Benny Popoitai: Commitment to Total Quality Assurance 
Address by Mr Benny Popoitai, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the 
Divine Word University 2013 Open Day, Port Moresby, 5 May 2013. 
 Fr.  Jan  Czuba,  President  of  the  Divine  Word  University  (DWU),  DWU  Community 
(administration, staff and students), DWU Development Partners, invited guests, ladies and 
gentlemen. 
Good evening to you all. It is indeed an honour to be invited to make the Key Note Speech at 
your 2013 Open Day celebration and activities. 
The theme of your 2013 Open Day is “Commitment to Total Quality Assurance”. I note that 
this  theme  is  consistent  with  DWU’s  mission  and  core  values  that  strives  for  academic 
excellence and quality academic programs. It is a theme that is not only appropriate but very 
relevant given the stage we are in with our nation’s development and the many challenges 
we face in nation-building. Equipping our young people not only with the required academic 
qualifications but the necessary and important societal values of living and working together 
harmoniously  before  they  enter  the  workforce  and  mainstream  society  is  very  important.  I 
therefore at the outset must thank the DWU for its commitment, drive and vigour in striving 
for  total  quality  assurance  in  preparing  the  next  generation  of  workers  and  leaders  of  our 
country. 
If  you  google  Total  Quality  Assurance  or  TQA,  you  will  get  about  29.2  million  entries  or 
results  on  the  internet.  The  results  throw  up  other  related  terminologies  like  Total  Quality 
Management (TQM) and Total Quality Control (TQC). Why so many results? It is because 
TQA, TQM and TQC are not only hot topics in management and performance benchmarking 
but also vital in driving excellence and ensuring competitiveness in the fiercely competitive 
workplace we face today, whatever the industry or service you may refer to. TQA in short, as 
many  of  you  would  be  aware,  relates  to  ensuring  a  product  or  output  meets  required  or 
expected standards in a suitable delivery time. 
Education,  as  we  all  know,  is  at  the  heart  of  every  nation’s  strives  to  develop.  Providing 
access, opportunities and quality education is therefore very important for the prospects of 
our young nation. Our educational institutions should not only aim at turning out quantities of 
students  but more  importantly,  a  high quality  of  graduates. This  is  where  DWU fits  in  well 
with  the  engagement  of  the  Australian  Universities  Quality  Agency  in  2011  to  conduct  an 
independent External Academic Audit of your activities and programmes. I was humbled to 
learn  that  DWU  was  the  first  university  in  the  country  to  voluntarily  go  through  the 
independent External Academic Audit in recognition of education as a public good, the many 
challenges  faced  in  PNG  and  the  need  to  demonstrate  a  system  of  accountability  and 
learning culture for our education institutions. Such initiatives aimed at improving academic 
performance and status are very worthwhile investment and truly reflect the genuineness of 
the DWU Council, Academic Board and Development Partners. If the audit recommendations 
are implemented successfully, which I am sure they will through your 10 year Action Plan, 
this will mean quality programs/courses offered which will further increase stakeholders and 
general public confidence for the DWU in producing quality graduates to assist in the delivery 
of social, economic, cultural and political development of our country. 
DWU’s  drive  towards  TQA  is  highly  commendable.  One  has  only  to  read  the  daily 
newspapers, listen to the radio or watch the television to see the serious problems we have 
in  our  society  today  –  some  worth  mentioning  are  corruption,  crime,  unemployment,  poor 
socio-economic indicators and social disharmony. We have generated high economic growth 
for  over  a  decade  now  but  still  struggle  to  ensure  we  all  live  together  in  peace  and 
happiness. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The efforts by DWU is consistent and complements the Government’s 2050 Vision Strategic 
Plan which sets out Human Capital Development as one of its priority pillars, in fact at the top 
of the list. An article in the Post Courier on 29 April 2013 (this week Monday) reported the 
Government’s focus on higher education, with funding between K40m and K50m on higher 
education  reforms  over  the  next  five  years  to  meet  global  quality  standards.  There  will  be 
amendments  to  the  Office  of  Higher  Education  (OHE)  Act  to  make  OHE  the  regulator  to 
oversee  the  operations  of  the  universities  and  higher  learning  institutions.  I  am  pleased  to 
note that the initiatives taken by the DWU will place it well ahead of its peers and the reforms 
about to take place in the higher education system of our country. 
We  at  the  Bank  are  also  constantly  looking  at  ways  to  up  skill  our  human  resources  and 
improve our work processes and engaging professionals and independent persons/firms to 
review our work process as part of the ongoing quality assurance program. Institutions and 
firms that have quality assurance program built into their work processes will no doubt benefit 
from the investment and stay ahead of the pack. 
Regarding  initiatives  from  the  Bank,  we  are  looking  at  sponsoring  programs  at  the 
universities  such  as  the  Banking  and  Finance  courses  already  taught  at  the  University  of 
PNG.  We  are  also  embarking  on  financial  inclusion  programs  and  are  talking  with  the 
Education  Department  to  develop  curriculums  to  be  taught  in  our  primary  and  secondary 
schools. In addition, the Bank has an ongoing graduate development program and we will be 
coming over to DWU in the coming years to continue to sponsor top students in Business 
Studies  programs.  The  Bank  to  date  has  sponsored  a  number  of  DWU  students  who  are 
currently working with us. The Bank has also engaged DWU services through Fr. Jan Czuba 
to  conducted  training  on  Ethnical  Leadership  in  Business  where  all  Bank  executive  and 
management team including myself attended in March 2013. This is a simple testament of 
the confidence the Bank has in your students, academic staff and your efforts to offer quality 
research,  teaching,  learning  and  community  engagement  and  will  further  strengthen  the 
relationship. 
I have the opportunity today to be shown around the school and have witnessed firsthand the 
upgraded educational facilities. I am overwhelmed by the effort and the commitment of the 
University  Council,  Academic  Board  and  Development  Partners  into  ensuring  quality 
education is offered. I am sure you will all agree with me that the University has come a long 
way in the last few years. 
On  your  Open  Day  celebrations,  I  had  the  opportunity  to  visit  the  many  stalls  and  display 
exhibitions put out by the various DWU faculties. If I were a judge, I know I will have a tough 
time deciding on who is the winner because they all, to me, met TQA standards and are all 
winners. 
In the next couple of minutes we will witness awards for the faculty displays held today. May 
the best team win and I wish you all an enjoyable evening for the rest of the program. 
Thank you all. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
