Luis M Linde: Spain and the issues facing Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  dinner  of  the 
Sixth High-Level Seminar of governors of the Eurosystem and Latin American central banks, 
Santiago de Chile, 8 December 2012. 
 Dear  President  Vergara,  Dear  Vice-President  Constancio, Dear  Colleagues,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen, 
It is for me a real pleasure to  participate  in the 6th edition  of this Seminar of Governors of 
the  Eurosystem  and  Latin  American  Central  Banks  and  to  be  given  the  opportunity  to 
address this speech to you. 
The Banco  de España has been co-organizing  this High-Level Seminar with  the ECB since 
its  first  edition,  in  2002.  Also,  when  the  Seminar  has  crossed  the  Atlantic  – to  Brazil,  in 
2004,  to  Mexico,  in  2009,  and  now  to  Chile –  we  have had  the  pleasure  of  collaborating 
with our Latin American colleagues; on this occasion with the Central Bank of Chile. So, as a 
co-organizer,  I  would  like  to  welcome  you  all,  too.  [Sean  bienvenidos.  Sejam  Bem- 
vindos.] 
A dinner speech  is expected  to  be both  light  or, at least, let’s  say, not  very heavy and, in 
any case, brief.  This should  be  the case, especially because  this  has been a long  day  for 
many of  us, just  arrived from  far away to  this  marvellous country.  To be  light  is not  going 
to be easy. The circumstances in the Eurozone -and particularly in some member countries, 
Spain  among  them –  would  make  it  rather  artificial  for  me  to  skip  in  my  address to  you 
tonight,  the hard issues we are facing in Europe. But I’ll try, at least, not to be too long. 
When this  series of  Seminars started  a decade  ago, things  among  the  countries  gathered 
here  today  were  very  different.  Latin  America  was  going  through  yet  another  episode  of 
regional financial stress – in the aftermath of the Argentinean crisis –  and the euro area was 
still  benefiting  of  the  smooth  start  of  the  euro  and  the  brilliant  prospects  offered  by  the 
Monetary  Union. At  present,  the  euro area is entangled  in a serious crisis,  whose  roots  – 
with hindsight –  were already taking hold by 2002. 
The strong push towards economic and financial integration that accompanied the process  of 
accession  and the setting  up of  EMU triggered  a period  of  intense economic convergence 
among  member  countries.  This was especially the case in countries  such  as Spain,  which 
had  joined  the  project  starting  from  real  income  levels  below 
those  of  the  main 
economies of the area. 
However,  this  process  went  hand  in  hand  with  the  accumulation of  imbalances  at  the 
domestic  and European levels. The deep  integration  of  European capital  markets  – one of 
the  most  remarkable  features  of  the  Monetary  Union –  resulted  in  a  large  availability  of 
financing to those economies whose prospects were perceived as brighter. In this process, 
Spain has become a sort of case study. 
In  fact,  the  underlying  fundamentals  of  the  Spanish  economy  were  not  as  solid  as  they 
seemed: product and labour markets suffered from structural rigidities and the expansionary 
cycle  was underpinned  by an  intense increase in credit and an overexpansion  in  housing, 
even taking  into  account  the increasing demand generated by immigration and tourism. 
Between  1999  and  2007,  the  weight  of  housing  investment  in  Spanish  GDP  doubled  to 
above  12%,  one  of  the  highest  on  record  among  advanced  economies.  To  a  significant 
extent the financing of this housing boom came from core European countries, intermediated 
by  their  financial  institutions,  and  resulted  in  a  rapidly  increasing  external indebtedness of 
our private sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  corresponding widening current account deficit was not only a  signal of robust internal 
demand;  it  also  reflected  a  gradual,  but  substantial,  loss  of  competitiveness.  The  large 
increase  in  employment  – 5,5 millions  between  1999  and  2007  (a 37%  increase) many of 
them  immigrants  –  generated  in  the  construction  and  other  labour  intensive  sectors, 
interacted with the dysfunctions of the labour market, leading to very low productivity gains 
and  increases  in  relative  labour  costs,  also  in  the  more  competitive  sectors  of  our 
economy. 
Additionally,  the housing boom  and the economic  expansion  gave rise to  an extraordinary 
increase in public revenues, providing for a significant increase in government expenditure. 
In  fact,  public  accounts  kept  improving,  so  that  fiscal  surpluses,  of  around 2%  of  GDP, 
were  achieved  in  the  years  previous  to  the  crisis.  But  the  temporary  nature  of  those 
revenues  and  the  underlying  fragility  of  the  fiscal  situation  became  evident  when  the 
housing sector  started  to adjust.  As a result of this adjustment  and the depth  of the crisis, 
the surpluses have turned into large and persistent  deficits,  reaching –11%  in 2009, a shift 
of more than 13 percentage points of GDP in just two years. 
Could  this  build-up  of  imbalances  have  been  avoided  or  mitigated? With  hindsight,  no 
doubt it could, but the economic and policy incentives were not there at the right time. 
On  the  one  hand,  financial  markets  failed  to  provide  enough  ex-ante  market  discipline: 
European and global  investors  were eager to  finance countries  with  higher expected  short 
term  returns,  dismissing  underlying  vulnerabilities.  Investors  tend  to ride  the  waves  of 
sentiment,  reacting  only  – but dramatically – when  weaknesses  become  evident.  In  this 
way,  they  act  procyclically,  inducing  large  swings  in  capital  flows.  Our  Latin  American 
colleagues are acquainted  with  these experiences, because they have suffered this type of 
“sudden stops” several times over the last decades. 
On  the other hand, economic policies did not respond adequately to the underlying dangers. 
In  a  context  of  apparent  economic  and  financial  stability,  and  with  the  European  project 
sailing  in  full  swing,  complacency  was  difficult  to  avoid,  and  there  was  little  incentive  to 
address  – or even  assess –  underlying  problems. This  applies  both to the European and 
the domestic spheres. 
The  surveillance  framework  operating  at  the  European  level  was  mostly  focused  on  the 
fulfilment  of  the  fiscal  targets  embodied  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  However,  this 
framework  revealed  itself  insufficient  and  ultimately  ineffective,  both  because  it  relied  on 
nominal  deficit thresholds – which  masked  fiscal  vulnerabilities  under  the  umbrella  of  a 
large cyclical increase in revenues- and because it was loosely applied. 
In several Euro area countries,  Spain  among  them,  the  structural  policies  that  could  have 
set  the  basis  for  a more  lasting  and sustainable  growth  path  were timid  in a period  when 
the  economy was  supported by  a  favourable  environment.  This  is  not,  by  the  way,  a 
European  peculiarity:  as  we  all  know,  structural  policies  tend  to  be  implemented  out  of 
necessity, that is, not in the good, but in the difficult  times. 
However, the narrative of the financial crisis in Spain somewhat differs from other developed 
countries.  Our  financial  system  was  not  exposed  to  the  complex structured assets which 
were  at  the  root  of  the  financial  crisis  in  2007-2008.  But,  while  we  did  not hold  this  kind 
of  toxic  assets,  we  have  suffered  the  toxification  of  the  housing  sector  assets  as  the 
crisis deepened. 
The freezing  of  the  global  financing  markets  that  started  in  mid-2007  also  disrupted  our 
financing  patterns  (heavily  dependent,  as I  have said,  on  external  funds  directed  towards 
the  housing  sector). The situation  only got  worse  when the  sovereign crisis  – that  started 
in Greece in late 2009 –  progressively  spread  to  other  euro area countries  with  vulnerable 
fundamentals. 
As we have seen in our discussions  today,  the trigger of the crisis in the euro area shows, 
to  a certain  extent,  similarities  to  those  that  affected  Latin  America  in  the  past:  a  stop  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
recent  decisions  by 
the  Governing  Council  on 
foreign  capitals  inflows,  which  induced  severe  financial  stress  and  real  adjustment.  But 
also  differences,  due  to  the  fact  that  this  reduction  of  capital  flows  took  place  in a highly 
integrated  monetary  union,  with  its  own  peculiar  adjustment  mechanisms,  leading  to  the 
segmentation  of  the  euro  area  capital  markets.  These  peculiarities  also  contribute  to 
explain  the  huge  magnitude  and  depth of  the  crisis.  The  scale  of  the  imbalances  and 
adjustments surpasses those in Latin American past experience. 
Correspondingly,  the  challenges  that  individual  countries  and  the  area  as  a  whole  are 
facing  are  daunting.  Indeed,  the  policy  response  to  the  crisis  – both at  the  national  level 
and at the level of the EU and the euro area authorities –  has been substantial,  particularly 
in the structural and institutional dimensions. 
The euro area authorities  have realised that,  in parallel to  the management of  the crisis,  a 
reshuffling  of  the  European governance  and  a strengthening  of  the  institutional  framework 
are necessary  for  the  long  term  sustainability  of  EMU.  But,  the  slow  process  of  decision 
making  in  Europe,  the  difficulties  of  policy  implementation  and  the  debate  around  the 
burden-sharing of the crisis have limited the positive effects of those policies on confidence 
and credibility. 
In this setting, the ECB and the Eurosystem have played a central role. While safeguarding 
their paramount objective of price stability, their actions have  been directed to re- establish 
the  proper  functioning of  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy,  as shown by 
the 
the  O[utright]  M[onetary] 
T[ransactions] initiative. 
Some  big  steps  have  been  taken  on  the  institutional  front  at  the  European  level.  Fiscal 
rules  have  been  strengthened  and  refined,  governance  reinforced  and,  in  the  financial 
sphere,  great  progress  is  being  made  to  establish  a  common  supervisory  framework.  In 
parallel,  national  constitutions have  been  adapted  in  several  countries  – Germany,  Spain 
and others – to comply with these new requirements. 
This  overview  of  the  problems  and  challenges  in  Europe  may  be  compared  with  the 
evolution of Latin America during the crisis and its aftermath. 
The Latin  American  performance  during  the  crisis  shows  that  these  countries  have drawn 
the  lessons  from  the  similar  episodes  they  went  through  in  the  late  nineties  and  early 
2000’s.  In particular,  I would  highlight  two  characteristics  of  the economic  setting  that  has 
made the region so resilient to  the external shock  this time: the improved  macroeconomic 
framework – underpinned by price stability –  and the reinforcement of financial stability. 
A recurrent vulnerability of the region has traditionally been the reliance on foreign currency 
denominated  financing.  This  financing  pattern  was  exposed  to  sudden  stops  in  capital 
flows.  With  the  progressive  achievement  of  price  stability,  the  attractiveness  of  local 
markets  and  local  currencies  increased  and  the  Latin  American  authorities  took  this 
opportunity  to promote the development of their domestic financial markets. 
The widening  of  the  local  banking  base has been  an essential complement  to  this  policy. 
Foreign  banks  investing  in  the  region  have  played  an  important  role  in  a  context  of 
financial  and  banking  liberalization.  Most  of  those  foreign  banks  brought  a  model  based 
on retailing  that  fitted  particularly  well the need to  strengthen  the local  financial base. The 
fact  that  many of  the  subsidiaries  had  to  finance  themselves locally  –  independently  from 
parent  institutions – also  helped  to  promote  financial  inclusion  among  the  population  and 
contributed  to reduce external vulnerabilities. 
Conclusions 
The  economic and financial crisis in Spain and other euro area countries – with its particular 
mixture  of  international  and  domestic elements – has  also  brought important lessons in 
terms of financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
One of  them  is the relevance of  the macroprudential  layer of  supervision  and the fact  that 
having  a good  micro-prudential  supervision  is  a necessary, but  not  sufficient  condition  to 
build  a resilient  financial  system.  There is  the  need  for  developing  the  framework  and  the 
tools  to  ensure  that  the  macro  perspective is  duly  taken  into  account. The  recent  BIS 
report  on macroprudential instruments  –   presented  in  our  last  meeting  in  Mexico – is  an 
good  step  in  that  direction.  However,  the  report  and  the  discussion  surrounding  it  also 
highlights  the  difficulties  of  setting  up  a  proper  macroprudential  framework,  at  the  local, 
regional and global level. 
Another  lesson  I  would  like  to  mention  refers  to  the  importance  of  a  close  cooperation 
between  home  and  hosts  supervisors,  which  has  materialized  in  Supervisory  Colleges, 
playing  an  important  role  in  this  context.  Indeed,  the  setting  up  of  the  European  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism,  a  process  which  will  have  its  starting  point  next  year,  will  entail 
new  challenges for  euro-zone  supervisors,  who  will  also need to  develop  new  procedures 
in their relations with supervisors of other regions. 
Before concluding,  I would  like to  thank  Banco  Central de Chile and President Vergara for 
the  hospitality  and  the  perfect  organization  of  this  event,  the  European  Central  Bank  for 
the collaboration and support  and all the participants  for their interest. 
I  wish  all  of  you  a  very  good  continuation  of  the  Seminar tomorrow  and  a  very  pleasant 
stay in Santiago de Chile. 
Muchas gracias a todos. Muito obrigado. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
