Choongsoo Kim: Bank of Korea’s 63rd anniversary 
Speech  by  Dr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  commemorating 
ceremony of the Bank of Korea’s 63rd anniversary, Bank of Korea, Seoul, 14 June 2013. 
 Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
We come together to commemorate the anniversary of the Bank of Korea’s establishment 
each  year,  wherever  we  work  –  in  Seoul,  and  in  our  domestic  branches  and  overseas 
representative offices. By honoring the history and tradition established by those who served 
before us, and by reflecting on what our contributions are to the development of our national 
economy and of the Bank of Korea, and on what kind of legacy we will leave to those who 
come after us, we use this as an opportunity to look back on the past, to analyze the present, 
and to seek future directions. It was on this occasion back in 2010, when we celebrated our 
60th anniversary and started out on a new sixty-year cycle, that we pledged to ourselves to 
make the BOK ‘a leading advanced central bank’ under the banner of a “global BOK”. This 
declared  our  resolve  to  develop  ourselves  to  fully  qualify  as  members  of  a  leading  world-
class organization and to reform the Bank of Korea with strong resolve so that, reborn as a 
leading  central  bank,  the  BOK  can  play  a  vital  role  in  steering  the  course  of  the  Korean 
economy’s  development.  And  three  years  have  now  passed  already  since  we  began  our 
bank’s second sixty-year cycle with this solemn declaration before the nation and the world.  
Although countries around the world have over the past five years struggled to emerge from 
the Great Recession, which is seen as the worst period of economic crisis since the Great 
Depression of the 1930s, their efforts have until now not borne sufficient fruit. On  the one 
hand countries have tried various new and unprecedented macroeconomic policies, in order 
to overcome the crisis as quickly as possible and to achieve economic recovery. And on the 
other hand they have devoted utmost efforts to pursuing global financial regulatory reforms, 
to forestall a future crisis and prevent crisis from recurring. And the Korean economy is no 
exception to this trend of change, and is facing a variety of challenges and tasks in line with 
the changes in environment at home and abroad. This situation can be comparable to the 
adventure  of  exploring  an  unspoiled  and  unknown  world,  and  the  effectiveness  of  our 
knowledge and experience are being tested. In the past, of course, the future was always 
uncertain, but once the uncertainties had lifted we were able to enter into a new economic 
paradigm. What kind of economic paradigm will take shape before us once we overcome the 
serious  uncertainties  we  are  presently  experiencing?  What  kind  of  new  lessons  will  our 
recent ordeals have for us? I believe that the time is not far off when we will be able to look 
back on our current situation as one which we have been able to overcome wisely, and that it 
is our responsibility to bring this time forward. Admittedly we were unable to prevent the crisis 
erupting, but its outcome will be largely decided by our skill in tackling it. As is the way of the 
world, we must have the wisdom to turn current misfortune to our advantage.  
In today’s global economy, where all economies are mutually interlinked, efforts on the part 
of just a few countries to solve global problems can hardly meet with success. Considering 
the analysis that the high degree of economic interconnectedness together with procyclical 
policy  have  increased  systemic  risks  to  the  economy,  and  that  this  was  a  decisive  factor 
behind the current global financial crisis, it is obvious that the involvement of many countries, 
and not just a few, is essential to overcoming it. Although the participation of a large number 
of countries will of course involve the problem of a complicated decision-making process, I 
do not believe there can be any objection to the view that global problems can only be solved 
by  securing  effective  momentum  toward  their  solutions  through  a  system  of  international 
cooperation.  What  is  important  to  us  now  is  that,  through  our  active  involvement  in  the 
international decision-making process, we must express our positions and views and strive to 
articulate our visions so as to nudge the world economy onto the course of global economic 
development  that  we  wish.  Indeed,  we  should  involve  ourselves  actively  in  the  clear 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  sequester,  and 
the  uncertainties  surrounding 
awareness that this path coincides with the maximization of our national interests. If we are 
unable to take part in the international decision-making process, not only will we be unable to 
secure the reflection of our positions but we will also face the difficulty of not being able to 
obtain information enabling our timely adoption of appropriate policy responses. 
Today, in commemorating the 63rd anniversary of the Bank of Korea, I would like to share 
with you three tasks – related, specifically, to policies for tackling the global financial crisis 
and the trends of change in the international economic environment, to redefining the role of 
the  BOK  in  line  with  the  changes  in  economic conditions  at  home  and  abroad,  and  to  the 
cultivation of the BOK’s and its staff’s potential. 
Dear friends and colleagues, 
We are paying more attention than ever before to the possibility of policy normalizations in 
the major advanced economies that implemented quantitative easing policies over the past 
few years, and to the influences that this will have on the international financial markets and 
emerging market economies. Needless to say, normalization does not necessarily mean a 
return  to  the  pre-crisis  state.  It  does,  however,  comprehensively  involve  the  process  of 
resolving matters such as when advanced economies will end their uses of unconventional 
tools, how the effects on other countries of their policy normalizations will develop, whether 
normalization  will  take  place  in  an  orderly  manner  through  appropriate  international  policy 
cooperation, and what will be the economic vision in the post-crisis era. And none of these 
issues  are  unrelated  to  the  Korean  economy.  The  financial  crisis  that  originated  on  Wall 
Street,  and  the  consequent  international  financial  reform  efforts  including  Basel  III;  the 
Eurozone  sovereign  debt  crisis  caused  by  spread  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  and  the 
continued  unrest  in  the  international  financial  markets;  the  fiscal  problems  in  the  U.S. 
including 
the 
unprecedented  policy  tools,  each  mobilized  for  a  particular  purpose,  including  Japan’s 
qualitative  and  quantitative  easing(QQE)  which  have  completely  changed  the  basic 
framework  of  monetary  policy  –  none  of  these  are  by  any  means  easy  to  analyze,  either 
separately or comprehensively. Some common characteristics of the countries implementing 
these policies, however, are that their policy rates are close to their zero lower bounds, and 
that their currencies are key currencies used in international settlement. Monetary policy is in 
principle  conducted  through  taking  into  account  the  domestic  economic  situation,  but  key 
currency  countries  should  understand 
inevitably  have 
international spillover effects. If a key currency country overlooks such externalities this can 
be interpreted as a dereliction of its responsibility to maintain the stability of the international 
economic  order,  and  its  currency  may  face  the  risk  of  possibly  losing  its  credibility  as  a 
reserve currency in international community. 
For countries like Korea, meanwhile, whose currencies are not key currencies and have not 
yet  been  sufficiently  internationalized,  measures  for  responding  to  policies  such  as  the 
quantitative easing by key currency countries cannot be found in economic textbooks written 
in the past. A new task for us, therefore, is to find alternative measures appropriate to our 
domestic circumstances by ourselves, through our own research. Under the assumption of 
the relative values of currencies being maintained, empirically identifying the effective lower 
bound  of  our  policy  rate,  corresponding  to  the  zero  lower  bounds  of  the  key  currency 
countries, is another homework assignment that we must solve. In an environment in which 
the  magnitudes  of  change  are  increasing  as  globalization  spreads  more  widely  than  ever 
before, these are newly emerging policy tasks that we must work proactively to find solutions 
for. It may sound a bit ironic, but we should always bear in mind that, although one of the 
causes  of  the  current  financial  crisis  was  the  further  strengthening  of  interconnectedness 
among  economies  due  to  the  rapid  progress  made  in  globalization,  the  process  of 
overcoming this crisis will in its consequences also further strengthen globalization. 
Discussions of quantitative easing termination and exit strategies are likely to be at the tops 
of the agendas in advanced economies in the near future, and reviews of action plans for the 
normalization process are being carried out. Needless to say, the extent of the impacts of the 
their  monetary  policies 
resolutions; 
their 
that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
normalization  process  on  the  world  economy  will  depend  upon  whether  advanced  central 
banks have the capacities to manage market expectations appropriately so that the markets 
can  refrain  from  overreacting.  The  importance  of  communication  with  the  markets  thus 
becomes emphasized still further. Although the pace of economic recovery is understood as 
a key to determining the timing of a change in monetary policy stance, the fact that the cost 
of sustaining quantitative easing may become ever larger over time, relative to its benefits, is 
also working as a factor moving forward the times of changes in policy stances. There is in 
addition  the  unavoidable  reality  that  the  marginal  utility  involved  has  been  gradually 
diminishing  as  several  countries  have  come  to  undertake  quantitative  easing.  There  are 
several issues before us in this regard that we must focus on and address. 
First, there is the question of whether the normalization will take place in a synchronized or in 
a sequenced fashion. The former is not all that likely, as the circumstances of the individual 
advanced  economies  concerned  vary,  but  if  synchronized  normalization  does  actually 
happen its influence is likely to be enormous. And even in the case of the latter method of 
normalization,  the  occurrence  of  increased  capital  flow  and  exchange  rate  volatility  will 
persist for an extended period, meaning that we can most emphatically not say that its costs 
will  be  low.  Since  the  range  of  fluctuation  will  depend  upon  the  relative  influences  of  the 
effects of various policies and systems, we will need to maintain a timely watch on changes 
in the international financial markets and adopt a flexible stance when responding so as to 
prevent  any  excessive  volatilities  of  capital  flows  or  exchange  rates.  The  process  of 
sequenced normalization will meanwhile be sequenced not only across countries, but also 
across the various different policy tools introduced in each country 
Second, the process of normalization will entail rises in interest rates, and we can therefore 
not rule out the possibility of facing the risk of a global interest rate increase. We need to also 
pay  attention  to  the  increased  burdens  on  the  financial  sector  for  maintaining  soundness, 
such as the demand for raising of additional capital due to potential valuation losses on bond 
holdings. From a historical perspective, the U.S. Federal Reserve’s interest rate hikes in the 
mid-1990s  caused  long-term  Treasury  bond  rates  to  rise  significantly,  and  due  to  the 
consequent  drastic  capital  outflows  Latin  American  countries  experienced  a  series  of 
financial crises. In contrast, the Fed’s interest rate hikes in the late-1990s did not trigger any 
increase in long-term bond rates, and in the mid-2000s, despite rate hikes by the Fed long-
term  yields  on  government  bonds  even  fell,  triggering  a  phenomenon  referred  to  as 
“Greenspan’s  conundrum”.  Bearing  in  mind  that  the  results  of  a  policy  rate  hike  may 
therefore vary significantly, we must keep a close eye on market changes. We should note 
that  while  the  economic  crises  in  many  countries  during  periods  of  interest  rate  increases 
over  the  past  few  decades  can  be  traced  in  part  to  common  phenomena  such  as  rises  in 
funding costs and declines in asset prices, they have also been attributable to large extents 
to financial institutions’ adverse selection. And this is because the adverse side effects and 
economic  vulnerabilities  built  up  through  the  widespread  pursuit  of  high-risk,  high-return 
investment during periods of low interest rates become evident once rates begin to rise. 
Third, we should work internally to identify the effects of our various policy instruments, and 
make preparations for dealing with any changes in external conditions promptly while at the 
same time devoting active efforts to eliciting global cooperation. The ratios of exports to GDP 
stand  at  only  around  10  and  13  percent  respectively  in  the  U.S.  and  Japan,  but  in  Korea 
reaches  nearly  50  percent.  We  should  note  that  stability  in  the  international  economic 
environment  achieved  through  global  cooperation  is  all  the  more  important  for  the  Korean 
economy, whose growth is so heavily dependent upon external conditions. Meanwhile, since 
it  is  a  global  rather  than  a  regional  equilibrium  that  must be  achieved  in  order  to  maintain 
global  economic  growth  and  stability,  we  need  to  redouble  our  efforts  to  promote  global 
cooperation so as to create an environment that is favorable to us. 
My dear friends and colleagues at the Bank of Korea, 
The revision of the Bank of Korea Act at the end of 1997 gave us a single responsibility, for 
price stability, and to achieve this goal we have operated an inflation targeting regime. With 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the 2011 revision of the Act we have now assumed partial responsibility for financial stability 
as well, but are all well aware that this can be achieved only through cooperation among the 
government,  the  supervisory  authorities  and  the  central  bank.  In  light  of  this,  we  need  to 
closely  examine  the  cases  of  the  U.S.,  which  operates,  as  its  organization  in  charge  of 
financial stability a Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), consisting of the Treasury 
Department, the nation’s supervisory organizations and the Fed, and of other countries. All 
over the world today, central banks are increasingly being asked to participate in the efforts 
to  promote  economic  growth  and  prevent  future  crisis  through  more  active  and  diverse 
means.  Although  based  on  the  premise  that  it  is  within  the  central  bank’s  legal 
responsibilities, the fact that ECB President Mario Draghi's promise last July to do “whatever 
it  takes  to  preserve  the  euro”  has  been  the  most  frequently  mentioned  and  most  strongly 
supported policy intention since then is direct proof of this. Mr. Draghi’s words show us how 
the central bank’s standing and roles are rapidly changing in directions different from in the 
past. And in fact the roles of the Bank of Korea are also expanding in various ways, in line 
with  changes  in  our  internal  and  external  environments.  I  would  like  now  to  consider  the 
current tasks that we face, by dividing them into four areas:  
First, and above all, maintaining price stability is our responsibility stipulated in Article 1 of 
the Bank of Korea Act. We have set the medium-term inflation target range at from 2.5 to 
3.5 percent for the next three years beginning from 2013, and are operating monetary policy 
accordingly. It is the central bank’s primary goal to stabilize and ensure that the medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations of economic agents converge to the inflation target, but since 
we use CPI as an inflation indicator, which has a decisive influence on inflation expectations, 
it  is  also  very  important  that  we  manage  changes  in  the  CPI  appropriately.  One  of  the 
characteristics of the structure determining inflation in Korea is that price determinants on the 
supply side, such as oil and vegetable prices, have greater influences than they do in other 
countries. And the stability of these prices has kept inflation below the lower bound of the 
target range for the past few months. Since economic agents’ inflation expectations remain 
at around the 3 percent level, however, there still exists an inflationary bias. Moreover, when 
we  look  at  the  international  discussions  we  see  two  extremes  of  arguments.  Some  on  the 
one hand say, considering the sustained low inflation in many countries since the crisis, that 
inflation concerns have now vanished and we should prepare ourselves instead for the risk of 
deflation  resulting  from  the  hoarding  of  liquidity.  As  an  aftereffect  of  the  excess  liquidity 
supplied  by  advanced  countries’  quantitative  easing  policies,  in  contrast,  others  expect 
inflation to be unavoidable in the future. And since the Korean economy is very sensitive to 
changes in external conditions, we, as the nation’s central bank, must be prepared to cope 
with whatever future course the global economy takes.  
Second,  maintaining  financial  stability  has  become  one  of  the  major  responsibilities  of  the 
Bank of Korea, as since the 2011 revision of the Bank of Korea Act we have begun placing 
greater emphasis on macroprudential issues than before in our joint inspections of financial 
institutions, and have gained increased access to data from financial institutions. We have 
also successfully constructed an econometric model for systemic risk assessment, and are 
working now on improvement of our Financial Stability Report, a statutory report submitted 
biannually to the National Assembly, so that it can be recognized at the global level. While in 
the  process  of  overcoming  the  global  financial  crisis  advanced  countries  have  been 
managing their own economies in exceptionally low interest rate environments, we must bear 
in  mind  the  comment  that,  in  such  an  environment,  the  possibility  should  never  be 
overlooked of the accumulation of economic vulnerabilities. The possibility of funds flowing 
continuously  to  businesses  subject  to  restructuring  can  also  not  be  ruled  out,  and  the 
vulnerabilities of these businesses will become immediately apparent if there is any hike in 
global  interest  rates.  We  must  continuously  monitor  the  markets  to  pick  up  imperceptible 
signs of a crisis, closely analyze the data to identify any possibilities of tail risk, and develop 
capabilities to maintain financial stability. We must also redouble our efforts to ensure that we 
are  not  overlooking  any  tail  risks,  by  closely  examining  whether  the  probability  distribution 
that  we  rely  on  excessively  truncates  specific  parts  of  the  upper  and  the  lower  areas,  or 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
forward.  Despite  central  banks  around 
whether the distribution does not represent the entire population of the economy due to any 
kind of selection bias. 
Third, the expanded application of credit policy is a task that the Bank of Korea must also 
focus  on  going 
the  world  having  adopted 
accommodative monetary policy stances and provided sufficient liquidity to the markets, this 
liquidity has not been linking with the real economy, and this fact has been pointed out as the 
main  cause  for  countries  around  the  world  being  unable  to  properly  achieve  growth.  To 
overcome this, central banks are, through commercial banks, attempting to strengthen their 
roles in providing funds to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) with the potentials to 
contribute to economic growth. The Bank of England’s Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) 
for SMEs is cited as a good policy example, and the ECB is also considering measures to 
support  SMEs.  With  the  recent  introduction  of  the  Supporting  Program  for  High  Quality 
Technology Start-up SMEs, we at the Bank of Korea have also enlarged and reformed our 
Aggregate Credit Ceiling Loan system dramatically, seeking to contribute to enhancing the 
nation’s  growth  potential  by  improving  SMEs’  productivity.  Such  policies  and  financial 
inclusion policies had previously been considered as falling within the government’s brief, but 
are  gradually  coming  to  be  considered  now  to  lie  within  the  domain  of  the  central  bank. 
Central banks are endeavoring to play more active roles in the efforts to strengthen the real 
and financial sector linkages. And by heightening the role of credit policy in complementing 
monetary  policy,  we  are  trying  to  redefine  the  expression  “monetary  and  credit  policies” 
specified in Article 1 of the Bank of Korea Act to conform with circumstances of our era. 
Fourth, we must redouble our efforts to build up our networking with leading central banks. 
To ensure global economic growth and stability, we cannot stress too much the importance 
of  the  sharing  of  information  among  economies  and  their  collaboration  and  cooperation  in 
policy. The Bank of Korea has, by utilizing the proceeds of the won-yuan swap agreement 
between the Bank of Korea and the People’s Bank of China, initiated use of the domestic 
currencies in trade settlement from early this year. Although we are still in an initial stage of 
striving to organize and foster the related systems, we can say that we have taken the first 
step,  albeit  cautiously,  toward  internationalization  of  the  Korean  won,  and  that  there  may 
ultimately  be  a  need  to  examine  measures  for  expanding  this  effort  to  all  economies  with 
which Korea has concluded FTAs. In order to support economic exchanges involving Islamic 
banking,  an  area  in  which  economic  cooperation  is  expected  to  increase  in  the  future,  we 
signed an MOU with the Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates last week. Going forward 
we  also  plan  to  sign  MOUs  with  central  banks  in  South  America,  and  we  would  like  to 
meaningfully expand our personnel and resource exchanges with the various central banks 
that have signed exchange agreements with the Bank of Korea. To my mind, it is only when 
all of these various efforts bear fruit that a ‘Global BOK’ will truly be established.  
Dear members of the Bank of Korea, 
If the various wide range of new operations that we have discussed so far is limited to the 
purview of only a small number of departments, then we can never achieve the sought-after 
results.  Their  effects  can  only  be  realized  when  all  departments  of  the  Bank  of  Korea, 
including  our  domestic  branches  and  our  overseas  representative  offices,  hold  them  as 
common goals and put them into practice. I would like to make it clear that no one among the 
2,200 staff members of the Bank of Korea is unconnected with these activities. I emphasize 
this because the operation of our organization must not be rigid, and we can come up with 
effective alternatives as needed only when we have established a climate of flexible mutual 
cooperation. If globalization refers to the disappearance of borders between countries, then 
we can only truly find ways of responding to globalization within our organization when the 
borders between our departments disappear. The mission given to us is to be able to nurture 
individuals who  are  in  tune  with  these  changes  in  our  environment,  meaning  those  whose 
ways of thinking and behavior are globalized. It is in truth impossible to overemphasize the 
importance of a multi-disciplinary knowledge. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
It is my judgment that the education and training of our staff carried out over the past few 
years,  to  strengthen  their  potential  capabilities,  have  come  to  great  fruition.  Increases  in 
various kinds of publications written under our staff members’ names, as well as the spread 
in the writing of papers to staff from almost all departments are major features in this regard. 
For example, the numbers of entries in the BOK Staff Paper Competition were 23 in 2011 
and 27 in 2012, and have increased substantially to 38 this year. The numbers of contest 
participants have also increased during these years – from 38 to 44 and then 56. Another 
visible  change,  moreover,  is  that  among  these  participants  there  have  been  eight  lead, 
principal  or  senior  economists.  The  number  of  our  staff  participating  in  international 
conferences has meanwhile also increased greatly, from 351 in 2010 to 412 in 2011 and 457 
in 2012. Classified by rank, among all of these people in 2012 there were 141 economists, 
103  senior  economists  and  77  principal  economists,  with  marked  increases  being  seen 
among senior economists and economists. I promoted the participation of lower-ranking staff 
in working-level conferences in the belief that their experiences there would enable them to 
play  proper  roles  when  they  participated  in  conferences  as  higher-ranking  officials  in  the 
future. I believe that this is now starting to show the desired results, and am convinced that 
the continuation of this trend will lead to a bright future for our Bank.  
An even more significant change can be identified by looking at the numbers of joint research 
projects carried out by our headquarters and domestic branches. These numbers were one 
in 2010, 35 in 2011 and 64 in 2012. Among them, the number of projects conducted jointly 
with foreign institutions has exhibited a dramatic change – from zero in 2012 to four in 2011 
and  20  in  2012.  And  even  though  the  first  half  of  this  year  has  not  yet  passed,  there  are 
already 20 such projects currently under way. The number of joint research projects carried 
out  at  the  domestic  branch  level  was  one  in  2010,  but  these  projects  have  also  became 
active recently, increasing to 15 in 2011 and 17 in 2012. In the meantime, collaborative joint 
research  among  our  domestic  branches  has  begun  from  this  year,  and  in  next  month  the 
general  managers  of  all  domestic  branches  and  director  generals  of  our  headquarters 
departments plan to meet to discuss three joint research projects among domestic branches. 
From the next quarter we also plan to release a “BOK Quarterly Regional Economic Report”, 
in which all domestic branches will take part. We expect to see in this the birth of a Korean 
“Beige Book, utilized as useful information on our nation’s regional economies. The majority 
of studies conducted by our domestic branches have meanwhile been recommendations in 
the studies have been adopted in policy-making by the local governments concerned.  
Since their introductions in 2011, the numbers of staff who have participated in job training 
have  been  286  in  our  Global  Initiative  Program  (GIP)  and  144  in  our  intensive  training 
program  for  principal  and  senior  economists.  There  have  also  been  83  staff  from  foreign 
central banks who have participated in the GIP, helping to establish networks between their 
banks  and  the  Bank  of  Korea,  and  the  number  of  foreign  central  bank  applicants  for  the 
program  has  been  on  the  rise.  Every  year  we  also  have  around  10  BOK  staff  members 
taking part in the training programs of international institutions and foreign central banks.  
In sum, I think that staff with great potential are provided with opportunities to display their 
potential freely, and that we have seen positive results from this. Intangible assets, which are 
necessary in order for the Bank of Korea to become a leading advanced central bank, are 
being  accumulated  almost  without  our  noticing  it.  I  believe  these  are  proud  and  inspiring 
achievements, that have produced considerable changes in a short period of time.  
Dear fellow BOK members, 
At  international  meetings  I  have  often  raised  the  new  issue  that  an  era  of  central  bank 
competition is on the horizon. I believe that this is a natural outcome of the increased impacts 
of  central  banks  on  their  national  economies  in  line  with  the  changes  characteristic  of  our 
times. Although there were opinions raised at first that the concept of competition applied to 
central banks seemed somewhat awkward, since the central bank is the only such institution 
in  its  country,  this  is  in  fact  a  valid  concept  since  there  are  a  number  of  different  central 
banks in the global economy as a whole. And as I have stressed to you at every opportunity, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the Bank of Korea’s contribution to Korean economic development must not be smaller than 
those  made  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  People’s  Bank  of 
China to their own respective economies.  
By now we should have the capabilities to comprehend other central banks’ activities, and to 
establish and implement policies tailored to our  own national economic conditions as well. 
Performing  such  varied  functions  could  be  compared  to  facing  a  situation  in  which  we 
sometimes need to aim at a moving target. And in this environment, it cannot be said that we 
are performing an appropriate role if we simply follow theories or practices established under 
other  economic  conditions.  We  should  instead  be  developing  our  abilities  to  create 
alternatives befitting our own national economy. Fostering the potential to understand what 
has gone wrong is just as important as the effort to find the answer to a problem. We are 
living in an era in which people equipped with critical minds and the capacities to uncover 
new tasks are urgently needed.  
If we consider our future by putting together the things I have just said, the global financial 
crisis facing us now will be ultimately overcome by strengthening the dynamic characteristics 
of our economy and by eliminating its uncertainties. It should be borne in mind that this crisis 
was  not  just  a  temporary  one,  and  that  a  new  steady-state  equilibrium  might  have  been 
created as the crisis has become prolonged. Low interest rates may have already become 
entrenched in our economy, for instance, and breaking from them to achieve normalization 
could carry other costs. To achieve economic recovery to normalcy and thus escape crisis, 
animal spirits must serve as a catalyst for our economy’s dynamic growth, while at the same 
time its productivity must be enhanced through constant restructuring. In order to contribute 
to national economic development by encouraging these economic conditions, the Bank of 
Korea  should  carry  out  the  four  roles  that  I  have  discussed  above  more  faithfully.  On  the 
macroeconomic policy side, the Bank must support growth until our national economy has 
recovered  to  the  level  of  its  potential  growth,  while  from  the  microeconomic  policy 
perspective maintaining its accommodative monetary policy and devising means for financial 
facilitation to ensure that the productivity of SMEs can increase.  
In this process, meanwhile, the importance of financial stability should not be downplayed. 
We  must  not  forget  that  during  the  Great  Moderation,  in which  we  enjoyed  stable  inflation 
and appropriate growth for a long period of time, we failed to sense that the seeds of a crisis 
were being sown. We have so far been paying greater social and economic costs due to the 
uncertainties  stemming  from  the  crisis  than  we  have  yet  realized.  The  rising  corporate 
savings amid the crisis in most countries clearly indicate a lack of corporate investment due 
to  uncertainty.  And  the  resulting  low  growth  is  the  price  that  we  have  been  paying.  Since 
there  is  a  risk  of  mutual  interaction  between  uncertainty  and  speculative  activities,  central 
banks  have  the  responsibility  to  closely  monitor  market  conditions  in  order  to  reduce  the 
adverse effects caused by disruptive factors stemming from speculative capital.  
Before  concluding,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  more  words.  Today  we  have  been  able  to 
confirm together that there are incalculable challenges lying ahead of us. However, only an 
organization  that  confronts  rather  than  shrinks  from  such  challenges  will  thrive.  It  has 
become  clear  recently  that  our  organization’s  response  capability  has  been  greatly 
enhanced, and that our employees have been actively utilizing their potentials. Based upon 
this confidence, let us further cultivate our public servant spirits as central bankers, so as to 
further strengthen our Bank’s status as a central bank held in great respect by the public. We 
will need to develop ourselves so that our society becomes more interested in and more in 
demand  of  our  talents.  To  this  end,  greater  spirits  of  sacrifice  and  service  should  be  the 
foundations of our lives. If we steadily move forward with consistency and a strong belief in 
our future, the Bank of Korea will be recognized for its contributions to the national economy. 
Perspiration, tears and pain are the fates of those who sow seeds. I look forward to seeing 
many such leaders emerging in our Bank.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
