Patrick Honohan: T K Whitaker Lecture “Design flaws of the euro” 
Introductory remarks by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, for the 
T K Whitaker Lecture “Design flaws of the euro” by Mr Harold James, Princeton University, 
Dublin, 1 February 2013. 
 Exactly 70 years ago today, the Central Bank of Ireland opened its doors, with the “general 
function  and  duty  of  taking…  such  steps  as  the  Board  may  from  time  to  time  deem 
appropriate  and advisable  towards  safeguarding  the  integrity  of  the  currency  and  ensuring 
that, in what pertains to the control of credit, the constant and predominant aim shall be the 
welfare  of  the  people  as  a  whole.”  Objectives  these  that  resonate  with  the  Central  Bank’s 
current mission statement: Safeguarding Stability; Protecting Consumers. 
The new Bank assumed and expanded the role its precursor, the Currency Commission, had 
performed  for  15  years  before  that.  Creation  of  the  Central  Bank  partly  followed  a  global 
fashion. As Minister for Finance Seán T. Ó Ceallaigh remarked in the second stage speech 
on  the  legislation  creating  the  Bank,  23  countries  had  created  central  banks  in  the  period 
1921–36. We know that underlying this wave of creation had been the desire by long-term 
Bank of England Governor Montagu Norman to create an international network with which he 
could  deal  on  financial  issues  without  having  to  work  through  Governments.  The  central 
forum of this network was the Bank for International Settlements, whose Economic Advisor, 
Per Jacobsson, was an influential member of the Irish Banking Commission 1934–38. This 
Commission has been set up by the Fianna Fail government to see what needed shaking-up 
in Irish banking and it did, albeit without evident enthusiasm, duly recommend that Ireland 
should  follow  the  new  fashion.  It  seems  that  both  the  Bank  of  England  (with  whom 
Jacobsson  stayed  in  touch  during  the  Banking  Commission’s  deliberations)  and  the  Irish 
banks, especially the Bank of Ireland, had misgivings about extending the wider powers of 
central banking to the Irish case, given the close ties to London. 
“Measaimíd,”  arsa  Seán  T.,  “gur  ciallmhar  an  mhaise  dhúinn  ár  gcóras  airgeadais  féin  do 
chur in oiriúint do réim an lae inniu.” But more likely it was the uncertainty about being able to 
rely in wartime on the traditional smooth access to liquidity in London, as evidenced by the 
rebuff  given  to  the  Bank  of  Ireland  there  when  it  made  exploratory  inquiries  in  September 
1939,  that  was  the  proximate  trigger  for  the  Government  (supported  by  many  opposition 
deputies)  to  take  the  plunge.  And  so  was  created  an  entity  which,  unlike  its  predecessor, 
would have the power and resources to increase “the cash reserve of …banks [which] will 
thereby be in a position to lend more freely and so set the wheels of trade and industry in 
motion again.” 
This exciting prospect did not, however, enthuse William Norton, leader of the Labour Party, 
who  opposed  the  Central  Bank  Bill  saying  that  it  “in  fact,  is  really  eye-wash”  and,  as  The 
Economist  had  already  written,  “likely  to  be  little  more  than  the  existing  Currency 
Commission under a new name.” 
As it turned out, most of the new powers acquired by the Bank, such as lending to and taking 
deposits  from  banks  and  Government,  did  indeed  remain  largely  unused  for  a  couple  of 
decades.  And  the  one-for-one  sterling  exchange  rate  link  remained  firmly  in  primary 
legislation until 1971. It was not until the early 1970s – the Whitaker years – that it could be 
said without fear of contradiction that the Central Bank was no longer operating as a mere 
Currency Board. 
Even  in  the  1970s,  public  communication  was  simpler  than  it  is  today.  For  example,  the 
Governor  was  able  to  muse  publicly  on  exchange  rate  policy  without  fear  of  the  message 
reaching the London money markets by the simple expedient of speaking in Irish: (see T.K. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  European  Monetary  System  did  bring 
Whitaker’s 1976 talk, printed in the Bank’s 1976 Annual Report: “An Ceangal le Sterling: An 
Cheart é a Bhriseadh?”) 
Thereafter change came relatively rapidly as the Central Bank had to respond to a changing 
external  environment.  Creation  of 
the 
foreshadowed end to the sterling link in 1979, but the new and brittle exchange rate regime 
was  associated  with  acute  monetary  management  challenges  at  a  time  of  acute  domestic 
fiscal  pressure.  The  EMS  crisis  of  1992–93,  which  saw  banks  having  to  borrow  from  the 
Central Bank at 100 per cent interest rate, culminated for the Central Bank in a weekend – 
exactly twenty years ago – that saw both a celebratory concert to commemorate the Bank’s 
golden anniversary, and the final EMS devaluation of the Irish pound. 
The emergence of the IFSC in subsequent years was the catalyst for a great expansion in 
financial regulation: this still places the heaviest  demands on the Central Bank in terms of 
staff resources assigned to authorising, regulating and supervising the very large number of 
firms and funds involved in the business of exporting financial services. 
Adaptation  of  the  national  system  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  the  euro  absorbed 
much of the Bank’s work in the 1990s and into the new millennium, while a new emphasis on 
consumer  protection  responded  to  acknowledged  weaknesses  in  that  area.  Our  currency 
centre rose to the challenge of printing a share of the new euro notes, with ever improving 
security features. 
But the design of the euro, topic of tonight’s T.K. Whitaker lecture to be given by Professor 
Harold James of Princeton University, did not, as many had assumed, protect members from 
macro-financial distress. 
The past few years have been probably the busiest ever for the Bank as it has raced to stem 
or  meet  outflows  and  repair  the  damage  to  the  banking  system  that  has  so  undermined 
national prosperity. With industry promotion no longer part of the Bank’s statutory mandate, 
the regulatory agenda has shifted into an unapologetically intrusive mode. Regulations are 
being enforced with sizable penalties imposed for violations. A graduated but intensive and 
unremitting programme of specific required deliverables is being imposed on the banks to try 
to ensure that they will deal effectively with the admittedly challenging task of getting ahead 
of  the  still-growing  mortgage  arrears  problem,  both  by  getting  those  who  can  back  on 
schedule, and modifying loans in the case of those who cannot do so. The Bank is currently 
also  playing  its  part  in  engaging  with  external  partners  in  seeking  to  limit  and  smooth  the 
impact  on  Irish  balance  sheets  of  the  indebtedness  accumulated  as  a  result  of  the  overly 
expansive decision to socialise banking losses, to help accelerate recovery of employment 
on a sustainable basis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
