Stefan Gerlach: Banking and Fiscal Union 
Introductory remarks by Mr Stefan Gerlach, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, 
at a panel session at the EUI conference on “The state of play in the euro area – fixing the 
EMU for the long term”, Florence, 21 January 2013. 
 I am grateful to Rebecca Stuart for her help in preparing these remarks. 
While  plenty  of  work  has  been  undertaken  since  last  summer  on  establishing  a  European 
banking union, progress has been uneven and it has stalled in some areas. Of course, it is 
difficult to build consensus in a situation where bank resolutions may become necessary, and 
deposit insurance schemes could be called on, in the near future. This is a matter that ideally 
should have been discussed and settled when EMU was formed, much in the same way as a 
car must be insured before it can be driven. Unfortunately, that route was not taken. 
Much  of  the  interest  in  banking  union  arises  because  it  is  a  necessary,  but  not  sufficient, 
condition  for  the  ESM  to  recapitalise  banks.  Indeed,  the  establishment  of  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  with  the  ECB  is  frequently  seen  as  having  been  adopted 
precisely because this is the fastest road, legally and institutionally, to banking union.  
It is of course essential and urgent to enable the ESM to support banking systems in order to 
overcome some of the tensions in the euro area, and there is intense public debate about 
how best to structure the SSM. In my introductory remarks today, however, I would like to 
take a step back from that debate and instead reflect more broadly on why a banking union is 
important for any monetary union to function well and why it is natural to locate the SSM with, 
or at least “close to”, the central bank in such a union. 
Banking supervision  
Why might it be beneficial to have a SSM in a monetary union? To my mind, one important 
reason is that a greater remove between supervisors and the banks they regulate can help 
improve the capacity for challenge and ensure a broader, more detached, perspective on the 
issues.  In  particular,  it  would  ensure  the  independence  of  the  supervisory  and  regulatory 
decision-making process from national political pressure, and avoid regulatory capture. For 
example, a distant supervisor may take action to address risks arising from a bubble in good 
times  that  a  national  supervisor  would  come  under  pressure  to  overlook.  It  also  seems 
unlikely that a banking supervisor from, say, Italy or Ireland, sitting in Frankfurt, supervising a 
bank in Spain or Slovenia will let career considerations influence his or her decisions.  
That said, local knowledge about the banking market and economic conditions are important. 
Systemic  banking  crises  can  be  exceptionally  costly  and  are  likely  to  remain  national 
phenomena, in much the same way as they are largely regional in the US. One reason for 
this  is  that  fiscal  policies  and  many  economic  policies  that  can  play  an  important  role  in 
setting  the  stage  for  a  bubble  will  remain  largely  national.  Retaining  some  capacity  to 
implement  national  macro  prudential  policy  will  therefore  be  important.  Overall,  it  seems 
essential to combine both union-wide and national factors in designing a SSM. 
Another reason why a SSM is desirable in a monetary union has to do with the credibility of 
the supervisory framework. When banks in a country run into trouble or a bubble is forming, 
outside  observers  tend  to  attribute  part  of  the  problem  to  weaknesses  in  the  national 
regulatory and supervisory regime. They naturally ask if other undetected problems may be 
brewing  in  the  financial  system  in  question.  This  may  lead  to  deposit  withdrawals  or  to  a 
national risk premium to develop even if the Sovereign has sufficient capacity to backstop the 
financial  system.  To  my  mind,  a  SSM,  provided  it  is  well-equipped  and  resourced,  is  less 
likely to have its credibility eroded in such a situation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Furthermore,  combined  with  a  single  supervisory  rulebook,  a  common  supervisory  culture 
can create a level playing field and increase transparency and confidence in the system. A 
SSM  can  also  eliminate  barriers  to  the  flow  of  information  between  supervisors  of  cross-
border  institutions.  The  development  of  a  common  resolution  framework  and  a  resolution 
fund will also facilitate an efficient management of cross-border banking difficulties.  
Indeed, while the debate around banking union is dominated by the capacity of the ESM to 
break the link between sovereigns and banks, a resolution framework alongside a common 
deposit guarantee scheme can help ensure that this link does not develop in future crises. 
The benefits of a resolution framework and fund in ensuring that taxpayers are insulated from 
the direct costs of resolving banks are clear. However, a common deposit guarantee scheme 
can be equally important; fears about the ability of individual sovereigns to backstop national 
deposit guarantee schemes have led to large intra-euro area retail deposit flows during the 
current crisis, significantly impacting on funding costs of banks in stressed sovereigns. 
Monetary policy  
Let me next turn to monetary policy. It is sometimes felt that monetary policy and banking 
supervision  should  not  be  conducted  by  the  same  institution  to  limit  the  risk  of  a  conflict 
between policy objectives that could hurt the credibility of monetary policy. Several concerns 
have  been  expressed.  Thus,  the  realisation  of  the  reputational  and  legal  risks  that 
supervision entails could damage the credibility of the monetary policy function. Furthermore, 
the  incentive  and,  crucially,  ability  of  the  supervisor  to  practice  forbearance  towards  a 
regulated institution which is facing difficulties is greater when the lender of last resort and 
the  supervisor  are  one  and  the  same.  Finally,  for  certain  shocks  the  appropriate  policy 
response  of  low  interest  rates  or  abundant  liquidity  provision  may  fuel  asset  prices, 
jeopardising financial stability and the price stability objective. 
While the concerns are real, in my view there are several mitigating factors:  
First, the design of the governance framework is critical. The primary objective for monetary 
policy must be price stability and the membership in the decision-making bodies for monetary 
policy and banking supervision should differ.  
Second, the geographical perspectives of banking supervision and monetary policy are likely 
to differ. While monetary policy is union wide, banking problems are likely to remain national. 
It seems unlikely that the realisation of financial instability in one or a few countries will lead 
to changes in union-wide monetary policy. 
Third,  episodes  of financial  instability  are  contractionary.  I  suspect that a  careful  review  of 
financial  history  would  provide  little  support for the  view  that  periods  of high  inflation  have 
been triggered by episodes of banking instability. 
Fourth, a conflict between the monetary policy and financial stability objectives is only likely 
when  a  large,  expansionary  aggregate  supply  shock  occurs.  In  this  case,  the  text  book 
prescription  until  now  has  been  to  relax  monetary  policy  to  permit  rapid  non-inflationary 
growth,  leading  to  a  risk  of  excessive  credit  expansion  and  a  bubble  forming.  However, 
macroprudential  policy  is  available  to  deal  with  the  asset  price  consequences  of 
expansionary monetary policy. 
A SSM is also likely to be helpful for monetary policy from an information perspective. For 
instance,  in  implementing  monetary  policy,  central  banks  require  their  counterparties  to 
satisfy  certain  criteria,  most  obviously  being  solvent.  Moreover,  Emergency  Liquidity 
Assistance shall only be provided to solvent banks. Thus, there is an on-going need for the 
central bank to have at least some information about individual banks.  
Furthermore, in setting monetary policy it is important to have a sense of how a change in 
policy  is  transmitted  through  the  banking  system  to  the  broader  economy.  Also  this 
information flows more easily if the supervisor is not too distant from monetary policy makers. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Similarly,  developments  in  the  broader  economy  may  first  be  reflected  in  supervisory 
information which may therefore be useful in setting monetary policy.  
Of course, the intensity of the debate about banking union reflects its importance. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
