Jens Weidmann: Pressing ahead – priorities for 2013 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Deutsche 
Börse Annual Reception, Eschborn, 21 January 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Mr Faber, 
Dear Mr Francioni, 
ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  be  invited  to  speak  to  you  once  again  at  Deutsche  Börse’s  Annual 
Reception. 
First of all, I have some good news to impart: the end of the world, announced for the latter 
part of December, proved not to be. Which is further demonstration of just how difficult long-
term forecasting is. 
But  now  another  disaster  looms:  a  year  with  the  number  13  in  it. Whilst  the  number  12  is 
associated with harmony and completeness, 13 has a harder time of it.  
For many, the number spells disharmony and is a harbinger of misfortune. Many aeroplanes 
have no 13th row, and floor 13 is frequently missed out in high-rise buildings in the United 
States.  However,  it  may  interest  you  to  know  that  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  Executive 
Board  meetings  are  held  on  the  13th  floor.  Superstition  about  numbers  appears  to  have 
passed us by. 
And  that  is  just  as  it  should  be,  because  central  bankers  do  well  to  maintain  a  rational 
relationship with numbers. Figures, data, statistics, balance sheets and the like are our daily 
bread.  
That applies to central bankers just as it does to stock exchange traders and other financial 
market experts. What we also have in common is that we are interested both in the figures 
that describe past economic events and in those which enable us to glimpse into the future. 
Although  forecasts  and  expectations  are  by  their  very  nature  uncertain,  they  nonetheless 
provide a basis for important decisions 
“Not only do expectations about policy matter, but (...) very little else matters.” 
These  words  about  monetary  policy  from  macroeconomist  Michael  Woodford  point  up  the 
importance of expectations in the economy. 
And  ultimately  these  expectations  come  to  be  traded  on  the  stock  exchange.  Deutsche 
Börse’s Annual Reception is therefore a perfect occasion to review the past year and then to 
take a look at expectations for the new year.  
Let me begin with our host: for Deutsche Börse AG, 2012 was an eventful and not entirely 
harmonious  year.  With  the  plans  to  merge  with  NYSE  Euronext  having  come  to  nothing, 
Deutsche Börse now needs to focus on growing organically. But I believe that the conditions 
are favourable for achieving growth under your own steam, and that Deutsche Börse is well 
positioned in the marketplace. 
Deutsche  Börse  is  of  central  importance  to  Germany  as  a  financial  location.  A  highly 
developed  economy  like  Germany’s,  with  its  innovative  and  internationally  successful 
companies, needs a broad range of top-quality financial services if it is to continue to achieve 
sustained growth. Deutsche Börse makes a decisive contribution to ensuring this is the case. 
The German financial system has also been spared excessive behaviour of a home-made 
nature.  This  is  a  very  good  environment  for  a  major  financial  location  –  and  for  Deutsche 
Börse. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
It must be added, of course, that the financial crisis has laid bare weaknesses in the financial 
system and in regulation which need to be rectified, and which are currently in the process of 
being rectified.  
The  purpose  of  the  reforms  is  not  to  strangle  the  financial  system  but  to  render  it  more 
stable. To achieve this, the risks in the system have to be made more transparent, and these 
risks need to be borne by those that entered into them. 
These are key prerequisites for ensuring that excessive risks are not taken on board and that 
the financial system can properly fulfil its essential economic functions. 
The  stock  exchanges,  as  organised  trading  venues,  have  a  central  role  to  play  in  these 
reform efforts. They ensure transparency, efficiency, reliability and market liquidity. 
The way in which modern regulatory standards have been swiftly implemented, making stock 
market trading even more robust and stable, provides Germany with a key advantage as a 
financial  location.  Deutsche  Börse  has  established  a  very  sound  position  for  itself  in  this 
respect,  including  in relation  to the  hot  topic  of  high-frequency  trading.  It  is  able to  offer  a 
trading infrastructure which is modern and reliable – think of circuit breakers – and it already 
meets most of the forthcoming requirements. 
2012 – review of an eventful year 
2. 
Deutsche Börse were not the only people for whom 2012 was an eventful year. The debt and 
financial crisis continued to prevail. Allow me to cast a roving spotlight over some of the key 
events and decisions in the crisis, just to remind you. 
• 
Potentially  unlimited  bond  buying  was  announced,  a  monetary  policy  move  which 
surprised  the  financial  markets  and  has  so  far  brought  greater  calm  to  these 
markets. 
Banking union was decided on in principle, with a single supervisory mechanism at 
the ECB. 
Collective action clauses will be attached to all government bonds issued in the euro 
area from the beginning of this year. 
Three-year tenders led to an unparalleled expansion in central bank liquidity. 
The ESM was established as a permanent provider of assistance. 
The  fiscal  compact,  aimed  at  strengthening  budgetary  discipline  in  the  monetary 
union, was ratified in 2012. 
Greece, where the sovereign debt crisis began, received a second rescue package 
in February, which had to be untied and modified in the autumn. 
    Mention should also be made of the island state of Cyprus: it requested financial assistance 
shortly after Spain did, and is currently still negotiating the details. 
Thus, 2012 was indeed a highly eventful year. Some now believe the depths of the crisis are 
behind us. Whatever the case, we still have a long way to go: many of the measures I have 
just mentioned will not rectify the causes of the crisis. The measures are aimed at dealing 
with the symptoms, and may create new problems of their own. 
So  let  us  now  look  forward,  to  2013.  What  should  we  expect,  what  it  is  reasonable  to 
anticipate, what should we seek to achieve? 
Economic situation and outlook 
3. 
Germany’s economy has made a weak start to the new year. Gross domestic product (GDP) 
appears to have contracted appreciably in the final quarter of 2012, and the economy is likely 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to be listless in the current quarter too. This is attributable not least to the crisis in the euro 
area and the uncertainty it is generating. 
Nevertheless,  there  is  a  realistic  prospect  that  this  phase  of  weaker  momentum  will  not 
persist  for  all  that  long  and  that  it  represents  no  more  than  a  blip.  As  a  result  of  the 
sluggishness  experienced  in  the  last  quarter  of  2012  and  the  first  quarter  of  2013,  our 
projection puts average GDP growth for the year at “just” 0.4%. 
However, this paints somewhat too gloomy a picture of the economy, which is likely to pick 
up  appreciably  as  the  year  progresses,  achieving  a  year-on-year  rate  –  ie  the  difference 
between the final quarters of 2012 and 2013 – of 1.1%. 
Overall, then, one might say that, although the economic outlook is modest, it is in no way a 
poor one, despite the prevailing uncertainty. The German economy remains in good shape. 
Economic policy challenges in the new year 
4. 
In order to be able to say the same thing for the euro area as a whole, we need to make 
decisive progress in tackling the financial and sovereign debt crisis in 2013.  
The financial crisis has been upon us for more than five years now, and the sovereign debt 
crisis for three years. Many people are weary of the crisis and would rather not hear about it. 
This crisis fatigue narrows people’s focus so that they are concerned only with smoothing the 
waters  in  the  short  term.  But  we  all  know  from  our  own  experience  that  problems  have  a 
habit of not going away until the root causes are dealt with. 
Of  course,  a  lot  has  already  been  achieved,  and  I  would  not  wish  to  downplay  these 
achievements. Significant progress has been made, for instance, in regulatory reform at an 
international level – think Basel III.  
Global current account imbalances have shrunk noticeably since their high point in 2007. 
And  there  has  also  been  some  improvement  in  the  crisis-hit  countries  of  the  euro  area: 
current account and budget deficits have fallen, competitiveness has improved, and work has 
been done on important structural reforms. 
I have already mentioned some of the progress achieved in the euro-area framework, such 
as the fiscal compact and the agreement on banking union. 
However,  these  advances  represent  milestones  en  route,  rather  than  the  final  destination. 
There remains plenty to do, in all the areas I have just mentioned. 
Regulation 
4.1 
On the question of regulation, I would like to highlight three areas as examples of where we 
now need to move forward. First, the new Basel III capital requirements. These should now 
be transposed into national law worldwide, including in the United States. 
Second,  in  Germany  as  elsewhere,  we  need  to  make  further  improvements  to  the 
arrangements  for  shielding  deposit-taking  credit  institutions  from  the  risks  of  speculative 
proprietary trading and high-risk lending.  
This  involves  more  than  just  tighter  capital  rules.  A  requirement  to  establish  trading  units 
which  are  legally,  organisationally  and  economically  independent  can  help  protect  deposit-
takers,  while  at  the  same  time  allowing  the  advantages  of  Germany’s  universal  banking 
system  to  be  retained.  Indeed,  there  is  no  call  to  forfeit  these  advantages,  since  banking 
systems  with  fully  segregated  functions  did  not  prove  to  be  in  any  way  superior  in  the 
financial crisis. 
Care  must  then  be  taken  in  defining  the  lines  of  business  which  need  to  be  set  apart. 
Customer-driven business and hedging transactions should not be included, and de minimis 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
limits  will  ensure  that  small  deposit-takers  can  also  undertake  proprietary  trading  and 
derivatives transactions to an appropriate extent. 
A  third  area  where  progress  needs  to  be  made  on  the  regulatory  front  is  high-frequency 
trading. The Bundesbank expressly welcomes the objectives of the relevant draft legislation. 
Computer-based high-frequency trading can enhance the efficiency of financial markets, for 
example by increasing market liquidity. Equally, though, high-frequency trading is susceptible 
to error and brings certain dangers with it. 
The plans to improve transparency through expanded information requirements are therefore 
appropriate.  The  installation  of  a  “kill  switch”  would  be  advisable,  to  enable  erroneous  or 
market-damaging algorithms to be deactivated. 
And it is to be hoped that Germany’s proposed legislation will serve to speed up the work at 
EU level on revising the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive. 
Budget consolidation and structural reforms 
4.2 
Among the economic policy tasks for 2013, I include pressing ahead with structural reforms 
and budget consolidation. These are challenges not just in the euro area. 
You  were  no  doubt  also  relieved  that  US  policymakers  were  able  to  thrash  out  a  deal 
between  New  Year’s  Eve  and  New  Year’s  Day  to  prevent,  initially,  the  US  economy  from 
falling off the edge of the fiscal cliff. 
Nevertheless,  that  compromise  still  falls  short  of  a  long-term  solution  to  the  existing  fiscal 
problems. The necessary raising of the US debt level and the spending cuts that have only 
been deferred could very soon lead to the next face-off. What is required here is acting more 
resolutely in the general interest, as the Europeans are regularly called on to do. 
Instead  of  that,  thoughts  and  minds  were  focused  on  the  suggestion  –  which  some  even 
meant seriously – that the US government should simply exploit a legal loophole and mint a 
platinum coin with a face value of one trillion US dollars and then pay this in at the Federal 
Reserve in order to acquire the money needed to cover current expenditure. 
The apparent aim of this proposal was to lever out the debt ceiling, but ultimately it amounts 
to solving debt problems by means of money creation. 
It now seems that this suggestion is no longer up for discussion, but I am still amazed to see 
onto what strange paths and byways unbridled pragmatism can lead when applied to crisis 
management. 
In  the  final  analysis,  there  is  no  smooth,  straightforward  and  quick  way  out,  either  in  the 
United  States  or  in  Europe.  The  processes  of  adjustment  in  putting  public  finances  and 
economic structures in order again are not going to take a matter of months or a few years.  
The losses of competitiveness in the countries in crisis, for example, were also built up over 
a decade. A great deal of perseverance will be required to make good those losses. 
Debt  reduction  by  governments,  enterprises  and  households  will  also  be  an  arduous 
process. In the case of sovereign debt, that process has not yet even really begun as only 
less new debt is being taken up initially. 
It  is  obvious  that,  in  many  countries,  pre-crisis  growth  rates  will  not  be  matched  any  time 
soon. 
Framework of monetary union and banking union 
4.3 
Nor  has  the  journey’s  end  been  reached  with  regard  to  a  new,  consistent  framework  for 
European  monetary  union.  Moreover,  so  far  there  is  still  no  consensus  on  what  the  final 
destination should be. To put a positive spin on it, there are a number of a diverse spirited 
opinions on the subject. A somewhat less positive take would be that national interests are 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
therefore  remains  unclear.  Progress 
plain to see, while the goal of a stable and functioning monetary union is sometimes lost from 
view. 
The  future  architecture  of  monetary  union 
is 
nevertheless  being  made  in  one  specific  but  important  area  –  the  financial  market 
architecture with the project of a European banking union. 
Properly designed, the banking union will strengthen financial stability in the euro area. It will 
then close up an unguarded flank of monetary union, thus helping to safeguard it as a union 
of stability. For that reason, the Bundesbank emphatically supports this project. 
The creation of a banking union is a case of major institutional work in progress and is, in 
essence, a matter of much the same complexity as setting up a monetary union. And even if 
it will certainly take less than the whole decade needed for EMU, it is a project that must not 
be rushed. It is too important for that. Nor should it create any new conflicts of interest which 
divert monetary policy from its primary objective of safeguarding price stability. 
Nevertheless, the easing in the financial markets must not dampen the zeal for reform in this 
area. Our guiding principle should be to act “as quickly as due caution allows”. 
A banking union entails not only a joint supervisory mechanism operating in accordance with 
the strictest uniform rules and standards possible. A resolution and restructuring mechanism, 
too, has to be an integral part of a banking union. A few days ago, Commission President 
Barroso rightly described this intention as a matter of the highest priority. 
Such a mechanism should ensure that, in the event of a bank encountering difficulties, it is, 
first  and  foremost,  the  owners  and  creditors  who  are  liable  for  their  investment  decisions, 
followed  by  a  fund  supported  by  the  banks,  and  only  then  –  in  exceptional  cases  –  the 
taxpayer,  with  mutualised  liability  being  possible  only  in  the  case  of  jointly  supervised 
institutions. 
The banking union additionally requires regulatory underpinning. Besides a generally better 
backing of risk positions with capital, as had already been decided in the case of Basel III, 
the risk arising from claims on the government also has to be backed with capital, at least in 
the medium term. This is the only effective way to break the vicious circle of tottering banks 
and teetering governments instead of merely shifting it to the European level by mutualising 
liability. 
We must not forget that the banking union is a project that is geared to the future. It cannot 
solve the current crisis and is not intended to clear up its legacy burdens. Rather, its purpose 
is,  above  all,  to  make  the  European  financial  system  and  thus  the  monetary  union 
permanently more resilient to new adverse developments and crises. 
If this succeeds, the banking union will protect the single monetary policy, the member states 
and their taxpayers alike. 
Central bank independence at risk 
5. 
Transferring responsibility for banking supervision to the ECB nevertheless fits in well with an 
impression that is becoming increasingly difficult to shake off outside the euro area as well. 
Central banks are having more and more responsibility thrust on them, even for tasks which 
lie outside their core mandate. 
My  colleague  James  Bullard  of  the  St.  Louis  Fed  (at  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the  American 
Economic  Association)  recently  bemoaned  the  fact  that  a  creeping  politicisation  of  central 
banks has been taking place worldwide in the wake of the financial crisis. One medium-term 
implication  of  this  development  might  also  be  that  price  stability,  as  the  main  objective  of 
monetary policy, is increasingly called into question with independent central banks going out 
of fashion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Stephen  King,  chief  economist  at  HSBC,  is  perhaps  right  in  predicting  that  “The  era  of 
independent central banks is coming to an end.” 
Even  now,  some  worrying  encroachments  can  be  observed,  say,  in  Hungary  or  in  Japan, 
where  the  new  government  is  involving  itself  massively  in  the  affairs  of  the  central  bank, 
making forceful calls for an (even more) aggressive monetary policy and threatening an end 
to central bank autonomy. 
One consequence, whether intentional or not, might also be an increasing politicisation of the 
exchange rate. So far, the international monetary system has come through the crisis without 
competitive devaluations and I hope very much that things stay like that. 
Now, in Japan of all places there may be more obvious problems than inflation and a weak 
currency.  It  is  not  without  good  reason,  however,  that  central  banks  have  been  given 
independence and a narrow mandate. This was a lesson of the 1970s and early 1980s – a 
time when many countries had high inflation rates, sometimes in double digits. 
In the United States, this era is called the “great inflation”, which  was followed in the mid-
1980s  by  the  “great  moderation”,  a  period  of  moderate  inflation  rates  and  dampened 
economic cycles. And, then, along with the “great financial crisis” came the “great recession”. 
“Great” is a famously popular, not to say overused adjective on the other side of the Atlantic. 
The experience of the great inflation was, in any event, that independent central banks with a 
narrow, credible mandate enjoyed greater success in combating inflation. 
As  a  result,  many  central  banks  worldwide  were  given  independence  in  the  1980s  and 
1990s. When the Bank of England was granted independence in 1997, Gordon Brown, then 
Chancellor of the Exchequer, said “The previous arrangements for monetary policy were too 
short-termist,  encouraging  short  but  unsustainable  booms  and  higher  inflation,  followed 
inevitably by recession.”  
The depoliticisation of money and central banks’ stability orientation undoubtedly made a key 
contribution to the great moderation. 
The  decline  in  inflation  during  this  period  was,  admittedly,  also  assisted  by  other 
developments, such as globalisation. To that extent, the great moderation can be seen as 
halcyon days for monetary policy. 
Since the outbreak of the crisis, the environment has become noticeably less favourable for 
central  bankers.  The  growing  demand  for  energy  and  raw  materials  on  the  part  of  the 
up-and-coming  economies  has 
impact  of 
globalisation flip over into rising pressure on prices.  
In  the  wake  of  the  financial,  economic  and  sovereign  debt  crisis,  central  banks  are  being 
urged to take measures to support the financial system, stimulate economic activity, reduce 
government funding costs and even safeguard government solvency. 
Overburdening central banks with tasks and expectations, however, is certainly not the right 
way to achieve a lasting solution to the crisis. The central banks, in turn, will best protect their 
independence by adopting a narrow interpretation of their mandate. 
In summary, it can be said that “Today most central banks are independent, headed by non-
elected officials, and quite powerful. This set-up is acceptable only if independence is limited 
by the mandate. That’s the framework the legislators have given us […]. That is why we are 
so  keen  about  respecting  the  mandate,  because  that’s  the  true  guarantee  of  our 
independence, which […] is crucial for our credibility. And credibility is essential for delivering 
price stability.”  
Those words are not mine, by the way, but come from a recent interview with Mario Draghi, 
who put the point most succinctly. 
inflation-dampening 
to  make 
tended 
the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
What matters now 
6. 
The key to resolving the crisis therefore does not lie with the central banks. 
Rather, permanently overcoming the crisis will now be a matter of rapidly implementing the 
regulatory  reforms  that  have  already  been  agreed  in  principle  –  above  all  Basel  III  –  and 
governments  implementing  budget consolidation  and  the  necessary  structural  reforms  in  a 
controlled,  creative  but  consistent  manner  –  and  not  just  in  Europe.  Similarly,  it  will  be 
important  to  put  in  place  a  coherent  framework  for  the  monetary  union  –  a  framework  in 
which, despite the communitisation of risks, liability and control are not thrown out of kilter –
with everything based on the Maastricht principles as long as there are no majorities for a 
genuine fiscal union. In this connection, too, the banking union should be designed in such a 
way that it really does become a primary pillar of a stability union. 
This year will probably not mark the end of the crisis. As I have already said, the processes 
of adjustment will take time. But decisive steps can be taken in 2013 to overcome the crisis 
on a lasting basis.  
Of course, I said the same thing at the last annual opening with regard to 2012. Still, that is 
not  my  own  personal  mantra,  but  rather  a  reminder  that  there  is  no  more  time  to  spare. 
Those steps being now taken, however, would be good news for us all, not least for Frankfurt 
as a financial centre and for Deutsche Börse. 
For all of us, I want to see these steps being implemented and, with that in mind, I wish you 
all the best in the new year.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
