Benoît Cœuré: The Single Resolution Mechanism – why it is needed 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the ICMA Annual General Meeting and Conference 2013, organised by the International 
Capital Market Association, Copenhagen, 23 May 2013. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Barbara  Attinger,  Cécile  Meys,  and  Pär  Torstensson  for  their  contributions  to  these  remarks.  I 
remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  financial  crisis  has  highlighted  the  weaknesses  of  the  institutional  framework  of 
Economic and Monetary Union. The negative feedback loop between banks and sovereigns 
as  well  as  signs  of  market  fragmentation  made  European  leaders  take  an  extraordinary 
decision last summer, namely to establish the European Banking Union. 
This is a historic step forward, but not unprecedented. As some of you might know, before 
the  National  Banking  Act  of  1864,  banks  in  the  United  States  were  state-chartered 
corporations,  subject  to  the  oversight  and  resolution  regime  in  the  state  in  which  they 
operated.  And  only  the  Banking  Act  of  1933,  often  referred  to  as  the  Glass-Steagall  Act, 
established  a  system  of  federal  deposit  guarantees  and  created  a  new  entity,  the  Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).1 
Of  course,  one  important  difference  is  that  in  the  United  States,  the  banking  union  came 
after, and not before the fiscal union. Establishing a banking union without a fiscal union is 
certainly  more  challenging.  Nevertheless,  and  as  I  will  argue  later,  it  is  desirable  and 
possible, provided the right sequence is in place.  
In  this  respect,  today  I  would  like  to  outline  my  thoughts  on  the  three  pillars  of  a  true 
European  Banking  Union:  (i)  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM);  (ii)  the  Single 
Resolution Mechanism (SRM); and (iii) a common system of deposit protection. I would like 
to emphasise that for there to be a genuine banking union, by which I mean a situation where 
confidence in deposits is independent of the jurisdiction in which they are located, all three 
pillars  have  to  be  in  place.  While  good  progress  is  being  made  on  the  supervisory 
mechanism, therefore, there should be no doubt in anybody’s mind that the single resolution 
mechanism is its indispensable complement. The two have to proceed in parallel. They can 
be complemented at a later stage by a common system of deposit protection, but eventually 
all three pillars will need to be in place for the banking system to be truly one. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism 
The first pillar of the banking union will be the Single Supervisory Mechanism. A strong and 
independent supranational supervisor will contribute significantly to the smooth functioning of 
the  monetary  union  and  to  restoring  confidence  in  the  banking  sector.  This  restoration  of 
confidence in the banking sector is key to restarting a well-functioning interbank market and 
to amplifying recent developments towards financial reintegration.  
The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  will  comprise  national  competent  authorities  from  the 
euro area as well as the ECB, with the possibility of non-euro area members participating. 
The  scope  of  the  proposed  regulation  is  very  broad,  covering  all  of  the  more  than 
6,000 credit institutions in the euro area. However, not all of them will fall under the direct 
responsibility of the ECB. The ECB will directly supervise those banks and banking groups 
                                                 
1   See Thomas J. Fitzpatrick, Moira Kearney-Marks and James B. Thomson: “The History and Rationale for a 
Separate Bank Resolution Process”, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
that are considered to be significant. The national authorities will retain their responsibilities 
for prudential supervision of the other banks. However, the ECB may at any time, on its own 
initiative and after consulting with, or at the request of, a national competent authority, decide 
to exercise direct supervision. The banks falling under direct supervision will be identified by 
using a methodology based on the criteria mentioned in the Regulation. We expect that it will 
cover more than 80%, or more than 25 trillion euro, of the euro area’s banking assets. It will 
represent the largest single supervisory jurisdiction by assets. 
The precise assignment of tasks within the Single Supervisory Mechanism will be specified in 
a  Framework  Regulation  that  the  ECB  will  publish  six  months  after  the  publication  of  the 
SSM Regulation. A public consultation will precede this publication – it will be very important 
to have input from the industry on this matter. 
As you may know, the current position is that a political agreement was reached on 18 April 
between  the  European  Council  and  the  European  Parliament  on  a  Regulation  conferring 
supervisory tasks on the European Central Bank. In our view, the Regulation will provide an 
effective framework for the ECB to exercise prudential supervision, while also providing for 
the necessary separation between the supervisory and monetary policy tasks of the ECB, as 
well as setting a high level of democratic control on the SSM.  
The Single Resolution Mechanism 
The  second  pillar  of  the  banking  union  will  be  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM). 
Although the framework for the SRM still needs to be defined as part of a collective effort by 
the European Commission, the European Council and the European Parliament, I would like 
to discuss why the SRM is needed, what its main components should be and how it can be 
established.  
The  crisis  has  shown  the  importance  of  having  a  framework  in  place  for  resolving  failing 
banks swiftly and impartially. As the ECB stated in its Opinion on the Commission’s proposed 
Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD):  “…all  financial  institutions  should  be 
allowed to fail in an orderly manner, safeguarding the stability of the financial system as a 
whole”.2  This  will  provide  the  right  incentives  to  financial  market  participants  and  minimise 
public costs and economic disruption.  
A  timely  resolution  of  a  bank  should  avoid  that  problems  in  one  bank  spill  over  to  other 
banks, possibly affecting European financial stability. Moreover, the uncertainty surrounding 
the  use  of  ad  hoc  solutions  in  Europe,  as  we  all  saw  recently  in  the  case  of  Cyprus,  has 
shown the importance of establishing a clear and credible legal framework to underpin the 
resolution  of  banks.  Without  such  a  framework,  decisions  are  often  taken  late  and  in  an 
improvised  way.  Any  solution  which  does  not  imply  an  outright  bailout  seems  to  take 
creditors and markets by surprise. This will need to change. I would say that after the events 
of Cyprus, markets should be convinced that Europe is serious and committed to bailing in 
and thus ending the bailout culture.  
While  Europe  has  already  demonstrated  that  it  has  the  resolve,  the  establishment  of  a 
credible  resolution  framework  will  ensure  that  it  will  also  have  the  powers  and  the  tools. 
Ending bailouts is key not only to enhancing market discipline, but also to ensuring that those 
who  appropriate  the  gains  are  also  those  who  cover  the  losses.  It  would,  however,  be  a 
mistake to assume that there will be no more troubled banks once the SSM is in force and 
supervisory responsibility is transferred to the ECB. So if the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
is to be effective, it needs to be complemented by a Single Resolution Mechanism to deal 
with non-viable banks. It is thus crucial that the SRM framework is in place once the SSM is 
                                                 
2   ECB  Opinion  29  November  2012,  (CON/2012/99),  http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/c_03920130212en 
00010024.pdf 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
operational.  From  the  ECB’s  point  of  view,  only  if  the  SSM  is  complemented  by  a  Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  with  a  common  backstop  can  the  negative  feedback  loop  between 
sovereigns and banks be broken, ensuring thereby that monetary policy transmission is fully 
restored.  
The  SRM  would  need  several  components  to  be  effective.  Although  the  European 
Commission is still defining the framework for the SRM, let me nevertheless mention what, 
from my point of view, the main features of such a mechanism should be.  
First,  the  SRM  should  be  based  on  a  strong  and  independent  Single  Resolution  Authority 
(SRA)  entrusted  with  the  necessary  powers.  This  would  enable  prompt  and  coordinated 
resolution  action  to  be  taken,  specifically  where  cross-border  banks  are  concerned. 
Experience  has  repeatedly  taught  us  that  mere  coordination  between  national  authorities 
does not suffice in a cross-border bank resolution. Successful resolution needs prompt and 
decisive action. Although the organisational aspects of the SRA still need to be decided, in 
order  to  achieve  its  objectives,  the  SRA  should  be  strong,  independent  and  preferably  a 
standalone  authority  and  should  collaborate  closely  with  the  SSM  and  the  European 
Commission.  
Second,  the  SRA  should  have  adequate  funds  for  resolution  financing.  Indeed,  for  the 
resolution framework to work well and be credible, the SRA must have access to a privately-
funded  European  Resolution  Fund.  This  Fund  should  be  pre-funded  by  levies  from  the 
private sector. This would ensure that the SRA has access to the necessary financing to take 
resolution  action  and  achieve  least-cost  solutions,  as  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC) does in the US.  
Third, in order to ensure the credibility of the Fund, it should have access to a temporary and 
fiscally neutral fiscal backstop at euro area level, to be used only as a last resort. 
Indeed, in order for the SRM to be effective, it will require a common resolution framework, 
containing comprehensive powers and tools. A harmonised toolbox of resolution powers is 
foreseen in the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, so it is crucial that this Directive is 
adopted as an immediate priority and passed into law before the SSM is operational.  
A  key  resolution  tool  included  in  the  Directive,  one  that  all  authorities  should  have,  is  the 
possibility of bailing in by creditors. Bailing-in is conducive to achieving a specific policy goal, 
namely  that  the  burden  of  bank  failures  should  be  borne  first  and  foremost  by  the  private 
sector, rather than the taxpayer.  
In  accordance  with  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  Key  Attributes  of  Efficient  Resolution 
Regimes  for  Financial  Institutions,  which  have  been  incorporated  in  the  BRRD,  resolution 
authorities  should  be  able  to  write  down  or  convert  into  equity  liabilities  in  a  manner  that 
respects  the  hierarchy  of  claims  in  a  liquidation.  Thus,  when  a  bail-in  by  creditors  takes 
place,  legal  certainty  and  predictability  are  essential.  Despite  the  limited  spillovers,  the 
idiosyncratic aspects of the bail-in by uninsured depositors in Cyprus may remain a cause for 
concern among investors. Creditors need to have a clear picture of what could happen in the 
event  of  a  bank  failure.  This  is  key  to  avoiding  excessive  market  volatility,  bank  runs, 
underprovision  of  capital  and  liquidity  and/or  overpricing  of  risk.  This  can  be  done  by 
respecting  the  hierarchy  of  creditors  in  the  event  of  insolvency,  i.e.  the  order  in  which 
creditors will suffer losses in a bail-in.  
In  order  to  enhance  legal  certainty  and  predictability,  a  clear  pecking  order  has  to  be 
established  regarding  the  financing  of  resolution  measures.  Losses  and  resolution  costs 
should first and foremost be borne by the shareholders and subsequently by the creditors of 
the  failing  institution.  Only  at  that  point  should  the  private  sector  be  called  in  to  finance 
resolution  via  the  resolution  fund.  Then  and  only  as  a  last resort  in  case  the  accumulated 
funds  in  the  resolution  fund  are  insufficient,  should  there  be  a  temporary  public  backstop 
providing credit to the resolution fund. But any such support should be fiscally neutral and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
recouped  through  ex-post  levies  on  banks.  This  will  ensure  that  financial  sector  repair  is 
ultimately financed by the private sector itself.  
As regards the use of bail-in, let me stress that it should not create wrong incentives to the 
original entity by just continuing with “business as usual”. Following the resolution process, 
only  the  critical  functions  and  “good  parts”  of  the  original  entity  should  survive,  either 
because they are sold to a private sector purchaser – as commonly done by the FDIC with 
the Purchase & Assumption approach used in the US – or because they are transferred to a 
bridge  bank.  It  needs  to  be  clear  that  the  aim  of  resolution  is  not  to  preserve  the  failing 
institution  as  such,  but  to  ensure  the  continuity  of  the  functions  that  are  critical  for  the 
financial system as a whole.  
Another important way of providing legal certainty and predictability in resolution would be to 
introduce harmonised depositor preference for eligible deposits in the EU. Currently, deposits 
have a preferential status in the hierarchy of claims in some Member States, while in others 
the deposits rank alongside any other senior unsecured creditor of the bank in insolvency. 
This may imply different treatment of depositors depending on the location of their deposits 
and lead to further market fragmentation.  
Introducing harmonised depositor preference for eligible deposits in the EU would lower the 
risk of bank runs as it reduces the incentive for uninsured depositors to withdraw deposits. In 
addition,  it  would  aid  the  resolvability  of  banks,  since  it  avoids  the  cumbersome  task  of 
splitting  the  eligible  deposits  into  covered  and  uncovered  parts.  It  would  also  enable 
uninsured  deposits  to  be  transferred  or  sold  along  with  the  insured  deposits  and  thus 
increase  the  franchise  value  of  the  bank  under  resolution  and  its  essential  parts. 
Nevertheless, it should be acknowledged that depositor preference may lead to increasing 
secured lending and decreasing maturity of the funding of banks. However this can be limited 
(i) by introducing a minimum requirement for bail-in-able instruments, calibrated to provide an 
adequate buffer of loss absorbency as foreseen in the draft EU framework; as well as (ii) by 
the introduction of the Net Stable Funding Ratio that banks will have to fulfil.  
Another argument often raised against deposit preference is that it may also raise the cost of 
senior  unsecured  funding  for  banks.  This  is  a  discussion  that  we  need  to  take  seriously. 
However I would make here two observations.  
First, one has to recognise the change in the liability structure of banks that is brought about 
by the deleveraging of the system. With generally lower loan to deposit ratios in the future 
relative to the pre-crisis period, and a clearer priority ranking of bank creditors, the role of 
senior unsecured wholesale funding for banks has evolved and will likely continue to evolve. 
If we accept that a smaller and less leverage banking system is desirable, then this evolution 
is not to be feared or resisted.  
Second, the overall effect on funding costs of banks is not straightforward, given the potential 
offset provided by cheaper deposit funding. Currently, more than half of the G20 countries 
already have depositor preference, among them the US, with no appreciable cost difference 
to  banking  systems  without  depositor  preference.  Furthermore,  deposit  preference  can  in 
principle reduce the probability of default of financial institutions. Depositor preference could 
further strengthen the incentives of unsecured creditors to exercise more effective discipline 
over  banks’  risk-taking.  This  implies  that  while  the  loss  given  default  for  senior  unsecured 
creditors increases as a result of depositor preference, the probability of default is likely to 
decrease. Also, as I argued before, lowering the risk of bank runs also reduces the future 
probability of default.  
Clearly,  when  applying  the  pecking  order,  the  Single  Resolution  Authority  should  take  into 
account all relevant factors. Particularly, it should consider (i) the least-cost principle for the 
taxpayer, (ii) financial stability considerations and (iii) the impact on the real economy. These 
elements call potentially for some flexibility in the application of the bail-in tool. But despite 
the undisputed need for flexibility, consistency should be ensured at the European level and 
exemptions should be clearly defined and strictly limited.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finally, the third pillar of the banking union is an integrated framework for deposit protection. 
A first step towards this aim would be the adoption of the pending legislative proposal of the 
Commission on a Directive for Deposit Guarantee Schemes (DGS). This framework should 
ensure depositor confidence and enable the national guarantee schemes, built on common 
EU standards, to interact with the SRM. Bail-in rules, with a clear treatment of depositors in 
resolution and insolvency, and with depositor preference making it less likely that the DGS is 
drawn  upon,  will  make  this  interaction  much  easier  in  a  real  crisis,  and  will  facilitate  the 
implementation of a common DGS at a later stage. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The decision to establish a genuine banking union is a fundamental step 
towards  completing  the  architecture  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  therefore  making  it 
more  effective  and  more  resilient. It  goes  without  saying  –  but  it  goes  perhaps  better  with 
saying it – that it is not the only step. It will have to be complemented itself by the completion 
of  the  Union  in  the  fiscal,  economic  and  political  fields,  as  identified  by  President  van 
Rompuy last year. In the area of banking policy as in those other fields, we have to heed the 
lessons  of  the  past:  we  have  to  make  the  new  architecture  comprehensive  and  internally 
consistent. We cannot again leave the project half-completed. It is for that reason that we, at 
the  ECB,  have  been  insisting  that  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  must  be  completed 
with the other pillars of the banking union, and the banking union must be completed with 
action in other areas too. So while we have made considerable progress, there is still much 
work to be done. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
