Duvvuri Subbarao: Is there a new normal for inflation? 
Speech  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Bankers’ 
Club, New Delhi, 8 March 2013. 
 1. 
India  recovered from  the  global financial  crisis ahead  of  most  other countries,  but 
inflation too caught up with us sooner than elsewhere. As measured by the wholesale price 
index (WPI), inflation went marginally into negative territory for a few months into the crisis in 
2009  and  started  rising  sharply  thereafter,  clocking  a  peak  rate  of  10.9  per  cent  in  April 
20101. Average WPI inflation was 9.6 per cent in fiscal year 2010/11, 8.9 per cent in 2011/12 
and 7.5 per cent during the first ten months of 2012/13 (Chart-1). 
 
  New normal hypothesis 
2. 
Despite  this  high  episode  of  inflation  playing  out  over  the  last  three  years,  the 
Reserve Bank has consistently maintained in all its policy reviews that its objective is to “… 
condition and contain perception of inflation in the range of 4.0–4.5 per cent. This is in line 
with  the  medium-term  objective  of  3.0  per  cent  inflation  consistent  with  India’s  broader 
integration into the global economy.” 
3. 
In  recent  months,  some  analysts  have  questioned  the  Reserve  Bank’s  resolve  to 
bring  inflation  down  to  this  level  given  the  trend  of  stubborn  and  persistent  inflation.  Their 
main  contention  is  that  average WPI  inflation  over  the  last  three  years  for  which  data  are 
available  (February  2010  –  January  2013),  at  8.8  per  cent,  is  significantly  higher  than  the 
                                                
1   The last time India experienced more than three successive years of inflation above 7.5 per cent was during 
1990–96. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
average inflation of 6.0 per cent in the three years before the Lehman collapse (September 
2005 – August 2008) suggesting that India’s inflation rate has undergone an upward phase 
shift owing to a host of domestic and global developments. Monetary policy calibration, it is 
argued, can get flawed unless the Reserve Bank acknowledges this new normal. 
4. 
The Reserve Bank does not agree with this ‘new normal’ argument. Indeed it is this 
intellectual conviction that informed our efforts to rein in inflation over the last three years as 
we  brought  inflation  from  double  digit  levels  to  below  7  per  cent.  The  central  task  of  this 
speech is to present the Reserve Bank’s position on the ‘new normal’ debate. 
Arguments in support of a new normal 
5. 
various analysts in support of a new normal. 
In  order  to  make  my  case,  let  me  first  summarize  the  arguments  put  forward  by 
Wage-price spiral is a permanent shock to the inflation path 
(i) 
The first argument for a ‘new normal’ stems from the steep increase in rural wages 
6. 
over the last few years that has set off a wage-price spiral. Nominal rural wages increased at 
double digit rates over the last five years. Indeed they increased so rapidly that despite high 
retail  inflation,  real  wages  too  surged  at  close  to  double  digits  in  the  last  three  years 
(Table-1). 
  7. 
By  far  the  most  dominant  driver  of  rural  wages  has  been  the  Government’s 
affirmative  action  programmes,  both  by  way  of  transfer  payments  (subsidies)  and  welfare 
programmes,  which  have  significantly  raised  the  demand  for  wage  goods  while  also 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
restraining  supply  of  labour  at  low  wages.  Two  other  factors  exacerbated  the  wage-price 
spiral. First, the large public employment programme has not only pushed up wages, but also 
exerted  upward  pressure  on  agricultural  input  prices  and  thereby  on  food  prices.  Second, 
even as wages have increased, there has been no corresponding increase in productivity – a 
recipe for inflation. 
8. 
The ‘new normal’ argument drawing from this is that it will be politically  difficult to 
reverse these entitlement programmes, they are here to stay, and that India should accept 
wage-price pressures as a structural feature and adjust its inflation goal accordingly. 
Commodity price pressures will persist 
(ii) 
9. 
Given  the  tepid  recovery  of  advanced  economies  from  the  crisis  and  consequent 
sluggish demand, the expectation was that global prices of commodities, especially of crude, 
would  remain  soft.  On  the  contrary,  commodity  prices  have  surged  compared  to  the  pre-
crisis period (excluding the highly volatile two years of the crisis) and have remained firm at 
that level (Chart-2). 
 
10. 
Several forces that will extend into the medium-term, it is argued, will work to keep 
commodity prices firm. First, oil producers, notwithstanding assurances to the contrary, will 
calibrate  supply  to  ensure  a  minimum  floor  price  for  crude.  Second,  ‘financialization  of 
commodities’, a catch phrase used to describe a spike in commodity prices quite unrelated to 
fundamentals, that gathered momentum thanks to the buildup in global liquidity provided by 
the  unprecedented  quantitative  easing  (QE)  in  advanced  economies  is  here  to  stay.  This 
creates  an  asymmetry  between  financial  market  conditions  and  the  real  economy  that  will 
remain a structural feature of the global economy. The third argument in support of higher 
commodity  prices  is  made  on  the  basis  of  long-term  fundamentals.  These  will  stem  from 
several factors: a larger world population, up from 7 billion in 2012 to over 9 billion in 2050, 
higher per capita energy consumption as emerging and developing economies ‘catch up’ on 
GDP levels, and the recovery of advanced economy growth to normal levels. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
11. 
The  new  normal  argument  in  this  context  is  that  these  global  price  pressures  will 
transmit to Indian prices either because of actual imports or because of largely import parity 
pricing, thereby stoking inflation pressures. 
The positive supply shock of the Great Moderation has run out 
(iii) 
12. 
The  world  enjoyed  an  extended  period  of  extraordinary  price  stability  during  the 
Great  Moderation  of  the  pre-crisis  years.  As  we  now  know,  this  was  largely  the  benign 
influence  of  the  integration  of  emerging  economies,  especially  China,  into  the  global 
economy. Through the 80s and 90s, China alone added over a billion people to the global 
labour pool. This raised global production, but without commensurate increase in demand, 
and hence prices remained low. 
13. 
The world, it is argued, will not return to the “Great Moderation” situation post-crisis. 
As China goes forward on its “rebalancing” from external demand to domestic demand, the 
global economy will see shrinking of low cost supplies from China and hence higher prices. 
The era of cheap imports is over and done forever. 
14. 
The  new  normal  argument  in  this  context  runs  as  follows.  Because  the  positive 
supply shock from China has all but waned, global inflation will shift to a new normal once 
the recovery is complete. The Reserve Bank’s implicit formula is to calibrate its comfort level 
of  inflation  some  2–3  percentage  points  above  the  average  rate  of  inflation  in  advanced 
economies, while also aiming to converge to the world average inflation in the medium-term. 
If so, it should recognize the new global normal for inflation and recalibrate its comfort level 
for domestic inflation accordingly. 
Quantitative easing will lead to higher inflation in advanced economies 
(iv) 
15. 
Advanced  economy  central  banks  have  battled  the  global  financial  crisis  with  an 
unusual show of policy force by resorting to unprecedented levels of “Quantitative Easing”. It 
is argued that this excess will haunt their economies through higher and persistent inflation 
once they recover to an equilibrium level. 
16. 
Will  advanced  economies  have  an  incentive  to  battle  those  inflation  pressures? 
Possibly not. Given their extraordinary fiscal pressures and consequent heavy obligation of 
public debt servicing, they may in fact find it a convenient way to inflate their way out of debt. 
17. 
The Indian dimension of this global outlook is as follows. If higher level of inflation in 
advanced economies on the way forward is inevitable, India should recognize this, and factor 
it into its policy calculus consistent with its goal of inflation a few percentage points above the 
average inflation in AEs. 
India should exploit the positive relationship suggested by the Philips Curve 
(v) 
18. 
Macroeconomists have long struggled with the dilemma posed by the Philips Curve 
relationship. The Philips Curve is just an empirically observed positive relationship between 
inflation  and  growth  (or  an  inverse  relationship  between  inflation  and  unemployment). 
Notwithstanding  subsequent  economic  research,  some  of  it  rewarded  with  Nobel  Prizes, 
which showed that the Philips Curve trade-off has no theoretical basis, there is a school of 
thought  that  monetary  policy  can  exploit  this  inflation-growth  trade-off  to  achieve  higher 
growth (or lower unemployment) by tolerating slightly higher inflation. 
19. 
For  those  who  believe  in  the  Philips  Curve  trade-off,  India  presents  a  persuasive 
case  for  bargaining  away  a  bit  of  inflation  to  secure  higher  growth  because  the  multiplier 
impact of higher growth on poverty reduction will be larger in the case of India. But wouldn’t 
higher  inflation  hurt  the  poor?  The  proponents  argue  that  it  will  not  because  higher  real 
incomes will raise purchasing power to more than offset the impact of higher inflation. 
20. 
It should be noted that the new normal inflation argument deriving from the Philips 
Curve  is  different from  the  earlier  arguments  in  one  important  way.  The  earlier  arguments 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have an involuntary dimension. India cannot influence these forces; it has to perforce adjust 
to  them.  In  contrast,  the  Philips  Curve  argument  involves  a  voluntary  policy  choice  of 
accepting higher inflation to secure higher growth. Should that choice be made, it will require 
the Reserve Bank to recalibrate its inflation goal at a higher level. 
(vi) 
PPP convergence on account of India’s integration into the global economy 
will imply accepting a new normal for inflation 
21. 
This  argument  is  based  on  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect  which  says  that  the 
absolute  price  level  in  a  developing  economy  needs  to  converge  with  those  of  developed 
economies as it integrates into the global economy on account of “PPP” (purchasing power 
parity) catch up. In the process of this catch-up, wages may increase ahead of productivity 
levels, especially in the non-tradeable sector, leading to inflation. 
22. 
India’s integration with the global economy over the last ten years has been much 
more rapid than we tend to acknowledge, and over the next ten years, it will be much more 
rapid than we tend to believe. The Economic Survey of 2011/12 had argued that this PPP 
convergence process for India over the next 30 years would involve an additional inflation of 
2  percentage  points  with  no  exchange  rate  adjustment  and  1.5  per  centage  points  if  the 
rupee  is  allowed  to  appreciate.  The  counsel  to  monetary  authorities  accordingly  is  to 
acquiesce in this “new normal” and support growth to hasten the process of PPP catch up. 
Interestingly, the debate about a new normal for inflation is not unique to India; it is 
Debate about a new normal not unique to India 
23. 
playing out in several countries in the post-crisis context in, of course, different ways. 
As early as in 2000, Bernanke2 had argued that the Bank of Japan’s (BoJ) monetary 
24. 
policy had hit the Keynesian liquidity trap, and that the BoJ should raise its inflation tolerance 
to 3 to 4 per cent in order to flog the deflationary forces. 
25. 
As the global financial crisis unfolded, Bernanke found himself at the receiving end 
of similar advice when Blanchard et al.3 and Krugman4 had, separately and independently, 
argued that the Federal Reserve should raise its inflation target from 2 per cent to 4 per cent 
in order to give itself larger head room for conventional monetary easing and thereby avoid, 
or  at  any  rate  delay,  recourse  to  unconventional  monetary  easing.  Quantitative  estimates 
have  reinforced  this  argument  by  showing  that  at  an  inflation  target  of  4  per  cent,  the 
probability  of  the  Fed  Funds  Rate  touching  zero  is  less  than  1  per  cent.  The  Fed  has, 
however,  resisted  this  call  for  a  higher  inflation  target  by  arguing  that  this  exposes  the 
economy to the risk of higher inflation by unhinging inflation expectations.5  
26. 
More recently, a higher inflation target debate played out in Japan in a more high 
profile  fashion.  In  deference  to  the  electoral  commitment  of  the  incoming  government  to 
provide a growth stimulus, the Bank of Japan raised its goal of 1% inflation to a target of 2% 
inflation which it hopes to achieve through unlimited bond purchase. 
27. 
In the UK, a battle of ideas is playing out on how to revive the sagging economy. 
The Government has firmly embraced a fiscal consolidation plan, but the private sector is yet 
                                                
2   Ben  S  Bernanke,  “Japanese  Monetary  Policy:  A  Case  of  Self-induced  Paralysis”,  Institute  for  International 
Economics, Special Report 13, September 2000. 
3   Olivier  Blanchard,  Giovanni  Dell’  Ariccia,  and  Paolo  Mauro,  “Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy”,  IMF  Staff 
Position Note, February 12, 2010. 
4   Paul Krugman, “Earth to Ben Bernanke: Chairman Bernanke Should Listen to Professor Bernanke”, New York 
Times, August 24, 2012. 
5   Esther L George, “The US Economy and Monetary Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
to  take  up  the  slack  left  by  the  Government  and  demand  is  yet  to  revive.  The  burden  of 
stimulating  the  economy  has  therefore  fallen  on  the  Bank  of  England  (BoE),  an  inflation 
targeter,  which  found  itself  consistently  overshooting  its  inflation  target  over  several 
successive months till mid-2012. 
28. 
This policy context has triggered a debate in the UK on whether inflation targeting is 
an appropriate policy stance in the face of unyielding recession. One option as suggested by 
Mark  Carney,  soon  to  be  BoE  Governor,  is  that  central  banks  could  consider  targeting 
nominal GDP instead of inflation. Nominal GDP targeting, by reducing uncertainty about how 
long monetary policy will stay easy, allows a central bank to persist with an accommodative 
monetary stance to stimulate growth even if inflation is above its comfort level. This is not 
costless though. It increases uncertainty about future inflation and can therefore potentially 
unhinge inflation expectations from their anchor around the targeted inflation. 
29. 
Even  as  these  debates  about  a  new  normal  for  inflation  are  becoming  more 
commonplace  around  the  world,  the  context  similarity  between  India  and  advanced 
economies  should  not  be  stretched. The  concern  in  advanced  economies  is  about  how  to 
continue with the stance of monetary easing even after the policy interest rates have hit the 
zero lower bound so as to minimize loss of employment and output. The concern in emerging 
economies  in  general,  and  India  in  particular,  on  the  contrary,  is  an  aspiration  for  higher 
growth aimed at poverty reduction, even if it entails higher, albeit not much higher, inflation. It 
is important to acknowledge this vital difference in evaluating the arguments for and against 
a higher “normal for inflation”. 
Why is it important to recognise if there is a new normal for inflation? 
30. 
It  is  important  because  not  recognizing  an  upward  long-term  structural  shift  in 
“normal  inflation”  can  lead  to  a  flawed  monetary  policy  stance  with  potentially  heavy 
macroeconomic costs. 
31. 
This  can  be  understood  in  the  paradigm  of  type-I  and  type-II  errors  in  statistical 
analysis.  If  indeed  there  is  a  new  normal  and  it  is  not  recognized,  this  could  lead  to  an 
overtightening of monetary policy, a type-II error. But there could be a type-I error too if the 
new normal is wrongly recognized and monetary conditions are kept accommodative for too 
long, thereby fuelling higher inflation. Theory also tells us that efforts to minimize one type of 
error result in maximizing the other type of error. So, where should the balance lie? Even if 
there is arguably a new normal for inflation, wouldn’t it be more prudent to err on the side of 
caution? And what will be the price to be paid for that prudence on the inflation front in terms 
of lost growth? 
32. 
Central  banks  face  a  complex  policy  choice  in  managing  the  growth-inflation 
balance.  Experience  shows  that  policy  mistakes  cannot  easily  be  reversed  in  short  order, 
and  typically  not  before  heavy  costs  have  been  paid  by  way  of  welfare  loss.  At  the  same 
time,  the  probability  of  policy  mistakes  is  high  because  it  is  difficult  to  get  an  accurate 
estimate of the potential growth rate of the economy in real time. 
Economic  history  of  the  last  50  years,  especially  of  the  US,  contains  several 
33. 
instances  where  central  banks  are  alleged  to  have  made  costly  errors.  The  best  known 
example is the Volcker disinflation policy of the early 1980s. Paul Volcker, the Fed Chairman 
of the time, is largely credited with restoring price stability in the US, but subsequently there 
have been questions about whether too high a price was paid for it by way of two recessions 
and a surge in unemployment. Was there, in fact, a new higher normal for US inflation that 
Volcker  did  not  recognize?  If  indeed  there  was,  how  does  it  square  with  the  low  inflation 
experience of the US over the last two decades? This is a debate that is yet to be settled. 
34. 
The  importance  of  having  an  accurate  estimate  of  the  “normal  values”  of  the 
fundamental  economic  variables  of  an  economy  –  potential  growth  rate,  natural  rate  of 
unemployment and threshold inflation – in order to accurately calibrate policy got reinforced 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
recently in the context of the US Fed’s announcement in December 2012 that it will maintain 
its current easy monetary policy stance “as long as the unemployment rate remained above 
6.5  per  cent”  provided  inflation  is  only  slightly  above  its  target  and  long-term  inflation 
expectations  remain  anchored.  This  has  raised  a  question  about  whether  the  Fed  has 
accepted  6.5  per  cent  as  the  new  normal  for  unemployment.  It  has  raised  an  even  more 
important question about whether 6.5 per cent unemployment is, in fact, an underestimate in 
which case the Fed would run the risk of maintaining its easy stance for far too long, thereby 
stoking inflation. 
New normal – counter arguments 
35. 
arguments for new normal as summarized earlier. 
Let me now put across the Reserve Bank’s assessment and position on each of the 
(i)  Wage-price spiral cannot sustain indefinitely 
36. 
The thrust of our response to the wage-price spiral argument is that even if inclusive 
growth  policies,  liberal  fiscal  entitlements  and  heightened  inflation  expectations  –  driven 
primarily by food inflation – trigger a wage-price spiral, it cannot be sustained in the absence 
of  an  accommodative  monetary  policy.  Admittedly,  wage  pressures,  unaccompanied  by 
productivity  increases,  start  off  as  demand  shocks,  but  soon  transform  to  act  more  like 
supply shocks. 
37. 
Like any other supply shock, exogenously imposed higher wages can be inflationary 
in the first round, but the bargaining power of labour will erode in time, and the necessary 
adjustment will take place to bring wages back in line with productivity levels. The recent high 
growth in rural wages also reflects a catch up with minimum wages, a necessary adjustment 
intended  by  the  Government.  After  the  initial  catch-up,  however,  wage  growth  cannot  be 
sustained without corresponding productivity increases. If not, firms will gradually lose their 
power  to  translate  higher  input  prices  to  higher  output  prices,  inevitably  leading  to  a 
correction in the wage pressures. 
38. 
Furthermore,  we  must  recognize  that  the  Government  does  not  have  the  fiscal 
capacity to continue entitlements and welfare programmes at this level. The Government’s 
embrace fiscal responsibility will act as a self-limiting check on the wage-price spiral. 
(ii)  Commodity price shocks are unlikely to persist 
39. 
Even  as  the  arguments  in  support  of  continued  upward  pressure  on  global 
commodity  prices  are  compelling,  there  are  some  credible  arguments  to  the  contrary, 
drawing mainly from an alternate energy scenario going forward. The global energy scenario 
will change on three dimensions – efficiency, demand and supply. 
40. 
On the efficiency front, regulatory and competitive pressures will ensure that gains 
from  energy  efficiency  will  continue  to  roll  in,  possibly  at  an  accelerated  pace.  From  the 
demand  perspective,  the  impact  of  these  efficiency  gains  on  emerging  economies  will  be 
larger, in the sense that the energy intensity of their GDP growth will be lower than that of 
advanced  economies  when  the  latter  were  at  similar  levels  of  GDP.  China  is,  in  fact, 
projected to move onto a less energy-intensive development path by 2020. 
41. 
From the  supply  perspective,  the  shale  revolution, first for gas  and then for  oil,  is 
expected  to  contribute  almost  a  fifth  of  the  increase  in  global  energy  supply  by  2030.  A 
roughly similar positive contribution is likely from renewable sources of energy – expected to 
treble  by  2030.  Growing  domestic  production  and  near  flat  consumption  may  see  the  US 
become self-sufficient in energy by 2030. Supply from Iraq is projected to increase steadily, 
and by 2030 it is likely to become the second largest global oil exporter, overtaking Russia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
42. 
Add to all this, the lessons of experience. For over a century now, commodity prices 
have  been  prone  to  mean  reversion.  There  is  no  reason  why  this  time  it  should  be  very 
different. 
43. 
Admittedly, gains on the energy front will translate to gains on the inflation front only 
if other policies are managed intelligently. In particular, demand for land from industrialization 
and  urbanization  should  not  be  allowed  to  crowd  out  bio-fuel  production.  Simultaneously, 
agricultural productivity needs to increase so as to meet the food requirements of a growing 
population even if some land is ceded for bio-fuel cultivation. 
44. 
The thrust of the Reserve Bank’s argument is that the current and projected trends 
for the global energy scenario do not provide a persuasive case for raising India’s “normal 
inflation”. 
(iii)  Global rebalancing will ensure benign inflation 
45. 
The  new  normal  argument  that  I  cited  earlier  is  that  China’s  ability  to  exert 
downward pressure on global prices will wane. It certainly will, but only gradually. Given the 
size of China’s economy, it will continue to be the world’s cheap manufacturer for at least the 
next  decade,  thereby  keeping  global  inflation  under  check.  Even  as  China  moves  up  the 
value  chain,  the  space  vacated  by  it  will  be  occupied  by  other  emerging  and  developing 
economies. All this suggests that multiple poles of global growth and competitive pressures 
will ensure that global inflation remains benign for at least the next decade. The argument 
that India must recalibrate its inflation higher because global inflation is going to be higher 
loses its potency if, in fact, higher global inflation is not a credible threat. 
QE – No Risk to global inflation in the medium-term 
(iv) 
46. 
Let  me  now  address  the  argument  about  advanced  economies  suffering  higher 
inflation down the road because of QE. There is a view that this threat is being exaggerated. 
Advanced economy central banks, especially the US Fed, have repeatedly asserted that they 
have in place well thought through plans to unwind QE in a non-inflationary way. Also note 
that long term inflation expectations in advanced economies do not suggest any risk to price 
stability. 
47. 
more 
governments do not resort to inflating their way out of debt. 
Most importantly, nothing hurts the election prospects of a democratic government 
that 
than  rising  prices.  Political  economy  compulsions  will 
therefore  ensure 
The Philips Curve relationship does not provide a realistic policy option 
(v) 
48. 
Experience since the 1990s demonstrates that the secular growth-inflation trade-off 
suggested  by  the  Philips  curve  does  not  hold  at  all  levels  of  inflation.  The  relationship  is 
indeed non-linear and reversible. There is a threshold level of inflation, below which it might 
be  possible  to  exploit  the  growth-inflation  trade-off.  However,  if  inflation  is  above  the 
threshold,  it  is  decidedly  inimical  to  growth  as  higher  inflation  does  not  raise,  but  actually 
lowers the growth rate. 
Mohanty et al. (2011)6 have estimated that the threshold inflation for India is in the 
49. 
range of 4.0 per cent to 5.5 per cent. Updated estimates, using the same methodology, yield 
a range of 4.4 per cent to 5.7 per cent, implying a mid-point rate of about 5.0 per cent. Even 
though  an  estimated  threshold  inflation  rate  need  not  be  the  optimal  inflation  target  for  a 
central bank, it nevertheless provides a reference point for calibrating the “normal inflation”. 
The surmise is that empirical research does not support the case for a new normal. 
                                                
6   Deepak Mohanty, A B Chakraborty, Abhiman Das and Joice John, “Inflation Threshold in India: An Empirical 
Investigation” W P S (DEPR): 18 / 2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
New normal on account of PPP convergence is not inevitable 
(vi) 
50. 
Apart  from  all  the  empirical  arguments,  there  is  also  an  important  conceptual 
argument against the “new normal” hypothesis. As India’s integration with the world picks up 
pace  over  the  next  decade,  it  is  important  also  that  our  inflation  rate  is  in  line  with  global 
inflation. A new normal based entirely on domestic considerations will result in a permanent 
wedge between domestic and global inflation which means a persistent real appreciation of 
currency. Real appreciation is unambiguously contractionary and militates against our growth 
aspiration. To support sustainable growth during a period when the economy is globalizing, 
our inflation rate needs to converge with the global inflation rate. This is the rationale behind 
the Reserve Bank’s policy of calibrating its medium term inflation goal to global inflation. 
51. 
This is an appropriate context for me to respond to the argument for a new normal 
based on the PPP convergence argument. Our view on this is that PPP convergence cannot 
be a policy goal, and accepting higher inflation to aid PPP catch up will be both futile and 
indefensible. As India’s per capita income rises, PPP convergence will happen automatically. 
We need to make sure that rise in incomes is accompanied by productivity gains so that the 
process of PPP catch up is non-inflationary. 
52. 
There is also no a priori reason to believe that the entire burden of adjustment on 
account  of  integration  with  the  global  economy  will  have  to  come  by  way  of  the  price 
differential closing. Part, if not all, of the burden can be borne by exchange rate adjustment 
too as evidenced by the experience of Japan starting the 1960, when the yen appreciated by 
over 300 per cent to close the price gap. How the burden of adjustment is shared between 
price  levels  and  exchange  rates  will  depend  on  country  circumstances  –  in  particular  the 
economy’s structural constraints and market rigidities. 
53. 
To support sustainable growth during a period when the economy is globalizing, our 
inflation  rate  needs  to  converge  with  the  global  inflation  rate.  We  need  to  manage  this 
convergence by calibrating the “inflation differential” over time rather than acquiescing in a 
new normal for inflation. 
Conclusion 
54. 
Admittedly, the average inflation rate in India over the last three years has trended 
up. Nevertheless, the context presents neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for the 
Reserve  Bank  to  revise  its  inflation goal.  Not  a necessary  condition  because,  as  indicated 
earlier,  much  of  our  inflation  is  driven  by  supply  constraints  which  can  be  corrected  by 
appropriate policies and their effective implementation. Accepting a new normal for inflation 
not  only  has  no  theoretical  or  empirical  support,  but  entails  the  moral  hazard  of  policy 
inaction  in  dealing  with  supply  constraints.  Not  a  sufficient  condition  because  there  is  no 
empirical  evidence  to  establish  that  the  benefits  of  higher  growth  outweigh  the  costs  of 
welfare loss associated with higher inflation. 
55. 
Key to our collective national aspiration for sustained high economic growth is low 
and steady inflation. It is only under such an environment of price stability that investors and 
consumers  can  make  informed  choices  and  contribute  to  growth.  The  responsibility  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  in  this  regard  is  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  and  ensure  price  stability. 
Neither  theory  nor  empirical  evidence  presents  a  credible  case  for  acquiescing  in  a  new 
normal for inflation in India. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
