Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Connecting Thailand to the new investment 
frontiers – contribution of monetary and financial policies 
Speech by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at “Thailand Focus 
2013 – connecting to new investment frontiers”, Bangkok, 28 August 2013. 
 Good morning, 
Distinguished Guests; Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
I would like to thank the Stock Exchange of Thailand and Phatra Security and Bank of 
America  Merrill  Lynch  as  co-organizers  for  the  invitation  to  address  our  distinguished 
audience  on  the  topical  issue  of  “Connecting  Thailand  to  the  New  Investment  Frontiers”.  I 
also would like to extend a very warm welcome to our foreign guests and to thank you for 
your continued interests in Thailand and the region. Today I would like to discuss the roles of 
monetary and financial policies in supporting the Thai economy as we prepare ourselves for 
the new investment frontiers. 
Economic outlook and headwinds from volatility in global financial markets 
 
As you know, much has happened recently with events taking a complete 180 degree 
turn  from  the  beginning  of  the  year.  It  did  not  seem  long  ago  when  the  EMEs  were  the 
fascination and destination of choice for international investors. But since May, global market 
sentiments have turned with the expectation of a scale back of the Fed’s asset purchases. 
This  coincided  with  the  concern  over  regional  slowdown,  initially  starting  with  China,  but 
lately  moving  to  other  South  and  South  East  Asian  economies.  Since  the  unprecedented 
sell-offs  in  May,  there  have  been  some  recent  corrections  to  the  initial  overreactions. 
Nevertheless,  capital  movements  and  asset  prices  continue  to  be  volatile  and  pose 
headwinds to growth and financial stability. 
 
The summer period provided a brief respite and provided investors with more time to 
be  selective,  not  treating  all  EMEs  as  one  single  asset  class.  Economic  fundamentals 
became a primary consideration for assessing in which market to remain invested. We trust 
that Thailand will continue to receive the attention of foreign investors because of our sound 
fundamentals  and  attractive  prospects.  These,  notwithstanding  the  current  soft  patches  as 
the economy consolidates and work on its long term competitiveness agenda. 
Role of monetary and financial policies in safeguarding stability 
Long before the Subprime and the Eurozone crises, Thailand had our own economic 
 
crisis of 1997. We experienced a setback that took us more than half a decade to recover. 
Since then we learnt the virtue of moderation and prudence. Firms had to deleverage, banks 
recapitalized,  regulatory  standards,  governance  reforms  and  bank  lending  practices  have 
improved markedly. The government’s fiscal framework was also strengthened following the 
fiscalization of the costs of financial sector restructuring. 
 
Years  of  hard  work  and  reform  efforts  paid  off  and  laid  the  foundation  for  a  more 
diversified  and  competitive  economy.  The  availability  of  policy  space  both  in  the  fiscal, 
monetary and financial policies, helped ensure  a much needed domestic source of growth 
when global trade collapsed in 2008. Timely government stimulus helped shore up domestic 
demand.  An  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  a  strong  and  well  capitalized  banking 
system  provided  a  favorable  environment  whereby  firms  and  household  could  continue  to 
finance  the  consumption  and  expansion  to  support  domestic  demand.  The  Thai  economy 
was able to navigate through short term sell offs and the sharp reversal of capital flows. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
recent turbulence in fact provided a reality check on the importance of policy consistency and 
the fundamentals of the economy. 
 
Monetary  and  financial  policies  in  Thailand  have  strongly  relied  on  prudence  and 
pragmatism.  A  credible  monetary  policy  framework  helped  anchor  inflation  expectation, 
thereby  fostering  continued  growth  and  stability.  A  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  also 
supported the efficient allocation of resources and competitiveness of the economy. A strong 
external position helped cushion against sharp reversals of capital flows. 
 
One  can  never  put  a  price  on  the  comfort  with which  a  strong  international  reserves 
position brings. Imagine if we had to raise domestic interest rates to defend the currency that 
is weakening because of capital outflows. All of this at a time when the global economy is 
weak  and  the  domestic  economy  needs  the  support  of  accommodative  macroeconomic 
policies! 
 
Financial liberalization and regulatory reform efforts under the Financial Sector Master 
Plan provided opportunity for Thais, particularly small-scale firms, to have better access to 
finance. A competitive banking system and a vibrant capital market also helped strengthen 
investors’ confidence through efficient resource allocation and appropriate pricing of risks. 
 
The  availability  of  policy  spaces  in  fiscal,  monetary  and  financial  policies  provided  a 
cushion  for  the  economy  to  withstand,  shocks  both  domestic  such  as  our  own  flood,  and 
external from the risks of a global slowdown. You may be reading market commentaries on 
the rise in household debt and credit growth in Thailand. Let me remind you that those were 
the  very  issue  raised  by  the  Bank  of  Thailand.  Successive  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
statements have pinned these as issues of concern to the MPC even though there were calls 
for a reduction in policy rates. Our traditional bias towards conservatism and our strong belief 
in  looking  beyond  shortermism,  kept  us  steadfast  in  our  mission  to  be  the  voice  of 
conscience and moderation. Through these repeated messages, the banking system and the 
property sectors, through their own reevaluation of risks and returns, have put on their own 
brakes and are now proceeding more cautiously. The economy overall is also benefiting from 
the  slower  pace  of  activities  which  were  they  to  continue,  would  risk  the  build-up  of 
imbalances in the property sector or household balance sheet. 
Connecting Thailand to the new investment frontier 
 
To enable Thailand to enjoy the benefits from the new investment frontier requires the 
continued  pursuit  of  sound  macroeconomic  and  financial  policies.  It  also  requires 
improvement on the supply side, ie the investment in infrastructure, education and innovation 
to  raise  the  competitiveness  of  the  country.  This  is  a  forward  looking  chapter  that  is 
unfolding. There is need for deeper collaboration between the public and the private sectors 
to position Thailand as an anchor or a hub for the region. 
Strategies  for  the  private  sector  to  ensure  a  durable  growth  strategy  can  best  be 
summarized in terms of three moves; Move up, Move out and Move in. 
1. Let me elaborate further. “Move Up” is a reminder for our firms and enterprises to 
 
raise  their  productivity  to  support  the  competitiveness  of  the  Thai  economy  and  in 
preparation for the upcoming economic integration. Moving up the value chain will enable us 
to differentiate our products, enhance its value, and to enable us to command the margins for 
our trade. Competing through cheap prices is no longer a viable and sustainable model, both 
for  the  firms  themselves  and  for  the  resource-constraint  economy.  Our  labour  force  is  in 
much need of productivity upgrades through relevant education, training and apprenticeship. 
Although these are long drawn processes, the rewards and returns for the economy is more 
durable. Increasingly, we are seeing large Thai corporates working in close cooperation with 
the education bodies, in the recruitment and training, to ensure the necessary and relevant 
supply of skills for their businesses. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2.  The  next  strategy  is  “Move  out”  beyond  the  boundaries  and  the  comfort  of  one’s 
 
own  home  market.  Thai  corporates  can  no  longer  wait  for  the  transfer  of  knowledge  and 
technology through FDI. They need to venture abroad to secure the resources, know how, 
franchise value or distribution channels. 
 
Recognizing this, the Bank of Thailand has gradually relaxed capital flows regulations, 
initially  on  outward  direct  investment  and  more  recently  on  portfolio  investments  for 
Accredited  Investors. We  plan  to  continue  to  broaden  the  scopes  of  investment  with  freer 
mobility for Thai residents in investing overseas. The BOT is also working closely with the 
Ministry of Finance and other agencies on appropriate tax incentives to facilitate the setting 
up  of  treasury  center  to  enable  large  corporate  to  conduct  in  house  financial  transactions 
more efficiently and with lower transaction costs. 
 
With the opening up of the New Investment Frontier, this is probably the most exciting 
times for Thai corporates to invest abroad to secure resources both raw material and know 
how, expanding customer base, acquiring distribution channels, and broadening markets. 
3. The last area of “Move in”, aims to create a more attractive business environment 
 
for  foreigners  to  turn  to  Thailand  as  an  important  spring  board  for  investment  in  the  new 
frontier markets. Thailand has a geographical location advantage to become an investment 
hub for the ASEAN Economic Community, particularly the new frontier markets. To become 
a  magnet  for  the  region,  Thailand  needs  to  maintain  its  ranking  in  the  ease  of  doing 
businesses in such areas of rules of law, governance and strong regulatory frameworks. The 
Thai capital market has also worked hard to promote its role as the funding centre for new 
frontier  markets.  Recently  the  Government  of  the  Lao  PDR  successfully  issued  Thai 
baht-denominated bonds amounting to THB 1,500 million to finance its investment projects. 
The quota have also been doubled to THB 3,000 million for next year. I am confident that the 
subsequent sessions in this two-day forum will offer you a clear picture on the opportunities 
and prospects this region has to offer. 
 
While the private sector works hard to “Move Up”, “Move Out” and “Move In”, the focus 
of  the  public  sector  is  on  infrastructure,  both  physical  and  intangible,  to  raise  the 
competitiveness of the economy, elevate its workforce capability and enhance its return on 
capital. 
 
Recognizing  the  short  lived,  though  timely,  nature  of  consumption-led  stimulus,  the 
government is embarking on a major infrastructure investments in logistics, communication, 
water management and transportation. A strong and efficient logistic system will significantly 
help reduce transportation and logistic costs which are major impediments to our longer term 
growth. These projects will help unlock the bottleneck and raise overall competitiveness as 
well as crowd in private investments. 
 
Infrastructural projects will also strengthen Thailand’s position as a hub for our Greater 
Mekong Sub-region (GMS) neighbors, and is expected to accelerate the integration of these 
economies  as  we  approach  the  2015  ASEAN  Economic  Community.  Projects  such  as  the 
North-South and East-West corridors will further facilitate integration as well as efficiency of 
transportation and logistics in the region. As the Western economies progress in the recovery 
from the global financial crisis, we in Asia should step up our preparations to avail ourselves 
of the benefits once the global economy is back on its track. 
 
This  is  a  good  occasion  for  our  foreign  participants  to  share  in  the  opportunity  and 
prosperity of the region. Foreign investors can participate as co-financing and co-investment 
partner  e.g.  through  becoming  Public-Private  Partnership  (PPP),  Joint  venture  (JV)  or  by 
investing in infrastructure bonds or primary shares. In the area of banking and finance, the 
country will shortly be welcoming new foreign participants, both as a strategic partner to an 
established Thai bank, as well as new entrants in the form of subsidiaries. 
 
In addition to tackling the infrastructure constraints, the government has articulated an 
ambitious goal of pushing Thailand towards an innovative economy. The Government raised 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the  goal  of  R&D  expenditures  as  share  of  GDP  from  0.2  to  1%  by  2016,  and  moved  to 
establish IT parks. This is still small in comparison to our neighbours such as Singapore and 
Korea,  but  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  The  challenge,  of  course,  remains  in  the 
implementation and execution phase. 
 
Given that our long-term growth strategy hinge largely on the infrastructure and human 
capital  investment  which  takes  time  to  bear  fruit,  the  urgency  to  start  now  is  all  the  more 
important. Postponing such reforms to a future date may risk running up to a scenario like 
Europe where the economic engine is being put through a major overhaul and restructuring, 
at  the  same  time  while  the  plane  is  still  flying  through  a  turbulent  storm  at  30,000  feet! 
Foreign investors have an important role to play in ensuring that Thailand press ahead with 
these reform efforts. As the voice of reason and conscience, foreign analysts, credit rating 
agencies  and fund  managers  have  not  hesitated  to  let  us  know  whenever  we  seem  to  be 
slipping in our reform path or policy inconsistency! 
Concluding remark 
 
To conclude, these are exciting times for all of us. In the wake of the great unwinding, 
as  public  agencies,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  can  undertake  the  necessary  monetary  and 
financial  policies  to  stabilize  the  market  and  attenuate the  effects  of short-term  volatility  or 
market fickleness. But the task for long-term development lies with everyone. All of us have a 
role to build the road to sustainable growth, for the country and the region. I thank the Stock 
Exchange  of  Thailand  and  co-hosts  for  this  occasion  to  bring  together  investors  and 
government agencies to renew our focus on investments and opportunities for the future. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
