Njuguna Ndung’u: Mobile and agency banking in Kenya 
Address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Technical 
Cooperation  among  Developing  Countries  Programme  on  “Mobile  and  agency  banking  in 
Kenya”, Kenya School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 6 May 2013. 
 Mr. Saleh Usman Gashua, Secretary General, AFRACA;  
Prof. Kinandu Muragu, Executive Director, KSMS and AFRACA’s sub-regional chair for 
East Africa;  
Facilitators;  
Distinguished Guests and Participants;  
Ladies and Gentlemen;  
It  is  my  pleasure  to  officially  open  this  knowledge  exchange  programme  on  Mobile  and 
Agency  Banking  in  Kenya.  On  behalf  of  the  Kenya  School  of  Monetary  Studies  (KSMS), 
which is co-hosting this programme, let me extend a warm welcome to you all to Kenya and 
in particular to KSMS, a leading regional training institution in financial matters. I sincerely 
hope that you will enjoy Kenya’s hospitality and tourist attractions during your stay in Kenya.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: At the outset I would like to commend AFRACA for its continued 
efforts towards enhanced agricultural and rural financing environment. Forums like this allow 
AFRACA  members  not  only  to  learn  from  each  other’s  experiences  but  also  to  challenge 
each other on possible policy solutions to increase agricultural and rural financing.  
As  you  may  be  aware,  financial  inclusion  has  lately  assumed  a  central  place  in  financial 
regulators  mandates  and  is  a  public  policy.  The  more  formally  financially  included  an 
economy  is,  the  greater  the  likelihood  of  attaining  financial  developments  and  financial 
stability.  In  this  regard,  AFRACA’s  vision  of  achieving  a  rural  Africa  where  people  have 
access  to  sustainable  financial  services  for  economic  development  is  very  relevant  to  the 
financial inclusion objectives of AFRACA’s members.  
Ladies  and Gentlemen:  AFRACA’s  decision  to  host  you  for  this  knowledge  exchange  on 
mobile and agency banking in Kenya is a well thought out decision. This is because over the 
last 6 years millions of people, most of whom were financially excluded, have been brought 
into the formal financial sector through successful rollout of innovative mobile phone financial 
services  products  (MFS).  Kenya  has  witnessed  increased  competition  and  diversity  in  the 
mobile phone financial services space with more mobile phone operators launching mobile 
money products. Financial institutions have also increasingly partnered and integrated their 
operating platforms with those of mobile phone financial services platform to leverage on the 
convenience and efficiencies they present. As a result, the unit costs for some of the financial 
products have been lowered significantly.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  potential  of  mobile  phone  technology  to  bridge  the  financial 
access barriers of distance and cost seems un-rivalled in Africa. In recognition of this, the 
Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI)  brought  together  policymakers  and  regulators  from 
18 African  countries  that  are  AFI  members  to  launch  the  African  Mobile  Phone  Financial 
Services Policy Initiative (AMPI) in February 2013. The aim of AMPI is to share experiences 
and  develop  policy  solutions  for  extending  financial  inclusion  to  the  Continent’s  large 
unbanked populace through the use of Mobile phone financial services.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: Allow me now to briefly share with you the Central Bank of Kenya’s 
role in propelling financial inclusion through mobile phone financial services. Even before the 
enactment of the National Payment Systems Act, the Central Bank of Kenya took a proactive 
role  in  facilitating  consultations  on  proposals  by  the  telecommunication  companies  to 
introduce  mobile  phone  money  transfer  services.  The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  continuously 
supported the rollout of innovative products driven by mobile phone technological platforms 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
using a “test and learn” approach that allows innovations to take place while ensuring that 
the necessary safeguards  are  in  place  to mitigate  the  potential  risks. This  approach  has 
allowed  CBK  to  partner  with  both  financial  service  providers  and  telecommunication 
providers as they seek to introduce innovative solutions into the market that are reliant on 
technology. This approach has seen an:  
a) 
Increase in mobile phone participants. Close to 20 million people are served by 
over 60,000 telecommunication companies agents handling over USD 54.4 million 
worth of Mobile phone financial service transactions per day in Kenya. These have 
achieved, with the stability and integrity of the financial system remaining intact.  
Introduction  of  Agent  Banking  by  both  banks  and  deposit  taking  microfinance 
institutions.  The  aim  was  to  increase  the  level  of  formal  financial  inclusion  in 
un-served and underserved areas. This has led to close to 17,000 approved bank 
agents’  facilitating  over  45  million  transactions  valued  at  over  Kshs  232  billion 
(USD 2.76 billion), mainly leveraging on mobile phone technology.  
Evolution of the mobile phone money transfer system to provide bill payments, 
savings/deposit  mobilization,  and  credit  application,  all  operated  in  the  same 
platform with lower costs to the public.  
Adoption  of  mobile  phone  technology  by  other  sub-sectors  such  as  pensions, 
insurance  and  capital  markets  to  provide  convenience  and  efficiency  to  their 
clientele.  The  information  capital  built  within  mobile  phones  is  an  area  of  great 
interest to credit reference bureaus and the credit market in general.  
b) 
c) 
d) 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  main  lesson  we  have  learnt  is  that  financial  inclusion  will 
succeed  once  we  understand  the  market  segments  and  the  delivery  channels  that  are 
appropriate  for  those  segments  for  financial  inclusion  to  succeed.  I  would  not  wish  to 
pre-empt  the  details  of  CBK’s  experiences  in  regulation  and  supervision  of  mobile  phone 
financial services and agency banking. My colleagues will be taking you through the detailed 
journey we have travelled during the day’s afternoon session.  
In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is worth noting that the potential to expand financial 
inclusion is still huge and mobile phone technologies are proving very useful in this front. At 
the end of this programme, I expect the unrivalled Africa’s pace of adoption of mobile phone 
financial  services  to  be  upheld.  Finally,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  reiterate  the 
commitment of CBK to contribute to the fulfilment of AFRACA’s vision. It is my hope that this 
programme  shall  provide  participants  with  key  lessons  on  how  to  achieve  a  rural  Africa 
where  people  have  access  to  affordable  financial  services  for  economic  development  –  to 
allow them to escape poverty through savings and affordable credit.  
With these remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is now my pleasure and honour to declare 
the  2013  Technical  Cooperation  among  Developing  Countries  Programme  on  Mobile  and 
Agency Banking officially opened. I wish you all fruitful deliberations.  
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
