DeLisle Worrell: Economic research as a practical guide to policy 
Opening remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Central Bank of Barbados’ 33rd Annual Review Seminar, Bridgetown, 23 July 2013. 
 I am, as many of you will know, an accidental central banker. If Sir Courtney Blackman had 
not actively sought me out at UWI Mona to establish the research dept of the new Barbados 
central bank in 1972, I would have pursued my career as an academic, as was always my 
intention.  However,  I  quickly  discovered  that  the  central  bank  can  be  the  most  rewarding 
career  for  an  economist,  because  at  the  central  bank  you  can  bridge  the  gap  between 
academics  and  policy  making  that  affects  the  lives  and  welfare  of  real  people.  Practicality 
has been the hallmark of all my economic research, and my motivation continues to be the 
desire  to  better  understand  why  people  undertake  commercial  transactions,  so  that  policy 
makers may guide us towards transactions that uplift the community, and away from actions 
that are self-defeating. This bias towards research that captures deep economic insights, and 
is practical, intuitive and that may be applied to the issues of the day, is manifest in much of 
the research you will find published on the Central Bank of Barbados website. Let me cite 
you a few recent examples. In April this year, as you should know, Central Bank introduced a 
new  policy  to  provide  guidance  to  financial  markets  on  interest  rates.  That  policy  was 
informed  by  research  published  under  the  title  “A  framework  for  interest  rate  policy  in 
Barbados”, which you may consult on the website. The research established that US T-bill 
rates and the volume of excess funds in banks are the most important factors affecting local 
rates. In 2011 the Bank made a change in policy pertaining to the foreign exchange market, 
which  was  informed  by  the  publication  “An  analysis  of  Central  Bank  intervention  in  the 
Barbadian foreign exchange market.”  
In  2011  the  Bank  published  “An  analysis  of  the  tourism  sector  in  Barbados”,  in  which  we 
measured Barbados’ competitiveness in the US, UK and Canada in terms of market share. 
The  study  investigated  how  market  share  has  been  affected  by  “shocks”  which  have 
impacted  Caribbean  and  world  tourism,  and  the  factors  affecting  the  utilization  of  existing 
tourist capacity as well as factors affecting hotel construction and investment in other tourism 
and ancillary services and infrastructure. 
“A  note  on  tourism  expenditure”,  also  published  that  year,  broke  down  Barbados’  tourism 
performance in the UK by country, showing how Barbados fared in the wealthiest regions, 
compared with those less affluent.  
That year the Bank also published an analysis of the impact of fiscal policy on the demand 
and supply of foreign exchange, reaching the conclusion that fiscal outcomes in Barbados 
have  been  sustainable  ever  since  the  mid-1990s.  The  Caribbean  Centre  for  Money  and 
Finance  has  just  launched  a  regional  study  of  fiscal  sustainability,  which  will  adopt  the 
approach used for Barbados in this study, in assessing fiscal policies throughout the region.  
In  the  paper  “International  Business  and  Financial  Services  Centres  in  the  Caribbean,” 
published  in  June  2011,  the  authors  showed  that  the  international  business  and  financial 
services  (IBFS)  industry  in  the  Caribbean,  though  miniscule  as  a  proportion  of  global 
financial markets, is the principal avenue for diversifying foreign exchange earnings for many 
Caribbean  countries.  In  the  smaller  countries  it  is  a  major  contributor  to  Gross  Domestic 
Product (GDP), government revenues and employment.  
In March 2011 Central Bank published “An analysis of Barbadian student enrollment at UWI 
Cave  Hill,  and  the  cost  to  the  Barbadian  government”,  showing  that  cost  savings  of  
$25,000–$44,000 per student could be realised by providing strong incentives for students to 
complete  standard  university  entry  requirements  at  the  Barbados  Community  College, 
instead of doing a preliminary year at UWI.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to 
locally-produced  products  due 
“A  review  of  the  VAT  system  in  Barbados”,  a  paper  published  last  December,  will  be  the 
subject of a panel discussion in this seminar. The study found that the proportion of indirect 
taxes  in  total  revenue  remained  unchanged  after  the  introduction  of  the  VAT  in  the  mid-
1990s; the yield of the VAT relative to the rate of tax was no higher than for the consumption 
tax  in  the  period  prior  to  its  introduction;  the  costs  of  administering  the  VAT  and  customs 
duties were about the same, relative to their yields, before and after the introduction of the 
VAT; and the consumption taxes that preceded the VAT were more buoyant in response to 
changes in income.  
Also published last December was a paper entitled “Import Substitution: how practical is it in 
Barbados”,  which  concluded  that  apart  from  energy  there  are  not  many  items  that  can  be 
replaced  by 
issues  of  market  size  and  price 
competitiveness.  The  examples  I  have  given  are  all  typical  of  the  research  I  find  most 
rewarding. As economists we all need to do research of a more technical and academic kind, 
but it should always be in search of insights that we can incorporate into practical guidance 
for policy. Our academic research needs to be in depth and grounded in Caribbean realities. 
That requires deep understanding of the theory, careful observation of Caribbean experience 
and economic behaviour, and painstaking analysis of the data. You also need to read widely 
on the topic, and set aside time for thoughtful reflection, as you proceed with the research. 
The reward will be genuine insight and useful contributions to our understanding of how our 
economies  work.  If  I  have  a  criticism  of  much  of  economic  research  in  the  Caribbean 
nowadays,  it  is  that  it  is  too  derivative,  an  unthinking  application  of  imported  theories  and 
methodologies  to  Caribbean  data,  often  accompanied  by  econometric  pyrotechnics  which 
anyone  with  mathematical  training  can  very  easily  see  through.  At  the  end  of  the day  this 
kind of research leaves the policy maker with little guidance, and the general public puzzled 
and apprehensive.  
There is a need, in Barbados, in the Caribbean, and indeed in the wider world, for economics 
that  people  can  understand.  The  economy  is  no  more  than  a  convenient  way  of  thinking 
about all the commercial transactions that take place in the national space in the course of a 
day  or  a  month  or  a  year.  The  varying  nature  of  these  transactions,  and  the  relationship 
between  them,  are  mind-bendingly  complex,  and  the  economic  theories  we  offer  in 
explanation are pitifully oversimplistic by comparison. Good economics consists of essaying 
a  theory  that  seems  to  fit  the  circumstance  under  investigation,  observing  the  outcome, 
making adjustments, and repeating. It is a process that of necessity involves the people who 
are doing the transactions that produce the observed result. If they are mystified about what 
you’re doing and why, chances are you  
will not get the expected result. That is why it is always most effective to end with economics 
that people can understand, whatever your theoretical starting point. Here at Central Bank 
we  do  academic  research  to  deepen  our  understanding  of  economic  processes,  but  it  is 
always  with  a  view  to  coming  up  with  better  policies  and  prescriptions,  whether  it  is  with 
respect  to  taxation,  fiscal  policy,  tourism  development  strategy,  import  substitution  or  the 
many other burning issues that we must address from time to time. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
