Matthew Elderfield: Single Supervisory Mechanism – benefits and 
challenges from a practical supervisory perspective 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Matthew  Elderfield,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland,  at  the  11th  Annual  European  Financial  Services  Conference  “Reshaping  Europe’s 
financial markets”, organised by Forum Europe Ltd., Brussels, 31 January 2013. 
 My thanks to the organisers for the opportunity to take part in this panel. There are a number 
of  interesting  issues  presented  by  the  banking  union  to  discuss.  The  starting  point,  as  we 
know, has been the desire to break the destructive link between stressed sovereign finances 
and weak banking systems. Europe is taking measures to establish the single supervisory 
mechanism, but I think an important issue to discuss today is the timetable and sequencing 
for the other essential elements of banking union. Establishing operational parameters for the 
use  of  the  ESM  for  direct  recapitalisation  and  agreeing  a  framework  and  set  of  national 
powers for resolution are urgently needed measures to make banking union a success and 
to resolve the financial crisis. I would argue that these need to be implemented in parallel to 
preparing for the operation of the SSM, with work on a European-level resolution authority to 
follow shortly and then European deposit guarantee arrangements to be explored at a later 
stage. 
But  as  the  only  supervisor  on  the  panel,  let  me  say  a  few  introductory  words  about  the 
benefits and challenges of the SSM from a practical supervisory perspective. To my mind, 
banking union holds out the prospect of strengthening the framework for European banking 
supervision, if implemented successfully. Creating some distance between supervisors and 
the banks they regulate (and, indeed, from the political systems of the banks they regulate) 
can  help  improve  the  capacity  for  challenge  and  ensure  a  broader,  more  detached, 
perspective  on  problems.  As  an  Englishman  working  in  Ireland,  I  need  to  disclose  that 
bringing in a foreigner to do your supervision is not, alas, the magic solution to all the woes of 
a  banking  system.  But  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  holds  open  the  prospect  of  an 
institutional framework, a broader skill set and more diversity of experience that should help 
insulate supervisors from the pressures – subtle and direct, cultural and political – that come 
from long-time and close proximity to their regulatory charges and their champions. 
However, there are some important practical implementation challenges that flow from this 
new structure. Let me briefly mention three of them. 
Firstly,  the  fact  that  there  will  necessarily  and  correctly  be  a  division  of  labour  between 
national supervisory authorities and central SSM staff at the ECB raises practical questions 
of organisation and decision making. The SSM will have a carefully calibrated governance 
structure, involving a Supervisory Board that interacts with the ECB Governing Council. At 
the bottom of the system will be the various national supervisors each feeding up dozens if 
not hundreds of issues and matters for decision and action, with this volume surging in times 
of  stress.  My  instinct  is  that  the  volume  of  these  decisions  is  considerably  greater  in 
supervision  than  in  monetary  policy.  It  will  therefore  be  important  that  clear  and  efficient 
decision-making procedures, with clear accountability, are put in place. 
Second,  it  is  important  that  supervisory  practices  and  procedures  converge  quickly  into  a 
common approach. Such integration is not easy and will take time, as I know from the FSA 
which involved the merger of nine and then a tenth organisation into one. In the case of the 
SSM,  we  will  have  at  least  17  supervisors  from  different  cultures  to  meld  together. 
Developing a common framework for risk assessment, with a common language for risk and 
common approaches to inspection and supervisory reviews, will be a process that forges this 
integration out of necessity and will involve some important early practical design questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Third,  and  closely  related  to  this  last  point,  it  will  be  important  to  develop  a  common 
supervisory philosophy and risk appetite. Will the SSM under the ECB be a principles based 
supervisor, a rules-based one or some judicious mix of the two? Will staff be encouraged – 
and firms warned to expect – an intrusive approach or not? It is important to articulate the 
essential elements of the supervisory approach so that front line staff – and the banks they 
supervise  –  have  a  clear  understanding  of  senior  management  expectations  and  risk 
appetite. I would like to see the new single supervisory mechanism give its front line staff a 
clear mandate to be challenging and assertive with banks in ensuring that risks are not just 
identified but are definitively mitigated in a time-bound manner. 
Work  is  underway  at  the  ECB  and  the  national  supervisors  to  start  to  put  these  practical 
building blocks in place. But we have a very tight timeline and much remains to be done. I 
look  forward  to  the  discussion  to  come  on  these  and  the  other  matters  posed  by  the 
introduction of the banking union. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
