K C Chakrabarty: Environmental and social sustainability – key issues 
and concerns 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Yes 
Bank–GIZ–UNEP Sustainability Series event on “Environment and social risk management”, 
Mumbai, 23 April 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Ms. Sangita Misra and Shri Anoop K. Suresh in preparation of this address is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Mr.  Robert  Tacon,  Tutor,  United  Nations  Environment  Programme-  Financial 
1. 
Initiative  (UNEP FI);  Ms.  Stefanie  Bauer,  Advisor,  Private  Sector  Development,  GIZ; 
Mr. Pralay  Mondal,  Senior  Group  President  –  Retail  &  Business  Banking,  Yes  Bank; 
Mr. Mengqi  Cai,  Programme  Officer,  Asia  Pacific  Task  Force,  UNEP  FI;  delegates  to  the 
event; members of the print and electronic media; ladies and gentlemen. It is a pleasure to 
be present here today to address this august gathering at this workshop on sustainability. I 
am,  indeed,  glad  to  see  different  organizations  with  varied  interests  and  areas  of  work 
coming  together  to  address  the  sustainability  issue,  a  subject  which  is  fast  gaining 
importance,  not  just  in  India,  but  also  globally.  Today,  all  stake  holders  –  Government, 
industry, business, banks and consumers – have increasingly started realizing that if India 
and Indian businesses have to maintain a high growth momentum in the medium to long run, 
they  have  to  focus  on  various  facets  of  sustainability  and  I  am  sure,  this  Conference  will 
serve to underscore this vital aspect. I, therefore, congratulate the UNEP, the GIZ and Yes 
Bank for this creditable initiative. 
Introduction 
A. 
2. 
Let me start from the very definition. Sustainable development has been defined in 
many  ways,  but  the  most  frequently  quoted  definition  is  from  Our  Common  Future,  also 
known  as  the  Brundtland  Report  (1987):  “Sustainable  development  is  development  that 
meets  the  needs  of  the  present  without  compromising  the  ability  of  future  generations  to 
meet their own needs.” 
3. 
There are different aspects to sustainability  viz., environmental and social that we 
need to understand. “Environment sustainability” refers to the need to preserve the ecology 
and ecosystems for sustainable growth. There is no denying that any developmental process 
that  alters  the  composition  of  the  global  atmosphere  and  puts  pressure  on  ecological  and 
socio-economic  systems,  that  are  already  under  stress  due  to  population  and  economic 
growth, is a threat to sustainability. Thus, sustainable development should try to maximize 
growth while utilizing the limited available natural resources in an efficient and responsible 
manner so as to ensure that they last long. The other aspect of sustainability is the “Social 
sustainability”  that  entails  that  the  development  process  promotes  social  cohesion  and 
reduces  inequities.  Any  form  of  social  exclusion  breeds  disharmony  that  leads  to  various 
disruptions  owing  to  which  business  suffers,  growth  suffers.  Social  sustainability  focuses 
both on “inter-generational equity” i.e., future generations should have the same or greater 
access  to  social  resources  as  the  current  generation,  and  “intra-generational  equity”  i.e., 
allowing equal access to social resources within the current generation. A balanced focus on 
both these aspects is a hallmark of sustainable development. 
4. 
The need for sustainable development has been gaining ground both internationally 
and at the national level. The Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth is the 
signature  effort  of  the  G20  that  was  launched  in  its  Pittsburgh  Summit  (September  2009). 
The  United  Nations,  post  Rio+20  summit  held  in  June  2012,  has  endorsed  the  idea  of 
adopting  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs)  in  the  post-2015  period,  when  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) period of 2000-2015 would end. Leaders at the G20 
last  year  also  collaborated  to  form  a  Climate  Finance  Study  Group  to  consider  ways  of 
effectively mobilizing resources, taking into account the objectives, provisions, and principles 
of  the  UN  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  (UNFCCC).  Currently,  work  is 
underway  to  officially  launch  the  public-private  Dialogue  Platform  on  Inclusive  Green 
Investments (DPIGI), particularly among developing countries.  
5. 
At the national level, the Twelfth Five Year Plan for India has emphasized the need 
for  faster,  more  inclusive  and  sustainable  growth  for  the  period  2012–17  and  accordingly, 
has made this the theme of the 12th Plan document. Government’s official publication “The 
Economic Survey” has also introduced a chapter on Sustainable Development and Climate 
Change since last year so as to focus on the developments in this area at home and abroad. 
The Prime Minister, in a recent speech, has reiterated the need for economic development to 
be environmentally sustainable. Against this backdrop, I would like to highlight various issues 
and strategies linked to the two aspects of sustainability – environmental and social – in the 
subsequent two sections. 
B. 
Environmental sustainability 
Sustainability and growth – The conflict and the balance 
6. 
Let me begin by highlighting the need for sustainability in the context of the conflict 
that  exists  between  economic  development  and  environment  sustainability.  Economic 
progress improves our standard of living and makes our life more comfortable. On the other 
hand, it is this very progress that can lead to degradation of the environment. Any increase in 
national income would arise only from increased production of goods and services involving 
greater  consumption  of  resources  such  as  land,  forest,  fuels,  etc.  whose  supply  is, 
essentially, limited. While some of these resources may be renewable, others get depleted 
and, ultimately, exhausted with continuous use. Any attempt to preserve the non-renewable 
resources might require compromising on the growth rates. 
7. 
The  conflict  between  economic  development  and  sustainability  is,  essentially,  a 
conflict  between  short  and  long  run  priorities,  between  the  interests  of  current  and  future 
generations.  Large  exploitation  of  natural  resources  today,  while  increasing  the  economic 
growth  for  the  current  generations,  would  lead  to  gradual  exhaustion  and  degradation  of 
these resources, thereby reducing their availability to our future generations and adversely 
affecting their output, income and living standards. So, environmental degradation not only 
affects us but also has repercussions for our future generations. 
8. 
Ultimately,  it  boils  down  to  maintaining  a  balance  between  economic  growth  and 
preserving natural resources, which is an inevitable challenge. By maintaining this balance, 
we can create a long term self-sustaining system. In this context, a recent committee set up 
by the Government is developing a framework for “Green National Accounts” for India which 
is  based  on  the  need  to  measure  economic  well-being  on  the  basis  of  a  comprehensive 
definition of wealth that includes natural and human capital and not GDP alone1. 
9. 
Globally,  the  need  for  sustainable  development  is  being  emphasized.  Sustainable 
development attempts to strike a balance between the demands of economic development 
and  the  need  for  protection  of  our  natural  environment.  The  UN’s  Human  Development 
Report 2013, while appreciating the rise of the South (connoted by the developing countries) 
in driving growth across the globe in the 21st century, has also pointed out that sustaining the 
                                                
1 
India saw a growth rate of 0.9 per cent in terms of Inclusive Wealth Index per capita between 1990 and 2008 
as against negative growth for some other countries like Russia and South Africa implying that their productive 
base has been completely eroded. However, given India’s low growth rate vis-à-vis China (2.1 per cent), it has 
to significantly improve its human capital and ensure that natural capital depletion is kept minimal. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
growth  momentum  requires  policy  focus  on  enhancing  equity,  managing  the  demographic 
change and confronting environmental pressures. 
Global cooperation and efforts 
10. 
Environment sustainability has a global dimension. Since Greenhouse Gases (GHG) 
emission in any country accelerates the process of global warming, this is obviously an area 
where  a  solution  involving  global  cooperation  is  needed.  No  country  will  have  sufficient 
incentive to contain its own emissions unless it is part of a global compact. Such a compact, 
in turn, is possible only if there is a fair distribution of the burden. Developing countries have 
consistently  argued  that  since  it  is  the  industrialised  countries  that  have  historically 
contributed the bulk of the accumulated stock of GHG, and are also the most able to pay, 
they must bear the burden of global mitigation and adjustment. 
11. 
A  comparison  of  the  carbon  dioxide  (in  short,  carbon)  emissions  across  the 
G20 countries  shows  that,  in  2010,  the  top  three  carbon  emitter  countries  were  Australia, 
USA, and Canada, with carbon emissions in per capita metric tonnes being 18.8, 18.1 and 
16.3, respectively. Brazil, Indonesia and India remain at the bottom among the G20 countries 
in  terms  of  carbon  emissions,  with  per  capita  contributions  in  2010  being  2.3,  1.6  and 
1.4 metric  tonnes  respectively,  way  below  the  developed  countries.  As  per  the  Economic 
Survey 2012–13, India's per capita carbon emissions in 2031 will be about 4 tonnes, which 
will still be lower than the global per capita emission in 2005 of 4.22 tonnes and about 75 per 
cent lower than the 2010 levels of the top three emitters. 
12. 
Given this data, you would agree that imposing emission reduction commitments on 
the  emerging  world  at  this  stage  at  similar  levels  as  that  of  advanced  countries  would  be 
highly unfair. Rather, a logical approach would be that countries which are more developed 
and  have  caused  greater  emission  as  part  of  their  development  process  should  share  a 
greater  responsibility  in  lowering  emissions  and  the  expectations  from  emerging  and  less 
developed  nations  should  be  tempered  so  that  they  can  attain  higher  growth,  thereby 
improving  the  quality  of  lives  of  the  poor.  This  way,  one  would  achieve  balance  among 
countries so that there is equity of development. 
13. 
As  regards  India,  it  remains  fully  committed  to  the  global  initiative  to  address 
environmental  issues.  India  is  participating  in  the  ongoing  international  negotiations  under 
the UNFCCC and has been part of 94 multilateral environmental agreements. In the recently 
held Doha Conference (December 2012), India protected its interests fully and succeeded in 
bringing the equity aspect firmly on the table. India has also voluntarily agreed to reduce the 
carbon emission intensity of its GDP by 20-25 per cent over 2005 levels by 20202. India was 
one  of  the  early  signatories  of  the  Montreal  Protocol  on  ozone  depletion  and,  as  of 
1st January,  2010,  has  completely  phased  out  the  production  and  consumption  of  ozone 
depleting  substances  such  as  chlorofluoro  carbons  (CFCs)  once  used  in  almost  all 
refrigerators and air conditioning systems3 and halons, which were used in fire extinguishers. 
It  remains  on  track  towards  complete  phase-out  of  production  and  consumption  of  hydro 
CFCs  by  2030.  Within 
is  also  consistently  making 
efforts/policies towards ensuring environmental sustainability. This includes policies like Joint 
Forest  Management,  Green  Rating  for  Integrated  Habitat  Assessment,  Coastal  Regulation 
Zone, clean energy drive through eco labeling and energy efficiency labeling, fuel efficiency 
standards, etc.  
the  Government 
the  country, 
                                                
2  Emissions from the agriculture sector would not form part of the assessment of its emissions intensity. 
3  These exclude use of pharmaceutical grade CFCs in manufacturing of Metered Dose Inhalers for Asthma and 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Diseases patients. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Reducing global wastage 
14. 
An integral part of doing business in a sustainable way is to reduce waste and, in 
the process, decrease operating costs and increase profits. As per estimates4, between 30 to 
50 per cent (about 1.2–2 billion) tonnes of food produced around the world never reaches a 
human stomach. While wastage in the sub-Saharan Africa and South-East Asian countries, 
including India, tend to occur primarily at the farmer-producer end of the supply chain due to 
inefficient  harvesting,  inadequate  local  transportation  and  poor  storage  infrastructure,  in 
developed countries such as the UK, produce is often wasted through retail and customer 
behaviour. Surveys also show that in India, at least 40 per cent of all fruits and vegetables 
are lost between grower and consumer due to lack of refrigerated transport, poor roads and 
inclement  weather.  Wasting  food  means  losing  not  only  life-supporting  nutrition  but  also 
precious resources, including land, water and energy. About 550 bn cubic metres of water is 
wasted  globally  in  growing  crops  that  never  reach  the  consumer.  Within  India,  water  use 
efficiency in agriculture, which consumes around 80 per cent of our water resources, is only 
around 38 per cent, which compares poorly with 45 per cent in Malaysia and Morocco and 
50–60 per cent in Israel, Japan, China and Taiwan. 
15. 
Estimates suggest that about 90 per cent of India’s waste is currently disposed off 
by  open  dumping  and  landfilling.  Presently,  the  country  has  more  than  36,000  hazardous 
waste generating industries, producing approximately 6 million tonnes of hazardous wastes 
per annum. Around 50 per cent of this can be recycled, which is not being done. This leads 
to hazardous materials getting disposed off into the environment and causing grave danger 
to living beings. It is also estimated that approximately 55 million tonnes of Municipal Solid 
Wastes are generated in urban areas of India annually, which otherwise could be a valuable 
potential source for power generation for an energy deficient country. 
16. 
In order to prevent wastages of this kind, governments and developmental agencies 
should  work  together  to  help  change  people’s  mindset  on  waste  and  discourage  wasteful 
practices by food producers, supermarkets, industrial units and consumers. Incentives could 
be provided to encourage adoption and implementation of such policies. The Union Budget 
2013–14  has  announced  that  cities  and  municipalities  would  be  encouraged  to  take  up 
waste-to-energy  projects  in  public-  private  partnership  (PPP)  mode.  Such  municipalities 
implementing waste-to-energy projects will be supported through different instruments such 
as viability gap funding, repayable grants and low cost capital. 
Sustainable usage of natural resources 
17. 
Apart  from  reducing  waste,  in  order  to  ensure  sustainable  development,  we  also 
need  to  use  our  natural  resources  judiciously  and  in  an  environment-friendly  manner. 
Particular  attention  is  required  to  be  paid  to  conservation  of  energy,  given  that  any 
development  process  is  bound  to  be  energy  intensive.  As  rightly  pointed  out  by  the  UN 
Secretary  General,  Ban  Ki-Moon,  sustainable  energy  is  the  golden  thread  that  links 
economic  growth,  social  equity  and  a  healthier  environment.  With  global  economic 
development, global energy demand is expected to double between now and 2050, energy 
prices are projected to rise and remain volatile, making imports a costly proposition for India. 
For  a  power  deficient  nation  like  India,  need  of  the  hour  is  to  explore  newer  means, 
particularly, more environment friendly and endogenous ones rather than depending solely 
on coal and oil, where our dependence on imports is high. In this context, natural gas is a 
good option where domestic potential is huge given our huge reserves. Our attempt should 
be to further exploit the huge potential from this environment friendly source. India has also 
shown commitment towards generation of 22,000 MW of solar energy by 2020. Several parts 
                                                
4  UK’s  Institution  of  Mechanical  Engineers  (IMechE)  report  on  “Global  Food; Waste  Not, Want  Not”,  January 
2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of  India  are  endowed  with  good  solar  radiation  and  deploying  solar  panels  even  on  one 
percent of the land area could result in over 500,000 MW of solar power. It has considerable 
advantages for powering the rural areas for education, health and employment. No doubt, it 
is expensive at this stage; however, with growing manufacturing capacity, short term viability 
gap  support  from  government,  aggressive  research  and  development  and  large  scale 
deployment, the cost is likely to come down. 
18. 
Inefficiency in usage and theft are also daunting problems facing the power sector, 
with  the  transmission  and  distribution  losses  amounting  to  about  22  per  cent  in  2011–12. 
Apart  from  enhancing  production,  efficiency  in  usage  by  generating  awareness  about  the 
importance of these resources is also crucial. An appropriate pricing regime is also important 
in  this  regard.  A  completely  deregulated  system  of  pricing  for  energy,  whereby  prices  are 
market-determined,  would  encourage  people  to  take  informed  decisions,  help  tackle  the 
problem of suppressed inflation in the economy and finally, make other alternative forms of 
renewable energy such as solar, tidal and bio-gas viable. 
19. 
Government  has,  in  recent  times,  taken  steps towards  appropriate  pricing  of  non-
renewable sources of energy and encouraging Clean and Green energy. Recognizing that 
consumer  pays  a  high  price  for  renewable  energy  because  of  high  cost  of  finance, 
Government has set up a National Clean Energy Fund by imposing a cess on coal that will 
provide funds to the Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA) for on-lending 
to  viable  renewable  energy  projects.  The  non-conventional  wind  energy  sector  has  got 
special incentives in the recent Union Budget 2013–14. India has recently signed the electric 
vehicles  initiative  (EVI)  of  the  Clean  Energy  Ministerial  (CEM)  that  aims  to  facilitate  the 
deployment  of  20  million  electric  vehicles  globally  by  2020.  As  you  are  aware,  the 
commercial manufacture of battery-operated vehicles has begun in India. 
20. 
In addition to power, the Indian economy and society faces daunting challenges in 
water as well. As per World Bank, at current rate, the 1.2 billion people in India will exhaust 
their  fresh  water  supplies  by  2050.  While  demands  of  a  rapidly  developing  economy  are 
huge, our potential for augmenting supply is getting limited. Water tables are falling. A recent 
assessment by NASA showed that during 2002 to 2008, India lost about 109 cu.km. of water, 
leading  to  a  decline  in  water  table  to  the  extent  of  0.33  metres  per  annum. Water  quality 
issues have increasingly come to the fore. We receive very good rains, yet our inadequate 
storage  and  distribution  facilities  make  water  a  scarce  resource  in  India.  Climate  change 
poses fresh challenges with its effect on the hydrologic cycle that might exacerbate impacts 
of floods  and  droughts.  Estimates  suggest  that about  half  of the  demand  for  water  will  be 
unmet by 2030. Given these challenges, it is important that we improve efficiency in water 
usage.  Initiatives  aimed  at  recycling  and  reuse  of  water,  better  flood  management  and 
ground water management is important. Transforming the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment  Guarantee  Act  (MGNREGA)  into  a  watershed  restoration  and  groundwater 
recharge programme, as envisaged in the 12th Plan, seems desirable. It could serve the dual 
purpose  of  preserving  water  resources  while  simultaneously  creating  employment.  Also, 
appropriate pricing of both water and electricity, will help recharge the depleting aquifers. 
Sustainable industrial/business practice 
21. 
Industry  being  the  catalyst  of  development,  it  needs  to  patronise  the  concept  of 
sustainability in its various processes. Sustainability is, now, seen as a key challenge as well 
as an opportunity in business. In future, only companies that make sustainability a goal will 
achieve  competitive  advantage.  Early  movers  today  can  reap  the  benefits.  That  means 
rethinking business models as well as products, technologies, and processes (Prahalad et al, 
2009).  Recognizing  this,  some  of  the  large  multinational  corporations  like  Unilever,  Coca-
Cola  and  Walmart  have  committed,  though  Consumer  Goods  Forum,  to  eliminate 
deforestation  from  their  supply  chains.  Microsoft  has  promised  to  go  carbon-neutral  by  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
2012–13. Markets have also started rewarding sustainable business5 that further adds to the 
reputation  of  a  company.  Sustainable  businesses  require  innovation  in  technology, 
organisation and management (usually all three together). Many of the sustainability gains 
would  require  more  fundamental  organisational  shifts,  and  need  to  be  led  by  the  top-level 
management. 
22. 
Some of the common characteristics of green companies include: using natural gas 
for  boiler  fuel,  recycling  biodegradable  waste,  minimum  use  of  plastic  material,  using 
recyclable packaging materials, using biomass and solar radiation as sources of renewable 
energy,  generating  electricity  from  hydroelectric  plants  and  reducing  toxic  emissions. 
Besides, there are some simple ways to make an office environment-friendly and reducing 
energy consumption by introducing efficient practices and generating consciousness among 
the staff. 
23. 
Obviously,  there  is  a  perception  which  is  true  to  some  extent  that  implementing 
greener  business  technologies  could  have  an  impact  on  cost,  risk  and  most  importantly, 
profitability.  However,  one  needs  to  be  innovative  to  find  out  ways  of  viability  within 
sustainability.  In  fact,  sustainable  practices  can  also  keep  the  companies  competitive. 
Careful usage of the natural resources, reduction in wastes and exploring ways of minimizing 
energy  usage,  saves  cost  and  boosts  profitability  of  the  company.  Some  organizations 
recycle and reuse their own waste to lower the cost of raw materials in manufacturing. Some 
companies sell waste to other sustainable organizations for recycling and reuse and, in the 
process, create a new stream of revenue. To give you an example of sustainable business, 
in  Ford  Car  Maker  Company,  the  seat  fabric  is  made  from  100  per  cent  post-industrial 
materials  and  renewable  soy  foam.  Many  companies  choose  to  become  greener  by 
neutralizing (or offsetting) their carbon emissions by buying carbon credits, which are used in 
various projects, such as reforestation projects, and balance their emissions. There are now 
many companies specializing in calculating and trading carbon credits and this is becoming a 
very popular trend. 
Sustainable agricultural practices 
24. 
In  India,  with  the  average  annual  rate  of  growth  of  foodgrains  production  and 
population  being  at  1.2  and  1.6  per  cent,  respectively,  over  the  past  decade,  per  capita 
availability of foodgrains, has started declining. Yield levels are stagnating and are below our 
counterpart emerging economies. With increasing income levels, there has been an increase 
in demand for protein items, in which we are not self sufficient. Given that poor spend more 
than  60  per  cent  of  their  income  on food,  any  hike  in  food  prices  due  to  lower  production 
hurts the poor the most. In India, eight million people were kept in income poverty from the 
increased food prices in 2010–11 (UN ESCAP estimates). The Right of all people to Food 
was reaffirmed by various countries at the Rio+20 United Nations Conference on Sustainable 
Development held in June 2012. 
25. 
Recognizing the impact of demographic trends on food demand, food supply has to 
keep pace. FAO estimates show that food production has to grow by 60-70 per cent to feed 
the expected 9 billion people by 2050. However, any attempt to increase food production will 
put pressure on the resources that it requires like land, water and energy. Several parts of 
food system, like the production of nitrogen fertilizers, are highly energy intensive. Hence the 
thrust  of  agricultural  development  in  coming  years  has  to  be  on  sustainable  agricultural 
practices. 
26. 
The  National  Agricultural  Policy  in  India  focuses  on  sustainable  development  of 
agriculture  by  promoting  technically  sound  and  economically  viable,  environmentally  non-
                                                
5  For example, ITC limited, Wipro Technologies, HCL Technologies, IndusInd Bank are identified among India’s 
top 10 green companies. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
degrading and socially acceptable uses of the country’s natural resources. Towards this end, 
productivity  enhancements  are  needed  through  higher  investments  in  agriculture,  greater 
research  in  the  area  of  regionally  adapted  varieties  and  hybrids,  adoption  of  eco-friendly 
integrated  pest  management  technologies  and  use  of  manure  and  compost  instead  of 
artificial fertilizers. With  limited  scope for  increasing  cultivable  land  in  India,  more  dynamic 
ideas  for  using  arable  land  elsewhere,  as  being  done  by  China  and  Japan,  could  also  be 
explored. 
Green banking 
27. 
You  would  agree  that  apart  from  industry  and  agriculture,  banks  as  the  financing 
agent  of  the  economic and  developmental  activities  of the  world,  could  also  play  a  crucial 
role  in  promoting  overall  sustainable  development.  It  is  in  this  respect  that  the  concept  of 
green  banking  has  emerged  and  is  recognized  as  an  important  strategy  to  address 
sustainable  development  concerns  and  creating  awareness  among  people  about 
environmental responsibility. Green banking has two dimensions. First, the way the banking 
business is being done – is it paperless or not. There is often a doubt that what big impact a 
monthly paper statement can have. It could be enormous. Estimates for US suggest if every 
household  were  able  to  switch  to  paperless  bank  billing,  this  would  save  an  estimated 
16,500,000  trees  per  year  or  about  a  46,000  acre  forest,  396,000  tonnes  of  CO2  a  year, 
495,000  tonnes  of  air  pollution  per  year  and  gain  almost  2,145,000  tonnes  of  oxygen  per 
year. There are several guidelines from the Reserve Bank on e-banking and banks are also 
putting sincere efforts towards adopting paperless banking. 
28. 
The second dimension of green banking relates to where the bank puts its money. 
Green  Banking  entails  banks  to  encourage  environment  friendly  investments  and  give 
lending priority to those industries which have already turned green or are trying to go green 
and,  thereby,  help  to  restore  the  natural  environment.  There  are  no  specific  RBI 
regulations/guidelines  for  banks  on  green  banking.  However,  in  its  circular  on  Corporate 
Social Responsibility, the Reserve Bank has advised banks to familiarise themselves with the 
issue of Corporate Social Responsibility, a concept whereby companies integrate social and 
environmental  concerns  in  their  business  operations  and  in  their  interactions  with  their 
stakeholders  on  a  voluntary  basis.  They  are  also  required  to  put  in  place  a  suitable  and 
appropriate  plan  of  action  towards  helping the  cause  of sustainable  development,  with  the 
approval of their Boards. In this context, particular attention has been drawn in the circular to 
the  International  Finance  Corporation  Principles  on  project  finance  and  carbon  trading. 
Further,  banks /financial  institutions  have  been advised  to  keep  themselves  abreast  of  the 
developments  on  an  on-going  basis  and  dovetail/modify  their  strategies/  plans,  etc.  in  the 
light of such developments. Albeit all this is voluntary on the part of the banks, the underlying 
objective  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  to  sensitise  banks  on  the  issue  so  that  they  can  help 
contribute to this effort by playing a more meaningful role. 
29. Let me emphasise that environmental viability is not very independent from commercial 
viability.  That  is  why  some  banks  have  begun considering  environment  viability  along  with 
commercial  viability  while  deciding  on  lending  decisions.  Reason  being  that  if  a  debtor 
company goes out of business due to environmental issues, the bank is exposed to credit, 
legal  and  reputational  risks  that  hinder  the  commercial  viability  of  the  project  as  well. 
However, unlike the foreign banks, Indian banks have a long way to go in this area. 
C. 
Social sustainability 
Need and importance 
We now move on to the other dimension of sustainability i.e., social sustainability. 
30. 
You would agree that no programme for controlling environment degradation can be effective 
without  education,  jobs  for  everyone  and  without  a  visible  rise  in  the  standard  of  living  of 
common masses. Unless we are in a position to provide employment and purchasing power 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
long 
to  ensure 
for  the  daily  necessities  of  the  people  living  around  forests,  we  cannot  prevent  them  from 
combing  the  forest  for  food  and  livelihood.  This  does  not  necessarily  mean  an  inherent 
conflict  between  the  two  dimensions.  We  need  to  strike  a  right  balance  between  our 
development  needs  and  environmental  commitments 
run  growth 
sustainability. 
31. 
Over the past ten years, many developing countries, including India, have achieved 
strong growth rates and increased economic prosperity, laying the foundations of a better life 
for their citizens. And yet, in several of these countries, the benefits of high growth have not 
penetrated  uniformly  across  all  citizens  and  societies.  Estimates  suggest  that  the  gap 
between  rich  and  poor  has  widened  in  most  OECD  countries  over  the  last  30  years.  The 
average income of richest 10 per cent of population is about nine times that of the poorest 
10 per cent6. These inequalities are reflected in strong sentiments of disconnect between the 
concerns  of  ordinary  citizens  and  those  of  political  elites,  even  in  developed  countries. 
Growth itself can be destabilising if it is not inclusive (Subbarao, 2012). The eradication of 
poverty and inequality remains the greatest global challenge facing the world today and is an 
indispensable  requirement  for  sustainable  development,  as  recognized  by  the  UN  Rio+20 
outcome document.  
32. 
Looking at India, it grew at an average rate of 7.8 per cent during the Tenth Plan 
and  at  about  7.9  per  cent  during  the  Eleventh  Plan  despite  the  global  crisis,  which  is 
praiseworthy.  While  this  has  also  been  associated  with  reduction  in  unemployment  and 
poverty  levels,  yet  these  remain  much  above  the  tolerable  levels.  Despite  improvement  in 
literacy and health outcomes as reflected in Census 2011 data, India is still not on target to 
meet some of the MDGs by 2015. Despite being one of the fastest growing economies of the 
world, India’s rank in terms of the global Human Development Index (2013) as brought out by 
the  United  Nations  is  136th  among  187  countries.  It  is  clear  that  the  country  has  major 
challenges to address, particularly in terms of making the growth process more inclusive and 
socially sustainable. 
Investing in human capital and jobs 
33. 
India’s  demographic  dividend  presents  the  country  with  a  great  opportunity  to 
enhance its growth and seek convergence of per capita incomes with that in the developed 
world. Median age for India’s population is about 27 years compared with over 40 for most 
OECD economies. There will be significant addition to India’s labour pool and even as the 
median  age  bucket  rises,  it  will  still  be  at  a  relatively  young  30–34  age  bracket  by  2026. 
Clearly, India has a potential advantage of demographic dividend over its emerging market 
peers  and,  in  case  we  want  to  reap  its  benefits,  we  need  to  invest  in  human  capital.  The 
World Bank’s World Development Report 2013, commenting on India, has also observed that 
providing key services like health and education can help create the right jobs that will lead to 
improved standards of living and inclusive growth, which would be relevant for India as it is 
expected  to  contribute  a  significant  proportion  of  global  labour  force  in  the  coming  years. 
More importantly, focus should be on women education as mother’s education is observed to 
be more important than household income for her child’s survival (HDR, 2013). 
34. 
The  combined  expenditure  of  central  and  state  governments  on  education  is  just 
about 3.3 per cent of GDP, while that on health is another 1.3 per cent of GDP. In contrast, 
the European Union countries spend from their general government account, 5.5 per cent of 
GDP on education and 7.5 per cent of GDP on health. Canada’s public spending on health 
alone is over 11 per cent of its GDP and that on education is nearly 5 per cent. India needs 
to step up its public spending on education and health considerably over the next five years. 
                                                
6  Even in the United States, average income of 20 per cent at the top of the distribution is almost 8 times higher 
than that of bottom 20 per cent. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  addition  to  higher  spending,  quality  of  such  spending  is  important.  Right  skilling  of  our 
work force by adequate focus on technical education is the need of the hour. Our technical 
institutes should get connected to the industry and the market and take inputs from there. 
35. 
In  the  face  of  various  constraints,  the  expenditure  by  the  Central  and  State 
Governments  on  education  alone  will  not  be  sufficient  to  make  a  difference.  The  private 
sector  would  also  need  to  pitch  in  for  improving  the  quality  of  education  and  educational 
system in the country. The banks have a very crucial role in facilitating pursuit of education 
by the resource-constrained youth. As we are all aware, the cost of education, in particular 
that of higher education, has risen very substantially. This is likely to result in exclusion of 
poor,  but  meritorious  and  deserving  youth from obtaining quality  education  unless  suitable 
funding is made available to them. In the year 2001, Indian Bank Association (IBA) prepared 
a Model Educational Loan Scheme (since revised) which forms the basis for banks’ loans to 
students for pursuing various educational courses. RBI, on its part, has permitted banks to 
classify  loans  and  advances  granted  to  individuals  for  educational  purposes,  including 
vocational courses up to  10 lakh for studies in India and  20 lakh for studies abroad, under 
“priority  sector”.  Further,  the  loans  granted  to  educational  institutions  are  eligible  to  be 
classified as “priority sector” advances under micro and small (service) enterprises, provided 
they  satisfy  the  provisions  of  MSMED  Act,  2006.  The  banks  have  been  mandated  not  to 
obtain collateral security in the case of educational loans up to  4 lakh. 
36. 
The statistics on the education loan granted by banks in India, however, portray a 
disconcerting  picture,  especially  in  terms  of  performance  by  the  private  sector  and  foreign 
banks. While the public sector banks accounted for 96 per cent of total outstanding education 
loan  by  the  commercial  banks  as  on  March  31,  2012,  the  comparative  figure  for  private 
sector stood at only 3.46 per cent (Annex 1). The share of foreign banks in the outstanding 
education  loan  is  virtually  negligible.  I  urge  the  representatives  of  the  private  sector  and 
foreign banks present here to make sincere efforts towards correcting this anomaly and be 
partners in development of human capital which would serve as the principal driving force for 
economic growth in the coming years.  
37. 
Given that social services are primarily state government responsibilities, with more 
than 80 per cent of combined government expenditure in these areas being incurred by the 
states,  the  necessary  public  interventions  would  largely  have  to  be  at  the  state  level.  It  is 
observed  that  states  lagging  behind  with  regard  to  expenditure  on  social  sector  have  not 
attempted to catch up with the better-performing states by allocating a larger share of their 
aggregate expenditure for human development, as their per capita social sector expenditure 
has remained significantly lower than that of the leading states, resulting in the persistence of 
disparities  in  human  development  indicators  across  states  during  the  2000s  (RBI,  2013). 
There  is  also  a  need  to  encourage  cooperation  between  the  public  and  private  sector  in 
achieving  human  capital  goals.  A  step  towards  increasing  private  expenditure  on  social 
sector is the corporate social responsibility clause incorporated in the new Companies Law 
that  mandates  a  company  making  profit  during  a  year  to  spend  at  least  2  per  cent  of  the 
average net profit during the three immediately preceding financial years on corporate social 
responsibility. It is important for companies to regard this as a good practice rather than as a 
tax. 
38. 
The  biggest  challenge  is  to  ensure  jobs  for  the  additional  supply  of  labour  that 
comes in to join the workforce. On a rough basis, about 10 million people would enter the job 
market every year for the next 15 years. Finding productive jobs for such huge numbers is a 
big challenge, and clearly, the answer lies in stepping up the employment intensity of growth. 
While the services sector has led India’s growth and employment story for some time now, 
India’s growth pace may not be sustained unless the manufacturing sector becomes more 
competitive  and  creates  lot  more  jobs.  This  poses  a  significant  challenge  in  employment 
generation and skilling our work force. While Government’s attempt should be to improve the 
playing field, it is the private sector that has to take the lead in this move of creating jobs to 
convert  the  demographic  dividend  to  our  advantage.  Again,  in  the  context  of  employment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
creation, the banks have a very major role to play. We are all aware that MSEs are a primary 
driver for job creation and GDP growth in our economy and, therefore, fostering a dynamic 
MSE  sector  should  be  a  policy  priority.  The  statistics,  however,  present  a  sorry  state  of 
affairs  insofar  as  the  performance  of  banks  in  lending  to  MSE  sector  is  concerned.  The 
number of borrower accounts has remained virtually stagnant over the past three years. If 
the banks have to make a significant contribution to creation of jobs in the economy, they 
would need to lay sharper focus on their financial inclusion and financial literacy initiatives so 
that not only demand for financial services is generated, but millions of micro-entrepreneurs 
also get created in the process. 
Financial inclusion 
39. 
Financial inclusion has been a focus area for the Reserve Bank and we consider it 
to be an imperative for achieving inclusive growth and for promoting social sustainability. We 
all  know  from  personal  experience  that  economic  opportunity  is  strongly  intertwined  with 
access  to  financial  system.  Such  access  is  especially  powerful  for  the  poor  as  it  provides 
them opportunities to build savings, insure themselves against income shocks and to meet 
emergencies  without  falling  into  the  clutches  of  the  usurious  money  lenders.  Financial 
inclusion will also pave the way for Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) for payment of social 
security  and  other  benefits,  which  will  minimize  transaction  costs  as  well  as  leakages.  In 
parts of the country where such EBT has already taken off, the results are impressive and 
the  experience  of  both  payers  and  recipients  extremely  satisfying.  Financial  inclusion  is  a 
global  public  good; for  the  poor, for  the  banks and  for  the  nation  and  hence,  the  Reserve 
Bank remains deeply committed to the Financial Inclusion Agenda. 
40. 
Our  approach  has  been  threefold  –  first,  increasing  the  reach  of  banking  by 
providing  doorstep  banking  in  remote  areas  using  technology  based  solutions;  second, 
fostering innovation through the introduction of new products and services designed for the 
poorer segments and third, ensuring a supportive and enabling policy environment. 
41. 
There is strong research evidence to suggest that this social banking experiment in 
India has been successful in improving the credit flows to the rural population and even in 
lowering  poverty  as  a  result.  Looking  at  the  numbers,  the  average  population  per  bank 
branch  has  improved  from  15,583  in  2001  to  12,601  in  2012.  As  per  latest  census, 
58.7 percent  households  were  availing  banking  services  in  2011  as  compared  with 
35.5 percent in 2001. Notwithstanding these efforts by the Reserve Bank and the financial 
sector,  the  challenges  are  enormous.  Providing  banking  coverage  to  a  population  of 
1.2 billion  and  ensuring  transactions  in  these  accounts  is  a  daunting  task.  The  synergy 
between Aadhaar cards, mobiles, banking accounts and electronic benefit transfer has to be 
fully  utilized  to  make  banking  in  the  unbanked  regions  a  viable,  low  cost  business. 
Simplification in KYC documentation requirements for small accounts done recently will also 
go a long way in fostering financial inclusion. 
Financial outreach and literacy 
42. 
Along  with  improving  aggregate  literacy  levels,  promoting  financial  literacy  among 
masses  is  now  well  recognized  as  an  important  demand  side  input  towards  achieving  the 
goal  of  financial  inclusion.  Lack  of  financial  awareness  and  literacy  is  one  of  the  main 
reasons behind low level of transactions in the accounts newly opened under our financial 
inclusion  initiatives.  By  making  the  poor  financially  literate,  we  can  empower  them  to  take 
informed decisions with regard to their savings, borrowings and investment. By bringing the 
poor  into  banking  business,  overall  domestic  and  household  savings  rate  could  rise,  thus, 
leading to higher and more sustainable growth. 
Recognizing this, the Reserve Bank, through its financial outreach programmes, has 
43. 
helped  in  spreading  awareness  and  improving  financial  literacy.  As  part  of  these 
programmes,  the  Top  management  visits  villages  across  the  country  to  interact  with  the 
villagers  to  understand  their  problems  and  expectations  and,  at  the  same  time,  tell  them 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
about  Reserve  Bank’s  policy  initiatives  and  the  advantages  of  being  linked  to  the  formal 
banking sector. With an objective of promoting financial literacy, Reserve Bank had advised 
banks to set up Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs). The FLCs are expected to impart financial 
literacy in the form of simple messages. 
44. 
In  order  to  ensure  effective  coordination  of  the  efforts  made  by  all  the  financial 
regulators  and  other  stakeholders,  a Technical Group  on  Financial  Inclusion  and  Financial 
Literacy  has  been  constituted  under  the  aegis  of  the  Financial  Stability  and  Development 
Council  (FSDC)  having  representation  from  the  Reserve  Bank,  Securities  and  Exchange 
Board of India, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority, Government of India, State 
Governments,  Central  Education  Board,  etc. The  group  is  in  dialogue with  NCERT,  CBSE 
and state education boards for inclusion of financial literacy in school curriculum. 
to  a  mean  GDP 
(Provopoulos,  2011). 
IMF  estimates  point 
Conclusion 
D. 
45. 
To  conclude,  today  the  definition  of  development  is  fast  changing.  The  feeling  is 
growing  that  we  should  re-order  our  priorities  and  move  away  from  the single-dimensional 
model which has viewed economic performance only in terms of growth (GDP), without really 
considering the social and environmental sustainability of our growth. 
46. 
From the central bank point of view, environmental issues are not usually a matter of 
primary concern considering that its core function is to safeguard monetary stability with focus, 
primarily, being on price stability, growth and financial stability objectives. While environmental 
issues do not directly impact a central bank’s objective function, indirectly and in the long term, 
they  do 
loss  of  
0–3 per cent of global GDP for a 3 degree Celsius global warming. The economic impact could 
be  seen  in  terms  of  contraction  in  economy’s  productive  capacity,  lower  growth  rates  and 
higher  prices.  Given  that  the  performance  of  the  financial  sector  is  closely  linked  to  the 
macroeconomic  scenario,  its  impact  on  the  financial  system  could  be  significant,  through 
increased exposure of the financial system to risk, both its own and through its clients, as well 
as  possible  damages  to  its  assets  (Nijathaworn,  2008).  Addressing  the  sustainability  issue 
surely requires more efforts and initiatives on the part of the Government and the industry, but 
we definitely share the concern and will continue to do our bit where ever possible. 
47. 
As  regards  climate  change  related  issues, multilateral  negotiations  should  respect 
equity and fair burden sharing among nations, keeping in mind both the historical emission 
levels of the developed world as well as the future growth prospects of the developing world. 
While  global  arrangements  continue  taking  shape,  India  remains  committed  towards  the 
implementation of several steps that have already been accepted to promote green growth in 
the context of sustainable development. 
48. 
Industry should try and adopt sustainable practices and reduce industrial wastes via 
encouraging in-house recycling and waste reduction. The role of all concerned stakeholders 
is  crucial  for  this  movement.  However,  I  would  emphasize  that  any  attempt  to  achieve  a 
green  economy  should  not  be  at  the  cost  of  local  communities.  The  poor  and  the 
underprivileged  have  to  be  protected  and  involved.  Green  economy  has  to  be  bottoms  up 
and democratized. 
49. 
I hope today’s event helps in generating awareness and throws up practical ideas on 
how  to  balance  the  goals  of  growth  and  sustainability  and  also  how  as  bankers  we  can 
integrate these considerations into our financial appraisal and risk assessment of projects. I am 
quite sure that the distinguished speakers who would be speaking on this subject through the 
day  and  the  learned  audience  gathered  here  will  collectively  find  out  new  models  of  doing 
business with environmental and social sustainability goals in mind. I believe that the senior 
bank management would also be encouraged to adopt these practices. I once again thank the 
organizers for inviting me and giving me an opportunity to share my thoughts on the subject. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Annex 1 
 12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Annex 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13 
References 
FAO (2011), “Global Food Loss and Food waste – Extent Causes and Prevention” 
FAO at Rio+20 (2012), “100 days to Rio +20, 100 facts making the link between people, food 
and the environment”. 
Government of India (2012), Draft Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-17) document, Vol I, Faster, 
More Inclusive and Sustainable Growth, Planning Commission. 
——— (2013) Economic Survey 2012–13, Ministry of Finance. 
——— (2013) Union Budget 2013–14, Ministry of Finance. 
——— (2012) Report of the Working Group on “Effectively Integrating Industrial Growth and 
Environment Sustainability” Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012–2017). 
Nijathaworn, Bandid (2008), “Is climate change a big deal for the financial system?”, speech 
by Deputy Governor, Bank of Thailand, at Bank Indonesia’s Annual international Seminar on 
“Macro  economic  Impact  of  Climate  Change:  Opportunities  and  Challenges”  in  Bali, 
August 2. 
Provopoulos George A (2011), “The impact of climate change in Greece”, Opening address 
by Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the presentation of the Report of the Climate Change 
Impacts Study Committee, Athens, 1 June. 
Parikh  Kirit  (2011),  “Interim  Report  of  the  Expert  Group  on  Low  Carbon  Strategies  for 
inclusive Growth”, GoI. 
Prahalad C.K., M.R. Rangaswami and Ram Nidumolu (2009), “Why sustainability is now the 
key driver of Innovation?’, Harvard Business Review, September. 
Prime  Minister’s  address  (2013),  At  the  International  Workshop  on  Green  National 
Accounting for India, April 5. 
——— (2013) At the 4th Clean Energy Ministerial, April 17. 
Reserve Bank of India (2013), Report on “State Finances: Study of Budgets of 2012–13”. 
——— (2012) Annual Report 2011–12. 
Sachs, Jeffrey D (2012) “From Millennium Development Goals to Sustainable Development 
Goals”, Columbia University, New York. 
Subbarao  D  (2009),  “Financial  Inclusion:  Challenges  and  Opportunities”,  speech  by 
Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Bankers’ Club in Kolkata on December 9. 
United Nations (1987), Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, 
“Our Common Future”, also called Brundland Report. 
———  ESCAP  (2012),Regional  Cooperation  for  inclusive  and  sustainable  development: 
South and South-west Asia development report 2012–13,South and South West-Asia Office, 
United Nations ESCAP. 
———  (2013),  The  Rise  of  the  South:  Human  Progress  in  a  Diverse  World,  Human 
Development Report. 
UNU-IHDP and UNEP (2012), “Inclusive Wealth Report 2012”, Measuring Progress toward 
Sustainability. 
Upadhaya V P, K Dutta Shantanu and U Sridharan (2006), “Environmental Management of 
Industrial  Hazardous Wastes  in  India,  Journal  of  Environment,  Science  and  Engg,  Vol  48, 
April. 
World Bank (2012), World Development Report 2013, Washington. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Websites: 
Ministry of Environment and Forests: www.envfor.nic.in 
Planning Commission: www.planningcommission.nic.in 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
