Carlos da Silva Costa: Portugal’s situation in the post-Troika period 
Address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the  “Portugal 
post-Troika” economists meeting, Lisbon, 5 July 2013. 
 Thank you, Mr. President. 
In my speech, I would like to address Portugal’s situation in the post-Troika period, starting 
with an assessment of how we got there, i.e. “the day before”. Indeed, the situation on the 
day  before  the  conclusion  of  the  Economic  and  Financial  Assistance  Programme  is  as 
important as the day after, given that it conditions subsequent developments. 
The day before the conclusion of the Adjustment Programme 
I. 
Taking into account the currently available economic projections, and using traffic lights as 
reference,  we  reach  the  time  of  transition  with  our  external  account  indicators  exhibiting  a 
“green” light, economic activity indicators and a number of fiscal indicators a “yellow” one and 
unemployment and public debt a “red” one (Table 1). 
Table 1 
Macroeconomic outlook at the conclusion of the Economic and 
Financial Assistance Programme 
Note: June 2013 projections 
Sources: IMF and Banco de Portugal. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1
Significant adjustment in external accounts (green) 
The  external  rebalancing  of  the  Portuguese  economy  is  remarkable,  having  been  quicker 
and  stronger  than  in  the  two  previous  programmes,  when  the  foreign  exchange  rate  was 
used  as  an  adjustment  instrument.  The  current  and  capital  account  and  the  goods  and 
services  account  –  which  in  2012  recorded  positive  figures  for  the  first  time  in  decades  – 
should remain in surplus. This adjustment reflects both the impact of  contracting domestic 
demand on imports and the increase in the market share of Portuguese exports. In fact, in a 
particularly adverse international environment, Portuguese firms made remarkable efforts to 
enhance the penetration and diversification of export markets. 
Muted recovery in economic activity and continuation of the process of fiscal deficit 
reduction (yellow) 
However, the dynamics of exports was not sufficient to sustain economic activity expansion. 
In  fact,  economic  activity  contracted  more  than  initially  projected  and  the  current  outlook 
points to a muted recovery in 2014. 
Fiscal adjustment, albeit lower than initially projected, is very substantial. The primary fiscal 
balance, which excludes interest expenditure, improved substantially. The adjustment is also 
very  significant  if  we  look  to  developments  in  the  structural  balance  of  public  finances. 
However,  the  fiscal  consolidation  process  was  slower  than  expected  and  its  sustainability 
must be ensured through public expenditure-cutting measures. 
Unemployment and public debt are very high and still growing (red) 
The level of unemployment is clearly a cause for concern, namely given that it largely reflects 
structural unemployment. This situation calls for the implementation of a safety network that 
safeguards social cohesion, allows for the re-training of long-term unemployed and prevents 
them from falling into inactivity. 
Public debt reached very high levels and is still growing. It is imperative that its developments 
ensure  a  sustainable  path.  This  constitutes  the  main  constraint  on  economic  policy  in  the 
future. 
I would here like to draw attention to one point which is of fundamental importance to me and 
deserves thorough consideration. As pointed out in Mr. Marco Buti’s speech, our adjustment 
programme  was  strictly  implemented.  This  notwithstanding,  a  perception  of  failure  arose 
among the Portuguese population and social and political players, namely the perception that 
we have failed to meet the programme targets. This perception is incorrect. Therefore, in my 
opinion, it is not only necessary, but important to debunk this idea, stressing that: 
 
first, international economic developments were much more adverse than previously 
expected, which had very negative consequences for exports, investment, economic 
activity  and,  consequently,  fiscal  revenues  and  expenditure  and  public  debt.  As 
such, and by way of illustration, if external demand had evolved in line with what had 
been initially projected in the Programme, the effort of budgetary adjustment made 
to date would imply that the government debt ratio would already be on a downward 
path (the dashed line in Figure 1 below). 
second, the Programme’s projections relied on fiscal multipliers that were ultimately 
below those estimated ex post. Increased uncertainty among economic agents that 
resulted  from  the  continued  weakness  of  the  external  environment  of  the 
Portuguese  economy  and,  in  particular,  the  simultaneous  fiscal  consolidation 
process under way in those external economies, led economic agents to predict a 
higher  fall  in  permanent  income.  As  a  consequence,  the  impact  of  fiscal 
consolidation measures on GDP – the multipliers – was underestimated.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
 Figure 1 
Public debt as a percentage of GDP 
Source: Banco de Portugal. 
 The  combination  of  these  two  adverse  factors  with  the  establishment  of  the  Programme’s 
targets as a percentage of GDP has made it necessary to revise those targets, on pain of 
triggering  and  feeding  a  vicious  circle  between  fiscal  consolidation  and  economic  activity 
developments. This warrants some rethinking of the adjustment programmes’ target set-up 
so as to prevent the return effect of GDP developments on compliance with the budgetary 
targets  –  through  tax  revenues  and  social  spending  –  and  debt  targets  –  through  tax 
revenues,  social  spending  and  the  “denominator  effect”.  My  message,  to  Mr.  Buti  in 
particular, is: the fiscal targets of future programmes should not be set as a percentage of 
GDP, but in the form of limits to nominal public expenditure given that these targets can be 
controlled by fiscal policymakers and, as such, allow for an actual assessment of the results 
achieved and the consequent accountability for failures. 
Still  on  the  subject  of  the  day  before  the  post-Troika  period,  it  is  important  to  take  into 
account the degree of financial market access by the sovereign issuer. If market access is 
not  restored  in  a  credible  and  sustained  manner  over  time,  upon  the  Programme’s 
conclusion,  a  very  painful  process  will  begin.  For  this  reason,  the  issuance  of  five  and 
ten-year Portuguese Treasury bonds, in January and May respectively, are key milestones. 
They were crucial so as to gauge the market’s “temperature” and to set up the progressive 
credibility  enhancing  of  the  Portuguese  government  debt.  It  should  be  recalled  that,  even 
after we balance public accounts, we will continue to depend on financial markets, given the 
substantial need to pay off existing public debt (Figures 2 and 3). This means that we will still 
need financial markets to be willing to refinance our debt. To this end, investors must feel 
comfortable  with  the  public  debt  level,  its  development  path  and  the  consistency  and 
credibility of the fiscal process. To sum up, creditors must feel that: our debt is sustainable, 
our  fiscal  policy  accommodates  the  respective  servicing,  its  reduction  is  consistent  in  the 
medium run and political players ensure compliance with the resulting liabilities. Given the 
state of our public finances, the leverage available to us is restricted to the pace of public 
debt adjustment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Figure 2 
Public debt – maturity profile 
Source: Banco de Portugal. 
Figure 3 
Medium and long-term debt annual repayment schedule 
(after extension of the EFSF and EFSM loans) 
  Source: IGCP (Portuguese Treasury and Debt Management Agency). 
By way of illustration, it should be noted that, assuming a long-term growth rate of nominal 
GDP  at  around  3  per  cent,  compliance  with  budgetary  targets  set  in  the  programme  for 
2013–2014  and  the  fiscal  compact  commitments  thereafter  (in  particular,  a  structural 
adjustment in the primary balance of at least 0.5 p.p. per year) would make it possible for us 
to  reach  a  government  debt-to-GDP  ratio  of  approximately  60  per  cent  around  2030 
(Figure 4).  This  means  that,  in  a  scenario  of  return  to  economic  growth,  compliance  with 
medium-term commitments under the fiscal compact would imply a sustainability path in the 
medium to long run for the Portuguese public debt. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 4 
Public debt as a percentage of GDP 
  Note: Assumptions of this scenario: (i) fulfilment of the Programme targets in 2013 
and 2014; (ii) increase of the structural primary balance by 0.5% of GDP per year 
until  2020,  reaching 
the 
expenditure side; (iv) increase in the implicit interest rate on public debt to 4.4% in 
2020 (3.9% in 2012). 
Source: Banco de Portugal. 
the  MTO;  (iii) consolidation  effort  exclusively  on 
This  exercise  corresponds  to  an  aggressive  adjustment  profile  in  terms  of  public  debt 
reduction.  My  preference  goes  to  a  smoother  debt  adjustment  path,  compatible  with  a 
parallel decline in the tax burden. Figure 5 shows a scenario of gradual reduction of the tax 
burden over time resulting from a freeze on nominal expenditure, against a background of 
strict compliance with fiscal commitments. This scenario would result in a slower reduction of 
public debt, albeit on a sustainable path, which would have the advantage of allowing for a 
tax burden reduction. 
It  is  common  knowledge  that  I  have  advocated  that  the  “bonus”  resulting  from  economic 
growth  should  be  divided  between  public  debt  cuts  and  tax  cuts.  Debt  reduction  is  key  to 
enhance our credibility with financial markets and, accordingly, ensure refinancing. In turn, a 
tax  burden  reduction  is  fundamental  to  unlock  the  growth  potential  and  absorb  structural 
unemployment  in  Portugal.  It  would  be  useful  if  we  could  arrive  at  a  broad  political 
consensus,  in  tandem  with  a  broad  consensus  among  social  partners,  whereby  we  would 
accept that the future economic growth bonus be used to reduce public debt and taxes. 
To  this  end,  one  option  would  be  to  reach  a  compromise  to  maintain  nominal  public 
expenditure at a constant level from 2015 onwards, which corresponds to a decline in real 
terms equivalent to the inflation rate at that time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Figure 5 
Public debt as a percentage of GDP 
Note: Assumptions underlying this scenario: (i) fulfilment of the Programme targets in 
2013  and  2014;  (ii) stabilisation  of  nominal  expenditure 
from  2015  onwards; 
(iii) gradual decline in direct taxes throughout the horizon; (iv) increase in the structural 
primary  balance  by  0.5%  of  GDP  per  year  until  2020,  reaching  the  MTO; 
(v) consolidation effort exclusively on the expenditure side; (vi) increase in the implicit 
interest rate on public debt to 4.4% in 2020 (3.9% in 2012). 
Source: Banco de Portugal. 
 The post-Troika period 
II. 
The challenges that lie ahead after the conclusion of the Economic and Financial Assistance 
Programme  are  not  smaller  than  those  faced  in  the  course  of  the  Programme.  More 
specifically, we must be able to answer the following questions: 
How can we ensure that the return to the financial markets is not reversed? 
How can we ensure sustained and balanced economic growth of the Portuguese economy 
within the euro area? 
As mentioned by the President and Mr. Buti, to answer these questions certain conditions 
must be fulfilled both at domestic and external level (Figure 6). 
At domestic level, and in the short run, the adjustment process of the Portuguese economy 
must go forward. This means, inter alia, to proceed with the consolidation of public accounts, 
improve  banking  system  profitability,  push  on  with  the  household  and  corporate  balance 
sheet adjustment, create a social security network for long-term unemployed and to set up 
conditions inducing potential output growth in Portugal.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conditions for a successful exit of the Programme 
Figure 6 
 Looking further ahead, a new institutional framework must be established, on the basis of a 
broad  consensus,  fostering  behaviours  consistent  with  the  maintenance  of  fundamental 
macroeconomic balances and the economy’s competitive capacity. 
In this context, the first point to have in mind is social cohesion. The ongoing sectoral shift in 
the  Portuguese  economy  suggests  that  unemployment  rates  should  remain  high  over  a 
protracted  period  of  time.  Safeguarding  social  cohesion  is  key  so  we  can  manage 
unemployment in line with its structural nature. In fact, a mechanical exercise conducted in 
Banco de Portugal shows that an 8 per cent annual growth of external demand up to 2020 
would  have  a  cumulative  reducing  impact  of  7  p.p.  on  the  unemployment  rate  (to  around 
11 per cent), which means that the solution to our unemployment problem does not lie on the 
demand side. We must be able to free up and generate entrepreneurial skills, attract foreign 
direct investment and boost our productive sector. At the same time, we must create support 
schemes to re-train long-term unemployed with a view to increase their employability. 
In addition to social cohesion, there are two other conditions which I find important. The first 
is  the  creation  of  a  political  consensus  on  the  Portuguese  economic  policy  leeway.  This 
political  consensus  is  not  the  same  as  “unanimity”,  it  is,  rather,  the  acknowledgment  of 
economic policy limits and the curtailment of the political discussion to those limits resulting 
from our external financing constraints and public indebtedness. 
The second condition is consensus among social partners. We must enhance the dialogue 
between social partners, so as to ensure a realistic negotiation of the distribution of income, 
i.e. taking into account productivity gains in the economy. We can draw inspiration from the 
experience  in  countries  like  Belgium  and  Finland.  These  countries  have  in  place  systems 
that, in case of risks to competitiveness, subordinate wage settlements to the imperative of 
safeguarding competitiveness and employment. 
At  the  same  time,  external  conditions  supportive  of  our  adjustment  must  be  put  in  place. 
These external conditions depend on the solidarity of our European partners, which can only 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
be accomplished if we prove to have a sense of responsibility and the ability to comply with 
our commitments. The keyword in this whole process is “trust”. 
Setting up the above-mentioned domestic conditions is important to strengthen our partners’ 
confidence in the fulfilment of our obligations over time and to win their solidarity. 
As regards short-term external conditions for a successful exit of the adjustment programme, 
I  consider  it  crucial  that  European  mechanisms  be  in  place  so  as  to  address  incidental 
factors.  To  deal  with  any  excess  volatility  in  financial  markets  and,  consequently,  prevent 
investors  from  moving  away  from  Portuguese  debt,  European  intervention  mechanisms  in 
the primary and secondary Portuguese debt markets must be in place, which, in turn, entails 
the adoption of a precautionary programme. The precautionary programme will help enhance 
the credibility of the macroeconomic adjustment process in the period immediately after the 
conclusion  of  the  Programme.  The  associated  conditionality  is,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
counterpart  to  our  European  partners’  solidarity  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  key  element  to 
consolidate market confidence in the country’s economic policies. 
Turning  to  medium-term  conditions,  it  is  crucial  that  the  European  Union  implements 
mechanisms  of  economy  policy  coordination  and  establishes  a  process  of  cooperative 
European growth. In this context, European countries with a favourable economic situation 
should  make  use  of  the  leverage  available  to  them  to  expand  their  domestic  demand, 
contributing  to  a  more  balanced  and  sustainable  adjustment  of  the  whole  economy.  The 
establishment of a Banking Union is a central pillar for fixing financial fragmentation in the 
euro  area  and  breaking  the  link  between  sovereign  risk  and  bank  risk.  This  is  a  very 
important  step  towards  enhanced  competitiveness,  given  that  it  will  make  it  possible  for 
identical  firms  in  terms  of  profitability  and  risks  to  have  similar  financing  conditions, 
regardless  of 
location.  Moreover,  structural  reforms  should  be 
implemented  that  induce  potential  output  growth  across  Europe  (e.g.  output  market 
deregulation and tax system reforms). 
In sum: 
 
their  geographical 
For a successful adjustment of the Portuguese economy and to ensure its prosperity 
within  the  monetary  union,  certain  domestic  and  external  conditions  must  be 
established. By proving that domestic conditions are in place, external conditions will 
ensue and be strengthened. 
In terms of  domestic conditions, social cohesion must be  ensured and consensus 
among  social  partners,  as  well  as  a  broad  consensus  between  political  players, 
must be reached. 
The necessary political consensus does not concern policies to be implemented but 
only the limits and constraints to their definition and implementation (as I have said 
on other occasions, although we may have different opinions on how to decorate the 
living room, we must admit that the living room walls are our limit and our constraint; 
in  terms  of  economic  policy,  the  walls  in  the  exercise  correspond  to  the  external 
constraints placed on any given country). 
  Thank you very much.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
