Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Developing a vibrant capital market in 
Uganda 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Official Listing of Bonus Shares at the Uganda Securities Exchange, Kampala, 7 June 2013. 
 The  Global  Chairman  &  Managing  Director,  Bank  of  Baroda  &  Guest  of  Honour  – 
Mr. S. S. Mundra  
Governing Council Members, Uganda Securities Exchange,  
Chief Executive Officer, Capital Markets Authority,  
Chairman and Board of Directors, Bank of Baroda (U) Ltd,  
Dignitaries and invited guests in your respective capacities,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good Morning  
It gives me great pleasure to be the Chief Guest on the occasion of the Official Listing of the 
Bonus Shares of the Bank of Baroda (Uganda) Ltd. I would like to commend the Board and 
the management of Bank of Baroda for their foresight in issuing bonus shares to facilitate the 
increase in the bank’s paid up capital, as well as for their continued good stewardship of the 
bank.  
The  Bank  of  Uganda  raised  the  minimum  paid  up  capital  requirement  for  banks,  from 
Shs 4 billion in 2011 to Shs 25 billion. The motivation for the increase was both to strengthen 
the  capital  base  of  banks  and  to  bring  our  minimum  paid  up  capital  requirement  closer  to 
those of our partners in the East African Community.  
Most  of  the  banks  operating  in  Uganda  already  had  a  capital  base,  in  terms  of  total 
shareholders’ funds, which exceeded Shs 25 billion prior to the statutory increase in paid up 
capital coming into effect (which for banks already operating in Uganda, was March of this 
year).  
For some banks, however, it was necessary to restructure their capital by transferring funds 
from their retained reserves to their paid up capital. Issuing bonus shares to shareholders is 
one  way  of  implementing  such  a  transfer.  It  also  provides  a  mechanism  for  rewarding  the 
existing shareholders out of the profits generated by the bank. This is actually the second 
time  in  the  last  two  years  that  the  Bank  of  Baroda  has  issued  bonus  shares  to  its 
shareholders, thereby increasing its paid up capital.  
The  Bank  of  Baroda  has  made  a  prominent  contribution  to  the  development  of  a  vibrant 
capital  market  in  Uganda.  It  was  the  first  financial  institution  to  be  listed  on  the  Uganda 
Securities  Exchange  (USE).  Since  it  was  first  listed,  the  value  of  the  bank’s  shares  has 
grown remarkably.  
The  Bank  of  Baroda  is  one  of  the  oldest  banks  in  this  country,  and  has  survived  and 
flourished  through  good  and  bad  times.  It  has  been  a  reliable  partner  for  the  business 
community.  In  recent  years  the  bank  has  expanded  both  its  branch  network  and  its  asset 
portfolio  to  take  advantage  of  the  robust  growth  in  the  business  sector.  Good  corporate 
governance, a commitment to providing high quality services to its customers and meticulous 
compliance  with  the  regulatory  and  statutory  requirements  has  been  the  hallmark  of  the 
bank. I would like to wish the Bank of Baroda the very best for the years to come.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
With these remarks, allow me to once again congratulate the shareholders, the Board and 
senior management of Bank of Baroda for the issuance of bonus shares and for continuing to 
support  both  the  development  of  the  banking  industry  in  Uganda  and the  country’s  capital 
markets.  
I hereby declare the Bank of Baroda bonus shares listed on Uganda Securities Exchange.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
