Guy Debelle: Some recent (and not so recent) trends in Australian debt 
markets 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the KangaNews DCM Summit 2013, Sydney, 19 March 2013. 
Thanks to Christian Vallence and Tom Williams for their help. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here again. Today, I’m going to talk about the local debt 
market. I’ll talk about the current state of play as well as a bit of history. 
Market Developments 
This  time  last  year,  debt  markets  globally  weren’t  in  great  shape,  though  the  local  market 
wasn’t faring too badly. A year on, global debt markets are in a much better position, with 
issuance  strong  across  most  parts  of  the  market,  spreads  considerably  lower  and  the 
absolute level of yields very low by historical standards. 
The market’s assessment of the likelihood of extreme outcomes has declined. The risks in 
Europe are still predominantly negative, but in China, the US and non-Japan Asia, the risks 
are much more balanced – one can even conceive of upside surprises! 
Australia’s financial markets have been influenced by these global factors. At the same time, 
domestic  markets  have  benefited  from  strong  international  demand  for  Australian  dollar 
assets.  Local  issuers  continue  to  be  viewed  favourably  by  offshore  investors  looking  to 
diversify credit exposures. 
Yields on Commonwealth Government securities have moved in line with global government 
bond yields. They are around post-federation lows, as this very long-run graph demonstrates 
(Graph 1). Semi-government spreads have tended to move in a fairly tight range. Yields on 
state  government  debt  are  also  around  their  lowest  since  Federation,  notwithstanding  the 
occasional ratings downgrade. 
Graph 1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1 
Demand  for  CGS  from  offshore  investors  remains  strong  (Graph  2).  The  share  of  foreign 
ownership has come off its recent peak but net purchases have still continued, just not in line 
with the pace of issuance. There have been reports of Japanese investors selling, in large 
part  because  of the  high  level  of  the  AUD/JPY exchange  rate,  but  these  sales  have  been 
more  than  compensated  for  by  increased  purchases  by  other  investors.1  The  foreign 
ownership of semis has been relatively constant, partly reflecting the preference the foreign 
official sector generally displays for sovereign or highly rated supranational paper rather than 
state or provincial debt. Instead, much of the increase in semi supply over the past couple of 
years has been met by the demand from domestic bank balance sheets looking to boost their 
liquid asset holdings. 
Graph 2 
 For financial institutions, the cost of unsecured wholesale debt has fallen sufficiently to make 
it  economical  for  them  to  replace  some  of  their  government  guaranteed  securities.  As  we 
noted in a recent box in the Statement on Monetary Policy,2 banks began repurchasing this 
debt  in  large  amounts  towards  the  end  of  last  year,  and  buybacks  have  totalled  around 
$19 billion  since  the  end  of  September  (Graph  3).  As  a  result,  the  contingent  liability  the 
scheme generates for the Australian Government has fallen more quickly than implied by the 
maturity profile of guaranteed securities, and currently stands at $53 billion. 
                                                
1   Some of the  demand  for  these  assets has  come  from  the official  sector.  Reflecting  these  increased  official 
holdings, the IMF recently announced that it will separately identify the Australian and Canadian dollars in its 
reserve  assets  report,  alongside  the  five  major  reserve  currencies.  Given  the  IMF  move  reflects  decisions 
already  taken  by  reserve  managers,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  reclassification  will  generate  a  new  source  of 
demand for Australian dollars. Nor is the IMF classification a benchmark for reserve asset allocation decisions 
for major reserve asset managers. Instead, the move reflects the realities that have been evident for some 
time. 
2   See  RBA  (2013),  “Box  D:  Buybacks  of  Government  Securities”,  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  February, 
pp 54–55. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 3 
 The ability to issue covered bonds has also helped in the repurchasing of guaranteed debt, 
as banks can offer investors with AAA mandates an alternative asset to invest in. Covered 
bonds have enabled banks to diversify their investor base, and have provided issuers with a 
wholesale funding source less sensitive to risk events than traditional unsecured funding. 
After  strong  issuance  in  the  beginning  of  2012  as  the  banks  ramped  up  their  programs, 
covered  bond  issuance  by  Australian  banks  slowed  as  the  year  progressed,  in  large  part 
reflecting  banks’  desire  to  spread  out  the  maturity  profile.  The  major  banks  have  utilised 
around 30 per cent of their issuance caps to date. Spreads on these covered bonds have 
tightened significantly since the first transaction in late 2011, reflecting not only the general 
improvement  in global  risk  sentiment,  but  also  increased familiarity  with  the  product  and  a 
widening investor pool. Australian covered bonds now price at a level close to much longer 
established covered bond programs (Graph 4). 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Graph 4 
Graph 5 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  general  decline  in  borrowing  costs  in  the  second  half  of  2012  has  helped  entice  a 
number of issuers back to the wholesale market, with volumes picking up across all markets 
towards the end of last year and into the first quarter of 2013 (Graph 5). 
In the unsecured market, banks continue to keep their stock of term debt relatively constant, 
that is, issuance is broadly in line with maturities. This strategy is the result of a number of 
different considerations, including the relatively subdued growth in balance sheets. But one 
dominant  cause  is  the  desire  to  maintain  a  strong  rating,  with  the  latent  threat  of  a 
downgrade  if  wholesale  issuance  were  to  grow  “too  large”.  This  reflects  the  somewhat 
misplaced  assessment  of  “deposits  good,  wholesale  funding  bad”.  As  a  result,  banks  are 
currently paying about the same price for a 3-month term deposit as they are for a 5-year 
debt issue. 
Banks have taken advantage of the increase in risk appetite by lengthening the tenor of their 
issuance. The average tenor of unsecured issuance has been 5 years since the middle of 
last  year,  compared  with  a  little  over  4  years  since  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis. 
Increasing tenor has also been a feature of other markets. For example, the Australian Office 
of Financial Management (AOFM) extended the average tenor of CGS issuance in 2011/12 
by over a year to 7.7 years,3 while over the past 12 months the tenor of corporate issuance 
has increased to nearly 11 years, compared with an average of 8 years since the beginning 
of the financial crisis. 
The securitisation market has only recently caught up to these trends, lagging behind most 
other  segments  of  the  debt  market.  Issuance  has  picked  up  of  late  and  spreads  have 
tightened  considerably  following  the  earlier  sizeable  tightening  in  covered  bond  spreads. 
Encouragingly, recent issuance has been completed with little or no support from the AOFM 
due to strong private investor demand, and primary market spreads are at their tightest level 
since 2007 (Graph 6). This spread tightening will lower the cost of mortgage lending for small 
banks and non-bank lenders who rely on securitisation for a large part of their funding. 
Graph 6 
                                                 
3   See  AOFM  (2012),  Australian  Office  of  Financial  Management  Annual  Report  2011–12.  Available  at 
<http://www.aofm.gov.au/content/publications/reports/AnnualReports/2011-2012/index.asp>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Conditions have also picked up in the Kangaroo market. Ten kangaroo issuers debuted in 
the market in 2012. The diversity of new issuers was also a notable feature, and included 
Asian names and non-financial corporates. Another positive development has been the re-
emergence of some non-SSA issuers not seen since the start of the global financial crisis, 
while more recently a number of European issuers have returned to the market after being 
absent for much of 2012. 
Kangaroo  issuance  has  been  supported  by  the  broad-based  reduction  in  spreads,  the 
attractive basis, and foreign investors looking beyond AAA instruments for Australian dollar 
exposure. These foreign investors have been notably active and Asian investor participation 
in particular continues to grow. 
Some recent RBA initiatives in Australian debt markets 
I will now briefly discuss two recent RBA initiatives concerning the local debt market. 
Firstly, the Reserve Bank is in the process of signing two-way credit support annexes with all 
of its swap counterparties. A number of these agreements are already operational, including 
those with the Bank’s largest counterparties, and we expect agreements to be in place with 
all  counterparties  in  the  coming  weeks.  This  move  is  in  line  with  best  practices  in  risk 
management.  As  more  market  participants  collateralise  their  exposures  in  both  directions, 
this should also free collateral for the system (in aggregate), and enhance liquidity and the 
resilience of the Australian derivatives markets. 
Secondly, late last year, the Reserve Bank announced new data reporting requirements for 
repo-eligible  RMBS.  The  information  required  by  the  Bank  includes  loan-level  and  other 
transaction specific data that issuers must also make publicly available. These initiatives are 
designed to help the Bank assess the quality of RMBS provided as collateral and will also 
improve the transparency of the market as a whole. For investors, the data will be easier to 
access and because the reporting templates are standardised, investors can better compare 
the  underlying  credit  characteristics  of  different  deals,  and  also  use  the  data  in  their  own 
analytics. 
The consultation period for the proposed reporting templates closed at the end of last year. 
The  Bank  is  currently  reviewing  the  consultation  findings  and  will  finalise  the  reporting 
templates over the next month or so. 
A long-run perspective on Australian corporate bond issuance 
I will now turn to the corporate bond market. Non-financial corporate issuance has also been 
robust, and was particularly strong towards the end of last year, led by some large deals from 
the mining sector. The December quarter was the strongest on record for domestic activity, 
with  BHP’s  $1  billion  transaction  receiving  significant  interest. The  deal  is  the  largest  ever 
non-credit wrapped transaction in the domestic market by a corporate issuer. 
To  place  these  more  recent  trends  in  a  longer-term  context,  I’d  like  to  take  a  moment  to 
consider how Australia’s corporate debt markets have evolved into their present form. The 
current corporate bond landscape is the result of a number of significant developments over 
the past century, outlined in a recent Reserve Bank Research Discussion Paper published in 
late 2012.4 This paper was the result of a substantial data collection exercise and extends 
our understanding of Australian bond issuance back to 1917. 
Broadly speaking, trends in bond issuance by Australian corporations can be broken down 
into three distinct periods (Graph 7). The first, which extended throughout the first half of the 
                                                
4   See  Black  S,  J  Kirkwood,  A  Rai  and  T  Williams  (2012),  “A  History  of  Australian  Corporate  Bonds”,  RBA 
Research Discussion Paper No 2012–09. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
20th century, actually saw the peak in the size of the corporate bond market relative to GDP. 
This period, particularly prior to World War II, was characterised by significant issuance by 
government-owned  Public  Trading  Enterprises  (PTEs).  Private  investment,  on  the  other 
hand, was largely financed through internal funds, and the modest private bond issuance that 
did occur was mostly to fund mining investment, much of it by corporations that later went on 
to become BHP. 
Graph 7 
 The bulk of the issuance by government-owned corporations took place in the 1920s. The 
proceeds were used mostly to fund public works programs, with investment by these PTEs 
accounting for as much as 7 per cent of GDP. Half of the bond issuance was by Victorian 
water and sanitation boards alone. Public works projects undertaken here in Sydney, on the 
other hand, including the building of the Sydney Harbour Bridge and Sydney’s underground 
railway system, were mostly funded directly by governments. 
Over  the  1930s  and  1940s,  the  stock  of  corporate  bonds  outstanding  declined  as 
governments reallocated resources away from the PTEs to finance war-related expenditure. 
By  the  end  of  the  Second  World  War,  the  corporate  bond  market  had  shrunk  to  around 
18 per cent of GDP. 
As  the  economy  expanded following World War II,  the  stock  of  corporate  bonds  remained 
relatively small as a share of GDP. At the same time, the corporate bond market began to 
shift towards  a  larger  share  of  private  issuance, in  part to fund mining  investment,  and  as 
corporations  looked  to  source  capital  from  outside  the  heavily  regulated  banking  system 
(Graph 8). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Graph 8 
Graph 9 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Bond issuance trends changed significantly from the early 1980s onwards as the Australian 
economy  and  financial  system  underwent  large  structural  changes.  Financial  deregulation 
and  liberalisation  in  the  late  1970s  and  early  1980s  saw  banks  rely  less  on  deposits  and 
instead  turn to the  capital  markets to fund  balance  sheet growth.  As  we know,  bank  bond 
issuance has since grown rapidly, and banks have become the largest issuers of Australian 
bonds (Graph 9). 
Some  other  notable  trends  since  the  early  1980s  have  included  the  large  number  of 
privatisations, which has resulted in the share of quasi-government bonds falling to close to 
zero,  and  the  growth  of  the  asset-backed  market.  On  the  investor  side,  compulsory  super 
and  increased  offshore  issuance  caused  a  shift  away  from  direct  holdings  by  households 
towards indirect holdings through superannuation funds and non-resident investors. 
Another important development was the abolition of capital controls and the floating of the 
Australian dollar. Prior to the 1980s, there were a range of constraints on capital flows that 
were  intended  to  prevent  or  discourage  firms  from  undertaking  foreign  borrowing.  Since 
these  controls  were  relaxed,  banks  and  other  corporations  have  obtained  a  significant 
proportion  of  funding  from  offshore  bond  markets.  Since  1986,  the  stock  of  bonds  issued 
offshore by Australian residents has exceeded the size of the onshore market (Graph 10). 
Graph 10 
 The  liberalisation  of  the  capital  account  also  contributed  to  the  development  of  the 
“Kangaroo” bond market. Kangaroo issuance was also encouraged by, and contributed to, 
the development of an active cross-currency interest rate swap market in Australia. 
I will finish with a few thoughts on the current state of the domestic corporate bond market. 
There  is  a  fair  amount  of  discussion  about  the  size,  liquidity  and  functionality  of  the  local 
market. Let me raise three issues worth considering: 
• 
Is the local corporate sector too banked? The US is often held up as the comparator 
here, but in some respects the US is the exception, with the size of the Australian 
corporate  bond  market  similar  to  that  in  Europe  and  the  UK  for  example.  That 
doesn’t mean the local market shouldn’t be bigger, just that it’s not that unusual. 
In many of the recent discussions about the state of the local market, I have been in 
the  room  with  both  issuers  and  investors.  The  issuers  say  there  is  not  enough 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 demand  for  their  paper.  The  investors  say  there  is  not  enough  supply.  But  what 
actually seems to be going on here is that the bid-ask is too wide. It is basically an 
issue  of  price.  Ironically,  those  very  same  discussions  are  often  chaired  by 
investment banks, whose mandate, I would have thought, would be to intermediate 
between the issuers and the investors. 
Finally, there is a nascent level of activity in developing different means of financing 
for  sub-investment  grade  corporates  other  than  traditional  bank  financing.  Banks 
would  still  do  the  credit  process  but  then  potentially  package  a  pool  of  sub-
investment grade loans into a security that would be attractive to investors. Two of 
the  issues  around  this  strategy  are:  first,  whether  the  margin  would  be  attractive 
enough  to  the  investor,  after  the  bank  has  charged  for  its  credit  process;  and 
second, whether the investors, particularly in the super sector, have the credit skills 
to appropriately assess the risk and price of such a product, given the super sector’s 
corporate skills have traditionally been confined to the listed corporate sector. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
