Choongsoo Kim: The past year in retrospect, challenges and resolutions 
for 2013 
New  Year  Speech  by  Dr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  Bank  of 
Korea, Seoul, 2 January 2013. 
 Dear  fellow  members  of  the  Bank  of  Korea, 
The  Dragon  Year  of  2012  has  passed  and  2013,  the  Year  of  the  Snake,  is now  upon 
us.  As  the  New  Year  begins,  I  take  it  as  very  meaningful  that  we  all gather  to  reflect 
together  on  the  past  year  and  firm  up  our  resolve  to  undertake what  we  must  in  the 
coming  year. It is  already  almost  five  years  since  the Global Financial  Crisis  struck,  yet 
the  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  we  still  have  little  clue  as  to  how  it  may  be  fully 
resolved.  Instead,  we  may  have  ourselves become  so accustomed  to  the  crisis  situation 
as  to  even  arouse  suspicions  that  we  might  be  becoming  gradually  desensitized  to  its 
seriousness. The current financial crisis is analyzed as originally caused by the side effects 
of  the  deepening  of  global  trends,  and  during  the  past  few  years  of  overcoming  the  crisis 
these  trends  have  progressed  in  ways  that  have  locked  in  the  interconnectedness  of  all 
economies of this world even more firmly. We have come to face the irony that our efforts to 
overcome the various side effects from the rapid progress of global trends have in the end 
produced  an  even  stronger  process  of  globalization.  What  this  means  is  that,  due  to  the 
environment  of  continuing  economic  recession  the  growth  of  international  trade  has 
contracted  compared  to  the  past,  but  the  universality  of  policies  and  systems  has 
expanded  all  the  more  and  their  interlinkages  have  been  further  strengthened. In  such 
an  environment,  the  extent  to  which  a  single  nation  can  resolve problems  through  its 
own  policy  tools  alone  can  be  said  to  be  growing  more  and  more  limited.  On  the 
other  hand,  as  the  crisis  drags  on  economic  agents’ patience for  enduring  the  social 
tensions  aroused  by  the  reform  agendas  that  had been  pursued  in  several  countries 
around  the  world  is  also  showing  signs  of reaching  its limits,  and  in  many  countries 
there  even  appear  to  be  preoccupations  with  the  short-term  resolution  of  outcomes 
brought  about 
than  concentration  on 
identifying  the  nature  of  the crisis  or  preventing  its  reoccurrence. 
Corresponding  with 
in  global  economic  conditions,  each  country  has 
attempted  various  countermeasures  domestically,  but 
in  bringing  about 
economic  stability  and  growth  while  eliminating  the  uncertainties prevalent in the  global 
economy  are  considered  to  have  not  been  sufficient.  It goes  without saying  that  it  has 
not  seemed  possible  for  Korea,  whose  growth driver  is  trade,  to  be  immune  to  the 
effects  of  these  global  uncertainties.  In  Korea,  in  addition  to  the  inevitability  of  a 
slowdown  of  growth,  to  prepare against  the  possibility  growing  of  economic  instability 
developing  into  social  risk as  uncertainties  rise higher,  a high  priority  has  been  given  to 
risk  management policies,  so  that  the  household  debt  problem,  the  long-term  slump  in 
the  housing market  and  the  like  do  not  pose  economic  risks,  while  considerable  policy 
attention  has  also  been  devoted  to  restraining  the  aftereffects  of  the  quantitative 
easing  policies  in  advanced  economies. 
The  economic  outlook  for  this  year  does  not  foresee  either  the  global  or the  Korean 
economies  being  markedly  better  than  last  year,  but  at  the  same  time neither  can  it 
be  said  to  contain  a large  number  of  negative  opinions.  Since  an economy  is  akin  to 
a  living  organism,  apt  to  show  dynamic  movements  at  any time,  it  is  important  that 
there  be  flexibility  to  deal  with  various  scenarios  that might  occur.  The  Bank  of  Korea 
has  already  made  it  public  that,  while  firmly anchoring  the  basis  for  price  stability,  its 
monetary  policy  this  year  will  seek  to promote  financial  stability,  support  the  recovery 
of  economic  growth,  and strengthen support  to  vulnerable  sectors.  As  for  the  inflation 
the  course  of  handling 
the  crisis,  rather 
the  changes 
their  effects 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
target,  the  Bank  had for  the  past  three  years  set  it  at  a  range  of  2  to  4%,  around  a 
3%  midpoint, but  for  the  next  three  years  this  has  been  narrowed  compared  to  the 
past  to  a 2.5–3.5%  range.  Given  that  uncertainties  in  the  external  environment  likely  to 
threaten  price  stability  will  remain  high,  this  narrowing  of  the  inflation  target  range 
should  be  recognized  as  reflecting  the  Bank  of  Korea’s  firm  determination  for  price 
stability. 
Dear  members  of  the  Bank  of  Korea, 
The  past  year  in retrospect: continued prevalence of uncertainty 
The past year can be referred to as one that ushered in political changes worldwide in the 
midst  of  a  global  financial  crisis.  Political  leaders  were  newly  chosen  in  all  four  of  the 
countries surrounding Korea, and there were changes in political leadership in many other 
countries as well, including France. In Korea, too, a new president was elected, and a new 
government is to be inaugurated soon. From a global perspective, it was imperative last year 
that the euro area crisis be resolved, but I would call the state of affairs one in which global 
efforts to escape this financial crisis in a time of rapid political change could not deliver the 
results  originally  expected. The  immediate  challenges  that the  world  must  work  on can  be 
classified  broadly  and  summed  up  as,  first,  global  rebalancing  and,  second,  reforming  the 
shortcomings of the financial regulatory and supervisory system that triggered the financial 
crisis. The former, as I have emphasized several times, is illustrative of the point that at the 
bottom of any financial crisis always sit imbalances in the real economy that have nurtured it, 
and the latter is based on the judgment that the cause of the financial crisis this time around 
lay in the failure to manage systemic risks, by reason of which reform efforts as represented 
for  instance  by  Basel  III  and  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  are  being  undertaken  to  strengthen  the 
financial regulatory and supervisory framework. 
The  financial  crisis  that  broke  out  in  New  York  crossed  over  to  Europe,  where  it 
metastasized  into  a fiscal  crisis,  and  the  situation  now  is  one  in  which real  economies 
around  the  world  cannot  properly  pull  out  of  recession,  as growth  in  some  emerging 
market  countries  has  declined.  Currently,  individual countries  are  drawing  up  measures 
to  cope  with  the  effects  of  the  U.S.  fiscal cliff  problem,  but  our  worry  lies  in  the  fact 
that,  even  if  in  actuality  that  issue is appropriately  resolved  in  one  form  or  another,  we 
will  not  see  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  come  to  an  end  any  time  soon.  Last  year, 
various  of  the initiatives  attempted  in  the  US,  Europe  and  elsewhere  in  response  to 
the financial  crisis  involved  the  introduction  of  unconventional  policies  or  facilities  that 
had  not  been  tried  in  the  past.  It is  bound  to  take  time  for  newly  attempted endeavors 
to  take  effect,  but  with  the  addition  on  top  of  this  of  political  uncertainties  resulting 
from  the  elections  of  political  leaders  in  these  countries economic  activities  could  not 
be  carried  out  in  a  stable  manner,  and  I  would  say  that  in  consequence  economic 
recovery  could  not  be  anything  other  than  slow. 
Even  under  such  external  circumstances,  we  can  say  that  economic  management  in 
Korea  was  stable  last  year,  to  the  extent  that  ours  was  the  only  country  whose 
sovereign  rating  was  upgraded  by  the  world’s  top  three  credit rating agencies.  Although 
growth  slowed  and  domestic  demand  was  sluggish,  a  very  large  current  account 
surplus  was  recorded  on  the  strength  of  favorable  exports,  and  prices  stabilized.  As 
the  supply-side 
from  energy  prices,  were 
relatively  eased,  and  the  output  gap  was  negative due  to  the  economic  recession,  the 
Bank  of  Korea  was  able  to  keep  prices  stable  at  the  2.2%  level,  well  below  the 
3%  midpoint  of  its  inflation  target.  This was  a  dramatic  change,  I would  say,  compared 
with  the  4.0%  of  2011.  For  the  Bank  as  well,  as  it  operated  through  the  first  year 
after  its  mandate  for  financial stability  was  introduced  in  the  Bank  of  Korea  Act,  there 
was  a  big  change  in that it  came  to  regularly  submit  its  Financial  Stability  Report  as  a 
statutory report  to  the  National  Assembly.  The  Bank  could  not  avoid  difficulties  in  the 
process  of  conducting  its  monetary  policy,  however.  And  needless  to  say  this  was 
inflationary  pressures, 
including  those 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in 
In  circumstances 
the  US  and  Europe. 
that  our  knowledge  and  experience  were  inadequate 
because,  with  external  uncertainties  rising  economically  and  politically,  it was  not easy 
to  grasp  the  impacts  on  the  Korean  economy  of  the  various  unconventional  polices 
introduced 
in  which  globalization  is 
intensifying,  it  is  clear  that  decision-making  without careful  consideration  of  the  impact 
on  the  domestic  economy  of  changes  in  the external  environment  is inappropriate,  but  I 
must  honestly  confess 
for 
understanding  these  changes,  and persuading  economic  agents  of  this  situation  was  an 
even  more  difficult responsibility  to  fulfill.  Along  with  this,  the  Bank  also  exerted  efforts 
to  keep abreast  of  the  new  global  trend  in  national  economic  management,  in  which 
the jurisdiction  of  the  central  bank  cannot  but  be  expanded.  It is  out  of  this standpoint 
that  the  Bank  has  considered  financial  inclusion  in  the  course  of  carrying  out  its 
monetary  policy,  and  has  striven  to  take  the  first  step  toward internationalization  of  the 
won  by  partial  use  of  the  proceeds  of  its  currency swap arrangement  with  the  People’s 
Bank  of  China  for  trade  settlement. Meanwhile,  it  is  profoundly  encouraging  that  Bank 
of  Korea  staff  members’  activities  outside  the  Bank  have  grown  vigorous,  that  their 
perspectives  in viewing economic  issues  have  become  global,  and  that  their  research 
and analysis capabilities  are  being  greatly  fostered. 
it 
their 
through 
industry 
financial 
resilience 
to  strengthen 
levels  are  high  and 
fiscal  spaces  exhausted, 
the  other,  although  to  block  outbreaks  of  financial  crisis 
Dear  friends  and  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of  Korea, 
Advent of new challenges for central banks: redefining their status and role 
The  changes  that  have  unfolded  over  the  past  five  years  since  the  Global Financial 
Crisis  can  be  seen  as  a  revolutionary  shift  in  the  perception  of  the  central  bank 
functions  held  for  the  past  century.  On  the  one  hand,  in  several advanced  economies 
whose  sovereign  debt 
it  has 
become  inevitable  that  monetary  policy  play  an  active  role  in  management  of  the 
economy;  and  on 
is 
tight  capital-  and 
desirable 
liquidity-related  regulations,  the  fact  of  the  matter  is  that concerns  are  being  raised  for 
realistic  reasons  about  such  regulations  weakening  competitiveness  in  the  short  run, 
and  causing  economic  recovery  to  slow  even more  thereby.  Let  me  elaborate  on  the 
former  point.  As  accommodative  monetary  policy  stances  have  been  kept  in  place 
central  banks’  nominal  policy rates have  reached  the  near  zero  level,  and  unorthodox 
measures  dubbed quantitative  easing  (QE)  are  thus  being  attempted  in  many  different 
forms.  For monetary  policy  to  have  an  effect  in  a  situation  of  realistic  constraint  at  the 
zero  lower  bound,  communication  policies  such  as 
forward  guidance  are  being 
attempted, seeking  to  nudge  the  activities  of  economic  agents  in  appropriate directions. 
While  Korea’s  policy  rate  was  5.25%  just  prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  that  of  the 
US stood  at  5.25%  in  early  2007,  and  the  dynamic  changes  in  the economy  that  saw 
it fall  to  its  current  0–0.25%  level  within  only  two  to  three years  offer  us  many lessons. 
And  to  expand  on  the  latter  point,  let  me  note  as a  case  in  point  that  the  reason 
why  the  US  and  Europe  cannot  move  readily  toward  the  Basel  III  framework  as 
originally  planned,  as  you are  well  aware,  is due  precisely  to  concerns  about  a  decline 
in  the  productivity  of  finance.  In particular,  in  order  for  a  certain  regulation  to  have  its 
intended  effect  in  the  global  economy  the  possibility  of  regulatory  arbitrage  must  be 
blocked,  but  the reality  is  that  many  countries  are  facing  a dilemma  since,  in  order  to 
achieve this  goal,  uniform  regulations  should  be  applied  to  countries  around  the  world 
at different  levels  of  financial  development. 
In  the  past  century,  as  overcoming  the  evils  of  inflation  has  been  made the  number 
one  priority  of  central  banks,  a  large  number  of  them  have  included price  stability  in 
their  articles  of  purpose  and  have  carried  out  inflation  targeting.  This  has  generally 
been  an  effective  policy  in  economies  with  high  inflationary  biases,  and  Korea  has 
also  adopted  it.  It has  recently  been  suggested  in academia,  however,  that  the  level  of 
nominal  GDP  should  be  made  the  policy  goal  instead,  and  one  major  central  bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
has  gone  so  far  as  to  leave  open  the possibility  of  its  carrying  out  policy  along  these 
lines.  This  has  of  course  long  been  proposed  in  theory,  and  although  it  cannot  be 
seen  as  having  yet been tested as  an  effective  alternative,  the  problem  that  causes  it 
to  be  advocated  lies in  the  fact  that  our  existing  instruments  are  not  proving  effective. 
As  I am  sure you  are  well  aware,  in  economies  that  have  been  unable  to  escape  low 
growth and  deflation  for  extended  periods  there  have  recently  even  been  attempts  to 
inflate  artificially  to  overcome  this  situation.  It  is  not  yet  known  what  consequences 
might  result  from  these  attempts,  but  they  too  are  based  on  the judgement  that  the 
existing  policies  have  failed  to  deliver  their  intended  effects. 
Communication policies related to the central bank policy decision-making process are very 
crucial even to central banks with scope remaining for policy rate adjustments, and I believe 
they have brought about changes in our ways of thinking even in the discussions concerning 
the  transparency  of  the  central  bank’s  policy  decision-making  process.  Transparency  is 
regarded as having the advantage of reducing uncertainty, and it can be said to be proxied 
by  precision  and  conditionality.  The  US  Federal  Reserve  has  recently  come  out  with 
communication policies hardly conceivable in the past. It has named the unemployment rate, 
the rate of inflation, and long-term inflation expectations as its three major parameters, and 
with  regard to their  levels  has  explicitly  spelled  out  the  two  qualifications  I just  mentioned. 
This represents a great transformation for central banks. And of course uncertainty does still 
remain, for instance as to the degrees of deviation to be tolerated should the three variables 
move  in  different  directions  against  expectations,  and  as  to  what  data  will  be  used  as 
reference  for  information  related  to  the  future  rather  than  the  past.  Although  there  is  no 
absence  of  voices 
the 
consequence of efforts to enhance transparency having instead further increased the scale 
of uncertainty or its scope of fluctuation, there is no doubt that we have taken the first step 
toward a sea change. The reason why such discussions are drawing particular attention is 
because, if advanced economies show stirrings of recovery, then central banks will have to 
cope with the possibility of global inflation as feared in some quarters. In addition, changes in 
the monetary policy stance to absorb the liquidity unleashed through QE could also act as a 
shock to the international capital markets. Therefore, for central banks that cannot be free 
from the influence of global inflation and changes in the international financial markets, it is 
important  to  understand  the  preconditions  for  any  changes  in  advanced  country  monetary 
policy stances, and efforts must be devoted ex ante to preventing any side effects that could 
arise in the course of such changes going forward. This is because, if we cannot properly 
deal with a global shift in the monetary policy stance, the possibility cannot be ruled out of 
our facing a local crisis. Such attention is in fact related to the policy tasks I mentioned earlier 
as goals that should be taken up by central banks. There is still a lack of evidence to make 
the assessment that nominal GDP targeting is more appropriate than inflation targeting, but 
one thing that is certain is that it is probable that operating the central bank with a reliance on 
any one yardstick will be judged as perhaps not desirable. 
tinged  with  concern  about  unintended  consequences, 
i.e. 
My dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
Resolution for 2013: extending ourselves as a global BOK to be a more competent central 
bank 
Even  though  faced  with  countless  challenges  domestically,  we  must  not  be negligent  in 
responding  appropriately  to  changes  in  the  external  environment.  As  I  explained  at 
some 
in  several  nations  will 
inevitably  bring  about  big  changes  in  the  existing  order.  The  Korean economy,  whose 
degree  of  external  dependence  is  high,  falls  under  the  direct sway of  their  influence.  I 
would  say  that  this  is  awakening  us  to  the  need  to always stay on  the  alert  and  not 
bury  ourselves  in  the  past  when  the  world  outside  is  changing.  I  believe  that  our 
biggest  challenge  is  how  much  we  can contribute  to directing  these  rapid  changes  in 
the  global  economy.  Regarding  changes  in  the  global  economy,  and  even  our  own 
the  various  new  policies  attempted 
length  earlier, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
central  bank  functions,  we have  had  a tendency to  rely  on  theory  and  experience  from 
the  West. Concerning  the  expression  “international  perspective”  as  well,  the  reality  is 
that  the  definition  we  have  of  it  is  very  passive,  amounting  to  having  the  ability  to 
identify  changes  in  the  international  economic  community  and  understand  what effects 
they  have  on  the  Korean  economy.  Going  a  step  beyond  this,  the  notion  of  an 
international  perspective  that  we  must  carry  with  us  from  this  point  on includes  having 
knowledge  and  viewpoints  on  how  the  international  community should  change.  Without 
this  shift  in  perception,  we  cannot  say  that  we  truly  possess  the  ability  to  make 
decisions  independently.  What  I  am  saying  is  that  it is  very  urgent  that  we  cultivate 
our  capabilities  and  build  up  our  capacity  now for  internalization  of  issues  in  the  global 
economy.  Monetary  policy  is  no panacea,  but  there  is  no  denying  that  its  content  is 
changing  very  rapidly. 
Simply  put,  I  believe  there  is  no  proposition  of  greater  priority  to  us  than  that  of 
making  a  more  competent  central  bank.  Propositions  carved  in  stone  can rarely  exist, 
but  I deem  this  to  be  our  calling  in  this  era.  The  aim  of  becoming a  “Global  BOK”, 
standing  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  leading  central  banks  around the  world,  is  based 
on  this  proposition,  which  is  also  a precondition  for  our being  able  to  make  decisions 
independently.  Being  competent  means  staying ahead of  others  and  being  differentiated 
from  them,  and  this  implies  that  at times  we must  not  decline  to  take  a lonely  road  in 
solitude.  Given  our  inherent  nature  as  a  sole  organization  in  the  nation,  it  is  only 
when  we  imbue  this  sense  of  tension,  intentionally  even,  that  the  vitality  of  our 
organization  can  be maintained. 
At  the  start  of  this  new  Year  of  the  Snake,  let  us  all  pull  together  and  pledge  to 
ourselves  and  to  others  beyond  these  walls  to  once  again  profoundly  transform  the 
Bank  of  Korea.  I  would  like  to  suggest  the  following  seven  points,  as  attitudes  and 
thoughts  that  I  hope  we  will  hold  in  our  minds  throughout  this year: 
First,  the  Bank  of  Korea  must  not  become  a  place  where  time  has  stopped.  Time 
must  flow,  and  the  Bank  must  be  an  organization  of  people  concerned  about  the 
issues  of  tomorrow.  Are  we  not  still  pouring  our  energies into  the  identification  of  past 
crises?  What 
In 
particular,  we  must  not  be  trapped  by  the  dogmas  of  yesteryear.  Dogmas  present 
other  people’s  philosophies  and experiences,  and  may  even  already  be  obsolete. 
Second,  we  must  depart  from  a  domestic-oriented  perspective.  In  an  environment  in 
which  we 
live 
to  strike  a  balance  between  the 
domestic  and 
the 
pressures  on  us  coming  from  the  external  environment,  and  seek measures  to  resolve 
global  issues.  We  must  not  just  look  at  our  peers  beside  us, but  be  equipped  with 
the  discernment  and  wisdom  to  observe  our  rivals  overseas.  We  must  at  all  times 
bear  in  mind  our  competition  and  cooperation with  international  organizations  and  other 
central  banks. 
Third,  we  must  not  be  content  with  a  reality  of  mainly  undertaking  familiar  tasks. 
Rather  than  just  repeating  what  we  did  yesterday,  we  must  seek out  new  tasks.  We 
must  evaluate  ourselves  to  see  whether  while  claiming  in words  to  “renew  ourselves 
each  day  and  the  next”,  we  have  not  in  reality  been rather  more  faithfully  carrying  out 
our  routine  work.  I  believe  we  cannot  expect  to  obtain  different  results  and  to  grow 
while  only  repeating  the  same  work.  The process  of  overcoming  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis  requires  the  courage  to  explore  the  unknown.  As  central  banks  have  played 
pivotal 
the  world 
becoming  perhaps  more scholarly  organizations  than  even  academia  itself,  so  we  too 
must  from  now  on be  able  to  propose  evidence-based  policies,  and  not  those  based 
on  unrealistic arguments. 
in  an  open  economy,  we  need 
the  global  perspectives.  We  must  exert  efforts 
in  overcoming  global  economic  crises,  and  are  around 
take?  What  must  we  prepare 
forthcoming  ones 
to  understand 
forms  will 
roles 
for? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Fourth,  we  must  not  continue  to  take  a passive  attitude  of  obediently undertaking  only 
our  assigned  tasks.  We  must  have  an  enterprising  spirit  to voluntarily  seek  new  tasks. 
The  most  you  can  do  in  carrying  out  assignments  given  by  others  is  to  get  the 
answers  right,  however  much  you may  know.  This is because  there  is  no  involvement 
of  the  critical  mind  and  so  from  here  on,  we must  develop  the  insight  to  frame  and 
present  issues  ourselves.  In  the  social  sciences,  right  answers  may  not  even  exist. 
However,  provided  that  we  have  a  properly  working  critical  mind,  I  believe  we  may 
have  the  merit  of  at  least heading  in  the  right  direction. 
Fifth,  working  internally  in  isolation  must  not  be  our  practice.  In  this global economic 
environment  we  must  also  develop  a  multi-tasking  capacity,  to  carry  out  a  variety  of 
tasks  comprehensively.  Positive  results  must  flow  from  our enhancement  of  autonomy 
in  line  with  the  abolishing  of  job  groups  to  this  end. We  must  foster  a  spirit  of  mutual 
collaboration  and  cooperation  with  our colleagues and  junior  and  senior  staff  members. 
The  Bank  must  become  an organization  in  which  diversity  coexists.  By  devoting  efforts 
to  mutual cooperation  and  coordination  between  the  human  resource  and  management 
departments,  between  the  departments  doing  research  on  and  analyzing  the markets, 
policy  and  institutions,  among  our  regional  branches  and  among  our overseas  offices, 
we  must  go  about  accomplishing  our  goal  of  maximizing  the synergies  therefrom. 
Sixth,  we  must  not  define  the  Bank  of  Korea’s  operations  very  narrowly,  as  in  the 
past.  The  central  bank  must  be  an  organization  that  contributes  to 
the  national 
economy,  and 
the  various 
it  must  establish  close  collaborative  relationships  with 
institutions  in  society.  That  is  to  say,  under  no  circumstances  must  we  be  isolated 
from  the  outside  world.  We  must  operate  with  the  awareness  that information  is  to  be 
shared  and  communication  to  be  smooth.  Even  more  important,  as  a  result  of  this 
drive  to  open  our  doors,  is  that  staff  working  in  the  central  bank  develop  as  key 
human  resources  recognized  as  indispensible  not only  within  the  Bank  of  Korea  but  in 
society  as  well. 
Seventh,  we  must  not  forget  that  all  of  our  actions  are  the  focus  of attention at  home 
and  abroad.  We  must  be  role  models  for  the  nation  in  all  our areas  of  operation.  I 
will  reflect  the  results  of  the  survey  of  employee  opinions on the  various  institutional 
changes  pursued  here  over  the  last  two  years  to transform the  Bank  of  Korea  into  an 
advanced  central  bank,  and  see  to  it  that  our  positive  transformation  to  meet  the 
expectations  of 
the  meantime 
reflecting  on 
the  evaluation  of  anti-corruption 
competitiveness  and  integrity  conducted by  a  national  agency  last  year  were  low,  and 
working  to  make  up  for  our imperfections.  Although  the  evaluation  criteria  used  for  us 
differed  from 
to  other  comparable  organizations,  without  making  an 
excuse  of  this  we must,  if  we  are  to  take  pride  in  being  a  central  bank,  exert  efforts 
to  not consider any  matter  of  public  business  as  trifling  but  do  our  utmost  and  become 
role models for  others. 
None  of  these  are  easily  achievable  tasks,  of  course,  but  we  must  join forces to  see 
all 
through.  And  under  no  circumstances  should  we  ourselves 
underestimate  our  potential.  Until  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  ends  we must  not  relax 
our  guard,  so  as  to  avoid  rigidity  and  be  meticulous  in  responding  flexibly  to  the 
changes  in  global  economic  conditions.  You  may  well  remember  that  one  year  ago 
today,  in 
this  place,  I  urged  that  we  carry  out  our  newly-given  financial  stability 
mandate  well,  achieve  the  inflation  target,  and pursue institutional reforms  that  meet  the 
public’s  expectations.  And  I  do  not think  it would  be  praising  ourselves  too  much  even 
if  we  say  that  we  have achieved these three  goals  without  difficulty.  This  goes  to  show 
what  we  are  capable  of,  even  under  anything  but  easy  conditions  at  home  and 
abroad,  and  so let  us  keep  on  changing  so  that  one  year  from  now,  when  we  gather 
again  in this same  place,  we  can  confirm  the  changes  in  ourselves. 
the  public  can  be  constantly  sustained.  We  are  in 
the 
that  our  scores 
these  changes 
those  applied 
fact 
in 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We  should  bear  in  mind  that  history  has  always  found  its  way  to  new  solutions  in 
response  to  crises,  and  has  not  returned  to  the  past.  This  means  that a  future  we 
have  not  expected  is  unfolding  before  us.  If  a  crisis  has  erupted  for  unexpected 
reasons,  who  knows  but  that  the  post-crisis  economy  may  also  evolve to  form  a  new 
paradigm  of  a  state  beyond  our  imagination. 
It  is  very  difficult  to  adopt  a  new  attitude.  There  is  an  African  proverb  that  says  “If 
you  want  to  go  fast,  go  alone.  If you  want  to  go  far,  go  together.” It is  said  to  be 
because  when  you are  going  far  you  cannot  avoid  dangerous animals.  In  the  face  of 
the  greatest  financial  crisis  of  this  new  century,  and  even  more  for  us  who  have 
worked  in  a  rigid  organization  for  so  long,  if  we  are  to  navigate  difficulties  like  the 
ones  we  face  today  should  we  not  be  able  to  go “together  fast”  if  only  for  a  short 
while?  Can  we  not  change  quickly  under  any circumstances? 
The  further  we  venture  into  the  future,  the  more  the  past  will  try  to  hold us  back  in 
the  same  place.  We  may  even  experience 
the  discomfort  of  having  our  efforts 
evaluated  by  past  standards.  That  is  why  it  is  difficult  to  build  a new  future.  We  must 
overcome  all  such  adversities,  however,  with  dignified  and indomitable  hearts  as  proud 
stakeholders  in  the  central  bank,  and  in  that  sense  may  this  year  go  down  as  a 
historic  one. 
In  this  new  Year  of  the  Snake,  I  wish  the  very  best  of  fortune  to  all  of  you  and 
yours,  and  to  all  members  of  the  BOK  family. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
