Erdem Başçi: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the 
press  conference  for  the  presentation  of  the  January  2013  Inflation  Report,  Ankara, 
29 January 2013. 
 Distinguished Guests,  
Welcome  to  the  press  conference  held  to  convey  the  main  messages  of  the  first  Inflation 
Report of the year. Today I will talk about recent global and domestic developments besides 
the CBRT’s inflation forecasts that are accordingly updated. I will now present an overview of 
the report, which will be published on our web-site shortly. 
The Report typically summarizes the economic outlook underlying monetary policy decisions, 
shares  our  evaluations  on  macroeconomic  developments  and  presents  our  medium-term 
inflation forecasts which were revised in view of the developments in the last quarter, along 
with our monetary policy stance. In addition to the main text, the Report includes nine boxes 
entailing  significant  and  up-to-date  analyses  on  various  topics.  For  instance,  one  of  these 
boxes presents an analysis on the level of credit growth rate which will prove reasonable and 
healthy  for  Turkey  in  the  period  ahead.  Moreover,  there  is  a  summary  of  two  papers 
examining the effects of the CBRT’s latest policies on the expectations and volatility of the 
foreign exchange rate. In the Report, there are also analyses on the current account balance, 
global risks, accounting of inflation forecasts, tax adjustments on the tobacco products and 
the sensitivity of tax revenues on the economic circumstances. Titles of the boxes are shown 
on the slide. I strongly recommend that you read these boxes, which will be published on our 
web-site shortly. 
Now, I would like to convey the main messages of the report. Firstly, I will touch upon the 
global economy and then move on to the monetary policy. 
The  last  quarter  of  2012  was  marked  by  an  improvement  in  the  risk  appetite  (Chart  1). 
Concrete  steps  taken  towards  the  resolution  of  the  Euro  area  problems  as  well  as  the 
favorable  news  regarding  the  US  and  Chinese  economies  were  the  leading  developments 
that  fed  into  the  risk  sentiment.  On  the  other  hand,  quantitative  easing  policies  were 
sustained  amid  the  persisting  sluggish  growth  outlook  in  advanced  economies.  Continued 
monetary  easing  at  a  global  scale  accompanied  by  increased  risk  appetite  led  to  an 
acceleration in portfolio flows towards emerging economies (Chart 2). We are of the opinion 
that  all  these  developments  once  again  highlighted  the  importance  of  a  flexible  monetary 
policy framework.  
Chart 1. 
Global Risk Appetite 
Chart 2.  
Portfolio Flows to Emerging Economies 
(Billion USD) 
Source: Credit Suisse, Bloomberg. 
 Source: CBRT. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1 
Monetary policy and monetary conditions 
1. 
In  this  period  of  extraordinary  global  circumstances, the  policy  framework  designed  by  the 
CBRT  plays  a  great  role  in  confining  the  adverse  impacts  of  global  shocks  in  Turkey. 
Particularly  the  year  2012  was  marked  by  the  fruitful  implementation  of  our  policy  mix. 
Persisting global imbalances notwithstanding, we witnessed a healthier outlook composition 
of growth besides a more evident rebalancing process. As illustrated in the slide, the current 
account  continued  to  improve  (Chart  3)  and  the  contribution  of  net  exports  to  growth 
displayed a surge (Chart 4). I would like to put special emphasis on the contribution of both 
exports  and  imports,  which  proved  positive,  highlighting  the  effectiveness  of  the  measures 
taken. 
Chart 3. 
Current Account Balance 
(12-Month Cumulative, Billion USD) 
Chart 4. 
Contribution of Net Exports to Annual GDP Growth(Percent) 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
 Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
 The year 2012 was not only a year of rebalancing but also a period of important achievements 
on  the  price  stability  front.  Inflation  trended  downwards  throughout  the  year  and  fell  by 
4.3 percentage  points  year-on-year.  Moreover,  medium-term  expectations  showed  a 
remarkable improvement for the first time after a protracted period (Charts 5 and 6). 
Chart 5. 
Inflation and Uncertainty Band  
Chart 6. 
12- and 24-Month Ahead CPI Expectations*  
(Annual Percent Change) 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
 * CBRT Survey of Expectations. Second survey period results for the pre-2013 period. 
Source: CBRT.   
 Having started to achieve the intended results regarding inflation and rebalancing, monetary 
policy has adopted a more accommodative stance since mid-2012. In this respect, the CBRT 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
lowered its average funding rate gradually since June by increasing the liquidity injected to 
the market (Chart 7). Improved risk appetite and more effective use of the Reserve Options 
Mechanism  (ROM)  have  allowed  a  gradual  reduction  in  the  upper  bound  of  the  interest 
corridor  since  September.  Meanwhile,  the  liquidity  provided  for  the  market  was  further 
increased, driving overnight market rates close to lower bound of the corridor. 
Chart 7. 
Policy Rate and Liquidity Policies 
(Percent) 
Source: ISE, CBRT. 
 Capital  inflows  accelerated  at  the  year-end  upon  the  surge  in  global  risk  appetite  coupled 
with a relative improvement in risk perceptions regarding Turkey. This contributed to a faster-
than-expected credit growth and appreciation pressures on the Turkish lira. I suppose you 
remember that we stated this as a possible risk scenario in the previous Inflation Report and 
listed  possible  measures  we  could  take.  Upon  the  materialization  of  these  risks  to  a  large 
extent,  we  launched  the  strategy  we  envisaged.  In  order  to  contain  the  risks  on  financial 
stability, the appropriate policy response would be to keep interest rates at low levels while 
sustaining macroprudential measures. In this respect, the policy rate and the corridor have 
recently  been  shifted  down  and  a  measured  tightening  has  been  implemented  through 
reserve requirement policy. 
Despite  the  cut  in  short  term  interest  rates, the  CBRT  maintained  its  cautious  and flexible 
stance, which is worth noting. Thus, I would like to reiterate that the impact of the measures 
taken  on credit,  domestic  demand  and  inflation expectations  will  be  closely  monitored  and 
the amount of the Turkish lira funding will be adjusted in either direction, as needed. 
Chart 8. 
Yield Curve* 
(Percent)  
Chart 9. 
2-Year Real Interest Rates for Turkey*  
(Percent) 
*Calculated from the compounded returns on bonds quoted at the ISE Bonds and Bills Market by 
using ENS method. 
Source: CBRT, ISE. 
* Calculated as the 2-year discounted bond returns derived from the yield curve, minus the 24-
month ahead CPI nflation expectations from the CBRT’s Survey of Expectations. 
Source: ISE, CBRT. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Market interest rates plummeted in the last quarter due to improved risk appetite besides the 
liquidity  policies  pursued  by  the  CBRT.  Meanwhile,  the  decline  in  long  term  rates  proved 
more  notable.  As  a  consequence,  yields  shifted  down  across  all  maturities  while  the  yield 
curve flattened in the interreporting period as illustrated in the slide (Chart 8). Real interest 
rates also plunged since the fall in nominal interest rates was more significant than that in 
inflation  expectations.  Although  having  crept  up  recently,  real  rates  still  stand  at  ever-low 
levels (Chart 9). 
Bank  lending  rates  also  remained  on  a  downward  track  in  the  last  quarter  amid  eased 
external financing conditions alongside our liquidity policy. Consumer loan rates maintained a 
downward  trend  in  line  with  the  market  interest  rates.  Moreover,  the  fall  in  corporate  loan 
rates became more significant in the final quarter of the year owing to the cuts in the upper 
bound of the corridor (Chart 10). What is more, tightening in the credit supply conditions for 
corporate lending receded in this period (Chart 11). 
Chart 10. 
TL Loan Rates 
(4-Week Average, Percent) 
Chart 11.  
Commercial Loan Standards* 
(Net Change)  
Source: BRSA, CBRT. 
 * Banks are requested to state the change in the demand for credit. Net percentage change of 
indexed responses indicates the direction of the change in credit demand. The index is calculated 
as [the sum of percentages for (Increased Somewhat + Increased Considerably)] – [the sum of 
the  percentages  for  (Decreased  Somewhat  +  Decreased  Considerably)]  +100.  Index  values 
greater than 100 signify increase in credit demand. 
Source: CBRT. 
 As a result of these developments, credit growth gained pace in the last quarter of the year 
(Chart  12).  Accordingly,  annual  rate  of  growth  in  total  credit  stock  materialized  around 
16 percent at the end of the year, slightly higher than the 15 percent benchmark level for the 
medium term (Chart 13). Total credit growth proved robust in early 2013, and the uptrend of 
13 weeks in credit volume stood close to the past years’ average. 
Chart 12. 
Loan Growth Rates   
(Adjusted for Exchange Rate, 13-Week Average, Annualized, Percent) 
Chart 13. 
Annual Growth Rate of Loans 
(Percent) 
Source: CBRT. 
4 
  Source: CBRT. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There is a risk of further acceleration in credit in the forthcoming period. Financial conditions 
index  continued  to  ease  with  rapid  capital  inflows,  improving  credit  supply  conditions,  and 
accommodative  liquidity  policy  (Chart  14).  This  outlook  necessitates  a  cautious  stance 
against macro financial risks. Given these evaluations, I would like to remind that in its first 
monthly meeting of 2013, the Committee highlighted the faster-than-expected credit growth 
and signaled that macroprudential measures might be continued should this trend persist. 
Chart 14.  
Financial Conditions Index  
* For further details on financial conditions index, see CBRT Economic Notes No. 12/31 and Report 2012-IV, Box 5.2. 
Source: CBRT. 
 Macroeconomic developments and assumptions 
2. 
Now, I will talk about the macroeconomic outlook and our assumptions which constitute the 
basis  for  our forecasts. First,  I  will  summarize  the  recent  inflation  developments,  and  then 
compare  the  short  term  forecasts  in  the  October  Inflation  Report  with  the  actual  year-end 
inflation data in 2012. Then, I will continue with the domestic and foreign demand outlook. 
Consumer inflation undershot the forecasts in the last quarter of 2012 and stood within the 
uncertainty band (3–7 percent) with 6.2 percent at the year-end (Chart 15). This lower-than-
envisaged inflation rate was mainly driven by the developments in unprocessed food prices, 
which  were  stated  to  pose  downside  risk  on  inflation  in  the  October  Inflation  Report. 
Meanwhile, core inflation indicators were broadly consistent with expectations. 
Chart 15.  
October 2012 Inflation Forecasts and Realizations 
(Percent) 
* Shaded region indicates the 70 percent confidence interval for the forecast. 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Cumulative  effects  of  the  previous  year’s  exchange  rate  and  import  price  movements 
gradually  waned.  Coupled  with  the  ongoing  slowdown  in  domestic  demand,  this  led  to  a 
sustained  fall  in  the  annual  rate  of  increase  in  core  goods  prices.  Meanwhile,  prices  of 
services remained on a mild track (Chart 16). Against this backdrop, core inflation indicators 
maintained a downward trend (Chart 17). 
Chart 16.  
Prices of Core Goods and Services  
(Annual Percent Change) 
Chart 17.  
Core Inflation Indicators SCA-H and SCA-I 
( Annual Percent Change) 
Source: TurkStat. 
 Source: TurkStat. 
 Now, I will touch upon the developments in economic activity on which the inflation forecasts 
are  based  besides  the  short  term  outlook.  Third-quarter  national  income  data  point  that 
domestic  demand  conditions  remained  weak  due  to  private  investment  demand.  Private 
consumption, which displayed an increase for the first time in a protracted period, limited the 
slowdown  in  final  domestic  demand.  Nevertheless,  demand  conditions  followed  a  slightly 
weaker  course  compared  to  the  projections  in  the  October  Inflation  Report  (Chart  18). 
Last-quarter  data  indicate  a  mild  pick-up  in  consumption  and  investment  demand  as 
envisaged. Accordingly, output gap forecasts regarding the second half of 2012 are slightly 
revised downwards compared to the previous report. 
Chart 18.  
2012Q3 Final Domestic Demand: Forecast and Realizations 
(Seasonally Adjusted, 2008Q1=100)  
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
 Meanwhile,  we  estimate  that  easing  financial  conditions  due  to  the  recent  rise  in  capital 
inflows may result in a higher-than-expected growth in final domestic demand in the first half 
of  2013.  Indicators  for  orders,  loans  and  other  leading  indices  also  support  this  outlook. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Accordingly, we based the projections on a stronger domestic demand outlook for the first 
half of 2013 compared to the previous reporting period. 
On  the  other  hand,  external  demand  remains  subdued.  This  period  did  not  see  a  notable 
change  in  global  growth  projections;  hence  there  was  no  significant  revision  in  export-
weighted global growth index (Chart 19). Accordingly, our forecasts are based on an outlook 
that entails a mild increase in exports driven by market and product diversification as in the 
previous report. 
Chart 19.  
Export-Weighted Global Economic Activity Index* 
(2008Q2=100)   
* For methodology, see Inflation Report 2010–II, Box 2.1 “Foreign Demand Index for Turkey”. 
Source: Bloomberg, Consensus Forecasts, CBRT. 
 In short, in line with the developments in domestic and external demand, the contribution of 
aggregate demand conditions to disinflation is envisaged to be larger in the second quarter 
of 2012; but smaller at the start of 2013 compared to the previous report. Overall, given the 
lagged  effects  on  inflation,  I  would  like  to  state  that  the  revision  in  the  output  gap  did  not 
bring about a noticeable effect on the end-2013 inflation forecast. 
As you all know, food, energy and import prices also play a great role in inflation forecasts. 
Therefore, before moving on to forecasts, I will briefly talk about our assumptions regarding 
these variables.  
The  outlook  for  import  prices  did  not  exhibit  a  notable  change  in  the  interreporting  period 
(Chart  20).  The  assumption  for  average  oil  prices  for  2013,  which  was  USD  107  in  the 
October  Inflation  Report,  was  slightly  revised  upwards  to  USD  108  in  line  with  the  futures 
prices. Due to the favorable course of non-energy import prices, we revised our assumption 
for import prices slightly downwards in the interreporting period (Chart 20). However, I would 
like  to  underline  that  this  revision  did  not  bring  about  a  noticeable  effect  on  the  inflation 
forecast for 2013. Meanwhile, the assumption for the annual rate of increase in food prices 
was preserved at 7 percent as it was in the previous report. In other words, we assumed that 
the  favorable  course  of  unprocessed  food  prices  in  2012  would  come  to  a  halt  in  the 
forthcoming period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Chart 20.  
Revision in Oil and Import Price Assumptions 
Oil Prices* (USD/bbl) 
Import Prices* (USD, 2003=100) 
* Shaded region indicates the forecast period. 
Source: Bloomberg, CBRT. 
 * Shaded region indicates the forecast period. 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
 Before  moving  on  to  projections,  I  will  dwell  on  our  assumptions  about  the  public  finance. 
Developments in the fiscal policy and tax adjustments in the last three months were broadly 
consistent  with  the  assumptions  laid  down  in  the  October  Inflation  Report.  Effects  of  the 
adjustments  in  tobacco  products  on  inflation  in  January  proved  to  be  as  expected. 
Furthermore,  the  year-end  budget  balance  was  consistent  with  the  targets  revised  in  the 
Medium Term Program (MTP). 
Medium term projections are based on the assumption that no additional tax adjustments will 
be introduced to tobacco and energy products in the rest of the year. On the other hand, I 
would like to mention that other tax adjustments and administered prices are assumed to be 
consistent with inflation targets and automatic pricing mechanisms. 
Regarding the fiscal outlook, medium-term inflation forecasts take the revised projections of 
the MTP as given. Accordingly, it is assumed that fiscal discipline will be preserved and the 
structural budget balance will not display a notable change in the forthcoming period. Thus, 
there has been no change in end-2013 inflation forecast stemming from fiscal policy. 
Thus, I can say that assumptions underlying inflation forecasts and external conditions were 
broadly kept unchanged. 
Inflation and monetary policy outlook 
3. 
Now,  I  would  like  to  present  our  inflation  and  output gap forecasts  based  on  the  outlook  I 
have described so far. I would like to remind you that medium term forecasts assume that 
monetary  policy  decisions  are  data  dependent.  Accordingly,  we  envisage  that  credit  and 
exchange rates follow a stable course and aggregate demand conditions are kept at levels 
that do not exert upside pressures on inflation. In other words, we based our forecasts on an 
outlook where risks arising from the recent surge in capital inflows risks are contained. 
When forming our forecasts, we assumed that annual loan growth rate would hover around 
15  percent  and  there  would  be  no  significant  change  in  the  real  effective  exchange  rate. 
Accordingly,  inflation  is  expected  to  be,  with  70  percent  probability,  between  3.9  and 
6.7 percent  (with  a  mid-point  of  5.3  percent)  at  the  end  of  2013,  and  between  3.1  and 
6.7 percent  (with  a  midpoint  of  4.9  percent)  at  the  end  of  2014.  We  expect  inflation  to 
stabilize around 5 percent in the medium term (Chart 21). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 21.  
Inflation and Output Gap Forecasts  
* Shaded region indicates the 70 percent confidence interval for the forecast. 
Source: CBRT. 
 In sum, we maintained inflation forecast for end-2013 at 5.3 percent, as there has been no 
major revision in the factors affecting inflation outlook in the past three months.  
We  expect  inflation  to  resume  its  downward  trend  after  creeping  up  in  January  due  to 
tobacco price adjustments. Although inflation may increase temporarily in May and June due 
to base effects in energy prices, it will continue to decline in the following months, closing the 
year  at  5.3  percent  (Chart  21).  We  expect  core  inflation  indicators  to  display  a  steady 
downward path and materialize below 5 percent at the end of the year. 
Revisions in our inflation forecasts are presented on the slide. Although there was no change 
in the end-year inflation forecast, we revised our inflation forecasts downwards compared to 
the path presented in the October Inflation Report in the short term due to the benign course 
of unprocessed food prices (Chart 22).  
Comparison of October 2012 and January 2013 Inflation Report Forecasts 
Chart 22. 
 
Inflation Forecasts 
 
Output Gap Forecasts 
Source: TurkStat, CBRT. 
Source: CBRT. 
  The same slide presents the revision in the output gap forecasts. We revised the output gap 
upwards for the first quarter of 2013 due to recent acceleration in capital inflows and credit 
growth.  However,  we  assumed  that  the  policy  measures  would  drive  the  output  gap  and 
credit path closer to the October forecast in the second half of the year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
We  can  summarize  the  main  message  of  the  forecast  regarding  the  monetary  policy  as 
follows: a cautious monetary policy stance should be maintained to keep inflation close to the 
target at the end of 2013. It is important that the CBRT does not disregard excessive volatility 
in credit and exchange rates, for macro financial risks to be contained. It should be kept in 
mind  that  keeping  credit  growth  at  healthy  and  reasonable  levels  will  support  both  price 
stability and financial stability. In fact, notwithstanding the recent faster-than-expected growth 
in credit, we envisaged that credit growth would hover around 15 percent.  
I would like to once more underline that any new data or information regarding the inflation 
outlook  may  lead  to  a  change  in  the  monetary  policy  stance.  Therefore,  assumptions 
regarding  the  monetary  policy  outlook  underlying  our  inflation  forecasts  should  not  be 
perceived as a commitment on behalf of the CBRT. 
In  addition  to  these  forecasts,  alternative  scenarios  on  the  inflation  outlook  and  the  global 
economy  are  discussed  in  the  Risks  section  of  the  Inflation  Report.  You  can  examine  the 
Report for details.  
While concluding my remarks, I would like to thank all my colleagues, who contributed to the 
Report,  primarily  those  at  the  Research  and  Monetary  Policy  Department  as  well  as  the 
members  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  and  thank  every  one  of  you  for  your 
participation.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
