Haruhiko Kuroda: Japan’s economy and monetary policy – toward 
overcoming deflation 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the 
Naigai Josei Chousa Kai (Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 29 July 2013. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to have this opportunity to address you today at the Naigai Josei Chousa 
Kai. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  a  new  regime  of  monetary  easing  called  “quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary easing” (QQE) this April with a view to achieving the price stability target 
of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) at 
the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. It has been three months 
since the introduction of the QQE, and there have been favorable developments spreading to 
financial markets and the real economy, and the public’s expectations for economic activity 
and prices are improving. At the same time, we have received various questions regarding 
the policy effect of the QQE. Today, I will first summarize developments in Japan’s economy 
and financial markets for the past three months, explain the outlook for economic activity and 
prices, and then provide my answers to questions regarding the QQE. 
I. 
Progress of the QQE and three positive developments 
Progress of the QQE 
A. 
Under  the  QQE,  introduced  in  April,  the  Bank  will  increase  the  total  amount  of  money  it 
directly  supplies  to  the  economy  –  the  monetary  base  –  at  an  annual  pace  of  about  
60–70 trillion  yen.  As  a  result, the  monetary  base  will  be  doubled  in  two  years,  increasing 
from 138 trillion yen at end-2012 to 200 trillion yen at end-2013 and to 270 trillion yen at end-
2014 (Chart 1). As a means to increase the monetary base, the Bank will purchase Japanese 
government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount outstanding will increase at a pace of about 
50 trillion yen annually. On a gross basis, this corresponds to purchasing a large amount of 
JGBs  at  a  pace  of  over  7  trillion  yen  monthly.  As  a  result  of  such  purchases,  the  amount 
outstanding  of  JGBs  held  by  the  Bank  will  be  more  than  doubled  in  two  years,  increasing 
from 89 trillion yen at end-2012 to 140 trillion yen at end-2013 and to 190 trillion yen at end-
2014. In addition, the Bank decided to more than double its average remaining maturity of 
JGB  purchases  from  slightly  less  than  three  years  to  about  seven  years.  This  monetary 
easing measure has both a quantitative aspect – such as increasing the monetary base and 
the  amount  outstanding  of  the  Bank’s  JGB  holdings  –  and  a  qualitative  aspect  –  such  as 
extending  the  average  remaining  maturity  of  the  Bank’s  JGB  purchases.  Hence  the  name 
“quantitative and qualitative monetary easing.” 
Over the past three months, the Bank has pursued the QQE as initially planned (Chart 2). 
The monetary base has expanded from 146 trillion yen at end-March to 173 trillion  yen at 
end-June, at a somewhat front-loaded pace toward 200 trillion yen by end-2013. The amount 
outstanding  of  JGBs  held  by  the  Bank  has  also  increased  to  more  than  110  trillion  yen 
recently from 91 trillion yen at end-March, at a steady pace toward 140 trillion yen by end-
2013. Also, the average remaining maturity of the JGBs purchased has extended to about 
seven years. 
Next, I would like to examine the changes that have been observed in financial markets and 
economic  activity  as  the  Bank  has  pursued  the  QQE.  Starting  with  the  conclusion,  a 
favorable turn has been observed in financial conditions, in expectations, and in economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
activity and prices (Chart 3). These changes include positive developments that had already 
begun  to  operate  before  the  introduction  of  the  QQE,  on  the  back  of  expectations  for 
monetary easing, and some also reflect expectations for the government’s so-called “three 
arrow” strategy as well as developments in the global economy. Therefore, not all of these 
favorable  developments  are  attributable  to  the  QQE;  nevertheless,  it  most  certainly  is  an 
important factor. 
Favorable turn in financial conditions 
B. 
Let me explain the three positive turnarounds, respectively. First, a favorable turn in financial 
conditions – in other words, financial markets and corporate finance are improving. 
First, stock prices are rising (Chart 4). To be specific, these rose from around 9,000 yen in 
autumn  2012  to  the  15,000–16,000  yen  level  in  mid-May  on  the  back  of  heightened 
expectations for economic improvement and of the depreciation of the yen. While there have 
been  declining  phases  in  order  to  adjust  to  a  rapid  rise,  stock  prices  have  shown  some 
resilience,  recovering  to  around  14,000  yen  once  again.  The  rate  of  increase  since  the 
beginning  of  2013  has  marked  around  35  percent,  far  higher  than  those  registered  in  the 
United  States  (just  under  20  percent)  and  Europe  (over  6  percent).  As I  have  consistently 
said, even during the period when stock prices fell temporarily, Japan’s economy is steadily 
improving,  and  financial  markets  –  including  stock  prices  –  will  reflect  such  fundamental 
movements in the real economy. 
Next is the developments in long-term interest rates (Chart 5). As the new policy framework 
has outdone prior market expectations both in terms of quantity and quality, it has taken time 
for  market  participants  to  digest  the  content  and  its  effects,  and  this  led  to  increased 
uncertainty in the JGB market. Such developments came to a pause toward end-April, but 
long-term interest rates in the United States rapidly rose from the beginning of May due to 
increased speculation that the Federal Reserve might taper the pace of its asset purchases, 
and the effects of this started to spread to Japan. Against this background, the Bank, while 
continuing  with  its  massive  JGB  purchases,  held  an  enhanced  dialogue  with  market 
participants and conducted flexible market operations, such as making the maximum amount 
of  those  purchases  per  bidding  smaller  as  well  as  increasing  the  frequency  of  purchases. 
Due  mainly  to  such  massive  JGB  purchases  and  flexible  market  operations,  long-term 
interest  rates  in  Japan  have  recently  been  almost  flat,  at  around  0.8  percent,  even  in  the 
midst of rising overseas rates. 
Meanwhile, in the foreign exchange market, the yen’s exchange rate against the U.S. dollar 
has been depreciating since autumn 2012, when it was around 80 yen to the dollar, and has 
recently been around 100 yen (Chart 6). Monetary easing aims at overcoming deflation and 
by  no  means  intends  to  maneuver  the  exchange  rate.  Nonetheless,  monetary  easing  will 
exert pressure toward depreciation ceteris paribus. 
Lastly, firms’ and households’ financial conditions have been accommodative. That is, with 
regard to funding conditions, the diffusion index (DI) for financial institutions’ lending attitudes 
as  perceived  by  firms  was  on  an  improving  trend  in  the  Tankan  survey  (Short-Term 
Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  and  issuing  conditions  for  CP  and  corporate 
bonds  have  remained  favorable  on  the  whole.  While  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in 
bank lending had been at about 1 percent up to around last autumn, the pace of increase 
has  gradually  picked  up  since  then  and  has  been  slightly  above  2  percent  most  recently 
(Chart  7).  The  amount  of  corporate  bonds  issued  in  the  April-June  quarter  registered  the 
largest level since the Lehman shock. In terms of funding costs, bank lending rates, in terms 
of  the  average  contracted  interest rates to  businesses  and  households,  have  continued  to 
decline and remain at historically low levels. 
Favorable turn in expectations 
C. 
The second favorable turn is that in the public’s sentiment and expectations. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First  of  all,  consumer  sentiment  has  been  improving  markedly  (Chart  8).  According  to  the 
Consumer  Confidence  Survey,  which  is  a  questionnaire  survey  on  consumer  perception 
conducted by the Cabinet Office, while there is discontinuity due to the change in the survey 
method,  the  DI  has  improved  to  a  pre-Lehman  shock  level.  By  generation,  sentiment 
improved  not  only  among  the  elderly,  who  hold  large  amounts  of  stocks  and  are  likely  to 
benefit  from  stock  price  rises,  but  also  for  young  people.  It  appears  that  expectations  for 
improvement in economic activity and income have started to emerge across a wide range of 
generations. 
On top of this, business sentiment has also been improving (Chart 9). The DI for business 
conditions  (all  industries,  all  enterprises)  in  the  June  Tankan  survey  improved  by 
6 percentage points from the March survey to reach minus 2. It has now reached a level as 
high  as  that  registered  in  the  December  2007  survey.  Moreover,  the  number  of  industries 
responding  that  business  sentiment  has  improved  has  also  increased,  and  now  stands  at 
26 out of 31 industries. 
Lastly, the public’s inflation expectations are rising. Looking at various indicators related to 
businesses, the DI for output prices in the June survey improved irrespective of firm size and 
category  (Chart  10). The forecast  DI  of  large firms  has  now  come  close  to  zero. This  has 
happened only twice in the last 30 years – once toward the end of the bubble period and the 
other just before the Lehman shock, when international commodity prices surged. As far as 
indicators  related  to  households  are  concerned,  according  to  the  Opinion  Survey  on  the 
General Public’s Views and Behavior, the share of respondents who expected that prices will 
go  up  one  year  from  now  exceeds  80  percent  (Chart  11).  A  number  of  surveys  collecting 
views among economists also indicate that the expected rate of inflation is rising. With regard 
to  market  indicators,  break-even  inflation  –  that  is,  the  yield  spread  between  fixed-rate 
coupon-bearing JGBs and inflation-indexed JGBs, and representative of the expected rate of 
inflation in the market – rose rapidly toward mid-May. While it has declined thereafter, break-
even  inflation  has  clearly  heightened  compared  with  the  beginning  of  the  year  (Chart  12). 
Based on these developments in the various indicators, it can well be judged that inflation 
expectations on the whole are picking up. 
Favorable turn in economic activity and prices 
D. 
The  third  favorable  turn  is  in  economic  activity  and  prices  reflecting  the  improvement  in 
financial markets and the public’s sentiment. 
Private  consumption  remains  resilient  on  the  back  of  sharp  improvement  in  household 
sentiment and the wealth effect from the stock market rally (Chart 13). As I mentioned earlier, 
in  addition  to  spreading  favorable  expectations  for  the  economic  outlook,  given  that  the 
cohort of the senior generation that holds a large amount of stocks tends to enjoy a higher 
propensity to consume – that is, they have an inclination to spend more money – than other 
generations, it is likely that a stronger wealth effect from the stock market rally is at work. 
Business  fixed  investment  has  stopped  weakening  as  business  sentiment  and  corporate 
profits have improved, and it is showing some signs of picking up (Chart 14). Indeed, in the 
June  Tankan  survey,  the  projections  for  fiscal  2013  show  that  firms  intend  to  increase 
investment steadily on the back of improvement in sales and current profits. 
On the price front, while the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items excluding fresh 
food)  had  been  negative,  it  reached  0  percent  in  May  and  turned  positive  in  June,  at 
0.4  percent, reflecting improvement in the economy and the yen’s depreciation (Chart 15). 
In  sum,  there  have  been  favorable  turns  in  financial  conditions,  in  expectations,  and  in 
economic activity and prices. All these developments suggest that the aim of the QQE – to 
lead Japan’s economy toward overcoming the deflation that has lasted for nearly 15 years – 
is right on track so far. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
II. 
The outlook for economic activity and prices (an interim assessment of the 
outlook report) 
Next,  I  will  move  to  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy.  As  for  the  baseline  scenario,  the 
economy  is  expected  to  recover  moderately  on  the  back  of  the  resilience  in  domestic 
demand and the pick-up in overseas economies. While the economy is likely to be affected 
from next year onward by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior 
to  and  after  the two  scheduled  consumption  tax  hikes,  it  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a 
pace above its potential – which is considered to be around 0.5 percent – as a trend, as a 
virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending operates. In terms of the median of 
the Bank’s Policy Board members’ forecasts of the growth rates, this is 2.8 percent for fiscal 
2013, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.5 percent for fiscal 2015, averaging almost 2 percent 
(Chart  16). The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in the  CPI,  excluding the  direct  effects  of the 
consumption tax hikes, is likely to follow a rising trend, mainly reflecting an improvement in 
the aggregate supply and demand balance as well a rise in the expected rate of inflation. In 
terms of the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts of prices, the year-on-year rate 
of change in the CPI is expected to be 0.6 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, 
and 1.9 percent for fiscal 2015. It is highly likely to reach the price stability target of about 
2 percent toward the latter half of the Bank’s projection period through fiscal 2015. 
It 
is 
important  that 
in  domestic  demand. 
Three key factors toward realizing the outlook 
For the above outlook to materialize, there are three key factors (Chart 17). 
First,  the  sustainability  of  firmness 
the 
aforementioned current improvement in business and household sentiment lead to sustained 
spending in tandem with an increase in income. 
In the corporate sector, a virtuous cycle from income to spending appears to be gradually 
starting to operate. In terms of “income,” corporate profits have been improving, and in terms 
of  “spending,”  the  June  Tankan  survey  results  revealed  solid  business  fixed  investment 
plans. Since the Lehman shock, firms have long restrained business fixed investment, and 
thus there seems to be large potential demand, mainly for maintenance and repair as well as 
replacement of existing equipment. As for the outlook, business fixed investment is likely to 
follow  a  moderate  increasing  trend,  and  we  will  confirm  this  with  the  actual  data  to  be 
released. 
In the household sector, despite the absence of a marked increase in labor income, private 
consumption has been resilient, mainly due to an earlier improvement in consumer sentiment 
and wealth effects brought about by the rise in stock prices. Hereafter, it is important that the 
increase in private consumption and housing investment continue, backed by firmness on the 
“income” front, such as an improvement in employment and wages. In this regard, the supply 
and demand conditions in the labor market are improving moderately, with the ratio of job 
offers to applicants having risen to 0.90 – a level observed for the first time since June 2008 
– and the unemployment rate heading toward a decline. In terms of wages, the year-on-year 
rate of decline in nominal wages per employee has slowed recently to minus 0.1 percent due 
to an improvement in the number of unscheduled hours worked and in bonus payments. It 
will be necessary to make sure that such improvements in employment and wages continue 
into the future, thereby supporting an increase in private consumption. 
Second,  among  factors  that  determine  prices,  I  would  like  to  point  to  developments  in 
inflation  expectations.  The  inflation  rate  is  determined  mainly  by  two  factors.  One  is  the 
aggregate supply and demand balance of the economy – the so-called output gap – and the 
other  is  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  In  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability 
target of 2 percent, both factors need to operate toward raising prices. 
As for the first factor – namely, the output gap – the intuitive view is that prices will rise if 
economic activity improves and the supply and demand balance tightens. In other words, as 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  level  of  economic  activity  increases,  the  capacity  utilization  rate  would  rise  and  the 
number of employees would increase, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate. The 
supply  and  demand  balance  would  then  tighten  in  the  labor  market  and  for  products  and 
services, thereby leading to a rise in wages and in prices of products and services. In the 
baseline scenario, which I mentioned earlier, the output gap will turn from negative to positive 
and gradually widen as the economy continues growing at a pace above its potential. In this 
way, upward pressure on prices will operate through developments in the output gap. 
What warrants more attention is the second factor that determines prices – that is, medium- 
to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  When  firms  and  households  make  decisions  on 
investment and consumption, they take actions based on their outlook for future inflation. For 
example, if a view spreads among the public that prices will rise in the future, firms would 
likely raise the prices of products and services accordingly, and wages would also be raised. 
Consequently,  consumer  prices  would  be  pushed  up.  In  this  regard,  inflation  expectations 
have already begun to rise, and I expect the expected rate of inflation to gradually converge 
toward the global standard of 2 percent, due to the effects of the Bank’s strong commitment 
to meet the price stability target as well as the effects of its bold monetary easing. 
The  third  factor  is  developments  in  overseas  economies.  We  consider  a  downturn  in 
overseas  economies  to  be  the  largest  risk  factor  to  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and 
prices I have outlined so far. The baseline scenario is that overseas economies are expected 
to  pick  up  against the  backdrop  that the  U.S.  economy  would  stay  firm  and  the  European 
economy would start to bottom out. However, there are also risks that warrant attention in the 
European economy, emerging and commodity-exporting economies, and the U.S. economy, 
respectively.  With  regard  to  the  European  economy,  although  the  tail  risk  of  substantial 
financial market turmoil having a global impact has receded due to efforts made thus far by 
policymakers, the European debt problem is yet to be fundamentally resolved. The Bank is 
paying  close  attention  to  whether  the  prolonged  fiscal  austerity  measures  and  a  receding 
economy  would  lead  to  political  turbulence  or  instability  in  financial  markets.  Next  is 
developments in the Chinese economy. There is a view that is becoming widely held that the 
economy  will  not  return  to  the  level  of  high  growth  observed  earlier,  as  policymakers  are 
enforcing their stance of emphasizing “quality-based” rather than “speed-based” growth. It is 
also  likely  that  the  over-capacity  issue  mainly  seen  in  manufacturing,  such  as  materials, 
could  restrain  growth  for  the  time  being.  As  developments  in  the  Chinese  economy  have 
substantial effects not only on Japan’s economy but also on commodity-exporting economies 
and other emerging economies, whether the Chinese economy will be able to make a soft 
landing to achieve economic growth at a cruising speed warrants vigilance. Lastly, we have 
the effects of the Federal Reserve’s tapering of its asset purchases. The discussion about 
such a move is based on the backdrop that the U.S. economy is recovering steadily, albeit 
moderately,  which  in  itself  has  positive  implications  for  the  world  economy  as  a  whole, 
including  emerging  economies.  Nevertheless,  it  is  necessary  to  continue  to  pay  close 
attention  to  developments  in  global  financial  markets,  including  capital  flows  to  emerging 
economies. 
Q&A about the policy effects of the QQE 
III. 
I have so far described the Bank’s QQE, the state of Japan’s economy, and its outlook. Let 
me next respond to some of the questions regarding the policy effects of the QQE. 
Effects of putting downward pressure on long-term interest rates 
A. 
Effect of containing nominal interest rates 
First is the effects on long-term interest rates. Following the introduction of the QQE, as long-
term  interest  rates  rose  compared  with  those  immediately  before  the  introduction,  some 
questioned  whether  the  policy  transmission  mechanism  of  putting  powerful  downward 
pressure on long-term interest rates was working effectively. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Before  examining  this  point,  let  me  summarize  factors  that  put  upward  and  downward 
pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates.  Long-term  interest  rates  are  formed  based  on 
expectations  for  future  short-term  interest  rates  and  on  risk  premiums  (Chart  18).  For 
example, in the case of 10-year government bond yield, this will be the sum of the short-term 
interest rate path for the next ten years and various risk premiums associated with holding 
government bonds. Of those, given that expected short-term interest rates will be determined 
according to economic and inflation outlooks, if economic activity improves and expectations 
for future price increases spread, there will be upward pressure on long-term interest rates. 
Risk premiums will increase, reflecting such factors as a rise in interest rate volatility or in 
interest  rates  overseas,  thereby  putting  upward  pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates.  In 
response,  the  Bank’s  massive  purchases  of  government  bonds  under  the  QQE  will  put  a 
powerful  squeeze  on  the  risk  premiums,  thereby  having  the  effect  of  putting  downward 
pressure on long-term interest rates. 
Let us confirm whether this effect has actually materialized, based on two facts. First is the 
comparison with last autumn, when long-term interest rates were almost at the same level as 
today. Comparing the situation of financial markets and the outlook for economic activity and 
prices, stock prices have risen about 60 percent from about 9,000 yen last autumn and the 
yen  rate  against the  U.S.  dollar  has  depreciated  about  25  percent from  75–79  yen. When 
looking at the outlook for economic activity and prices using the ESP Forecast Survey, which 
compiles economists’ forecasts, the outlook for the real GDP growth rate for fiscal 2013 has 
improved substantially from 1.54 percent as of October 2012 to 2.75 percent as of July 2013, 
and the outlook for the year-on-year rate of change in consumer prices has also increased 
from  0.11  percent  to  0.36  percent  during  the  same  period.  The  economic  and  inflation 
outlooks  for  the  longer  term  have  also  been  revised  upward.  While  such  improvement  in 
financial  markets  and  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  naturally  create  upward 
pressure on long-term interest rates, actual long-term interest rates have nevertheless been 
contained at almost the same level as last autumn. 
Second  is  the  comparison  with  developments  in  long-term  interest  rates  overseas.  As 
mentioned earlier, since May this year, interest rates overseas have been rising due in part 
to  increased  speculation  that  the  Federal  Reserve  might  taper  the  size  of  its  asset 
purchases. Looking at changes since mid-May, the U.S. long-term interest rate has risen by 
0.5 percentage point from 2.0 percent to 2.5 percent. In contrast, Japan’s long-term interest 
rate has been roughly flat. 
These  facts  suggest  that  the  Bank’s  massive  purchases  of  government  bonds  have 
effectively  compressed  risk  premiums  and  powerfully  contained  upward  pressure  on  long-
term  interest  rates.  Hereafter,  although  there  is  likely  to  be  upward  pressure  on  long-term 
interest rates as the outlook for economic activity and prices improves, downward pressure 
to  contain  interest  rates  is  expected  to  further  increase  as  the  Bank’s  purchases  of  JGBs 
progress. 
Effect of lowering real interest rates 
So far I have provided an explanation from the viewpoint of downward pressure on nominal 
interest rates. In terms of stimulating an effect on economic activity, what is important is “real 
interest  rates,”  which  affect  decision-making  on  spending,  including  business  fixed 
investment and housing investment. The real interest rate is the interest rate that has been 
adjusted for the effects of rises and falls in prices, and can be calculated by subtracting the 
expected  inflation  rate  from  the  nominal  interest  rate.  As  real  interest  rates  cannot  be 
observed  directly,  you  may  wonder  how  firms  will  make  decisions  based  on  real  interest 
rates.  Suppose  you  are  making  a  decision  regarding  business  fixed  investment.  If  you 
consider that prices will rise in the future and prices of your products will also rise, business 
fixed investment to that extent should pay off even if the nominal borrowing rate is high. This 
illustrates the importance of real interest rates. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The QQE aims at lowering real interest rates both in terms of putting downward pressure on 
nominal  interest  rates  and  raising  expected  rates  of  inflation.  As  I  have  been  explaining, 
judged from various indicators, expected rates of inflation have been rising on the whole. As 
nominal  interest  rates  have  been  more  or  less  flat,  real  interest  rates  seem  to  have  been 
declining. Also in this regard, the QQE has been exerting its intended effects. 
Increase in bank lending 
B. 
Next, we have sometimes been presented with the view that, even though the Bank provides 
massive money to the financial markets, such money might not be channeled from financial 
institutions  to  firms  and  households.  In  relation  to  this,  what  I  want  to  focus  on  is  the 
development  in  bank  lending.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  bank 
lending  has  been  increasing  moderately  since  last  autumn,  and  has  recently  been  slightly 
above 2 percent. The backdrop to this is that the behavior of firms, households, and financial 
institutions  could  have  become  positive,  reflecting  various  policy  measures  by  the  Bank, 
including the QQE. 
In addition to putting powerful downward pressure on long-term interest rates, the QQE – as 
a result of the Bank’s massive purchases of government bonds – exerts effects on investors 
and financial institutions that used to invest their funds in government bonds in order to shift 
their  investment  in  lending  and  other  assets  – the  so-called  portfolio  rebalancing  effect.  In 
addition,  the  QQE  has  the  effect  of  generating  proactive  demand  for  funds,  including 
business  fixed  investment  and  housing  investment,  by  converting  households’  and  firms’ 
“deflationary sentiment” – in other words, a natural way of thinking that prices will not rise. 
Furthermore,  in  order  to  support financial  institutions’  efforts  to  increase lending,  the  Bank 
has established such facilities as the “Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening 
the  Foundations  for  Economic  Growth”  and  the  “Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to  Stimulate 
Bank Lending.” The amount provided through these facilities has reached about seven trillion 
yen, supporting financial institutions’ efforts to tap firms’ proactive demand for funds. 
Due to prolonged deflation, many firms now hold massive cash and deposits. As firms can 
make business fixed investment and other investment by first using such cash and deposits, 
there is some uncertainty as to what extent firms’ demand for investment might lead to an 
increase in demand for borrowing from financial institutions. In that sense, while it will not be 
desirable to solely focus on the growth rate of lending, be it based on own funds or external 
borrowing, it is important to prepare an environment that enables firms’ positive actions. 
Relationship between wages and prices 
C. 
Lastly, we often have been asked whether, in achieving the 2 percent “price stability target,” 
if only prices rise and wages do not, this might have a costly impact on people’s lives. In this 
regard, the Bank does not consider it sufficient if only prices go up. With Japan’s economy 
growing  in  a  well-balanced  manner  amid  a  virtuous  cycle  among  production,  income,  and 
spending, the Bank aims to create a situation in which a gradual rise in the inflation rate is 
accompanied by an increase in employment and wages. For wages to increase against the 
backdrop of such positive developments in the economy, it becomes necessary for firms to 
anticipate  future  increases  in  the  growth  rate  and  to  become  confident  with  regard  to 
increasing new hiring. In addition, as mentioned earlier, if people’s “deflationary sentiment” is 
converted thanks to the Bank’s monetary policy, decisions on wages will be changed such 
that they are based on the assumption that prices will rise. Looking at the developments in 
the  growth  rate  of  hourly  cash  earnings  and  that  of  the  CPI,  one  can  confirm  that,  when 
prices  actually  rise,  wages  increase  almost  simultaneously  (Chart  19).  It  is  therefore 
important that the environment I have just described be put in place, whereby wages can be 
raised,  and  to  realize  an  economy  in  which  a  rise  in  inflation  rates  is  accompanied  by  an 
increase in wages, as in the past. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Concluding remarks 
I  have  so  far  described  the  policy  effects  of  the  QQE,  based  on  the  situation  in  financial 
markets  as  well  as  in  economic  activity  and  prices  over  the  past  three  months.  The  QQE 
itself is an extremely powerful policy, but it will exert maximum effects when combined with 
the various measures by the government. In relation to this, I would like to note two points in 
particular. 
First  is  the  government’s  growth  strategy.  I  have  explained  the  transmission  channel  of 
monetary  easing  in  terms  of  the  funding  costs,  particularly  of  firms,  mainly  based  on 
expected  inflation  rates  and  real  interest  rates.  In  more  accurate  terms,  the  degree  of 
monetary easing is determined by the spread between return on assets and funding costs. In 
other words, if firms’ outlook for profitability improves due to the growth strategy, the effects 
of  monetary  easing  will  further  strengthen.  Also,  as  touched  upon  earlier,  a  rise  in  firms’ 
expectations for growth forms the basis for wages to rise. The government has formulated 
concrete  measures  such  as  the  “Japan  Revitalization  Plan,”  and  we  expect  their  steady 
implementation. 
Second  is  securing  confidence  in  public  finance.  The  Bank’s  measures,  including  JGB 
purchases, are conducted with the purpose of achieving the price stability target, but if this is 
perceived as financing the fiscal deficit, the effects of the QQE could be hampered as long-
term interest rates rise due to an expansion in risk premiums. The joint statement released 
by the government and the Bank of Japan in January stated that the government will steadily 
promote  measures  aimed  at  establishing  a  sustainable  fiscal  structure  with  a  view  to 
ensuring  the  credibility  of  fiscal  management.  It  is  essential  that  this  be  put  into  action  in 
order for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation and achieve sustainable growth. 
I  would  like  to  finish  my  speech  today  by  stating  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  is  committed  to 
achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  at  the  earliest  possible  time,  by  steadily 
continuing with the QQE, and to overcoming deflation, which is the greatest challenge facing 
Japan’s economy. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
