Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, for the 
Hearing at the Committee on Economic and  Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, 
Brussels, 8 July 2013. 
 Madam Chair, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be back with your committee for our last exchange of views 
before the summer break. 
At this time, it is worth taking stock of progress over the past 12 months. Clearly, financial 
conditions in the euro area today are more stable and resilient than they were last summer. 
This is partly due to our determined monetary policy actions. Governments and parliaments 
have also played a key role in the relative return of confidence and stability by undertaking 
courageous reforms, at both the national and European levels. 
Yet despite this progress, the euro area still faces considerable challenges. The economy is 
still weak. Financial fragmentation remains. This challenges the very concept of the Single 
Market.  Small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  can  find  it  difficult  to  access  credit, 
particularly in countries under strain; and several key steps remain to be taken to complete 
the banking union. These are the three topics that I will address in turn today. 
Economic and monetary developments 
1. 
Let  me  first  briefly  discuss  our  recent  monetary  policy  decisions.  In  May,  the  Governing 
Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) decided to lower the interest rate on the main 
refinancing  operations  by  25  basis  points  to  0.50%  and  the  rate  on  the  marginal  lending 
facility by 50 basis points to 1.00%. The rate on the deposit facility was left unchanged at 0%. 
These policy decisions took account of subdued underlying inflationary  pressures over the 
medium  term  and  they  are  expected  to  improve  funding  conditions  across  the  whole 
monetary union. 
Following its July meeting, the Governing Council stressed that the monetary policy stance is 
geared  towards  maintaining  the  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  warranted  by  the 
outlook for price stability and promoting stable money market conditions. 
It  reiterated  that  its  monetary  policy  stance  will  remain  accommodative  for  as  long  as 
needed.  Furthermore,  the  Governing  Council  sharpened  its  communication  by  announcing 
that it expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended 
period  of  time.  This  expectation  was  based  on  the  overall  subdued  outlook  for  inflation 
extending into the medium term, given the broad-based weakness in the real economy and 
subdued monetary dynamics. In the period ahead, we will monitor all incoming information 
on  economic  and monetary  developments  and  assess  any  impact  on the  outlook for  price 
stability. 
the  significant 
The  accommodative  stance  of  our  monetary  policy, 
improvements in financial markets since mid-2012, should help to support prospects for an 
economic recovery later in the year and in 2014. 
On non-standard measures, the Governing Council decided in May to continue conducting all 
refinancing  operations  as  fixed-rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment,  at  least  until 
mid-July  2014.  This  measure  will  help  to  support  a  smooth  transmission  of  the  ECB’s 
together  with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
monetary  policy  stance.  In  particular,  it  will  ensure  that  banks’  lending  decisions  are  not 
impaired by funding constraints. 
The  Governing  Council  also  decided  in  May  to  start  consultations  with  other  European 
institutions on initiatives to promote a functioning market for asset-backed securities (ABS) 
collateralised by loans to non-financial corporations. 
Before discussing this issue in more depth, let me briefly comment on the economic outlook. 
Economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  contracted  for  a  sixth  consecutive  quarter  in  the  first 
quarter of 2013. Labour market conditions remain weak. Recent confidence indicators based 
on survey data have shown some further improvement, albeit from low levels. Overall, euro 
area economic activity should stabilise and recover over the course of the year, although at a 
subdued pace. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  continue  to  be  on  the 
downside. The recent tightening of global money and financial market conditions and related 
uncertainties  may  have  the  potential  to  negatively  affect  economic  conditions.  Other 
downside risks include the possibility of weaker than expected domestic and global demand 
and slow or insufficient implementation of structural reforms in euro area countries. 
Annual  inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  continued  to  moderate,  falling  from  2.5%  in  2012  to 
1.6%  in  June.  Looking  ahead,  the  underlying  price  pressures  over  the  medium  term  are 
expected to remain subdued, reflecting the broad-based weakness in aggregate demand and 
the  modest  pace  of  the  recovery.  Inflation  expectations  nonetheless  continue  to  be  firmly 
anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of maintaining  inflation  rates  below,  but 
close to 2%. 
Risks to the outlook for price developments are expected to be still broadly balanced over the 
medium term. Upside risks relate to stronger than expected increases in administered prices 
and  indirect  taxes,  as  well  as  higher  commodity  prices.  Downside  risks  stem from  weaker 
than expected economic activity. 
Consistent  with  our  expectations  of  low  underlying  inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium 
term, monetary and, in particular, credit dynamics remain subdued. The annual growth rate 
of  loans  to  the  private  sector  remains  negative.  To  a  large  extent,  weak  loan  dynamics 
continue  to  reflect  primarily  the  current  stage  of  the  business  cycle,  heightened  credit  risk 
and the continuing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets. 
Financial fragmentation and SME financing 
2. 
Let me now turn to the second topic namely the financing of SMEs. It is important to recall 
that the euro area financial system is mainly bank-based: around 80% of the debt of non-
financial corporations consists of bank loans. There can be no sustained recovery without a 
sound  banking  system  capable  of  effectively  intermediating  funds  across  the  whole  euro 
area. 
Over the recent past, this intermediation process has suffered from two issues: 
First, financial fragmentation, between peripheral and core countries; and 
Second, higher challenges for SMEs relative to large firms. 
On the first issue, lending rates are very heterogeneous across euro area economies. This 
reflects  divergent  bank  funding  conditions  as  well  as  country-specific  macroeconomic 
developments that affect the creditworthiness of borrowers. The ECB took action, within our 
mandate,  to  alleviate  this  fragmentation:  explicitly,  we  took  action  that  alleviated  funding 
constraints and reduced the dispersion of bank funding costs not least through the three-year 
long-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs).  Still,  the  dispersion  in  lending  rates  across 
countries and borrowers remains substantial. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As regards the second issue, access to financing is more challenging for SMEs than for large 
firms. Spreads between bank lending rates for small-sized loans and large loans are still high 
by historical standards, although they have broadly declined since the last quarter of 2012. 
Difficult access to credit by SMEs is an issue for investment and growth in parts of the euro 
area, especially in countries under strain. 
In Spain, for instance, the interest rate on small loans is almost 2.3 percentage points greater 
than interest rates on large loans. In France, by contrast, the difference is only 1 percentage 
point.  Given  their  high  dependence  on  bank  credit,  SMEs  in  countries  under  strain  suffer 
particularly from financial fragmentation. 
In  this  context,  the  Commission  and  the  European  Investment  Bank  (EIB)  are  looking  into 
possible ways to support SME financing, notably in the form of joint risk-sharing instruments. 
These would combine the lending capacity of the EIB and the European Investment Fund as 
well as resources from national promotional banks to finance special activities in EU priority 
areas. 
A number of options – of both a short- and longer-term nature – are being explored, including 
the  provision  of  guarantees,  credit  enhancements  of  SME  loan  pools  to  revive  structured 
credit  markets  over  a  longer  time  horizon;  and  third,  purchases  of  asset-backed  securities 
(ABS) by the Commission and the EIB. 
Initiatives  to  foster  the  developments  of  the  capital  market,  including  the  securitisation 
market, to complement the role of the banking system are particularly useful in the euro area. 
With  respect  to  securitisation,  we  have  to  be  aware  of  the  numerous  constraints  on  the 
revival of ABS public issuance. These include in particular some proposed changes to the 
regulatory framework, which may reduce incentives to invest in certain types of ABS in the 
long  term.  Such  constraints  need  to  be  properly  addressed.  The  regulatory  treatment  for 
securitisation  should  acknowledge  the  credit  performance  and  ensure  an  unbiased  level 
playing field with other securities regarding risk, rating and maturity. 
I  would  also  like  to  make  clear  that  with  regard  to  the  ABS  market  the  ECB  now  has  an 
advisory role. 
Banking union 
3. 
Policy-makers have made strong commitments on moving towards banking union – now it is 
essential to deliver on those commitments. The objective is effectively threefold: reinstating 
beyond doubt the soundness of the banking system; re-integrating the banking system; and 
delivering a supervisory and resolution framework that will prevent a repeat of the past risk 
build-up. 
All core elements should fall into place swiftly to reap the full benefits of a banking union. The 
stakes are too high to afford undue delays. To complete such an essential project, resolute 
action has to be taken in the months to come – and this Parliament has a key role to play. 
First, until the regulation on the single supervisory mechanism (SSM) is adopted, we at the 
ECB  cannot  formally  take  decisions.  In  this  context,  it  is  my  understanding  that  the 
supervisory accountability arrangements with the Parliament, in line with the SSM regulation, 
are nearing finalisation on the basis of a constructive stance by both parties. 
In view of the adoption of the regulation, we have already launched the process of internal 
preparations, on which I would like to give you a brief update. 
We  are  working  in  close  and  constructive  cooperation  with  the  national  authorities  for  the 
establishment of the SSM. This includes five main workstreams: first, mapping the euro area 
banking system to identify in particular systemic institutions; second, addressing legal issues 
in  the  development  of  the  new  supervisory  processes  at  SSM  level;  third,  preparing  a 
harmonised  supervisory  data  reporting  framework;  fourth,  developing  a  supervisory  model 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
and manual; and fifth, designing and implementing the balance sheet assessment required 
by the SSM Regulation. 
Let  me  be  clear  about  the  importance  of  that  fifth  workstream.  A  credible  and  thorough 
balance sheet assessment is an indispensable step towards restoring full confidence in the 
banking system. Transparency on asset valuation is necessary to subsequently assess the 
capital position of banks and also to facilitate market transactions on bank assets. 
The balance sheet assessment will be complemented by a stress test, in coordination with 
the European Banking Authority, that will cover all banks supervised directly by the ECB. We 
expect to conclude the comprehensive assessment when the SSM becomes operational. It is 
crucial  to  have  a  commitment  to  ensure  that  effective  backstops  are  available,  in  order  to 
ensure that the assessment is duly and timely concluded. 
A  second  cornerstone  of  banking  union  is  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive 
(BRRD). By providing the tools and powers in national laws, it will form a basis on which to 
build a single resolution mechanism (SRM). The ECB welcomes the fact that an agreement 
on BRRD was reached at the last ECOFIN meeting. I trust that this Parliament, together with 
the Council, will reach an agreement by the end of this year. 
This  will  in  turn  pave  the  way  for  a  swift  entry  into  force  of  the  European  Stability 
Mechanism’s  direct  bank  recapitalisation  instrument.  We  welcome  the  political  agreement 
reached at the last Eurogroup meeting. This instrument will usefully complement the existing 
European  backstop  and  will  contribute  to  the  further  decoupling  of  banks  from  their 
respective sovereigns. 
A  single  resolution  mechanism  is  the  next  crucial  pillar  of  the  banking  union.  It  is  an 
indispensable complement to the single supervisor and should ideally be in place once the 
SSM is operational. The ECB looks forward to the Commission’s proposal for an SRM with a 
strong single resolution authority at its heart and a single resolution fund at its disposal. 
Thank you for your attention. I am now looking forward to your questions.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
