Linah K Mohohlo: The role of information technology in domestic 
economic development and regional integration – opportunities and 
related challenges 
Speech by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the Gala Dinner of 
the SWIFT 2013 Africa Regional Conference, Gaborone, 22 May 2013. 
 On  behalf  of the Board and  all staff  of  the Bank,  I  would  like  to  welcome  you,  not  only  to 
Gaborone and to Botswana, but to this Gala Dinner as well, an event at which we need to 
relax, mingle and get to know each other less formally. 
In his opening remarks yesterday, the Honourable Minister highlighted the importance of this 
Conference to the development and economic integration process of Africa. Taking cue from 
this,  you  have  since  deliberated  on  several  issues  that  are  fundamental  to  these 
developments, which include payments systems, financial inclusion, cross-border payments, 
as well as information and communication technology (ICT). 
This  evening,  I  will  share  with  you  some  observations  on  the  subject  of  “The  Role  of 
Information  Technology  in  Economic  Development  and  Regional  Integration:  Opportunities 
and  Related  Challenges”.  By  now,  you  can  hardly  have  failed  to  notice  the  impact  of  the 
continuing ICT revolution in transforming the daily lives of most people: both rich and poor, 
young and old. Contrary to widely-held expectations, ICT has proved to be an effective agent 
for  narrowing,  not  widening,  the  digital  divide.  But  the  sheer  dynamism  of  this  revolution 
brings  not  only  evolving  opportunities,  but  also  challenges,  particularly  perhaps  for 
traditionally conservative bodies such as central banks. 
It is now clear that ICT-driven financial transactions can be the impetus for the next stage of 
domestic  socio-economic  development  and  should,  therefore,  be  fully  harnessed  in 
promoting regional economic integration. It goes without saying that, if the benefits of ICT are 
to  be  realised,  members  of  the  public,  financial  sectors  of  respective  countries  and  all 
stakeholders must be fully on board; they need to embrace its use and ensure that it is not 
subverted or abused. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The  path  to  regional  and,  ultimately,  continental  economic  development  and  integration  is 
complex;  it  requires  purposeful  and  resolute  determination,  the  preconditions  of  which 
include meaningful economic integration, harmonisation of fiscal and monetary policies and 
convergence  of  banking  policies  and  systems.  With  respect  to  the  last  of  these,  you  will 
agree  that  coordination  in  harnessing  the  potential  of  ICT-based  financial  transactions 
infrastructure  is  critical  for  progress  in  driving  forward  the  process  of  development  and 
integration. 
Many  in  Africa  share  a  common  experience  of  inadequate  infrastructure,  whether  it  be  for 
transport, communication, or making payments. Until we are personally inconvenienced, it is 
easy  to  forget  the  problems  this  can  cause.  But  we  need  to  change  the  current  situation 
where, in far too many respects, the continent remains more directly linked with developed 
countries than with its constituent nations. It is not unusual to have better flight connections 
between African countries by first going to Europe. Indeed, not so long ago, intra-continental 
telephone communications were routed through London, Paris, Madrid or Lisbon. 
I am reminded of the observation made yesterday at the first plenary session that to a large 
extent, the priority of domestic rail and road infrastructure is outward linkages to seaports, 
rather than to neighbouring countries. Some rivers marking national boundaries still have no 
bridges; and to all of this must be added the problems caused by visa applications, customs 
controls and overly zealous officials manning our borders. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Evidently,  the  bottlenecks  are  further  compounded  by  weak,  or  even  non-existent,  direct 
cross-border payments infrastructure between countries. In fact, as already pointed out, it is 
quicker  to  effect  payments  to  Europe,  North  America  and  other  developed  markets  than 
across  borders  within  Africa.  This  is  either  because,  the  impressive  recent  growth  of  pan-
African  banking  groups  notwithstanding,  many  of  our  banks  and  financial  institutions  are 
mostly of European or North American parentage; or it is due to better technological linkages 
with the developed world. 
It is pleasing, however, that efforts to redress this infrastructure deficit are at last gathering 
much-needed momentum, whether it be through established institutions such as the African 
Development Bank, institutions-in-waiting such as the proposed BRICS development bank, 
or through funding by way of private capital markets. 
Furthermore,  advances  in  ICT  abound  across  the  continent,  with  levels  of  connectivity 
heading  steadily,  rapidly  even,  in  the  right  direction.  Indeed,  ICT  is  key  to  social  and 
economic  connectivity,  as  it  renders  payments  more  efficient  and  cheaper  at  all  levels: 
domestic, regional, Pan-African and global. This is of particular benefit in the African context 
where  banks  continue  to  be  spread  thinly  across  people’s  settlements,  particularly  in  rural 
areas. In this case, cellular phone networks are enabling previously excluded segments of 
society  to  access  basic  financial  services,  mainly  through  money  transfer  facilities,  but 
increasingly through other features associated with traditional banking. 
In Botswana, we are making discernable progress (although we can increase the pace); we 
are  in  the  process  of  modernising  the  payments  system.  We  have  now  electronically 
automated the Clearing House, and this has reduced the cheque clearing period to only a 
few days. The objective is to reduce the clearing period further to one day when the cheque 
imaging  and  truncation technology  is  in  place.  Furthermore,  large  value  payments  (that  is, 
those  in  excess  of  half  a  million  Pula)  are  made  electronically,  in  this  way  benefiting 
government and large corporations, given improved speed and security, as the risk of fraud 
is reduced. The Real Time Gross Settlement system has also been in operation for a good 
number of years (at least 7 years). 
A platform of Visa International called Visanet provides a national net settlement service for 
all  participating  banks.  Internet  banking,  using  a  desktop  computer,  is  complimented  by 
mobile  phone  transactions  for  paying  utility  bills,  money  transfers  and  managing  bank 
accounts. Many pensioners and beneficiaries of government social security programmes are 
able  to  access  their  entitlements  through  smart  card  technology  that  is  operated  by  local 
shops and businesses, irrespective of their place of abode. 
As a result of these ICT-driven infrastructure improvements, people located in areas far away 
from developed parts of the country now have access to financial services. The time saved in 
long  distance  travel  to  go  to  banks  and/or  pay  bills  is  significant.  More  broadly,  the  much 
needed  financial  inclusion  is  being  facilitated  by  affording  and  extending  basic  services  of 
money  transfer,  payments  and  safe-  keeping  to  those  living  in  all  but  the  most  remote 
communities.  This  is  most  important  in  our  society  where  the  extended  family  remains  of 
central importance. It is particularly gratifying for those of us with long enough memories to 
recall the effort that was previously required to effect even the most basic transaction from 
such locations. 
Cross-border  payments  have  also  been  facilitated.  In  the  SADC  region,  the  payments 
integration  project  is  well  underway,  and  the  SADC  Integration  Regional  Electronic 
Settlement System (SIRESS for short) is expected to be commissioned later this year. 
Just  as  for  infrastructure  for  domestic  financial  transactions,  the  prerequisite  for  effective 
cross-border payment systems is that they must be safe and secure. To echo the sentiments 
made  by  the  Honourable  Minister  yesterday,  this  means  an  effective  legal  and  regulatory 
framework  is  indispensible  in  each  jurisdiction,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  much  needed  legal 
legitimacy of electronic signatures, as well as other identification and evidential information. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I  trust  SWIFT  would  want  to  be  associated  with  these  developments  (advanced  ones  and 
those not so advanced). It is important that Africa receives, from SWIFT, the much needed 
support so the continent is able to leap-frog into transactions that no longer depend on face-
to-face exchanges of cash, particularly in view of the limited bank branch network. 
Given my vantage point, I have observed that the reaction of governments and central banks 
to the rapid spread and increase in usage of electronic financial services, particularly through 
cellular  phones,  has  been  mixed.  There  are  those  who  wish  to  push  for  across-the-board 
regulation, and others who favour a more selective, or “light-touch”, approach in order not to 
be seen to discourage innovation of new platforms and business models. The emerging view 
is that any regulation, oversight and supervision should focus on each specific service, rather 
than adopt a one-size-fits-all approach. 
In other words, a bouquet of oversight regulatory and supervisory instruments will need to be 
selectively and judiciously brought to bear on ICT-based financial services. Indeed, there are 
elements to which commercial law and consumer protection regulations should apply; while 
those  that  are  potentially  of  systemic  importance  to  the  financial  sector  will  fall  under  the 
prudential  ambit  and  appear  on  the  supervisory  radar.  In  view  of  the  evolving  nature  of 
technology  and  its  application,  it  is  imperative  that  establishing  the  appropriate  balance 
between  vigilance,  adaptation  and  learning  through  experience  is  the  order  of  the  day. 
Needless  to  say,  central  banks  play  a  key  role  in  selecting  the  appropriate  colours  and 
scents for this bouquet; what is critical is to learn to be adaptable and, if necessary, creative, 
without losing sight of the core responsibilities. 
Honoured Guests: 
I conclude by acknowledging our collective indebtedness to SWIFT and technology solution 
companies for playing their part in researching and developing technology and its software, 
in the best interests of enhancing the development and expansion of the financial sector. In 
turn,  this  smooths  trade  relations  by  expediting  cross-border  payments,  thus  enhancing 
regional and continental economic integration. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
This brings me to the end of my remarks. I wish you fruitful deliberations of what is left of 
your daunting programme. I also wish you a safe return home. I hope you will take with you 
pleasant memories of your brief stay in Gaborone. 
Better  still  I  hope  you  are  seriously  considering  the  Honourable  Minister’s  invitation  to 
familiarise yourselves with our city and its surroundings. For those able to spare a little time, 
please visit at least one of the unique tourist attractions for which the country is renowned. 
As the brand goes: Botswana is our pride; please make it your destination. 
Please enjoy the dinner and the rest of the evening. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
