Sabine Lautenschläger: From supervision to resolution – a German 
perspective 
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
Institute of International and European Affairs, Dublin, 25 June 2013. 
  Introduction 
1. 
Dear Mr Halligan,  
ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to thank you very much for your invitation. It has been my pleasure to come to 
Dublin to discuss with you those new developments relating to the banking union which are 
of  such  great  importance  to  Europe.  The  title  of  my  remarks  refers  to  the  “German 
perspective”.  I  would  like  to  talk  with  you  about  my  vision,  and  that  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank. And – I will make no secret of it – I have a case to put before you today. 
One  of  James  Joyce’s  most  famous  literary  characters,  Stephen  Dedalus,  once  observed 
that errors were the portal of discovery. Having failed to prevent the crisis in the first place, 
policy  makers  and  supervisors  alike  are  at  least  rightly  being  called  on  to  learn  the  right 
lessons. One of these lessons is the banking union, which was launched in June 2012. The 
eurozone summit resolved, amongst other things, to transfer banking supervision to the ECB. 
Further  elements  were  added  in  December  2012.  These  include  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  here  in  the  euro  area.  A 
single European deposit insurance scheme is also being discussed. 
Adding a single resolution mechanism to a single supervisory mechanism is, in my opinion, 
not just a good idea, but one whose time has come. Control and liability should go hand in 
hand.  But  a  European  resolution  mechanism  likewise  needs  harmonised  standards  and 
instruments,  which  are  currently  being  developed  with  the  EU’s  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution  Directive  (BRRD).  If  I  may  say  so  here:  the  Irish  Presidency  has  distinguished 
itself admirably during these difficult negotiations. 
The third pillar of a banking union – a European deposit insurance scheme – is currently not 
regarded as a priority task. I concur with this view. After all, a deposit insurance scheme is a 
promise by a government to its depositors to indemnify them to a certain degree in the event 
of a crisis. A joint deposit insurance scheme would thus necessarily mean joint liability of the 
member states’ taxpayers. However, joint liability in this area requires joint European control 
in economic and fiscal policy. And we are nowhere near that stage yet. 
However, there are more conditions to be met for an effective and efficient banking union, 
which  concern  material  supervisory  legislation:  a  centralised  European  supervisory  regime 
requires  common  supervisory  rules.  The  adoption  of  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation 
and Capital Requirements Directive, and their probable entry into force on 1 January 2014, 
have brought us a major step closer to a “single rulebook” for banks and supervisors alike. I 
would also like to give my warmest thanks and congratulations to the Irish Presidency here, 
too, for their negotiating and organisational skills in this thorny matter, one on which no fewer 
than four presidencies had to work very hard at that. Well done! 
Single supervisory mechanism 
2. 
Where  do  things  now  stand  with  regard  to  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  the  SSM? 
Where do I stand? A fundamental political consensus has been achieved. A formal resolution 
in  Germany  is  still  pending,  however,  as  this  significant  transfer  of  powers  requires  a 
two-thirds  majority  in  each  of  Germany’s  two  houses  of  parliament.  The  required  majority 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
was reached in the Bundestag, or lower house, on 14 June 2013; the Bundesrat, or upper 
house, will vote on 5 July 2013. I trust that everything will go smoothly, and that the Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  Regulation  will  enter  into  force  in  the  late  summer  so  that,  in  the 
second  half  of  2014,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  can  start  supervising  banks  in 
cooperation with national supervisors. 
I  expect  major  benefits from  the forthcoming  European  cross-border  supervision  of  banks. 
The last five years, in particular, have brutally shown us that crises do not stop at national 
borders, especially in a monetary union. An advantage of the SSM is that it will draw on a 
broader and better basis of information across the eurozone, thereby making it possible to 
reveal  undesirable  developments  more  quickly.  If  designed  correctly,  with  a  strong  arm  in 
benchmarking and peer review, we can uncover trends in individual business lines and risk 
management  much  sooner  in  future.  I  also  expect  this  to  be  a  major  step  towards  the 
consistent application of the supervisory rules, as a second pillar of the single rulebook, so to 
speak. I am hoping that European supervision, in teams of supervisors from various nations, 
will provide a new approach which incorporates the best elements of each nation’s approach 
to  supervision.  This  new  approach  will  leave  no  room  for  a  “home  biased”  supervisory 
regime. 
However, the SSM also has some major weaknesses, and I would like to single one out for 
particular emphasis. It has to do with the fact that the final say on central decisions taken by 
the ECB – and thus also in the SSM – rests with the Governing Council of the ECB. It is true 
that these decisions will be prepared in a Supervisory Board, composed of representatives of 
all  eurozone  national  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks,  and  that  the  Governing 
Council of the ECB can only accept or reject the proposals. A mediation panel would resolve 
disagreements. However, the Governing Council would have ultimate responsibility no matter 
what. I have misgivings about this setup, for two reasons. First: this governance structure is 
quite complex, and its functional viability still needs to be demonstrated. I admit that I side 
with  the  sceptics  here.  Second:  it  will  not  be  possible  here  to  draw  a  clear  dividing  line 
between  monetary  policy  and  supervision:  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  Regulation 
only goes as far as EU primary law allows. 
I therefore see the ECB facing conflicting aims: price stability and a stable banking system. 
This  conflict  of  aims  can  threaten  the  ECB’s  “internal  independence”.  Over  the  medium to 
long  term,  I  believe  it  is  necessary  to  put  the  SSM  on  a  sound  legal  footing;  there  is  no 
getting around changes to primary law to improve the governance structure and to draw a 
clear line between the monetary and supervisory functions. I am convinced that we need to 
tackle the issue of these changes. 
Single resolution mechanism 
3. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  my  second  main  topic  for  today:  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism 
(SRM).  The  financial  market  crisis  has  shown  us  the  magnitude  of  the  hazards  and  costs 
associated with buzzwords such as “too big” or “too complex to fail”. The G20 governments 
have  therefore  committed  to  take  measures  to  prevent  taxpayers  from  having  to  bail  out 
distressed  banks.  The  onus  is  now  on  policymakers  and  supervisors  to  develop  a  bank 
resolution and restructuring process. 
This  issue  takes  on  a  new  dimension  in  the  context  of  joint  supervision.  After  all,  within  a 
cross-border  supervisory  structure,  there  also  has  to  be  a  common  restructuring  and 
resolution regime in order to achieve a balance between liability and control. 
To that end, we have to establish a central European resolution agency and a joint European 
resolution fund. 
In order to make such a single European restructuring and resolution regime lawsuit-proof, a 
change to primary law is required here, too. In my view, the current legal framework for the 
establishment  of  a  special  resolution  authority  for  the  euro  area,  with  extensive  powers  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
intervention, is insufficient. As a European resolution authority will have extensive powers to 
intervene, its legal basis must be absolutely watertight. Resolution will invariably be followed 
by lawsuits – that much is certain. 
What  shape  should  such  a  resolution  authority  take  in  practice?  Transferring  the  relevant 
tasks to the EU Commission, limited to only a subset of member states, and even if just for a 
transitional  period,  is  not  a  really  good  idea.  It  harbours  legal  pitfalls:  restricting  the 
authority’s  powers  to  the  euro  area  is  hardly  covered  by  Article  114  of  the  Treaty  on  the 
Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) and also poses the threat of conflicts of interest. 
Resolution and state aid would be merged into one single authority. 
As in the context of the SSM, in this area, too, policy makers are called upon to tackle with 
determination  the  task  of  laying  the  groundwork  under  EU  primary  legislation  for  an 
independent resolution authority. 
Hierarchy of liability 
4. 
What  other  unfinished  business  is  there?  Well,  there  is,  above  all,  the  issue  of  the 
instruments and procedures to be applied when a bank is to be resolved or restructured. 
At  all  events,  the  resolution  and  restructuring  of  a  bank  supervised  directly  by  the  ECB 
requires  common  instruments  and  procedures,  which  will  also  benefit  EU  countries  which 
join the SSM. I therefore welcome the Irish Presidency’s efforts to push ahead with the highly 
complex and controversial BRRD dossier. 
The crucial precondition to finalising this dossier is agreeing on who will ultimately foot the 
bill. To this end, we need to define the hierarchy of liability clearly and ex ante: 
Shareholders should be the first to bear losses; if that does not suffice we must not hesitate 
to bail in junior and senior debt holders as well – at least most of the time. The big issue is 
currently  whether  or  not  deposits  should  be  put  in  a  class  of their  own  in  the  hierarchy  of 
liability – in other words, should there be a “depositor preference”. Some member states also 
want all deposits, or at least those insured up to €100,000, to be exempted from a bail-in. 
A privately financed resolution fund is a further line of defence. All banks supervised directly 
by  the  ECB  would  have  to  contribute  to  this  joint  European  resolution  fund,  which  would 
supersede  national  regimes  in  the  medium  term.  This  fund  should  also  be  able  to  require 
additional payments from member banks. 
Every now and then, I hear the notion that the Eurosystem could also make a contribution, 
for instance, by providing bridge loans. I don’t think that’s a good idea. True, a central bank 
can  provide  emergency  liquidity  –  but  only  if  a  bank  is  suffering  from  temporary  liquidity 
shortages.  However,  it  may  not,  and  should  not,  contribute  aid  towards  resolution  or 
restructuring, as this can easily cross the line into fiscal policy. 
As  a  last  resort,  however,  the  fund  could  request  public  financial  assistance  for  example, 
from  the  ESM,  as  there  could  be  threats  which,  in  extraordinary  cases,  could  require 
recourse to public funding. 
Direct recapitalisation through the ESM 
5. 
Public  funds  is  a  buzzword  and  a  hot-button  issue,  one  that  is  inseparably  linked  to  the 
question: who is the public that is supposed to be doing the funding? Should nation-states be 
called to pay up whenever a crisis occurs, or should there be a joint European fund? I see no 
compelling  reasons  why  the  costs  of  bank  restructuring  should  be  shifted  entirely  to  the 
European level. You see: the weal and woe of a bank depends not only on the competence 
of its management but also on external factors: the quality of supervision; the financial and 
economic strength of its borrowers, which in turn hinges on a nation’s economic policy; and 
also the fiscal policy of the country where a bank is based. Ample proof of this assertion is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
provided by the fact that a bank’s funding costs are dependent on the sovereign credit rating 
of its home country. Although we will be centralising supervision in Europe next year, other 
factors such as economic and fiscal policy will remain largely the responsibility of individual 
nations. And, as long as that is the case, the arguments for shifting losses completely to the 
European level do not appear to be compelling. 
The  Balance  Sheet  Assessment  provided  for  by  Article  27  of  the  SSM  Regulation  also 
acquires  major  significance  in  this  context:  this  article  requires  the  ECB  to  assess  the 
portfolio quality of the banks it will be supervising in future. What the regulation does not say, 
however, is what happens if hidden losses are disclosed. I have two things to say about this. 
I consider the Balance Sheet Assessment to be very important. For it to be successful, we 
should base our assessments of banks’ balance sheets not only on supervisors’ judgements. 
We should also enlist outside specialists – external auditors – for a quantitative assessment. 
Not only in order to restore market participants’ confidence in the European banking industry, 
but also to minimise reputational risk for the ECB. All supervisors in Europe are familiar with 
ad hoc examinations. These are precisely the instruments we should be using here. This is 
the only way we can avert the suspicion of national supervisors taking too much account of 
national special circumstances. 
My other remark follows on directly: it concerns the legacy risks of banks supervised under 
the  SSM.  As  these  risks  were  created  in  the  past,  under  the  responsibility  of  individual 
member states, they should be borne in a national context, too. 
Changes to primary law 
6. 
I  have  twice  mentioned  changes  to  primary  law  in  the  context  of  the  banking  union:  once 
referring to the SSM and again with regard to the SRM. 
I am indeed aware that many are recoiling at the thought of changing primary law, as it is a 
long and winding road. Ultimately, however, the project of creating a banking union is similar 
to the creation of the single monetary policy. And, we did things properly then and started by 
establishing  a  sound  legal  foundation.  If  it  was  good  enough  for  establishing  a  monetary 
union, it will be good enough for a banking union. 
That notwithstanding, I think the SSM and a restructuring and resolution mechanism should 
be  launched  prior  to  changing  EU  primary  law.  However,  we  should  start  working  on 
amendments to primary law right away, given the foreseeable difficulties and the amount of 
time this endeavour will probably take. 
Significance of the single supervisory mechanism to the Bundesbank 
7. 
While I am here with you today, the ECB is visiting my colleagues at the Bundesbank to put 
on a “road show” extolling its virtues as an employer. As Goethe’s Faust put it: “Two souls, 
alas!  are  dwelling  in  my  breast”  –  as  much  as  I  look  forward  to  a  single  supervisory 
mechanism, to the success of which many of my fellow Bundesbankers will be instrumental, I 
will be very, very sorry to have to do without them at the Bundesbank. The SSM, after all, is 
designed in such a manner that the quality and expertise of national supervisors will continue 
to be the decisive factor. 
This constituent of the EU – the principle of subsidiarity – will have a place in the banking 
union, too. Nonetheless, themes relating to banks and their supervision and resolution will 
acquire a new European dimension. And, as long as it is done well, this is as it should be. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
