Jörg Asmussen: Interview in Börsen-Zeitung 
Interview with Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, in Börsen-Zeitung, published on 12 September 2013. 
 The  summer  in  the  euro  area  was  rather  quiet  this  time  –  compared  with  previous 
years. After the ECB’s summer break, do you feel properly relaxed and fit for the next 
all-night crisis talks in Brussels? 
I’ve been back at work since the second week of August. It’s almost a tradition at the ECB for 
German Members of the Executive Board to take an early summer vacation and then hold 
the fort in August. So my vacation is already just a memory. 
But on a serious note: how hot will it get in the much forecasted “hot autumn”, with 
new discussions about Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Co.? 
“Hot autumn” is an interesting term, but I think it’s overestimated. Even if many people, for 
widely diverging reasons, think that the world will look different on 23 September – following 
the parliamentary elections – it is not true. The introduction of the eurobonds and the end of 
consolidation, etc. will not come about on 23 September either. Instead, in this autumn too, 
we will have to gradually confront the existing difficulties. 
What is the most pressing topic? 
Greece will certainly be at the top of the agenda again, with two urgent issues that will need 
to  be  resolved  this  autumn  under  the  ongoing  programme.  First,  it  is  set  to  run  a  budget 
deficit in 2015 and 2016 that will need to be corrected during the Troika programme review at 
the  end  of  September,  because  Greece  has  introduced  a  medium-term  fiscal  strategy. 
Second, the ongoing programme reveals a financing gap in the second half of 2014 on the 
part of the donor countries, which will also need to be closed to ensure the involvement of 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), because IMF involvement requires a programme that 
is fully funded for 12 months in advance. 
Is that the gap of around EUR 4 billion up to EUR 4.5 billion? 
I’m always amazed at the kind of speculation heard about such figures. 
That figure was given by the Minister of Finance Wolfgang Schäuble. 
The exact amount cannot be quantified at all yet, and I wouldn’t like to speculate. The level 
will for one depend on the extent to which Greece will be able to privatise assets. The more 
assets that Athens privatises, the narrower the gap will be. 
Greece will have to return to the capital markets in 2014, because government bonds 
will mature. Will it manage to do so? And if not: how will the ECB, which holds a large 
part of these bonds, react? 
According to the Greek Minister of Finance Ioannis Stournaras, Greece will try to return to 
the capital markets in the second half of the year. That is the right thing to do, and it remains 
to  be  seen  if  it  will  succeed.  In  any  case,  we  as  the  ECB  assume  that  the  bonds  we 
purchased under the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) will be fully repaid. 
One  option  would  be  for  the  ECB  to  transfer  the  bonds  to  the  European  Stability 
Mechanism  (ESM),  which  would  be  more  flexible,  in  respect  of,  say,  maturity 
extensions. 
That idea crops up repeatedly, but I don’t think it would be at all feasible politically. We will 
hold the bonds until maturity under the SMP programme. 
And when will a decision be made on “Greece III”? Will there also be a haircut? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
If the country does not succeed in gaining full access to the markets for 2015, the question of 
a supplementary programme will arise in the course of 2014. But the main concern now is 
the implementation of the ongoing programme – not what happens after that. 
Another urgent topic is Ireland. The rescue programme finishes at the end of this year. 
If there is to be more help, a decision would need to be taken soon. 
But it’s also possible that the Irish will find their own solution. 
The  Minister  for  Finance  Michael  Noonan  has,  however,  announced  that  Ireland  is 
seeking a precautionary credit line from the ESM to the amount of EUR 10 billion in 
order  to  safeguard  its  return  to  the  capital  markets.  Would  that  suffice  as  a 
prerequisite  for  the  ECB  to  purchase  Irish  government  bonds  under  its  Outright 
Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  programme  in  order  to  support  prices  if  necessary. 
Noonan has indeed expressed his hope that the credit line would not be linked to new 
conditions. 
I have of course read what he said. He knows that a precautionary ESM programme also 
involves conditionality. 
But  that  is  limited  to  a  country’s  adherence  to  the  Stability  Pact  and  other  EU 
regulations. There are no new conditions requiring reforms. Is that sufficient for the 
ECB? 
OMTs  can  only  be  activated  under  the  conditions  that  have  been  made  known:  a  country 
requires  an  ESM  programme,  and  that  may  also  be  a  precautionary  programme  with  the 
option of the ESM engaging in purchases in the primary market. Another requirement is IMF 
involvement. But it’s particularly important, and we have said this repeatedly, that countries 
under  a  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  Programme  must  be  in  a  position  to 
regain full access to the capital markets. Treasury bills, for example, are not sufficient. OMTs 
are a monetary tool, not a substitute for a lack of capital market access. 
But OMTs can also be used to help countries to regain this access – they don’t need 
to have it already. 
The ECB Governing Council will evaluate that in each case, based on considerations such 
as:  does  the  country  have  an  issuance  calendar?  What  volumes  does  it  issue?  Can  it 
present a complete yield curve? A decision will then be made. 
In Portugal the government itself is talking of a second rescue package and is hoping 
for  a  further  relaxation  of  the  conditions.  Will  Portugal  need  more  help  and  will  it 
receive it? 
The  country  was  set  back  by  the  political  uncertainty  in  the  summer.  This  uncertainty  has 
now  been  overcome  and  the  country  can  and  should  take  up  from  where  it  stood  in  the 
spring  of  this  year,  when  it  was  able  to  successfully  issue  a  long-term  bond.  Market 
confidence could be won back through a full implementation of the programme. That is why it 
is essential to keep to the existing programme and all its objectives. 
The  debate  on  a  second  package  is  heard  in  Cyprus  too.  Not  least  because  the 
collapse of the economy was worse than forecast. When can we expect “Cyprus II”? 
This  question  never  ceases  to  amaze  me.  The  Cyprus  programme  has  not  even  been 
operating for  six  months  and  it  has  a  duration  of  three  years.  I fail  to  understand  why  the 
question  of  a  supplementary  programme  is  already  being  raised.  Cyprus  must  now 
implement  the  programme.  There  has  been  one  review  so  far  and  that  was  successfully 
completed. The issue now is to continue the programme – nothing more. 
Not  much  has  been  heard  about  Slovenia  recently.  Will  that  country  seek  a  rescue 
package  if  the  ECB’s  asset  quality  review  exposes  all  the  trouble  in  the  banking 
sector? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in 
respect  of  property 
tax  also  conflicts  with 
Slovenia  is  now  conducting  a  separate  stress  test  for  the  country’s  ten  major  banks.  The 
results  will  be  available  in  late  November  or  early  December. We  will  then  know  what  the 
capital shortfalls are and whether they can be covered. Moreover, the state of the banking 
sector is a serious problem for the country, but not the only one. Slovenia has inefficient state 
enterprises, attempts to introduce pension reform have failed twice and it is running a larger 
budget deficit than EU regulations allow. 
Many  people  are  also  concerned  about  the  heavyweights  France  and  Italy.  Some 
observers  fear  that  both  countries  are  completely  incapable  of  introducing  reforms. 
How  frustrated  are  you  and  your  ECB  colleagues  that  the  large  countries  are  not 
making  better  use  of  the  time  that  the  ECB,  too,  is  “buying”  for  them  to  introduce 
reforms. 
Let me say one thing first: we all have a strong interest in an economically strong France. 
The entire construction of the euro area can only function with a strong France. The latest 
pension  reforms  are  a  step  in  the  right  direction  but  do  not  go  far  enough.  I  also  see 
problems regarding the intended funding through higher taxes and contributions, rather than 
through  specific  spending  cuts.  Besides,  the  plans  also  contradict  the  EU  Commission’s 
country-specific  recommendations.  The  bottom  line  is  that  France  will  need  to  do  more  to 
enhance its competitiveness. The government will need to speed up the pace of reforms. 
And Italy? 
Much was achieved through fiscal policy efforts under the former prime minister Mario Monti. 
It is now important to ensure that these successful achievements are not eroded. The latest 
retreat 
the  EU’s  country-specific 
recommendations. Italy has one major problem: its extremely slow potential growth, which by 
all  estimates  hovers  around  0%. That  is  what  needs  to  be  addressed, everything  revolves 
around that. 
But how likely do you think it is that something will change. Surely the examples point 
to the conclusion that reforms might be successfully pushed through were it not for 
the lack of a sustainable political willingness to reform. 
I am basically more optimistic. Reforms will be made under the pressure that something has 
to be done. If there is no compulsion – through pressure on interest rates, say, or a high level 
of  unemployment  –  nothing  will  happen.  That  not  only  applies  to  the  current  problem 
countries but also to Germany. 
But  many  critics  actually  accuse  the  ECB  of  eliminating  this  market  pressure  by 
adopting OMTs. 
I don’t think that reproach is justified. OMTs are not aimed at harmonising interest rates on 
government  bonds  in  the  euro  area.  What  we  wanted  was  to  eliminate  the  unwarranted 
redenomination risk from the interest rates. The pressure to reform is still high, but it comes 
mainly from the high level of unemployment, especially high youth unemployment. 
Besides  the  reforms  in  the  individual  countries,  reforms  are  proceeding  in  the  euro 
area  itself.  Banking  union  is  a  key  issue.  Before  the  ECB  takes  on  banking 
supervision, it wants to conduct a rigorous asset quality review. In carrying out this 
review, is it a condition for the ECB that countries commit themselves in advance to 
covering a capital shortfall if necessary? 
This asset quality review will provide clarity about the banks’ balance sheets. Of course we 
don’t want to take on any “bad eggs”; the reputational risk is ours alone. However, from our 
perspective,  a  lack  of  clarity  about  the  balance  sheets  is  one  of  the  main  obstacles 
preventing banks from extending more credit. Clarity would also improve the functioning of 
the interbank market. In that sense, the review is not a threat but an opportunity. If it is to be 
a success, we must know what will be done should a capital shortfall emerge. If there is no 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
answer  to  that,  people  will  suspect  that  the  review  was  too  favourable.  That  doesn’t  help 
anybody. 
So you are confident, all in all. But some observers find that the crisis is unresolvable, 
pointing to what they see as unbridgeable conflicts of interest. 
Yes, I have a fundamentally different view. Look at what has happened since 2012, much of 
that  would  have  been  hard  to  imagine  in  advance.  To  name  a  few  examples:  the  fiscal 
compact, the German-style debt brake in 25 EU countries, the steps towards banking union 
with  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  and  the  ESM.  I  am  aware  that  the  ESM  is 
controversial  in  Germany,  but  as  a  crisis  management  tool  that  did  not  exist  before,  it 
nonetheless fills an institutional gap. I am optimistic that Europe will come out of the crisis 
stronger and more robust. 
But that won’t be true of the euro area’s growth potential, will it? Many economists 
now think that will be much lower. 
We don’t traditionally publish our estimate of that. However, we must work on the assumption 
that  the  potential  growth  rate  has  slowed  down  –  owing  to  the  lower  use  of  labour  and, 
especially, the fall off in investment. The long-term development is still unclear. If the crisis is 
used to push through the necessary reforms, potential growth may accelerate. But we also 
need to consider the rapid ageing of the population, which will depress potential growth. 
Let’s  now  look  at  the  current  situation.  The  ECB  is  more  sceptical  than  many 
economists – many would even say “pessimistic” – when it comes to the economic 
outlook. What is that assessment based on? 
I wouldn’t say that we are pessimistic. We are currently seeing the confirmation of what we 
have been expecting since December: the euro area is recovering very slowly in the course 
of the year, and that improvement will continue next year. However, there is no reason for 
our growth forecasts to go shooting up, and that is why we remain cautious. 
And that is why the ECB is continuing to try to use its forward guidance to shield the 
euro area economy from rising market interest rates in the event that the ultra-loose 
monetary policy in the United States comes to an end? 
Our forward guidance comprises two elements: it aims to further clarify our views regarding 
the economic situation and the manner in which we intend to react to it. It is important to note 
that the United States and the euro area are at completely different stages of the economic 
cycle.  Here  in  the  euro  area  economy,  an  imminent  change  in  the  direction  of  monetary 
policy would certainly come far too early. 
But how realistic is decoupling from the United States? The markets, at any rate, don’t 
seem  to  have  all  that  much  faith  in  that  prospect,  if  you  look  at  the  rising  money 
market rates. 
I think it’s a little early to be judging that. Overall, we believe that we’ve been successful in 
reducing the volatility of rates. We’ve been moderately successful as regards the actual level 
of  interest  rates.  Rates have  risen  on  account  of  positive  economic  data.  It  remains  to  be 
seen how the situation will develop in the likely presence of further cautiously positive data. 
And if things do not go according to plan, will the ECB reduce its key interest rates 
again or conduct new LTROs? 
We will continue to monitor the situation. We haven’t said any more than that. Sometimes 
you have to keep calm, rather than coming up with something new every month. 
Why is the ECB not publishing inflation projections beyond 2014? If those projections 
were below the 2% mark, that could be a strong signal that an increase in key interest 
rates was not to be expected in the foreseeable future. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We have just published our updated inflation projections for 2013 and 2014. Both are less 
than  our  target  of  “below,  but  close  to,  2%”.  We  will  publish  projections  for  2015  in 
December. 
But that’s not for another three months, and the Federal Reserve’s policy could cause 
considerable volatility in that time. 
Thus far, all private sector forecasts see inflation in the euro area being significantly less than 
2% in 2015, as do the forecasts of other public institutions, so there’s no big secret. 
Is it conceivable that the ECB will, in the future, link its forward guidance to a specific 
inflation target? 
We haven’t done that so far. 
There are a few things that you used not to do, but now do. 
That’s true, so that remains to be seen. 
But you still don’t see any deflationary risks for the euro area? Some economists say 
that it’s not enough to just look at stable inflation expectations. They fear a balance 
sheet recession and debt deflation, as in Japan. 
No, we don’t see such risks, and I don’t think we’re underestimating them, either. It is quite 
clear that the inflation target is symmetrical. But at the moment, we see neither inflationary 
nor deflationary risks. 
In the future, the ECB intends to publish accounts of its meetings. You have clearly 
argued in favour of indicating who voted for what and why. Now it seems that these 
will be more like summary accounts indicating the primary arguments. 
My opinion has not changed. I do indeed believe that demands are higher today in terms of 
transparency. The ECB was once right at the forefront in this regard, when it introduced its 
monthly  press  conferences.  Now,  though,  we  are  lagging  way  behind  when  you  see  what 
other central banks are doing. That’s why I believe that publishing accounts that summarise 
the general course of the discussion would be helpful. I personally would also be in favour of 
indicating  how  people  voted.  That  would  require  all  members  of  the  Governing  Council  to 
explain how their own arguments and their own voting behaviour were in line with the ECB’s 
European mandate. 
What  about  the  argument  that  individual  central  bankers  would  then  be  put  under 
pressure? 
I  think  the  concerns  that  the  pressure  would  become  too  great  have  been  exaggerated. 
Someone who takes on a job like that must be capable of withstanding pressure. Nobody will 
be put in prison for voting for an interest rate rise in the euro area. People shouldn’t be that 
sensitive in this regard. I was in favour of OMTs because they were – and still are – the right 
response for Europe, despite the fact that many in Germany are opposed to them. 
The  OMT  programme  has  made  a  significant  contribution  to  the  easing  of  the  euro 
crisis.  Many  observers  fear  that  the  forthcoming  ruling  by  Germany’s  Federal 
Constitutional  Court  will  impose  strict  limits  on  OMTs,  and  that  this  could  trigger 
turbulence. How big is that risk? 
I  don’t  know  how  the  judges  in  Karlsruhe  will  rule  either,  and  I  have  great  respect  for  the 
court – from one independent institution to another. I think, though, that the views of market 
participants in New York, Frankfurt and Hong Kong are quite clear: the OMTs are fine the 
way they are, without any limitations being imposed. 
Is it really realistic to assume that the mere announcement of OMTs will be sufficient 
in the longer term? Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, has said 
that one lesson from the crisis is the fact that announcements will be tested. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  principle  of  deterrence  also  applied  in  the  cold  war.  But  what  matters  is  that  we  are 
completely  ready  to  act.  When  the  necessary  conditions  have  been  met,  we  will  take  a 
monetary policy decision. 
We’ve had extremely low interest rates worldwide for a long period of time, combined 
with  unprecedented  non-standard  measures.  The  Bank  for  International  Settlements 
(BIS) is warning that, this time, the exit will be even more difficult than in the past. Is it 
actually possible to exit this situation without turbulence? 
Otmar Issing said that an exit was a question not of technical possibilities, but of political will. 
This exit will certainly be more complex on account of the non-standard instruments. But yes, 
I am of the opinion that an exit without turmoil is possible. It just needs to be communicated 
clearly. 
William  White,  former  chief  economist  at  the  BIS,  warns  that the  current  ultra-loose 
monetary policy has long been creating new threats to financial stability. 
There are good reasons why interest rates are currently at the level they are. However, it is 
also clear that if you keep rates low for a long period of time, that will have many side effects, 
such  as  misallocation  of  capital  and  reduced  pressure for  structural  reforms. We must  not 
lose sight of those side effects. 
And,  if  necessary,  push  back  against  erroneous  developments  in  the  markets  by 
means of interest rate rises – “leaning against the wind”, as it’s called in economic 
jargon? 
I think the number of arguments in favour of “leaning against the wind” has indeed increased 
in recent years. But at the same time, our mandate at the ECB is clear. Our primary objective 
is  price  stability,  and  only  if  that  is  achieved  does  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the 
European  Union  provide  for  us  contributing  to  financial  stability.  Those  objectives  have  a 
clear hierarchy. 
What are the major lessons that the ECB – and central banks in general – should learn 
from the crises of recent years? 
As I have said, I think the main thing has been the increase in the significance of financial 
stability.  There  has  been  a  tendency  during  the  crisis  to  shift  responsibility  for  banking 
supervision to central banks, making them responsible for macro-prudential supervision. As 
regards  the  euro  area,  one  important  thing  has  certainly  been  the  realisation  that  our 
monetary union was incomplete. You can draw two conclusions from that: you can decide to 
scrap it altogether, which would, in my view, be a mistake; or you can decide to complete it. 
The banking union is the first step in that direction, but not the last. 
Many  experts  think  that  another  necessary  lesson  is  the  importance  of  stronger 
international  coordination  of  monetary  policy,  as  action  at  national 
is 
increasingly  having  spillover  effects.  They  also  point  to  the  recent  turbulence  in 
emerging economies as a result of the debate surrounding the Federal Reserve. 
Perhaps  I  should  first  say  a  few  words  about  the  turbulence  in  emerging  economies.  The 
weakening  observed  in  many  countries  is  certainly  related  to  the  reversal  of  capital  flows. 
However, it is also the case that this weakening is particularly affecting emerging economies 
that have large current account deficits and have failed to carry out reforms. You can protect 
yourself from such developments by doing your homework. 
And with capital controls? Even the IMF is no longer strictly opposed to those. 
I  am  very  cautious  in  that  regard.  There  are  certainly  extreme  situations  where  that 
instrument can be used. But in normal situations, there is no doubt that free movement of 
capital supports growth. 
But let’s go back to international cooperation. Would that be appropriate, and would it 
be feasible from a political perspective? 
level 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I don’t think the answer here is black and white. On the one hand, every central bank has a 
national mandate. And I don’t think that will change in the foreseeable future. On the other 
hand, there is already some coordination – at the BIS, at the G7 and at the G20. 
The latest G20 summit has just ended. Little came of it. Are you disappointed? 
The summit was clearly overshadowed by events in Syria. I think the fact that the issue of tax 
avoidance  and  tax  structuring  is  now  being  raised  at  G20  level  is  a  positive  development. 
There  was  some  limited  progress  in  terms  of  financial  regulation.  However,  I  was  indeed 
disappointed  by  the  decisions  made  in  the  area  of  fiscal  policy,  as  the  United  States  and 
Japan  in  particular  –  especially  the  latter  –  have  no  credible  medium-term  consolidation 
plans. These are required as a matter of great urgency. 
You have talked about the reform of the global financial system. Almost exactly five 
years after Lehman Brothers, where are we exactly? 
I do think that the global financial system has become more robust. However, it’s quite clear 
that we are not yet where we should be. Progress is urgently needed on the “too big to fail” 
issue,  which  primarily  concerns  the  complexity  of  these  institutions.  The  second  issue  is 
shadow banking. It is true that we have tightened up the regulation of banks. However, that 
leads to shifts into other areas. Consequently, the risk may not ultimately be any smaller; it 
may just lie somewhere else. That must now be followed up. 
Is it not now the case that regulation itself is too complex? 
That  is  a  legitimate  question.  However,  if  you  establish  simple  rules,  that  comes  at  the 
expense of fairness in individual cases. That is true of the leverage ratio, for example. That 
certainly  has  disadvantages  and  may  be  unfair  in  individual  cases.  But  it’s  a  rough  initial 
guide that we can work with. I’m also convinced that there will be a Basel IV – and that will 
be simpler than Basel III. 
Will  it  also  put  an  end  to  the  situation  whereby  no  capital  needs  to  be  held  for  the 
government  bonds  of  EU  countries?  The  Deutsche  Bundesbank  in  particular  is 
pushing  for  the  abolition  of  this  zero  weighting  and  limits  on  the  amount  of 
government bonds that financial institutions are allowed to hold. 
The ECB does not yet have a position on that. My view is that consideration should be given 
to  amending  the  zero  weighting  in  the  medium  term.  I  would  not  do  that  today,  though.  I 
would do it after the crisis. And I would only do it if it was coordinated at global level. Action 
on that needs to be taken at international level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
