Yves Mersch: A regime change in supervision and resolution 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the European Supervisor Education (ESE) Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 
26 September 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak today. 
As you know, Europe has in recent years faced the worst economic and financial crisis since 
the 1930s. Growth remains weak and unemployment is unacceptably high, with only the first 
shoots of recovery showing through. 
Yet  out  of  these  difficulties,  some  positives  have  begun  to  emerge.  The  euro  area  has 
recognised that, for its collective stability, it has to deepen integration in certain areas – and it 
is  now  beginning  to  do  so.  What  we  are  seeing  playing  out  today  is  not  so  much  the 
“audacity of hope”, but rather the “audacity of necessity”. 
In my view, the most significant change taking place is the development of Banking Union. 
Monetary  Union  needs  Banking  Union,  not  least  because  a  stable  banking  sector  is  an 
essential  complement  to  a  sound  money.  I  therefore  see  the  project  of  building  Banking 
Union as the most important integration step since the launch of the euro. 
For those of us involved in supervision and other financial sector issues, it is an especially 
fascinating time. We are at what political scientists call a “critical juncture” – that rare time 
when a window of opportunity opens to fundamentally redesign institutions. It feels like being 
back 25 years ago when we were preparing EMU. 
But  this  also  imposes  on  us  a  responsibility.  This  window  may  not  open  again  for  many 
years, so we need to make sure that the decisions we take today are the right ones. Most 
importantly,  we  need  to  ensure  that  Banking  Union  is  not  just  a  label  –  that  it  initiates  a 
genuine regime change in the way that banks are supervised and resolved. 
How to achieve this regime change is what I would like to focus on in my remarks today. 
The elements of a regime change 
In  my  view,  a  genuine  regime  change  has  to  involve  two  elements:  first,  building  a  single 
system for banking supervision and resolution; and, once that is in place, building a stricter 
system as well. 
Why do we need both elements? 
We need a single system to ensure that we have a level playing field for the banking sector 
across Europe – and hence to create a truly single financial market in Europe. 20 years after 
the  Single  Market  was  supposed  to  be  completed,  the  banking  sector  in  Europe  remains 
fragmented  along  national  lines.  This  has  many  drawbacks,  not  least  that  it  disrupts 
monetary  policy  transmission,  makes  banks more  exposed  to country-specific shocks,  and 
encourages  home  bias  in  government  bond  purchases  that  strengthen the  bank-sovereign 
loop. 
To give an example of how far short we remain of a fully integrated financial market, a recent 
study  found  that,  between  2005  and  2012,  the  average  number  of  bank  mergers  and 
acquisitions per year in the United States was 343, whereas in Europe the yearly average 
was just 58. One reason for this is that we have lacked a single system of supervision and 
resolution across Europe, which has discouraged cross-border activity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We need a stricter system to ensure that, when we have the new tools of Banking Union, 
they are used proactively – namely, to create a stronger and more stable banking sector. We 
still have an uphill struggle in Europe to restore investor confidence in the banking sector. 
And  this  is  partly  because  we  do  not  have  a  consistently  strict  approach  to  banks  –  on 
balance sheet transparency, on loss recognition and on resolution. 
Evidence of this is the divergence in the price-to-book ratio for large and complex banks in 
the  euro  area  and  outside.  For  banks  outside  it  is  currently  around  1,  while  for  euro  area 
banks it is only 0.7 – in other words, euro area banks are priced by the market at less than 
their book value. An important reason for this is that countries outside the euro area have 
made  much  faster  progress  in  acknowledging  losses  and  resolving  banks  that  were  not 
viable. 
Creating a genuine regime change, both in the system of supervision and resolution and in 
its application, could therefore have a powerful effect for Europe. In the near term, it could 
help accelerate the clean-up of banks’ balance sheets and thus restart bank lending. In the 
medium term, it could help encourage the development of genuinely European banks. 
So how do we get to this regime change? 
Building a single system 
Let me start with the first element, building a single system. In my view, for any system to be 
single,  two  conditions  have  to  be  fulfilled.  First,  there  needs  to  be  a  single  set  of  rules. 
Second, if those rules contain any discretion, there needs to be a central authority that can 
enforce them evenly. 
A single system for supervision 
For supervision, we are currently making progress on both these conditions. 
In  terms  of  rules,  we  now  have  a  new  rulebook  for  banks  across  Europe  as  part  of  the 
Capital Requirements Directive IV. Within the single supervisory mechanism (SSM), we will 
also have a single supervisory manual that will apply to all banks. This will cover issues like 
the  methodology  for  the  Supervisory  Review  and  Evaluation  Process  (SREP),  off-site  and 
on-site reviews, risk assessments and model validations. We are thereby ensuring that the 
same  supervisory  standards  will  be  applied  across  Banking  Union  –  and  indeed,  through 
harmonisation with the European Banking Authority, across the EU as a whole. 
In  terms  of  decision-making,  we  are  strengthening  the  centre  by  integrating  the  European 
and national levels of supervision. A particular innovation here will be the Joint Supervisory 
Teams,  which  will  contain  staff from  both the  ECB  and  the  national  competent  authorities. 
There will be one team for each significant banking group directly supervised by the SSM, 
operating under the management of a coordinator working for the ECB. This guarantees a 
collective  approach  and  ensures  that  there  will  always  be  a  European  element  in  the 
decision-making. Indeed, the final responsibility for decisions will rest with the ECB. 
This  process  of  creating  an  integrated  SSM  is  of  course  a  major  organisational  challenge. 
We are bringing together 17 or more different national supervisors, with different operating 
cultures  and  supervisory  philosophies,  into  a  single  mechanism  with  a  single  culture  and 
philosophy.  And  the  ECB  will  be  directly  hiring  around  1,000  new  staff,  of  which  around 
750 will be involved in supervision. So it will take time to reach our cruising speed. 
With the SSM Regulation foreseen to enter into force at the beginning of November, we are 
ready to publish the vacancy notice for the Chair of the Supervisory Board, followed by those 
for the top management of the SSM – the four Directors General of the main departments 
and the six Deputy Directors General. The vacancy notices for the middle management will 
follow a few weeks later, and then – in accordance with the cascade principle – the broad 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
recruitment will begin. We need to be ready with the basic structure of the organisation for 
the Asset Quality Review (AQR) towards the end of the first quarter of 2014. 
Let  me  therefore  briefly  take  this  opportunity  to  describe  how  we  foresee  the  SSM’s 
organisational structure. 
The  SSM  will  contain  four  Directorates  General  and  a  Secretariat  Division.  Two  of  the 
Directorates General (DGs Micro-Prudential Supervision I and II) will conduct the direct and 
day-to-day  supervision  over  significant  banks.  The  division  of  responsibility  for  supervision 
between  these  two  departments  will  be  largely  determined  according  to  a  risk-based 
approach, allowing them to specialise by risk exposure, complexity and business model of 
the credit institutions. 
The third Directorate General (DG Micro-Prudential Supervision III) will host the conduct of 
indirect supervision over less significant banking groups. Direct supervision of these banks 
will still be carried out by the relevant national competent authorities (NCA) on a day-to-day 
basis, but with regular reporting to the ECB. 
The fourth Directorate General (DG Micro-Prudential Supervision IV) will perform horizontal 
supervision  and  specialised  expertise  functions,  such  as  supervisory  quality  assurance, 
methodology  and  standards  development,  enforcement  and  sanctions, crisis  management, 
capital market risk analysis and model validation. 
Within  the  organisational  set-up,  the  middle  management  below  the  Directors  General  will 
encompass  Heads  of  Division  and  Section  and  Senior  Advisors,  from  which  the  Joint 
Supervisory Team (JST) coordinators will be chosen. 
Let me also say a few words on how we foresee the practical work and the organisation of 
the off- and on-site-supervision. 
The  Joint  Supervisory  Teams  (JST)  are  responsible  for  the  day-to-day  supervision  of 
significant  banks.  They  propose  inspections,  in  which  they  participate  without  leading  the 
inspections. That task is allocated to the Head of Mission. The Head of Mission is nominated 
by the horizontal Directorate General, Micro-Prudential Supervision IV – that is, by the ECB. 
Generally, on-site inspection teams are led by NCA staff. This does not preclude, however, 
the possibility of the ECB taking the lead. 
The JSTs prepare the recommendations, lead the closing meeting of the inspection with the 
credit institution, and provide the follow-up of the recommendations. 
The horizontal DG is in charge of maintaining the on-site inspection methodology. Moreover, 
it plans the on-site inspections to be conducted at significant banks on a yearly basis and 
updates on a half yearly basis the global inspection planning. 
On-site inspections are specific in-depth investigations of risks, risk controls and governance. 
They  are carried  out on  the  basis  of  a  predefined  scope,  timeline  and  resources,  and  use 
investigating and inspecting techniques to test controls and substantive procedures, following 
common standards. 
They follow specific procedures and are conducted in an independent manner – vis-à-vis the 
JST,  the  NCAs  and  the  respective  inspected  credit  institutions.  The  outcome  of  on-site 
inspections will be a report containing findings and an executive summary. 
A single system for resolution 
A single system for resolution is just as important as a single system for supervision. Banks 
need  to  know  how  they  will  be  treated  both  in  life  and  in  death  –  as  do  the  creditors that 
invest in them. So here again, having a single set of rules and a central authority that can 
enforce them is essential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The single  set  of rules for  resolution  – the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  –  has 
already been agreed by the Council of the European Union, and discussions are now under 
way with the European Parliament. 
In principle, I welcome this Directive as a vast improvement on the status quo. Before the 
crisis very few countries had resolution frameworks in place, and this has led to ad hoc and 
inconsistent approaches in different countries. 
However, where I think this Directive falls short is in the discretion it still allows to national 
resolution authorities to exempt certain classes of liabilities from bail-in. In my view, this is 
not conducive to the building of a single system, as it leaves too much uncertainty about how 
bail-in will be applied. 
One can imagine a situation, for example, where a particular class of investors is excluded 
from  bail-in  owing  to  national  political  economy  concerns.  Or  a  situation  where  larger 
countries with larger resolution funds are in a position to exclude more creditors than smaller 
countries. Investors will be forced to second-guess these issues. 
In  this  context,  having  an  authority  that  can  take  central  decisions  becomes  even  more 
important. If there is going to be discretion in how resolution rules are applied, then we need 
to  ensure  that  this  discretion  is  applied  in  the  same  way  across  different  countries.  This 
underscores  why  a  strong  single  resolution  mechanism  is  so  necessary  –  and,  more 
concretely, why that mechanism has to have  independent decision-making powers and no 
national vetoes. 
A single resolution mechanism is also essential to ensure that we have a single approach to 
the resolution of cross-border banks. Dividing resolution along national lines has not proven 
an  efficient  way  to  solve  cross-border  coordination  problems  and  achieve  a  least-cost 
resolution  strategy  overall.  Moreover,  in  a  divided  system  we  can  anticipate  protracted 
wrangling over burden-sharing, which only delays the clean-up from a crisis. 
To address this issue, I see it as essential that the mechanism comprises not only a single 
resolution  authority,  but  also  a  single  resolution  fund.  The  Commission’s  proposal  for  the 
single  resolution  mechanism  foresees  such  a  fund,  financed  by  levies  on  private  banks. 
According to Commission estimates, it will reach a size of about €55 billion by 2025. 
I welcome this proposal in principle. But I think that, during the build-up phase, clarification is 
needed on what will happen if there are exceptional circumstances which lead to the fund’s 
resources being exhausted. The proposal is unclear here. In my view a credible backstop is 
essential to ensure that resolution costs can be separated from national budgets. 
To sum up, what defines a single system is having a single set of rules that can be enforced 
evenly  from  the  centre.  We  are  on  the  way  to  achieving  this  for  supervision.  I  see  it  as 
essential  that  we  also  achieve  it  for  resolution.  Banking  Union  is  ultimately  a  way  of 
establishing a single financial market where banks are separated from their sovereigns. To 
paraphrase Mervyn King, we therefore need to ensure that banks are both European in life 
and European in death. 
Building a stricter system 
Let me turn to the second element of a genuine regime change, building a stricter system. 
Putting in place new rules and institutions for supervising and resolving banks is essential. 
But it is equally important to use them in a way that leads to a measurably stronger and more 
stable banking sector. 
How can we achieve this? 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A new approach to supervision 
The first building block is a willingness on the part of policy-makers to make bank balance 
sheets  more  transparent  according  to  the  common  standards  of  the  SSM.  The  SSM 
Regulation puts us in a position to do this by requiring a comprehensive assessment of the 
banks  the  ECB  will  directly  supervise.  This  requirement  goes  beyond  a  purely  accounting 
exercise. We have to ensure that the assessment is rigorous and managed from the centre. 
There is no point in having a new pair of glasses if you are not willing to open your eyes. 
Our current plan for the comprehensive assessment is to have three elements. First, a risk 
assessment,  which  will  identify  broad  risk  factors,  including  funding  and  liquidity  risks. 
Second,  a  balance  sheet  assessment,  which  will  review  asset  quality  using  calculation, 
qualification  and  valuation  checks  of  a  broad  risk-based  nature,  with  central  quality 
assurance according to a common methodology. This will draw on the expertise of external 
consultants. Third, a stress test, which will apply the results to an adverse scenario. 
The  linkages  between  the  balance  sheet  assessment  and  the  stress  test  still  need  to  be 
defined  in  detail.  What  is  clear,  however,  is  that  both  are  communicating  vessels.  If  the 
former  is  a  more  thorough  point-in-time  stock-taking,  then  the  later  has  to  contain  more 
forward looking elements. 
As  a  consequence  of  this  three-pronged  exercise,  some  banks  might  face  capital  gaps  to 
close. In our view, it is very important for the credibility of the exercise that the scope of the 
process  remains  ambitious;  this  implies,  for  example,  that  a  data  integrity  validation  is 
undertaken. 
Of course, we need to be alert to the practical concerns of the stakeholders of the exercise, 
including  the  banks.  It  is  important  that  all  requirements  for  the  banks  are  clearly  defined, 
finalised, explained and delivered to them well ahead of the official starting date. Ideally, the 
final  templates,  including  the  accompanying  instructions  on  how  to  use  them,  should  no 
longer be altered once data is being compiled for the balance sheet assessment. 
But we will not compromise on the scope and strictness of the exercise. 
We would like to launch the exercise, starting with the determination of the risk portfolios, by 
the  end  of  this  year  already  –  although  this  depends  to  some  extent  on  when  the  full 
Supervisory  Board  is  appointed.  I  am  confident  that,  once  the  SSM  Regulation  has  been 
approved,  the  ECB  and  the  European  Parliament  can  work  in  a  constructive  spirit  in 
appointing  the  Supervisory  Board  –  in  particular  in  ensuring  a  fast-track  procedure  for  the 
appointment of the Chair. 
When we have the results of the assessment, policy-makers also need to be willing to deal 
with the consequences. Certainly, European banks are in a stronger position today than they 
were a few years ago. For example, in Spain banks have provisioned €184 billion euro – that 
is 10.5% of their loan books – and have raised €22 billion in new equity since 2008. But we 
cannot rule out the possibility that the exercise will still reveal capital needs. It is essential 
that there are backstops in place to address this. 
If the backstops are not there, I fear that the exercise will create a lose-lose situation for the 
banking  sector.  If  the  results  reveal  only  small  capital  needs,  markets  will  think  they  have 
been  fudged  to  save  public  money.  If  they  reveal  significant  capital  needs,  markets  will 
question  how  they  will  be  filled,  creating  uncertainty.  Either  way  the  confidence  boost  we 
hope to gain from the assessment will be lost. 
A new approach to resolution 
The second building block of a stricter system involves changing the way in which we deal 
with non-viable banks. 
To  begin  with,  we  need  to  make  sure  that  we  use  the  new  resolution  powers  to  their  full 
extent. As most European countries do not have much experience with winding down banks, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
there may be a tendency to avoid putting banks into resolution – by practising supervisory 
forbearance and allowing banks ever more time to restore viability. The ECB as supervisor 
has an important role to play here in ensuring that this does not happen. 
To ensure that resolution powers are used in full, it would also help to have all the elements 
of the new resolution framework in place at the same time. The supervisory powers of the 
SSM  will  apply  in  principle  from  November  2014  onwards.  The  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution Directive framework is foreseen to take effect in January 2015, and the start of 
the  single  resolution  mechanism  is  planned  for  the  same  date.  But  under  the  current 
agreement, the new provisions on bail-in would only be applicable from January 2018. This 
means that there will be a period of three years where the resolution authority is unable to 
use one of its key resolution tools. 
For this reason, I favour bringing forward the entry into force of bail-in. The Directive still has 
to be agreed with the European Parliament, and in my view we should push for a start date 
of  2015  for  bail-in  so  that  we  have  the  full  resolution  toolbox  available  from  the  outset  
– instead of over-extending the State Aid rules as a proxy. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
What I have tried to illustrate today is that a regime change involves two components. First, 
the right rules and institutions to ensure a single system. Second, a willingness to use those 
rules and institutions in a stricter manner. It is therefore a question not only of mechanisms, 
but also of mindsets. 
We have already made some encouraging progress, in particular on the SSM. But there is 
still  a  long  way  to  go,  and  success  is  only  possible  with  a  cooperative  effort.  Whether 
Banking  Union  achieves  a  regime  change  will  ultimately  depend  on  the  cooperation  and 
dedication  of  literally  thousands  of  legislators,  regulators  and  supervisors.  It  is  the  very 
definition of a “team effort”. 
In the same vein, we need to strengthen our joint training efforts in supervision skills. The 
European Supervisor Education initiative is an example of a common cross-border approach 
which could be built upon. 
Yet in my view Banking Union is the challenge of our times. The crisis has presented us with 
a  once-in-a-generation  opportunity:  to  build  a  safer  banking  sector;  to  strengthen  our 
Monetary  Union;  and  in  the  process  to  take  forward  the  historical  process  of  European 
integration. We are privileged to have this opportunity – and we need to take it. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
