Benoît Cœuré: COGESI workshop on collateral eligibility requirements 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at the COGESI 
(Contact  group  on  euro  securities 
infrastructures)  workshop  on  collateral  eligibility 
requirements, Frankfurt am Main, 15 July 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a privilege for me to say a few words at this occasion, when we present the report on 
collateral eligibility requirements. The work conducted by the “ECB Contact Group on Euro 
Securities Infrastructures” – known simply as COGESI – together with members of the ECB 
Money Market Contact Group has been remarkable.  
This is the first COGESI event that I have attended, and I am very pleased to see so many 
key  stakeholders  present  to  address  issues  and  developments  relevant  for  the  European 
securities  settlement  industry  and  issues  which  are  of  common  interest  for  market 
infrastructures, market participants and the Eurosystem.  
Before turning more specifically to the report itself, let me just say that COGESI provides a 
very useful platform for industry collaboration and advancement of new developments in the 
field of securities infrastructures.  
It  is  an  optimal  forum  to  discuss  issues  and  challenges  which  are  emerging  in  relation  to 
increasing  demand  for  collateral,  such  as  addressing  solutions  for  the  optimisation  of 
collateral usage and, where needed, the transformation of collateral, as well as considering 
consistency of rules and regulations, standardisation, and post-trading developments insofar 
as these relate to collateral. In this sense, the work of COGESI complements some recent 
work  at  the  level  of  the  Committee  for  the  Global  Financial  System  (CGFS)  on  the 
implications of asset encumbrance and demand for high-quality assets that can be used as 
collateral.  
Furthermore, COGESI supports both the ECB and Eurosystem in our ongoing monitoring of 
developments  in  the  market  and  at  the  level  of  market  infrastructures.  In  this  regard, 
COGESI  continues  to  be  one  of  the  most  important  sources  of  feedback  from  market 
participants and infrastructure representatives on initiatives related to euro securities clearing 
and  settlement  integration.  The  transparency  generated  through  these  exchanges  of 
information plays an important role in building confidence in the financial system. 
The published report on collateral eligibility requirements is an excellent example of what can 
be achieved through a forum such as COGESI, also when it cooperates with another ECB 
contact group in a related field, the MMCG. 
The report contributes to a relevant and topical discussion on the availability of collateral, and 
its  use  in  both  central  bank  operations  and  private  repo  markets.  As  a  system  of  central 
banks that implements monetary policy and ensures adequate intraday liquidity by providing 
collateralised  lending,  the  Eurosystem  is  itself  a  large  collateral  receiver  and  is  very  much 
affected in its core activities by collateral availability in the financial system.  
At previous opportunities I have discussed in detail the initiatives that the ECB has already 
taken to enhance collateral availability for its own operations1, so that I do not need to repeat 
these today. However, the report not only looks at the central bank collateral frameworks of 
the  Eurosystem  and  other  major  central  banks,  but  applies  a  comprehensive  approach 
encompassing  also  the  impact  of related  regulatory  requirements  and  existing  practices of 
                                                
1  Speech by Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, ECB-DNB Joint central bank seminar 
on collateral and liquidity, Amsterdam, 1 October 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
central  counterparties  (CCPs).  This  report,  therefore,  complements  the  work  of  the  BIS 
Markets Committee on “Central bank collateral frameworks and practices” that was published 
this March. 
Let me underline the added value of this work. From a policy perspective, market participants 
are  confronted  with  the  increasing  demand  for  collateral,  which  could  raise  challenges  – 
particularly taking into account that not all collateral assets are equally accepted under each 
framework. The report takes a broad view, and provides information that extends beyond our 
day-to-day  business.  Understanding  differences  in  collateral  acceptance  is  important  to 
address  the  implications  of  the  differences  and  to  identify  issues  that  merit  further 
consideration by both policy-makers and market participants.  
As  mentioned  in  the  report,  while  understanding  the  differences  among  the  collateral 
frameworks is important and having transparency in this respect is absolutely essential in the 
current environment, there should be no call for ultimate unification of collateral rules, given 
the different purposes for which collateralisation is provided. Market participants will have to 
manage their respective pools of collateral in a way that allows them to provide collateral for 
different purposes, such as collateralisation in central bank operations, as assets in liquidity 
buffers of regulators and as margin requirements with central counterparties.  
I note that the report in fact sees a certain diversification across the collateral frameworks as 
a positive element that enhances resilience; provided of course, that certain conditions are 
met,  first  and  foremost  that  we  have  ex-ante  transparency  of  the  different  collateral 
requirements and a smooth and efficient functioning at the level of market infrastructures.  
Given the differences in collateral frameworks, it is important that there are no obstacles in 
the transfer of collateral. In the euro area, continuous attention is needed on ensuring that 
there are sufficient settlement links between (I)CSDs, that these have appropriate operating 
hours to address the needs of the market, and that triparty collateral management services 
are further developed.  
On  the  latter,  I  pause  for  a  moment  to  recall  that  one  important  milestone  was  achieved 
earlier today with the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between (I)CSDs, banks 
(in  the  name  of  the  European  Repo  Council)  and  a  CCP,  with  the  respective  parties 
committing  to  work  further  on  a  solution  for  triparty  settlement  interoperability.  Triparty 
settlement  interoperability  is  an  important  initiative  that  will  help  foster  greater  financial 
integration and harmonisation, reduce fragmentation and help to create a single European 
repo market. The aim of the “TSI initiative”, as  you are all  well aware, is to bring together 
borrowers  and  lenders,  regardless  of  where  the  underlying  liquidity  or  collateral  is  held, 
thereby avoiding the build-up of silos of collateral in the market. 
More should be done, and I therefore fully subscribe to the actions identified by COGESI.  
In  particular,  I  encourage  the  group  to  further  increase  the  transparency,  clarity  and 
understanding  of  the  linkages  between  collateral  frameworks,  regulatory  rules  and  market 
practices.  
We  need  also  further  improvements  in  the  processes  that  support  the  mobilisation  of 
collateral. The Eurosystem will do its part in 2014, by abolishing the so-called Repatriation 
Requirement. That will allow for more efficient mobilisation of assets for use in Eurosystem 
credit operations via the Correspondent Central Banking Model (CCBM).  
The Eurosystem is also integrating the support of triparty collateral management services on 
a cross-border basis into its central bank framework and of course T2S, which  will go live 
from  2015  to  2017,  will  support  more  efficient  cross-border  collateral  transfer.  From  the 
industry,  we  may  expect  to  see  further  improvements  in  the  services  that  support  a  more 
optimal use of collateral assets.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In this regard, I encourage you to analyse solutions to optimise the use of collateral. I am 
very  interested  in  the  group’s  deliberations  on  the  tools  to  increase  the  efficient  use  of 
collateral, and the implications of collateral transformation services. 
Against  a  background  of  increasing  demand  for  collateral,  COGESI  should  drive  further 
development of effective procedures for enhancing collateral availability. 
Again, I would like to show my appreciation for your work on the report and to encourage you 
to continue your successful collaboration.  
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
