Fritz Zurbrügg: A snapshot of the financial situation in Switzerland 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Fritz  Zurbrügg,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 20 June 
2013. 
 I  will  begin  today  with  the  situation  on  the  financial  markets.  Then  I  will  address  the 
management of our currency reserves, before moving on to trends in the money market, as 
well  as  the  current  discussion  regarding  reference  interest  rates.  Finally,  I  will  say  a  few 
words on the future of the repo market infrastructure in Switzerland. 
Developments on the financial markets 
In  December,  at  the  last  news  conference,  I  remarked  on  an  easing  of  tensions  on  the 
financial  markets.  This  easing  largely  continued  in  the  first  half  of  2013.  The  government 
bonds of the European peripheral countries, in particular, benefited from the greater trust of 
investors, with Ireland and Portugal raising funds via long-term bonds on the capital market 
for the first time since 2010 and 2011, respectively.  
The  buoyant  mood  on  the  financial  markets  was  also  demonstrated  on  the  advanced 
economies’ stock markets. In May, there were new historical highs in the US, the UK and 
Switzerland.  Investors’  risk  appetite  was  encouraged  not  least  by  the  very  expansionary 
monetary  policy  around  the  world.  Various  central  banks,  including  the  European  Central 
Bank (ECB), again reduced their key interest rates early this year. The prospect of low yields 
on  bond  markets  induced  many  investors  to  increase  their  equity  investments.  In  Japan, 
monetary  policy  announcements  resulted  in  significantly  improved  investor  sentiment,  with 
the Nikkei stock index climbing by 80% between November 2012 and May 2013 on the back 
of  a  strongly  depreciated  yen  and  the  ensuing  higher  profit  expectations  of  Japanese 
companies.  
In  the  positive  risk  climate,  investments  perceived  as  secure  have  lost  value.  A  prominent 
example  is  gold:  The  dollar  price  per  fine  ounce  of  gold  had  risen  in  2011  to  a  high  of 
USD 1,900. Currently, it is approximately a quarter lower. Government bonds perceived as 
secure have also fallen in value, even though their yields are still very low. This also applies 
to Confederation bonds. While the yield on ten-year Confederation bonds, for example, has 
significantly  increased  since  the  low  point  of  last  December,  at  around  0.8%  it  is  still 
extremely low. 
Movements in the Swiss franc exchange rate matched this risk-friendly market environment. 
Since  January,  the  euro/Swiss  franc  exchange  rate  has  moved  further  away  from  the 
minimum  rate  of  CHF 1.20,  and  at  times,  values  were  recorded  which  were  last  seen  in 
Spring  2011,  in  other  words,  before  the  introduction  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate.  On  a 
trade-weighted basis, however, the Swiss franc has remained largely unchanged since the 
beginning of the year.  
The favourable developments on the financial markets, which have persisted over a lengthy 
period, were the result of a reduction in extreme risks. This was due, on the one hand, to 
measures taken by the ECB, and on the other, to the fact that, in the US, the ‘fiscal cliff’ was 
averted. As recent weeks have shown, conditions on the financial markets can change again 
swiftly.  In  Japan,  there  has  been  a  sharp  correction  on  the  stock  market  and  the  yen  has 
again  gained  somewhat  in  value.  Meanwhile,  in  the  euro  area,  there  is  a  discrepancy 
between  the    generally  favourable  trend  on  the  financial  markets  and  the  disappointing 
economic data. Finally, in the US, a certain degree of uncertainty about the future monetary 
policy  direction  of  the  Federal  Reserve  (Fed)  has  gained  ground.  Overall,  the  market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
environment  continues  to  be  dominated  by  high  levels  of  uncertainty,  thereby  remaining 
susceptible to sudden shifts in mood. 
Management of currency reserves 
The  easing  of  tensions  on  the  financial  markets  also  affected  the  Swiss  National  Bank’s 
(SNB) currency reserves. These are mainly composed of foreign currency investments and 
gold.  At  the  end  of  May,  the  SNB  held  foreign  currency  investments  of  just  over 
CHF 440 billion (cf. chart 1). Due to our liquidity and security requirements, a large portion of 
our  foreign  exchange  holdings  are  in  government  bonds  and  deposits  with  other  central 
banks.  This  portion  amounted  to  78%  at  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of  2013.  To  further 
diversify investment risk and increase investment in real assets, we raised our proportion of 
equities  from  12%  to  15%  in  the  first  quarter.  We  currently  hold  equities  worth  around 
CHF 65 billion, which is three times more than at the end of 2011. In this regard, we have 
widened our scope to include shares of companies with relatively small market capitalisation, 
as well as those in advanced economies not previously considered, with the result that our 
equity portfolio now covers all advanced economies. Since we have invested relatively little 
in these new markets, our currency allocation has hardly changed in recent months. 
The  proportion  of  gold  in  the  currency  reserves  amounted  to  10%  at  the  end  of  the  first 
quarter of 2013. From an investment viewpoint, gold is important for a good diversification of 
the currency reserves. Historically, gold often moves in an opposite direction to other assets. 
In contrast to equities or bonds, however, gold does not yield interest or dividends. And as 
the recent months have shown, gold is also among the most volatile and therefore most risky 
investments, with a noteworthy example occurring in April, when the gold price fell by about 
15% in less than a week.  
Last December, the SNB announced it would be opening a branch office in Singapore. This 
will enable us to more efficiently manage our foreign currency investments, which have risen 
sharply,  to  expand  our  market  coverage  in  Asia,  and  to  position  ourselves  closer  to  key 
market  participants.  Singapore  is  one  of  the  most  significant  trading  centres  for  bonds  in 
Asia. At the same time, the branch office in Singapore will facilitate the enforcement of the 
minimum exchange rate. It will open in July, with a staff of seven. The Singapore office will 
concern itself only with trading; settlement will continue to take place in Zurich. The branch 
office is completely subordinate to existing SNB oversight and control. 
Swiss franc money market and reference interest rates 
The continuing high level of Swiss franc liquidity has had the desired effect of keeping money 
market interest rates at close to zero. The three-month Libor has been at around two basis 
points  since  mid-January.  Interest  rate  expectations,  based  on  Libor  future  contracts,  are 
also close to zero for the foreseeable future, but not negative, as was the case over much of 
last year. 
As  a  result  of  the  very  low  money  market  interest  rates  and  high  liquidity  in  the  banking 
sector, money market turnover has dropped substantially in recent years. This is illustrated in 
chart 2, which shows the total of banks’ sight deposits at the SNB, as well as turnover in the 
area of secured and unsecured call money. The small number of transactions on the money 
market  is  a  problem  for  generating  representative  reference  interest  rates.  In  addition,  the 
selection  and  setting  of  reference  interest  rates  has  come  under  the  scrutiny  of  market 
participants and the public, as a consequence of the Libor manipulation.  
As  regards  the  problems  surrounding  the  Libor,  efforts  at  reform  are  underway  on  an 
international level. To ensure the continuation of the Libor, a raft of measures have already 
been initiated. These include both an improved regulatory framework for the Libor fixing, as 
well  as  enforced  oversight  by  the  relevant  authorities.  The  aim  is  to  make  the  Libor  more 
representative  and  to  restore  the  trust  of  market  participants.  Aside  from  these  regulatory 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
steps, what is also vital for the continued existence of the Libor is that an adequate number 
of banks participate in the Libor fixing, and that the money market upon which the Libor fixing 
is based recovers its importance.  
Credible and representative reference interest rates are of major importance for the financial 
markets.  They  serve  as  benchmarks  in  the  pricing  of  loans,  financial  products  and 
derivatives. In Switzerland, approximately 80% of banks use the Libor as a benchmark for 
loans, especially for mortgages. The responsibility for the provision of reference interest rates 
therefore  lies  primarily  with  the  market  participants.  They  should  be  aware  of  this 
responsibility,  and  become  involved,  where  necessary,  in  exploring  alternative  reference 
interest rates. The SNB is playing a supportive role in this regard, in that it is participating in 
discussions with market participants, as well as with Swiss and foreign authorities. 
Future of the repo market infrastructure in Switzerland 
With  regard  to  repo  market  infrastructure,  it  is  important  that  we  are  well  prepared  for  the 
future.  A  functioning,  secure  and  efficient  repo  market  is  vital  for  the  implementation  of 
monetary  policy,  as  well  as  for  market  participants’  access  to  central  bank  liquidity. 
Switzerland has a long tradition of organising its core financial market infrastructure as a joint 
enterprise, according  to  the  ‘user-owned,  user-governed’  principle.  In  the  case  of  the  repo 
market, the current solution has proven its worth. Nonetheless, due to changes in the stock 
market  and  regulatory  environment,  the  SNB  has  undertaken  a  reassessment  of  the 
situation. 
In the light of this, the SNB has decided to conduct its monetary policy operations via a new 
trading platform, provided by SIX Group Ltd, as of May 2014. In this way, the repo market will 
be  based  on  an  integrated  solution,  in  which  the  trading  platform,  securities  settlement 
system  and  payment  system  are  covered  by  a  single  source.  Moreover, 
further 
developments  will  also  be  possible,  for  example  the  expansion  of  trading  to  incorporate 
further products. Since the new trading platform will resemble the existing Swiss franc repo 
system (Eurex Repo), access for market participants will entail only minimal adjustments. We 
are confident that an integrated solution is the best means of ensuring a robust repo market 
infrastructure. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Charts 
 
 
   4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
