Deepak Mohanty: Perspectives on housing finance in India 
Remarks  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
International  Conference  on  “Housing:  an  engine  for  inclusive  growth”,  organised  by  the 
National Housing Bank, New Delhi, 12 April 2013. 
 The assistance provided by A.B. Chakraborty, Ravi Shankar, Abhiman Das and Binod B. Bhoi is acknowledged. 
I thank Mr R.V. Verma, Chairman and Managing Director, National Housing Bank (NHB) for 
the opportunity to be a part of this distinguished panel on “Housing Finance Post Sub-prime”. 
Housing  is  a  basic  necessity.  Yet  a  large  number  of  households  do  not  have  access  to 
decent housing, particularly in a developing country like ours. In view of the importance of 
housing,  a  key  element  of  public  policy  in  many  countries  has  been  to  encourage  house 
ownership largely through fiscal incentives and better availability of housing finance. At the 
same time, the demand for housing finance has encouraged financial innovations, at times 
resulting  in  financial  crisis  like  the  recent  one.  While  development  of  housing  finance  in 
advanced  countries  has  a  long  history,  the  expansion  of  housing  finance  by  the  formal 
financial sector in India is of relatively a recent origin. Keeping in view the demand-supply 
gap, our favourable demography, increasing urbanisation and better growth prospects, the 
demand for housing finance will continue to grow. The challenge, therefore, is expansion of 
housing  finance  to  a  wider  section  of  the  population  with  the  necessary  safeguards  to 
preserve financial stability. 
Against this background, I will touch upon the sub-prime crisis in the US with the objective of 
distilling the lessons that can be drawn for the development of housing finance. I will then 
dwell upon the developments in housing finance in India with a particular reference to banks. 
I  will  also  discuss  the  initiatives  taken  by  the  NHB  and  the  Reserve  Bank  to  develop  the 
statistics  on  housing  finance,  particularly  house  price  indices.  I  will  conclude  with  some 
thoughts on developing housing finance on the way forward. 
Sub-prime lessons 
Globally,  developments  in  housing  markets  and  house  prices  have  drawn  considerable 
attention  in  both  academic  and  policy  circles  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis. 
The recent global crisis emanated from the sub-prime segment of the US housing market. 
While  the  crisis  has  spread  and  become  broad-based  across  the  globe,  the  post-crisis 
recovery has also been predicated on the prospects of the housing sector in many advanced 
economies. 
As emphasized in the literature, there are different channels through which housing affects 
the  economy:  First,  housing  wealth  constitutes  a  significant  portion  of  total  wealth  of 
households in the advanced economies. For instance, housing wealth accounted for about 
one-half of household net worth in the US and over two-thirds in the euro area. Hence, any 
variation  in  it  may  have  significant  impact  on  households’  consumption  and  thereby 
aggregate  demand  in  the  economy.  Second,  housing  markets  have  implications  for  the 
supply side of the economy as labour mobility and employment is affected by the housing 
economy. Third, house prices, like any other asset prices being interest rate sensitive, affect 
transmission of monetary policy. Finally, boom and bust in house prices have implications for 
business cycles and hence financial stability. 
Historically, sharp increases in house prices have been followed by sharp declines after the 
price bubble bursts. Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) show that the six major historical episodes 
of banking crises in the advanced economies since the mid-1970s were all associated with a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
housing  bust.1  In  the  decade  preceding  the  sub-prime  crisis,  not  only  did  the  house  price 
increased  substantially,  it  was  also  more  synchronous  across  the  advanced  economies 
(Chart 1). Thus, sharp increases in house prices over a prolonged period are often predictive 
of crises in the future. 
 Moreover, the run-up in property prices was also associated with large expansion in credit 
leading to a substantial increase in household debt. According to the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF), in the advanced economies, the ratio of household debt to income rose by an 
average of 39 percentage points to 138 per cent during the 5-year period preceding 2007.2 
Cecchetti  (2012)3  argues  that  booms  in  the  prices  of  assets  used  as  collateral  create 
procyclicality and property price booms tend to be much worse than equity price booms. 
The  institutional  structure  for  housing  finance  and  the  role  of  government  differ  across 
countries.  It  is  argued  that  the  key  determinants  of  market  depth  of  housing  finance  in 
advanced economies are greater acceptability of housing as collateral and well defined legal 
rights of borrowers and  lenders. The mortgage loans are typically long-term, 20–30 years. 
But,  mortgage  interest  rates  in  most  cases  tend  to  be  linked  to  short  term  rates  with  the 
provision for periodic resets. There are exceptions, however, such as the US, where long-
term fixed-rate mortgage even for 30 years is available. Loan to value ratios (LTVs) also vary 
widely  across  countries.  Similarly,  one  can  observe  significant  variation  in  the  degree  of 
governmental participation in the housing market across the advanced countries and EMEs, 
in  terms  of  subsidies  and  tax  benefits  as  also  measures  to  provide  affordable  housing 
(Chart 2). 
                                                 
1   Reinhart, C. M. and Rogoff, K. S. (2009), This Time is Different : Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton 
University Press, New Jersey, as cited in the Global Financial Stability Report, IMF, April 2011. 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2012),  “Dealing  with  Household  Debt”,  Chapter  III,  World  Economic  Outlook, 
April. 
2  
3   Cecchetti,  S.  G.  (2012),  “Closing  Remarks:  Property  Markets  and  Financial  Stability  –  Issues  and 
Interpretations”, Conference Volume, Reserve Bank of Australia. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Notwithstanding  the  desirability  and  beneficial  role  of  housing  finance,  sharp  rise  in  house 
prices  coupled  with  rapid  growth  in  housing  credit  does  raise  concerns  in  the  context  of 
financial stability. Post-crisis it has been argued that central banks should also use macro-
prudential  tools  along  with  normal  interest  rate  policy  to  pre-empt  excessive  rise  in  house 
prices to mitigate risks. The instruments that are generally suggested fall under three broad 
categories:  capital-based  tools  such  as,  countercyclical  capital  buffers,  sectoral  capital 
requirements and dynamic provisions; liquidity-based tools such as, countercyclical liquidity 
requirements and asset-side tools such as, caps on loan-to-value (LTV) and debt-to-income 
(DTI) ratios.4  
Housing finance in India 
Let me now turn to housing in India. As per the Census, during the decade of 2001 to 2011, 
while  housing  stock  increased  by  51  per  cent,  number  of  households  has  increased  by 
47 per  cent.  Notwithstanding  recent  improvements,  urban  India  in  2012  had  an  estimated 
shortfall  of  about  19  million  houses.  Most  of  the  housing  shortage  is  obviously  for 
economically weaker section (56 per cent) and low income group (39 per cent) people.5  
Institutional financing for housing in India is dominated by commercial banks. As on March 
2012,  outstanding  housing 
finance  companies  was 
Rs.6.2 trillion, of which about two-thirds were accounted for by banks. 
loans  by  banks  and  housing 
                                                 
4   Report of the Working Group (Chairman: José Manuel González-Páramo) established by the Committee on 
the Global Financial System, “Operationalising the selection and application of macroprudential instruments” 
CGFS Papers No. 48, BIS, December 2012. 
5   Report of the Technical Group on Urban Housing Shortage (TG-12), Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation (Chairman: Amitabh Kundu), Government of India, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Overall trend in annual growth of credit of scheduled commercial banks in India indicates that 
the share of credit for housing in aggregate credit rose from under 5 per cent in March 2001 
to 12 per cent by March 2006. This was facilitated by a number of favourable factors: First, 
sustained reduction in inflation resulted in lowering of lending rates. Second, removal of the 
restriction of prime lending rate (PLR) as the floor rate for pricing housing loan coupled with 
reduction in risk weight from 100 per cent to 50–75 per cent for housing loan to individuals 
aided  competitive  pricing  of  such  loans.  Third,  the  acceleration  in  GDP  growth  raised  the 
demand  for  housing.  Thereafter,  the  rate  of  growth  in  housing  credit  has  moderated. 
Consequently,  its  share  in  total  bank  credit  has  declined  gradually  to  about  8  per  cent  by 
March 2012. 
As a percentage of GDP, outstanding housing credit from banks rose from 1.2 per cent in 
2001 to a peak of 5.3 per cent in 2006 before moderating to 4.2 per cent by March 2012. The 
weighted average lending rate (WALR) on housing loan first declined from 12.8 per cent in 
March 2001 to a low of 8.6 per cent in 2006 before rising to 11.1 per cent by March 2012. 
Though the interest rate on housing finance has gone up since 2006, it has remained below 
the overall weighted average lending rate of banks (Chart 3). 
 The  moderation  in  growth  of  housing  credit  after  2006  could  be  attributed  to  the  following 
factors:  First,  some  slowdown  in  housing  credit  growth  could  be  expected  after  the  initial 
catch-up  phase  as  the  pent  up  demand  is  met.  Second,  GDP  growth  also  moderated 
following  the  global  financial  crisis  which  dampened  the  demand  for  housing.  Third,  the 
tightening  of  prudential  norms  of  increasing  risk  weights  to  a  range  of  50–125  per  cent, 
higher  provisioning  against  standard  housing  assets  and  prescription  of  LTV  norms  to 
mitigate risks could also have led to some moderation. 
Notwithstanding tighter prudential standards, direct housing loan of up to Rs. 2.5 million and 
indirect  bank  finance  to  government  agencies  for  rehabilitation  of  slum  dwellers,  and  to 
housing  finance  companies  (HFCs)  for  rehabilitation  of  slum  dwellers  as  well  as  for 
construction of individual dwelling units of up to Rs. 1.0 million are treated as priority sector 
loans.  Government  also  allows  deduction  from  income  up  to  Rs.0.1  million  per  annum  for 
principal  repayment  and  Rs.  0.15–0.25  million  for  interest  component  for  income  tax 
purposes.  In  addition,  there  are  several  specific  government  schemes  for  housing  for  the 
underprivileged. While these measures have incentivised house ownership, there is a huge 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
gap  between  demand  and  supply  besides  affordability.  Let  me  now  turn  to  house  prices 
which have implications not only for demand but also for financial stability. 
House prices 
Real  estate  prices  are  conceptually  somewhat  different  from  the  prices  of  goods  and 
services.  While  prices  are  generally  determined  by  supply  and  demand,  real  estate  prices 
additionally  reflect  market’s  expectations  of  future  prices.  As  experience  shows,  if 
expectations  are  belied  there  could  be  dramatic  adjustments  in  prices  raising  stability 
concerns. Compilation of house price indices is challenging not only because of difficulty of 
gathering accurate price data but also due to quality changes in the construction of similar 
size of houses even in the same locality. To overcome these challenges, various methods for 
measuring house prices such as hedonic prices, repeat sales, median prices and sale price 
appraisal ratio have been developed. It is therefore not feasible to construct a single index 
that would satisfy all the requirements. The choice of a method therefore is largely influenced 
by the ease of regular availability of data and the characteristics of the housing market. For 
example, the Case-Shiller index based on repeat sales data is popular in the US. However, 
given the predominance of new construction and first time ownership, repeat sales method 
may not be suitable in the Indian context. 
In  India  currently,  we  have  two  publicly  available  House  Price  Indices  (HPIs):  (i)  NHB-
Residex  compiled  on  survey  based  information  for  20  cities,  and  (ii)  RBI-HPI  based  on 
registration prices information for 9 cities. The work of compilation of a HPI was initiated by 
the Reserve Bank in 2007 beginning with Mumbai city. Subsequently, the coverage has been 
extended  to  eight  more  cities:  Delhi,  Chennai,  Kolkata,  Bengaluru,  Lucknow,  Ahmadabad, 
Jaipur and Kanpur. Apart from data for individual cities, a composite house price index (HPI) 
covering  these  9  cities  with  base  2008–09:Q4=100  is  currently  being  disseminated  by  the 
Reserve Bank on a quarterly basis. As per the Reserve Bank’s composite HPI, house prices 
have nearly doubled since 2008–09 (Chart 4).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
Furthermore, the Reserve Bank is also developing a housing asset price monitoring system 
covering such details as LTV ratio, EMI to income ratio and price to income ratio based on 
housing loan data from select cities collected from select banks and HFCs. 
Way forward 
Let  me  now  conclude  with  some  thoughts  on  the  way  forward.  First,  besides  institutional 
finance, self financing from private sources, withdrawals from provident funds and loans from 
employers are important sources of housing finance. The available national accounts data on 
households’ investment in physical assets do not distinguish between pure households and 
propriety & partnership concerns. Hence, there is a need to develop a distinct component of 
pure households’ investment in residential construction for a more comprehensive measure 
of contribution of housing to households’ net worth. 
Second,  both  the  NHB-Residex  and  RBI-HPI,  besides  providing  a  cross-check  on  house 
prices,  facilitate  a  comparison  between  final  market  prices  and  registration  prices.  The 
coverage  of  the  cities  needs  to  be  expanded  to  develop  a  representative  all-India  urban 
house price index. 
Third, in order to enhance the information base of the housing finance market, the Reserve 
Bank should place in public domain its detailed database on house price monitoring system. 
Fourth,  keeping  in  view  the  recent  moderation  in  expansion  of  institutional  finance  for 
housing,  an  important  question  is  whether  securitization  would  help  in  expanding  housing 
finance and also address the problem of procyclicality, thereby stabilizing house prices. As 
the US experience with the sub-prime crisis shows, securitization could impart liquidity and 
enhance efficiency only when it leads to creation of simple structures easily understood by 
market  participants  and  regulators.  Given  our  early  stage  of  development  of  the  mortgage 
market, there is scope for housing disintermediation both through more active involvement of 
apex  refinancing  institutions  like  the  NHB  and  also  through  development  of  simple 
securitized mortgage products backed by adequate regulatory safeguards. 
Fifth,  in  order  to  mitigate  risks  in  housing  finance,  besides  application  of  macro-prudential 
regulations, there is a need to develop a fixed rate housing loan product of longer maturity. 
Thank you. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
