Már Guðmundsson: The evolving structure of the post-crisis financial 
sector 
Speech  by  Mr  Már  Guðmundsson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  the 
3rd Annual Palm Beach Strategic Forum, Palm Beach, USA, 8 April 2013. 
 I  am  both  pleased  and  honoured  to  address  you  here  today  and  would  like  to  thank  the 
organisers for giving me the opportunity to do so. 
This session is on global economic conditions and prospects. Other speakers have covered 
the macroeconomic and monetary policy aspects of the topic. I will use my allotted time to 
focus mostly on the financial sector, but I promise to say a few words about Iceland as well. 
There  is,  of  course,  an  important  link  between  the  real  economy  and  financial  spheres.  A 
broken financial sector is less likely to be able to finance the growth that we need.  
In many advanced countries, we are in the early phases of a deleveraging process where, to 
a varying degree, households, companies, sovereigns and financial institutions are – by force 
or by choice – reducing debt levels that have become either unsustainable or obviously too 
risky in the new environment. Such generalised deleveraging can be a painful process, with 
a  significant  adverse  effect  on  economic  growth  for  a  prolonged  period,  as  former  such 
episodes bear out. However, as I read the data, in many of our countries weak credit growth 
is due even more to limited credit demand than to supply. So if we were magically able to 
bring the financial sector back to full health and an optimal leverage ratio by tomorrow, we 
would  not  have  solved  the  problem.  Significant  debt  problems  would  still  exist  for  several 
sovereigns  and  several  parts  of  the  non-financial  private  sector.  In  addition,  we  would  still 
have  the  confidence  crisis  that  has  been  so  pronounced  in  Europe.  So  it  is  going  to  be  a 
more  protracted  process.  The  EU  has  not  resolved  its  crisis,  although  there  has  been 
progress in deleveraging and de-risking bank balance sheets.  
In September 2008, when I was still at the BIS, I gave a speech in Boston bearing the title: 
How  might  the  current  financial  crisis  shape  financial  sector  regulation  and  structure?1  I 
realise now how foolhardy that endeavour was because those were indeed early days. But 
still, many of the potential changes that I mentioned have stood the test of time, such as the 
inevitable deleveraging; shifts in bank business models, especially on the funding side; the 
need for bigger capital and liquidity buffers; and  how potentially difficult cross-border crisis 
management  and  bank resolution  would  turn out  to  be  in  the  European  context.  But  there 
were also very important elements missing from my list – elements that have turned out to be 
of major importance for the unfolding of the crisis and the reform agenda. Key among them 
are  the  interaction  between  sovereign  debt  and  banking  fragility  and  the  problem  of  big 
banks in small countries – of which my country, Iceland, was a prime example and Cyprus is 
the latest. I will expand on this shortly. 
The financial crisis and the policy responses to it, especially some of the drastic decisions 
taken in the heat of intense crisis management, have changed the structure of the financial 
sector and will do so more profoundly going forward. There are several reasons for this, such 
as the plain collapse and disappearance of financial institutions, the non-viability of certain 
business models and practices in the new environment, the need for the financial sector to 
shrink and deleverage after the real risks in this world had been revealed, the intended and 
unintended  consequences  of  new  prudential  regulation,  the  coming  effects  of  structural 
regulations  that  at  least  partly  ring-fence  insured  deposits  and  payment  systems  from  the 
“casino”.  Then  there  is  the  shrinking  of  cross-border  banking  through  the  retreat  of  banks 
                                                 
1  See http://www.bis.org/speeches/sp081119.htm 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
behind  their  national  borders  and  the  weakening  and,  in  some  cases,  collapse  of 
international financial centres in smaller countries.  
We can see where this is heading: towards a financial sector that is smaller, less leveraged, 
less  complex,  more  fragmented,  more  regulated,  and  more  national.  Some  of  that  is 
inevitable,  and  some  retrenching  from  the  excess  levels  of  finance  in  relation  to  the  real 
economy is probably beneficial at this stage, both at the national and the global level. The 
risk,  however,  is  that  the  process  could  go  too  far.  Yes,  there  are  risks  to  financial 
globalisation, but there are also benefits. In order to reap  those benefits, we need a safer 
framework for cross-border banking at the regional and global level and some ground rules 
for capital flows and capital controls.  
Let me briefly turn my own country, Iceland, into a case study of some of the issues involved. 
During  the  financial  crisis,  three  small  European  countries  that  had  relatively  big  banking 
systems  but  no  apparent  fiscal  problems  prior  to  the  crisis  have  suffered  very  serious 
financial and economic crises. These are Iceland, Ireland, and Cyprus. In all three countries, 
the balance sheets of the banks were around 8–9 times GDP.  
All three are members of the EU single market – in Iceland’s case, through the agreement on 
the  European  Economic  Area.  That  includes  free  movement  of  capital  and  provision  of 
financial  services.  The  underlying  principles  are  those  of  home  licensing  for  operation 
anywhere in the area and of a level playing field for competition, where size and location are 
not supposed to matter. It therefore goes against the underlying principles of this framework 
to consider the size of banks relative to GDP as a metric for concern, as is now so rightly in 
fashion. We know now that there are deep flaws in this framework and that these flaws are 
important elements in the current euro area crisis, but they also played a significant role in 
the  case  of  Iceland’s  banking  crisis.  A  key  issue  here  is  the  contradiction  between  these 
so-called  European  Passport  rights,  on  the  one  hand,  and  national  supervision,  national 
deposit  insurance,  and  national  crisis  management  and  resolution  regimes,  on  the  other. 
This is what recent European Union proposals of a banking union are supposed to address.  
Membership  in  the  EU  single  market,  along  with  the  global  conditions  of  cheap,  abundant 
credit, made it possible for the Icelandic banks to expand phenomenally in the course of only 
five years, from less than two times GDP to more than 9 times GDP. Earlier in the decade, 
the banks had been privatised and became managed by relatively young, risk-loving former 
investment  bankers.  Much  of  the  expansion  was  really  off  Iceland’s  border,  with  both 
financing  and  investment  taking  place  abroad.  In  Iceland’s  case,  there  was  a  substantial 
additional risk compared to Ireland and Cyprus, as nearly 70% of the banks’ balance sheets 
were denominated in foreign currency, with the traditional maturity mismatch that is the bread 
and butter of banking but without a credible lender of last resort to back it up. In other words, 
Icelandic banks had only limited access to ECB liquidity (although there was some access 
through  subsidiaries  in  Luxembourg),  which  proved  fatal  during  the  global  run  on  cross-
border liabilities of banks that immediately followed the collapse of Lehman Brothers. 
But there is always a silver lining. The lack of an adequate safety net and the absence of 
international  or  regional  co-operation  at  the  peak  of  the  panic  forced  Iceland  to  adopt  a 
radical solution in order to ring-fence the sovereign from the collapsing banks. These were 
private banks, and a bail-out by the Icelandic sovereign would have bankrupted the country.  
The banks were split overnight into domestic and international banks without disruption in the 
public’s access to banking services, and the international part went into resolution. The result 
was  a  drastic  cut  in  the  leverage  ratio  of  the  remaining  banking  system,  from  over  30  to 
around 5. Yes, Iceland had to introduce capital controls, which are still in place. But those 
controls  did  not  take  the  form  of  limiting  deposit  withdrawals  from  banks,  as  was  done  in 
Cyprus, and current account transactions have been mostly unrestricted.  
History and further research will tell whether this cold turkey response turns out to be better 
than more gradual approaches that sometimes turn into “death by a thousand cuts”. When 
making that assessment, we have to take into account that Iceland’s recession was the result 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  two  stories:  the  macroeconomic  boom-bust  cycle  in  a  small,  open,  and  financially 
integrated economy, and the rise and collapse of three cross-border banks operating on the 
basis  of  EU  legislation.  The  first  is  familiar,  and  Iceland  was  already  on  its  way  into  a 
recession as a result of it when the banks collapsed. The second was unique at the time, as 
it occurred during the first international financial crisis since the birth of the EU single market. 
Iceland lost around 12% of GDP from peak to trough during the recession. But the recovery 
began  in  the  middle  of  2010,  and  the  Central  Bank  forecast  from  February  is  that  Iceland’s 
economy will grow by just over 2% this year. The recovery has already reduced the seasonally 
adjusted unemployment rate from over 9% at the peak to around 4½%. New banks, smaller 
and domestically oriented, have been rebuilt. But there are still significant legacy issues and 
challenges, including capital controls and inflation expectations well above target. 
Source:  Philippon  (2008):  The  Evolution  of  the  US  Financial  Industry 
from 1860–2007. 
  Source:  Philippon  and  Reshef  (2008):  Wages  and  Human  Capital  in  the 
US Financial Industry 1909–2006. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Before I close, let me expand my scope again and say a few words about possible broad 
long-term  future  trends  regarding  the  relative  size  and  importance  of  the  financial  sector. 
Look at these two graphs. One shows the share of the US financial sector in GDP going back 
to 1860. The other shows relative skill-corrected wages in the financial sector and an index of 
deregulation (where down is more regulation). We can see that there is a peak in all of these 
measures  around  the  time  of  the  1929  crisis,  followed  by  a  secular  decline.  Regulation 
reaches a peak and relative wages bottom out in the 1960s and 70s. Then there is a long 
climb until just before the current crisis. If this was all we had to go on, it would be difficult to 
escape a certain prediction of what happens next! The big question is what it might mean for 
growth and prosperity. So it is important that we strike the right balance, as it is so aptly put 
in the programme for this event. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
