Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Vigilance amid stability and growth 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  annual  reception  for  the  banking  community,  Manila, 
18 January 2013. 
 Distinguished guests from the banking community, the government, Philippine business, the 
diplomatic  corps,  multilateral  institutions,  NGOs,  the  media,  special  guests,  good  evening 
and a happy new year. 
The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and its Monetary Board welcome all of you to this traditional 
annual reception for the banking community. This annual ritual provides us the opportunity to 
come together to review the past and to share our roadmap moving forward. 
But first, allow me to call on my co-hosts tonight, the other members of the Monetary Board: 
Finance  Secretary  Cesar  Purisima,  MBM  Alfredo  Antonio,  Ignacio  Bunye,  Peter  Favila, 
Felipe Medalla, and Armando Suratos. 
As  you  may  have  noticed,  the  high-rise  BSP  building  behind  us  greets  everyone 
“masaganang bagong taon.” In English, this means wishes for “A prosperous new year.” Our 
collective wish, here at the BSP, is for balanced, sustainable and inclusive growth that brings 
prosperity to Filipinos. We at the BSP believe that if we unite and work together, this is not 
impossible. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  While  global  headwinds  continued  to  challenge  economies  around 
the world home-grown sources of resilience enabled the Philippine economy to grow with a 
6.5% increase in GDP in the first nine months in 2012. This surpassed growth projections 
and earned for the country the distinction of posting one of the fastest growth rates in Asia. 
This strong economic growth was achieved with inflation remaining low and stable. At 3.2% 
in 2012, inflation was well within the target range set by the National Government. This tells 
us that our monetary policy settings remain supportive of non-inflationary growth. 
At the same time, the Philippines continued to have a strong external position with, based on 
the latest figures, a balance of payments surplus of $9.2 billion for full-year 2012 and Gross 
International Reserves at $83.8 billion as of year-end. This continues to enhance confidence 
in our ability to meet potential shocks. 
Another source of resilience for our economy is our strong and responsive banking sector. 
As  of  November  2012,  aggregate  gross  lending  of  universal  and  commercial  banks  was 
around  P3.4  trillion,  13%  higher  than  the  year  before.  In  fact,  lending  of  universal  and 
commercial banks has been growing at double-digit rates since January 2011. Indeed, the 
Philippine  banking  sector  continues  to  underpin  our  country’s  economy,  as  adherence  to 
good  governance  becomes  the  norm  and  risk  management  standards  align  with  global 
benchmarks. 
For instance, it is noteworthy that even as bank lending sustained double-digit growth, the 
quality  of  loans  continues  to  improve,  with  non-performing  loans  dropping further to  2%  in 
October  last  year,  compared  with  over  18%  in  the  aftermath  of  the  1997  Asian  financial 
crisis.  At  the  same  time,  banks  have  always  kept  their  capitalization  above  the  regulatory 
threshold, largely through the retention of earnings and a conscious build-up of capital. 
Also assets of the banking sector as of last October were about P7.6 trillion, our highest on 
record. The same can be said of deposit levels, profits and bank capitalization. 
Now,  our  challenge  is  dealing  with  the  consequences  of  this  “apparent”  success.  In 
particular, surges in capital flows. As Fed Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke stated, emerging 
markets have been attracting capital because we have remained resilient even at the height 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
of  the  recent  crisis.  Essentially  he  was  saying  we  are  the  victims  of  our  own  success.  Of 
course,  the  near-zero  interest  rate  regimes  in  the  advanced  economies  have  also  been  a 
factor behind the strong capital flows going to emerging markets. 
The ideal scenario is to convert these surges in capital flows into real economic assets, such 
as factories in the manufacturing sector or storage facilities in the agricultural sector. In doing 
so, we would have leveraged the financial resources into added productive capacity. 
However,  if  these  resources  remain  financial  in  nature  and  in  search  of  better  returns  for 
risks  they  deem  acceptable,  then  the  onus  shifts  once  again  to  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng 
Pilipinas. More than ever, monetary policymaking requires great care and balance – Balance 
to  contain  speculative  actions  but  not  to  discourage  investments  and  balance  to  maintain 
financial and macroeconomic stability but not to stifle competition and growth. 
As  the  central  monetary  authority,  we  need  to  find  this  delicate  point  of  policy  equilibrium 
when  the  potential  impact  of  policy  on  key  market  parameters  such  as  on  exchange  and 
interest rates won’t outweigh the economic virtues of an open market. The issue here is not 
individual risks of products and transactions. Instead, it is about the risks to the system from 
the  possible  build-up  of  risks.  Risks  that  could  eventually  spill  over  across  stakeholders, 
products, transactions and sub-markets. 
We  need  therefore  to  be  attentive  to  the  possibility  of  downstream  risks  even  when  the 
picture  upstream  looks  overtly  robust  and  rosy.  This  is  the  challenge  of  prudently  asking 
ourselves constantly “What can go wrong?” and to prepare accordingly for such possibilities. 
To us at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, this is at the heart the very essence of ensuring 
financial stability. And, as complex a challenge as it may be, it represents our central policy 
framework moving forward. 
The  environment  we  operate  in  is  not  static.  And  we  envision  that  our  reform  agenda  will 
remain dynamic as policy developments emerge and market needs arise. But, even as the 
components of this agenda can change, the ultimate and driving goal remains the same. 
Our agenda will cover the Basel Accord on capitalization and other financial standards, as 
well  as  policy  reforms  on  OTC  Derivatives  and  financial  market  infrastructures.  We  also 
encourage  banks  to  become  more  proactive  in  doing  their  part  to  broaden  the  reach  of 
financial  education.  On  its  own,  the  BSP  implements  finance  education  programs  across 
different age groups to empower Filipinos to save, invest and manage their resources with 
prudence,  to  avoid  scams  and  to  protect  their  rights  as  bank  customers.  To  us,  financial 
education is valuable not only for empowering our people but also in enhancing the stability 
of  our  financial  system.  This  should  also  lead  to  improvements  in  the  savings  rate  in  our 
country which lag behind that of our neighbours. 
Certainly,  our  agenda  moving  forward  calls  for  a  collective  effort  as  the  ramifications  and 
accountabilities cut across different financial institutions and regulatory agencies. 
In this period of change, it is important that we agree on the direction we want to take the 
system. And having agreed, the stakeholders must collaborate on working on such changes 
in ways and forms as may be required by circumstances, for the greater good. 
Ladies and gentlemen. We have seen how successful cooperation between the BSP and the 
banking sector generated long-term benefits for our country and our people. 
For  this,  the  BSP  and  the  Members  of  the  Monetary  Board  thank  the  leaders,  the 
management  and  the  staff  of  the  Philippine  banking  community.  Maraming  salamat  sa 
inyong lahat! 
We also thank our guests from other sectors of our country for taking time to join us tonight. 
We are heartened by your show of support. 
As the economist Adam Smith once said, and I quote: “civilized society stands at all times in 
need of the cooperation and assistance of great multitudes.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It is our hope therefore that the same spirit of cooperation and collaboration will characterize 
our pursuit of continuing reforms in 2013 and the years ahead. 
And  now,  let  us  offer  a  toast  to  all  of  us  coming  together  for  an  even  stronger,  more 
responsive, more inclusive, and more successful Philippine banking system that will underpin 
a strong and vibrant Philippine economy that will bring prosperity and a better quality of life to 
our country and our people. Cheers! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
