Ravi Menon: Singapore’s financial centre in the new landscape 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Investment Management Association of Singapore’s (IMAS) 14th Annual 
Conference, Singapore, 13 March 2013. 
 Mr Lester Gray, Chairman of IMAS, 
Distinguished speakers, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
A new financial landscape 
Four years since Lehman Brothers collapsed, a new financial landscape is emerging. While 
the  contours  of  this  new  landscape  are  still  forming,  three  driving  forces  are  discernible: 
financial deleveraging, regulatory reforms, and the rise of Asia 
Driving forces 
First, the global financial industry is deleveraging. Banks around the world are consolidating 
their  balance  sheets  and  tightening  underwriting  standards,  even  forgoing  certain  types  of 
lending  altogether.  Many  have  resorted  to  shedding  assets,  especially  assets  in  those 
countries where the banks do not enjoy a large market share. 
• 
According to BIS data, globally, banks’ foreign claims fell by about 15% from early 
2008 to 2012. 
For European banks, the decline was twice as steep, at about 30%. 
• 
Second, the global financial crisis has spurred financial regulatory reforms on a scale that we 
have never seen before. 
• 
Basel III will raise the quantity and quality of capital that banks must hold, increase 
the liquidity buffers they must keep, and limit the amount of leverage they can take 
on. 
Solvency  II  will  raise  requirements  on  capital  adequacy  and  risk  management  for 
European  insurance  companies,  and  shape  the  development  of  risk-based  capital 
frameworks for insurers in other jurisdictions. 
New capital markets regulation will transform the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives 
trading  business,  with  mandatory 
reporting,  central  clearing,  and  margin 
requirements for non-centrally-cleared contracts. 
Additional  capital  charges  and  closer  supervisory  intensity  will  be  applied  on  the 
so-called  G-SIBs,  or  global  systemically  important  banks,  as  part  of  efforts  to 
address the “too-big-to-fail” problem. 
   Some regulatory initiatives will impinge directly on the structure of financial institutions. Many 
jurisdictions  are  pushing  for  local  incorporation  of  institutions,  especially  if  they  are 
systemically important. In America and Europe, regulators are reviewing various proposals 
for separating or insulating retail banking from riskier activities. 
Third, the centre of gravity of financial activity is shifting towards Asia. 
• 
The  IMF  forecasts  that,  in  the  next  five  years,  emerging  Asia  will  grow  by  about 
7% per annum, nearly three times faster than the 2.5% forecast for the advanced 
economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The financing needs of companies and individuals in Asia will grow in tandem. Infrastructure 
investment  needs  alone  will  amount  to  a  staggering  8  trillion  US  Dollars  over  the  next 
decade. There is opportunity to mobilise Asia’s large pool of savings to meet these financing 
needs. But this transmission is not working as well as it should, because financial markets in 
Asia are still under-developed and fragmented. The region remains heavily reliant on bank 
lending, and capital markets are not deep enough. 
• 
According  to  McKinsey,  bank  loans  were  more  than  a  third  of  Asian  banking  and 
capital markets, compared to just 10% in the US. 
Debt capital markets are particularly under-represented, contributing only 20–30% of 
financing in Asia, compared to 65% in the US and 55% in Europe. 
 A “new normal” in global finance? 
How will the global financial landscape change in response to these three driving forces? It 
will be hard to say but let me hazard some guesses. 
First, if the reforms are well implemented, we should see a material reduction of risk in the 
financial sector and improved financial stability. I do not think we will see an end to financial 
crises as such, but financial systems should become more resilient. This, in and of itself, will 
enhance economic welfare substantially. 
Second,  financial  institutions  will  be  forced  to  rationalise  their  business  models  and 
streamline their operations to better optimise capital, reduce compliance costs, and enhance 
efficiency. 
Third, global financial institutions will expand their Asian footprint. They will establish more 
Asia-focused teams and functions. Many of these firms will make a second home in Asia. But 
Asia is a diverse and non-homogenous market. Global financial institutions will hub in more 
than one location. 
The  structure  of  global  banks  is  likely  to  change  significantly.  Banks’  profits  and  return  on 
equity will come under pressure. The risk-return profiles of virtually all banking products will 
be re-ordered. The new liquidity rules will make deposits a strategic source of funding. Retail 
banking stands a good chance of reclaiming its role as the bedrock of banking. 
Insurance companies, facing higher capital requirements and ageing demographics, will be 
under  pressure  to  boost  returns  on  investment  and  enhance  asset-liability  management. 
Many  of  them  will  be  motivated  to  access  new  and  under-penetrated  markets,  and  seek 
higher yielding investments within the constraints of regulations and their mandates. 
Exchanges will continue to consolidate and adopt a “multi-asset class” approach. Companies 
will  explore  other  avenues  for  raising  capital,  including  private  placements.  There  will  be 
more  standardised  derivative  products  and  new  types  of  market  infrastructure:  central 
counterparties for clearing, trade repositories for reporting, and swap execution facilities for 
trading. High-volume, low-margin platforms will likely become more competitive. 
A big unknown is the future of long-term finance. 
• 
First,  banks  are  likely  to  play  a  reduced  role  in  providing  long-term  financing, 
especially  for  infrastructure.  Basel  III  will  raise  the  cost  of  issuing  long-term 
corporate  and  project  finance  loans  above  the  cost  of  issuing  mortgages  and 
short-term loans. 
Second,  insurance  companies  may  be  discouraged  from  investing  in  long  term 
assets, as a possible consequence of Solvency II. 
Third,  institutional  investors  such  as  pension  funds  and  endowments  often  face 
restrictions  on  portfolio  allocation  that  discourage  them  from  providing  long-term 
financing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  2 
  Fourth, the range of instruments that allow long-term investment is limited: in many 
countries, bond, equity and securitisation markets that provide alternative avenues 
for long-term finance are underdeveloped. 
If finance is to play its role as an enabler of economic growth, it will be important to develop 
new avenues for long-term funding. 
Singapore’s value proposition as a financial centre 
MAS has been closely studying these trends in global finance and finetuning its strategies to 
develop Singapore as a premier financial centre. The emerging financial landscape plays to 
Singapore’s strengths. 
Singapore’s value proposition in this new landscape rests on four pillars: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I will take stock of Singapore’s strengths in each of these four areas and outline how we have 
refreshed our strategies and approaches. 
smart regulation; 
diverse ecosystem; 
pan-Asian focus; and 
deep talent pool. 
Smart regulation 
First, smart regulation. Since the global financial crisis, a higher premium has been placed on 
well-regulated financial centres like Singapore, which set high standards but implement them 
in a way that makes business sense. 
MAS has always required banks to meet high prudential standards, exceeding international 
norms  in  several  areas.  During  the  global  financial  crisis,  this  ensured  that  adequate 
safeguards were in place and confidence sustained. Post-crisis, our banks are well-placed to 
meet the new global capital and liquidity standards. Maintaining high standards is compatible 
with fostering a vibrant financial centre. They provide confidence for financial institutions and 
customers to do business here. 
MAS  pays  close  attention  to  the  design  of  financial  regulation  to  ensure  that  they  are 
risk-based and not more burdensome than necessary to meet regulatory objectives. 
• 
An example is the Financial Holding Companies (FHCs) Bill that is currently before 
Parliament. 
MAS will not regulate all FHCs. The Bill will give MAS the flexibility on whether or 
not to regulate a particular FHC, taking into consideration, for instance, whether the 
FHC’s subsidiaries are important to Singapore’s financial system. 
 MAS  consults  the  industry  and  other  stakeholders  when  introducing  significant  new 
regulation. The exception of course is where the issue is market sensitive. We consult at an 
early  stage  on  the  broad  policy  proposals  as  well  as  in  the  later  stages  of  detailed 
rule-making.  We  carefully  consider  all  feedback  on  the  impact  of  new  regulation  and 
implementation  issues,  and  adjust  the  proposals  where  appropriate.  This  helps  MAS  to 
calibrate the rules in a way that is appropriate for our market. 
• 
Take for example, the recent proposed changes to the regulatory capital framework 
for holders of capital markets services licenses. MAS briefed the industry, consulted 
extensively, and conducted quantitative impact studies. 
In response to feedback, MAS has decided to provide a longer transition period of 
two years for industry to comply with the new rules. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 MAS will also revise its calibration of the operational risk capital charge. 
Final details of the regulatory capital framework will be announced by June this year. 
Diverse ecosystem 
The  second  pillar:  Singapore  has  a  diverse  financial  ecosystem.  The  various  parts  of  the 
financial  sector  not  only  serve  important  functions  in  their  own  right,  but  are  mutually 
reinforcing. 
• 
The  World  Economic  Forum  has  ranked  Singapore  2nd  worldwide  for  financial 
market development – a testament to the depth and breadth of Singapore’s financial 
sector. 
A full-fledged financial centre 
Singapore provides a broad and integrated suite of financial services. 
We are an important regional funding centre. 
• 
The Asian Dollar Market, with its total asset size of more than 1 trillion US dollars, 
has  played  a  key  role  in  serving  the  financing  and  treasury  needs  of  individuals, 
corporates, and institutions in Singapore and the region. 
We  are  the  premier  asset  management  centre  in  Asia,  acting  as  gateway  to  the  world  for 
Asian investors and for the world to tap Asian investments. 
• 
Assets  under  management  by  Singapore-based  managers  have  more  than 
quadrupled over the last decade to reach 1 trillion US dollars in 2011. 
We are the leading insurance centre in Asia. 
• 
Singapore  plays  host  to  about  190  insurance  institutions  meeting  the  protection 
needs of the economy and society across the region. 
The  industry  has  built  up  expertise  in  complex  and  specialist  risks  –  including 
marine, energy, aviation and credit and political risks. 
 We have one of the most developed bond markets in Asia. 
• 
Singapore’s total market capitalisation has grown by over 150% in the last decade, 
to 270 billion US dollars in 2011. 
We are the fourth largest foreign exchange trading centre in the world. 
• 
FX  and  FX  derivatives  turnover  in  Singapore  has  more  than  tripled  in  the  last 
decade, with an average daily traded volume of about 360 billion US dollars. 
We are Asia’s leading commodity derivatives trading hub. 
• 
• 
Most of the major global banks have their regional hubs in Singapore. 
According to some estimates, Singapore accounts for more than half of Asia’s OTC 
commodity derivatives trades. 
To succeed in the new financial landscape, Singapore must comprehensively support Asia’s 
long-term financing needs. Let me highlight two strategic areas where we will harness our 
diverse financial ecosystem: debt capital market and infrastructure financing. 
Debt capital market 
In a world of deleveraging and higher regulatory constraints on banks, it is now more urgent 
than ever to develop strong capital markets to complement bank lending and help to provide 
a better match for longer term funding requirements. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 The fundamentals for a strong debt capital market are in place. 
• 
The Singapore bond market is fully accessible to all issuers and investors globally 
with no capital controls, hedging restrictions, or withholding taxes. 
There  is  diversity  of  issuers  –  financial  institutions,  corporations  and  government 
agencies. 
There is variety in instruments issued, including structured and securitised debt. 
• 
Last year, I announced three initiatives to further improve the efficiency and liquidity of the 
Singapore Dollar bond markets. We have made good progress since. 
The  provision  of  swap  liquidity  to  primary  dealer  banks  handling  Singapore  Dollar  debt 
issuance for corporations is fully operational. MAS is now able to support swap transactions 
at market-determined rates. 
The  Singapore  Dollar  corporate  bond  securities  lending  facility  will  become  operational  by 
June this year. The facility will provide market makers an avenue to borrow securities and 
make prices more freely. 
The  price  discovery  initiative  to  provide  end-of-day  prices  for  Singapore  Dollar  corporate 
bonds  was  completed  in  June  last  year.  This  price  transparency  has  already  spurred 
industry-led  efforts  to  create  a  Singapore  Dollar  corporate  bond  index  which  market 
participants  could  use  as  a  benchmark  for  investment  management.  MAS  supports  these 
efforts. 
Infrastructure finance 
A relatively new thrust in our financial sector strategy is infrastructure finance. Infrastructure 
is a sector ripe with opportunity. However, private sector participation has so far been muted 
due  to  the  shortage  of  “bankable”  projects  and  risks  that  the  private  sector  alone  is  not 
equipped to mitigate. The financing gap will be compounded by new regulations restricting 
bank lending, which is still the primary form of infrastructure financing in Asia. 
Singapore  is  working  in  partnership  with  a  diverse  group  of  stakeholders,  to  help  address 
these challenges. 
• 
We  are  working  with  the  World  Bank  to  identify  and  develop  bankable  projects  in 
Asia. The World Bank’s investment arm, the IFC, will be setting up in Singapore its 
first  Asset  Management  Company  office  outside  Washington  DC,  to  co-invest  in 
regional infrastructure projects. 
Last year, Temasek Holdings partnered Singapore-based banks to establish Clifford 
Capital,  which  aims  to  plug  financing  gaps  faced  by  Singapore-based  companies 
involved in long-tenor, cross-border infrastructure projects. 
MAS is exploring with industry players how capital market solutions can encourage 
investor  interest  through  project bonds,  infrastructure  debt  funds,  and  project  loan 
securitisation. 
  Pan-Asian focus 
A  third  pillar  of  Singapore’s  value  proposition  as  a  financial  centre  is  its  pan-Asian  focus. 
With  strong  links  to  all  the  key  Asian  economies,  Singapore  is  a  natural  gateway  for 
international  firms  looking  to  access  Asia,  and  for  Asian  businesses  to  access  the  world. 
There are three new areas of opportunity that play to Singapore’s pan-Asian focus: ASEAN 
connectivity, OTC derivatives infrastructure, and offshore RMB business. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
ASEAN connectivity 
First, ASEAN connectivity. Singapore, in partnership with our ASEAN neighbours, is actively 
pursuing greater harmonisation and integration across the region’s financial markets. 
• 
We  are  trying  to  harmonise  rules  and  regulations  and  develop  integrated  trading, 
clearing and settlement infrastructure. 
For example, ASEAN regulators are currently working on a framework to facilitate 
cross-border  offerings  of  collective  investment  schemes.  This  initiative  aims  to 
promote greater flow of capital across the region and enhance investor choice. 
The stock exchanges of Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand have linked up through a 
common trading platform, the ASEAN Trading Link. This platform provides investors 
a single entry-point access to the three largest equity markets in ASEAN. 
  There is still some way to go to achieve seamless participation across the region’s financial 
markets. But these initiatives are a good start. 
OTC derivatives infrastructure 
Second, OTC derivatives infrastructure. Earlier, I spoke of global regulatory reforms driving a 
revolution  in  the  derivatives  market.  This  has  brought  about  new  market  infrastructure 
developments, and Singapore has made significant strides in two key areas. 
The first area is clearing. 
• 
• 
SGX AsiaClear, Asia’s first OTC clearing facility, was established as early as 2006. 
As counterparty to both buyers and sellers, AsiaClear mitigates counterparty credit 
risk in OTC transactions. 
AsiaClear’s  value  to  the  trading  community  extends  to  record  and  statement 
services, position netting, and cost savings for customers posting margins. 
Today, SGX AsiaClear is the region’s leading multi-asset OTC clearing house, with 
volumes exceeding 300 billion US dollars to-date. 
  The second area is trade reporting. 
• 
Just  in  December  2012,  the  Depository  Trust  &  Clearing  Corporation’s  (DTCC) 
Global Trade Repository established its Asia-Pacific global data centre in Singapore. 
The Singapore location is part of its global trio of data centres, designed to support 
DTCC’s global trade repository services around the clock. 
DTCC’s initiative will fill a key post-trade market infrastructure gap in Singapore and 
the Asia Pacific region. 
The 
convenience of reporting to a Singapore-based infrastructure. 
from  reduced  connectivity  costs  and 
industry  will  benefit 
the  greater 
   These  developments  not  only  align  us  with  global  regulatory  reforms,  they  allow  us  to 
strengthen our role as a derivatives and risk management hub in Asia. 
Offshore RMB 
The third area of opportunity that plays to Singapore’s pan-Asian strength is offshore RMB 
business. The RMB’s role in facilitating intra-regional trade and investment will only grow in 
the  coming  years.  Singapore  is  in  a  strong  position  to  facilitate  greater  RMB-denominated 
trade and investment in the ASEAN region. 
We  are  deepening  liquidity,  establishing  key  infrastructure,  and  working  with  industry  to 
expand the range of RMB products and services in Singapore. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  February  this  year,  the  Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of  China’s  Singapore 
branch was designated Singapore’s RMB clearing bank. 
Just  five  days  ago,  MAS  and  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  signed  an  enhanced 
bilateral currency swap agreement. This will enable MAS to provide RMB liquidity to 
banks in Singapore where needed. 
is 
the  Financial 
Deep talent pool 
The  fourth  and  final  pillar  supporting  Singapore’s  financial  centre  is  our  deep  talent  pool. 
Over  the  years,  we  have  invested  heavily  in  building  up  the  competencies  of  our  financial 
sector workforce, providing training grants across a broad range of programmes under the 
Financial  Sector  Development  Fund  (FSDF).  Perhaps  the  most  important  of  these 
programmes 
Industry  Competency  Standards  (FICS),  a  structured 
competency framework that is job-specific and practice-oriented. 
Looking ahead, to foster and sustain a strong financial sector workforce, MAS will take a dual 
approach.  We  will  groom  a  first-rate  Singaporean  talent  base,  while  continuing  to  secure 
highly-skilled global professionals. 
MAS is stepping up efforts to build a strong core of Singaporean specialists and leaders in 
finance. We are working with the major financial institutions here, on several fronts: 
• 
to nurture young Singaporeans at the entry level with opportunities to be mentored 
by senior leaders and to broaden their horizons across various functional roles; 
to  give  Singaporeans  the  opportunity  to  deepen  specialist  skills  by  expanding  our 
Finance Scholarship Programme; and 
to help mid-career Singaporeans take on international postings that will help prepare 
them for leadership positions. 
  At  the  same  time,  to  stay  relevant  in  the  more  complex  financial  landscape  of  tomorrow, 
Singapore must remain open to diverse talent and expertise. 
The financial sector offers Singaporeans great opportunity for well-paying, high value-added 
jobs. We need to ensure entrants to the sector have the necessary foundational skills and 
incumbents  keep  their  skills  relevant  and  updated  through  continuous  professional 
development. The Institute of Banking and Finance will be sharpening the FICS programme 
to support this. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  The  global  financial  industry  is  undergoing  great  change.  What  kind  of 
financial centre do we want to be? If I had to choose three words, I would say robust, trusted, 
and purposeful 
• 
robust,  in  the  sense  of  building  resilience  against  shocks  and  managing  risks 
prudently; 
trusted, in the sense of staying clean and imbibing a culture of fair dealing with all 
stakeholders; and 
purposeful, in the sense of generating real value, creating opportunities for people, 
and serving the economic needs of Singapore and the region. 
  This vision cannot be realised by MAS alone. It is through active partnership with the industry 
and  associations  like  IMAS,  that  we  can  make  this  happen  –  Singapore  as  a  premier 
financial centre in the emerging landscape of tomorrow. 
I wish you all a fruitful conference. Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
