Luis M Linde: Introduction to Christian Noyer 
Speech by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, introducing Christian Noyer at 
the Foro de la Nueva, Madrid, 28 June 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an honour and pleasure for me to introduce to you today, here at the Foro de la Nueva 
Economía, my colleague and friend Christian Noyer, the Governor of the Banque de France. 
With the presence of Governor Noyer, the Foro de la Nueva Economía continues its tradition 
of inviting distinguished international personalities from the world of administration, business 
and politics, to promote the exchange of ideas on matters of particular interest to society. 
I will begin my brief description of the career of Governor Noyer by emphasising something in 
his  curriculum  vitae:  Christian  Noyer  is  a  good  friend  of  our  country.  The  Spanish 
government has recognised this, by awarding him the Gran Cruz de la Orden del Mérito Civil. 
With a legal training – he studied law at Rennes and Paris – Governor Noyer subsequently 
graduated from the Institut d’Études Politiques and the École Nationale d’Administration, the 
school for senior civil servants and top corporate executives. 
His professional career began in 1976, when he joined the Treasury in the French Ministry of 
the  Economy  and  Finance,  where  he  held  various  positions  relating  to  debt  management, 
regulation of the financial industry and the management of public corporations. In the 1990s 
he  was  Head  of  the  Treasury  and  Chief  of  Staff  for  the  Ministers  of  Finance  Edmond 
Alphandéry and Jean Arthuis. 
During those years he built up considerable European and international experience. He was 
a  member  of  the  European  Monetary  Committee  and  held  the  office  of  alternate  for  the 
Minister  of  Finance  at  the  OECD,  the G7  and  the  G10.  As  Head  of  the  Treasury,  he  also 
chaired the Paris Club. 
In 1998 he was appointed Vice-President of the newly established European Central Bank. 
In 2003 he succeeded Jean-Claude Trichet as Governor of the Banque de France, a post 
that  he  still  holds  following  his  reappointment  in  October  2009.  He  is  a  member  of  the 
Governing Council of the European Central Bank and Chairman, since 2010, of the Basel-
based Bank for International Settlements. He is also head of the Prudential Control Authority, 
one of the two most important regulation and supervision bodies in France. 
Today, Christian Noyer is one of the most respected and long-serving central bankers. He 
has  extensive  experience  in  monetary  policy  management,  and  in  banking  and  financial 
regulation and supervision. He has been at the forefront of efforts to address and resolve the 
financial crisis that began in 2007 and the subsequent European sovereign debt crisis. 
As well as for his profound knowledge of monetary and financial matters, Governor Noyer is 
known  for  the  extremely  courteous  and  careful  way  in  which  he  always  expresses  his 
opinions and even his most serious disagreements. 
I am sure, ladies and gentlemen, that you are going to enjoy and benefit from the quality, 
both in substance and in form, of the address that Governor Noyer is about to give. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
