Glenn Stevens: Financing the Asian century 
Remarks  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Asia-Pacific Financial Market Development Symposium, Sydney, 10 April 2013. 
 Welcome to Sydney. 
We  are  here  this  evening  at  the  Royal  Sydney  Yacht  Squadron,  founded  in  1862  for  the 
enjoyment of sailing by its members.  
I am not a sailor; aviation is more my hobby. But one can see that in sailing, key elements to 
a successful voyage would be similar to those in aviation. These would include: 
• 
• 
• 
an adequate amount of training and proficiency on the part of the skipper and crew 
a realistic assessment of the capabilities and limitations of your craft 
a clear destination and a route to get there, though with some flexibility in amending 
the route should circumstances change 
a realistic assessment of the risks involved, including a respect for the weather1 
compliance with the rules 
a plan B in case something goes wrong 
in the worst case scenario, the availability of rescue to protect human life – though 
not the financial interests of the boat’s owner. 
 All these are important. 
Without wanting to push the analogy too far, many elements of policy making and financial 
development could be said to share many of these attributes. 
We need to understand how systems work, and their limitations. We want the participants, 
regulators and supervisors to have appropriate training and skill. We need to keep in mind 
our  desired  destination  and  retain  some  flexibility  of  choice  in  the  route  depending  on 
circumstances. We need to think about how to respond in the event problems occur and to 
have a clear idea of whose interests need to be protected. We need a realistic assessment of 
how much we can’t know. And so on. 
Meetings  such  as  this  one  are  good  opportunities  to  learn  about  how  the  system  is 
developing, to improve our understanding of how it works, and to have a conversation about 
desired  destinations  and  routes  to  get  there.  And  I  think  after  the  events  of  the  past  five 
years, we are all conscious of the limits of our knowledge. 
It  would  be  apparent  from  your  deliberations  today  that  Asia’s  financial  markets  are 
continuing to develop rapidly. To take the market for fixed interest securities, the total size of 
the bond market in Asia, excluding the very large Japanese market (which has been highly 
developed  for  a  long  time),  now  amounts  to  about  US$7  trillion,  having  increased 
substantially over the past five years. This is an amount equivalent to around 60 per cent of 
the area’s GDP. While in absolute terms a lot of this growth has been in China, in many of 
these countries debt markets are equivalent to at least 50 per cent, and in some cases well 
over  100  per  cent,  of  national  GDP.  Issuance  of  corporate  debt  in  2012  was  about 
                                                
1 
In  aviation  and,  I  imagine,  in  sailing,  a  good  weather  forecast  is  invaluable.  My  observation  is  that  those 
weather forecasts are actually pretty good. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said for forecasts in economics 
and finance. This doesn’t mean we don’t set out on the journey – we have no choice – but it means we should 
do so with due care. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
US$700 billion, which is not far short of the amount in the euro area, though still a long way 
below  the  pace  of  issuance  in  the  United  States.  Metrics  of  liquidity  suggest  an  improving 
trend, with reasonable turnover and in most cases bid-ask spreads on sovereign debt coming 
down to a handful of basis points. 
Equity  markets  are  likewise  of  substantial  size.  For  several  Asian  countries,  and  leaving 
aside  markets  like  Singapore  and  Hong  Kong,  market  capitalisation  relative  to  GDP  is 
broadly  similar  to  or  even  larger  than  in  the  United  States.  The  Chinese  equity  market  is 
considerably smaller in relative terms, but that is not surprising given the history of being a 
centrally planned economy. 
Banks in Asia continue to play a central role in providing finance, which is reflected in the 
relatively large size of banking systems in the region. A number of countries in the region, 
including China and Japan, have banking system assets exceeding 200 per cent of GDP – 
although some  other countries,  where financial deepening  and  liberalisation  still  has  some 
way  to  run,  have  relatively  smaller  banking  systems.  After  being  severely  affected  by  the 
Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s, the region’s banking systems were fairly resilient to 
the  more  recent  (global  financial)  crisis  and  are  today  well  capitalised  with  sound  asset 
performance. 
So the size of Asia’s financial system has grown substantially. 
Some have said that Asia’s financial development and integration lags behind the progress 
being  made  on  the  trade  and  economic  fronts.  The  striking  growth  of  intra-Asian  trade 
reflects the general trade orientation of the Asian growth strategy but also, in recent years, 
the  growing  organisation  of  production  processes  across  borders.  Where  it  is  possible  to 
adopt  a  set  of  agreed  technical  standards  –  global  standards  for  IT  components,  or 
communications protocols might be examples – and impediments are removed, it seems that 
economic networks spanning national borders can quickly emerge. If it is true that this has 
outpaced  financial  integration,  perhaps  that  is  because  it  may  be  harder  to  align  and 
streamline legal and regulatory processes insofar as they bear on financial activity than it is 
for trade. 
Having said that, I’m not sure that growth in Asian finance is lagging all that far behind. The 
statistics on growth of markets seem a bit too compelling to push that argument too far. 
Moreover,  further growth  in  Asia’s  capital  markets  is  surely  likely.  The  region  continues  to 
have, in the main, high rates of saving and investment. So its real “wealth” is growing. (So is 
its human capital, which will improve the productivity of its physical capital stock.) In addition, 
many countries continue to see the normal pattern in which the markets that intermediate the 
flows  of  saving  and  investment,  and  that  develop  the  tradeable  financial  claims  over  the 
stock  of  real  wealth,  grow  faster  than  income.  The  experience  of  the  advanced  countries 
suggests that this process of “financial deepening”, while it may ultimately have some limit, 
has a long way to go in the emerging world. 
So  the  task  for  policy  might  be  not  so  much  to  promote  growth  per  se,  as  to  shape  the 
growth.  What  sort  of  financial  system  do  we  want  to  see  develop  in  the  region?  What,  in 
other words, is our destination? 
Three desirable descriptors come to mind. We want a financial system that is sound, efficient 
and integrated. 
“Sound”  does  not  mean  refusing  to  take  any  risk.  The  yachts  outside  are  probably  safest 
when tied up to the mooring. If that’s all that ever happens, though, they are not fulfilling their 
purpose. Similarly we want some prudent risk-taking in the financial sector – that is its job. It 
could be argued that the world’s financiers swung in 2008 from insufficient regard for risk to 
excessive risk aversion. 
But as is the case when the yachts move off from their moorings to catch the winds in the 
open water and perform as they were designed, a degree of risk is involved. And, like sailing, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  context  for  that  risk-taking  has  to  give  due  weight  to  safety.  In  years  past,  excessive 
leverage,  inadequate  attention  to  liquidity  and  funding  risk,  and  poor  lending  standards  all 
played a part in a serious erosion of confidence in banks and various “shadow banks” in the 
United  States  and  Europe.  We  would  have  to  say  as  well  that  supervision  was  found 
wanting.  Once  the  crisis  hit,  the  complexity  of  operations  across  borders  then  greatly 
complicated efforts by policymakers to address the resulting problems. 
The financial system in this time zone, in contrast, has come through this episode in much 
better  shape.  Thanks  partly  to  the  painful  lessons  of  the  Asian  crisis  and  other  episodes, 
banks  had  generally  stronger  capital  positions  and  higher  lending  standards,  while 
supervisors  had  also  done  their  job  in  the  years  prior  to  2007.  Moreover,  several  banking 
systems in the region are among the earliest adopters of the new, tougher, Basel standards. 
It goes without saying that we want this prudence to continue. But unlike the case in some 
other countries, the financial sector in the region is well placed to play its role in supporting 
the  sustainable  growth  of  economic  activity  and  trade.  It  is  noteworthy  that  as  European 
banks sought to pull back from some activities in the region, including trade finance, banks 
from within the region have stepped up. So this is a point for confidence. 
This is not to say that there are no sources of vulnerability. In particular, concern has been 
expressed about the risks that may be growing in the “shadow banking” system in China. In 
recent  years,  an  increasing  share  of  financing  in  China  has  been  provided  by  non-bank 
entities  and  through  banks’  off-balance  sheet  activities.  In  no  small  part,  this  growth  in 
shadow banking reflects restrictions on both the quantity of bank credit, and controls on loan 
and deposit rates. Such restrictions lead to demand for credit exceeding the formal banking 
sector’s ability to supply it, and also provide an incentive for savers to seek alternatives to 
low-yielding bank deposits. The Chinese authorities have introduced a number of measures 
to mitigate the risks, and many types of shadow banking activities in China are now subject 
to  some  regulatory  oversight.  Hopefully,  this  will  lead  to  a  stable  outcome.  But  China’s 
experience is one that others have had at various times: as long as there are incentives to 
by-pass  the  formal  banking  sector,  the  shadow  banking  system  may  keep  on  growing 
together with the risks. More generally the risks associated with prolonged low interest rates 
globally are very much on the minds of policymakers right around the region, and will be for a 
while, I would think. 
Turning  to  the  second  and  third  on  the  list  of  desirable  attributes  for  finance,  namely 
efficiency and integration, it may be that these will naturally go together. An efficient financial 
system intermediates savings at a low cost, and directs them to the uses that are expected to 
produce the highest risk-adjusted return. As in most industries, a degree of competition in the 
system  is  helpful  in  producing  this  efficiency.  Competition  from  foreign  firms  can  be  a 
powerful  force  in  this  regard.  So  openness  to  cross-border  investment  flows  will  remain 
important, as will openness to the innovative new domestic entrants. 
Of course, as in any industry, and perhaps more so in finance, there have to be boundaries 
to competition. We don’t want lending standards to be competed down too far, for example, 
any  more  than  we  would  want  competition  between  airlines  to  lead  to  lower  maintenance 
standards  in  pursuit  of  lower  costs.  That  is  where  the  regulatory  framework  and  the 
supervisors come in. 
Moreover, greater integration in the region, insofar as that is possible and remains consistent 
with legitimate national sovereign objectives, offers efficiency gains as well. A large regional 
capital market would be expected to offer a greater field of choice for savers and borrowers 
and lower intermediation costs. Progress towards this is being made through efforts to make 
regulatory frameworks more consistent and improving infrastructure across regional markets, 
even as demand increases for locally issued debt securities. These developments have been 
aided, in part, through regional cooperation on initiatives such as the Asian Bond Fund and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the Asian Bond Markets Initiative. Ongoing cooperation will help to continue the development 
of regional capital markets.2 I would simply observe that it may take a degree of commitment 
to keep progress occurring, not least because some responses to the financial crisis around 
the world may work towards a lessening of the degree of globalisation of finance. 
End-piece 
To  these  observations  about  safety,  efficiency  and  integration,  I  would  add  two  further 
thoughts. The first is that Asia will in all likelihood continue to have multiple currencies for a 
long  time  yet.  A  decade  ago  it  was  becoming  fashionable  for  Asia  to  look  at  Europe  and 
wonder whether that was a model for an Asian currency area in due course. But we can now 
see all too clearly how demanding it is to be in a currency union, and how much supporting 
financial and political structure is needed for it to work. This may one day be built in Asia, but 
it takes a long time: Europe’s prodigious efforts over 50 years or more did not, as it turns out, 
produce fully the conditions for currency union. 
It follows from this that Asian markets for foreign exchange in Asian currency may need to 
continue developing. It probably means as well that unless something serious goes wrong in 
China, the RMB  will eventually become the dominant currency in the region. That may be 
stating  the  obvious,  but  there  could  be  a  profound  adjustment  for  many  countries  in  the 
region from membership of what is, at present, a de facto US dollar zone, to membership of 
an  RMB  zone.  To  some  extent  this  has  begun  with  the  use  of  RMB  for  trade  settlement, 
which  is  growing quickly.  Full  development  will  require  liberalisation  of  the  Chinese  capital 
account. This will presumably continue to occur, but on a timetable decided – as it should be 
– by the Chinese authorities. 
The second and final observation is related to exchange rates in some ways. It is that Asia 
surely  will  want to see its own financial sector doing more of the intermediation of its own 
saving. That is, Asia will want to send less of its saving abroad to hold supposedly “low risk” 
– and certainly low return – obligations issued by the “old” world, and do less re-importing of 
that saving, in the form of risk capital intermediated by the major financial centres at higher 
cost. Why not deploy the region’s own saving at home, for higher return? It is not as though 
there  are  no  productive  opportunities  in  the  region.  By  most  accounts  Asia’s  infrastructure 
needs  over  the  next  couple  of  decades  are  very  large.  Moreover,  as  the  region’s  own 
financial  sophistication  and  strength  grows,  and  as  its  capacity  to  accept  risk  grows 
commensurately,  the  need  for  costly  self-insurance  against  capital  flow  disruptions  surely 
lessens. That does not deny the logic for what Asia did for many years in building foreign 
reserves, but the cost benefit analysis is surely looking different today from 15 years ago. So 
to use the language from the beginning of my remarks, perhaps there are now more direct 
routes to the destination of development and prosperity for Asia than there were a decade or 
two ago. 
All  of  this  is  tied  up  with  the  debate  about  “global  imbalances”,  the  reorienting  of  Asia’s 
growth towards domestic sources, the role and governance of the international institutions, 
and so on. These are issues worthy of discussion, including in the G20 process as well as in 
regional fora. But that is a discussion for another day. 
Once again, welcome to Sydney and I hope your deliberations will be a great success.  
                                                
2  For example, market depth and liquidity would likely benefit from increased access for non-resident investors 
as well as the growth in complementary market segments such as repo markets. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
