Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Property bubbles and economic policy 
Keynote speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 
Special Panel on “Property markets, financial stability, and macroprudential policies”, at the 
Allied Social Science Associations – American Real Estate & Urban Economic Association 
Annual Meeting, San Diego, 4 January 2013. 
 Property  market  bubbles  have  long  been  recognized  as  an  important  risk  to  economic 
stability. Although not all property bubbles lead to financial crises, there are malign bubbles 
that do indeed trigger significant financial stresses and cause economic crises, such as the 
US housing bubble of the 2000s. 
In  this  presentation,  I  argue  that  demographic  trends  are  one  of  the  key  drivers  of  the 
property  price  movements  we  have  observed  over  the  past  few  decades.  In  particular,  I 
argue  that  a  growing  young  population  increases  the  likelihood  of  a  property  bubble.  The 
increased  demand  for  property  from  a  growing  young  population  is  likely  to  induce  the 
institutional  change  of  a  loosening  of  financial  laws  and  regulations  that  pushes  up  prices 
further, thereby fueling a malign price bubble. (These institutional factors will be discussed in 
greater  detail  by  my  fellow  panelists  Frank  Warnock  and  Tim  Riddiough.)  In  contrast,  the 
negative effects of the bursting of a price bubble are all the more pronounced where there is 
an ageing population. 
Macroprudential  or  institutional  policies  therefore  become  important  in  responding  to  a 
malign  property  bubble.  (This  will  be  the  subject  of  the  presentation  by  Ken  Kuttner.) 
However, I believe that the issue is not limited to questions of the technical effectiveness of 
various  macroprudential  policies,  but  highlights  the  very  fact  of  the  “procyclicality”  of 
institutional  changes  in  laws  and  regulations  induced  by  demographic  change.  From  this 
discussion I will draw three policy implications: firstly, the need, to recognize the significant 
effects  of  demographic  trends,  secondly,  to  avoid  too  loose  a  policy  in  the  demographic 
bonus phase, and thirdly, to avoid too strict a policy in the demographic onus phase. 
In  the  final  part  of  this  presentation,  I  will  discuss  property  price  indexes,  and  outline  an 
attempt to obtain relevant price information in a timely manner. Timely and accurate data on 
property  prices  is  of  utmost  importance  in  responding  to  a  property  bubble,  especially  in 
emerging markets. (Yongheng Deng will discuss this issue in the context of China.)  
1. 
Demographic trends and property markets 
Demographic trends and malign property bubbles; cross-country evidence 
Let me first explain why demographic trends are important using a series of charts depicting 
the recent bubble episode in the advanced countries. In these charts, I juxtapose, first, the 
ratio of working-age population to the rest (the inverse dependency ratio), second, the real 
property price index, and third, total loans in real terms.1  
In the United States (Chart 1.1), we have two peaks in the working-age population ratio. And 
the real property price index, which is the real house price index, seems to have two peaks, 
roughly coinciding with the demographic change. It is the second peak which triggered the 
financial crisis of 2008. The first peak coincided with the S&L problem, which had a far less 
                                                
1   The  figures  for  the  United  States,  Japan  and  China  are  taken  from  Nishimura,  K.  G.,  “How  to  Detect  and 
Respond  to  Property  Bubbles:  Challenges  for  Policymakers,”  in  Heath,  A.,  F.  Packer,  C.  Windsor,  eds., 
Property Markets and Financial Stability, Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, 2012, pp.292–301. The figures 
for the other countries are constructed in a similar way to those for these three countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
severe effect on the economy. The difference between the two lies in the difference in the 
total loans. The level of the real total loans in the first peak was high, but far lower than in the 
second peak that triggered the financial crisis. A remarkably similar picture is found in Japan, 
where  the  second  peak  around  1990  is  a  malign  bubble  that  triggered  a  long  period  of 
stagnation (Chart 1.2).  
In Europe, we have two groups. The first group, including the United Kingdom (Chart 2.1), 
Spain  (Chart  2.2),  and  Ireland  (Chart  2.3),  had  a  similar  experience  to  that  of  the  United 
States and Japan. The second group, including Germany (Chart 3.1) and France (Chart 3.2), 
tells a different story: their working population ratio, property prices, and real loans peaked at 
different times. And it is the first group, in Chart 2, which suffered property bubbles triggering 
financial distress, most severely in Ireland and  Spain, and to a lesser extent in the United 
Kingdom. 
What lessons can we learn from this rather cursory examination of recent history? It shows 
that,  if  a  demographic  change,  a  property  price  bubble,  and  a  steep  increase  in  loans 
coincide, then a financial crisis seems more likely. 
Malign property bubbles: interplay of demographic trends and institutional factors 
Demographic  trends  have  a  significant  effect  on  property  prices,  especially  their  land 
component.2 In the population dividend phase, young baby boomers want to buy more land 
and save more real money for their retirement. Since the supply of land is physically limited, 
the  real  price  of  land  will  go  up.  Similarly,  if  nominal  money  supply  is  held  constant,  the 
“price”  of  real  money  holdings,  which  is  the  inverse  of  the  price  level,  should  also  go  up, 
implying deflation. Being mandated to maintain price stability, the central bank is then likely 
to increase nominal money to keep prices stable. The result is an increase in property prices 
while general price levels remain stable.3 
The  story,  however,  does  not  end  there.  Property  markets  are  also  influenced  heavily  by 
institutional factors. The  supply  of  land  is  regulated  by  the  government  in  many  countries, 
typically in the form of zoning. Housing finance systems are heavily dependent on financial 
laws  and  regulations.4  Property  markets  are  subject  to  high  transaction  costs,  which  may 
change as a result of financial innovation.5 Any change or even prospect of change in these 
institutional  factors  may  drastically  change  the  dynamics  of  property  prices,  leading  to  a 
considerable deviation from the underlying fundamentals, that is, to a property bubble. 
In fact, in the population dividend or bonus phase, when baby boomers’ demand for property 
is  strong,  the  demand  for  institutional  change  is  also  strong,  favoring  easier  acquisition  of 
property. The government is likely to come under political pressure to loosen financial laws 
and regulations, which in turn fuels expectation of further loosening. These changes, and the 
prospect  of  change,  induce  credit  expansion  to  finance  property  acquisition  and  push  up 
property  prices  further  and  far  beyond  their fundamental  value  given  the  initial  institutional 
framework.  The  price  hike  caused  by  such  institutional  changes  may  even  induce  overly 
optimistic expectations of the “this-time-is-different” type about property markets and prices. 
                                                
2   See, for example, Takáts, Előd (2012): “Aging and house prices,” Journal of Housing Economics, vol 21, no 2, 
June, pp 131–41, and Nishimura, Kiyohiko G. (2011): “Population ageing, macroeconomic crisis, and policy 
challenges,” Panel discussion at the 75th Anniversary Conference of Keynes’ General Theory, University of 
Cambridge, 19–21 June 2011. 
3   See Nishimura, K. G., and E. Takáts, “Ageing, Property Prices, and Money Demand,” Working Paper no. 385, 
Bank of International Settlements, September 2012. 
4   See Warnock, F. E., and V. C. Warnock, “Developing Housing Finance Systems,” in Heath et al. ibid., 49–67. 
5   Packer,  F.,  and  T.  Riddiough,  “Securitization  and  the  Commercial  Property  Cycle,”  in  Heath  et  al.  ibid., 
143–190. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Thus, the demographic condition of population dividend or bonus is fertile ground for malign 
property bubbles. 
Population ageing and declining long-term per capita growth 
So far, I have discussed the formative stage of malign bubbles. Then, what happens when a 
malign bubble bursts? Here again, demographic trends are important and likely to influence 
the adjustment process significantly.  
As  is  often  argued,  the  economy  has  to  endure  a  period  of  lower  growth  after  a  malign 
bubble bursts. Chart 4 shows the rolling ten-year average of the per capita GDP growth rate 
of advanced countries. After the collapse of the bubble, the Japanese per capita rate plunged 
from  above  3  to  around  1.  It  is  remarkable  to  note  that  the  per  capita GDP  growth  of  the 
United States and major European countries also fell almost uniformly to around 1 after the 
collapse  of  the  their  bubbles  (except  for  Italy,  where  the  rate  has  fallen  even  further  to 
become negative). 
Debt  overhang  and  resulting  deleveraging  are  often  cited  as  the  major  culprits  of  this 
substantially  lower  growth.  The  next  two  charts  suggest  more  than  that  and  point  to  the 
possible importance of demographic trends. They juxtapose the working-age population ratio 
(inverse dependency ratio) and the long-run per capita growth rate, which is the average per 
capita growth rate of the past ten years, for the United States (Chart 5.1), Japan (Chart 5.2), 
the  United  Kingdom  (Chart  6.1),  Spain  (Chart  6.2)  and  France  (Chart  6.3).  These  figures 
suggest a possible link between demographic trends and long-term per capita growth, which 
is determined by efficiency in production. 
Population  ageing,  which  we  observed  first  in  Japan  and  now  in  the  United  States  and 
European countries, may affect factor productivity and long-term efficiency in the economy 
as  a  whole.  For  example,  population  ageing  reduces  the  mobility  of  workers  and 
entrepreneurs  between  regions  and  industries.  Population  ageing  also  changes  the 
composition of consumer demand, and the vast difference among senior citizens in terms of 
wealth and experience reduces the effectiveness of mass-marketing to create demand.6 This 
means many advanced economies experiencing a malign bubble and population ageing at 
the same time face doubly downward pressure from debt overhang and population onus. 
2. 
Policy implications 
Awareness of the significant effects of demographic trends 
Let me now turn to the policy implications of what I have examined. The first lesson from the 
experience of the advanced economies is to be aware of demographic trends. In particular, 
we should take into account that the likelihood of malign property bubble formation is much 
greater in the population dividend or demographic bonus phase, while the negative impact of 
the collapsing bubble is far severer in the phase of the burden of an ageing population, or 
demographic onus.  
This  is  particularly  important  in  some  emerging economies.  Chart  7  shows  the  situation  in 
Brazil (7.1), China (7.2) and Korea (7.3). In Brazil, the peak of the working age population 
ratio  is  a  decade  away,  but  house  prices  and  credit  expansion  are  skyrocketing  toward  it, 
indicating  the  possible  risk  of  a  future  malign  bubble.  The  possible  risk  could  be  seen  in 
China and Korea, where the working-age population ratio is likely to peak in a few years and 
credit expansion continues. Moreover, the size of population dividends is much greater and 
the future decline of the working-age population ratio is much more pronounced in these two 
                                                
6   See  Nishimura,  K.  G.,  “Demographic  Transition,  Impact  of  ICT,  and  Globalization:  A  Long  View  of  the 
Post-Crisis World,” Speech at the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, August 28, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
countries than in Brazil and the advanced countries in Charts 1 to 3, suggesting demographic 
change will have an even greater impact. Of course, the correlation between demographic 
factors  and  property  bubbles  remains  loose,  as  exemplified  by  the  German  experience. 
However, considering the imminent grave consequences of a malign property bubble under 
the  burden  of  an  ageing  population,  it  is  advisable  for  policy  makers  to  take  precautions 
against the possible danger. 
Avoiding excessive loosening of a policy in the demographic bonus phase 
The recent bubble episodes have shown us that, in the population dividend or bonus phase, 
when  demand  for  property  increases  substantially,  financial  laws  and  regulations  tend  to 
become  loose,  thereby  fueling  property  price  bubbles.7  In  other  words,  financial  laws  and 
regulations  and  government  policies  are  markedly  “procyclical”,  though  here  the  cycle  is 
much longer than business cycles. The financial innovation of subprime RMBS is surely one 
example. So the second lesson is that we should avoid an excessive loosening of financial 
regulations and government policies in the demographic bonus phase. 
Here macroprudential policies become important, which rely on measures such as LTV and 
DTI  requirements.8  Unfortunately  however,  I  find  most  discussions  about  macroprudential 
policies are concerned only with taming overly optimistic expansion of credit and fund flows, 
while  they  fail  to  give  sufficient  attention  to  the  often  “procyclical”  regulatory  changes  that 
trigger such expansion. Thus, I still have strong reservations over the effectiveness of some 
macroprudential measures in a truly malign bubble, since such measures may simply mean 
temporary halting of the expansion and thus amount to “kicking the can down the road”.9  
Avoiding excessive tightening of a policy in the demographic onus phase 
Next, what is the lesson for the collapsing stage of a bubble? Adjustment is still under way, 
even in Japan after more than two decades since the 1990 bubble burst. However, one thing 
is clear: adjustment is long and severe when the economy is under the burden of an ageing 
population, or in the demographic onus phase. It is also becoming evident that there is no 
quick  fix  for  the  problem  and  no  quick  return  to  the  “old  normal”  of  the  population  bonus 
phase. 
Policy  makers  now  face  dual  problems:  they  have  to  minimize  the  likelihood  of  another 
malign bubble in the future, and at the same time they have to minimize the current distress 
caused by the past bubble. Future bubble prevention usually leads to significant tightening of 
once-loose  regulations  and  government  policies  toward  banking  and  housing  finance 
systems. The thrust of strict regulations is fueled by popular anger against the beneficiaries 
of the past malign bubble. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  we  should  be  aware  that  we  are  in  a  phase  of  demographic 
onus, with lower demand for property than in the demographic bonus phase of decades ago. 
This means regulatory measures appropriate in the population bonus phase may be too strict 
in  the  population  onus  phase.  So  we  must  avoid  too  strict  a  policy  in  the  population  onus 
                                                
7  
In fact, the regulatory changes of 2004 (the so-called Bear Sterns exemption and the regulatory change with 
respect  to  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac)  caused  unprecedented  rapid  expansion  of  credit,  becoming  a 
precursor of the financial crisis. See Nishimura, K. G., “What Should we Learn from the Eurozone Crisis – A 
Regulatory-Reform  Perspective,”  Speech  at  the  Institute  of  International  Bankers  2012  Annual  Washington 
Conference, March 5, 2012. 
8   See Kuttner, K., and I. Shim, “Taming the Real Estate Beast: The Effects of Monetary and Macroprudential 
Policies on Housing Prices and Credit,” in Heath, et al. ibid., 231–259. 
9   For more detailed discussion on macro-prudential policies in the case of the Japanese property bubble, see 
Nishimura, Kiyohiko G. (2011) “Macroprudential Lessons from the Financial Crisis: A Practitioner’s View,” in: 
Kawai, Masahiro. and Eswar Prsard (eds.) Asian Perspectives on Financial Sector Reforms and Regulation: 
Washington, D.C., Brookings Institution Press, 180–195. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
phase, and avoid regulatory and policy “procyclicality” in the downward direction. Moreover, 
we should also recognize that a severe balance-sheet adjustment under population ageing 
hampers  the  effectiveness  of  conventional  policy  tools.10  In  addition,  seemingly  overly 
pessimistic expectations aggravate the problem of policy effectiveness.  
Thus,  policy  makers  have  to  perform  a  subtle  balancing  act  between  long-run  crisis 
prevention and immediate crisis response.  
Property price indexes as the foundation of policy 
3. 
Let me now turn to the issue of data and statistics as the foundation of policy. Unfortunately, 
the  current  state  of  our  knowledge  about  property  markets  is  still  limited,  especially  in 
constructing property price indexes that are reliable (R), accurate (A), timely (T), and easy 
(E) to understand – what I call the “RATE” requirement. Thus, property prices were identified 
at  the  November  2009  G20  Meeting  as  one  of  the  crucial  data  gap  issues.  To  rectify  the 
problem,  Eurostat  is  taking  the  lead  in  drafting  a  Handbook  on  Residential  Property  Price 
Indices under the aegis of the Inter-Secretariat Working Group on Price Statistics.11  
With  respect  to  accuracy,  the  RRPI  Handbook  (4th  draft)  recommends  hedonic  price 
indexes,  especially  in  countries  where  transactions  are  limited  and  repeated  sales  may 
involve sampling biases. Most emerging economies, including China, are in this category, as 
well as many advanced countries like Japan.12  
With respect to timeliness, there has been promising progress. Note that for a policy maker, 
timely  information  is  as  important  as,  or  in  some  cases  more  important  than,  reliable  and 
accurate  information.  According  to  this  criterion,  existing  transaction-based  property  price 
indexes, though accurate, are not helpful in immediate policy making, since they inevitably 
lag  far  behind  market  movements.  For  example  in  Japan  (Chart  8),  it  typically  takes 
10 weeks  from  posting  in  the  market  to  negotiation,  5.5  weeks  from  negotiation  to  actual 
transaction, and 15.5 weeks from transaction to being recorded in the government data base. 
In  addition,  extra  weeks  are  needed  for  data  collection  and  compilation,  so  that  the  lag  is 
likely to amount to almost a year.  
First  asking  price  data  are  timely  but  not  accurate  (because  they  are  biased),  while 
transaction price data are accurate but not timely, posing a dilemma. However, there is an 
important way around this dilemma. Using previously-owned condominium prices in Tokyo, 
my collaborators and I are able to show that if a hedonic quantile-regression procedure of 
quality  adjustment  is  applied  to  both first  asking  price  data  and  transaction  price  data,  the 
resulting  price  distribution  is  almost  identical  (Chart  9).13  This  implies  that  if  hedonic 
quantile-regression quality adjustment is appropriate, which is likely, we can use first asking 
                                                
10   Not  only  does  the  conventional  policy  of  controlling  the  overnight  interbank  rate  turn  out  to  be  ineffective 
because  of  the  zero  lower  bound,  but  the  unconventional  policy  of  asset  purchases  is  also  becoming  less 
effective in altering firms’ and households’ financial conditions as the long rates themselves move down to a 
very low level. The Bank of Japan’s funding facilities for financing economic growth and the Bank of England’s 
funding for lending scheme are new types of unconventional policy aimed at coping with this problem. See 
Nishimura, K. G., “Funding for Financing Economic Growth – A Schumpeterian Perspective,” Remarks at the 
Global  Interdependence  Center  Conference  on  The  Global  Financial  Crisis:  Lessons  from  Japan,  Tokyo 
December 3, 2012. 
11   http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/hicp/methodology/owner_occupied_housing_hpi/ 
rppi_handbook. 
12   Deng,  Y.,  J.  Gyourko,  and  J. Wu,  “Land  and  Housing  Price  Measurement  in  China,”  in  Heath,  et.  al.  ibid., 
13–43. 
13   Shimizu, C., K. G. Nishimura, and T. Watanabe (2011) “House Prices at Different Stages of the Buying/Selling 
Process,”  Working  Paper  no.  69,  Research  Center  for  Price  Dynamics,  Institute  of  Economic  Research, 
Hitotsubashi University. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
price data to construct a reliable proxy of quality-adjusted transaction price distribution. Thus, 
we get timely and reliable quality-adjusted price data through this procedure. 
I will stop here for the discussions of other panelists. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1 
 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 