Duvvuri Subbarao: A revolution in monetary policy 
Welcome remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
15th C D Deshmukh Memorial Lecture on “A revolution in monetary policy – lessons in the 
wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis”  delivered  by  Prof  Joseph  Stiglitz,  Mumbai,  3 January 
2013. 
 1. 
On  behalf  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  I  have  great  pleasure  in  welcoming 
Prof. Joseph E. Stiglitz, who will shortly be delivering the C.D. Deshmukh Memorial Lecture. 
Also,  a  warm  welcome  to  Mrs.  Anya  Stiglitz  who  has  accompanied  him.  I  am  delighted  to 
acknowledge  the  presence  here  of  the  family  members  of  Sir  Chintaman  Deshmukh  
–  Shri Atul  Deshmukh, Smt.  Sheetala  Deshmukh,  and  their children,  Ashish  and  Priyanka, 
Prof.  Sunita  Chitnis  and  her  son  Dr.  Ajay  Chitnis.  Your  presence  here  means  a  lot  to  us. 
Finally, and importantly, a warm welcome to all our invitees to this prestigious lecture. 
C.D. Deshmukh 
2. 
Sir Chintaman D. Deshmukh has a special place in the history of the Reserve Bank. 
He was the first Indian Governor of the Reserve Bank, and served the institution with great 
distinction and dignity from August 1943 to June 1949. He presided over the transformation 
of the Reserve Bank from a private shareholders’ bank to a nationalised institution and was 
the intellectual force behind the enactment of a comprehensive legislation for the regulation 
of  banking  companies  which  has  stood  the  test  of  time.  Governor  Deshmukh  participated 
actively in the establishment of the Bretton Woods Institutions in 1945 and played a critical 
role in managing India’s nascent economy as we confronted the challenges of war financing 
following the Second World War. 
3. 
After  leaving  the  Reserve  Bank,  Shri  Deshmukh  went  on  to  become  the  Finance 
Minister  of  India,  a  career  graph  repeated  by  our  current  Prime  Minister,  Dr.  Manmohan 
Singh nearly forty years later. Shri Deshmukh brought to the office of the Finance Minister a 
passion for newly  independent India’s development and a humane and inclusive  vision for 
nation building. By all accounts, Sir Chintaman Deshmukh was one of the finest public policy 
intellectuals of post-independence India. 
4. 
The  Reserve  Bank  instituted  the  C.D.  Deshmukh  Memorial  Lecture  in  1984  to 
honour  the  memory  of this  illustrious  Governor  of  the  Bank. The  last  Deshmukh  Memorial 
Lecture was delivered by Lord Adair Turner in February 2010 on: “After the Crisis: Assessing 
the Costs and Benefits of Financial Liberalization”. 
Today’s speaker – Prof. Stiglitz 
5. 
It  is  befitting  that  the  fifteenth  C.D.  Deshmukh  Memorial  Lecture  today  will  be 
delivered  by  a  pre-eminent  public  policy  intellectual  and  one  of  the  most  influential 
economists of our time. Introducing Prof. Stiglitz is a challenge because he is so well known 
and  that  no  introduction  can  be  original  or  revealing.  It  is  a  challenge  also  because  his 
contribution  to  public  policy  has  been  so  enormous  and  phenomenal  that  it  is  difficult  to 
summarize that briefly. Nevertheless, I will take on the task of introducing Professor Stiglitz if 
only to pay homage to a tradition. 
6. 
and Co-chair of Columbia University’s Committee on Global Thought. 
7. 
In 1979, Joseph Stiglitz was awarded the coveted John Bates Clark Medal, given by 
the  American  Economic  Association  to  an  economist  under  40  who  has  made  the  most 
significant contribution to the field. Prof. Stiglitz lived up to that early promise by winning, as 
Professor Joseph Stiglitz is currently University Professor at Columbia in New York 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
we  all  know,  the  Nobel  Prize  for  Economics  in  2001  for  his  analysis  of  markets  with 
asymmetric information. He has the distinction, in a sense, of a “double Nobel” as he was a 
lead  author  of the  1995  Report  of  the Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change,  which 
shared the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize. In 2011, the prestigious Time magazine named him one 
of the 100 most influential people in the world. 
8. 
Prof.  Stiglitz  helped  create  a  new  branch  of  economics,  “The  Economics  of 
Information”,  exploring  the  consequences  of  information  asymmetries  and  pioneering  such 
pivotal concepts as adverse selection and moral hazard which have now become standard 
tools not only of theorists, but also of policy analysts. 
9. 
I  am  sure  many  in  this  audience  have  read  his  book  Globalization  and  Its 
Discontents. Some of you may have read the authorized edition, some may even have read 
the  pirated  edition  because  this  seminal  book  has  been  translated  into  35  languages, 
besides  at  least  two  pirated  editions.  In  the  non-pirated  editions,  it  has  sold  more  than  a 
million copies worldwide. His most recent book, The Price of Inequality: How Today’s Divided 
Society Endangers Our Future, hit the New York Times best seller list within a few weeks of 
publication. The book provides a powerful critique of the free market orthodoxy, but ends on 
a note of hope, arguing that “another world is possible”. 
The  topic  for  Prof.  Stiglitz’s  Lecture  today  is:  “A  Revolution  in  Monetary  Policy: 
Revolution in monetary policy 
10. 
Lessons in the Wake of the Global Financial Crisis”. 
Since  the  topic  is  about  a  revolution  in  monetary  policy,  I  can  do  no  better  than 
11. 
invoking Vladimir Lenin, something of an authority on revolutions, who said: “A revolution is 
impossible without a revolutionary situation”. Global macroeconomic developments over the 
past five years have indeed led central banks to a revolutionary situation. When the crisis hit 
following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  central  banks  acted  with  an  unusual  show  of 
policy  force,  quickly  exhausted  their  conventional  tools,  then  threw  out  the  rule  book  and 
went  on  an  uncharted  territory  of  money  creation  which  has  taken  many  names  and 
metamorphosed into many acronyms. 
12. 
Today, there is quite some bewilderment among policy makers, particularly central 
bankers,  about  what  else  can  be  done  to  engineer  a  recovery.  This  bewilderment  has 
spawned a vigorous, interesting and instructive debate on the pursuit of monetary policy. Let 
me briefly outline some key issues in this debate. 
Quantitative easing 
13. 
The point of departure in this debate is the view that after policy interest rate has 
been brought to the zero lower bound, nothing else needs to be done except for the central 
bank to say that it will keep interest rates low in the future too. It is argued that this would 
encourage people to borrow more and spend it, bailing the economy out of recession. 
14. 
But  this  idea  of  topping  up  monetary  easing  with  communication  may  not  always 
work. People may not believe that the central bank will keep its promise of low interest rates. 
Even if they believe the central bank, they may not still borrow since what they are trying to 
do is to get out of debt rather than get into further debt as is the case today. 
So,  how  do  central  banks  improve  their  credibility?  By  tying  their  promise  of  low 
15. 
interest  rates  to  specific  quantitative  real  sector  variables?  The  US  Federal  Reserve  has 
recently led the way in this direction by saying that it will keep interest rates low as long as 
the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 per cent, and in the process, is willing to tolerate 
inflation  slightly  above  its  long-run  target.  Another  way  of  reinforcing  this  promise  of  low 
interest rates is the idea of shifting from targeting inflation to targeting nominal GDP. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Financial stability 
16. 
Quantitative easing has not been the only issue in this monetary policy revolution. A 
parallel, if also related, debate has been about the role of financial stability in the monetary 
policy objective function. This has raised several questions. What is the role of central banks 
in preserving financial stability? When and how should they use monetary policy to pursue 
financial  stability?  If  you  admit  the  argument  that  one  instrument  can  secure  only  one 
objective,  do  central  banks  have  the  policy  instruments  to  pursue  the  financial  stability 
objective? 
Independence of central banks 
17. 
A third major debate in monetary policy has been about the independence of central 
banks. In recent weeks, we have all seen this issue of central bank independence play out in 
Japan with political pressures on the Bank of Japan to adopt a higher inflation target so as to 
create more room for growth stimulus. The example of Japan is recent and high profile, but 
by no means an exception; the issue of monetary policy independence has acquired greater 
potency  following  the  expansion  of  the  mandates  of  central  banks  and  their  more  explicit 
pursuit of real sector targets such as growth and unemployment. 
Emerging market economies and monetary policy revolution 
18. 
Revolution in monetary policy is not exclusive to advanced economy central banks. 
Emerging market economy central banks are going through a revolution too with, of course, 
different  nuancing.  They  have  not  been  inflation  targetters  in  the  strict  sense;  they  have 
always  struggled  to  maintain  the  balance  between  growth  and  price  stability.  And  learning 
from the experience of several country specific and regional crises, they have also added, 
either explicitly or implicitly, financial stability to their objective functions. 
19. 
Monetary  policy  revolution  in  emerging  market  economy  central  banks  has  an 
additional  dimension,  which  is  that  in formulating their  monetary  policy,  they  are  having  to 
contend  with  the  forces  of  globalization,  in  particular  the  spillover  impact  of  the  advanced 
economy central banks. The “impossible trinity” asserts that a country cannot simultaneously 
maintain all three policy goals of free capital flows, a fixed exchange rate and independent 
monetary policy. Recent experience in emerging market economies has demonstrated that 
the  “impossible  trinity”  is  no  longer  a  text  book  paradigm;  balancing  between  these  three 
policy goals is becoming a practical policy consideration. 
Monetary and fiscal policies 
20. 
Even  as  monetary  policy,  both  in  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies.  is 
going  through  a  “revolution”,  one  thing  is  clear.  Central  banks  cannot  fix  economies  by 
themselves.  Governments  need  to  act  too  from  the  fiscal  side,  and  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies have to act in harmony. On top of this, governance needs to improve to inspire the 
trust and confidence of consumers and investors. 
21. 
The  crisis  is  still  with  us;  and  the  revolution  in  monetary  policy  is  still  work  in 
progress. But it has thrown up a number of questions. How will this revolution play out? What 
will it mean for the mandates of central banks and the autonomy with which they will deliver 
on that mandate? Who will win and who will lose? And, to sum it all up, what are the lessons 
from  this  “revolution”  for  monetary  policy?  For  answers  to  these  weighty  questions,  who 
better to turn to than Professor Joseph Stiglitz. 
22. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  please  join  me  in  welcoming  Professor  Joseph  Stiglitz  to 
deliver the C.D. Deshmukh Memorial Lecture on: “A Revolution in Monetary Policy: Lessons 
in the Wake of the Global Financial Crisis”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
