Graeme Wheeler: Decision making in the Reserve Bank of New Zealand 
Speech  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the 
University of Auckland Business School, Auckland, 7 March 2013. 
 I’m  sure  that  central  banking  was  the  furthest  thing  from  his  mind  when  the  British 
mountaineer, Eric Langmuir aptly said: 
“A decision without the pressure of consequence is hardly a decision at all”. 
Central  bankers  are  often  criticised for  avoiding  decisions,  although  leaving  policy  settings 
unchanged is often a major decision in itself. Sometimes they are accused of communicating 
in a secret code with the real meaning known only to other central bankers. So how do we 
undertake  important  policy  decisions  in  the  Reserve  Bank  and  how  do  we  endeavour  to 
communicate? 
Operational independence 
i) 
In  1990,  the  Reserve  Bank  became  the  first  modern  central  bank  to  have  a  legislated 
structure  in  which  the  government  took  the  lead  in  setting  the  objective,  while  the  central 
bank  had  operational  independence  in,  and  formal  accountability  for,  the  execution  of 
monetary policy. New Zealand also led the way with flexible inflation targeting, a framework 
now widely adopted by central banks across the OECD region. The 1989 Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Act states that “the primary function of the Reserve Bank is to formulate and 
implement monetary policy directed to the economic objective of achieving and maintaining 
stability in the general level of prices”. 
The legislation created provision for a Policy Targets Agreement (PTA) between the Minister 
of Finance and the Governor of the Bank. In practice, the PTA defines the objectives of the 
Bank, specifies an inflation range representing price stability and outlines considerations that 
the Bank must give weight to in framing monetary policy decisions. The current PTA, signed 
on 20 September 2012, introduces the goal of keeping future average CPI inflation near the 
two percent target mid-point of the one percent to three percent range. Like its predecessor 
PTAs,  it  also  requires  the  Bank  to  seek to  avoid  unnecessary  instability  in  output,  interest 
rates, and the exchange rate. 
The Governor’s responsibilities and obligations are conferred and imposed under the 1989 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act, the 2009 AMLCFT Act, the 2010 Insurance (Prudential 
Supervision Act), to which is expected to be added the Non-Bank Deposit Takers legislation 
currently in the House. The Governor has the power to act for the Bank on all matters within 
the ambit of the Acts that are not required to be dealt with by the Board of the Reserve Bank 
(which relate to the appointment, remuneration and removal of the Deputy Governors). The 
Governor may delegate decision making authority to other officers of the Bank. 
The bank’s span of responsibilities 
ii) 
The Reserve Bank is a full service central bank and its responsibilities are broader than most 
other  central  banks.  Not  all  central  banks  are  responsible  for  prudential  and  regulatory 
oversight of the banking and payment systems, or have the authority to undertake exchange 
rate  intervention.  In  addition,  the  Bank  has  an  extensive  programme  of  financial  stability-
related initiatives underway that includes Open Bank Resolution, the introduction of macro-
prudential  instruments,  a  review  of  the  payments  system,  and  implementation  of  Basel  III 
capital requirements. The Bank has also taken on responsibilities for anti-money laundering 
and regulation of insurance companies and non-bank deposit takers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Important checks and balances 
iii) 
The  checks  and  balances  and  accountability  mechanisms  relating  to  the  Bank  are 
considerable and include: 
• 
Publication  of  an  annual  report,  at  least  two  Monetary  Policy  Statements  (we  do 
four),  and  two  semi-annual  Financial  Stability  Reports.  The  Bank’s  reports  are 
reviewed  by  Parliament’s  Finance  and  Expenditure  Committee,  the  Board  of 
Directors  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  and  the  Bank  provides  press  conferences  around 
each Monetary Policy Statement and Financial Stability Report. 
External auditing of the Bank’s financial reporting, oversight by the Audit Committee 
of  the  Reserve  Bank  Board,  and  a  strong  in-house  internal  auditing  function  that 
reports to the Governor and works closely with the Board’s Audit Committee. 
Publication of regulatory impact assessments of any prudential policy that it adopts. 
Monitoring and oversight by the Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank, which acts 
as  agent  to  the  Minister  of  Finance  in  reviewing  how  well  the  Bank  meets  its 
legislative  responsibilities.  The  Board  reviews  the  Bank’s  performance  under  the 
PTA, and its efforts to promote the maintenance of a sound and efficient financial 
system. In considering the Bank’s monetary policy decisions, the Directors receive 
all of the papers discussed by the Bank’s  Monetary Policy  Committee, the  written 
advice that the Governor receives from individual members of the Monetary Policy 
Committee, and webcasts of the Governor’s press conferences.  
The Board meets nine times a year (four times a year outside of Wellington where 
receptions  are  held  with  the  business  community)  and  provides  advice  to  the 
Governor  on  various  management  issues.  The  Board  assesses  the  Bank’s 
performance in meeting its obligations and responsibilities, discusses this with the 
Minister of Finance, and publishes its review in the Bank’s Annual Report. 
The Minister of Finance’s powers under the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act to 
direct the Bank to formulate and implement monetary policy for different economic 
objectives  to  those  specified  in  Section  8,  and  to  determine  the  basis  for  foreign 
exchange intervention by the Bank. The most coercive powers exercisable against 
registered banks may only be exercised by the Minister, or with his consent. These 
powers must be exercised transparently, and have not to date been used. 
    The policy decision making framework 
iv) 
In order to assist with major policy decisions, we recently introduced a Governing Committee, 
comprising the Governor, the two Deputy Governors and the Assistant Governor, under the 
chairmanship of the Governor. The Governing Committee will discuss all major monetary and 
financial  policy  decisions  falling  under  the  Bank’s  responsibilities,  including  decisions  on 
monetary  policy,  foreign  exchange  intervention,  liquidity  management  policy,  prudential 
policy  (both  micro  and macro)  and  other  regulatory  policies. To  date,  individual  Governors 
have  taken  responsibility  for  particular  areas  of  the  Bank,  such  as  operations,  monetary 
policy  and  financial  stability.  Going  forward  Governors  will  have  more  individual  and 
collective involvement in key decisions taken across all areas of the Bank. This is the same 
decision  making  framework  adopted  by  the  Bank  of  Canada,  which  also  has  a  single 
decision maker model. As with the Bank of Canada, the Governor retains the right of veto on 
committee decisions. The Committee formalises and expands past practice. 
Several  other  central  banks,  including  the  central  banks  of  Brazil,  Mexico,  and  Sweden, 
make  monetary  policy  through  a  central  committee  comprising  the  Governors,  although 
sometimes other internal members are included. These committees benefit decision making 
by pooling the knowledge, wisdom, and expertise of individual Governors. Such committees 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
bring  strength,  especially  where  considerable  uncertainty  is  involved,  and  can  mitigate 
extreme preferences of an individual.  
The Bank’s Governors team has extensive experience inside and outside the Reserve Bank. 
While the change represents a management rather than governance initiative, the Governing 
Committee will maximise the knowledge and experience of the Governors individually and as 
a collective, rigorously test ideas and build consensus around major policy decisions. 
Analytical  and  policy  papers  are  discussed  in  several  important  committees  including  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee,  Macro-financial  Committee,  Financial  System  Oversight 
Committee, and the Assets and Liabilities Committee (which examines  impacts of portfolio 
decisions  and  changing  relative  prices  on  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet).  These  committees 
have  clear  terms  of  reference,  mainly  meet  fortnightly,  and  are  chaired  by  a  Governor. 
Usually  decisions  are  taken  at  the  committee  meeting,  but  major  and  complex  policy 
decisions  will  often  be  referred  to  the  Governing  Committee.  Management  decisions  are 
taken at weekly meetings of the Bank’s Senior Management Group and all communications 
issues and requests are discussed weekly at the Communications Committee. 
Communicating policy decisions 
v) 
We  are  expanding  our  on-the-record  speaking  by  increasing  the  number  of  speeches, 
broadening the range of topics while remaining within the Reserve Bank’s framework, and 
increasing the number of speakers. At the same time, the Bank will continue its extensive 
off-the-record briefings to groups ranging in size from 15 to 400 people, but we will become 
more  selective  in  the  80–100  briefings  we  provide  each  year. We  are  also  expanding  our 
communications through social media, in-house videos, webcasts and other online channels.  
We  provide  considerable  background  briefings  to  the  media,  but  announce  our  policy 
decisions through our publications, speeches, and press conferences. We will also provide 
six-monthly briefings to the caucuses of the political parties, and are redesigning our website 
to expand its information content and increase its accessibility. 
To  be  effective,  monetary  policy  requires  transparency  in  terms  of  policy  goals  and  how 
these are to be achieved. The former is contained in the Policy Targets Agreement; the latter 
through  our  Monetary  Policy  Statements,  OCR  announcements,  speeches  and  press 
conferences.  In  commenting  on  monetary  policy  decisions  and  especially  those  relating  to 
the official cash rate, we are conscious that traders pre-position themselves prior to policy 
announcements and that the exchange rate and interest rate spreads can alter depending on 
the  policy  decision  and  the  language  that  accompanies  it.  Above  all,  we  want  policy 
statements to accurately reflect the economic conjuncture and outlook as we see it, and the 
range  of  considerations  we  are  weighing  in  fulfilling  our  responsibilities.  In  the  case  of 
monetary  policy,  these  include  implementing  monetary  policy  in  a  sustainable,  consistent, 
and  transparent  manner,  having  regard  to  the  efficiency  and  soundness  of  the  financial 
system,  and  seeking  to  avoid  unnecessary  instability  in  output,  interest  rates,  and  the 
exchange rate. 
The 90-day interest rate projection contained in the Monetary Policy Statement is a form of 
forward guidance as to our expectations of movements in the Bank’s Official Cash Rate. It is 
intended to help businesses and households plan with greater confidence in managing their 
consumption patterns and saving and investment decisions, and to help shape expectations 
about  the  future  path  of  inflation  and  interest  rates.  This  also  helps  market  participants  to 
anticipate  the  Reserve  Bank’s  policy  responses  as  new  data  becomes  available.  As  with 
most conditional projections, the interest rate path is affected by the risks and uncertainties 
that usually increase with time. In practice, the balance of language around the projection is 
at  least  as  important  as  the  projection  itself  in  shaping  expectations  of  the  outlook. When 
market expectations adjust smoothly and efficiently, it can diminish the need for larger policy 
adjustments  by  the  central  bank  that  could  otherwise  unsettle  markets  and  have  greater 
impacts on asset prices and spending decisions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Concluding comments 
Global financial markets are still dealing with the major regulatory changes and the massive 
adjustments taking place in government, corporate, financial sector and household balance 
sheets in economies that generate around two thirds of world output and over three quarters 
of  cross  border  capital  flows.  The  spill-overs  from  these  adjustments  and  the  fiscal  and 
monetary  responses  to  them  can  be  especially  challenging  in  small  open  economies  with 
stronger growth prospects, and where there are high expectations of what central banks can 
achieve. 
The Reserve Bank endeavours to provide an accurate assessment of the implications and 
challenges of these adjustments for the New Zealand economy. In doing so, we seek to be 
clear  on  what  we  can  and  cannot  influence,  and  how  government  policy  instruments  and 
private  sector  responses  can  increase  our  effectiveness.  At  the  same  time  we’ve  been 
extending  our  regulatory  oversight,  building  the  protections  available  to  taxpayers  in  the 
event of bank failure, and increasing the range and scope of instruments to help deliver price 
stability and increase the efficiency and soundness of the domestic financial system.  
Within  the  Bank  we  are  looking  to  the  team  of  Governors  to  debate  major  policy  matters 
leading to decisions, and increasing the frequency and scope of our on-the-record reporting. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
