Barry Whiteside: Commemorative coin for Fiji’s Iliesa Delana 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
unveiling of the Iliesa Delana commemorative 50 cent circulation coin at the Reserve Bank of 
Fiji, Suva, 18 September 2013. 
 Chief Guest Mr Iliesa Delana 
Distinguished Guests 
Board of Directors, and colleagues 
Members of the media 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Bula vinaka and a very warm welcome to you all. 
This is a truly special occasion and we thank you for accepting our invitation to help honour a 
true son and “icon” of Fiji, Iliesa Delana, in a slightly different way from our morning tea after 
his London Paralympic gold medal win last year. This is not to say that we did not treasure 
those  earlier moments when  our  whole  nation  was  at  one,  coming together to  celebrate  a 
bright shining star. 
After that morning tea we at the Reserve Bank of Fiji really felt we could do better and make 
the recognition more lasting. After all, this was an achievement up there with the very best in 
our Country’s history! 
Today, we will be unveiling a commemorative circulation coin that will feature London 2012 
Paralympic  Games  athlete,  Iliesa  Delana,  in  action  winning  the  gold  medal  during  the 
F42 High  Jump  event.  This  is  the  first  time  that  we  have  featured  a  sportsperson  on  our 
coins. We have had them on stamps, but never on a circulation coin! 
I  am  sure  by  now  Iliesa  needs  no  introduction  as  he  has  become  a  household  name 
throughout Fiji and an inspiration to many. His achievements say it all. But let me say a few 
words in honour of Iliesa anyway, and to also inspire the younger generation. 
Iliesa believes in the motto “Disability is not a barrier in life but a challenge” and I strongly 
believe that he continues to live up to his motto as he always continues to raise the bar. 
Hailing from the village of Naisausau, Namara, in the province of Tailevu, Iliesa debuted at 
the Far East and South Pacific Games for the Disabled (FESPIC), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia in 
2006. In 2011 Iliesa participated at the World Championships where he recorded a jump of 
1.73m in the F42 category and was ranked number 2 in the world. 
At the London 2012 Paralympic Games, Iliesa’s jump cleared the bar of 1.74m breaking the 
Oceania record for the event and he became the first Fijian ever to win gold at Paralympics 
or Olympics level. 
Iliesa’s achievements of course have been highly recognised and appreciated – and rightfully 
so. In 2011 and 2012 he won back to back Sportsman of the Year awards and later in 2012 
he was also awarded the 2012 Fiji Person of the Year. He has officiated at many sports and 
social events recently and continues to evoke that sense of pride as a Fijian who has come 
from humble beginnings and taken to the world stage. 
We are delighted to further recognise and share his achievements and we thought to take 
this to the next level by striking a special coin, a coin that will be used by all Fijians, a coin 
that will be symbolic of something great, something to inspire us all to strive for the best. 
Work on this new 50 cent coin commenced in September 2012 and we were glad to have 
received the various approvals from Iliesa himself as well as FASANOC, the Fiji Paralympic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Committee,  Digicel  as  Iliesa’s  major  corporate  sponsor  and  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Board  of 
Directors, to proceed with the coinage and make it a reality. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  only  produced  500,000  coins  of  this  special  issue,  in  a 
50 cent denomination. Many would ask why the 50 cents? It is the largest coin in our existing 
family and given its size, we strongly felt the designs could be prominently featured without 
losing  any  of  the  details  of  this  historic  win.  The  50  cent  coin  is  also  a  widely  used  coin 
denomination. 
The  obverse  (front)  design  features  Fiji’s  Coat  of  Arms  while  the  reverse  (back)  design 
features Iliesa at the event. The obverse and reverse designs complement each other and 
are  reminiscent  of the moment  the  Fijian flag was  flown  high  with  pride  at  the  Paralympic 
games soon after Iliesa’s jump with millions of viewers watching the win across the globe. 
This coin is a “limited edition legal tender circulation coin” which will be issued into circulation 
from today. The coin can, of course, be used to pay for goods and services although I am 
sure it will fast become a collector’s edition, not only locally, but also by sporting enthusiasts 
across the world, given its limited mintage. I am sure the children will be keen to get hold of 
one and retain it as part of their collections! 
With  this  recognition,  I urge  all  aspiring  athletes  to  learn from  Iliesa’s  hard  work,  courage, 
determination and achievements to continue to strive for the best. You can achieve the most 
difficult of tasks if you set your mind to it. You are Fiji’s future. If you have the will to do so, 
you will surely succeed. Take that lesson from Iliesa. 
We believe that this is the highest level of recognition that we at the Reserve Bank can give 
someone. What better way than to be featured on our Fijian currency, be known to the rest of 
the world and promote Fiji to the rest of the world. 
On  behalf  of  the  Board,  Management  and  staff  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  I  once  again 
congratulate Iliesa on his magnificent gold medal win at the London 2012 Paralympic Games 
and wish him well for the future. I also extend my sincere appreciation and gratitude to you 
all for taking time out to celebrate this occasion with Iliesa. 
Vinaka vakalevu and God Bless Fiji! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
