Deepali Pant Joshi: NISM Conference on ethics and corporate 
governance 
Speech by Dr Deepali Pant Joshi, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
National  Institute  of  Securities  Markets  Conference  on  ethics  and  corporate  governance, 
Kolkata, 11 December 2013. 
 Introduction 
At the outset, let me congratulate the organisers for this topical choice of subject, one which 
concerns us all. I thank Director, National Institute of Securities Markets, Dr Sandip Ghose 
and the Institute of Company Secretaries for having me here and my dear friend, Prashant 
Saran, for that brilliant opening address, which quite sets the tone for this panel. 
Que custodiet ipso custodes? Who will guard the guards ? 
Over  the  last  two  decades,  corporate  governance  has  attracted  a  great  deal  of  public 
interest,  it  is  now  widely  appreciated  that  this  is  critical  for  the  economic  health  of 
Corporations  and  of  larger  society.  The  headlines  of  newspapers  of  the  past  few  years  in 
particular,  portray  a  dismal  story  of  lack  of  corporate  ethics:  Satyam,  Enron,  falling  stock 
markets,  corporate  failures,  dubious  accounting  practices,  abuses  of  corporate  power, 
criminal investigations reflect that the entire economic system on which investment returns 
depend is showing signs of infirmity and stress that have undermined investor confidence. 
Almost as if checks and balances that should protect our interests are pushed to one side, 
driven by the overwhelming need to move fast in relentless pursuit of profits. Notably some 
failures were the result of fraudulent accounting and other illegal practices, others were just 
bad governance. 
Company Boards or Old Boy’s Clubs? 
Company Boards often deteriorate to being a cosy club, friends of the boss, who just met to 
rubber stamp his decisions. I read the Economist (of 7th December) on flight, and the turn of 
phrase  (on  page  67)  was  interesting.  Critics  have  compared  directors  to  “parsley  on  fish”, 
decorative  but  ineffectual;  or  honorary  colonels,  ornamental  in  parade  but  fairly  useless  in 
battle”. Ralph Nader calls them “cuckolds” who are always the last to know when managers 
have erred.  
The  corporate  scandals  of  the  early  2000s  forced  boards  to  take  a  more  active  role.  The 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and the New York Stock Exchange’s New Rules in 2003 obliged 
directors to take more responsibility for preventing fraud and self-dealing. This led to a big 
increase in the quality  of boards. But it also wasted a lot of talent on form-filling and box-
ticking. Many of the same companies exhibited actual corporate governance risks such as 
conflicts of interest, inexperienced directors, overly lucrative compensation, or unequal share 
voting  rights.  In  the  face  of  such  scandals  and  malpractices,  there  has  been  a  renewed 
emphasis on corporate governance. 
OECD definition of corporate governance 
“Corporate  governance  is  the  system  by  which  business  corporations  are  directed  and 
controlled.  The  corporate  governance  structure  specifies  the  distribution  of  rights  and 
responsibilities  among  different  participants  in  the  corporation,  such  as,  the  board, 
managers, shareholders and other stakeholders and spells out the rules and procedures for 
making  decisions  in  corporate  affairs.  By  doing  this,  it  also  provides  the  structure  through 
which  the  company  objectives  are  set  and  the  means  of  attaining  those  objectives  and 
monitoring performance” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Thus  corporate  governance  includes  within  its  ambit,  the  relationship  of  a  company  to  its 
shareholders  and  to  society;  the  promotion  of  fairness,  transparency  and  accountability; 
reference to mechanisms that are used to “govern” managers and to ensure that the actions 
taken  by  them  are  consistent  with  the  interests  of  key  stakeholder  groups.  The  salient 
features  span 
legal  and  regulatory 
environment, appropriate risk management measures, information flows, the responsibility of 
senior management and the board of directors. 
transparency  and  accountability, 
issues  of 
the 
The Banking Regulation Act 
Section 10A of the Banking Regulation Act lays down stipulations for the Board of Directors. 
They must have special knowledge of the following 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accountancy  
Agriculture and Rural Economy  
Banking  
Cooperation  
Economics  
Finance  
Law  
Small Scale Industry 
 
Or  any  other  matter,  the  special  knowledge  of,  and  practical  experience  in 
which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  would  be  useful  to  the  Banking 
Company.  Provided  that  out  of  the  aforesaid  number  of  Directors,  not  less 
than two shall have special knowledge of, practical experience, with respect to 
agriculture  and  the  rural  economy,  cooperation  or  small  scale  industry  and 
shall not (i) have substantial interest in, or be connected with, whether as an 
employee, manager or managing agent,  
Any  company,  not  being  a  company  registered  under  section  25  of  the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 to 1956), or  
Any  firm,  which  carries  on  any  trade,  commerce  or  industry  and  which,  in 
either case, is not a small scale industrial concern, or (ii) be proprietors of any 
trading,  commercial  or  industrial  concern,  not  being  a  small  scale  industrial 
concern.  
  Voting  rights  will  be  distributed  amongst  the  Board  of  Directors  in  a  manner  such  that  no 
more than three Directors are entitled to exercise voting rights in excess of twenty percent of 
the total voting rights of all the shareholders to the Banking Entity. 
The  tenure  of  Directors  except  the  Chairman  or  the  whole  time  director  is  limited  to  eight 
continuous years. 
The Chairman of the Board (appointed on a whole time basis) or the Managing Director of 
the Banking entity and any Director (appointed by the Reserve Bank under Section 10A of 
the Banking Regulation Act) will not be required to hold qualification shares in the Banking 
Entity. 
The RBI has the power, from time to time, to appoint one or more persons to hold office as 
additional directors of any Banking Company, if it is of the opinion that the same is in the 
interests  of  banking  Policy/public  interest/banking  company  depositors,  it  may  also  require 
the banking company to elect or appoint any other person as the Chairman in case it is of the 
opinion that the current elected Chairman is not a fit and proper person to hold such office. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Requirements of Corporate Governance as per the RBI guidelines on Corporate 
Governance 
RBI  issues  guidelines  on  corporate  governance  for  public  sector  banks  which  serve  as  a 
base for the Corporate Governance framework in Banks.  
Banks must perform due diligence of the directors in regard to their suitability for appointment 
to the Board by way of qualifications and technical expertise. The Government should also 
be guided by certain “fit and proper” norms for the appointment of Directors representing the 
Government on the Boards of Public sector banks. 
Banks  need  to  elect  shareholder  nominees  in  proportion  to  the  shares  issued  to  public 
subject  to  a  maximum  of  six  nominees  in  respect  of  banks  which  have  issued  capital  to 
public up to 40% of the Banks paid up capital. 
Executive Directors (EDs) are eligible for appointment as Chairman of the Board of Directors 
on  fulfilment  of  the  following  criteria  vesting  in  having  served  in  the  position  and  residual 
tenure. 
Guidelines  on  the  number  of  EDs  –  Small  Banks  with  business  of  less  than  INR  1.5  lakh 
crore  may  have  two  EDs  with  the  responsibilities  of  the  second  Director  including  human 
resource development and technology. Large banks with business of more than Inr 3 lakh 
crore may have three EDs, the third with responsibility for HRD and Technology.  
I have been a Director on the Board of Andhra Bank, I found that the Boards of Banks are 
hedged with innumerable Committees – there are Management Committee, Credit Approval 
Committee, Audit Committee, Risk management Committee, Special Committee to monitor 
large  Value  Frauds/Anti-Fraud  Committee,  Asset  Liability  Committee,  Customer  Service 
Committee,  Shareholders  Investors  Grievance  Committee,  Share  Transfer  Committee, 
Remuneration  Committee  and  so  on  and  so  forth  and  yet  the  state  of  Management  and 
Corporate Governance in public sector banks remains a cause of grave concern.  
As Deputy Governor, Dr. Chakrabarty, recently pointed out (Bancon address), if restructured 
assets show further deterioration surely the appraisal mechanisms were weak RAROC Risk 
adjusted  Return  on  Capital  was  not  correctly  computed.  The  mechanisms  of  Corporate 
Governance surely merit much greater attention. 
Regulator as supervisor 
Banks  constitute  the  largest  financial  intermediaries  globally  and  possess  stupendous 
powers of leverage. The RBI plays a direct role in Bank governance through the regulation 
and  supervision  of  Banking  Institutions.  This  role  assumes  greater  salience  viewed  in 
conjunction with the need to ensure systemic and financial stability. Banks enjoy the benefit 
of  high  leverage  with  the  downside  protection  of  deposit  insurance  which  weakens  their 
incentives for strong management. They also remain “Too Big to Fail” (TBTF).  
The current Basel accord lays even greater stress on risk measurement and management. 
Bank  Supervisors  must  make  the  Boards  of  banks  the  main  locus  of  accountability  and 
assess board effectiveness. Regulatory and supervisory systems that foster more accurate 
information  disclosure  and  empower  private  investors,  legal  rights,  substantially  boost 
banking  system  and  profitability.  Large  investors  may  manipulate  the  firm  contrary  to  the 
broad interests of Banks and other shareholders.  
The  task  of  the  Bank  supervisor  is  indeed  onerous.  Information  asymmetries  plague  all 
sectors  but  this  is  even  more  tangential  in  finance;  in  product  or  other  service  markets, 
purchasers part with money in exchange for something new. In finance, money is exchanged 
for a promise to pay in the future. In many product or service markets, if the product sold – a 
car or a haircut is defective, the buyers often find out relatively soon. However, loan quality is 
not readily observable for quite some time and can be hidden for extensive periods. Banks 
can  also  alter  the  risk  composition  of  their  assets  more  quickly  than  most  non-financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
industries. Banks can also sweep problems under the carpet by extending further loans to 
clients  that  cannot  service  previous  debt  obligations.  In  most  sectors  where  there  is  an 
inventory pileup, be it cars or computers, it is generally a negative sign about the company’s 
performance but when inventories of money pile up in a bank, it becomes more liquid.  
It  is  much  harder  to  sort  out  whether  this  is  a  negative  signal  or  a  prudent  response  by 
management to a risky environment. Corporate governance of Banks is an essential element 
of sound regulatory architecture. The regulatory response is an imperative of ethics. 
Is the business of business just business? 
Milton Friedman had a view that corporate executive’s responsibility generally will be to make 
as much money as possible while conforming to their basic rules of the society, both, those 
embodied in law and those embodied in ethical custom. The objective is the maximisation of 
consumption  and  production.  “The  business  of  business  is  just  business”.  This  is  not  an 
axiom  one  can  concur  with.  If  you  consider  the  business  of  Companies  historically,  it  has 
embraced colonialism and slavery! So the element of ethics must always underlie necessity 
of both business personal and organisational conduct. 
Formal codes of ethics 
While many of the governance issues that organizations face are not new, the environment 
in  which  they  confront  them  today  is  more  challenging  than  ever.  Many  companies  are 
adopting  legal  compliance  mechanisms  which  address  ethics  or  conduct  issues  in  formal 
documents. 
Solidarity among colleagues;  
Pride and commitment to working for the Organization;  
Personal Aspirations that are aligned with organizational goals.”  
RBI ethics@work 
The RBI, with the assistance of Professor Dipankar Gupta, who is also a Director on the RBI 
Central Board, has formulated a Code of Conduct for itself, which we term ethics@work. You 
may well ask, why an ethics manual and I quote from the ethics manual  
“An Ethics Manual promotes: 
 
 
 
The ethics manual is expected  
 
 
 
 
 
The  written  code  of  ethics  will  be  useful  for  socialization  of  our  new  recruits  in  the 
organization, serve as an implement of employee training. Be a benchmark transgression of 
the same, will invite disciplinary action. It will also help in dispute and conflict management. 
The  moral  dilemmas,  the  approach-approach  conflicts  will  be  more  easily  resolved  with 
reference to the touchstone of the code of ethics. It clarifies the organisation’s expectations 
from the employee and vests on enshrining complete transparency. This is a formal code of 
business conduct and ethics, to be ascribed to and strictly adhered to by all employees. It is 
morally incumbent upon them to do so. 
To define and clearly set out what will be deemed to be acceptable behaviour.  
We hope that this will promote and ensure high standards of practice  
And also establish a benchmark for self-evaluation  
Lay down the mainframe for professional behaviour and responsibilities  
Enable a sense of occupational identity Ideals we can clearly ascribe to.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Some organisations also have ethics officers but in the ultimate analysis, the foundations of 
ethical behaviour go well beyond corporate culture and policies. These are rooted in one’s 
moral  training,  lessons  parents  and  school  teachers  have  taught  from  early  childhood  on 
which affect not just individual behaviour the competitive business environment and indeed 
society as a whole.  
Conclusion 
From an ethical dimension, at a fundamental level, the key issues of corporate governance 
involve  questions  concerning  relationships  and  building  trust  (both  within  and  outside  the 
organization.  Aristotle,  in  the  Nichomacnean  Ethics  explained  that  it  is  “in  justice”  that  the 
ordering of society is centered. 
Ethics  comes  from  the  Greek  ethos  and  embraces  both  work  ethics  and  “mores”  –  the 
conduct  and  culture  of  the  organisation.  It  is  therefore  all  encompassing  and  must  be  all 
pervasive.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
