Peter Praet: Interview in Financial Times 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in Financial Times, conducted by Ms Claire Jones and published on 12 December 2013. 
 The  European  Central  Bank  has  forecast  inflation  of  1.3  per  cent  in  2015,  which  is 
usually seen as the policy-relevant horizon. How can you justify not doing more now 
when inflation is forecast to be almost a third below your target two years from now? 
We aim at an inflation rate of close but below 2% over the medium term. Given the subdued 
outlook  for  prices,  we  are  already  doing  a  lot.  We  have  cut  rates.  Since  July  2012  our 
overnight rate has been in general lower than that controlled by any other major central bank. 
We  have  offered  our  forward  guidance.  We  have  extended  the  conduct  of  our  main 
refinancing operations as fixed rate tender procedures full allotment until at least 7 July 2015. 
So, after a prolonged period of low inflation, we would expect inflation rates to return back to 
rates closer to 2%. However, this will take some time given the nature of the shock, namely 
the  unwinding  of  real  and  financial  imbalances,  and  the  possibly  longer  than  normal 
transmission lag of monetary policy in such an environment. 
But  we  have  also  said  that  we  are  ready  to  act  again  should  risks  to  the  downside 
materialise. 
What matters, in particular, is that medium to long term inflation expectations remain firmly 
anchored in line with price stability. 
Mr  Draghi  said  last  Thursday  that  there  had  been  a  brief  discussion  of  negative 
interest rates and that any further LTRO would have to involve an extension of lending 
to the real economy. Are these two policies for which you feel as though you could 
build a strong consensus of support on the governing council should economic – or 
financial – conditions disappoint? 
What is important here is to remember that the governing council unanimously – and I’d like 
to emphasise this – shares the same assessment of economic conditions. There is unanimity 
on the outlook; the view on the economy is very much shared in the governing council. Price 
pressures are going to be subdued for a prolonged period of time 
As a result, we all agree to have an accommodative monetary policy for as long as needed. 
And even take more measures, if needed. 
That’s why we can say: we are ready to act and able to act. 
Under what conditions would you act? 
We are  very  well  aware  that  price  pressures  are  likely  to  remain  subdued for  a  prolonged 
period  of  time  but  we  expect  inflation  rates  to  converge  again  towards  2  per  cent  as  the 
cyclical upswing of the economy takes hold. 
We are at the same time very conscious that, if some of the downside risks do materialise, 
then  –  because  price  pressures  are  already  weak  today  –  we  would  act  decisively  again. 
This view is very strongly shared by the governing council members. 
What are the scenarios that could lead you to act? 
There are a number of downside risks that we have identified. 
They relate to the state of the economy and downside risks to growth, a tightening of global 
financial conditions with undue spill-overs to the euro area, energy prices, and – last but not 
least – a fatigue in structural reforms in Europe. This would mean that investments do not 
pick  up  and  that  business  confidence  doesn’t  improve  further.  For  me  that’s  the  most 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
important  aspect  of  all  –  that  structural  reforms  are  being  implemented  so  as  to  improve 
growth  potential,  employment  opportunities  and  overall  confidence.  However,  for  this  last 
downside risk, monetary policy has clearly its limits in what it can do. 
Another  risk  would  be  that,  as  a  result  of  the  comprehensive  assessment,  there  could  be 
some dampening effect in the short term. That risk is still fairly limited and temporary – and 
should  be  compensated  for  by  the  expansionary  effects  over  the  medium  term,  which  will 
positively  affect  confidence  in  the  nearer  term.  We  will  be  monitoring  this  risk  from  a 
monetary perspective. 
However, this potential procyclical effect of an AQR should not lead to softening the rules of 
the AQR. 
The instruments you use to handle each scenario may depend of the nature of the shock. 
Each instrument has a different impact and any of the measures taken would depend on our 
analysis of the monetary and economic developments. 
Could you just say a little bit more about the possible impact of the AQR? 
A  strong  comprehensive  assessment  makes  central  bank  action  more  effective.  Monetary 
policy does not work as well if banks’ capital basis is thin and insufficient to support lending. 
In  the  US,  you  can  intervene  directly  in  the  markets  to  transmit  monetary  policy  stimulus, 
because the markets play a bigger role in financing the economy. Here, the pass-through of 
your  monetary  policy  is  primarily  via  the  banks  and  it  takes  time.  The  comprehensive 
assessment should shorten the time it takes for monetary policy to impact the real economy. 
Indeed, it is easier for the central bank to support the economy as healthier banks tend to 
lend more. 
The worst case, to say it very bluntly, is of a central bank providing liquidity to banks just to 
buy or carry legacy assets, and the banking sector doesn’t restructure. This was typically the 
Japanese situation in the early 2000s. 
Perhaps paradoxically, a rigorous AQR and stress test helps monetary policy. Appropriately 
treating  banks’  holdings  of  sovereign  debt  according  to  the  risk  that  they  pose  to  banks’ 
capital makes it unlikely that the banks will use central bank liquidity to excessively increase 
their  exposure  to  sovereign  debt.  This  is  because  banks  will  be  wary  of  the  constraints 
placed on sovereign debt by the stress tests to which they are subject at the same time. 
Therefore,  should  the  procyclical  impact  of  the  AQR  be  significant,  then  monetary  policy 
would  be  able  to  act  –  without  hesitation  and  being  reassured  that  the  side  effects  of  a 
liquidity injection that we have seen for the 2011–2012 operations would be minimised. 
So how would you assess whether the AQR was procyclical? 
Don’t forget  we  have  our  two  pillar  approach:  we  analyse  the  business  cycle,  but  we  also 
look at money and credit. 
We will see from the second pillar very quickly if the credit situation doesn’t improve. At this 
stage of the recovery, what we see at the moment is quite normal. The big corporate firms do 
not have as many constraints as the SMEs. They have around €2trn in excess cash, they 
can  access  debt  markets.  The  reluctance  to  invest  comes  more  from  the  business 
confidence side. 
And if you did act because of the impact of the AQR, what exactly would you do? 
Depending on the situation, the central bank can decide on the most effective way liquidity 
provision can be provided. 
There are no restrictions on the way a central bank provides liquidity to the banks via repo, a 
priori. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
You want to reach your price stability objective. At the same time, you want to be sure that 
when  you  provide  liquidity  against  adequate  collateral,  it  doesn’t  reduce  the  incentive  to 
restructure  the  banking  sector.  And  so  by  having  a  well-designed  comprehensive 
assessment – like the one we’re preparing now – we are easing the job of the central bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
