Vítor Constâncio: Banking Union and the European crisis 
Opening remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at 
the 6th Santander International Banking Conference, Madrid, 5 November 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak today at the Santander International Banking Conference 
that has become over the years a very relevant event.  
A  window  of  opportunity  is  currently  open  for  the  banking  sector  in  Europe.  We  have  the 
possibility  to  change  how  the  banking  sector  serves  the  economy;  to  implement  adequate 
regulation  and  ensure  its  stability  and  efficiency;  and  with  banking  union,  to  reform  how 
banks are supervised and resolved. If we make the most of this opportunity, we can put the 
banking  sector  on  a  sounder  footing  for  a  generation.  We  therefore  face  a  profound 
responsibility as policymakers to get these changes right. 
Today’s conference includes many expert speakers who will go into detail on the on-going 
reforms of the banking sector. I would therefore like to use my remarks today to recall why 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) was the necessary response to the crisis and how 
the  design  of the  SSM  is  addressing  some  of the  weaknesses  in  the  initial  architecture  of 
EMU. 
The point I will emphasise is that one of the main drivers of the crisis was private imbalances 
financed  by  banks  in  both  core  and  peripheral  countries.  For  this reason,  one  of the most 
important lessons we can take from the crisis is the importance of building a genuine banking 
union. 
The crisis narrative 
Indeed, the importance of banking union is related with the role of the banking sector in the 
development of the European economic crisis.  
As  you  know,  there  are  many  explanations  for the  crisis:  some  observers  like  to focus  on 
unsound  fiscal  policies  and  excessive  sovereign  debt;  others  on  competitiveness  losses 
engineered  by  uncontrolled  unit  labour  costs;  and  others  still  see  the  crisis  more  as  a 
traditional balance of payments crisis in a “fully fixed” exchange rate regime. 
But there is one narrative that connects these explanations and it is oldest narrative of the 
crisis. It states there was essentially nothing wrong with the initial design of EMU, and the 
crisis  resulted  mostly  from  the  fact  that  several  peripheral  countries  did  not  respect  that 
design – in particular the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). In this story, the 
root of the crisis lays mostly with fiscal indiscipline in an over-heating economy. This led to 
wage and price increases, which implied a loss of competitiveness, which in turn led to the 
balance of payment crises. 
This narrative is internally coherent, but in my view it exaggerates the role of fiscal policies as 
an initial cause of the crisis. 
To begin with, it does not seem that fiscal soundness, as measured by compliance with the 
SGP, is particularly correlated with later developments in the crisis. Germany and France did 
not respect the Pact in 2003–4, while Spain and Ireland respected it more or less fully until 
2007. Indeed, Spain was running a budget surplus before the crisis. 
Neither does it seem that fiscal policies played a primary role in driving the economic cycle 
before the crisis. There was no uniform rise in government debt ratio in the euro area before 
the crisis, and in several countries debt-to-GDP ratios actually fell. In Spain, for instance, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
public debt ratio fell from 62% of GDP to 36% from 1999–2007 and in Ireland from 47% to 
25%.  
The more important factor driving the economic imbalances up to 2007 was the increasing 
private financial deficits – or put differently, rising private debt levels financed by the banking 
sectors of both core and peripheral countries.  
Contrary to public debt ratios to GDP, private debt was increasing much more rapidly in all 
peripheral countries before the crisis. In Portugal the private debt ratio to GDP increased by 
49% from 1999 to 2008, in Spain by 75%, in Ireland by 101% and in Greece by 217%. To 
fund this expansion of private debt, cross-border lending between euro area banks increased 
significantly, encouraged by the absence of exchange rate risks after the introduction of the 
euro.  The  exposures  of  banks  from  core  to  peripheral  countries  more  than  quintupled 
between 1999 and 2008. 
These  developments 
fiscal,  current  account  and 
competitiveness  positions  before  the  crisis.  As  a  significant  part  of  the  credit  growth  was 
being  financed  from  abroad,  countries  built  up  large  capital  account  surpluses  and 
corresponding  large  current  account  deficits  as  the  mirror  image.  The  mechanism  that 
connected these financial and real trade flows was the loss of competitiveness – that is, an 
appreciation of the real exchange rate caused by economic over-heating. 
As  this  audience  knows  well,  all  these  developments  later  implied  major  problems  in  the 
financial sector in peripheral countries when the cycle turned. On the asset side, loan quality 
deteriorated, while on the liability side, those loans could no longer be funded from abroad. It 
was only at this point, due to the economic downturn and the need to backstop banks, that 
sovereign debt began its steep rise and became a driver of the crisis in itself.  
the  evolution  of 
largely  explain 
Drawing the right lessons for the euro area 
In emphasising this private debt-focused narrative for this crisis, my aim is not to negate the 
importance of fiscal policies. Fiscal policies certainly should not have been pro-cyclical, and 
fiscal discipline today is essential to ensure sustainable debt levels in the future. My aim is 
rather to ensure that we recognise the central role played by the financial sector in the crisis 
and so draw the right lessons for the future.  
The most important such lesson is that the euro area needs stronger governance of financial 
policies – an ability to identify and curb cross-border financial flows and hence prevent debt-
driven imbalances. The decentralised system of supervision we had before the crisis, based 
on loose cooperation between national supervisors, simply did not permit this.  
It  is  therefore misleading to  say  that  the  crisis was  solely  the  result  of periphery  countries 
living  beyond  their  means  as  a  matter  of  policy.  The  authorities  had  to  respect  the  single 
market  rules  and  could  not  contain  alone  the  large  capital  inflows  that  were  fueling  the 
imbalances.  Indeed,  with  a  national  approach  to  supervision,  the  forces  driving  financial 
developments lay largely outside the legal capabilities of national supervisors. 
In saying this, I do not deny that supervisors were also too slow to react, due in part to a 
belief  in  self-regulating  markets.  Yet  had  they  tried  to  contain  these  financial  inflows,  it  is 
questionable whether they could have done so successfully. 
The  conclusion  I  draw  is  as  follows:  to  have  an  integrated  financial  market  and  overall 
stability there cannot be purely national supervision. Instead, there has to be supervision at 
level of the market – that is, at the European level.  
Let me therefore turn to the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The benefits of the Single Supervisory Mechanism  
The SSM, which will formally take over supervision in November next year, is being designed 
to solve the “financial trilemma”1 created by national supervision – that is, to support financial 
integration and maintain financial stability by moving supervision to the European level. It will 
address both the institutional and macro-prudential limitations that supervisors faced before 
the crisis. 
Starting  with  the  institutional  limitations,  the  key  innovation  of  the  SSM  is  that  it  creates 
genuinely European supervision, by which I mean supervision on both core and peripheral 
banks.  From  November  next  year,  every  bank  in  Europe  will  be  part  of  the  same  system. 
This puts supervisors in a better position to prevent boom-bust cycles caused by excessive 
cross-border lending – and if they fail to do so, there will be collective responsibility for that 
failure.  
In  line  with  the  subsidiarity  principle,  European  supervision  will  involve  centralised  and 
decentralised elements. For the big significant banks (around 130), the ECB will be the direct 
responsible  supervisor,  but  supervision  will  take  place  at  both  the  European  and  national 
levels. We will integrate these levels by setting up Joint Supervisory Teams (JST) for each 
significant bank. 
Let me use the example of Santander to illustrate how this will work. 
For the parts of the banking group resident within the SSM, there will be a core supervisory 
team comprising of staff from both the ECB and the national competent authorities (NCAs) in 
the  countries  where  Santander  is  active  –  that  is  9  within  the  euro  area. Within  this  team 
there will be a national coordinator for each country, drawn from the respective NCA, and an 
overall coordinator, who will be an ECB staff member. The national coordinators will manage 
the permanent experts working at the national level, while the ECB coordinator will ensure 
quality and take responsibility for output sent to the Supervisory Board.  
In this way, the expertise in the NCAs will be fully utilised, while final decisions will rest with 
the ECB – in keeping with the objective to have a European approach to supervision. 
For less significant smaller banks, the balance will be tipped more towards decentralisation. 
The  responsible  supervisor  will  remain  the  national  authority.  However,  banks  will  still  be 
integrated into the single system of the SSM. They will be supervised according to a single 
supervisory  model  that  we  are  currently  developing,  which  will  be  approved  by  the  future 
Supervisory  Board,  and  the  ECB  has  the  legal  right to  take over  direct supervision  of  any 
bank at any moment. 
Turning to the macro-prudential limitations, the SSM will create new possibilities to make use 
of  macro-prudential  policies  to  curb  pro-cyclicality  in  credit  supply  and  volatility  in  cross-
border flows. It will introduce two important changes to macro-prudential policy-making at the 
European level. 
The  first  change  is  related  to  instruments.  As  part  of  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive 
IV/Capital  Requirements  Regulation,  the  SSM  will  gain  a  series  of  new  macro-prudential 
powers.  These  include, among  others,  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer,  the  systemic  risk 
buffer and the macro-prudential elements from Pillar 2. These instruments are designed to 
help cool credit-led booms and/or provide additional buffers in downturns to mitigate credit 
crunches. 
There  is  some  scepticism  in  academic  circles as  to the  effectiveness  of  these tools,  but a 
recent study on the Spanish experience  with dynamic provisioning suggests we should be 
more  optimistic.  It  finds  that  the  buffers  created  by  dynamic  provisioning  somewhat 
                                                
1  Dirk Schoenmaker (2011) “The financial trilemma” in Economic Letters, 111, pp. 57–9. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
contracted  credit  availability  in  good  times  and  helped  expand  it  in  bad  times. The reason 
these provisions were insufficient to stop the credit boom was that they needed to be applied 
more evenly and aggressively.2 
The second change is related to decision-making. As a European decision-maker, the SSM 
will be able, if needed, to apply prudential measures to banks in both borrowing and lending 
countries. This is important because, to the extent that macro-prudential measures mitigate 
credit  booms  by  raising  banks’  cost  of  equity,  this  effect  can  be  offset  if  there  are  large 
inflows from abroad that lower banks’ cost of debt. Indeed, one can suppose that this was an 
additional reason that dynamic provisioning in Spain was not enough to avert the credit boom 
and the housing bubble.  
The ECB’s comprehensive assessment of the main European banks 
Taken together, I am confident that these institutional and macro-prudential changes will help 
strengthen financial governance in the euro area. We will have the right supervisory powers 
at  the  right  level  of  action  –  the  European  level.  Before  we  start  actually  our  supervisory 
tasks we will conduct a comprehensive assessment of the significant banks in the euro area. 
This assessment will consist of three elements. First, a supervisory risk assessment which 
will  identify  the  key  risks  in  banks’  balance  sheet;  second,  a  point-in-time  Asset  Quality 
Review  (AQR)  to  enhance  transparency  over  asset  quality,  provisioning  and  capital;  and 
third, a stress test to examine the resilience of banks’ balance sheet to stressed scenarios. 
The  assessment  will  conclude  with  a  single  disclosure  of  the  outcomes,  which  will  be 
published before the ECB assumes its supervisory role in November 2014.  
As  the  ECB  has  recently  released  a  communication  about  this  exercise,  I  will  not  go  into 
more detail on its features today. Let me however stress that the exercise will be rigorous 
and transparent and will involve private expert firms, such as external auditors, consultants 
and  specialised  asset  evaluators.  Their  presence,  together  with  the  announced  “strong 
central governance structure”, will enhance the credibility of the exercise.  
National Supervisors and private firms involved in the assessment will work within the terms 
of a detailed framework defined by the ECB and their final output will be subject to a central 
review to assess their quality and analyse their consistency across banks and countries.  
We  of  course  do  not  know  what  the  assessment  will  find.  But  we  trust  that  the  euro  area 
banks are today better prepared to undergo such an exercise. They are much stronger than 
in recent years. They have significantly strengthened their capital positions and now compare 
reasonably well with US banks in that respect. 
In terms of risk-weighted assets, the median Core Tier 1 ratio of the largest euro area banks 
currently  stands  at  12.7%,  above  their  American  counterparts.  The  majority  of  significant 
euro  area  banks  already  comply  with  the  minimum  capital  requirements  of  the  fully 
implemented Basel III framework. 
In terms of leverage – as measured by the ratio of equity over total assets – EU banks may 
at first  sight  appear to  have  lower  ratios  than their  US  peers,  but  as  FDIC  Vice  Chairman 
Thomas Hoenig has showed, if the same accounting standards are applied then the median 
of the leverage ratios of large EU and US banks are quite similar. 
In terms of absolute nominal size, if we look at the 20 largest banks in the EU and the US, 
the EU banks now have a capital level approximately 100 billion dollars larger.  
                                                
2  Gabriel  Jiménez,  Steven  Ongena,  José-Luis  Peydró  and  Jesús  Saurina  (2012),  “Macroprudential  Policy, 
Countercyclical  Bank  Capital  Buffers  and  Credit  Supply:  Evidence  from  the  Spanish  Dynamic  Provisioning 
Experiments” Sveriges Riksbank working paper. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Where euro area banks do not compare so favourably  with their US peers, however, is in 
their low profitability and fragile investor confidence. Investors seem to be uncertain whether 
banks have proper asset valuations and are adequately provisioned. But this is precisely the 
issue  the  comprehensive  assessment  should  address  –  it  is  an  exercise  in  removing 
uncertainty by giving investors all the facts.  
I said some time ago that markets had an excessive negative perception of European banks. 
In  fact,  euro  area  bank  share  prices,  as  well  as  price-to-book  ratios,  have  been  rising  in 
recent  months  in  part  in  anticipation  of the  assessment. This  would  suggest that  investors 
expect the clarity provided by the exercise to be clearly positive for the euro area banking 
sector.  
Regarding the response to the exercise, if some capital shortfalls are revealed, the private 
sector is today in a position to play a major part in filling them. This is more feasible than in 
recent years given the improvement in market conditions.  
Indeed, since last year banks have been improving the robustness of their balance sheets by 
increasing  capital  and  provisions  in  anticipation  of  our  comprehensive  assessment.  In  this 
sense, the exercise is already producing results – and it indicates the willingness of banks to 
resolve existing problems within the sector itself.  
In the same vein, given the number and size of European banks, there is scope for some 
consolidation  within  the  banking  sector  without  reinforcing  the  so-called  “too-big-to-fail” 
problem. Our recent “Banking Structures Report” shows that this trend is already ongoing in 
Europe.  Nevertheless,  as  a  last  resort,  confirming  the  existence  of  public  backstops  is 
important to reassure all stakeholders of the credibility of the whole assessment exercise.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Although various explanations exist for the crisis, I am pleased that what I view as one of its 
important lessons is now being learned. This lesson is that a single financial market with a 
single  currency  needs  a  single  system  of  supervision  –  and  alongside  this,  a  Single 
European Resolution Mechanism (SRM).  
The  SRM  is  an  essential  component  of  banking  union.  It  helps  break  the  bank-sovereign 
nexus by allowing banks to be resolved at the European level with minimum use of taxpayer 
funds. And it adds credibility to the European supervisor by providing reassurance that banks 
can  be  resolved  in  an  orderly  and  efficient  manner  without  creating  financial  instability  – 
especially large cross-border banks.  
With  the  development  of  banking  union,  we  are  creating  the  conditions  for  a  more  stable 
financial  sector  in  the future  and  a  better functioning  monetary  union.  But  we  also  need  a 
banking  sector  that  takes  responsibility.  As  supervisors,  we  expect  the  banks  to  be  better 
capitalised and less leveraged, more stable and efficient, to perform their indispensable role 
in financing the economy and supporting the on-going, fragile economic recovery.  
Because the crisis of the European economy is not over. It is true that modest growth has 
returned in the last six months and that countries under stress have gone through a painful 
but  successful  adjustment, 
loss  of 
competitiveness  in  terms  of  unit  labour  costs  and  even  achieving  external  accounts 
surpluses. At the same time, the recession has been deep and has left unprecedented and 
unacceptably  high  unemployment.  Until  economic  growth  is  able  to  significantly  reduce 
unemployment, the authorities should not become complacent in their efforts to continue the 
structural and institutional reforms essential to overcome the crisis.  
It is clear that for the successful completion of the rebalancing process Europe needs more 
investment  and  higher  domestic  demand  growth.  We  therefore  need  a  more  coordinated 
approach to macroeconomic policy at the euro area level to achieve higher demand growth, 
their  deficits,  correcting 
reducing 
initial 
their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
to  support 
financial  means 
the  announced  contractual  programmes  with 
as well as the continuation of structural reforms in all member countries in order to increase 
growth and facilitate a more encompassing rebalancing process.  
At the same time, to support national structural reforms in stressed countries, the enactment 
of 
their 
implementation should play a significant role.  
Finally, it would be important if a future decision could be reached to implement at the euro 
area  level  what  is  referred  in  the  President  Van  Rompuy’s  Report  “Towards  a  genuine 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union”  as  “….the  establishment  of  a  fiscal  capacity  to  facilitate 
adjustment to economic shocks. This could take the form of an insurance-type mechanism 
between  euro  area  countries  to  buffer  large  country-specific  economic  shocks.  Such  a 
function would ensure a form of fiscal solidarity exercised over economic cycles, improving 
the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  and  reducing  the  financial  and  output  costs 
associated with macroeconomic adjustments”. 
In the view of the President Van Rompuy’s Report, a stable EMU needs to be built on four 
pillars: financial union, fiscal union, economic union and political union. 
Member States have been able to decide a remarkable sequence of reforms in the past few 
years and there is now a much clearer vision of what rules and institutions are essential for 
monetary  union  to  function  more  effectively.  The  single  currency  needs  strong  common 
institutions. Strong institutions to supervise and stabilise the financial market; to guide fiscal 
policies; 
to  coordinate  economic  policy,  guarantee  competitiveness  and  encourage 
sustainable growth.  
This  is  the  vision  that  should  guide  us  in  all  our  endeavours  to  definitely  overcome  the 
European crisis. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
