Deepali Pant Joshi: Moving financial capability forward – innovation 
scale and impact 
Intervention by Dr Deepali Pant Joshi, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
10th Anniversary of the Citi-FT Financial Education Summit, Hong Kong, 7 December 2013. 
 Inputs from Sushma Vij DGM and Geetha Nair AGM are gratefully acknowledged. 
Dear  friends  ,  I  am  honoured  to  be  here  today  at  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  summit  on 
financial literacy and thank Citi and FT for having me here, and of course, my friend David 
Pilling for the  opportunity  to  share  the  India  experience.  David  we  are  out  of  the  woods!  I 
confirm this. As all the people in this room know, financial literacy has emerged as a focus 
area for policy makers all across the globe, in the wake of the global financial crisis. 
Financial literacy means different things to different people. We in India understand financial 
literacy differently depending upon the underlying objective to build greater financial inclusion 
through financial literacy, for maximising welfare, both individually and for society generally. 
Although, we have progressively promoted financial literacy, many challenges remain. These 
include (i) the large excluded sections many of whom may be illiterates especially in the rural 
or  remote  areas  with  difficult  physical  access;  (ii) the  need  for  better  supervisory  capacity 
among financial regulators; and (iii) addressing the pervasive “informal” markets that handle 
lending, insurance, and remittances for those unable to tap into the formal system. 
This  is  a  tenth  anniversary  of  the  summit.  In  these  ten  years,  India  has  seen  significant 
changes.  As  you  know,  we  have  a  large  banking  system  which  comprises  besides  Public 
Sector Banks, Private Sector Banks, Regional Rural banks and Cooperatives with significant 
penetrative outreach. Well, these banks are now all on interoperable Core Banking System 
platforms  which  enables  us  to  significantly  leverage  technology  to  leapfrog  the  barriers  of 
geography  and  distance  and  tackle  issues  of  voluntary  access.  We  have  significantly 
liberalised  our  rules  on  bank  branching,  we  have  enabled 
the  use  of  Banking 
Correspondents  (BCs),  some  of  the  mobile  companies,  such  as,  AIRTEL  and  Vodafone, 
partner  with  banks  as  BCs.  We  have  also  liberalised  the  dreaded  KYC  norms  to  make  it 
easier for a poor person or a migrant to open a bank account. We have enabled E-KYC. Our 
unique identity card, the Aadhar, is enabling digitisation of social benefit transfers which will 
also  lead  to  steady  revenue  streams  for  service  providers  and  we  have  a  big  push  on 
building financial capability. 
Role of financial education in India 
Greater  financial  access  combined  with  financial  education  creates  financially  responsible 
citizens.  This  mix  of  financial  access  and  financial  education  provides  a  foundation  for 
appropriate  market  conduct  and  prudential  regulation.  Improving  individuals’  financial 
behaviour is a long-term policy priority. Financial education needs to commence early and 
continue through adulthood. 
In  order  to  achieve  the  objective  of  financial  inclusion,  our  financial  literacy  efforts  are 
primarily  directed  towards  dissemination  of  simple  messages  of  financial  prudence,  in 
vernacular  languages,  through  large  awareness  campaigns  across  the  country  combined 
with vigorous roll out of financial inclusion plans by banks, insurance and pension funds, and 
others. It is important to note that being literate is not a necessary prerequisite for attaining 
financial literacy as the basic financial messages can be conveyed through various alternate 
means  without  relying  on  written  inputs.  Some  of  the  basic  messages  we  seek  to  deliver 
through our financial literacy drives are: 
• 
Why save  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Why save regularly and consistently  
Why save with banks  
Why borrow within Limits  
Why borrow from banks  
Why borrow for income generating purposes  
Why repay loans  
Why repay loans in time  
Why do you need insurance  
Why you will need regular stream of income post working life–pension  
Why you should keep money aside regularly and consistently during your earning 
life for pension in old age  
What is interest? How moneylenders charge very high interest rates?  
• 
Since the challenge in India is to link a larger number of financially excluded people to the 
formal financial system, the focus of our strategy at the base level is to create awareness of 
basic financial products. Some of the steps that have been taken by the Reserve Bank of 
India and other stakeholders to promote financial literacy in India are:  
Outreach  visits  by  Senior  Executives  of  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  remote  villages:  The 
objective of these visits is to understand the ground level position, spread awareness about 
benefits of being connected to the formal financial system and disseminate information about 
the functioning of RBI.  
RBI website – We have created a link for Financial Education on the RBI website, containing 
material  in  English,  Hindi  and  11  vernacular  languages,  which  includes  comic  books  on 
money and banking for children, films, messages on financial planning, games on financial 
education and link for accessing the Banking Ombudsman Scheme for customer grievance 
redress. Some of the popular comic books brought out by the department of communication 
are  Money  Kumar,  Raju  and  the  Money  Tree  and  some  films  which  very  simply  impart 
messages on financial education to children. The department of communication also hosts 
groups  of  school  children  and  explains  the  working  of  RBI  to  them  and  imparts  simple 
financial concepts to them. 
Inter School Quiz: In line with the “catch them young” strategy for our financial education 
initiatives, the Reserve Bank launched the RBIQ, an all India inter school quiz competition, in 
2012.  The  quiz  seeks  to  be  an  effective  platform  for  disseminating  financial  education  by 
creating awareness and sensitisation about the history and role of the Reserve Bank, about 
banking  and finance,  economics, current  affairs,  etc.,  besides  seeking  to  build  a  “connect” 
between the Reserve Bank and the young student community enrolled in schools across the 
country. 
Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) have been opened by various banks with a sharp focus 
on  the  spread  of  Financial  Literacy,  to  create  awareness  about  financial  products  and 
provision of counselling facilities for customers of banks. There are more than 800 FLCs in 
the  country  as  on  September  30,  2013.  Use  of  mobile  Financial  Literacy  vans  is  done  by 
banks in the difficult terrains.  
Town Hall events: These are conducted across the country, including in Tier II and smaller 
cities, bringing together commercial banks and other stakeholders.  
Mass media campaign are launched through tie ups with educational institutes, financial 
awareness workshops/helplines, books, pamphlets and publications on financial literacy by 
NGOs, financial market players, etc.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Capacity Building is attempted through the Conduct of Financial Literacy programs by Rural 
Self Employment Training Institutes. 
Awareness campaigns: By distributing pamphlets, comic books, enacting plays and skits, 
arranging  stalls  in  local  fairs,  exhibitions,  participating  in  information/literacy  programs 
organised by Press. Similarly, in these times of financial uncertainty and risk, the importance 
of  educating  people  about  the  advantages  of  Life  and  Non-life  insurance  products  is 
important. 
Institutional framework in India for spreading financial education 
Now coming to the institutional framework created in India for the spread of financial literacy, 
I  would  like  to  mention  that  we  are  among  the  very  few  countries  where  an  apex  body 
namely  the  Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC)  chaired  by  the  Union 
Finance  Minister  with  heads  of  all  financial  sector  regulators  as  members  has  been 
mandated,  inter  alia  to  focus  on  spread  of  financial  inclusion  and  financial  literacy.  So  we 
have a buy in of our strategies at the highest levels Under the aegis of the FSDC, a National 
Strategy  for  Financial  Education  (NSFE)  for  India  has  been  prepared.  The  Strategy 
envisages  ways  of  creating  awareness  and  educating  consumers  on  access  to  financial 
services;  availability  of  various  types  of  products  and  their  features;  changing  attitudes  to 
translate  knowledge  into  responsible  financial  behaviour;  and  enabling  consumers  of 
financial  services  understand  their rights  and  obligations. The  Strategy  necessitates  active 
involvement  of  individuals,  financial  sector  regulators,  educational  institutions,  NGOs, 
financial  sector  entities,  multilateral  international  players  and  the  Governments  both  at 
Centre and State levels. 
National strategy for financial education 
Our National Strategy envisages a time frame of five years for its massive financial education 
campaign and aims at establishing initial contact with 500 million adults, educating them on 
key saving, protection and investment related products so that they are empowered to take 
prudent financial decisions. It also seeks to create awareness about the consumer protection 
and  grievances  redress  machinery  available  in  the  country.  Basic  financial  education  is 
aimed to be included in school curricula up to senior secondary level. This is based upon the 
premise that the most effective way is to weave financial education into the normal content of 
curriculum. Accordingly, we are engaging with the curriculum setting bodies like the National 
Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), Education Boards like the Central 
Board for Secondary Education (CBSE), Central and State Governments to try and embed 
such concepts in the school curriculum. 
One of the objectives of the NSFE is to standardise the messages that various stakeholders 
seek  to  disseminate  through  their  financial  education  initiatives.  The  NSFE  document 
identifies certain simple messages I mentioned earlier in my speech such as why save; why 
invest; why insure; why save with banks; why borrow within limits; why repay loans in time; 
why borrow for income generating purposes, what is interest and how moneylenders charge 
very  high  interest  rates,  etc.  It  is  a  well-recognised  fact  that  standardisation  will  help  in 
ensuring consistency in the messages which reach the target audience from various sources 
and making them more focused and powerful.  
Integrated approach – financial inclusion through financial education 
We  have  already  done  some  work  in  this  direction.  We  have  designed  a  mass  scale 
Financial Literacy Program to integrate the financially excluded population with low level of 
income and low literacy level with the formal financial system. The program is run through 
our Financial Literacy Centres set up by banks, nearly 800 in numbers. About 40000 rural 
branches of the banks would scale up these efforts by conducting one outdoor literacy camp 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
in  a  month.  In  addition  to  this  we  leverage  the  infrastructure  created  at  the  state  level, 
comprising of State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) at the Apex which is ably supported by 
the Lead District Managers (LDMs) at the District level. Financial Literacy Centres organise 
Outdoor  Literacy  camps  which  are  spread  over  a  period  of  three  months  and  delivered  in 
three  phases  wherein  along  with  creating  awareness,  accounts  are  also  opened  in  the 
Literacy  camps.  The  program  has  been  received  well  on  the  ground  as  an  integrated 
approach  of 
through  creating  awareness  and  providing  access 
simultaneously. 
In order to ensure consistency in the messages reaching the target audience of financially 
excluded  people  during  the  Financial  Literacy  Camps,  we  have  issued  comprehensive 
Financial Literacy Material containing a financial literacy Guide, Financial Diary and a set of 
16  posters  which  contain  very  simple  messages  of  How  To  Save.  For  instance,  we  are  a 
nation of tea drinkers. So we just explain graphically that everyone can drink two cups of tea 
less! Walk into a bank walk into prosperity and so on and so forth. 
inclusion 
financial 
Conclusion 
While  it  is  important  to  begin  teaching  financial  skills  at  school  level,  achieving  and 
maintaining financial know-how is a lifelong undertaking. The types of financial decisions that 
people have to make vary through the course of their lives, and thus we are trying to ensure 
that access to financial education is readily available at all stages of life with the help of other 
stakeholders. Moreover, relevant, accurate, and reliable financial information must be readily 
available to consumers at the time they are making their decisions.  
Through financial education, we try to provide individuals with the knowledge and skills they 
need  to  make  better  choices  about  finances.  Through  consumer  protection,  we  can 
safeguard  individuals  against  harmful  practices  and  bad  information  that  lead  to  poor 
financial  choices.  Accomplishing  these  two  goals  we  believe  will  result  in  economic 
empowerment for all concerned. 
While  a  number  of  measures  have  been  taken  and  are  being  taken  in  India,  given  the 
enormity of the task, a lot of ground still needs to be covered. Apart from the Government 
and  the  regulatory  bodies,  there  is  a  need  for  involving  the  civil  society  and  all  other 
stakeholders  in  spreading financial  literacy. The widespread  existence  of financial  illiteracy 
indicates that we need to do a lot more. There is a lot of skepticism on whether Financial 
literacy actually leads to changes in behaviour and some recent papers which suggest that 
this does not and it is the classic conundrum of being able to take the horse to the water but 
not being able to make him drink! Bilal Zia our world Bank researcher and colleague and I 
discussed this thoroughly at dinner and we concluded that the trick vests in the right delivery 
model so targeted interventions do work. 
I  once  again  thank  the  organisers  of  this  Conference  for  providing  me  the  opportunity  to 
share with  you the Indian experience and some of the work we have been doing to move 
financial  capability  forward  Innovation  scale  and  Impact  of  the  process.  We  are  model 
neutral. We do believe that technology has an important role to play we are seriously looking 
at innovative models. Summits, such as, the present one, are important in generating new 
ideas leading clarity of thought and definition of purpose among the various stakeholders. I 
do believe that the summit offers a special opportunity to learn from mutual experience and 
sincerely hope that with our collective efforts financial literacy would be widely disseminated. 
The  common  man  would  be  empowered  to  take  informed  financial  decisions  and  in  the 
process, the global financial marketplace would become a more stable arena. 
I wish the Summit great success and hope that you have extremely enriching deliberations 
over  the  course  of  the  Summit  and  hope  these  processes  of  engagement  continue  to  the 
building of a better world. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Thank You Jeff Wagner of FT, Stefen Bird CEO Asia Pacific Citi and David Pilling Asia editor 
Financial  Times  for  having  me  here  this  beautiful  afternoon  and  thanks  for  the  patient 
hearing.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
