Gill Marcus: Inspiring young women to make South Africa more inclusive 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Ruth First 
Jeppe High School for Girls Memorial Trust, Johannesburg, 29 October 2013. 
 Good evening ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a real honour and a privilege to be asked to speak to you tonight, not just because this 
event honours an exceptional person, Ruth First, but also because this event supports the 
education  and  development  of  young  women  in  our  country.  There  can  be  no  investment 
more  important  than  to  invest  in  the  education  of  young  people.  And,  given  that  the  odds 
remain heavily stacked against women from all walks of life in our society, investment in the 
education of young women makes a real difference to the individual, the family and society 
as educating the girl child is a sure way to break the cycle of poverty and the skills shortage 
that is spoken about so often. 
Jeppe  High  School  for  Girls  has  a  long  and  proud  tradition  of  delivering  education  of  the 
highest  quality  to  girls  in  Johannesburg.  The  excellent  track  record  of  the  school  in 
maintaining a 100 per cent matric pass rate for 20 years, and ensuring that an incredibly high 
proportion of young women go on to university, deserves praise and recognition. I wish to 
congratulate the school, its head mistress and teachers, as well as the school community for 
this outstanding achievement. 
Public education of the highest standard for all children is critical for democracy to flourish, 
and was integral to the liberation struggle, as lack of education is the greatest exclusion there 
can  be. I fully  support  and  endorse the  establishment  of  a  trust  that funds  scholarships to 
support young women from less advantaged backgrounds who show academic potential. 
Tonight  I  would  like  to  add  my  voice  to  those  of  many  others  in  congratulating  the  young 
women who have won scholarships to study at this wonderful educational institution. Jeppe 
Girls High, through the Ruth First Jeppe Trust, has set an example of how communities can 
come together to provide education for all, not just the privileged few. We need many more of 
these initiatives so that the ugly shadow of our apartheid history is eliminated from the lives 
and opportunities of our children. 
Let me say a few words about Ruth, the inspiration for this initiative and whose life comprised 
multiple facets. She was an activist, a revolutionary, a woman, a mother, a journalist, a writer 
and an academic. In addition to these attributes, she espoused and lived a set of values that 
continue to shape our country today and are deeply embedded in our Constitution and our 
aspirations.  These  values  include  non-  racialism  and  non-sexism,  a  sense  of  justice  and 
fairness  that  puts  the  interests  of  the  poor  and  ordinary  people  ahead  of  self-interest;  the 
commitment and courage to not only stand for what is right, but also to stand against what is 
wrong. 
It is Ruth’s sense of justice that continues to inspire millions of South Africans today, even as 
we increasingly live in a world where injustice prevails and material benefit is idolised. Ruth’s 
struggle  and  our  Constitution  should  inspire  all  of  us  to  continue  the  fight  for  a  more  just 
world,  where  the  provision  of  high  quality  public  education  to  all  children  must  take  the 
highest priority. 
Ruth  fought  for  a  world  in  which  all  people,  irrespective  of  race  or  gender,  had  equal 
opportunities, a world where children from both rich and poor families would have access to 
the  best  education  and  the  best  work  opportunities.  Despite  all  of  our  problems  and 
challenges  as  a  society,  we  should  remain  steadfast  in  our  commitment  to  build  a  South 
Africa  in  which  opportunity  is  shared  more  equally,  where  hard  work  and  effort  trump  the 
shadow of history. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ruth  used  her  education  and  her  enquiring  mind,  analytical  thoroughness  and  personal 
courage as tools in the struggle against apartheid and colonialism, and in working for a world 
committed  to  fairness,  justice  and  the  advancement  of  people.  She  read  voraciously.  She 
studied  all  manner  of  topics.  Ruth  is  credited  with  writing  books  on  diverse  topics  ranging 
from Mozambican migrant workers to Libyan politics. 
There is a Chinese proverb – Shi Shi Qui Shi – seek truth from facts, that epitomised Ruth’s 
work.  Her ground  breaking research  and  direct  investigation  into the  working  conditions of 
potato  farmers  in  Bethal  in  the  1950s  with  the  late  Joe  Gqabi,  who  was  also  later 
assassinated  in  Zimbabwe,  led  to  an  exposé  of  the  prison-like  conditions  faced  by  farm 
workers  and  the  consequent  potato  boycott.  Also,  it  set  a  new  standard  for  investigative 
journalism and a complete rethink on labour relations in the agricultural sector. Her detailed 
research  into  the  lives  of  migrant  workers  on  South  African  mines  is  still  used  today  to 
understand  the  social  and  economic  aspects  of  the  migrant  labour  system.  If  only  world 
leaders  had  read  her  writings  on  Libya,  they  would  have  had  a  far  better  insight  into  that 
complex society. 
Ruth was a committed communist; she was not a revolutionary who simply used ideology to 
win  an  argument.  She  looked  at  the  facts;  she  analysed  the  evidence  and  came  to 
conclusions that could be defended by the data and analysis, even when such conclusions 
were  uncomfortable  for  some,  especially  those  in  leadership  positions  or  high  office.  Ruth 
was an outstanding investigative reporter and mentored dozens of young journalists to look 
analytically  into an issue before putting pen to paper. Our journalism profession today can 
learn a great deal from the rigour she applied to any story she wrote. 
Ruth First was also a woman who was not scared of challenging authority. Not only did she 
dedicate her life to the struggle against apartheid, even within the liberation movement she 
spoke out when she saw abuse, policies and practices she felt were unjust and unjustifiable. 
Ruth spoke out against the invasion by the Soviet Union of Hungary and Czechoslovakia in 
1956  and  1968,  respectively,  even  though  the  South  African  Communist  Party  held  a 
different position at the time. 
Ruth paid the ultimate sacrifice, not only for her beliefs but because of her voice. She was 
killed by an apartheid government intent on keeping an immoral and unjust system of racial 
oppression  in  operation.  But  it  was  Ruth  and  the  many  millions  of  people  who  fought  for 
justice and equality who ultimately prevailed. Apartheid has been defeated, but the struggle 
for a just and equal South Africa and Africa in a more caring world must continue. 
Ruth leaves us with many lessons that are particularly pertinent for young women today. She 
became a respected leader in a male dominated world. She used her knowledge, analytical 
rigour, voice and education to fight for justice. She worked hard to uncover the facts, analyse 
the data, and thereby defend her findings and arguments in a profession and world that was 
not entirely comfortable with such an approach. 
I  have  had  the  singular privilege  of, though  to  various  degrees, knowing  Ruth,  her mother 
and father Tilly and Julius, her husband Joe Slovo and their daughters Shawn, Gillian and 
Robyn. Having been inspired by Ruth and many other leaders of the struggle for liberation 
and democracy, I hope that her life will inspire young women to continue to make our world a 
better place. There can be no better way to honour Ruth and all she held dear than to ensure 
that young women be given the opportunity to receive the best quality education that there is 
to  offer.  And  for  that  education,  that  search  for  knowledge,  to  be  valued,  and  not  just  the 
certificate, important as that may be. 
To live such a life takes courage and, as we all assess the many and different challenges 
young  people  face  now  and  in  the  years  ahead,  let  us  be  inspired  by  what  has  been 
achieved and have the courage, determination and tenacity to build a future and a people 
bound together by values that would make Ruth smile. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Again,  I  wish  to  thank  the  School  and  the  Trust  for  their  sterling  efforts  in  educating  our 
youth. Congratulations to the recipients of the scholarships on offer today. Your efforts will 
inspire a new generation of women to live lives that have meaning, that contribute to making 
our country more inclusive and just, a celebration of all that life and living has to offer in a 
South Africa that has been shaped by women like Ruth. 
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
