Stephen S Poloz: Opening statement before the Senate Standing 
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  before  the 
Senate  Standing  Committee  on  Banking,  Trade  and  Commerce,  Ottawa,  Ontario, 
20 November 2013. 
 Thank you for the opportunity for Tiff and me to be with you today to discuss the October 
Monetary Policy Report, which the Bank published recently. The Bank aims to communicate 
our  objectives  openly  and  effectively  and  to  stand  accountable  for  our  actions  before 
Canadians. One of the best ways to do this is through appearances such as this one. 
Allow  me  to  spend  a  few  minutes  on  the  highlights  of  the  Report.  I’d  like  to  flag  some 
important changes that were introduced with this issue. 
• 
We have modified the Report to explicitly capture the uncertainty that is inherent in 
our outlook. The goal is to present to Canadians a reflection of the evolution of the 
risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  that  are  embedded  in  our  policy,  rather  than  simply 
compare a snapshot of the current forecast with that of our previous forecast. 
The  picture  is  not  always  perfectly  clear,  and  so  we  added  new  measures  of  ex 
ante, or before the fact, uncertainty to our five most critical projection variables. We 
added  “rule  of  thumb”  ranges  around  the  base-case  projection  for  the  growth  of 
Canadian  and  U.S.  GDP  and  for  Canadian  total  CPI  inflation,  as  well  as  for  the 
current level of the output gap and the growth rate of potential output in Canada. 
With this, we are reminding ourselves – and those who watch us – that economic 
projections are subject to considerable uncertainty and are revised over time as new 
economic data become available. 
Monetary  policy  formulation  is  more  a  process  of  risk  management  than  one  of 
engineering. In our policy deliberations, we evaluate and assess all of the risks, both 
positive and negative, and use judgment to determine the balance among them. 
As is customary in the October Report, we reviewed the forecast for potential output. 
Due to lower-than-expected labour productivity growth in the past year, as well as 
the delay in the expected pickup in demand for exports and investment, the forecast 
for potential output growth was revised down slightly. 
Since  the  Report  was  published  four  weeks  ago,  the  outlook  for  the  global  and 
Canadian economies has not changed substantially. 
Let me remind you what we reported: 
–   We  expect  the  global  economy  to  expand  modestly  in  2013.  However,  its 
near-term dynamic has changed, and the composition of growth is now slightly 
less favourable for Canada. 
Uncertain global and domestic economic conditions are delaying the pickup in 
exports and business investment in Canada. This leaves the level of economic 
activity lower than the Bank had been expecting. 
       –   While household spending remains solid and some indicators in the housing 
sector  continue  to  rise,  we  still  expect  a  gradual  unwinding  of  household 
imbalances. 
The  Bank  expects  that  a  better  balance  between  domestic  and  foreign 
demand  will  be  achieved  over  time  and  that  growth  will  become  more  self-
sustaining. But this will take longer than previously projected. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
–   We are expecting investment growth to contribute to a rebound in the rate of 
labour  productivity  growth  over 
the  next  couple  of  years.  However, 
demographic  factors,  primarily  the  aging  population,  are  expected  to  put  a 
drag on the growth rate of trend labour input. This drag will largely offset the 
effects  of  rising  investment.  This  is  why  we  expect  that  the  growth  rate  of 
potential  output  will  remain  fairly  stable  at  around  2  per  cent  over  the  next 
three years. 
Real GDP growth is projected to increase from 1.6 per cent this year to 2.3 per 
cent next year and 2.6 per cent in 2015. The Bank expects that the economy 
will return gradually to full production capacity, around the end of 2015. 
Inflation  in  Canada  has  remained  low  in  recent  months.  This  reflects  the 
significant  slack  in  the  economy,  heightened  competition  in  the  retail  sector, 
and some other sector-specific factors. 
  –   With larger and more persistent excess supply in the economy, both total CPI 
and core inflation are expected to return more gradually to 2 per cent, around 
the end of 2015. 
Although  the  Bank  considers  the  risks  around  its  projected  inflation  path  to  be 
balanced,  the  fact  that  inflation  has  been  persistently  below  target  means  that 
downside risks to inflation assume increasing importance. However, the Bank must 
also  take  into  consideration  the  risk  of  exacerbating  already-elevated  household 
imbalances. 
Weighing  these  factors,  the  Bank  judged  on  23  October  that  the  substantial 
monetary policy stimulus in place remained appropriate and decided to maintain the 
target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. 
  Since then, while some new data points have been released, our outlook remains roughly the 
same, as I mentioned. If you have any questions about the recent data, Tiff and I would be 
pleased to address them, as well as any other queries that you may have. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
