Jean-Pierre Danthine: Resilience of Swiss banks from a financial stability 
perspective 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the Swiss National Bank, at the Media News Conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 
12 December 2013. 
 In my remarks, I would like to look at the situation at Swiss banks from a financial stability 
perspective,  taking  the big  banks first  and  then  moving  on  to  a  discussion  of  domestically 
focused banks. To close, I will say a few words on the subject of banknotes. 
Big banks: strengthening resilience 
Since the last media news conference in June, the two Swiss big banks have improved their 
capital situation further. This applies particularly to their risk-weighted capital ratios, where, in 
an  international  comparison,  they  are  above  the  average  for  large  global  banks.  Credit 
Suisse,  for  example,  has  already  met  the  requirement  of  13%  loss-absorbing  capital  to 
risk-weighted assets, which comes into force in 2019. According to its published plans, UBS 
should be able to meet this target by the end of 2014. As regards total capital – which, in 
addition to loss-absorbing capital, also comprises low-trigger contingent capital instruments – 
the big banks have also made great progress; however, they have not yet achieved the ratios 
that will apply from 2019. 
Unweighted capital ratios – leverage ratios – generate a different picture. Both banks have 
also  been  able  to  improve  their  leverage  ratios  considerably;  yet  in  an  international 
comparison  based  on  a  number  of  commonly  used  definitions,  they  are  still  below  the 
average of large global banks. 
As  my  colleague Thomas  Jordan  has  explained,  economic  and financial  conditions for the 
Swiss banking sector continue to be challenging. For this reason, it is vital for the big banks 
to continue improving their capitalisation, and in turn their resilience, particularly as regards 
the  leverage  ratio.  This  is  especially  important  because  the  leverage  ratio  is  growing  in 
significance  as  a  measure  of  bank  resilience.  In  times  of  crisis,  in  particular,  the  leverage 
ratio often becomes the focus of market attention. 
In  the  SNB’s  view,  the  top  priority  for  the  big  banks  is  the  consistent  and  rapid 
implementation  of  the  “too  big  to  fail”  (TBTF)  regulations.  The  focus  should  be  on  the 
following areas: 
First,  the  credibility  of  risk-weighted  asset  calculations  based  on  banks’  internal  models 
should be strengthened. As outlined previously, risk-weighted ratios yield a different picture 
of  a  bank’s  capital  situation  than  leverage  ratios.  In  this  context,  the  SNB  is  currently 
supporting  FINMA  in  an  examination  of  whether  and  to  what  extent  risk-weighted  assets 
based on banks’ internal models differ from those based on the standard approach, which is 
model-independent.  If  this  examination  reveals  no  substantial  inexplicable  differences,  this 
would strengthen market confidence in the model-based approach. Conversely, if there are 
any substantial differences that cannot be explained, corrective measures would need to be 
considered  and  implemented.  Such  measures  would  also  boost  confidence  in  the  model-
based approach. 
Second,  it  must  be  ensured  that,  if  necessary,  there  can  be  an  orderly  resolution  of  a  big 
bank  in  the  event  of  a  crisis.  From  the  Swiss  perspective,  the  emergency  plans  on 
maintaining  systemically  important  functions  are  particularly  important  in  this  regard.  The 
emergency plans must be credible and workable in a crisis. For this reason, the big banks 
should continue to push forward consistently  with their emergency plans. Moreover, global 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
resolution plans must ensure that the non-systemically important units of a big bank can be 
resolved in an orderly fashion. Adjustments to the group structure, as recently announced by 
both big banks, represent a first step in this process. An additional tool which can facilitate 
global  resolution  is  based  on  the  bail-in  concept,  which  is  the  subject  of  widespread 
discussion at international level. With a bail-in, debt can be converted to equity capital, which 
would enable the big banks to carry additional losses in the event of a crisis. However, the 
effectiveness  of  a  bail-in  essentially  depends  on  whether  appropriate  debt  is  available  in 
sufficient  quantities,  and  whether  its  characteristics  are  such  as  to  ensure  a  smooth 
conversion into equity capital in the event of a crisis. In this regard, the authorities will have 
to  examine  the  extent  to  which  it  is  necessary  to  expand  the  existing TBTF  regulations  to 
take account of Swiss specificities. 
Domestically focused banks: resilience and lending policies 
I would now like to turn to the domestically focused banks. In Switzerland, there has been a 
further increase in risks on the mortgage and real estate markets since the end of 2012. This 
development poses the greatest challenge to the stability of domestically focused banks over 
the medium term. 
Conditions on the mortgage market, in particular, have deteriorated. In Switzerland, growth in 
mortgages for residential real estate continued to exceed GDP growth in 2013. In the first 
three quarters of this year, mortgage volumes increased by CHF 27 billion, or an annualised 
4.4%. Over the same period, annual economic output, i.e. aggregated economic output over 
four  quarters,  rose  by  CHF  8.4  billion  from  the  end  of  2012,  or  an  annualised  1.9%.  This 
means that, for Switzerland as a whole, the already high indebtedness is continuing to grow 
faster than people’s capacity to offset this debt with income. 
The situation on the residential real estate market has also deteriorated slightly. Depending 
on the segment, real estate prices have risen in real terms by between 2.6% and 3.5% on 
average since the beginning of the year. Despite a slowing of momentum compared to last 
year, these growth rates are still high in a historical comparison. In addition, overall, prices 
for  residential  real  estate  have  increased  more  strongly  than  rents  or  income  since  the 
beginning of the year. 
There is also no sign of a reversal of domestically focused banks’ risk appetite. With regard 
to mortgage lending for owner-occupied residential property, the proportion of new loans with 
high  loan-to-value  ratios  has  decreased  slightly.  Where  affordability  risks  are  concerned, 
however,  no  such  development  can  be  identified.  Moreover,  domestically  focused  banks 
remain the driving force behind the strong domestic mortgage growth. While a few individual 
banks  have  reined  in  their  lending  considerably  compared  to  last  year,  others  have 
maintained a high level of lending growth, or have even stepped up lending. Finally, interest 
rate risk exposure is extremely high by historical standards, whereas average interest rate 
margins have narrowed further over the same period. 
On  a  positive  note,  domestically  focused  banks’  capitalisation  as  measured  by  regulatory 
requirements  remains  at  historically  high  levels.  However,  as  discussed  in  this  year’s 
Financial  Stability  Report,  these  regulatory  capital  ratios  could  be  overstating  the  banks’ 
resilience, because the major risks prevailing in the mortgage and real estate markets or the 
interest rate risk exposure are not, or only partly, taken into account. Against this backdrop, 
banks  should  –  irrespective  of  the  regulatory  requirements  –  continuously  assess  their 
resilience,  and make  adjustments  where  necessary.  They  should  be  able  to maintain  their 
economically important functions, even if real estate prices were to fall sharply and interest 
rates were to simultaneously rise. 
Over  the  last  few  years,  a  number  of  measures  have  been  taken  to  reduce  the  risks  to 
financial stability arising out of developments in the mortgage and real estate markets. The 
most recent of these measures is the activation, in February this year, of the countercyclical 
capital buffer (CCB). These measures were necessary and useful. For example, this year a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
few  large  domestically  focused  banks  –  citing,  among  other  reasons,  the  activation  of  the 
CCB  –  have  taken  steps  to  strengthen  their  capital  and  thereby  their  resilience.  So  far, 
however,  the  package  of  measures  has  not  been  enough  to  prevent  a  further  build-up  of 
imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets. 
In  an  environment  of  persistently  low  interest  rates,  coupled  with  banks’  undiminished 
appetite for risk,  the  danger  of  a further  build-up  of  imbalances  remains  considerable.  For 
this reason, the SNB continues to monitor the situation very closely, and regularly assesses 
whether the CCB should be adjusted. 
Supply of secure banknotes ensured at all times 
Now I would like to say a few words on the subject of banknotes. At the beginning of October, 
we  informed  the  public  that,  since  autumn  2012,  a  small  number  of  Swiss  1000-franc 
banknotes have been in circulation which were not issued by the SNB. As you know, these 
notes  were  abstracted  during  the  production  process  at  Orell  Füssli,  before  they  had  been 
through all stages of production. 
Out  of  consideration  for  the  investigation  by  the  Office  of  the  Attorney  General,  this 
information  was  only  made  public  after  some  of  these  notes  appeared  in  Switzerland.  As 
previously  announced,  those  in  possession  of  such  banknotes  will  be  reimbursed  the 
nominal value by Orell Füssli. 
For the SNB, security is paramount in the production of banknotes. Orell Füssli has reviewed 
its security arrangements, and has taken the necessary measures to ensure that such events 
are precluded to the greatest possible extent in the future. 
I would like to emphasise that the SNB and Orell Füssli have been working together in the 
area  of  banknote  production  for  about  a  century.  The  supply  of  secure  banknotes  for  our 
country has been, and will continue to be, guaranteed at all times. We will also be pursuing 
the development of the new banknote series in close collaboration with Orell Füssli. 
As  you  are  aware,  the  new  banknote  series  has  suffered  a  series  of  delays.  The  SNB  is 
committed  to  putting  banknotes  into  circulation  that  are  state  of  the  art  in  terms  of  both 
design  innovation  and  technology.  Our  current banknote  series  was  unique  in  this  respect 
when it was issued in the mid-1990s. And it still has a very high security standard today, as a 
result of this commitment to quality. This means that the SNB is not under any pressure to 
roll out a new banknote series quickly. The new series must meet very high security, quality 
and technical production standards – and will have to do so for at least 15 years after its first 
release.  So  it  is  worth  taking  the  time  to  ensure  that  the  new  security  features,  which  are 
complex, technologically innovative and have never before been applied to banknote design, 
can  also  stand  up to the  rigours  of  industrial  production  processes.  A  number  of tests  are 
currently being carried out. The first denomination in the new series – the 50-franc note – will 
not be issued until 2015 at the earliest. We will announce the exact issue date as soon as 
production of the first banknote denomination has been completed.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
