Manuel Sánchez: The shared task of financial inclusion 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  Sixth 
Financial Education Summit, organised by Banamex, Mexico City, 19 November 2013. 
 It is an honor to participate in this meeting on financial education and economic citizenship. I 
am pleased that Banamex has organized, once again, a forum for discussion and analysis 
that contributes to understanding the challenges posed by financial inclusion in our country, 
and to pondering viable options for promoting it. 
Theory  and  international  evidence  show  that  financial  intermediation  and  inclusion  favor 
economic  development  and  enhance  living  standards.  Among  other  benefits,  access  to 
banking  services  allows  individuals  and  firms  to  make  better  savings  decisions,  carry  out 
economic transactions efficiently, and finance consumption and investment. 
Despite these advantages, Mexico is under-banked relative to advanced countries, and also 
even relative to nations of similar or less development. The percentage of people with a bank 
account, the proportion of individuals and firms with credit, and the availability of distribution 
channels such as bank branches, automatic teller machines, and point-of-sale terminals for 
every 100,000 inhabitants reveal that Mexico is significantly behind, although the data also 
suggest a huge opportunity for improvement.1 
As  is  well  known,  many  savers  and  seekers  of  credit  meet  their  needs  with  ingenious 
methods running from investments in and trading of animals to rotating savings and credit 
associations  (tandas).  Indeed,  those  with  null  or  limited  access  to  financial  services  have 
come  up  with  other  ways  of  saving,  demanding  loans,  making  financial  decisions,  and 
carrying  out  fairly  complex  operations  in  their  own  ways.  In  fact,  the  proportion  of  the 
population that uses informal financial services surpasses that using the formal system.2 
Frequently,  these  schemes  are  effective.  For  example,  contrary  to  commonly  held 
prejudices,  informal  credit  markets  for  people  with  low  incomes  tend  to  have  a  strong 
payment culture, partly because transactions occur in communities with strong binding ties. 
However, it is also true that informal vehicles hardly guarantee optimum scales and protect 
users from possible fraud, given that they lack adequate rules and supervision. 
Low financial inclusion can obstruct or make more expensive the access to information and 
services indispensable to increasing people’s opportunities and improving social wellbeing. 
To the extent that this limitation may affect broad segments of the population, generally those 
with the lowest incomes, it can diminish the productive potential of social groups and entire 
regions, making marginalization more acute. 
Obstacles to and progress on financial inclusion in Mexico 
There are several factors that may explain the low level of financial inclusion in Mexico. The 
greatest problem for financial intermediaries appears to reside in the high costs of servicing 
low-income communities, especially those in isolated locations. 
                                                 
1   See BIS (2012), Statistics on payment, clearing and settlement systems in the CPSS countries, January; the 
World Bank, Enterprise Survey; and central banks. 
2   According to recent data, 36 percent of Mexican adults save in the formal system, while 44 percent save in the 
informal system. At the same time, 28 percent have formal credit, while 34 percent seek loans in the informal 
sector.  See  INEGI  (2012),  Encuesta  Nacional  de  Inclusión  Financiera.  Análisis  de  los  resultados,  INEGI, 
pp. 20–27. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In fact, geographic distances, low population density, and the small size of the market make 
it  more  burdensome  for  banks  to  open  branches  and  other  service  channels.  Additionally, 
low balances and high-volume transactions make accounts expensive to administer. Where 
loans are concerned, limited information on individuals and firms as well as poor guarantees 
and  recovery  mechanisms  can  make  lending  unprofitable.  On  the  other  hand,  product 
designs inadequate to the needs of users also limit financial inclusion. 
From the perspective of potential customers, practical reasons and cultural barriers exist, as 
manifested  by  distrust  in  banks.  Many  people  cite  as  reasons  for  not  using  financial 
institutions  the  facts  that  fees  are  high  and  interest  rates  on  savings  low,  excessive 
requirements  are  demanded,  and  branches  are  far  away.  Definitely,  the  benefits  of  formal 
financial  intermediation  have  not  been  well  communicated,  nor  has  a  more  effective 
response been offered by financial intermediaries to certain potential customer needs.3 
Nevertheless, in recent years, Mexico has continued to increase the availability of financial 
services for ever greater numbers of families and businesses. For example, intermediaries 
have expanded their physical infrastructure to provide services, and to widen and diversify 
product  offerings.  Similarly,  the  use  of  electronic  transactions  has  increased  significantly, 
substituting less efficient means of payment such as checks. 
One piece of remarkable progress has been the growth of commission agents, through which 
businesses  can  provide  financial  services  on  behalf  of  banks,  allowing  them  to  take 
advantage of already built infrastructure, lower their costs, and promote inclusion in faraway 
populations.  To  highlight  the  contribution  of  this  phenomenon,  it  is  enough  to  say  that 
currently, in more than 10 percent of the nation’s municipalities, a commission agent is the 
only way formal banking services are provided.4 
In addition, mobile phones have begun to be used as a financial services medium. Even if 
they  have  not  yet  become  a  wide  distribution  channel,  partly  due  to  platform  development 
and interconnection problems, their potential is enormous. With mobile phones, the use of 
which is widespread across all income brackets, individuals today can carry out various basic 
operations such as consulting savings balances and making payments to third parties. 
low  profitability, 
technologies  and 
the  use  of  new 
Shared challenges on financial inclusion 
Despite this progress, a lot remains to be done to incorporate those not served by the banks. 
Given the fact that apparently many challenges to financial inclusion come from high costs 
and 
facilities  brought  by 
telecommunications  will  without  a  doubt  continue  to  play  a  key  role  in  augmenting  the 
possibilities of banking penetration in Mexico. 
Beyond the factors that drive success is the need for all players to be actively involved in the 
endeavor  of 
the 
interconnection of services, competition in the banking industry, and transaction safety. In an 
important  way,  they  should  also  strengthen  the  prudential  and  supervisory  frameworks  so 
that  previously  informal  activities  become  incorporated  in  a  way  that  safeguards  the 
population’s wealth with due caution. 
The financial intermediaries, in turn, should keep participating actively in the development of 
these  markets,  creating  new  ways  of  servicing  an  ever  wider  and  more  heterogeneous 
public. 
inclusion.  The  authorities  should  continue 
to  promote 
financial 
the 
                                                 
3   See the key reasons for which an individual decides not to open a bank account in Ibid, p. 22. 
4   The  CNBV 
the  data  on  coverage  by  commission  agents  at 
reports 
http://portafoliodeinformacion.cnbv.gob.mx/bm1/Paginas/infoper.aspx 
the  municipal 
level 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  the  final  analysis,  keeping  up  with  the  pace  of  society  will  continue  to  be  essential  to 
broadening the formal financial system. Throughout the world, it has been clear that many 
market transformations have come from social initiatives or businesses with the imagination, 
creativity and technology to satisfy savings, lending and payment needs. 
For  example,  in  many  countries,  innovations  have  included  the  creation  of  peer-to-peer 
platforms, which pinpoint matches between those who seek loans with savers who decide to 
lend. Another method, crowdfunding, has become a popular way for firms seeking loans and 
previously  analyzed  by  the  platform  to  sell  their  shares  on-line  and  convert  investors  into 
shareholders and creditors. 
Analogously,  in  Mexico,  some  firms  which  distribute  their  products  in  small  retail 
establishments  have  facilitated  the  use  of  electronic  means  for  cash  management  and 
payments, incorporating a significant number of very small businesses in the financial sector. 
These  kinds  of  initiatives,  well-regulated  and  undertaken  with  caution,  allow  families  and 
communities  to  build  savings  and  start  new  businesses  which  increase  basic  capacities, 
generate  income,  and  help  them  fight  against  inefficiency  and  poverty.  At  the  same  time, 
formal  financial  intermediaries  can  complement  and  develop  these  projects  to  generate 
permanent customers. 
Conclusion 
Financial inclusion engenders benefits for the population as well as for intermediaries. The 
lowering of costs through technology can allow the harmonization of popular forms of finance 
with formal services. 
We should learn, then, to assimilate financial schemes which originate in society. Numerous 
experiences prove that modifying paradigms and using creativity to extend financial services 
is not only an activity with enormous social impact, but also, good business. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
