Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Financial inclusion and the 
development of the financial system 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
3rd Graduation  Ceremony  of  the  Uganda  Institute  of  Banking  and  Financial  Services, 
Muyenga, Kampala, 4 October 2013. 
 The Board Chairperson of the Uganda institute of Banking and Financial Services, 
Members of the Board of Directors of the institute 
Members of the Institute present 
The Graduands 
Invited Guests in your respective capacities 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
First I would like to thank the Board Chairperson, Mrs. Balaka, for inviting me to officiate at 
this function. I would also like to congratulate all those who are graduating today. 
Financial inclusion, which is defined as expanding access of low income families to a broad 
range  of formal financial  services,  has  become a  priority for financial  sector  policy  makers 
across  the  developing  world  in  recent  years.  The  main  reasons  for  prioritizing  financial 
inclusion as a policy objective are threefold. 
First, expanding the opportunities of people to trade is almost always welfare enhancing; this 
applies to financial markets as well as other types of markets. Secondly, access to financial 
services may help poor people to finance investment in micro-enterprises, for example the 
purchase  of  farm  inputs,  which  will  enable  them  to  raise  their  incomes.  Thirdly,  financial 
inclusion can help to deepen financial markets, for example by attracting more savings into 
banks, although it is not the only channel through which financial markets can be deepened. 
Empirical  research  has  shown  that  a  deepening  of  the  financial  system  supports  higher 
levels of private investment and economic growth over the long term. 
These are sound reasons for supporting efforts to promote financial inclusion, but I also think 
that the policy challenges pertaining to promoting financial inclusion are more complex than 
is often realised, in two important respects. The first is that access to financial services may 
not  be  the  only  constraint,  or  even  the  most  important  constraint  to  achieving  a  strategic 
policy objective. For example, it is unlikely that expanding access to financial services in rural 
areas will enable smallholder farmers to expand their output and raise their incomes unless it 
is supported by efforts in other areas, such as the provision of agricultural extension services 
and better rural feeder roads, to help smallholders to modernise their farming practises. 
Secondly, although there may be synergies between financial inclusion and other strategic 
objectives of financial sector policy, such as the deepening of financial markets, there may 
also  be  trade-offs  with  other  objectives.  It  is  important  to  comprehend  clearly  what  these 
trade-offs and synergies might involve if sound policies for the development of the financial 
sector are to be designed. This requires an understanding of the economic reasons why so 
large a share of the population is excluded from access to financial services. 
The  vast  majority  of  the  Ugandan  population  have  virtually  no  access  to  formal  financial 
services, other than the use of mobile money. The latest FINSCOPE survey, which will be 
published  shortly,  found  that  only  8  percent  of  Ugandans  save  money  in  a  bank  account, 
while  another  6  percent  save  money  with  a  savings  and  credit  cooperative  (SACCO). The 
financially excluded are the poor, especially those living in rural areas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  main  reason  why  the  poor  are  excluded  from  access  to  formal  financial  services  is 
because serving this segment of the population entails financial institutions incurring much 
higher transactions costs, relative to the value of the services provided, than is the case for 
more wealthy customers. These costs may be prohibitive for the bank or for the customer to 
bear.  Furthermore,  the  costs  of  operating  branches  in  rural  areas  are  large  relative  to  the 
rather limited volume of revenues which can be generated from these branches, especially 
as  many  of  the  basic  requirements  of  operating  a  bank,  such  as  the  provision  of  electric 
power, are more expensive in rural areas than in urban areas. 
Serving the financially excluded may also entail higher risks for financial institutions, because 
the  poor  have  fewer  resources  to  cushion  themselves  against  adverse  shocks  and  fewer 
assets  which  can  serve  as  collateral  for  loans  than  wealthier  customers  have.  As  such 
financial  exclusion  reflects  the  economic  reality  of  conducting  the  business  of  financial 
services in a poor and largely rural society; it is not just a form of market failure which can be 
easily rectified through policy intervention. That is why promoting financial inclusion involves 
potential trade-offs with other policy objectives. I will give one example of such a potential 
trade-off. 
A  major  concern  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda  (BOU)  is  the  very  high  interest  rate  spreads  of 
commercial  banks,  as  I  have  made  clear  on  several  occasions.  The  average  net  interest 
margin of the Ugandan banking system in the last financial year was 12 percentage points. 
High  interest  rate  spreads  lead  to  high  real  lending  rates,  which  constrains  borrowing  by 
productive  enterprises,  especially  those  which  operate  in  competitive  markets  where  profit 
margins are thin. This is especially the case for small and medium scale enterprises (SMEs) 
which  provide  the  main  source  of  formal  sector  employment  for  Ugandans,  and  are  thus 
essential  in  the  struggle  to  eradicate  poverty. The  respondents  of the World  Bank’s  Doing 
Business  Survey  reported  in  the  2013  African  Competitiveness  Report  cited  access  to 
finance  as  the  second  most  problematic  factor  for  doing  business  in  Uganda  (after 
corruption). The main reason why interest rate spreads in Uganda are so wide is the high 
fixed and operating costs of the banks. Interest costs comprise less than a third of the total 
expenses of commercial banks in Uganda; the rest of the costs comprise salaries, utilities, 
the maintenance of buildings and provisions for bad debts. 
Reducing bank operating costs is essential if interest rate spreads are to narrow and lending 
rates for borrowers are to be made more affordable. However, reducing bank operating costs 
may  not  be  compatible  with  expanding  access  to  banking  services  to  the  poor,  if  the 
transactions costs and the risks involved in providing banking services to the poor are higher 
than those involved in serving existing bank customers. That does not make it undesirable to 
expand  financial  services  to  the  vast  majority  of  the  population  currently  unbanked,  but  it 
does  mean  that  it  must  be  done  in  a  cost  effective  manner  which  does  not  force  up  the 
average cost to asset ratios of banks or increase the risks in their loan portfolios. 
How might it be possible to promote financial inclusion in a manner which does not conflict 
with  other  strategic  goals  of  financial  sector  policy?  Branchless  banking  innovations  like 
Mobile  Money  and  Agent  Banking  offers  a  solution  to  some  aspects  of  the  problem  of 
financial  exclusion,  although  not  all.  Over  eleven  million  people,  comprising  a  third  of 
Uganda’s population, are registered as mobile money customers. Mobile banking in Uganda 
currently only offers payment and money transfer services, but it has the potential to provide 
a platform for other financial services; for example linking customers to savings accounts in 
banks, as is starting to happen in Kenya through the agent banking model. However mobile 
banking per se will not alleviate the main constraints facing the poor in accessing credit from 
formal financial institutions. 
Microfinance  institutions,  which  utilise  innovative  modalities  for  serving  low  income 
households, such as group lending, and provide financial products which are tailored to the 
needs  of  this  segment  of  the  population,  offer  another  channel  for  expanding  financial 
inclusion. When microfinance first emerged in Uganda, in the 1990s, it was undertaken by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
not for profit organisations using concessional finance from abroad and did not involve taking 
deposits  from  customers.  In  2003,  Uganda  enacted  legislation  to  allow  microfinance 
institutions to take deposits and for those that do so to be regulated by the BOU, as a third 
tier of supervised financial institutions (after banks and credit institutions). This reform was 
motivated by the recognition that access to deposits is often equally as important as access 
to  loans  for  low  income  customers  and  that  microfinance  institutions  would  be  more 
sustainable over the long term if they could build a domestic deposit base, rather than having 
to rely on donor funds, to finance their lending. 
The  growth  of  deposit  taking  microfinance  in  Uganda  over  the  last  10  years,  since  the 
Microfinance  Deposit  Taking  Institutions  Act  was  passed  in  2003,  has  not  really  met 
expectations. Only a few microfinance institutions applied for licenses as tier III microfinance 
deposit taking institutions (MDIs). The total deposits of the MDIs are less than one percent of 
the  deposits  of  the  commercial  banks.  At  the  same  time  a  plethora  of  semi  formal  and 
informal financial institutions, which include nearly two thousand SACCOs, have grown up. 
All  of  these  semi-formal  and  informal  financial  institutions,  which  are  not  subject  to  any 
prudential regulation, are collectively referred to as tier IV financial institutions. 
The growth of the unregulated financial sector has prompted the BOU to rethink its strategy 
towards  the  tier  IV  financial  institutions.  It  is  not  feasible  to  try  and  regulate  all  of  the 
SACCOs  and  other  tier  IV  institutions,  because  there  are  far  too  many  of  them  to  do  this 
effectively. However, we believe that the larger SACCOs, those with hundreds or thousands 
of  members,  should  be  encouraged  to  graduate  to  become  microfinance  deposit  taking 
institutions, licensed and regulated by the BOU. This will enhance their financial stability and 
therefore  help  to  protect  their  savings.  We  are  currently  in  the  process  of  preparing 
amendments to the MDI Act to make it easier for the larger tier IV institutions to graduate to 
become  licensed  MDIs,  for  example  by  removing  the  requirement  that  MDIs  should  be 
limited liability companies, rather than mutual associations. In addition, the amendments to 
the  MDI  Act  will  create  an  obligation  on  SACCOs  which  hold  total  savings  of  more  than 
Shs 1.5 billion to convert to tier III status. We anticipate that approximately 13 of the existing 
tier IV MFIs and SACCOs will graduate to tier III status. 
Financial  exclusion  is  not  caused  only  by  constraints  on  the  supply  side  of  the  financial 
market.  Many  people  are  discouraged  from  participation  in  formal  sector  financial  markets 
because of a lack of knowledge, or misinformation, about financial products and insufficient 
knowledge about their rights as consumers of these products. To address these problems, 
the BOU has launched a program to promote financial literacy, through educational activities. 
The  BOU  has  also  prepared  consumer  protection  guidelines  for  commercial  banks  and 
publicized these in the media. 
To  conclude, I  want  to  emphasize  the  complex  challenges facing  policymakers. There  are 
fundamental  economic  reasons  for  why  large  parts  of  the  population  are  excluded  from 
financial  services.  We  need  to  promote  financial  inclusion,  but  this  objective  must  be 
balanced against other priorities for financial sector development. 
We should, therefore, aim to encourage innovations to promote financial inclusion which can 
minimise the trade-offs and maximise the synergies with other policy objectives. 
Thank you for listening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
