Lars Rohde: The most important recent economic developments in 
Denmark 
Speech by Mr Lars Rohde, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the Auditors’ Day 
2013, Copenhagen, 26 September 2013. 
 In the turbulent period in the wake of the financial crisis and the subsequent government debt 
crisis, Denmark became known as a “safe haven” among international investors. The Danish 
government  has  maintained  its  triple-A  rating,  at  times  capital  inflows  into  Denmark  have 
been sizeable, and both interest rates and the yield spread to Germany reached historically 
low levels. In fact, the yield spread to Germany was even negative for a while. Presumably 
no-one could have imagined that before the crisis. And if Denmark’s economic policy had not 
enjoyed a high degree of credibility, it would not have been possible. It now looks as if the 
situation is normalising, at least for long-term interest rates.  
Today  I  would  like  to  outline  the  most  important  economic  developments  leading  to  our 
current situation. Let me start with an international perspective. 
With the introduction of the euro in 1999, a number of heavily indebted southern European 
countries  such  as  Greece,  Spain,  Portugal  and  Italy,  as  well  as  Ireland  –  the  “GIIPS 
countries”  –  saw  their  yield  spreads  to  the  core  member  state,  Germany,  narrow 
substantially.  Many  of  the  GIIPS  countries  had  sustained  government  deficits,  and  the 
structural element of these deficits was incorrectly estimated. As a result, government debts 
were  allowed  to  increase  further  from  elevated  levels.  Productivity  grew  at  a  slow  pace  in 
these  countries,  while  wage  inflation  was  fairly  high,  which  undermined  competitiveness. 
Previously, that could have been addressed by devaluing the currency. With the euro, that 
was no longer an option. This was the situation in the GIIPS countries – to varying degrees. 
The financial crisis was a wake-up call, and in 2011 the heavily indebted countries were hit 
by the sovereign debt crisis. Economic imbalances were large, and investors realised that a 
single currency does not automatically entail joint liability for sovereign debt. Yield spreads 
widened  again.  Retrospectively,  we  can  see  that  the  financial  markets  did  not  play  the 
watchdog role, as they should have done. Given the unsustainable economic policies, risk 
premia on the government bonds of the debt-ridden countries should never have fallen to the 
German  level  after  the  introduction  of the  euro. The  economies  in  question  are  now  in  an 
adjustment process, which is all the more difficult because action was not taken at an earlier 
stage. This shows what may happen if economic policy is not sufficiently responsible. 
To  a  large  extent,  the  description  of  the  heavily  indebted  countries  in  the  lead-up  to  the 
financial crisis also describes developments in Denmark – but with the opposite sign.  
History shows that when it comes to fiscal policy, credibility or lack of credibility is what really 
separates the wheat from the chaff in terms of the countries seen as safe havens.  
For many years, Denmark pursued fiscal policy that dampened cyclical fluctuations. But in 
the period before and during the most recent upswing, fiscal policy became procyclical. That 
was unfortunate, and it has contributed to prolonging the adjustment of the economy after the 
downturn. 
Nevertheless, there were sizeable government surpluses and government debt was reduced 
in  the  years  leading  up  to  the  financial  crisis.  So  Denmark’s  point  of  departure  was  more 
favourable when the crisis hit. Unlike most other EU member states, Denmark had scope to 
let  public  finances  cushion  the  impact  of  the  strong  setback  without  jeopardising  basic 
confidence in the fiscal policy pursued.  
In response to the lessons learned from the financial crisis, a set of framework conditions for 
responsible fiscal policy have been laid down. This has been done at EU level via the Fiscal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Compact, which forms the basis for the Danish Budget Act. From 2014, the Act lays down 
4-year current spending ceilings for central, regional and local government. It is hoped that 
the  Budget  Act  will  help  to  ensure that  the  many  years  of  systematic  budget  overruns  are 
now  a  thing  of  the  past.  Even  before  the  Act  comes  into  force,  discipline  has  been 
strengthened, in that spending has been within budget in recent years. 
Pursing responsible fiscal policy requires a constant effort. In the current debate on the 2014 
Finance  Act,  there  have  been  proposals  to  ease  fiscal  policy  more  than  the  government 
plans  to  do.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  takes  a  clear  stand  on  that  issue.  There  is  neither  a 
need for nor scope for further expansionary measures. Fiscal policy is already very close to 
the limits of the framework adopted.  
Moreover, although we have a negative output gap – and consequently spare resources in 
the economy – the gap is not tremendously large, and Danmarks Nationalbank expects it to 
narrow  gradually  towards  2015.  Unemployment  is  not  far  from  its  structural  level  and  is 
actually 30,000 lower than when the Whitsun Package of austerity measures was introduced 
in 1998. Considerable savings have been built up in the economy, and at some point this will 
invariably  lead  to  higher  private  consumption  and  investment.  Fiscal  easing  at  the  current 
juncture could prove to be badly timed as it might boost an economy which is already on its 
way up, with a risk that the economy overheats again.  
Besides  sound  fiscal  policy,  the  transition  from  a  country  with  large  external  debts  to  a 
creditor nation is important in relation to Denmark’s status as a safe haven. A few decades 
back,  the  current-account  deficit  was  a  theme  that  dominated  practically  all  economic 
discussions. Denmark had permanent deficits from the early 1960s until 1990. External debt 
accumulated  and  constituted  40  per  cent  of  GDP  when  it  peaked  in  1986.  That  severely 
restricted Denmark’s room for economic manoeuvre. Many of us remember Finance Minister 
Knud  Heinesen’s  warning  that  Denmark  was  heading  for  an  abyss.  Today  we  are  in  the 
opposite  situation.  Denmark’s  net  foreign  assets  now  exceed  35  per  cent  of  GDP  and 
continue to grow. However, we expect them to fall this year due to rising long-term interest 
rates, which will entail capital losses on pension funds’ hedging instruments in particular.  
In recent years, Denmark has received the equivalent of 3 per cent of GDP in annual return 
on its net foreign assets; this increases consumption opportunities correspondingly.  
The current account of the balance of payments reflects the difference between savings and 
investment  in  the  economy  overall.  The  positive  trend  since  1990  is  attributable  to  a 
structural  increase  in  the  propensity  to  save  rather  than  lower  investment.  True,  the 
investment ratio is somewhat low at present, but in view of the current cyclical position it is 
not unusually low.  
One of the reasons for the structural increase in the propensity to save in Denmark is that the 
tax deductibility of interest payments has been reduced steadily from 73 per cent in the mid-
1980s.  Undoubtedly,  labour-market  pensions  also  play  a  role  as  they  are  in  the  nature  of 
compulsory savings for some people.  
As I have already mentioned, Denmark’s net foreign assets provide a sound annual return. 
Investment income from abroad increases domestic demand. That leads to upward pressure 
on wages in Denmark, which in turn weakens competitiveness. In other words, an internal 
revaluation  process  takes  place.  In  countries  with  floating  exchange  rates,  the  currency 
would  appreciate.  This  is  a  kind  of  balancing  mechanism,  and  part  of  the  deterioration  of 
Denmark’s competitiveness by 20 per cent since 2000 should be viewed in that light.  
The fall in competitiveness was particularly strong in connection with the overheating of the 
Danish economy in 2006–08, but a large part of the excess wage increase has been made 
up for in recent years, as wage inflation has been lower here than in competitor countries. In 
fact, Denmark’s industrial production, which is to a large extent driven by exports, has risen 
more strongly than Sweden’s since it dived in response to the financial crisis in the autumn of 
2008.  The  reason  why  growth  in  GDP  has,  nevertheless,  been  lower  than  in  Sweden  is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
weaker domestic demand as a result of the strong downturn in the Danish housing market 
after  the  overheating,  with  a  resultant  loss  of  wealth  and  negative  implications  for  private 
consumption.  
In  general,  it  does  not  make  sense  to  speak  of  “structurally  weak  competitiveness”. Weak 
competitiveness is temporary, not permanent. After a while it  will strengthen as a result of 
developments in wages and exchange rates. With the fixed-exchange-rate policy, Denmark 
has deselected the latter option.  
Over a period of time, extensive structural reforms have been introduced in Denmark. These 
include  reforms  of  pensions,  taxation  and  unemployment  benefits,  to  mention  but  a  few 
examples. The reforms help to secure the future foundations of the Danish economy and are 
also  an  element  of  credible  economic  policy.  But  in  the  short  term  they  may  initially  have 
increased uncertainty in the population, thereby extending the recession slightly. However, 
this is not an argument for not taking action.  
Obviously,  we  cannot  talk  about  credible  economic  policy  without  mentioning  the  fixed-
exchange-rate  policy.  Over  the  last  30  years,  considerable  credibility  has  been  built  up 
around this policy and no-one seriously questions it.  
When  the  financial  crisis  peaked  in  the  autumn  of  2008,  the  krone  –  like  other  small 
currencies – came under very strong pressure. Combined with a number of crisis measures, 
the high degree of credibility helped to ensure that Denmark weathered the crisis.  
Thanks to the favourable balances and strong confidence in the Danish economy, we have 
benefitted from the historically low interest rates in the wake of the financial crisis. This has 
buoyed  up  private-sector  demand  and  hence  also  production  and  employment  in  recent 
years. Both short- and long-term interest rates have fallen considerably since end-2008. This 
is a concrete example of “credibility counts”, which is the theme of the Auditors’ Day 2013. 
On  6  July  2012,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  reduced  the  rate  of  interest  on  certificates  of 
deposit  to  minus  0.2  per.  In  other  words,  banks  and  mortgage  banks  must  pay  to  hold 
liquidity  at  Danmarks  Nationalbank;  a  situation  that  is  unique  in  both  a  historical  and  an 
international  context.  Subsequently  the  rate  of  interest  on  certificates  of  deposit  has  been 
raised to the current level of minus 0.1 per cent. In recent years, pressure on the krone has 
entailed preventing it from strengthening. That is, undeniably, more pleasant than having to 
support a weakening currency.  
In the last few months, long-term interest rates in particular have begun to rise again, and the 
Danish yield spread to the euro area is no longer negative. We have known all along that 
interest  rates  would  normalise  at  some  point,  but  as  long  as  this  simply  means  that  our 
neighbouring economies are recovering, it is not a problem. 
I have talked about the importance of credible economic policy. This crisis has emphasised 
the  need  for  credibility  –  at  both  macro  and  micro  level.  In  Denmark,  several  banks  had 
managements  who  were  over-optimistic  when  it  came  to  calculating  the  need  for  loan 
impairment  charges.  Roskilde  Bank  and  Tønder  Bank  are  sad  examples.  Both  of  these 
banks are history now. 
I  realise  that  the  concept  of  credibility  is  not  unknown  to  auditors.  The  whole  purpose  of 
audits is to ensure confidence in the information provided in the financial statements, so that 
investors and other stakeholders may trust the information – and make informed decisions. 
The auditors perform an important task as the trusted representatives of society. This task is 
also of significance to the macroeconomy as it helps to reduce uncertainty about the figures, 
thereby facilitating capital and credit flows.  
But  trust  in  auditors  has  also  been  shaken  a  little  by  the  financial  crisis.  Several  legal 
investigations  of  the  banks  that  have  been  wound  up  question  the  quality  of  the  audits 
performed. And in several cases the government-owned winding-up company, the Financial 
Stability Company, has raised claims against the external auditors for non-compliance with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
good audit practice. I am not going to anticipate the outcome of these cases, but – even if 
they relate to only a few black sheep – they have a negative impact on the general reputation 
and credibility of auditors. As a result, confidence in the financial statements may be eroded. 
As  always,  the  authorities  respond  by  introducing  more  regulation.  In  Denmark,  there  are 
proposals for a special certification scheme for auditors of financial enterprises in addition to 
the  approved  degrees  in  accountancy.  And  at  the  European  level,  the  Commission  has 
tabled  a  number  of  proposals  to  strengthen  the  independence  of  auditors  –  including 
compulsory rotation between accounting firms – and proposals to coordinate supervision of 
auditors in the individual member states. I also know that your organisation, FSR – Danish 
Auditors,  has  initiated  a  project  to  enhance  transparency  and  quality  within  the  sector  in 
Denmark.  
Such  initiatives  are  important  and  relevant.  They  can  help  to  create  a  framework  for 
confidence  and  credibility.  But  ultimately,  credibility  is  the  responsibility  of  the  individual 
auditor, who must ensure that he or she has the necessary competences and asks critical 
questions at the right time. And that the management of the reporting firm is able to provide 
satisfactory  answers  to  these  questions.  It  is  important  that  you,  as  auditors,  dare  to 
challenge the statements and answers provided by management. It is not enough to focus on 
ticking boxes and observing formal requirements. 
I have also noted that the market mechanism does seem to be functioning to some extent – 
in  Denmark  and  internationally.  Accounting  firms  connected  with  financial  enterprises  that 
have collapsed after the revelation of major accounting irregularities have lost reputation and 
customers. That helps to ensure self-discipline.  
As with the credibility of economic policy, confidence must be built up over time. On the other 
hand, it can evaporate in no time if the expectations of society are not met. So it is important 
that you as a profession work to reduce the “expectations gap” – that is, the gap between 
what the general public expects from auditors and what legislation requires. I think the key 
words in this context are communication and openness. That will promote both confidence 
and credibility. 
Thank you for inviting me to speak. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
