Denton Rarawa: The importance of fearing God as you climb your life’s 
mountains 
Keynote address by  Mr  Denton Rarawa, Governor of Central Bank of Solomon Islands, at 
the  Su’u  National  Secondary  School  2013  Graduation  Ceremony,  Malaita  Province, 
2 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
Chairman of Su’u School Board, Mr Edward Ronia; 
Other Su’u School Board Members; 
Education Director, SSE Church, Mr Joash Maneipuri 
Su’u School Principal, Mr Johnson Paraerae; 
Deputy Principal, Mr Timothy Aihunu; 
Other members of Staff of Su’u School; 
Former students & friends of Su’u School 
Parents and Guardians; 
Chiefs and Community Leaders of Dorio; 
Graduating Students; 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all, let me thank the Su’u School Graduation Organizing Committee for inviting me 
yesterday  to  be  your  Guest  of  Honour  at  this  Graduation  ceremony  this  afternoon.  It  is 
indeed an honour and privilege for me to be here. It is also good to be back at Su’u after 
35 years. I still have fond memories of my time as a student here, although most have faded 
over the years. The place has certainly changed but it is really sad to  see that the school 
facilities have been allowed to deteriorate over the years. 
This afternoon I will address mainly the graduating students. Some of you, especially Forms 
3, 5 and 6 students will continue your education next year here at Su’u school or in other 
schools in the country. Some Forms 6 and 7 graduates will enter university at SINU or within 
the region. But most of you will find employment or return to your communities. 
The theme of my presentation this afternoon is: “The importance of fearing God as you 
climb your life’s mountains”. I don’t know why I chose the analogy of “mountains”. Maybe 
because Su’u school sits on top of a mountain. 
I have a friend from Nepal. Nepal is a tiny country between China (or the Chinese province of 
Tibet) and India. Nepal is a mountainous country. In fact, the highest mountain in the world, 
Mt Everest is in Nepal. My Nepalese friend is an avid mountain climber in his younger days. 
He  was  telling  me  about  the  most  satisfying  and  most  frustrating  aspects  of  mountain 
climbing. 
The best part of mountain climbing is when you finally reach the top of the mountain. It is a 
very satisfying feeling. You reach the top and celebrate, congratulate your colleagues, punch 
the air, shout and laugh. But the most frustrating part, especially in Nepal, is upon reaching 
the top and celebrating, you see not far away, another mountain higher than the one you 
just reached the top. 
I think this story best represents our journey in life. Apostle Paul in the Bible refers to it as a 
“race”, others as a “fight” while even others look at it as a “development process”. I will refer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to our life’s journey as that of “mountain climbing”. Since the time we are born and up to the 
time we die, we continuously climb mountains. 
I believe today you have reached the top of one of your mountains, your “secondary school 
mountain”. That is why we are here this afternoon participating in this graduation ceremony. 
You  have  successfully  completed  Forms  3,  5,  6  and  7.  It  is  time  for  celebrations  and 
thanksgiving. You can congratulate yourselves and each other. Your parents and teachers 
are proud of you. 
But  having  reached  the  top  of  your  “secondary  school  mountain”,  you  are  actually  at  the 
bottom  of  your  next  mountain  in  life.  It  could  be  your  “university  education  mountain”,  a 
“career mountain” or even a “new family mountain”. 
Some of you completing Form 7 this year, for example, may be fortunate to get a university 
scholarship  next  year  to  continue  your  studies.  You  may  have  reached  the  top  of  your 
secondary  school  mountain  this  year,  but  next  year  you  will  start  at  the  bottom  of  a  new 
mountain,  your  “university  education  mountain”.  You  start  your  first  year  at  university  and 
work  your  way  up  that  mountain  for  another  four  years  before  you  reach  the  top  of  that 
mountain. 
After four years and having successfully climbed the “university mountain” you graduate with 
a university degree ready to join the workforce. Even with a university degree, when you join 
the  workforce,  you  start  as  a  junior  officer  at  the  bottom  of  a  new  mountain,  your 
“professional career mountain”. Over time, as you gain experience and new skills, you work 
your way up your “career mountain” until you reach the top of that mountain. 
In the Public Service, you become the Permanent Secretary (PS), in the Private Sector you 
become  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  (CEO)  of  the  Company  or  State  Owned  Enterprise 
(SOE). These positions are at the top of those organizations and companies. But to reach 
the top, you have to start at the bottom and climb your way up. 
Along  the  way,  you  meet  your  future  partner  and  start  a  family  at  the  bottom  of  a  new 
mountain,  your  “family  mountain”.  At  your  wedding,  you  celebrate  with  family  and  friends. 
Your parents or friends spend a lot of money for your wedding. But you are just at the bottom 
of your “family mountain”. 
So we see that life is like climbing mountains. As soon as we reach the top of one mountain, 
we start at the bottom of another one. 
Right tools & equipment important 
In  mountain  climbing,  as  in  everything  else,  you  need  the  right  equipment  and  tools  to 
succeed. You need the right safety equipment, strong ropes, right clothing especially shoes. 
Imagine a female mountain climber trying to climb with “high heel” shoes. She will not get 
very far up the mountain. 
I  believe  some  of  these  “tools  and  equipment”  you  have  learnt  and  acquired  here  at  Su’u 
School.  You  have  developed  “study  habits”  that  are  very  important  when  you  go  to 
university.  If  you  can’t  and  don’t  study  at  university,  you  will  not  reach  the  top  of  your 
“university mountain”. Other Christian values such as honesty, hard work, faithfulness and 
respect  are  important  tools  you  have  been  taught  during  your  time  here  at  Su’u  school. 
These values are important for success later in life, when you climb your other mountains, be 
it your professional career or family. 
But I believe, the most critical tool you need to successfully climb your mountains in life is to 
have the “Fear of our Creator”. Su’u School over the years has promoted Christian values 
and  produced  many  God-fearing  Solomon  Islanders  who  are  now  at  the  top  of  their 
respective  mountains.  So  I  would  like  to  encourage  you  all,  our  graduating  students  to 
practice your Christian values acquired at this school but most of all fear God in everything 
you do when you leave this school. Fear God as you climb your next mountain and he will 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
guide  you  and  provide  for  you.  The  Bible  says  it  very  clearly…“without  me,  you  can  do 
nothing” 
Last night at the Form 5 dinner, Solomon Islands’ Auditor General and Chairman of the Su’u 
School  Board,  Mr  Edward  Ronia,  spoke  about  corruption  in  our  country.  Corruption  is  like 
cancer that is destroying our country. I fully agree with his assessments. In fact corruption is 
a major obstacle holding back our country from developing. It is not about money or lack of it. 
There  is  a  lot  of  money  in  our  country.  We  generate  a  lot  of  money  from  our  economic 
activities and our Development Partners provide a lot of assistance to our country. In fact, 
Solomon Islands is one of the high “aid per capita” countries in the world. 
So our problem is not because we don’t have money. It is because we have mismanaged our 
money and corruption is a very big part of that mismanagement. And corruption is rife in our 
country  because  our  leaders,  we  the  people  of  this  country  have  lost  or  forgotten  that 
important value of fearing God. 
A God-fearing leader will not accept that “yellow envelope” pushed under the table. A God-
fearing businessman will not pay that extra $1000 to the Tender Board member to secure 
that “road maintenance” project. A God-fearing politician will put that wharf where it makes 
economic  sense  to  have  a  wharf  and  not  where  his  supporters  live.  A  God-fearing  school 
principal will not ask for $500 from me to transfer my child to his school. 
So  we  can  see  that  corruption  is  indeed  a  cancer  slowly  eating  away  at  the  core  of  our 
country.  But  that’s  not  what  our  Creator  wants  our  country  to  be.  We  are  meant  to  be  a 
healthy, wealthy country, not a sick and corrupted one. We are called Solomon Islands, after 
one of the wisest kings that ever lived for a reason. And I believe that Solomon Islanders are 
wise people. But why are we allowing this to happen to our beloved country? How do we get 
our country out of this situation? 
I believe we need to re-dedicate and re-commit our country to fear God in everything we do. 
We all need to re-dedicate ourselves to fight corruption in our country. 
And you graduating students of Su’u School who already fear God and will soon go out into 
the  world  and  climb  your  new  mountains,  I  encourage  you  to  hold  on  strongly  to  your 
Christian values and the fear of God. Your Christian values and the fear of God will enable 
you to deal with whatever challenges you will face wherever you may be. 
Your parents, guardians and teachers have played their part in helping you reach this stage, 
the top of your “secondary school mountain”. Your parents/guardians have invested in your 
education  by  paying  your  school  fees  and  provided  for  your  needs  when  at  school.  Your 
teachers have also played their part in teaching you and imparting their skills and knowledge 
to you here at Su’u School. This is all they can do and have done for you. It is up to you now 
to repay their investment in you in terms of finances, time, effort and intellectual guidance to 
be successful in whatever you do after Su’u School. If you hold on strongly to your Christian 
values,  apply  them  in  whatever  you  do  and  continue  to  fear  God,  I  believe  you  will  be 
successful and your future will be bright. 
But first you must succeed in your exams next week. On that note, I wish you all the best in 
your exams and may God’s many blessing be upon you as you answer that exam question 
or tick the box of that “multiple choice” question. 
Thank you for listening. 
May God Bless Su’u School and May God Bless Solomon Islands. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
