Jwala Rambarran: Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago – serving its 
citizens 
Remarks by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the Divali Celebrations 2013 – Jai Shri Hanuman, Port of Spain, 27 October 2013. 
 Sita Ram, good evening and welcome to the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago. 
We feel honoured and heartened that so many of you accepted our invitation to attend the 
Central Bank’s Divali 2013 show entitled, Jai Shri Hanuman. 
This  evening’s  Divali  show  is  the  second  consecutive  one  of  its  kind  to  be  put  on  by  the 
Central  Bank  since  I  assumed  office.  As  you  look  around  and  admire  the  tremendous 
decorative  effort  and  thought  gone  into  this  evening’s  event,  you  may  have  a  few  burning 
questions on your mind. 
Perhaps one major question relates to why the Central Bank is celebrating Lord Hanuman 
and not Mother Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth and prosperity, who is the traditional deity 
worshipped at Divali, and the one who we would all say is an obvious choice for the Bank. 
The answer is quite simple. 
For Divali 2012, we were inspired by Mother Lakshmi for our celebrations, and as we moved 
into planning this year’s Divali events, we thought of the Ramayana and decided, for the next 
four  years,  to  use  a  different  character  from  the  Ramayana  on  which  to  base  our 
celebrations. 
This  year,  as  you  can  see,  we  selected  Lord  Hanuman,  and  the  theme  is:  “A  symbol  of 
strength and stability.” 
As you may all be aware, Hanuman is a central figure in the Ramayana, one of the greatest 
of  Hindu  epics  and  a  sacred  text  that  has  been  the  source  of  courage,  strength  and 
inspiration for the Hindu community since the earliest days of indentureship in Trinidad and 
Tobago and the wider Caribbean. 
Hanuman is a devoted servant of Lord Rama, who willingly responds to the request of Lord 
Rama to help rescue Sita. Sita was Lord Rama’s wife who was kidnapped by the demon king 
Ravan. Hanuman performs various tasks in his quest to rescue Sita, eventually ending in a 
battle between good and evil in which Ram defeats Ravan. 
In each of these arduous tasks, Hanuman uses not just his miraculous powers such as the 
ability to change his size at will and to fly across long distances, but he uses his intellect, 
knowledge and wisdom to outsmart the various demons he encounters. 
In one scene Hanuman is captured by Ravan’s minions and his tail is set on fire by covering 
it with oil and cloth. Hanumanji started growing his tail until his captors had run out of oil and 
cloth, while they were frantically trying to get more cloth, Hanuman employed the opposite 
tactic and shrunk his size, and released himself from his chains. He then flew off and with his 
tail still burning used it to set fire to Ravan’s city of Lanka, thereby reducing it to ash. This is 
just one example of how Lord Hanuman used ingenuity to fulfill his mission and serve Lord 
Rama. 
So what does this have to do with strength and stability and the Central Bank? I mentioned 
earlier the Ramayana is a great Hindu epic; there are twists and turns, villains and heroes. 
The financial crisis this country experienced five years ago can be described as epic as well. 
There have been villains who through greed and avarice took what was not theirs to take, 
just like Ravan took Sita. Unlike Ravan, however, some of our own local demons are yet to 
get what they deserve and to be brought to justice. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  Central  Bank  is  the  silent  servant  of  the  people  of  this  country,  doing  what  it  takes, 
putting  creative,  new  measures  in  place,  to  move  our  country  onto  a  better financial  path. 
Like Hanuman was willing to serve Lord Rama with unwavering devotion, so too the Central 
Bank is devoted to ensuring financial stability for all our citizens in Trinidad and Tobago. 
Whether  we  are  undertaking  new  approaches  to  supervision  of  the  financial  system,  or 
putting in place new financial legislation, the Central Bank, like Hanuman, is prepared to be 
strategic and creative in securing victory over the financial difficulties raging around us. We 
will not be fatigued in this quest, and in our mission to bring the financial rakhshas (demons) 
to justice. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, we often sell our country as multicultural, but while it sounds nice to 
say, how much do we really do to celebrate our cultural diversity. As an independent national 
institution, I firmly believe that the Central Bank must celebrate all of our culture and all of our 
people’s talents. 
It is for this reason, for the first time in its forty nine-year history, the Central Bank supported 
Ramleela  this  year.  Ramleela  is  considered  the  oldest  and  largest  open  air  theatre  in  the 
Caribbean.  It  provides  an  opportunity  for  people  to  learn  the  story  of  Ram’s  life  and  his 
adherence  to  truth  despite  harsh  challenges.  The  Bank  supported  this  cultural  artform  by 
partly funding a group called the Pandavas based in Palmiste, South Trinidad. This is a youth 
Ramleela  group  and  last  weekend  they  put  on  an  advanced  community  production  that 
would rival shows that are staged by professionals in Queen’s Hall and in this Auditorium. 
Even as we did this, there were some who corrosively questioned why the Central Bank was 
supporting Ramleela. I wish to remind everyone that it was no lesser personage than Derek 
Walcott who chose to open his 1992 Nobel Prize acceptance speech for Literature entitled 
“The  Antilles:  Fragments  of  Epic  Memory”  with  a  strong  and  striking  reference  to 
Ramleela in Felicity, replete with color, song and ritual. 
I  also  wish  to  remind  everyone  that  in  2005  UNESCO  proclaimed  Ramleela  among  the 
world’s  “Masterpieces  of  the  Oral  and  Intangible  Heritage  of  Humanity”.  According  to 
UNESCO, Ramleela is a repository of cultural diversity and creative expression, as well as a 
driving  force  for  living  cultures.  Since  Ramleela  can  be  vulnerable  to  the  forces  of 
globalization,  social  transformation,  and  intolerance,  UNESCO  encourages  communities  to 
identify, document, protect, promote and revitalize such heritage. 
For  the  first  time  as  well,  this  year  the  Central  Bank  has  a  booth  at  the  Divali  Nagar, 
showcasing our two outreach arms – the Office of the Financial Services Ombudsman and 
the  National  Financial  Literacy  Program.  I  encourage  you  to  visit  us  at  the  Divali  Nagar, 
whether you have a complaint about a bank or insurance company, whether you are simply 
curious about improving your financial literacy, or whether you just want to see a softer, more 
humane side to the Central Bank. Our people would be delighted to meet with you. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Trinidad and Tobago is a diverse country. From Indian Arrival Day to 
Eid-Ul-Fitr, from Emancipation to Ramleela and Divali, from TUCO’s Calypso history month 
to Carnival, the Central Bank intends to support our rich cultural diversity. 
While I am happy to share this show with you I must tell you that all of our cultural events are 
also held for staff. This year as we turned to Lord Hanuman for inspiration, we had a roat and 
parsad making display for staff, as part of our Divali activities. Some of you may know roat is 
a fried sweet delicacy prepared and used in the worship of Lord Hanuman. 
I understand from our Corporate Communications Department, there were many calls and e-
mails from our vigilant staff, who pointed out that we had made a mistake and had spelt roti 
wrong in the posters for the event. Although we explained to staff that we were talking about 
roat,  not  roti,  many  were  simply  convinced  our  Corporate  Communications  team  was  just 
atrocious at spelling and we were going to teach them how to make roti. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This story is meant to remind you of why we see the need to continue to support our culture. 
There  is  always  something  new  to  learn  and  that  is  one  reason  why  Central  Bank  will 
continue to stage these events for the public and staff. 
As  I  close,  I  want  to  repeat  the  one  message  I  hope  you  remember  as  you  leave  here 
tonight,  and  I  will  turn  to  the  Ramayana  one  more  time.  After  Ravan’s  defeat,  Lord  Rama 
asked Hanuman how he would like to be thanked for his services. Hanumanji answered, “My 
lord,  let  me  spend  the  rest  of  my  days  in  your  service.”  That  summarizes  the 
fundamental work of this Bank and what we do – spending our days in service to our people. 
That is the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago. 
I do hope you enjoy the rest of the show and your evening with us, especially the unveiling of 
our Divali Display on the Ground Floor. 
Jai Shree Hanuman! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
