Luis M Linde: Profile of Professor Nicholas Bloom – winner of the 
XII Germán Bernácer Prize 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  XII  Germán 
Bernácer Prize Ceremony, Madrid, 24 September 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure for me to introduce this award ceremony for the 12th Germán Bernácer 
Prize. 
First  of  all,  let  me  once  again  thank the  organizers  and  sponsors  of  the  Prize.  They  have 
established  an  excellent  programme  to  support  economic  research  in  the  fields  of 
macroeconomics, monetary policy, and financial economics. 
This is the 10th time that the Bernácer Prize award ceremony has taken place at the Banco 
de  España.  The  continued  support  and  backing  of  this  initiative  of  the  Observatory  of  the 
European  Central  Bank  by  the  Banco  de  España  is  justified  by  its  conviction  of  the 
importance of macroeconomic research, insofar as it concerns the functions to be performed 
by the European System of Central Banks. 
By recognizing the relevance of a prize like this, which has been awarded, in every instance, 
on  the  basis  of  academic  excellence,  the  Banco  de  España  reaffirms  its  commitment  to 
economic research. As many of you know, this Prize commemorates a distinguished Spanish 
macroeconomist  who  worked  at  the  Banco  de  España,  as  director  of  its  Research 
Department, during the 1930s. Despite the isolation of the Spanish economics profession at 
that  time,  Germán  Bernácer  obtained  substantial  international  recognition  for  his  research 
contributions. 
In this edition, to the very illustrious list of previous winners of the Germán Bernácer Prize, 
we  add,  with  all  due  merit,  Professor  Nicholas  Bloom,  a  British  economist,  who  is  today 
Professor in the Economics Department at Stanford University. 
Professor Bloom graduated in Economics from Cambridge University, obtained his masters 
at Oxford University and his Ph.D. at University College London. He has been awarded the 
2010 Frisch Medal of the Econometric Society, is a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts 
and  Sciences  and  an  associate  editor  of,  among  other  journals,  Econometrica  and  the 
Quarterly Journal of Economics and Management Science. He has published many articles 
on  economic  and  management  issues  in  top  journals,  including  the  American  Economic 
Review, Econometrica and the Quarterly Journal of Economics. 
Professor  Bloom’s  two  main  areas  of  research  are  macroeconomic  uncertainty  and  firm 
organization  and  productivity.  In  the  first  area,  his  main  contributions  are  to  show  that 
macroeconomic uncertainty increases substantially in the aftermath of significant shocks. He 
also  shows  that  during  these  periods  of  uncertainty  firm’s  investment  responds  less  to 
demand  shocks.  This  set  of  contributions  has  promoted  research  that  explores  the 
importance of variations in volatility to explain macroeconomic fluctuations and the decisions 
of agents in the economy. 
In  the  second  area,  firm  organization  and  productivity,  he  shows  that  social  capital, 
represented by trust, increases aggregate productivity by affecting the organization of firms. 
He  also  shows  the  implications  of  these  organization  techniques  on  the  implementation  of 
Information and Telecommunication technologies across firms. In both cases, he is able to 
capture  the  macroeconomic  implications  of  decisions  made  at  the  firm  level,  linking  micro 
and macro questions. 
I conclude by extending my congratulations to Professor Bloom. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
