Daniel Mminele: “Does the investment case for emerging markets still 
hold?” 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Old Mutual Investor and Analyst Showcase Dinner, Cape Town, 4 December 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen and thank you to Old Mutual for inviting me to say a few 
words tonight, just as another year with its share of uncertainties and challenges is drawing 
to a close. The topic chosen for our discussion, namely whether or not there is still a case for 
investing in emerging markets (including South Africa) may have sounded incongruous two 
or  three  years  ago,  when  emerging  countries  were  at the forefront  of  the  global  economic 
recovery, and capital flows into the emerging world had resumed at a strong pace following 
the 2008–09 financial crisis. However, the last twelve months in particular have proved more 
challenging  for  securities  markets  in  the  emerging  world,  and  it  is  the  seriousness  and 
durability of these challenges which I will try to assess tonight.  
The changing role of emerging markets in global growth  
2. 
The  historical  case  for  portfolio  diversification  into  emerging  market  assets  has  long  been 
based on the growth outperformance of emerging market countries. As these countries grew 
faster  than  their  developed  counterparts,  reflecting  either  favourable  demographics,  large 
investments in human and physical capital, strong productivity gains, better governance or a 
mix of these, returns on invested financial capital were expected to be elevated. In turn, this 
justified faster growth in prices of emerging market equities. Furthermore, as income levels 
converged  towards  those  of  more  developed  economies,  support  for  stability-oriented 
policies  –  and,  consequently,  lower  and  more  stable  inflation  –  increasingly  became  the 
norm, enabling a reduction in the risk premium embedded in these countries’ fixed-income 
markets.  Finally,  stronger  productivity  gains  called  for  an  appreciation  of  emerging  market 
currencies, at least in real terms, over the long run. For most of the past decade, empirical 
evidence  supported  this  paradigm:  For  example,  between  2002  and  2012,  the  Morgan 
Stanley  Capital  International  (MSCI)  index  for  emerging  market  equities  outperformed  its 
global counterpart by 300 per cent, while returns on local currency emerging market bonds 
were 40 per cent higher than those on US Treasuries over the period.  
Yet, something seems to be changing. Emerging market economic growth is still outpacing 
that of the developed world, but the gap is narrowing. In its October 2013 World Economic 
Outlook,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  projected  that  growth  in  emerging  markets 
would slow from 4,9 per cent in 2012 to 4,5 per cent this year and pick up to 5,1 per cent next 
year,  whereas  at the  same time,  developed  economies  would accelerate from  1,2  per cent 
this year to 2,0 per cent in 2014. Such a narrowing, albeit a mild one, in the “growth gap” is 
nonetheless  surprising  as  in  the  past  decade  or  two,  recoveries  in  the  developed  world 
generally  saw  the  emerging  economies  outpace  advanced  economies.  In  a  word,  global 
recoveries used to leverage the emerging market performance, rather than undermine it.  
Why  is  this  happening?  It  is  hard  to  pinpoint  a  single  cause.  But,  among  others,  the 
performance of exports in many emerging economies has been poor, by historical standards, 
over the past eighteen months, suggesting (at least in some sectors) a loss of world market 
share. Also, in the current year, the co-existence of strong rates of credit growth and slowing 
real GDP growth in several large emerging market economies has raised concerns about a 
declining  efficiency  of  invested  capital.  Separately,  efforts  by  Chinese  authorities  to 
rebalance  economic  growth  towards  a  more  consumer-oriented  model  has  prompted 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
expectations  that growth  in  China  will  in  future  be  less  intensive  in  industrial  commodities, 
with negative implications for the major exporters of these commodities.  
The  big  question  is  how  much  of  the  recent  developments  represent  underlying  structural 
changes, or whether some of these factors will prove cyclical – for instance, that exports will 
revive  once  the  developed  world’s  recovery  is  more  solidly  entrenched.  There  are  some 
issues  that  point  to  a  structural  component.  Firstly,  one  tool  through  which  developed 
economies  are  fostering  economic  improvement  is  by  restoring  competitiveness,  be  it  via 
cost  and  price  disinflation  (as  in  the  case  of  the  euro  zone’s  periphery)  or  by  allowing 
currency  depreciation  (like  in  Japan).  Secondly,  a  difference  between  the  current  situation 
and  the  early  2000s  –  when  the  recovery  saw  emerging  market  growth  outpace  global 
benchmarks  –  is  that  the  real  effective  exchange  rates  of  emerging  market  currencies  are 
not,  on  balance,  as  depreciated  as  they  were  at  the  time.  Thirdly,  there  are  increasing 
indications that the moderation in economic growth in the emerging world has some lasting 
causes,  for  example  less  favourable  demographic  patterns.  It  is  significant  that  the  IMF’s 
estimates for potential economic growth in all the five BRICS countries are lower, in 2013, 
than similar estimates made in 2011.  
The likely impact of declining global liquidity 
3. 
The impact of somewhat less favourable fundamentals has, of course, been compounded by 
concerns that the ample liquidity made available in recent years to fight the global crisis will 
gradually be withdrawn, perhaps in the not-too-distant future. The announcement by the US 
Federal Reserve in May that conditions would probably soon warrant a tapering of its asset 
purchase programme – which incidentally does not equate to a reduction in global liquidity, 
merely to a phasing down of additional injections – quickly resulted in a sharp rise in the risk 
premium embedded in most emerging market assets. Since Chairman Bernanke first talked 
about tapering on 22 May 2013, the JP Morgan index of emerging market currencies has lost 
7.5 per cent of its value versus the US dollar; the Emerging Market Bond Index (EMBI) local 
currency  index  has  fallen  by  around  2.4  per  cent  at  the  same  time  as  the  EMBI-plus 
sovereign spread of US dollar-denominated debt over US Treasuries increased by close to 
100  basis  points;  and  the  MSCI  Emerging  Market  equity  index  has  fallen  by  4.0  per  cent, 
even as the MSCI World index of global equities continued to power ahead, gaining 6.0 per 
cent over the period.  
What  will  happen,  then,  when  global  central  bank  liquidity  starts  declining  in  earnest? 
Admittedly, the response to tapering talk since May need not necessarily be a guide to future 
market moves, as the reduction in the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases is probably by now 
discounted  to  a  much  larger  extent  than  it  was  before  Chairman  Bernanke  spoke  to 
Congress in May. To the extent that the Fed does not again surprise markets, but instead 
manages  to  stabilize  expectations  embedded  in  the  longer  part  of  the  US  yield  curve,  for 
example via the continued and effective use of its forward guidance, the impact on the global 
asset  price  constellation  could  be  more  benign  than  it  has  been  so  far  this  year.  But  how 
much is priced-in, nobody really knows.  
Nonetheless,  the  strong  correlation  seen  since  the  second  quarter  of  2013  between  the 
exchange rates and bond yields of emerging countries (especially those seen as the most 
vulnerable  to  a  reversal  of  capital  inflows,  because  of  more  fragile  domestic  growth  or 
external  account fundamentals)  and  US  Treasury  yields,  does  highlight  the  vulnerability  of 
the former to a further backup in the latter. Notwithstanding central bank efforts at anchoring 
long-term rate expectations, it seems difficult to imagine that a reduction in global liquidity – 
at a time when non-resident demand for US bonds, in particular, has been waning – would 
have no significant impact on US or core European yields. International estimates of “term 
premiums” embedded in longer-term bond yields did suggest that quantitative easing policies 
had  compressed  these  premiums  to  unusually  low  levels;  in  turn,  as  prospects  for  an 
unwinding  of  quantitative  easing  emerged,  they  started  to  normalize.  Furthermore,  term 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
premiums have shown some correlation across both developed and emerging bond markets, 
in particular since they began to rise from May 2013 onwards.  
The case for (still) investing in emerging markets  
4. 
Risks  hanging  over  emerging  market  assets,  however,  do  not  mean  that  the  case  for 
investing in such assets is closed. First of all, while the growth out-performance of emerging 
countries relative to the developed world has been dwindling, this should not obscure the fact 
that  the  gap,  while  narrowing,  remains  positive,  and  that  emerging  markets  remain  the 
biggest  contributors  to  global  growth.  Demographic  trends,  productivity  gains,  increases  in 
the stock of capital remain conducive to a stronger growth performance of emerging market 
countries  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  Even  countries  that  have  shown  a  relatively  strong 
degree of convergence with living standards of the developed world can still out-perform the 
latter, as the case of Korea and Taiwan shows.  
Similarly, emerging countries continue to display, on balance, better fiscal or external metrics 
than  their  developed  world  counterparts,  whether  one  looks  at  current  account  balances, 
public  deficits  or  ratios  of  public  and  private  debt  to  GDP.  Rather  than  the  developments 
following Mr Bernanke’s comments in May 2013 representing an “emerging market crisis”, as 
some  may  want  us  to  believe,  what  is  probably  a  more  correct  characterization  of  the 
developments  is  a  correction  or  re-pricing  in  the  wake  of  expected  normalization  of  global 
monetary  policy  and  uncertainty  around  the  speed  of  such  normalization.  What  seems  to 
further underpin the emerging markets investment case is much stronger fundamentals when 
compared to previous episodes of emerging markets coming under pressure, such as in the 
late 1990s, or even more recently in 2008. Substantial progress has been made in the last 
two decades towards more flexible exchange rates, reserves have been accumulated on a 
grand  scale,  fiscal  positions  are  healthier  than  in  many  advanced  economies,  all  of  these 
making emerging markets overall more resilient. With regard to the more cyclical component 
of  the  recent  developments,  without  underplaying  the  need  for  structural  reform  in  some 
cases, one could even draw a more constructive conclusion of current developments, namely 
that  depreciating  exchange  rates,  and  moderation  in  growth  patterns  may  actually  be 
testimony to how responsive these economies have become, and can adjust to changes in 
the underlying fundamentals.  
Furthermore, global investors may at present be relatively under-weight in emerging-market 
securities,  strengthening  the  case  for  out-performance  of  the  latter  over  the  medium  term. 
Private surveys of US and EU pension funds do suggest that their allocation to emerging-
market  debt  has  remained  stable  and  relatively  low,  as  a  share  of  total  assets  under 
management, in recent years, even as the share of emerging market bonds in world market 
capitalisation  continued  to  grow.  In  particular,  global  investor  allocations  to  local-currency 
bonds  of  emerging  market  economies remain  low,  in  part  because  of historical  reasons of 
liquidity which nonetheless fade over time as emerging economies increasingly expand the 
size and maturity of their local bond market.  
That  said,  not  all  emerging  countries  retain  sustainably  stronger  fundamentals  than  their 
developed  world  counterparts,  and growing  divergences  within  the  broad  emerging  market 
bloc, coupled with the likelihood of less abundant liquidity over the next few years, suggest 
that  differentiation  between  respective  emerging  markets  could  increasingly  become  the 
norm  in  coming  years.  Whereas  the  immediate  post-recession  years  had  seen  a  strong 
cross-correlation  between  the  performances  of  different  emerging  market  assets,  as  they 
shared common drivers in the form of liquidity injections and interest rate expectations in the 
world’s major economies, such correlations have already started to wane in 2013. Country 
differentiation gradually began to replace the proverbial “risk on, risk off” trading patterns of 
the  earlier  period.  Countries  with  relatively  weaker  growth,  inflation  and  external  account 
metrics  saw  their  currency,  bond  and  equity  markets  under-perform  those  with  more  solid 
fundamentals. Therefore, it may not be helpful to lump together countries and call them “the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
fragile  five”,  when  underlying  dynamics  in  these  countries  could  be  quite  different,  even  if 
they present similarities when one looks at budget deficits and current account deficits.  
South African assets under this new paradigm  
5. 
This allows me to conclude with a few words on our domestic situation. Domestic financial 
markets  have faced  significant  challenges  since  the  second quarter  of this  year.  The rand 
has extended a depreciating trend that began in the latter half of 2011, and lost about 12 per 
cent on a trade-weighted basis since early March, declining to levels last seen in late 2008, 
at the height of the global financial crisis. The yield on the benchmark R186 long-term bond 
has  risen  by  more  than  100  basis  points,  even  as  domestic  short-term  rates  remained 
anchored by the absence of a change in the Reserve Bank’s repurchase rate, while the CDS 
spread on five-year sovereign South African debt also widened, generally by a larger amount 
than those of countries enjoying a similar rating to South Africa. The domestic equity market 
has been the exception to this rule, although this partly reflects the “rand hedge” qualities of 
certain  sectors  or  stocks  which,  because  of  the  dollar  pricing  of  their  outputs  or  the 
international  diversification  of  their  operations,  tend  to  benefit  from  a  depreciation  of  the 
currency.  
We  cannot  be  under  the  illusion  that  the  poor  performance  of  domestic  financial  markets 
since  the  beginning  of  this  year  is  a  mere  consequence  of  a  less  favourable  international 
backdrop. Domestic socio-economic fundamentals also play a part in investment decisions of 
global buyers of South African securities. Phases of rand under-performance relative to other 
large  emerging  market  or  commodity-linked  currencies  have  frequently  coincided,  of  late, 
with  disappointing  foreign  trade  or  current  account  data  releases;  similarly,  episodes  of 
labour  disputes  are  often  accompanied  by  a  poor  performance  of  the  local  currency  and 
credit  spreads.  More  generally,  investors  seem  to  query  whether  the  growth  prospects  of 
South Africa will be sufficient to meet, over time, the economic aspirations of its citizens and, 
in  so  doing,  cement  public  support  for  the  stability-oriented  macroeconomic  policies  which 
investors have long regarded as a “constant” of the political landscape since the advent of 
democracy in 1994.  
However, one should not so easily forget the great many strides South Africa has made on 
the macroeconomic front, reflected by greater macroeconomic stability and longer upswings 
in the business cycle since the advent of democracy. The adoption of an inflation-targeting 
monetary policy framework in 2000 came with many benefits – contributing to a decline in the 
level  and  volatility  of  inflation  and  nominal  interest  rates,  improving  the  transparency  and 
accountability  of  the  central  bank,  and  therefore  also  its  credibility.  South  Africa  became 
increasingly  integrated  into  international  financial  markets,  contributing  to  the  growth  and 
development of its own domestic financial markets and financial infrastructures in terms of 
sophistication, depth and liquidity, thereby helping to boost growth and improve the country’s 
resilience  against  external  shocks.  The  policy  and  institutional  framework  similarly  remain 
strong. It is also as a result of this underpinning for the South African investment case that, 
over  the  years,  South  Africa  has  been  included  in  a  number  of  bond  indices  tracked  by 
international investors, such as the JP Morgan Emerging Market Bond Indices and the Citi 
World Government Bond Index.  
The strides we have made as a country are borne out by favourable rankings in a number of 
competitiveness reports. Overall, South Africa is ranked 53 out of 148 in the 2013/14 World 
Economic Forum Global competitiveness report; ranked in the top 15 worldwide in the 2012 
Emerging  Markets  Opportunity  Index;  first  in  economic  competitiveness  in  the  Africa 
Competitiveness  Report  (taking  the  lead  in  financial  market  development,  technological 
readiness, market size, business sophistication and innovation); and 39 out of 185 countries 
in the World Bank’s Report on Doing Business.  
South  Africa  is  respected  for  its  good  corporate  governance  –  ranking  first  for  ethical 
behaviour of firms; efficacy of corporate boards and protection of minority shareholders in the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Global Competitiveness Index. We perform particularly well in a number of areas: quality of 
institutions; intellectual property protection; property rights; efficiency of legal framework; and 
accountability of private institutions. These rankings are a clear indication of South Africa’s 
economic and financial potential.  
That  said,  there  are  no  doubt  challenges  that  we  confront  today  as  a  country  and  those 
challenges  are  reflected  in  the  somewhat  weaker  investor  sentiment.  There  is  an  urgent 
need  for  action  on  structural  reforms,  focus  on  quality  education  and  skills  development; 
infrastructure investment; to name a few. The National Development Plan sets out a good 
framework for dealing with these issues and the implementation thereof would help place the 
country on a faster and more sustainable growth path. Tackling these challenges requires a 
collective effort by players inside and outside government and a realisation that trade-offs will 
be necessary, and that the more difficult challenges cannot be addressed in a manner that is 
entirely painless for everybody.  
What role can, and should monetary policy play in supporting investor confidence in South 
Africa’s fundamentals? Admittedly, it is the nature of financial markets that perceptions of risk 
evolve over time, resulting in at least some degree of price volatility, even in those markets 
perceived as among the safest. Policymakers cannot completely eliminate financial market 
volatility. Yet in the recent past, some emerging countries have used specific tools to try and 
limit  the  extent  of  such  volatility.  One  should  however  remember  that  the  structures  of 
financial markets differ across countries, and hence a policy tool that appears appropriate in 
some  jurisdiction  may  not  necessarily  be  the  most  desirable  one  in  a  different  country. 
Furthermore, empirical evidence does not, so far, suggest that the volatility of South African 
financial  assets  has  meaningfully  diverged  from  those  of  markets  in  countries  where  such 
policy tools have been implemented.  
It is, however, important that investors remain assured and convinced of the firm commitment 
of South African authorities to price stability and sustainable public finances, irrespective of 
the  challenges  that  the  country  faces  in  the  pursuit  of  sustained  economic  growth  and 
development. In that respect, the Bank’s commitment to flexible inflation targeting, monetary 
policy  transparency  and  predictable  implementation,  remain  crucial  to  limiting  any  rise  in 
financial market uncertainty and volatility.  
The Monetary Policy Committee at its November meeting judged that an unchanged policy 
rate  was  consistent  with  its mandate  at this  stage. In  order  to  maintain  the  integrity  of the 
inflation  targeting  framework,  however,  it  would  not  hesitate  to  take  appropriate  action, 
should  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook  deteriorate  significantly.  At  the  same  time,  a 
reduction in public deficits as per the framework laid out in the October 2013 Medium-Term 
Budget Policy Statement, together with the implementation of measures agreed upon in the 
National Development Plan, aimed at unlocking the country’s longer-term growth potential, 
would substantially assist the Bank in carrying out its mandate of price and financial stability, 
in the interest of sustained economic growth and development.  
Conclusion  
6. 
Let me then finish by answering the question of whether there is still a case for investing in 
emerging  markets  with  a  “yes”.  While  challenges  remain  and  headwinds  in  the  form  of 
uncertainties  around  Fed  tapering,  lower  growth  in  key  emerging  market  economies,  and 
continued volatility are likely to be with us for some time, and the need to address certain 
structural  challenges  by  emerging  economies  is  beyond  question,  the  much  better 
fundamental backdrop of emerging markets and continued prospects of higher growth than in 
advanced economies, especially in regions such as Sub-Saharan Africa, appear to suggest 
that  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  write  off  emerging  markets.  By  rather  adopting  a  somewhat 
medium  to  longer-term  investment  horizon  with  appropriate  diversification  strategies,  and 
looking through some of the temporary turbulence, investors that maintain their loyalty to this 
asset  class  are  likely  to  reap  the  benefits.  Emerging  markets  appear  to  be  adjusting  both 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
cyclically  and  structurally  from  spectacular  levels  of  growth  observed  previously  to  more 
sustainable levels. This should continue to support a steady investment case.  
Thank you. 
Selected bibliography  
World Economic Outlook – Transitions and Tensions, International Monetary Fund, October 
2013. 
“Reviewing  the  Case  for  EM  Local  Debt  –  Structural  Strength,  Cyclical  Headwind”,  The 
Rohatyn Group, August 2013. 
“Will  DM’s  Recovery  be  EM-friendly?”  Emerging  Market  Macro  Outlook  and  Strategy,  Citi 
Research, 27 September 2013. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
