John McDermott: Understanding the New Zealand exchange rate 
Speech by Dr John McDermott, Assistant Governor and Head of Economics of the Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand, to Federated Farmers, Wellington, 22 November 2013. 
 Whenever presenting on the economy, the first question I get almost always relates to the 
elevated level of the New Zealand dollar. People are often concerned that that the exchange 
rate is too high or too volatile and believe that these problems could be addressed by running 
monetary policy differently. 
Concern  about  the  exchange  rate  is  understandable.  Movements  in,  and  the  level  of,  the 
exchange rate can have substantial impacts on the performance and structure of the New 
Zealand  economy  and  on  people’s  livelihoods.  The  exchange  rate  is  important  and  the 
Reserve Bank devotes a great deal of resources to understanding it. 
Today I want to summarise the Bank’s thinking on the types of questions we get about the 
exchange rate. Given time constraints, it will be necessary for me to skip over many of the 
complications and nuances behind these questions. For those who would like to know more, 
I  invite  you  to  visit  the  Reserve  Bank’s  website.  It  has  a  large  volume  of  analysis  on  the 
exchange rate – presented both in lay terms and in as technical a form as you could ever 
wish.1  
Before I begin though, it is worth noting, what I think everyone now accepts, that the solution 
to  a  high  and  variable  exchange  rate  is  not  higher  inflation.  International  and  historical 
experience has shown that if a central bank runs monetary policy looser than is required it 
will  generate  inflation.  Such future  inflationary  problems  would  be  very  costly  to  resolve  in 
terms of growth and employment. 
Is the exchange rate high? 
An  initial  question  is  whether  the  exchange  rate  is  high.  The  answer,  currently,  is  most 
certainly yes: the nominal exchange rate is at historically high levels against nearly all of our 
trading partners2. 
Here it is important to introduce the concept of the real exchange rate. The real exchange 
rate, as well as being influenced by the nominal exchange rate, also takes account of relative 
inflation  rates  so 
is  a  better  measure  of  overall  competitiveness.  An  exporter’s 
competitiveness is determined not just by the nominal exchange rate, but also by their cost of 
doing business relative to their foreign competitors. 
Unfortunately for New Zealand’s tradable sector, just like the nominal exchange rate, the real 
exchange rate is also high. Figure 1 shows the real exchange rate over the past 50 years, 
and the current rate is well above its historical average since 1964. 
When the New Zealand dollar is either high or low, it tends to remain high or low for longer 
than the exchange rates of other countries. So in the current situation, not only is it clear that 
the real exchange rate is high, it is also likely that this elevation will persist for some time. 
                                                
1   A relatively accessible example of the Bank’s research on the exchange rate was a conference we held (jointly 
with  Treasury)  earlier  in  the  year.  Copies  of  all  the  papers  from  this  conference  are  available  at 
http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research_and_publications/seminars_and_workshops/Mar2013/programme.html. 
2   On  a  trade  weighted  basis  and  against  the  major  currencies  involved  in  New  Zealand  dollar  transactions 
(other than the Australian dollar), our exchange rate is currently in the top decile relative to historic experience. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  What are the drivers of the real exchange rate? 
We can think about what drivers the exchange rate in a couple of ways. One is the cyclical 
dimension of the exchange rate and the other is the long term level. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  models  that  are  able  to  explain  a  good  proportion  of  cyclical 
fluctuations in the exchange rate.3 These models typically highlight the correlation between 
the  exchange  rate  and  a  few  key  variables,  such  as  the  terms  of  trade,  interest  rate 
differentials, relative house price inflation, and measures of risk. Of course, one should never 
confuse these correlations as causal explanations of the exchange rate. Figure 2 illustrates 
how  the  cyclical  movements  in  the  three  most  important  variables  used  in  one  of  these 
models can explain a large proportion of exchange rate fluctuations.4  
Even though we can explain the cyclical movements in the exchange rate these movements 
may  not  be  welcome  by  the  tradables  sector  because,  among  other  things,  it  adds 
uncertainty  to  decision  making.  That  said,  short  term  exchange  rate  volatility  can  be 
effectively countered through the use of forward exchange rate contracts, but it remains true 
that longer term exchange rate cycles are more difficult to handle for many exporting firms. 
                                                
3   For examples see McDonald, C (2012) “Kiwi drivers – the New Zealand dollar experience” AN 2012/02 and 
Cassino  E  and  Z Wallis  (2010)  “The  New  Zealand  dollar  through  the  global  financial  crisis”  RBNZ  Bulletin 
September 2010. 
4   For specific details see McDonald, C (2012) “Kiwi drivers – the New Zealand dollar experience” AN 2012/02. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
More  important  issues  relate  to  the  long  term  drivers  of  the  exchange  rate  and  the 
implications of the exchange rate being overvalued. When the Reserve Bank talks about an 
overvalued  exchange  rate  we  usually  mean  that  the  exchange  rate  is  too  high  to  achieve 
desired economic outcomes such as an appropriate allocation of resources. In this sense the 
exchange rate can be overvalued even if its strength can be explained by factors such the 
terms of trade.5  
An  important  issue  when  it  comes  to  determining  the  exchange  rate  in  New  Zealand  has 
been  the  persistent  gap  between  savings  and  investment.  Over  the  past  40  years  New 
Zealand  has  demanded  more  capital  for  investment  in  housing,  infrastructure  and  other 
assets than its domestic saving rate could finance. This has meant an on-going reliance on 
foreign  saving  and  capital  inflows.  This  saving  shortfall  has  also  put  upward  pressure  on 
interest rates and the exchange rate. 
The resulting higher exchange rate has surely affected the tradable sector’s profitability and 
its decisions about investment, employment, and market strategy. These decisions may well 
have led to a misallocation of resources resulting in a tradables sector that is smaller than is 
desirable. International experience certainly suggests that countries that sustain fast growth 
tend  to  do  so  with  a  strongly  growing  tradables  sector,  tapping  the  potential  of  a  global 
market and the productivity prospects that creates. 
Could the high real exchange rate be addressed by running monetary policy 
differently? 
A range of suggestions aimed at solving the overvaluation problem have been provided by a 
number of commentators, such as: 
                                                
5   Sometimes people use overvalued to mean a value of the exchange rate higher than indicated by economic 
fundamentals. This is not the meaning being used here but rather it means the effects of the exchange rate 
are undesirable from an economic perspective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Keeping interest rates low; 
Currency intervention; 
Quantitative easing; 
Capping the exchange rate; 
Targeting growth and employment, and 
Changing the focus of monetary policy. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
As much as we would like it otherwise, many of these suggestions are either unlikely to have 
a significant lasting effect, or have unpalatable trade-offs such as much higher inflation, or 
are simply not feasible. The limitations and problems associated with these suggestions have 
been  well  covered  in  Governor  Wheeler’s  speech  Manufacturing  decline  not  just  a  dollar 
story so I will not repeat them here.6 
There are some things the Reserve Bank has been doing that, at the margin, may avoid the 
exchange rate being higher than is currently the case. 
The  Bank  does  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  from  time-to-time.  But  evidence 
from the past, here and elsewhere, suggests foreign currency intervention is unlikely to have 
a  sustained  impact  in  lowering  the  exchange  rate.7  This  is  because  daily  foreign  currency 
transactions  in  New  Zealand  dollars  swamp  any  practical  intervention  capacity,  averaging 
around  $100  billion  per  day  with  more  than  80  percent  of  the  transactions  taking  place 
offshore.  At  best  the  Reserve  Bank  can  attempt  to  smooth  the  peaks  and  troughs  of  the 
exchange rate. Of course, reasonable people can differ on what is the appropriate scale of 
intervention used to smooth some of the volatility. But the old economic saying that there is 
no free lunch still applies: the greater the scale of intervention, the greater the financial risk 
carried by the tax payer. 
More active macro-prudential policy has been undertaken recently to help reduce the build-
up in systemic risk in the banking sector resulting from imbalances in the housing sector. The 
current low interest rates, although appropriate for the current inflationary environment, are 
contributing to those financial stability risks. In such circumstances one might consider using 
monetary  policy  more  aggressively  to  lean  against  house  prices.8  While  this  would  mean 
inflation would take longer to rise to the mid-point of the target band it would reduce the risk 
of a future crash in the housing market. 
However, using monetary policy to reduce the financial stability risks of a booming housing 
market would put additional upward pressure on the exchange rate. Instead, we have used 
macro-prudential policy, in particular the loan-to-value ratio limits, to help moderate the risks 
in the housing market. This addresses the financial stability issue more directly and reduces 
the need for monetary policy to put pressure on interest rates and the exchange rate. 
What, other than monetary policy, will remedy the real exchange rate? 
Saying  there  is  little  monetary  policy  can  do  about  the  exchange  rate,  is  not  the  same  as 
saying there is little that can be done. The Reserve Bank undertakes a great deal of research 
and analysis on the exchange rate. One example of this research was  an Exchange Rate 
Forum jointly hosted by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and the Treasury earlier in the 
                                                
6   See http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research_and_publications/speeches/2013/5150125.html. 
7   Chetwin,  W  and  A  Munro  (2013)  “Contemporary  exchange  rate  regimes:  floating,  fixed  and  hybrid”  paper 
presented to Exchange Rate Policy Forum. 
8   Borio C and P Lowe (2002) “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the nexus” BIS working 
papers No. 114. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
year. One of the objectives of the forum was to generate ideas for reducing the harm caused 
by the exchange rate. 
The  harmful  effects  of  exchange  rate  cycles  can  potentially  be  addressed  partly  through 
improved  microeconomic  policies,  especially  those  that  promote greater  competition.  Such 
policies need to be structured to make the economy more flexible, thereby reducing the need 
for the exchange rate to carry the burden of absorbing economic shocks. An example here 
could be increasing the responsiveness of the building industry to housing demand. 
Likewise,  reducing the magnitude  of  domestic demand  cycles  would  reduce  the  pressures 
that  monetary  policy  needs  to  lean  against.  Avoiding  pro-cyclical  changes  in  fiscal  policy 
such  as  tax  cuts  or  increasing  public  spending  when  resources  are  already  stretched. 
Similarly, banks could avoid excessively relaxing credit standards when demand for financing 
is strong. Such actions would ease cyclical exchange rate pressures. 
Since  the  savings  and  investment gap  plays  a prominent  role  in  New  Zealand’s  exchange 
rate story, it seems reasonable to suggest that it will be necessary to tackle our reliance on 
foreign  savings  to  finance  our  consumption  and  investment.  The  dependency  on  foreign 
savings  means  that  we  have  persistently  needed  interest  rates  above  those  in  most 
developed economies. Addressing the residential investment needs of a growing population 
and  increasing  the  incentives  for  private  sector  savings,  such  as  the  tax  treatment  of 
investment  income  and  issues  around  the  long-term  design  of  public  and  private  pension 
systems, are the sorts of issues that need to be debated to see what would work best in New 
Zealand. 
Conclusion 
The exchange rate plays an important role in a small open economy like New Zealand and 
generates many questions and concerns. The persistently high exchange rate is out of line 
with  what  looks  to  be  necessary  if  New  Zealand  is  to  achieve  its  economic  aspirations  of 
catching up with the rest of the OECD’s income levels. 
The Reserve Bank spends a great deal of time on this issue because it is important. In so 
doing  we  have  developed  a  number  of  models  that  can  explain  the  exchange  rate.  But 
explaining the exchange rate is not the same as saying it is fairly valued. 
The New Zealand dollar is overvalued from the standpoint of its effects on the economy and 
we  would  like  to  see  a  lower  exchange  rate.  A  key  conclusion  of  our  work  is  that  this 
overvaluation stems, at least in part, from the persistent savings and investment imbalance. 
Therefore  to  address  New  Zealand’s  overvalued  exchange  rate the  underlying  imbalances 
themselves must be addressed. Raising domestic savings relative to our investment needs 
appears  the  best  way  to  sustainably  lower  New  Zealand’s  real  interest  rates  and  take  the 
pressure off the real exchange rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
