Ewald Nowotny: The future of monetary policy 
Text of the Joint Vienna Institute Lecture by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central 
Bank of the Republic of Austria, Vienna, 24 September 2013. 
 The  financial  crisis  that  flared  up  in  2008  and  whose  consequences  continue  to  hold  the 
world in its grip has severely tested the consensus on monetary policy as it existed prior to 
2008. Soon after the onset of the crisis central banks pushed existing tools to their limits and 
adopted new types of measures that went far beyond what had been thinkable a few years 
ago.  
To some extent the scale of the new policies just reflected the scale of the shock that had hit 
the economies. In this sense the measures can be considered temporary, one-off extreme 
actions taken in reaction to an extreme, one-off crisis event. However, the crisis has also put 
serious doubts on some of the basic tenets of monetary policy held before 2008. While there 
is still no new consensus around, it is clear that our thinking about how the economy works 
and the proper role of monetary policy has changed. This means that even after the acute 
phase of the current crisis is over, banks have been stabilized, public finances are back in 
order, unemployment has declined and growth has resumed, which may still be well far in the 
future, monetary policy will not return to the ways from before 2008. 
Monetary  policy  therefore  faces  a  double  challenge.  In  the  short  run  stability  has  to  be 
restored while in the long term an enduring framework has to be established that is capable 
of preventing the recurrence of a crisis as the one seen in 2008. Both the immediate and the 
longer-term future of monetary policy will be the topic of this paper. The first section focuses 
on  the  policies  adopted  by  central  banks  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis.  The  second  section 
discusses the exit from these policies and the associated challenges. Finally, the concluding 
section provides an outlook on the possible long-term design of monetary policy. 
Challenges to pre-crisis thinking 
Before discussing the policies that central banks have recently adopted, it might be useful to 
recapitulate the way monetary policy had been thought about before 2008. In the decades 
leading up to the financial crisis, hand in hand with globalization, the opening of markets for 
goods,  financial  services  and  capital,  economic  models  converged  and  so  did  monetary 
policy. The key elements of the consensus were (1) that central banks should focus on one 
primary objective, i.e. price stability, and (2) that central banks could perform their function 
best when given independent authority over policy. The consensus was based on the belief 
that the influence of elected politicians with their presumed short-term focus on re-election 
would  bias  monetary  policy  towards  higher  inflation.  Monetary  policy  should  thus  be 
delegated  to  an  autonomous  agency  with  a  clearly  defined  objective of  price  stability.  The 
delegation  in  turn  was  thought  possible  because  monetary,  fiscal  and  prudential  policies 
were  believed  to  operate  separately,  relying  on  their  particular  sets  of  instruments  and 
exerting  only  limited  influence  on  the  other  policy  areas,  hence  requiring  a  minimum  of 
coordination. For quite some time the consensus worked fine, seemingly vindicated by a long 
period of relatively stable output growth and low and stable inflation, which was labelled the 
Great Moderation. 
Events since 2008 have disproved the idea of a neat separation of policies. Prudential policy 
had  been  unable  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  a  massive  financial  crisis,  possibly  helped 
along by unintended side effects of monetary and fiscal policy. A key lesson of the crisis was 
then that in the absence of financial stability, monetary policy can be severely hampered and 
fiscal  policy  pushed  off  track.  Re-establishing  financial  stability  in  turn  can  come  at  a  very 
high  price;  and  part  of  it  may  be  achieved  through  emergency  actions  and  balance  sheet 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
policy of the central bank, again blurring the separation lines between fiscal and monetary 
policy. 
Using the central bank balance sheet 
A few years ago the balance sheets of central banks have been a barely noticed sideshow. 
The  focus  was  on  interest  rate  policy.  Today,  with  interest  rates  close  to  or  at  their  lower 
bound and consequently hardly moving, attention has shifted to what happens in the balance 
sheets.  After  having  been  stable  or  growing  steadily  for  years,  balance  sheets  have 
expanded  massively  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis  (Figure  1).  Total  assets  and  liabilities 
multiplied  within  a  matter  of  months,  rising  in  total  by  a  factor  of  three  in  the  case  of  the 
Eurosystem, a factor of above four for the Federal Reserve System (Fed) and close to five 
for the Bank of England and the Swiss National Bank. In the euro area and Switzerland the 
level has stabilized or even declined over the last year, while in the US and the UK the trend 
is still upwards. 
One reason for the expansion is that the balance sheet is the main (if not the only) remaining 
instrument of central banks when policy rates cannot be lowered further. In fact, however, 
balance sheet policy had already played a significant role while interest rates were still well 
above their current low levels. In order to understand the logic of balance sheet policy it is 
necessary to look at the composition of the balance sheet and the components of the recent 
increases. 
Figure 1
Balance sheets of the Fed, the Eurosystem
and the Swiss National Bank
Index, January 2006 = 100
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2006
2008
2007
Fed
Eurosystem
SNB
Source: Thomson Reuters.
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Figure 2
Assets of the Federal Reserve
in billion USD
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
2007
other
MBS and agency debt
lending to financial institutions
Gold, SDR
2008
2009
2010
2011
2013
2012
AIG, Bear Stearns
lending to financial markets
Treasuries
Source: Thomson Reuters.
Federal Reserve 
In the case of the Federal Reserve three phases can be distinguished (Figure 2). In a first 
phase, which lasted from early 2008 to early 2009, the balance sheet was mainly driven by 
new lending programs designed to support banks that had difficulties accessing refinancing 
markets.  With  the  rapid  stabilization  of  US  banks,  volumes  in  these  operations  declined 
significantly in 2009 and were soon discontinued.1 Policy focused instead now on the market 
                                                 
1  The major exception being the swap agreements with foreign central banks, most notably the ECB, but these 
operations addressed USD requirements by Non-US banks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
for mortgages, badly hit by a crisis in the housing market. Interest rates on mortgages had 
not declined to the same extent as policy rates, reflecting higher risk premia. A new program 
by  the  Fed  specifically  addressed  this  risk  premium  by  buying  up  significant  amounts  of 
mortgage-backed securities (MBS).  
It is only in the third phase, beginning in November 2010, that US treasuries moved center 
stage. In the early months of the crisis, the Federal Reserve had even run down its treasury 
holdings  and  redirected  funds  to  the  lending  programs  for  banks.  In  2009  some  treasury 
bonds were bought alongside MBS but only to bring the total up to its pre-crisis level. By then 
the  main  focus  of  US  monetary  policy  had  become  the  question  of  how  to  invigorate  a 
flagging economy with short-term interest rates already at a historic low. In this context the 
purchase  of  longer-dated  US  treasuries  was  hoped  to  push  down  the  yield  curve,  driving 
down interest rates also in those markets important for private investment and consumption 
decisions.  Operation  Twist,  the  replacement  of  short-dated  by  longer-dated  treasuries 
announced in September 2011 pursued an essentially similar tactic of decreasing the relative 
supply of longer-dated treasuries in the market, driving their price up and their yields down. 
In  September  2012  the  Federal  Reserve  published  an  open-ended  commitment  to  buy 
USD 40  billion  and  USD  45  billion  worth  of  MBS  and  longer-term  Treasury  securities, 
respectively, per month. 
Eurosystem 
A  look  at  the  consolidated  balance  sheet  of  the  Eurosystem  (Figure  3)  reveals  a  few 
similarities  as  well  as  a  number  of  differences.  In  the  case  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  main 
policy-relevant balance sheet component and also the one essentially driving the size of the 
balance sheet are the regular refinancing operations, where banks receive liquidity against 
eligible  securities.  Before  the  crisis  about  two-thirds  of  this  liquidity  was  provided  for  one 
week, while the remainder for three months. 
Unlike  in  the  US,  the  financing  of  the  real  economy  in  the  euro  area  relies  extensively  on 
banks. During the crisis the main policy concern in the euro area was therefore to ensure that 
banks would pass on lower policy rates to their customers and remained able and willing to 
provide loans to companies and households. Consequently, the Eurosystem lengthened the 
average  maturity  of  its  refinancing  operations  to  reduce  maturity  mismatch  in  commercial 
bank  balance  sheets  by  first  providing  larger  three-month  tenders  and  later  special 
operations with  one-  and  even  three-year  maturities.  To  assure  banks  that  refinancing  will 
always  be  available  if  needed,  limiting  the  incentives  for  banks  to  hoard  liquidity  and  hold 
back lending, the Eurosystem switched to a new tender procedure, in which all demands for 
liquidity were satisfied at the set policy rate as long as banks can provide sufficient eligible 
collateral.  This  fixed-rate  full  allotment  (FRFA)  procedure  made  the  volume  of  outstanding 
liquidity effectively depend on banks’ demand. As is visible in Figure 3, volumes fluctuated 
significantly, pointing to periods of stress as well as an easing of tensions. 
European banks needed refinancing not only in euro but also US dollars and Swiss francs, in 
which the euro area is short. In cooperation with the Federal Reserve and the Swiss National 
Bank,  the  Eurosystem  consequently  set  up  tender  facilities  similar  to  those  for  euro  to 
provide foreign exchange. These programs are all very much akin to the lending programs 
the Federal Reserve offered to US banks. 
Compared to the US, outright purchases of assets play a much smaller role in the euro area. 
The covered bond purchase programmes (CBPP) I and II addressed tensions in the market 
for  covered  bonds,  which  is  again  very  important  for  bank  refinancing  in  the  euro  area. 
Comparable  to  the  purchase  of  MBS  in  the  US,  the  CBPPs  addressed  risk  premia  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
mortgage  market  in  the  euro  area,  if  on  a  much  smaller  scale  than  in  the  US.2  The 
differences between the Federal Reserve and the Eurosystem become even more evident 
when  it  comes  to  the  purchase  of  government  securities.  While  the  Fed  purchased  US 
treasuries  on  a  large  scale  to  lower  risk-free  interest  rates,  the  Eurosystem’s  Securities 
Markets Programme (SMP) was much smaller and targeted towards the debt titles of specific 
euro area countries hit by risk premia that were judged to be excessively high. Its economic 
logic – reducing risk premia – is thus closer to the MBS purchases in the US rather than to 
the purchase of US treasuries. 
Assets of the Eurosystem
Consolidated balance sheet, in billion EUR
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
2010
2008
2009
0
2007
Gold
Other assets
MRO
Lending facility
Securities for MP purposes
Source: ECB.
2013
2011
2012
Foreign exchange
LTRO
Fine tuning
Foreign exchange in EA
Figure 3
Figure 4
Assets of the Swiss National Bank
in billion CHF
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Foreign exchange
Domestic USD repos
Loans to stabilization fund
Domestic CHF repos
CHF swaps with foreign CBs
Other assets
Source: Thomson Reuters.
Swiss National Bank 
The Swiss National Bank gives another example of balance sheet policy, yet with different 
components driving the increase in total assets (Figure 4). In the early phase of the crisis, 
until  2009,  the  SNB  also  expanded  its  lending  to  banks,  both  in  Switzerland  and  through 
swap agreements abroad. As in the US, lending to banks soon declined. In the opinion of the 
SNB  board,  a  larger  threat  to  economic  stability  in  Switzerland  then  came  from  the  Swiss 
franc exchange rate, which was being driven up by safe haven flows. The high Swiss franc 
was  considered  dangerous  for  a  small  export-oriented  economy  like  Switzerland,  harming 
economic growth and threatening to push Switzerland into deflation. Consequently, the SNB 
intervened  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets  to  dampen  the  appreciation  of  the  franc.  On 
6 September  2011  the  SNB  announced  that  it  would  “no  longer  tolerate  a  EUR/CHF 
exchange  rate  below  the  minimum  rate  of  CHF  1.20”  and  was  “prepared  to  buy  foreign 
currency  in  unlimited  quantities.”  As  can  be  seen  in  Figure  4  sizeable  interventions  were 
required  between  May  and  July  2012,  but  since  then  foreign  exchange  holdings  and  total 
balance sheet numbers have remained stable. 
The Federal Reserve, the Eurosystem and the Swiss National Bank give a good overview 
over balance sheet policies since 2008.3 Four observations can be drawn: 
                                                 
2  Under the CBPP 1 a nominal amount of EUR 60 billion was bought; the maximum amount of EUR 40 billion of 
the CBPP 2 was not fully utilized. At the end of August 2013, holdings of MBS and agency debt by the Federal 
Reserve stood at USD 1,360 billion USD, and they are still rising further. 
Including the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan would not yield much different evidence. 
3 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
     institutional 
intellectual  and 
First, balance sheet policies have been employed by central banks irrespective of 
their  rather  different 
traditions.  Faced  with  an 
unprecedented  crisis,  central  banks  have  reacted  flexibly,  using  new  tools  and 
instruments  as  soon  as  the  limits  of  traditional  interest  rate  policy  had  become 
apparent. Flexibility was key. 
Second,  policies  in  the  different  countries  relied  on  different  components  of  the 
balance  sheet  and  affected  different  markets,  mainly  because  economic  and 
financial structures differed and so did optimal policies. 
Third, differences appear not only between countries but also over time. During the 
most critical initial phase, around the failure of Lehman, all central banks focused on 
bank refinancing markets. It is only later that policies diverged. In Switzerland the 
foreign exchange market was seen as the most important lever for policy; in the US 
the markets for mortgage securities and government debt took center stage; while in 
the  euro  area  bank  refinancing  remained  crucial,  alongside  the  markets  for 
government  debt  of  a  few  countries  particularly  hit  by  the  sovereign  debt  crisis. 
Again,  both  similarities  and  differences  between  the  policies  of  the  major  central 
banks testify to their flexibility in the design of unconventional policies. 
Fourth, there is no one-to-one relation between the effectiveness of policy and the 
size of a change in the balance sheet. The stance of monetary policy as expressed 
by the policy rate, with all due caution about differences in the transmission between 
various economic areas, can be rather easily compared between central banks, both 
in terms of levels (5% is higher than 3%) and changes (lowering interest rates by 2% 
is  more  accommodating  than  lowering  by  1%).  This  is  not  the  case  with  balance 
sheet policies. Depending on the underlying markets, smaller or larger interventions 
might  be  needed  to  achieve  the  same  effect  in  two  different  countries.  In  the 
extreme case, no change in the balance sheet is needed at all. 
The financial crisis holds two particularly interesting examples for that. The first is 
the  announcement  of  a  maximum  exchange  rate  for  the  Swiss  franc  and  the 
commitment  to  unlimited  purchases  by  the  SNB.  While  in  the  month  before  the 
announcement  the  SNB  had  bought  foreign  exchange  worth  more  than  CHF  90 
billion, after the announcement the pressure immediately eased and the Swiss franc 
even  depreciated  without  any  sizeable  intervention  by  the  SNB  in  the  following 
seven months. The second example was the announcement by the ECB of Outright 
Monetary  Transactions  (OMT),  again  potentially  unlimited  purchases  of  securities 
issued  in  particular  countries  within  the  euro  area.  Before  the  announcement, 
financing  markets  for  both  European  governments  and  companies  had  been 
characterized  by  diverging  yields  and  increasing  fragmentation  along  national 
borders. As in the case of the Swiss exchange rate, the mere announcement of the 
OMT led to a rapid convergence of yields and easier financing conditions for banks 
in  stressed  countries.  Again  this  effect  appeared  without  any  purchases  actually 
undertaken. The effect of balance sheet policies can therefore not be measured by 
the changes in the size of the balance sheet alone. 
The last observation also draws the attention to the importance of expectations about future 
policy, in particular in periods characterized by high uncertainty. The announcements of the 
ECB and the SNB removed uncertainty about the future course of policy of the two central 
banks and stabilized expectations around the outcome desired by policymakers.  
Forward guidance 
Guidance  on  future  policy  has  not  only  been  provided  in  the  form  of  commitments  to 
unlimited purchases but also in other domains of monetary policy, in particular the setting of 
policy rates. Here again, improved communication about future policy intentions has allowed 
for  a  better  aligning  of  market  expectations  with  policy  intentions,  typically  supporting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
accommodative  policies.  This  has  reduced  uncertainty  about  the  future  interest  rate  path, 
stabilized the yield curve, and thus strengthened the effects of short-term interest rate policy. 
Forward guidance involves two elements. The first is communication about the central bank’s 
perception  of  future  economic  conditions.  The  second  is  communication  about  the  central 
bank’s  reaction  to  these  conditions.  Both  elements  are  equally  important,  yet  guidance 
practices across central banks have differed remarkably  with respect to their emphasis on 
either  the  first  or  the  second  element.  As  an  illustration,  Table  1  shows  the  dates  and 
wordings of recent forward guidance announcements by three major central banks.4 
The  Fed  has  introduced  threshold-based  forward  guidance  about  its  interest  rate  policy  in 
December 2012. Low-interest policies are announced to be in place until the unemployment 
rate falls below a numerical threshold level of 6.5%. Explicit conditionality is introduced by 
quantitative  and  qualitative  criteria.  Specifically,  it  is  stressed  that  interest  rates  could  be 
increased  once  inflation  is  expected  to  be  above  2.5%  or  inflation  expectations  no  longer 
remain well anchored. In June 2013, the Fed also provided date-based guidance about the 
tapering  of  its  asset  purchase  program,  revealing  its  intention  to  cease  new  purchases  of 
Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities by mid-2014.  
The  Bank  of  England’s  forward  guidance  in  August  2013  was  on  both  interest  rates  and 
asset purchases at the same time. Akin to the Fed, the Bank of England provides threshold-
based  guidance  with  a  numerical  target  for  the  unemployment  rate.  Both  the  announced 
interest  rate  and  asset  purchases  policies  are  subject  to  the  same  (quantitative  and 
qualitative) knockout criteria, which include risks to price stability and financial stability.  
The ECB, in turn, has provided qualitative open-ended guidance, not referring to any explicit 
threshold or date that will likely lead to the termination of the accommodative policy stance. 
The conditionality of the ECB guidance is not linked to a numerical threshold for inflation, but 
more broadly to changes in the outlook for price stability. 
Both  quantitative  and  qualitative  guidance  have  their  relative  merits,  and  both  face 
challenges. First, forward guidance must be clearly understood by the public to be effective. 
To  this  end  it  must  neither  provide  too  much  information,  which  may  confuse  market 
participants about the central bank’s policy intentions, nor provide too little information, which 
may increase the risk of misunderstandings. Finding the right balance is particularly difficult 
for policymakers at the center of the public debate, be it in the United States, in Europe, or 
elsewhere.  Their  exact  choice  of  wordings  typically  gives  rise  to  extended  debates  in  the 
financial media, which often involves serious misinterpretations. A recurrent example is that 
simple statements about positive economic developments are misinterpreted as indications 
of imminent increases in the interest rate. Second, forward guidance must be credible. On 
the  one  hand,  this  requires  that  market  participants  have  confidence  in  the  central  bank’s 
assessment of future economic conditions, that is, economic forecasts must continue to be of 
the  highest  quality.  On  the  other  hand,  policy  intentions  must  be  time-consistent.  This  is 
guaranteed  in  the  current  practices  by  the  conditional  nature  of  forward  guidance 
announcements, giving central banks the necessary room to react to unanticipated market 
and economic developments.  
The medium term: eventual exit from unconventional policies 
Unconventional monetary policy measures have been of the utmost importance to strengthen 
accommodative monetary policy, and they will continue to be an important policy tool as long 
as the economy is in troubled waters. Yet it is clear that central bank balance sheets cannot 
grow forever. In the medium term, when the economy is back on track and solid growth is 
restored,  some  unconventional  measures  will  have  to  be  reversed.  This  eventual  exit  will 
                                                 
4  But note that many central banks have recently given similar forward guidance about their policy intentions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
pose unprecedented challenges to central banks, and it is our responsibility to prepare for 
these challenges well in advance.  
The following three aspects are particularly relevant. First, we must find the adequate timing 
and sequence of actions. Second, we must ready the public for the eventual exit by carefully 
communicating  our  exit  strategy.  Third,  we  must  take  into  account  potential  international 
spillover effects of our policies. Given the strong international linkages of banks and financial 
markets,  monetary  policy  changes  in  one  major  currency  area  can  have  significant  global 
effects. 
Timing 
Finding the right timing is the first key challenge when exiting unconventional policies. Exiting 
too early or too fast may create risks to economic growth and employment. Exiting too late or 
too slowly may create risks to price stability, both over the short and the medium term, and 
distort the private sector’s incentives to continue balance sheet repair. Exit strategies thus 
need  to  be  designed  in  a  cautious  manner.  They  must  be  flexible  to  respond  to  changing 
economic  conditions.  They  must  involve  gradual  and  steady  adjustments  rather  than 
occasional and disruptive action. They must provide the right incentives. 
Of  particular  importance  to  the  design  of  exit  strategies  is  also  the  initial  composition  of  a 
central  bank’s  balance  sheet.  As  outlined  in  greater  detail  before,  the  Fed’s  quantitative 
easing  program  mainly  relies  on  large-scale  asset  purchases,  especially  purchases  of 
mortgage-backed  securities  and  Treasury  bonds.  The  exit  strategy  will  therefore  have  to 
incorporate a detailed state-contingent plan that formulates when, or under what conditions, 
purchases of new assets in either asset class will cease and existing portfolios will be sold 
off.  As  indicated  by  the  disruptions  following  the  Fed  announcement  in  June,  market 
participants expect that these actions will have significant impacts on asset prices and thus 
the overall economy. Moreover, finding the adequate sequence of reversing actions will be 
critical to keeping disruptions in asset prices to a minimum, and to ensuring the stability of 
the financial system.5 For the design and success of the Fed’s exit strategy, precise a priori 
knowledge about the macroeconomic impact of different reversing options thus seems to be 
essential.  
The  ECB’s  response  to  the  crisis  has  focused  on  the  establishment  of  new  credit  easing 
policies. Most notably, enhanced repurchasing operations have been introduced to provide 
the banking system with sufficient liquidity. As stated above, compared to the United States, 
the  supply  of  liquidity  in  the  euro  area  adjusts  more  endogenously  to  banks’  demand  for 
liquidity, and the ECB’s assets are of shorter maturity than the Fed’s assets. These features 
will facilitate reversing unconventional policy measures in a gradual and careful way, while 
monitoring  the  health  of  the  financial  system.  It  will  also  allow  us  to  respond  quickly  to 
unexpected  disruptions.  Exiting  from  unconventional  credit  easing  policies  may  thus  be 
easier than exiting from large-scale asset purchases. But this by no means implies that the 
exit  will  be  easy.  We  too  must  carefully  decide  on  when,  how  fast,  and  in  what  order  the 
unconventional measures – including our commitments to provide virtually unlimited liquidity 
to  banks  and  secondary  markets  for  government  debt  –  shall  be  reversed.  We  too  must 
correctly  anticipate  the  implications  of  different  reversing  options  for  macroeconomic  and 
financial stability. These are obviously difficult tasks given the lack of past experiences. Yet I 
have no doubt that we will successfully master these difficulties.  
Forward guidance on exit  
The  second  key  challenge  is  to  ready  the  public  for  an  eventual  exit  from  accommodative 
policies. Striking the right balance between clarity and transparency will be especially difficult 
                                                 
5  This has been convincingly argued Krishnamurthy at this year’s Jackson Hole conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
in this context because the exit process will likely expand over an extended period of time. 
Communication  of  future  policy  actions  will  thus  be  complex.  Formulating  adequate 
conditionality  concepts  a  priori  will  be  particularly  difficult,  and  it  may  become  desirable  to 
adapt conditions along the way. This creates additional risks to the central bank’s reputation 
and credibility: Changes in guidance could be perceived as a deviation from existing policies 
rather than a clarification of existing policies. To keep these risks to a minimum, we need to 
choose forward guidance practices carefully from the start, so that sizeable revisions do not 
become necessary later.  
Global liquidity and international spillover effects 
Finally, our exit strategies must also take into account potential international spillover effects. 
Banks operate on a global scale, and their decisions on funding and credit today are global in 
nature.  The  private  global  liquidity  created  by  the  financial  sector  is  a  key  determinant  of 
funding  conditions  in  the  broader  international  economy,  in  addition  to  the  official  global 
liquidity provided by central banks.6 The accommodative policy stance over the past years 
has  contributed  to  easy  financing  conditions  not  only  in  the  crisis  countries  but  also  in 
countries with stronger economic conditions. Many argue that today, global banks searching 
for  yield  in  a  low-interest  rate  environment  show  signs  of  excessive  risk-taking  and 
weakening lending standards in some of these economies, most notably in emerging market 
economies.  
Global liquidity thus poses at least two further challenges to monetary policy in the advanced 
economies.  First,  continuing  an  accommodative  stance  for  too  long  may  increase 
problematic  international  liquidity  spillovers,  and  may  eventually  contribute  to  a  build-up  of 
systemic risks unless addressed by prudential measures. Second, an unexpected early exit 
may  cause  a  sharper  and  quicker  than  expected  tightening  of  financing  conditions  in 
emerging markets, causing sudden reversals of cross-border capital flows and disruptions in 
financial markets. Our exit strategies must take into account these potential side effects. 
The long term: a new framework for monetary policy 
Regarding the future of monetary policy in the long term, the main question is: How close will 
monetary  policy  return  to  the  pre-crisis  framework?  As  of  today,  opinions  on  this  question 
vary greatly. Some in favor of reversing the latest innovations argue that these have moved 
the central bank more into political territory, raising concerns about the clarity of price stability 
mandates  or  about  democratic  legitimation.  Others  argue  that  the  crisis  has  forcefully 
demonstrated  that  our  initial  model,  with  its  clear  separation  of  monetary  and  financial 
stability  policies,  has  not  delivered  on  its  promises  and  should  be  fundamentally 
reconsidered.  Eventually,  the  most  probable  outcome  is  that  some,  but  not  all,  recent 
innovations will be part of the future monetary policy framework.  
One innovation that will survive is the integration of prudential policy tools. The recent crisis 
has highlighted that financial sector stability is a necessary precondition for macroeconomic 
stability  and  vice  versa.  Micro-  and  macroprudential  policy  tools  that  seek  to  guarantee  a 
strong  financial  system  thus  interact  with  monetary  policy  tools  that  seek  to  stabilize  the 
macro  economy.  This  interdependence  is a  valid  argument  for  coordinating  prudential  and 
monetary policy. The recent establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism within the 
ECB has been an important step in this process. On the other hand, taking up supervisory 
tasks may expose a central bank to massive reputational risks. In my view, no central banker 
with  an  adequate  survival  instinct  will  seek  actively  a  larger  role  in  banking  supervision, 
especially microprudential supervision. So the specific form of institutional arrangements has 
to play a decisive role. 
                                                 
6  For a thorough discussion see the report “Global liquidity – concept, measurement and policy implications” by 
the Committee on the Global Financial System, available at http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs45.htm. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A  further  innovation  that  may  well  be  important  in  the  future  framework  is  increased 
international  cooperation.  Central  banks’  holdings  of  foreign  currency  assets  have  risen 
sharply  in  recent  years.  Reasons  for  this  development  include  exchange  rate  stabilization, 
insurance  against  a  destabilizing  run  on  the  domestic  currency,  or  a  desire  to  retain  the 
ability to provide foreign currency liquidity to the domestic economy. On a global scale, these 
benefits  have  to  be  weighed  against  significant  costs  implied  by  foreign  exchange 
accumulation. Externalities are imposed on other countries due to distortions of international 
asset prices, and accumulating central banks become increasingly subject to exchange rate 
and  valuation  risk,  and  to  the  risk  of  capital  losses.  Among  the  euro  area  members  these 
costs are still relatively low, since the pooling of foreign exchange and gold reserves within 
EMU  has  led  to  significant  efficiency  gains.  For  emerging  economies,  however,  costs  are 
significant. This is reflected also in the recent initiative of the BRICS countries to create the 
Contingent  Reserve  Arrangement,  a  currency  reserve  fund  pooling  foreign  exchange 
holdings  worth  USD  100  billion.7  If  the  trend  of  reserve  accumulation  continues,  global 
cooperation  of  central  banks  may  become  increasingly  desirable  since  it  reduces  the 
precautionary  incentive  for  central  banks  to  hold  foreign  reserves  and  thus  the  associated 
costs. Formal arrangements, such as swap lines between central banks, have the potential 
to consistently prevent shortages of liquidity in foreign currencies. Given their success during 
the  recent  crisis,  they  may  well  become  a  more  permanent  element  of  the  international 
monetary policy framework. 
                                                 
7  China  will  be  contributing  foreign  exchange  reserves  worth  USD  41  billion,  Brazil,  India  and  Russia 
USD 18 billion each, and South Africa USD 5 billion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Table 1 
Recent forward guidance practices 
Wording 
(…) this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at 
least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation 
between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half 
percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-
term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. 
“(…) the Committee currently anticipates that it would be appropriate to moderate 
the monthly pace of purchases later this year. And if the subsequent data remain 
broadly aligned with our current expectations for the economy, we would continue 
to reduce the pace of purchases in measured steps through the first half of next 
year, ending purchases around midyear (…) our policy is in no way predetermined 
and will depend on the incoming data and the evolution of the outlook as well as 
on the cumulative progress toward our objectives.”  
The MPC intends not to raise Bank Rate from its current level of 0.5% at least until 
(…) the unemployment rate has fallen to a threshold of 7% (…)The MPC stands 
ready to undertake further asset purchases while the unemployment rate remains 
above 7% if it judges that additional monetary stimulus is warranted. 
The guidance (…) would cease to hold if any of the following three “knockouts” 
were breached:  
(i) 
in the MPC’s view, it is more likely than not, that CPI inflation 18 to 24 
months  ahead  will  be  0.5  percentage  points  or  more  above  the  2% 
target; 
medium-term  inflation  expectations  no  longer  remain  sufficiently  well 
anchored; 
the  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC)  judges  that  the  stance  of 
monetary policy poses a significant threat to financial stability (…). 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(…) our monetary policy stance will remain accommodative for as long as 
necessary. The Governing Council expects the key ECB interest rates to remain 
at present or lower levels for an extended period of time. This expectation is 
based on the overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, 
given the broad-based weakness in the real economy and subdued monetary 
dynamics. In the period ahead, we will monitor all incoming information on 
economic and monetary developments and assess any impact on the outlook for 
price stability. 
Central Bank Date 
Federal Reserve 
December 20128 
 
June 2013 
Bank of England 
August 20139 
ECB 
July 201310 
                                                  
8  See http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20121212a.htm and 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20130619.pdf. 
9  See http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Pages/forwardguidance.aspx. 
10  See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2013/html/is130905.en.html.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
