Glenn Stevens: Remarks to Citi’s 5th Annual Australian & New Zealand 
Investment Conference 
Remarks  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  Citi’s 
5th Annual Australian & New Zealand Investment Conference, Sydney, 29 October 2013. 
 Welcome to Sydney. 
As ever, the times remain “interesting”. You will have much to talk about. I will confine myself 
to  some  brief  remarks,  firstly  about  the  global  scene,  and  then  about  the  situation  in 
Australia. 
From  this  distance,  the  US  economy  appears  to  be  healing.  The  “headwinds”  from  the 
housing sector are lessening, corporations are in a strong financial position and the labour 
market is improving, albeit slowly. Much financial repair has been made. The new sources of 
abundant  energy  in  the  US  will  also  act  as  a  growth  enhancer.  The  biggest  remaining 
problems  are  how  to  put  the  US  budget  onto  a  sustainable  long-run  footing,  and  how  to 
manage the exit from extraordinary monetary policy settings. 
In  Europe,  numerous  downside  risks  that  were  top  of  mind  a  year  ago  have  not,  in  fact, 
materialised – which is no small achievement. Moreover, there are signs of a modest cyclical 
upturn in economic activity. That said, those downside risks still exist and the recovery has 
been described by ECB President Draghi as weak, uneven, fragile and starting from very low 
levels. 
China,  meanwhile,  has  continued  to  grow,  more  or  less  in  line  with  the  objectives  of  the 
Chinese  authorities.  This  is  more  moderate  than  the  double-digit  rates  China  recorded  in 
earlier  times.  But  it  is  still  a  robust  performance  and  China  is  now  a  big  economy  whose 
performance matters for the rest of the world. The key question in China would be whether 
the  “shadow-banking”  system,  where  much  of  the  growth  in  financial  activity  has  been 
occurring, can be adequately controlled and kept stable. 
The “emerging market” economies have experienced some turbulence. Until May this year, 
their  problem  was  inward  flows  of  capital,  resulting  in  part  from  “spillovers”  from  the 
extraordinary measures taken by the major countries. This put upward pressure on exchange 
rates,  and  made  for  easier  financial  conditions,  which  was  conducive  to  rising  credit  and 
asset  values.  It  was  also  a  permissive  environment  for  the  continuation  of  any  underlying 
imbalances or weaknesses. When the Federal Reserve began to lay out the conditions under 
which it would consider scaling back its extraordinary measures, and the possibility became 
real that such a scaling back might begin this year, capital markets reacted by scaling back 
their own purchases of assets in emerging markets. The situation then became much less 
permissive. Financial conditions for a number of countries tightened, exchange rates started 
to come under downward pressure, and policymakers were faced with the need to accelerate 
the crafting of responses. 
That  pressure  was  lessened  when  the  Fed  did  not,  in  the  end,  begin  the  “taper”  in 
September. Since then, stock markets have advanced, long-term interest rates have edged 
down and the US dollar has weakened. The outflows from emerging markets slowed. Even in 
the  face  of  the  impending  deadline  for  lifting  the  US  debt  ceiling,  markets  experienced  a 
relatively  limited  amount  of  disruption  (though  it  is  very  doubtful  that  they  would  have 
accepted  a  default  event  with  the  same  equanimity).  There  was  a  distinctly  more  relaxed 
tone to the discussions in and around the IMF and G20 meetings in Washington in October 
than there had been at like meetings earlier in the year. 
But it would be a mistake to relax for very long in the face of this delay. Surely the “taper” will 
come. We should hope it will, since it will signal that the US economy is well established on a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
recovery  track,  and  it  will  start  to  lessen  some  of  the  uncomfortable  spillover  effects 
unavoidably  associated  with  the  present  set  of  policies.  For  some  countries,  including 
Australia, the beginning of a return to something resembling more normal conditions, in at 
least one major advanced country, would lessen some of the difficulties we face in our own 
policy choices. 
For  some  other  countries,  this  may  see  some  resumption  of  the  less  welcome  pressures 
seen  earlier  this  year.  The  good  news  is  that  we  have  had  a  dress  rehearsal  of  what  the 
beginning of tapering will probably look like, so we have a sense of the pressure points, and 
there  is  now  a  window  within  which  to  address  some  of  them.  It  would  be  wise  for 
policymakers to use that window. 
Turning to the Australian economy, we have seen, over the past couple of months, evidence 
of a lift in sentiment in the business community. A lessening of political uncertainty has no 
doubt helped this, though we should note that this follows an improving trend in measures of 
household confidence that began in the second half of last year. That uptrend had a setback 
in mid 2013, but then resumed. 
One  force  helping  household  and  business  confidence  has  been  a  positive  trend  in  asset 
markets. Over the past year, the stock market, as measured by the ASX 200 accumulation 
index, has returned about 25 per cent.1 The median price of a dwelling in Australia has risen 
by about 8 per cent over the past 18 months, reversing a previous decline. Overall, the net 
worth of Australians has increased by around 15 per cent, or more than $800 billion, since 
the end of 2011. 
It is not yet clear to what extent, or when, these more favourable trends in “confidence” will 
translate into intentions to spend, invest and employ. The pace of new dwelling construction 
is starting to respond to higher prices in the established property market, as we need it to. 
But at this stage, the available information suggests that broader investment intentions in the 
business  community  remain  subdued.  It  may  be  a  while  yet  before  we  can  expect  to  see 
conclusive evidence of a change here. 
In the interim, some commentators have taken the view that the property market dynamics 
are worrying. My own view, thus far, has been that some rise in housing prices is part of the 
normal cyclical dynamic, that it improves the incentive to build, and that a price rise reversing 
an  earlier  decline  probably  isn’t  something  to complain  about too quickly.  Moreover,  credit 
growth,  at  between  4  and  5  per  cent  per  annum  to  households,  and  less  than  that  for 
business, does not suggest that rising leverage is so far feeding the price rise. Hence it has 
been a little too early to signal great concern. 
There are, however, two caveats. The first is that, notwithstanding the above comment, credit 
growth may pick up somewhat over the period ahead. So this is an area to which  we will, 
naturally, pay close attention. 
Secondly,  while overall  credit growth remains low at present, borrowing is increasing quite 
quickly  in  some  pockets.  Investor  participation  in  housing  in  Sydney,  in  particular,  is 
becoming  noticeably  stronger.  Over  the  past  year,  the  rate  of  finance  approvals  for  this 
purpose has increased by 40 per cent. 
We have certainly experienced higher rates of growth of finance than that in the past, and it 
may be that we are seeing some catch-up from a delayed initial response to fundamentals 
favouring more investment in housing. Nonetheless, as this activity continues, lenders and 
borrowers  alike  would  be  well  advised  to  take  due  care.  It  is  very  important  that  strong 
lending  standards  remain  in  place,  and  that  decisions  be  based  on  sensible  assumptions 
                                                
1   This index, by the way, exceeds the 2007 peak, unlike the more widely quoted standard share price index. 
The difference comes from the fact that the Australian listed company sector has maintained a dividend yield 
of around 4.5 per cent, on average, since 2007. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
about  future  returns.  That’s  what  we  need  if  we  are  to  experience  a  long  and  sustainable 
expansion in housing investment that houses our growing population at acceptable cost, and 
pays reasonable returns on the capital deployed. That’s the sort of outcome we want, as part 
of the more balanced growth path for the economy we are seeking over the years ahead. 
Another part of the balanced growth path would involve an expansion in some of the trade-
exposed sectors that have been squeezed by the high exchange rate. The foreign exchange 
market is perhaps another area in which investors should take care. While the direction of 
the exchange rate’s response to some recent events might be understandable, that was from 
levels that were already unusually high. These levels of the exchange rate are not supported 
by Australia’s relative levels of costs and productivity. Moreover, the terms of trade are likely 
to  fall,  not  rise,  from  here.  So  it  seems  quite  likely  that  at  some  point  in  the  future  the 
Australian dollar will be materially lower than it is today. 
The  high  exchange  rate  has  also  had  a  significant  impact  on  the  Reserve  Bank’s  own 
balance  sheet.  It  led  to  a  decline  in  the  value  of  the  Bank’s  foreign  assets  and  hence  a 
diminution in the Bank’s capital, to a level well below that judged by the Reserve Bank Board 
to be prudent. This has been a topic of some interest of late. Our annual reports have made 
quite clear over several years now that, while this rundown in capital in  the face of a very 
large  valuation  loss  was  exactly  what  such  reserves  were  designed  for,  we  considered  it 
prudent to rebuild the capital at the earliest opportunity. It has been clear that the Bank saw a 
strong case not to pay a dividend to the Commonwealth during this period, preferring instead 
to retain earnings, so far as possible, to increase the Bank’s capital. That rebuilding could in 
fact have taken quite a few years, given the low level of earnings. 
That  is  the  background  to  the  recent  decision  by  the  Treasurer  to  act  to  strengthen  the 
Bank’s balance sheet, in accordance with a commitment he made prior to the election. The 
effect of this is that instead of it taking many years to rebuild the capital, it will occur in the 
current year. This results in a stronger balance sheet on average, and makes it likely that a 
regular flow of dividends to the Commonwealth can be resumed at a much earlier date than 
would otherwise have been the case. 
With those few remarks, I wish you well in your deliberations at your conference today. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
