Guy Debelle: Remarks to the International Monetary Fund Research 
Conference 
Remarks by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  to  the  International  Monetary  Fund  Research  Conference,  Washington DC, 
8 November 2013. 
 It is a great honour and pleasure to be here. I, like many in this room, owe Stan Fischer a 
great debt. I was the last graduate student that he supervised. You could argue that I drove 
him out of academia into policymaking! 
When Stan was teaching his macro course at MIT, in the very first lecture he used to say: 
you learn [the] ISLM and Mundell-Fleming [models] in your undergraduate course (and most 
of us learnt it from [Rudiger] Dornbusch and [Stanley] Fischer), then you come to graduate 
school  and  we  cover  that  in  half  a  lecture  before  moving  onto  teaching  more  advanced 
technologies. But then you go out into the real world of policymaking and your first and best 
intuition still comes from Mundell-Fleming. 
So  I  must  say  I  was  struck  by  Emmanuel  Farhi  and  Ivan  Werning’s  claim  upfront  in  their 
paper1  that,  to  quote,  “because  our  model  has  explicit  microfoundations  and  a  formal 
treatment of general equilibrium, it is better suited for normative analysis than the traditional 
Mundell-Fleming models”. 
That’s a pretty big claim. Call me old-fashioned but I’m not sure that I buy it. 
Before  I  get  to  that,  let’s  think  a  bit  more  about  some  issues  that  come  with  a  floating 
exchange rate. Emmanuel and Ivan talk in their paper about emerging markets, but it’s not 
just an emerging market issue. I will also draw on the Australian experience. 
When the exchange rate is moving in line with the terms of trade, the real fundamentals, it 
plays the appropriate macro stabilisation role. Farhi and Werning have that explicitly in their 
model. In Australia’s case, over the 30 years of the float, the exchange rate has done just 
that most of the time. 
The  problem  is  when  financial  factors  cause  the  exchange  rate  to  deviate  from  the  real 
fundamentals. 
How can that come about? 
Well let’s think of a country, which I’ll call the Usual Suspect or US for short. That country 
pursues an extremely expansionary monetary policy, which is completely justifiable from its 
perspective.  This  spills  over  to  the  rest  of  the  world  which  experiences  an  exchange  rate 
appreciation as capital flows to earn a higher yield. 
Even  if  the  global  portfolio  reallocation  that  comes  about  from  this  is  small  from  the  US’ 
perspective,  it  can  be  large  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  small  open  economy  that  is  the 
recipient of these flows. 
In the emerging market world, the concern is often that the capital inflows will become capital 
outflows.  In  Australia’s  case,  an  exchange  rate  appreciation  that  is  not  in  line  with  the 
fundamentals, if persistent enough, can lead to Dutch Disease. 
This is the fundamental problem, be it a Trilemma, or Dilemma, as Hélène Rey labels it. 
                                                
1  Farhi E and I Werning (2013), “Dilemma not Trilemma? Capital Controls and Exchange Rates with Volatile 
Capital Flows”, Paper presented at the 14th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, Washington DC,  
7–8 November. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But, you might say, isn’t a stronger US economy good for the rest of the world? Or in other 
words, “suck it up sunshine”. 
That may well be true for the rest of the world as a whole, but it is not necessarily true for 
every other country. There is an income and a substitution effect at work here. The income 
effect is the boost from a stronger US in terms of greater global demand. The substitution 
effect  is  the  negative  effect  of  the  exchange  rate  appreciation.  The  substitution  effect  can 
outweigh the income effect, particularly if you don’t trade that much with the US and/or if the 
capital  flows  are  large  relative  to  the  size  of  your  economy  leading  to  a  relatively  large 
appreciation of the exchange rate. 
That is the fundamental problem that the authors are getting at in their paper. Though, so far, 
Mundell-Fleming  has  done  just  as  well  in  getting  to  this  point  as  their  more  advanced 
technology. 
Now let’s think about what happens when the capital flow reverses. (I would note that the 
term  “sudden  stop”  maybe  isn’t  the  right  term  to  use,  being  a  hold-over  from  a  fixed 
exchange rate world.) 
In Australia’s case, the exchange rate depreciates and the main concern is inflation. This is 
manageable  if  the  appropriate  macro  framework  is  in  place,  such  as  an  inflation  targeting 
framework. This is one of the points of Fischer’s 2001 lecture at the first incarnation of this 
conference. 
In the emerging markets world there are two problems. The first are also inflation concerns, 
particularly  if  inflation  expectations  are  less  well  anchored.  The  second  are  balance  sheet 
effects in the form of unhedged foreign exchange denominated liabilities. This is the genesis 
of the fear of floating and was critical in the Asian crisis. Paul Krugman’s second generation 
models capture this well. 
Does the model in the paper here capture this? Mostly. It captures the issue of the exchange 
rate not moving in line with the fundamentals. It doesn’t capture this balance sheet channel 
though, where the exchange rate depreciation hurts so much. 
Why  doesn’t  the  standard  macro  response  work?  That  is,  when  the  exchange  rate 
appreciates, lower interest rates to ameliorate its impact. Mundell-Fleming would say to do 
that. It would also say use fiscal policy, which is not discussed in the paper. 
Extreme reductions in interest rates can cause problems of excessive price rises in domestic 
asset  markets.  So  could  one  turn  to  “macro-prudential”  measures?  These  are  effectively 
domestic capital controls on the locals, rather than the capital controls on the foreigners that 
the paper proposes. 
Basically  one  is  trying  to  make  yourself  less  attractive  to  foreign  capital  inflow.  That’s  the 
fundamental issue here in this paper. 
That  has  posed  an  interesting  conundrum  in  Australia  in  recent  years.  We  have  been 
experiencing  a  “boom  with  gloom”. We  have  had  the  difficult  balancing act  of trying to  tell 
foreigners that the economy is not as good as they think it is, so stop sending us so much 
capital, while at the same time trying to convince the locals that the economy is not as bad as 
they think it is. Now that’s a real dilemma! 
In the end I see the model in this paper as proposing capital controls to address the distortion 
of the exchange rate moving out of line with the fundamentals. Basically it boils down to the 
Tinbergen principle. With only monetary policy, there is one instrument and two objectives. 
Give me another policy instrument and it is easier to hit the two objectives. 
But other potential instruments are not considered in the paper. For example, intervention in 
the foreign exchange market in the form of reserve accumulation, which has been used in 
many emerging markets. This is helpful on the way in, in terms of dampening the inflows, but 
it also helpful in dealing with the outflows when they come. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Moreover,  the  paper  is  silent  on  how  to  go  about  applying  the  capital  controls  in  practice. 
Indeed, it is ironic to be discussing the appropriate implementation of capital controls at the 
IMF, which for a long time has regarded them as a complete anathema. Capital flows are a 
repeated game, an issue I know the authors have addressed in another paper. If you are a 
capital importing country, you need capital inflows to sustain growth in the medium term. 
In the end, the paper does not convince me of their claim to abandon that long-time stalwart, 
the Mundell-Fleming model. The intuition of Mundell-Fleming gets me to the same point as 
this more fancy technology. So I’m not sure I’ll invest in the technology upgrade. So the first 
thing that Fischer said in his macro lecture stands the test of time. In the real world, in the 
end you always come back to ISLM and Mundell-Fleming.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
