Mario Draghi: Interview on the European Cultural Days of the ECB 
Interview  with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  Ilmārs 
Rimšēvičs,  Governor  of  Latvijas  Banka  (Bank  of  Latvia),  for  the  special  supplement  of 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung, published on 6 October 2013. 
 Mr Draghi and Mr Rimšēvičs, the work of a central bank has to do with numbers, rules 
and procedures. Where is the connection to culture in your organisations? 
Draghi: As individuals we take part in cultural activities, often with our friends and families. I 
think  it  is  indispensable  for  any  person  to  be  culturally  active  in  a  very  broad  sense  –  it 
confirms that you are part of society. Besides, even in our daily work, we express ourselves 
in  cultural  terms  –  think  of  the  images  on  our  banknotes,  the  architectural  style  of  our 
buildings or the design of our publications. As an employer of highly qualified professionals, 
we have a huge interest in stimulating our environment in a way that increases the quality of 
life here in Frankfurt, the city that was chosen as the seat of the ECB by the governments of 
the European Union.  
Rimšēvičs: Where is the connection to culture in my organisation? Our coins, our buildings, 
and our choir. Latvijas Banka has been developing a collector coin programme for 20 years 
now, telling the story of Latvia – its historical, cultural, emotional values – in this miniature art 
form.  Some  of  our  buildings  date  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century  –  our 
headquarters  in  Riga  is  a  listed  building,  whereas  some  other  buildings  have  only  been 
completed  at  the  beginning  of  the  new  millennium,  for  example  our  new  cash  vault.  Both 
building  anew  for  a  modern  central  bank  and  preserving  history  require  a  good 
understanding  of  architectural  possibilities  and  styles.  And  there  are  my  colleagues,  of 
course, who have come together to form a choir – we are keen singers and enjoy music very 
much. 
And these Cultural Days make us a living part of a very rich tapestry of Latvian cultural life for 
an entire year! The Cultural Days of the ECB are one opportunity to spread knowledge about 
our country. The introduction of the euro in Latvia in just a few months’ time is another step in 
the  same  direction,  and  I  could  also  mention  Riga’s  status  as cultural  capital  of  Europe  in 
2014 in the same context. 
Draghi:  In  Frankfurt,  the  mere  existence  of  the  ECB  has  undoubtedly  contributed  to  the 
cultural richness of the city and the region. Since the Middle Ages, Frankfurt has been at the 
crossroads  of  traders  from  all  parts  of  the  continent,  and  they  have  brought  with  them 
impulses for fine arts, music, architecture, and performing arts. The Rhine-Main region has 
meanwhile developed into an international metropolitan area. At the ECB we both contribute 
to and profit from this development.  
Which of the events during the Cultural Days are your personal favourites? 
Draghi: I’m particularly looking forward to the opening concert, and after that I will have to 
see what my schedule allows for. I think the secret of a successful programme is its diversity. 
We will offer a very special Latvian mix of classical and contemporary music, theatre, film, 
literature, photography and a series of events for children. 
Rimšēvičs: It would not be fair of me to highlight one or two events, at the expense of the 
others.  At  the  same  time,  it’s  clear  that  Latvia  is  a  centre  of  excellence  in  one  particular 
discipline: choral music. Some people even say that Riga is the choir capital of the world. 
According  to  some  accounts,  Latvia  has  more  than  400  active  choirs,  and  that’s  not  even 
including the countless school choirs. So the choir events are bound to be top of the agenda. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Overall, I hope that we can create something of a “wow” effect among the people of Frankfurt 
and the Rhine-Main region, as they experience the hidden treasures of our country.  
We have to ask this question: does it not detract from the difficult economic and 
financial situation that you are organising cultural festivities, at a time when many 
people are suffering from the crisis? 
Rimšēvičs: The Latvian financial and economic crisis of 2008-09 is over and has been for 
quite some time – Latvia has been the fastest growing EU economy for three consecutive 
years  and,  according  to  the  European  Commission’s  forecasts,  we  can  look  forward  to 
another couple of years of similar performance. I would rather see all the effort that went into 
overcoming  the  difficulties  as  worth  celebrating  and  these  Cultural  Days  as  a  very  good 
opportunity to bring Latvia closer to the rest of Europe, and particularly to Germany. We had 
our own approach to solving the crisis – some agree that it was interesting and innovative. I 
hope that our culture – soon to be on show in Frankfurt – will be fascinating and interesting in 
its own right.  
Your question contains an assumption that culture is a kind of luxury that you can only afford 
when  the  economy  is  booming.  I  think  that  is  a  wrong  perception.  Culture  and  interaction 
between  people  is  a  necessary  ingredient  of  our  lives,  independent  of  economic 
developments.  
Draghi: I completely agree. One could even say that literature, music, performing arts and 
fine  arts  provide  inspiration  that  helps  to  bring  about  economic  prosperity.  Commerce  and 
culture are dependent on one another! 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
