Brian Wynter: Quarterly Monetary Policy Report – latest economic 
developments in Jamaica 
Remarks by Mr Brian Wynter, Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, at the press briefing for the 
June 2013 Quarterly Monetary Policy Report, Kingston, 21 August 2013. 
 Good Morning Ladies and Gentlemen: 
In  presenting  today’s  release  of  the  Quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Report  for  the  June  2013 
quarter  I  will  take  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you  the  outturn  for  the  quantitative 
performance  criteria  which  were  agreed  under  the  programme  with  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF). I will then highlight the Bank’s policy actions over the review quarter 
and some of the main economic developments which had an impact on these decisions. I will 
also share the Bank’s perspective on the near term outlook for some of the main economic 
variables. Also, this quarter’s report includes two special articles: The Evolution of Jamaica 
Dollar Liquidity and Its Impact on Money Market Interest Rates – January to June 2013 and 
Recent Developments in Remittance Inflows, both of which should be of interest. 
Performance under the IMF Extended Fund Facility (EFF) – June 2013 quarter 
The monetary targets under the EFF for end-June 2013 were comfortably met. In particular, 
the net international reserves (NIR) amounted to US$1003.2 million relative to the target of 
US$873.9 million. The target for net domestic assets (NDA) was also met. Information from 
the Ministry of Finance indicates that we also met the fiscal and debt targets. In addition, the 
structural benchmarks due to be achieved during the period were met. 
Against this  background,  a  team from  the IMF  is  presently  in  Jamaica  conducting  the first 
review  of the  country’s  performance  under the Extended  Fund  Facility  (EFF). Their  review 
will inform consideration by the IMF Executive Board in September. Approval of the review 
by the Executive Board will facilitate the next drawdown from the IMF. This will also serve to 
provide  reassurance  to  other  multilateral  partners  and  the  financial  markets  about  the 
Government’s  commitment  to  the  reforms  that  are  necessary  to  improve  the  country’s 
competitiveness and growth. 
Economic developments in the June 2013 quarter 
Monetary and foreign exchange policy 
Turning to  economic  developments  during  the  June  2013 quarter, the  Bank maintained  its 
monetary policy rate at 5.75 per cent during the June quarter. The monetary policy rate is the 
interest  rate  paid  by  the  Bank  on  30-day  certificates  of  deposit  (CDs).  This  policy  stance 
reflected  the  context  of  little  change  to  the  near-term  outlook  for  inflation  and  some 
improvements in investor confidence following the approval of the four-year EFF by the IMF’s 
Executive Board. During the quarter, the Bank offered nine variable rate CDs and two US-
dollar indexed notes to the market. These instruments shifted $21.8 billion into longer-tenor 
securities  (that  is,  between  six  and  18  months)  and  offset  the  Bank’s  purchase  from  the 
market of US$196.3 million, equal to about $19.3 billion. 
Against the background of these developments, the weighted average selling rate of the US 
dollar  depreciated  by  2.5  per  cent  for  the  review  quarter.  This  adjustment  followed  a 
depreciation of 6.0 per cent in the March 2013 quarter. The slower pace of depreciation in 
the  June  quarter  also  reflected  the  impact  of  lower  demand  for  foreign  currency  to  meet 
current account transactions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Inflation 
It  is  encouraging to  be able  to  report  that  headline  inflation  was  1.2  per  cent for  the  June 
2013 quarter, below the outturn of 2.7 per cent for the March 2013 quarter and well below the 
forecast range for the June quarter of 2.0 to 3.0 per cent that we announced when we last 
met in May. The inflation outturn for the review quarter was largely due to the lagged pass-
through of the depreciation in the exchange rate and the impact of drought conditions on the 
prices of some agriculture items. However, the impact of these factors was lower than the 
Bank had anticipated. The lower than projected inflation also reflected the impact of a sharp 
reduction in energy costs, which was not expected, and the effect of weaker than anticipated 
demand conditions. 
For the September quarter, the Bank is projecting inflation to be in the range of 2.0 per cent 
to 3.0 per cent. The materialization of this forecast would be below the inflation outturn for 
the September quarters of the last five years. Inflation in this quarter is expected to be driven 
by increases in the prices of domestic agricultural produce and processed foods. In addition, 
inflation in the period is expected to reflect the impact of higher prices for crude oil and the 
effect of the seasonal increase in demand related to the summer holidays and back-to-school 
preparations.  However,  the  announced  reduction  in  communication  costs  and  persistent 
weak demand conditions are expected to moderate the impact of these factors on the overall 
price level. Headline inflation for July, at 0.5 per cent, exhibited this muting effect. 
Despite the significantly lower than expected outturn of inflation for the first four months of 
the fiscal year, the Bank is maintaining the FY2013/14 forecast for inflation to be in the range 
of 8.5 per cent to 10.5 per cent. Domestic prices are expected to reflect the impact of higher 
international  commodity  prices,  particularly  crude  oil,  and  the  pass-through  of  the 
depreciation in the exchange rate. Additionally, seasonal increases in the prices of domestic 
agricultural produce are expected to contribute to inflation for the period. 
However, although the muting effect may well continue, a cautious assessment of the near 
term risks suggests that inflation may also end up close to the upper bound of the forecast 
range  for  the  quarter  and  the  fiscal  year.  These  risks  largely  relate  to  the  administrative 
adjustments  to  transportation  costs  (which  were  recently  announced)  and,  possibly, 
adjustments  to  utility  costs  as  well  as  higher  than  expected  crude  oil  prices.  Adverse 
weather, in the context of a forecast for an above average hurricane season, also remains an 
upside  risk  to  the  forecast.  The  existence  of  weaker  than  anticipated  domestic  demand 
conditions continues to be the main downside risk. 
Real GDP growth 
Real GDP is estimated to have contracted in the June quarter, albeit at a slower rate than in 
the  previous  quarter.  Both  the  tradable  and  non-tradable  sectors  are  estimated  to  have 
declined in the quarter. The contraction reflected the impact of drought conditions, continued 
weak  domestic  demand  as  well  as  the  slow  recovery  in  the  global  economy  which 
contributed to lower remittance inflows and low demand for Jamaica’s goods and services. 
Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing; Hotels & Restaurants and Electricity & Water Supplies were 
estimated to be the main industries which recorded declines. 
Looking ahead, the Bank is projecting that real sector activities will improve in the remaining 
quarters of the fiscal year. This forecast largely reflects an expected recovery relative to the 
outturn  for  the  corresponding  period  of  FY2012/13  when  the  performance  of  the  economy 
was negatively affected by Hurricane Sandy which was followed by drought conditions and a 
high level of investor uncertainty related to perceived delays in concluding an agreement with 
the  IMF.  Therefore, the projection for  real  GDP growth  is  predicated  on improved  investor 
confidence, continued expansion in the global economy and more robust growth in credit to 
the private sector given the release of resources as a result of reduction in demand from the 
public sector. Against this background, real GDP growth for the September quarter as well as 
FY2013/14 is projected to be in the range of 0.0 per cent to 1.0 per cent. The risks to the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
forecast are assessed to be on the downside and relate to weaker than expected external 
and domestic demand. 
Near-term outlook 
Monetary policy over the near term will continue to focus on maintaining single-digit inflation 
in the context of a flexible and competitive exchange rate regime. Further, given the current 
forecast for inflation and growth in the economy as well as continued fiscal consolidation, the 
Bank can be expected to maintain its current monetary policy stance, including the issue of a 
series of longer-dated instruments. 
Over the longer term, the Bank’s objective is to achieve a gradual reduction of inflation to a 
rate that is consistent with that of our main trading partners. We believe that the combination 
of  low  inflation  and  exchange  rate  flexibility  is  a  valuable  tool  in  maintaining  the 
competitiveness of the export sector. Robust expansion in the export sector will contribute to 
sustained economic growth and improvements in real per capita incomes. 
With respect to foreign exchange reserves, we expect to see a seasonal fall in reserves in 
the quarter and the next. This pattern has been factored into the setting of the targets under 
the EFF for September and December, a period when imports are highest. Thus, while we 
are likely to continue to exceed the NIR targets given the margin that we already enjoy, we 
should nevertheless expect to see a seasonal fall in the NIR in the September quarter. 
Ladies and gentlemen: the world economy is gradually recovering from the depression which 
started in 2008. Jamaica must position itself to take hold of the opportunities which will be 
opened  for  growth  and  success.  In  this  regard,  I  continue  to  urge  you  to  take  note  of  the 
catalytic  and  comprehensive  reforms  which  the  Government  has  been  implementing, 
including enhancements in access to credit for the private sector and initiatives to diversify 
the  sources  of  energy,  thereby  lowering  production  costs.  These  reforms  are  aimed  at 
improving  the  macroeconomic  environment  and  removing  impediments  to  growth.  In  the 
context  of  historically  low  interest  rates  and  on-going  reforms  to  create  a  more  business-
friendly environment, I am encouraging all economic agents to strengthen their resolve and 
redouble their efforts. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
