William C Dudley: Key developments in the tri-party repo market 
Introductory remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Workshop on “Fire Sales” as a Driver of Systemic 
Risk in Tri-Party Repo and Other Secured Funding Markets, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, New York City, 4 October 2013. 
 Good morning. I am pleased to have the opportunity to open this workshop and discuss key 
developments in the tri-party repo market. In my remarks, I would like to give a brief overview 
of  some  of  the  problems  that  surfaced  in  this  market  during  the  financial  crisis  of  2008, 
recognize the improvements that have occurred since then, and most importantly, highlight 
significant vulnerabilities that still persist despite the progress we have made. While we can 
feel  proud  of  the  enhancements  that  are  currently  underway  in  the  tri-party  repo  market, 
today I want to underscore the fact that significant work remains to be done.  
The tri-party repo market constitutes a vital component of the U.S. financial system. It plays 
an important role in providing financing for broker-dealers that make markets in Treasury and 
agency  securities,  and  is  an  important  mechanism  that  supports  dealer  intermediation  of 
credit.  The  market  also  provides  a  secure  investment  vehicle  for  those  that  manage  large 
amounts of liquidity and need an investment vehicle to park these monies. We care about the 
health  and  stability  of  the  tri-party  repo  market  both  because  of  our  interest  in  promoting 
stable and liquid financial markets and because we use it to implement monetary policy.  
The recent financial crisis showed us that the tri-party repo market was inherently unstable 
due  to  deficiencies  in  the  settlement  infrastructure.  Prior  to  2008,  there  was  limited 
recognition of the ways in which adverse developments in this market could quickly transmit 
risk to other parts of the financial system with unforeseen consequences. We now know, with 
the benefit of hindsight, that the market was overly reliant on massive extensions of intraday 
credit by the clearing banks to the broker-dealers, that market participants did not adequately 
appreciate the magnitude of the risk embedded in the role played by the clearing banks, and, 
as  a  result,  market  participants  underpriced  risk  in  ways  that  undermined  the  market’s 
resiliency during periods of stress.  
These vulnerabilities were made apparent in the spring of 2008 when the events surrounding 
Bear  Stearns  demonstrated  the  run  risk  that  existed  more  broadly  in  the  tri-party  repo 
market,  prompting  the  Federal  Reserve  to  intervene  in  order  to  restore  confidence  and 
market functioning. This intervention took the form of the creation of a Primary Dealer Credit 
Facility in March 2008, and a subsequent expansion of the facility in September 2008. The 
scope and scale of the market disruption were clearly very troublesome.  
As many of you are aware, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York published a white paper 
in May 2010 that highlighted three critical sources of instability associated with practices in 
the  tri-party  repo  market:  (1)  the  market’s  excessive  reliance  on  intraday  credit  from  the 
clearing banks; (2) weaknesses in the liquidity and credit risk management practices of cash 
lenders and clearing banks that left them vulnerable to stress environments; and (3) the lack 
of a mechanism or process for liquidating collateral during periods of stress in a manner that 
did not destabilize other segments of the financial system.  
After the crisis, we asked the industry to help develop a plan to reengineer the tri-party repo 
settlement  infrastructure  to  mitigate  these  risks.  The  industry  responded  by  identifying  key 
changes that could be made to the platform to eliminate market reliance on intraday credit, 
thereby removing a key source of fragility observed in 2008. This process was challenging at 
times,  and  ultimately  required  our  intervention  as  a  supervisor  to  move  forward.  But  the 
industry successfully developed a roadmap for reform that is the basis for the changes now 
being  implemented.  The  clearing  banks  are  making  substantial  investments  to  reengineer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
their  tri-party  repo  settlement  processes,  while  lenders  and  borrowers  are  making 
adjustments  to  their  business  practices  and  technologies  to  ensure  they  are  ready  for 
changes  that  are  occurring  in  the  market.  When  completed  at  the  end  of  next  year,  we 
expect that these changes will substantially improve the stability of the market. Indeed, the 
work  completed  to  date  has  already  reduced  the  amount  of  activity  being  financed  on  an 
intraday  basis  from  100  percent  to  about  70  percent,  and  we  project  that  intraday  credit 
usage  will  decline  to  no  more  than  10  percent  by  the  end  of  next  year.  By  removing  the 
clearing  bank from  the  role  of  substantial  intraday  lender,  and  making  tri-party  repurchase 
exposures  truly  bilateral,  we  expect  that  market  participants  will  have  better  incentives  to 
manage their liquidity and credit risks more prudently.  
While these changes represent positive developments that will enhance the stability of the tri-
party repo market, an important challenge remains. Current reforms do not address the risk 
that a dealer’s loss of access to tri-party repo funding could precipitate destabilizing asset fire 
sales, whether by the dealer itself, or by the dealer’s creditors following a default. Industry 
participants  have  yet  to  fully  embrace  the  role  they  must  play  in  finding  a  solution  to  this 
problem. As a result, I would urge industry participants to begin work on this issue without 
further delay. In fact, this is one of the motivations for convening today’s workshop – to start 
the dialogue.  
As several of the speakers will discuss in greater detail today, when fire sales occur they can 
undermine the stability of other markets beyond the tri-party repo market. The transmission 
of instability typically occurs as a consequence of increased margin calls and mark-to-market 
losses that strain firms’ liquidity and capital positions and put additional pressure on firms to 
further  deleverage.  Such  scenarios  can  have  material  adverse  repercussions  on  other 
market segments and market participants.  
It  is  vital  that  we  take  steps  to  address  this  risk  now,  during  a  period  when  markets  are 
functioning without stress, in order to improve the resiliency of this market before the next 
crisis occurs. This is especially important in light of the heightened threshold established by 
the Dodd-Frank Act for future central bank interventions in the event of a market disruption. 
Even if this constraint did not exist, the experience of the recent financial crisis has served to 
strengthen  our  resolve  to  ensure  that  the  market  is  structured  in  a  way  where  risk  is 
accurately priced and resilient to stress on a day-to-day basis, without the need for official 
sector intervention as a first resort.  
As many of you know, the Federal Reserve has been calling for action on this issue over the 
past  two  years,  and  all  three  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  annual  reports  have 
highlighted  this  as  a  significant  issue  worthy  of  our  attention.  However,  the  diversity  of 
participants in the tri-party repo market has made it difficult to move forward quickly with a 
market  solution  that  addresses  the  risk  I  have  outlined.  Industry  leadership  is  absolutely 
critical  to  overcoming  these  challenges. If  industry  is  unable  to  play  its  role  in  achieving  a 
holistic solution, regulators may find themselves forced to employ the specific policy tools at 
their  disposal  in  their  respective  purviews  to  address  the  fire  sale  risk.  While  such  an 
approach  may  indeed  enhance  the  overall  stability  of  this  market,  it  could  also  lead  to 
unintended consequences that include reducing the efficacy of the critical role played by this 
market in supporting the broader financial system.  
I am glad that you are all here today to work with us to begin to identify the best solutions to 
the  problem  of  fire  sale  risk  in  the  context  of  the  tri-party  repo  market.  I  urge  you  to 
participate actively and express your ideas candidly. I am confident that we will come up with 
the best solution to this problem by working together.  
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
