 Stefan Ingves: Strengthening bank capital – Basel III and beyond 
Keynote address by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Ninth High Level Meeting for the Middle 
East  &  North  Africa  Region,  jointly  organised  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision, the Financial Stability Institute and the Arab Monetary Fund (AMF), Abu Dhabi, 
United Arab Emirates, 18 November 2013. 
 As prepared for delivery 
Good morning everyone, and thank you for the opportunity to speak about what – among the 
myriad of recent regulatory initiatives – has probably been the most important: strengthening 
bank capital. 
Strengthening bank capital is not simply about asking banks to hold more capital. Rather, it is 
a broader objective that involves ensuring the functioning of the entire capital regime. The 
Basel  Committee’s  approach  has  therefore  been  to  work  extensively  on  the  consistent 
implementation  of  the  regulatory  capital  framework.  The  ultimate  goal  is  to  implement 
Basel III so that it strengthens the quantity, quality, consistency and reliability of bank capital 
ratios around the world. 
Quantity and quality of capital 
As you know, a set of requirements designed to raise the quantity and quality of bank capital 
lies at the heart of the Basel III reforms. Not only were minimum capital requirements raised, 
but the increases in capital requirements were focused on where they were needed most: in 
going-concern loss-absorbing capital, or Common Equity Tier 1. The requirement for higher-
quality capital was just as important as the increases in the headline minimum capital ratios, 
if not more so. 
Given the challenge posed by the new requirements to a banking industry still in recovery, 
Basel III provides for a transitional period out to 2019 so that banks will have ample time to 
build  their  capital  bases  in  an  orderly  and  sustainable  fashion.  The  good  news  is  that  the 
global banking industry is responding well to the new requirements and, for large parts of the 
industry,  the  transitional  time  may  not  be  needed.  For  the  101  large  internationally  active 
banks (the so-called Group 1 banks)1 that we survey every six months, the story is one of an 
industry that already on average meets the 2019 requirements. The average CET1 ratio at 
end-December  2012  was  9.2%,  well  above  the  basic  7%  minimum.  Of  course,  there  are 
variations between banks, and some still have work to do, but even for those with a shortfall 
against  the  2019  requirements,  that  shortfall  has  now  fallen  to  €115  billion,  sharply  down 
from almost €400 billion just a year previously.2 
                                                 
1  These banks are internationally active and have Tier 1 capital in excess of €3 billion. 
2  These  shortfalls  include,  where  relevant,  any  additional  capital  surcharge  for  those  banks  identified  as 
systemically  important  on  a  global  basis.  As  a  point  of  reference,  the  sum  of  after-tax  profits  prior  to 
distributions across the same sample of Group 1 banks during 2012 was €420 billion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Chart 1: CET1 Capital Ratio (%), Group 1 banks 
 o
i
t
a
R
1
T
E
C
 10
8
6
4
2
0
n
o
i
l
l
i
 B
R
U
E
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
H1 2011
H2 2011
H1 2012
H2 2012
Basel III fully phased-in
Chart 2: CET1 Shortfall (€ bn), Group 1 banks 
H1 2011
H2 2011
H1 2012
H2 2012
Minimum
Minimum plus buffer plus G-SIB surcharge
  the 
international  minimum  standards  within 
Consistency of bank capital regulation 
An  important  new  mandate  for  the  Committee  is  to  be  more  active  in  monitoring  the 
implementation  of 
individual  member 
jurisdictions. This stems from the G20 Leaders’ desire that Basel III be implemented in a “full, 
timely and consistent” manner. Consistent implementation is critical if there is to be a level 
playing field for international banks. 
Implementation  is  more  than  issuing  new  rules  and  regulations.  Durable  and  consistent 
implementation  also  requires  monitoring,  evaluation  and  analysis  of  intended  prudential 
outcomes.  To  this  end,  the  Committee  last  year  instituted  the  Regulatory  Consistency 
Assessment Programme (RCAP). A key feature is the jurisdiction-specific peer assessment 
in  which  a  small  team  of  experienced  supervisors  and  regulatory  policy  experts  reviews  a 
member  country’s  Basel  III  regulations  across  all  its  components  and  sub-elements.  The 
purpose is to find any divergences from the agreed standards and to weigh the current and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 potential materiality of any weaknesses. To foster transparency, the resulting assessments 
are made public, together with an overall review of compliance with the Basel standards. 
Some  comment  that  this  effort,  well  intended  as  it  is,  will  ultimately  be  fairly  limited  in  its 
impact  because  the  Committee  has  no  enforcement  power  and  cannot  override  the 
sovereign  regulatory  power  of  national  authorities.  It  is  true  that  the  Committee  does  not 
have this power, and nor should it. But that does not mean that the peer reviews and the 
RCAP process as a whole lack impact. We have thus far published five monitoring reports, 
and completed assessments on the final Basel III rules in Japan, Singapore, Switzerland and 
China.  In  all  cases,  the  implementation  of  Basel  III  was  deemed  compliant  with  the 
international standards. But importantly, in all cases the assessment process also generated 
a  number  of  changes  to  the  domestic  regulatory  framework  to  fill  gaps  and  improve  the 
alignment  with  the  international  standards.  This  shows  that  a  peer  review  programme, 
coupled with transparency, can make an impact even without a suite of legal powers to back 
it up. 
Overview of assessment outcomes 
Assessed member 
jurisdiction 
Publication date of 
assessment 
Number of regulatory changes, 
amendments, and clarifications 
made by a member jurisdiction 
during the assessment 
Japan 
Singapore 
Switzerland 
China 
October 2012 
March 2013 
June 2013 
September 2013 
5 
15 
22 
90 
Table 1
Overall assessment 
grade 
Compliant 
Compliant 
Compliant 
Compliant 
 Comparability of bank capital ratios 
Over  time,  the  consistent  national  implementation  of  Basel  III  standards  will  help  ensure 
greater “truth in advertising” when comparing bank capital ratios. It is important that, when a 
bank publishes what purports to be a Basel III capital ratio, investors and counterparties can 
be  reasonably  sure  that  the  ratio  has  been  consistently  calculated  and  that,  if  there  are 
differences,  those  differences  are  transparent  and  some  measure  of  their  materiality  is 
available. 
But  there  is  more  to  bank  capital  calculation  than  just  following  national  regulations.  The 
current framework makes use of internal models – these were introduced in 1996 for market 
risk, and in 2006 for credit and operational risk. The rationale was clear: to provide incentives 
for improved risk measurement, and reduce arbitrage via greater risk sensitivity. The Basel I 
framework,  established  in  1988,  had  grown  outdated  and  was  increasingly  subject  to 
arbitrage.  Given  its  limited  risk  sensitivity,  it  provided  banks  with  incentives  to  accumulate 
risk, as the build-up of many risks would not be visible in banks’ capital ratios. In the current 
framework,  internal  models  provide  an  important  means  of  generating  the  increased  risk 
sensitivity that is regarded as essential. 
Making capital adequacy ratios more risk-sensitive should, in theory, also make them more 
comparable.  Capital  adequacy  assessments  are  about  measuring  the  adequacy  of  capital 
relative to the risks a bank is taking. Measuring capital, ie the numerator, is relatively easy. 
The  denominator,  ie  risk,  is  a  much  more  slippery  concept,  and  a  certain  degree  of 
sophistication and complexity is needed to measure it. But by enhancing the accuracy of risk 
measurement, we should be making capital adequacy ratios more comparable and reliable, 
both over time and between banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 As an aside, let me clarify that this is no criticism of the leverage ratio as a regulatory tool. It 
is  simply  that  capital  adequacy  and  leverage  are  two  different  concepts,  and  measure 
different  things.  The  risk-based  capital  framework  is  not  ideal  for  placing  an  absolute 
constraint on leverage, just as a leverage ratio is not ideal for assessing whether capital is 
adequate  to  cover  the  risks  undertaken.  This  is  why  Basel  III  adopts  a  “belt  and  braces” 
approach,  using  the  leverage  ratio  as  an  important  backstop  for  the  risk-based  capital 
adequacy regime. 
Returning  to  the  rationale  for  using  internal  models  to  measure  risk,  it  is  important  to 
remember that a key premise was that banks’ risk-based capital ratios should consistently 
reflect  banks’  risk-taking.  That  was  why  Basel  II  provided  not  only  for  the  use  of  internal 
models in Pillar 1 of the regulatory framework, but also for the Pillar 2 and 3 requirements so 
as  to  provide  a  second  view  on  banks’  solvency  (Pillar  2),  including  one  based  on  stress 
tests  and  performance  measurement,  and  to  facilitate  market  discipline  via  disclosure 
(Pillar 3). 
Unfortunately,  the  financial  crisis  and  subsequent  analysis  have  shown  that  bank  and 
supervisory practices are not as consistent as they could be. For example, the risk weights of 
some banks that introduced internal models under Basel II have been trending downwards in 
recent  years,  when  experience  and  intuition  say  they  should  have  been  moving  in  the 
opposite direction. Many people worried that Basel II would be procyclical. It would seem that 
those  fears  are  largely  unfounded,  but  for  reasons  that  may  be  far  from  satisfactory! 
Increasingly,  this  has  led  to  questions  about  the  credibility  of  internal  model-based  capital 
ratios. 
Therefore,  alongside  the  assessment  of  national  regulations,  the  RCAP  has  also  started 
studying  the  consistency  of  outcomes  at  individual  banks.  As  with  the  introduction  of  a 
rigorous  peer  review  programme, 
initiative  should  not  be 
underestimated. Never before have we had international teams of supervisors looking at the 
modelling practices at individual international banks. I think this is a quite telling example of 
the  regulatory  community’s  commitment  to  improving  the  consistency,  comparability  and 
reliability of bank capital ratios. 
The  Basel  Committee’s  two  recently  published  studies  on  RWA  variability  have  compared 
banks’  estimates  of  risk-weighted  assets  on  hypothetical  portfolios  of  financial  instruments 
(for the trading book) and credit counterparties (for the banking book). To give you an idea of 
the size of the task, in the case of the banking book, for example, the Committee collected 
banks’ probability of default (PD) and loss-given-default (LGD) estimates for 46 sovereigns, 
77 banks, and more than 1,200 large corporates. 
Both  reports  suggest  that  the  underlying  differences  in  risk  remain  the  core  driver  of 
differences  in  risk  weights  and  capital  requirements,  as  intended.  However,  there  are  also 
supervisory  and  practice-based  variations,  and  they  are  material.  While  it  is  difficult  to  be 
precise  on  how  much  variation  is  “too  much”,  the  observed  range  of  practice-based 
variations analysed by the two studies appears too wide. To give you a flavour of that: just 
taking the banking book results alone, two banks with exactly the same assets could report 
capital ratios that differ by 4 percentage points – the most conservative bank would report a 
regulatory capital ratio of 8% when the least conservative one would report 12%. Of course, 
this  simply  compares  the  extremes  in  the  sample  –  many  banks  were  much  closer  to  the 
average. But if outsiders have no way of identifying who is “average” and who is an “outlier”, 
this variance is clearly too wide to underpin confidence in the measurement of bank capital. 
So what are we doing about it? 
Building  upon  these  initial  studies,  the  Committee  has  started  extending  its  analysis  to 
establish  a  comprehensive  picture:  for  the  trading  book,  the  initial  analysis  has  been 
extended  to  more  complex  portfolios,  with  results  expected  in  the  next  few  months.  In 
parallel, the work on the banking book will extend to the other remaining core asset classes, 
especially  retail  portfolios,  SMEs  and  so-called  “partial  use”  exposures  (ie  exposures  that 
the  significance  of 
this 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 have not been migrated to the internal models). The Committee also foresees extending its 
work to operational risk, the third core risk type. And once the Committee has done an initial 
round  of  assessment,  we  will  need  to  repeat  the  exercise  periodically  to  see  whether  the 
policy measures that I will discuss shortly are having the desired impact. 
Further analysis to establish a comprehensive picture will take us into 2015, but this does 
not, of course, prevent us from taking action in the meantime. It is clear that a problem exists 
and the Committee is considering a range of supervisory and policy responses – without, I 
must  add,  settling  on  anything  definitive  just  yet.  Given  the  multi-faceted  nature  of  the 
problem,  it  is  also  clear  that  we  will  need  a  multi-faceted  response.  As  there  is  no  silver 
bullet,  we  will  likely  end  up  with  a  series  of  incremental  policy  and  supervisory  changes, 
drawing from the following list: 
 
Most immediately, we will see supervisory action. Our benchmarking work has, for 
the first time, given supervisors meaningful information on international benchmarks 
against  which  they  can  compare  their  domestic  banks.  Many  supervisors  are 
responsible  for  only  a  handful  of  IRB  banks,  and  it  can  be  difficult  to  generate 
reliable benchmarks from a small sample. But our studies have provided supervisors 
with a much clearer picture of how their banks stack up against their international 
peers, and supervisory action is already being taken against a number of the outlier 
banks that are on the low side. 
Similarly,  the  Committee’s  RCAP  jurisdictional  assessments  are  having  an  impact 
by reducing variability due to undesirable differences in national regulations. These 
may often seem to be small issues of technical detail, but they can have a material 
impact on capital outcomes. To the extent these differences are removed, they can 
add to the consistency of outcomes. The Committee is also looking at the issue of 
national discretions and Pillar 2, and it is investigating whether more can be done to 
reduce variability from these sources by elinimating discretion where possible, and 
strengthening supervisory guidance on model validation, review and approval. 
Since transparency (or lack thereof) of bank modelling practices is at the heart of the 
problem,  during  2014  the  Committee  plans  to  propose  enhancements  to  Pillar  3. 
The  aim  is  to  provide  banks’  external  stakeholders  with  information  to  better 
understand banks’ risk profiles and risk-weighted asset differences. But it is unlikely 
that  disclosure  can  be  the  sole  response,  and,  thus,  this  initiative  will  have  to  be 
flanked by other measures targeted specifically at practice-based deviations. 
Our  latest  policy  proposals  stemming  from  the  fundamental  review  of  the  trading 
book  were  released  at  end-October,  and  incorporate  a  number  of  proposals  that 
flow  directly  from  the  findings  on  practice-based  variation  in  the  trading  book.  For 
example,  certain  modelling  choices with  respect  to  the  choice  of  stressed  periods 
and the scaling of short-horizon estimates to longer horizons have been constrained 
in the latest proposals, along with more gudiance on expected supervisory practices. 
More  generally,  within  the  policy  framework,  we  are  looking  at  how  far  greater 
constraints  on  the  modelling  practices  of  banks  are  needed.  This  could  involve 
enhancing  the  data  requirements  on  which  models  are  built,  limiting  certain 
modelling assumptions or techniques, and/or strengthening validation requirements. 
To  make  a  more  direct  impact,  we  are  also  examining  the  role  of  floors  and 
benchmarks within the regulatory framework. Floors are not a new phenomenom in 
the capital framework, but we need to look at whether existing floors are effective, 
and  whether  there  is  a  case  for  their  greater  use,  particularly  for  products  and 
markets  where  data  are  limited,  or  other  characteristics  that  make  them  hard  to 
model reliably. 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Finally, as I mentioned earlier, we also intend to ensure that the leverage ratio fulfils 
its  intended  role  as  a  backstop  to  the  risk-based  regime.  Despite  the  case  for  its 
inclusion in the regulatory regime that I made earlier, some people have questioned 
the merits of a leverage ratio. But given the very high levels of leverage that could 
be generated under the risk-based regime, it is a sensible measure to include as a 
backstop  in  the  regulatory  framework.  And  the  case  for  a  leverage  ratio  will  only 
grow further if risk-weight variability is not adequately dealt with. 
In  sifting  through  these  potential  actions  and  trying  to  find  the  preferred  policy  mix,  it  is 
important  that  supervisors  and  the  industry  engage  in  a  constructive  dialogue  on  the  best 
way forward. Banks have a keen interest in ensuring that their risk measurement methods 
are seen as robust and credible: not only does this affect confidence in the reliability of their 
capital ratios, but any doubts also call into question their stress-testing results and their risk 
management  systems  more  generally,  since  these  are  invariably  all  built  on  the  same 
foundations.  Thus  the  Committee  is  keen  to  hear  from  banks  and  other  interested  parties 
what their preferred course of action is. Recent initiatives by the industry groups, such as the 
International  Institute  of  Finance  (IIF)  and  by  the  Global  Association  of  Risk  Professionals 
(GARP), to foster improved understanding of these issues, are therefore very welcome. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me sum up some of the key points I have made this morning. First, it is important that 
bank capital is seen to be of sufficient quantity, quality, consistency and reliability. These four 
characteristics are critical to the long-run credibility and success of the international capital 
adequacy framework. 
In  Basel  III  itself,  the  Committee  has  made  substantial  enhancements  to  the  quantity  and 
quality  of  capital.  By  agreeing  to  be  part  of  the  Committee’s  RCAP  initiative,  and  by 
responding to it, national authorities have made clear their commitment to fulfilling the G20’s 
call for consistency in implementing the reforms. And we are now, for the first time, delving 
into the capital calculation practices of individual banks from an international perspective, to 
see what needs to be done so that the results are sufficiently comparable and reliable. 
The Committee is well aware that any changes to bank and supervisory practices will have 
costs.  The  potential  side  effects  of  materially  narrowing  down  modelling  choices  could 
include  a  reduction  in  risk-sensitivity  and  a  corresponding  increase  in  the  potential  for 
arbitrage.  If  not  done  well,  it  could  also  reduce  banks’  incentives  to  invest  in  risk 
management  models,  especially  their  attempts  to  continuously  broaden  and  deepen  their 
understanding of risk. As always in regulation, we need to find the right balance: we need to 
reduce  material  practice-based  differences  in  RWA  variation,  while  limiting  the  adverse 
effects from doing so. 
Resolving  this  issue  will  also  take  time:  there  is  no  quick  fix.  It  will  be  a  significant 
undertaking,  and  we  need  to  carefully  study  the  right  mix  of  regulatory  and  supervisory 
responses.  But  given  the  importance  of  the  issue,  we  have  to  move  ahead  because  the 
consensus is building that the status quo cannot be maintained, as it helps neither banks nor 
supervisors. 
Hence  the  title  of  my  speech  today:  Strengthening  bank  capital:  Basel  III  and  beyond.  The 
Basel III reforms themselves deliver two of the four characteristics that I said were essential – 
higher quantity and quality of capital. They are important, but not enough on their own. It is the 
Committee’s current and future work programme on implementation and consistency that will 
ensure that the full benefits of the regulatory reforms of bank capital can be achieved.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
