Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Financial advisers the future – rise of the new 
wave 
Keynote address by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank 
of Malaysia, at the 2nd Annual Conference of the Association of Financial Advisers “Financial 
advisers the future – rise of the new wave”, Kuala Lumpur, 31 October 2013. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  at  the  2nd  annual  conference  of  the 
Association  of  Financial  Advisers  (AFA).  This  year  would  be  the  eighth  year  that  financial 
advisers have been a part of the financial landscape in Malaysia. As the industry looks to the 
future, I think it is useful to also look back to the motivations for developing financial advisers 
in Malaysia. Fundamentally, the objective was to improve the quality of advice on insurance 
solutions that was being provided to consumers. Before financial advisers, such advice was 
mainly only available in this country from tied agents and this system had certain limitations 
in terms of incentive structures and the breadth of products that the agent could draw on to 
advise  consumers.  A  second  objective,  and  perhaps  one  that  has  not  been  emphasized 
enough,  is  the  expectation  that  financial  advisers  would  be  able  to  help  individuals  and 
households with a broader financial outlook. This means helping individuals and households 
understand how insurance fits within their broader financial management strategies to grow 
their savings, manage risk and meet specific financial goals. 
Growth potential and opportunities 
Over  the  last  three  years,  the  financial  advisory  industry  saw  total  premiums  transacted 
increase by an average annual growth of 21%. While this is from a low base, the industry is 
on a sustained growth trajectory, which suggests that financial advisers are adding value and 
successfully  distinguishing  themselves  from  alternative  channels  for  the  distribution  of 
insurance offerings. We are pleased to see a further three new financial advisers added to 
the industry this year. The industry has only begun to scrape the surface in harnessing the 
potential  that  exists  for  financial  advisers  to  make  a  substantial  contribution  in  helping 
Malaysian households improve their financial management and prepare for income shocks. 
This potential is striking. Every year, more than two million life and family takaful policies are 
sold, 69% of this by tied agents. More than 40% of the Malaysian population still do not have 
any form of insurance, and a large proportion of those who do are likely to be significantly 
under-insured. This is supported by a recent study commissioned by Bank Negara Malaysia 
which  found  that  79%  of  more  than  1,000  respondents  surveyed  did  not  have  enough 
financial  buffers  to  sustain  living  expenses  beyond  3  months.  Malaysian  of  retirement  age 
and older are particularly vulnerable. Based on statistics from the Employees Provident Fund 
in 2011, more than 70 percent of contributors who were 54 years old at the time had savings 
of only RM50,000 or less accumulated for retirement. Only 30% of these contributors were 
still  working.  With  a  reported  average  life  expectancy  of  75  years,  many  Malaysians  are 
clearly at risk of not being able to meet their financial needs during retirement. The low level 
of  financial  literacy  among  Malaysians,  especially  in  appreciating  the  importance  of  risk 
diversification and reduction, and how to use financial instruments effectively to achieve this, 
has further compounded the problem. 
Taken  together,  these  observations  underscore  the  tremendous  opportunity  that  exists  for 
financial  advisers  to  raise  the  game  in  quality  of  advice,  and  in  educating  Malaysian 
households  on  the  effective  use  of  insurance  and  takaful  as  a  financial  management  tool. 
Financial advisers are well-placed to provide lifelong financial planning support to Malaysian 
individuals and households in an environment of a growing middle class segment with higher 
purchasing power. To do this, gaining public trust and confidence is critical. Today, I think 
you will agree with me that that level of trust and confidence in insurance intermediaries at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
large remains below where it could and should be. An important starting point has to be a 
mindset that puts a client’s needs at the centre of advice and product recommendations, and 
which  is  firmly  focused  on  helping  the  client  to  achieve  his  financial  and  life  goals.  This 
implies a view to developing lasting and durable partnerships with clients, and investments to 
build and maintain a high level of competence among financial adviser representatives who 
can tailor advice and tackle a broad range of consumer needs and profiles. 
Importance of sound advice 
Access  to  sound  financial  advice  has  become  even  more  important  today  as  households 
face  the  challenges  of  managing  heavier  debt  loads,  higher  costs  of  healthcare  and 
education, effects of natural calamities that are occurring with greater frequency, and longer 
life spans. We believe that the responsibility to provide sound advice falls on all insurance 
intermediaries, whether you are an agent, an insurance broker, a bancassurer, or a financial 
adviser. This is clear in our Guidelines on Proper Advice which states among other things, 
that if an intermediary cannot match the needs and requirements of a customer with a life or 
takaful  product  within  the  intermediary’s  offerings,  the  intermediary  should  not  recommend 
any  product  to  the  consumer.  However,  we  are  also  mindful  that  sound  advice  can  have 
different shades which depend on many factors, including the competence of those providing 
the  advice,  the  solutions  that  they  are  permitted  or  equipped  to  advise  on,  and  incentive 
effects  which  may,  either  in  perception  or  reality,  colour  that  advice.  Financial  advisers 
provide an alternative channel through which consumers can obtain insurance advice, taking 
into account individual perspectives on these factors. The fundamental principle remains the 
same  –  that  whichever  the  channel,  and  acknowledging  the  advantages  and  limitations  of 
different channels, consumers should receive advice that is in their best interests. 
Strengthened legislative framework for consumer protection 
Before I turn to the Bank’s strategies and priorities for the further development of the financial 
advisory industry, let me briefly touch on the new legislation for financial services that marks 
a key milestone in strengthening the consumer protection framework Malaysia. As you are 
aware, the Financial Services Act and the Islamic Financial Services Act 2013 were brought 
into force in June this year. Under these new laws, the Bank has been given a clear mandate 
to  foster  fair,  responsible  and  professional  business  conduct  among  financial  service 
providers. To this end, the Bank may specify and enforce standards on the business conduct 
of financial service providers to ensure that financial consumers are treated fairly. The laws 
also  specifically  prohibit  financial  service  providers  from  engaging  in  unfair  or  deceptive 
business conduct including making false, misleading or dishonest representations, and tied 
selling. The laws further provide for the approval of a financial ombudsman scheme for the 
resolution of disputes involving financial services. 
A  significant  amount  of work  is  currently  being  undertaken  by  the  Bank  on  these fronts  to 
give full effect to the law. We are close to finalising principles for treating customers fairly and 
guidance on prohibited conduct which will be published for consultation and feedback from 
the industry and other stakeholders. We will continue to raise standards on transparency to 
consumers, taking into account new insights from research conducted by the Bank to better 
understand  how  consumers  use  information  to  make  financial  decisions.  We  are  also 
considering options for putting in place an effective mechanism to handle disputes involving 
financial  intermediaries.  This  mechanism  does  not  exist  today  outside  of  the  advisory  and 
complaint services provided through Bank Negara Malaysia’s LINK channel. 
Changes  were  also  introduced  under  the  new  laws  to  deliver  a  more  efficient  regulatory 
regime for insurance intermediaries. Specifically, the scope of regulatory approvals required 
has  been  substantially  reduced,  for  example  the  requirements  to  seek  the  Bank’s  prior 
approval for shareholding changes not amounting to control, and for the appointment of key 
personnel,  financial  adviser’s  representatives  (FAR)  and  auditors.  Intermediaries  now  only 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
need  to  notify  the  Bank  and  comply  with  minimum  qualification  and  suitability  standards. 
While  we  believe  this  will  help  you  run  your  businesses  more  efficiently,  our  focus  on 
preserving a high level of integrity, competence and professionalism among intermediaries 
has not changed and we will, as we have demonstrated over the course of the year through 
stronger enforcement actions, apply more intrusive supervision if we find that intermediaries 
have not discharged their responsibilities as expected. 
A  new  category  of  financial  adviser,  that  is  the  Islamic  financial  adviser,  was  introduced 
under  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Act  2003.  This  is  also  aligned  to  the  objective  of 
encouraging  takaful  agents  to  upgrade  themselves  to  be  Islamic  financial  advisers  as  the 
demand for financial advice grows. Similar to specialised takaful brokers introduced in 2005, 
Islamic financial advisers will be specialising in advising on family takaful and other Shariah-
based products. 
Strategic priorities to further develop the financial advisory industry 
The Bank has identified a number of strategic priorities to further develop the full potential of 
the financial advisory industry in delivering better outcomes to consumers and increasing the 
level of insurance penetration in Malaysia. I should say that we benefitted significantly from 
our engagements with the industry on the direction that we intend to take and the key issues 
that need to be addressed moving forward. Today, let me mention four key priorities. 
Our  first  priority  is  to  ensure  that  financial  advisers  are  highly  competent  and  professional 
when  they  provide  advice. We  understand from our  engagements  with  AFA  that  recruiting 
the  right  talent  continues  to  be  a  major  challenge  given  that  financial  advisory  firms  are 
competing with larger financial institutions for a limited pool of qualified individuals. The Bank 
will continue to work in close collaboration with AFA to increase the talent pool. This includes 
reviewing  on  a  regular  basis,  the  programmes  and  qualifications  that  meet  the  minimum 
standards  for  financial  advisors  and  working  with  academia,  training  providers  and 
accreditation  bodies  to  broaden  the  qualifications  recognized  without  compromising  on 
quality. There is also a need to lift the competency requirements for financial advisers. The 
current emphasis has been largely on ensuring that financial advisers have sound product 
knowledge and the core competencies to understand and analyse their client’s needs. We 
believe  there  is  a  need  for  financial  advisers  to  possess  a  larger  body  of  financial  and 
technical  knowledge,  that  includes  a  deeper  awareness  of  latest  developments  in  the 
industry  and  opportunities  available,  and  to  be  able  to  apply  this  knowledge  to  a  client’s 
advantage.  Other  core  competencies  that  need  to  be  given  greater  emphasis  include 
effective communication and problem solving skills. 
The second priority is to identify and address the barriers that are preventing qualified parties 
from entering the industry, and the constraints that are limiting the ability of financial advisers 
to recommend the best solutions to their clients. We are close to making an announcement 
on  revised  minimum  entry  requirements  for  financial  advisory  business.  The  Bank  is  also 
currently  working on measures to create a more level playing field with respect to product 
offerings among the insurance intermediaries. The Bank and the Securities Commission will 
also continue to coordinate closely in facilitating the ability of financial advisers and financial 
planners  to  provide  advice  on  a  broad  range  of  financial  solutions.  In  this  respect,  further 
enhancements are expected to be made to regulatory processes to improve efficiency and 
further ease the regulatory burden on the existing players. 
The  third  priority  is  to  improve  the  alignment  between  the  interests  of  consumers  and 
financial  advisers.  We  believe  how  incentives  are  structured  have  an  important  role  in 
shaping the quality of advice that a consumer receives. While there are current requirements 
for potential conflicts to be clearly disclosed to consumers, the effect of such disclosure in 
alerting  consumers  to  consider  how  such  conflicts  may  affect  any  advice  received,  and  to 
temper their decisions appropriately, may not be adequate to resolve the inherent conflicts 
that are created when a financial adviser is compensated by product providers. At the same 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
time,  the  vast  majority  of  Malaysian  consumers  are  not  currently  accustomed  to  paying 
directly for advice. In moving towards a better alignment of interests, there is an opportunity 
for  fee-based  business  models  to  gain  more  traction,  with  financial  advisers  doing  more  
– individually and collectively as an association – to explain how they add value through the 
advice that they give. 
The  fourth  priority  is  to  intensify  our  review  of  the  quality  of  advice  provided  by  financial 
advisers to consumers through our supervisory work programme. This will contribute towards 
ensuring that financial advisers stay at the “top of their game” in terms of quality of advice, 
and that this is sustained through effective oversight arrangements within financial advisory 
firms to check that the interests of clients are being well-served at all times. 
At the industry level, the AFA will have a key role in elevating the stature of the industry by 
coordinating initiatives to create greater awareness on the role of financial advisers, educate 
consumers on the importance of financial advice and to promote financial advisory services. 
AFA  can  also  play  an  important  role  in  driving  higher  standards  of  professionalism  in  the 
industry  through  the  development  and  implementation  of  industry  codes  of  conduct  and 
ethics that are focused on the interests of clients. 
Well informed financial consumers 
The  Bank  is  mindful  that  while  great  emphasis  has  been  placed  on  the  responsibility  of 
financial service providers and intermediaries to ensure that the products recommended to 
consumers  are  appropriate  to  their  needs,  consumers  are  ultimately  accountable  for  their 
own financial decisions. Our best efforts to improve the quality of and accessibility to financial 
advice  would  be  incomplete  without  at  the  same  time,  equipping  consumers  with  the 
knowledge, skills and tools to make informed financial decisions. These capabilities not only 
allow individuals to build, manage and preserve wealth, they are essential to help consumers 
protect  themselves  against  poor  market  practices  and  to  take  appropriate  actions  when 
treated unfairly. Therefore, enhancing financial capability among Malaysians has been and 
will continue to be an important agenda of the Bank. Financial advisers have an important 
role in this effort given your unique vantage point as an objective adviser, and through the 
close  relationships  that  are  cultivated  with  your  clients. We  look  to  the  industry  to  provide 
input and support to the Bank’s ongoing work to develop financial capability programmes that 
are tailored to the different key life stages of individuals from their days as a student, when 
they enter the workforce, when they start and raise a family, and in retirement. 
Conclusion 
In closing, let me congratulate the AFA on its second annual conference and the progress 
that has been made in bringing the industry together under an organized platform to further 
advance and develop the industry. I come back to my opening comments and look forward to 
working  with  the  Association  to  deliver  the  objectives  that  were  originally  set  out  for  the 
industry,  that  is  to  improve  the  quality  of  advice  and  enhance  its  role  in  supporting  the 
broader financial  management  strategies  of  Malaysian  households  and  individuals  to  grow 
their savings, manage risk and meet their financial goals. Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
