George A Provopoulos: Where is the Greek economy heading? 
Presentation  by  Mr  George  A  Provopoulos,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
7th Hellenic Albanian Business Forum, Tirana, 13 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
It’s a pleasure to speak to you here today. This forum is an excellent example of the close 
ties that exist between our two nations. Greek-Albanian trade relations, as we all know, are 
strong and expanding. Greek entrepreneurial presence in Albania continues to be important. 
Greece’s share in Albania’s FDI stock is more than 15%. Importantly, Greek banks have a 
considerable presence here and have contributed to Albania’s smooth transition to a market 
economy.  Because  of  the  important  economic  presence  of  Greece  here,  I  will  focus  my 
remarks  on  developments  in  the  Greek  economy,  especially  with  regard  to  the  banking 
system. I will also provide a few remarks on the role of Greek banks in Albania. Let me first 
provide an overview of the impact of the Greek sovereign crisis on the banking system. Prior 
to the outbreak of the sovereign crisis, the banking sector had sound fundamentals – with 
high capital positions, low loan-to-deposit ratios, and essentially no toxic assets of the kind 
that set-off the 2007 global financial crisis. However, the sovereign crisis spilled over to the 
banking system, generating a general crisis of confidence, which intensified the contraction 
of GDP and worsened the debt dynamics. Yet, I believe that the future now looks brighter. 
Why  do  I  believe  this?  Because,  for  one  thing,  during  the  past  few  years,  throughout  the 
contraction,  Greece  has  made  important  progress  in  addressing  its  fiscal  and  external 
imbalances.  In  addition,  the  country’s  banking  system  has  been  recapitalized  and 
consolidated. Allow me to consider each of these areas – fiscal and external adjustment, and 
the restructuring of the banking system. 
Fiscal adjustment 
First, fiscal adjustment. Greece’s fiscal consolidation is one of the largest ever achieved by 
any country at any time under an IMF programme. From 2009 to 2012 the fiscal deficit was 
reduced by 10 percentage points of GDP. In 2013 we expect it to be reduced by a further 
3 (2.9) percentage points of GDP. The structural fiscal deficit – that is, the deficit corrected 
for the business cycle – will have shrunk by almost 20 percentage points of GDP by end-
2013. A few years ago the primary fiscal deficit exceeded 10 per cent of GDP. This year the 
primary balance is in surplus. What makes these achievements especially impressive is that 
they have taken place despite a contracting economy, which creates moving targets for fiscal 
consolidation. 
External adjustment 
Let  me  now  turn  to  external  adjustment.  In  the  9  years,  2001  through  2009,  Greece  lost 
about 30 per cent in terms of cost competitiveness against its major trading partners. In just 
4 years,  2010  through  2013,  the  entire  loss  has  been  recovered.  Competitiveness  is  also 
being  promoted  through  structural  reforms.  As  a  result  of  these  improvements  in 
competitiveness, a rebalancing of the Greek economy is taking place. The share of exports 
of goods and services in GDP rose from 19 per cent in 2009 to 27 per cent in 2012. The 
share  of Greek  exports of goods  in  world  trade  has  risen  by  30  per  cent  since  2010. The 
current  account,  which  reached  a  deficit  of  15  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2008,  has  moved  into 
surplus in the first eight months of 2013, and we expect a surplus for the year as a whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Preserving banking system liquidity, and 
Restoring capital adequacy. 
The banking sector strategy 
With the deepening of the crisis a few years ago, the Bank of Greece stepped-in to preserve 
banking system stability. Our efforts focused on two fronts: 
• 
• 
The  Bank  of  Greece,  as  part  of  the  Eurosystem,  provided  ample  liquidity  to  banks  at  low 
interest rates using standard and non-standard monetary policy measures. Moreover, when 
banks  came  under  intense  liquidity  pressures,  the  Bank  of  Greece  provided  them  with 
emergency  liquidity  assistance.  In  terms  of  capital,  a  national  backstop  of  €50  billion  was 
established  in  the  form  of  the  Hellenic  Financial  Stability  Fund.  In  addition,  the  Bank  of 
Greece conducted a viability study of the banking system. Based on this study, viable banks 
have  been  fully  recapitalized  using  a  combination  of  state  and  private  funds.  Non-viable 
banks that were not able to raise private capital have been resolved, using state of the art 
resolution  tools  –  tools  that  are  now  being  introduced  in  many  other  countries.  In  total, 
9 banks have been successfully resolved. 
As a result, today we have four well-capitalized viable pillar banks; one of them under state 
control – but soon to be privatized (Eurobank) – and three privately managed (NBG, Alpha 
and  Piraeus).  We  also  have  a  few  smaller  banks,  that  are  also  well-capitalized.  This 
situation, with four large banks and a few smaller ones, should be seen in the context of a 
banking  system  comprising  almost  20  banks  a  few  years  ago.  I  believe  that  the 
consolidation, and the elimination of excess capacity to be achieved over the next few years, 
are impressive. Moreover, there is a significant backstop facility (the “buffer”), in excess of 
€10 billion, to provide additional capital support to banks, should that be necessary. 
I  am  extremely  satisfied  that,  having  survived  such  an  enormous  economic  and  financial 
storm,  the  Greek  banking  system  is  becoming  more  competitive  and  well-capitalized.  This 
result didn’t just happen – it was the result of enormous work, difficult decisions, and careful 
organization. However, this is not the end of the story for the transformation of the banking 
system. The second stage of our strategy is just beginning. This stage will be characterized 
by efforts to implement a new banking model. 
This model will allow banks to exploit synergies and economies of scale, and will, therefore, 
entail a further elimination of excess capacity. In this way, banks will become more efficient, 
gradually reducing their reliance on state aid and central-bank funding. Banks also need to 
refocus their business on their core activities. This step implies selling non-core assets and 
rationalizing their network and activities abroad. Rationalization does not mean outright sale. 
The banks will consider disposing operations that absorb disproportional amounts of capital 
and  (scarce)  liquidity.  However  they  do  not  intend  to  proceed  to  fire  sales  of  self-funded, 
efficient  business  units,  a  situation  that  characterizes  most  subsidiaries  of  Greek  banks  in 
Albania. 
But I will come back to this issue. As you may know, we have recently engaged BlackRock – 
for a second time – to update credit loss projections for banks’ loan portfolios up to 2016, and 
to  study  the  efficiency  of  banks’  procedures  in  managing  non-performing  loans.  As  I 
mentioned, due to the efficient use of resources, a buffer of €10 billion is available [at the 
Hellenic Financial Stability Fund] as a public backstop, should additional capital needs arise. 
Moreover,  we  estimate  that  the  sale  of  non-core  assets  and  the  exploitation  of  synergies 
arising from mergers will provide a further buffer of an estimated €5-€6 billion. Banks also 
need to manage their loan portfolios in a more efficient way. This involves primarily efficient 
resolution of non-performing loans. Improvements in the NPL management will lead to lower 
capital  requirements. The  reduced  capital  requirements  are  expected  to  free  up  resources 
that can be used to finance the new business model of the Greek economy. Thus, banks will 
play a key role in shifting funds from non-productive to productive businesses. Finally, low 
deposit  rates  are  allowing  banks  to  reduce  funding  costs  and,  thus,  to  ease  the  cost  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financing for both retail and corporate clients. These developments should have a positive 
impact  upon  operating  efficiency  and,  eventually,  the  ability  of  borrowers  to  service  their 
obligations. 
Greek banks in Albania 
Now, let me say a few words about the Greek banks in Albania. Greek banks comprise an 
important part of the Albanian banking system as evidenced by the fact that they hold about 
20% of total banking sector assets. They are well-capitalized, mainly self-funded, and play a 
vital  role  in  the  Albanian  economy.  However,  individually  their  operations  are  rather  small 
compared to those of other foreign banks in Albania. Therefore, some mergers may need to 
take  place.  In  recent  years,  Greek  banks  have  spread  widely  in  South  Eastern  Europe. 
However, few banks managed to obtain, on an individual basis, a substantial market share 
and size, which are critical factors for efficiency and profitability. This shortcoming has to be 
addressed. A stronger presence of fewer banks would be better not only for individual banks, 
but also for the market and the domestic economy. The benefits of consolidation can be seen 
in the Greek banking market.  
A  major  challenge  not  only  for  subsidiaries  of  Greek  banks,  but  for  the  Albanian  banking 
system as a whole, is the rising level of non-performing loans. The rise in NPLs is a problem 
for most countries in the region, including Greece. Dealing with this situation is important for 
not  only  the  robustness  of  the  banks  but,  more  importantly,  for  ensuring  adequate  credit 
supply to the real economy. It is for these reasons that the matter of effective management of 
NPLs  is  a  top  priority  for  the  Bank  of  Greece.  We  have  set  up  a  plan  to  increase  banks’ 
efficiency in dealing with troubled borrowers. The frameworks that the banks will develop will, 
of  course,  be  disseminated  throughout  their  groups  and  will  contribute  to  the  efforts  by  all 
supervisory  authorities  in  Southeastern  Europe  to  address  the  common  concern  of  non-
performing loans.  
Finally,  I  would  like  to  reassure  you  that  Greek  banking  groups  have  not  engaged  in 
excessive deleveraging and they are not going to do so in the future. In fact, there has been 
no “home”-bias in the loan deleveraging process, rather the opposite. The need of strategic 
restructuring does not mean a weaker commitment by Greek banks. After all, their presence 
here and in other countries is a strategic choice as they see substantial long-term growth and 
earnings potential in both Albania and the region more generally. 
The future: the cost has been borne; we are now expecting to bear the fruits 
Dear friends 
We  are  now  seeing  the  results  of  the  changes  that  have  been  taking  place  in  the  Greek 
economy. Over  the past  year  or  so  there  has  been  positive  news  with  respect to financial 
indicators and soft data; recently, there has been positive news in the hard data. The policy 
reforms  –  including  fiscal  adjustment  and  structural  reforms  –  that  Greece  has  been 
implementing during the past several years follow an established recipe. That recipe worked 
for the U.K. in the 1980s, Sweden and Finland  in the early 1990s, Asia in the late 1990s, 
Germany in the early 2000s, and in many other countries. This recipe includes fixing social 
security, strengthening employment incentives, raising consumption taxes, and streamlining 
the public sector. Some of these measures – especially structural reforms – take some time 
to work. They require patience, perseverance, and the ability to ignore the siren calls of those 
who  offer quick fixes.  That  recipe  is  now  working  in  Greece. The  benefits  of the  country’s 
adjustments  extend  beyond  the  credibility  and  competitiveness  effects  of  decreasing 
macroeconomic  imbalances.  In  light  of  these  developments,  I  expect  economic  growth  to 
return,  starting  in  2014.  If  Greece  achieves  a  primary  surplus  in  2013,  which  seems  very 
likely to happen, the euro area will be discussing further debt reducing measures in spring 
2014.  Indeed,  financial  markets  apparently  share  my  view  about  a  positive  future  for  the 
Greek economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Recently, the FT ran an article that reported that both hedge and long funds are investing 
heavily  in  Greek  banks.  I  can  confirm  that  this  is  indeed  the  case.  The  markets  have 
introduced a new term GRECOVERY – that is, a recovery of the Greek economy, to replace 
the  earlier  term,  GREXIT.  As  my  remarks  today  make  clear,  I  believe  that  the  markets’ 
reassessment is well-founded. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
