Ryuzo Miyao: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Nagano, 13 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to exchange views with people representing Nagano 
Prefecture, who have taken time to be here despite their busy schedules. Please allow me to 
express  my  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  activities  of  the  Bank  of  Japan’s 
Matsumoto Branch and the local office in the city of Nagano. 
Today,  I  will  review  economic  activity  and  prices  in  Japan,  whose  economy  has  been 
recovering moderately, and then discuss the Bank’s monetary policy. My concluding remarks 
will touch briefly on the economy of Nagano Prefecture. Following my speech, I would like to 
listen to your views on the actual situation of the local economy and to your candid opinions. 
I. 
Recent developments in economic activity and prices 
Moderate recovery in Japan’s economy 
A. 
Economic  activity  in  Japan  stopped  weakening  after  the  turn  of  2013.  Domestic  demand 
remained  resilient,  partly  due  to  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  and  various  economic 
measures.  Overseas  economies  were  gradually  heading  toward  a  pick-up.  Against  this 
background, the economy then returned to a moderate recovery path around the middle of 
the year (Charts 1 and 2). 
I  will  elaborate  on  the  recent  developments  in  Japan’s  economy.  As  for  external  demand, 
although some emerging economies other than China and commodity-exporting economies 
have  shown  signs  of  weakness,  overseas  economies  as  a  whole  are  gradually  heading 
toward a pick-up. Specifically, (1) the U.S. economy continues to recover moderately against 
the  backdrop  of  firm  private  demand,  (2)  the  European  economy  has  stopped  weakening, 
and (3) the Chinese economy has been stabilizing. On the back of these factors and partly 
supported by developments in foreign exchange rates, exports have generally been picking 
up,  albeit  at  a  moderate  pace.  As  for  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  as  a 
whole  has  been  picking  up,  as  corporate  profits  and  business  sentiment  are  improving;  in 
addition  to  the  resilience  in  business  fixed  investment  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector, 
positive  developments  have  started  to  be  seen  in  that  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  While 
public  investment  has  continued  to  increase,  as  positive  effects  of  various  economic 
measures  have  come  to  take  hold  fully,  housing  investment  has  also  been  increasing. 
Private  consumption  has  remained  resilient,  reflecting  an  improving  trend  in  consumer 
sentiment  from  a  somewhat  long-term  perspective  as  well  as  recent  improvement  in  the 
employment  and  income  situation.  Reflecting  such  developments  in  domestic  and  external 
demand, industrial production has been increasing moderately. An improvement in activity in 
the  nonmanufacturing  sector,  including  services  and  construction,  has  been  more  evident 
than that in production in the manufacturing sector. 
As for the outlook, Japan’s economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery (Chart 3). 
To  elaborate,  overseas  economies  –  mainly  the  advanced  economies  –  are  expected  to 
gradually  pick  up.  Emerging  economies  other  than  China  and  commodity-exporting 
economies,  some  of  which  are  exhibiting  weakness,  will  likely  continue  to  lack  growth 
momentum  for  the  time  being.  However,  from  a  somewhat  long-term  perspective,  their 
growth  rates  are  likely  to  start  picking  up  again  with  an  improvement  in  the  advanced 
economies.  Under  these  circumstances,  exports  and  industrial  production  are  expected  to 
increase  moderately,  and  domestic  demand  is  expected  to  remain  firm.  The  pick-up  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
business  fixed  investment  will  become  pronounced  as  moves  to  undertake  postponed 
investment for maintenance and replacement spread in tandem with continued improvement 
in corporate profits. Private consumption is expected to maintain its resilience, underpinned 
by an improvement in the employment and income situation. In this way, a virtuous cycle will 
operate more clearly both in the corporate and household sectors. 
Meanwhile, as for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) 
for all items less fresh food turned positive in mid-2013 and has recently been in the range of 
0.5–1.0 percent, as prices of energy-related items such as petroleum products and electricity 
have  been  rising  and  cost  increases  have  been  passed  on  to  selling  prices  with  resilient 
private consumption. As for the outlook, although the upward pressure from energy-related 
items  will  weaken  gradually,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is  expected  to 
continue to follow a rising trend as medium- to long-term inflation expectations will rise with a 
moderate improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance. 
What I have presented is generally consistent with the path toward achieving the 2 percent 
price stability target, which I described in a speech in April 2013 at a meeting with business 
leaders  in Gifu.1  In  that speech, I  presented  a  path  consisting  of  the following five  stages: 
(1) recovery in the world economy; (2) accommodative financial conditions, reflected in asset 
prices and foreign exchange rates; (3) a gradual rise in the potential growth rate of Japan’s 
economy accompanied by an increase in business fixed investment and structural reforms; 
(4)  an  improvement  in  the  output  gap  amid  firm  household  spending;  and  (5)  a  gradual 
heightening in inflation expectations. I then emphasized that, with this path, it was important 
that  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  rise  above  1  percent  during  fiscal  2014.  I 
continued that, if the virtuous cycle of the five-stage path was maintained thereafter and the 
medium- to long-term trend inflation rate increased toward 2 percent, the actual inflation rate 
was  expected  to  approach  the  2  percent  price  stability  target.  After  about  half  a  year, 
although  the  recovery  in  the  world  economy  –  the  first  stage  of  the  path  –  has  lagged 
somewhat  behind  and  household  spending  –  the  fourth  stage  –  has  turned  out  to  be 
somewhat  stronger  than  expected,  it  can  be  judged  that  the  path  is  generally  on  track  to 
achieve the 2 percent price stability target. In particular, the recovery in private consumption, 
as  well  as  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector,  affects  a  wide  range  of  economic  activity,  and 
therefore may support upward pressure on a broad range of prices. 
Risks to the outlook for economic activity and prices 
B. 
As I have described, Japan’s economy is likely to continue its moderate recovery. However, 
both  upside  and  downside  uncertainties  exist  over  the  economic  outlook,  such  as  the 
following, and I am paying slightly more attention to the downside risks overall. 
First,  there  is  uncertainty  regarding  developments  in  overseas  economies.  In  particular, 
some emerging economies other than China and commodity-exporting economies are facing 
structural  problems  such  as  current  account  deficits,  and  thus  pose  downside  risks. I  also 
recognize  that  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  possibility  that  the  recovery  in  the  U.S. 
economy  and the  world  economy  may  be  delayed  depending  on the  consequences  of the 
fiscal problem in the United States. 
Second  is  developments  in  households’  employment  and  income  situation.  For  domestic 
demand to continue to maintain its firmness in the future, the key issue is whether a virtuous 
cycle whereby improvement in the employment and income situation supports consumption 
will be maintained. In this regard, despite some downside risks, I see a possibility that the 
mechanism of upward momentum may operate, about which I will explain in the next section. 
                                                
1  For  details,  see  Ryuzo  Miyao,  “Economic  Activity,  Prices,  and  Monetary  Policy”,  Speech  at  a  Meeting  with 
Business Leaders in Gifu, Bank of Japan, April 18, 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Third  is  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hikes.  The  hikes  will  have  adverse  effects  on 
households’ real disposable income, but the effects are likely to be mitigated to some extent 
by, for example, the government’s various economic measures. On this basis, whether these 
effects  will  slow  the  economy  by  more  than  expected  depends  on  the  employment  and 
income  situation  and  developments  in  prices  at  each  point  in  time.  Therefore,  attention 
should be paid to the effects of the consumption tax hikes. 
Fourth,  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations  are  subject  to 
uncertainty.  These  expectations  may  be  either  raised  or  lowered  depending  on  firms’ 
innovations,  such  as  their  creative  efforts  to  boost  demand,  on  progress  in  regulatory  and 
institutional reforms, and on future developments in tax reforms. 
C. 
Issues to be considered regarding private consumption and inflation 
expectations 
Sustainability of the resilience in private consumption 
1. 
The  current  economic  recovery  is  characterized  by  domestic  demand-led  growth,  led  by 
private consumption in particular, as opposed to recovery in the past that typically was led by 
external demand such as exports and production (Chart 4). In what follows, I will take up the 
topic of sustainability of the resilience in private consumption and explain its background as 
well  as  the  issues  I  consider  to  be  important  with  regard  to  anticipating  developments  in 
economic recovery. 
a. 
Improvement  in  consumer  sentiment:  rise  in  stock  prices  and  improvement  in  the 
employment and income situation 
Favorable  consumer  sentiment  is  one  factor  that  underpins  private  consumption.  The 
Consumer Confidence Index, which is a major indicator for consumer sentiment, has been 
improving significantly since end-2012. It is often noted that this is attributable to the rise in 
stock prices during the same period (Chart 5). Looking at developments in stock prices, their 
uptrend  continues  on  the  back  of  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  more 
accommodative  financial  conditions.  Some  take  the  view  that,  through  the  improvement  in 
household sentiment, the rise in stock prices only boosts consumption by the  wealthy and 
the elderly who hold stocks. Even so, it is reasonable to say that higher stock prices have 
been stimulating spending by those people who are willing to spend. It should be noted that 
wealth effects for the elderly seem to spill over into the working segment of the population, as 
seen in, for example, greater consumption related to grandchildren and increased demand 
for three-generation family trips.2 
One  factor  that  could  affect  consumer  sentiment  more  broadly  is  the  employment  and 
income situation. For example, if firms offer more jobs and the number of employees rises, 
the  overall  outlook  for  income  improves,  thereby  making  consumer  sentiment  more 
favorable. An improvement in the employment and income situation could make people more 
willing  to  borrow  and  spend  more  confidently.  In  fact,  a  strong  correlation  is  observed 
between  the  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  –  which  represents  the  number  of  job 
openings relative to the number of job seekers – and the Consumer Confidence Index (Chart 
6). Employment conditions as suggested by the active job openings-to-applicants ratio and 
the unemployment rate deteriorated in the wake of the Lehman shock, but thereafter have 
been  on  a  recovery  trend.  If  this  trend  continues,  consumer  sentiment  is  likely  to  be 
underpinned at a high level. 
                                                
2  The October 2013 issue of the Regional Economic Report released by the Bank contains a review of regional 
features of recent developments in consumption (available in Japanese). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Sustainable improvement in income: rise in labor productivity 
b. 
A  rise  in  labor  productivity  is  important  in  terms  of  providing  support  for  improvement  in 
economic activity and income in the longer run, as this means strengthening the foundations 
for  Japan’s  economic  growth.  If  prospects  for  a  sustainable  improvement  in  income  are 
widely acknowledged, private consumption will continue to be resilient. Labor productivity per 
worker has been growing steadily, albeit at a moderate pace, and this trend has been firmly 
taking hold despite such significant events as the Lehman shock and the Great East Japan 
Earthquake (Chart 7). 
Looking at a breakdown by industry, labor productivity in the nonmanufacturing sector has 
been  exhibiting  higher  growth  in  the  past  couple  of  years  (Chart  8).  The  level  of  labor 
productivity  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector  is  still  lower  than  that  in  the  manufacturing 
sector.  In  addition,  it  remains  difficult  to  increase  value-added  in  some  segments  of  the 
nonmanufacturing  sector,  due  in  part  to  various regulations.  However,  labor  productivity  in 
the nonmanufacturing sector as a whole continues to show higher growth than in the past, 
and  has  been  exceeding  the  level  seen  before the  Lehman  shock.  Developments  in  labor 
productivity  include  the  effects  of  cyclical  economic  recovery,  but  the  underlying  trend 
reflects a pick-up in economic growth potential from a somewhat long-term perspective. For 
example,  reports  on  interviews  with  firms  and  other  relevant  information  across  regions 
suggest  steady  progress  in  firms’  efforts  to  create  demand,  such  as  for  high  value-added 
services, and to make active fixed investment, with both being done across a wide range of 
areas such as wholesaling and retailing, construction and real estate, accommodations, and 
eating and drinking services.3 
Recent developments in the underlying trend of labor productivity  in the  nonmanufacturing 
sector show a strong correlation with developments in private consumption (Chart 9). There 
is  a  possibility  –  although  this  interpretation  should  be  taken  with  care  –  that  the  rise  in 
productivity has been boosting prospects for a sustainable improvement in income, leading 
to higher growth in private consumption. 
The rise in labor productivity in the nonmanufacturing sector may also be exerting upward 
pressure on a broad range of prices through the growth in consumption (Chart 10). It can be 
considered  that  this  rise  has  exerted  a  positive  influence  on  the  inflation  rate  through  an 
improvement  in  the  supply-demand  balance,  as  its  effects  of  increasing  value-added  and 
demand would more than offset its effects of generating price competition through cost cuts 
and subsequently exerting downward pressure on prices.4 
In the manufacturing sector, the rise in labor productivity in terms of value-added in Japan 
has  come  to  a  pause.  However,  looking  at  the  corporate  sector,  firms  have  been  steadily 
enhancing  their  ability  to  make  profits  on  a  global  basis.  Overseas,  for  example,  they  are 
increasing  their  production,  fixed  investment,  and  parts  procurement.  In  the  manufacturing 
sector, corporate profits have recently been growing rapidly, helped in part by developments 
in foreign exchange rates, and stock prices are firm, as are those in the nonmanufacturing 
sector (Charts 11 and 12). It should also be noted that Japan’s net income from the rest of 
the world exceeds the historical peak (Chart 13). If the current account surplus is maintained 
                                                
3  See the October 2013 issue of the Regional Economic Report released by the Bank (only the summary of the 
report is available in English) and the report on the features of and background to business fixed investment in 
the nonmanufacturing sector of the Chubu region released by the Bank’s Nagoya Branch on October 18, 2013 
(available in Japanese). 
4  Empirical  studies  also  indicate  that  a  rise  in  productivity  will  improve  the  supply-demand  balance  in  a 
sustainable  manner,  thereby  exerting  positive  effects  on  the  inflation  rate.  For  example,  see  Ryuzo  Miyao, 
“Nihon no Keiki Hendou Youin: Jikeiretsu Bunseki karano Shiten (Sources for Japan’s Economic Fluctuations: 
A  Perspective  from  Time-Series  Analysis)”,  Gendai  Keizaigaku  no  Chouryuu  (Contemporary  Trends  in 
Economics), Toyo Keizai Inc., 2011, pp. 35–65 (available in Japanese). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
People’s inflation expectations: forward-looking expectation formation 
through  an  improvement  in  the  income  balance,  the  country’s  net  assets  will  increase, 
thereby exerting positive effects on consumption. 
2. 
People’s inflation expectations have been rising on the whole. For example, in terms of short-
term inflation expectations such as those for fiscal 2013 or for a year ahead, many indicators 
–  including  the  results  of  surveys  conducted  on  households,  economists,  and  market 
participants – show a gradual rise. Medium- to long-term inflation expectations, such as for 
five  and  ten  years  ahead,  are  also  rising,  according  to  surveys  conducted  on  economists 
(Chart 14). 
Let  me  elaborate  on  how  people  form  expectations  of  future  inflation  rates.  Generally 
speaking,  there  are  two  ways  to  predict  economic  variables.  One  is  backward-looking 
expectation  formation,  where  past  results  are  directly  used  to  form  expectations.  A  typical 
example is that the inflation rate for the previous period is simply assumed as the expected 
future inflation rate. In this case, expectations for future inflation rates are fixed to actual past 
inflation rates. 
The other is forward-looking expectation formation, where future inflation rates are predicted 
in  line  with  the  underlying  mechanism  of  future  developments  in  economic  activity.  As  an 
example,  let  us  simply  consider  the  Phillips  curve  and  assume  that  prices  rise  when 
economic  activity  improves.  Given  this,  when  prospects  for  a  sustainable  improvement  in 
economic activity are widely acknowledged in view of efforts to strengthen the foundations 
for economic growth and the spread of policy effects, people expect a rise in prices based on 
the  relationship  between  economic  activity  and  prices  at  a  future  point  in  time  –  in  other 
words, inflation expectations will rise. Meanwhile, in the corporate sector, better prospects for 
economic activity and sales will enable firms to ease price competition and pass higher costs 
on to selling prices. As a result, prices for the present period will likely incur upward pressure, 
thereby shifting the entire observed Phillips curve upward, or making the curve steeper than 
before. 
In  the  actual formation of  inflation  expectations,  aspects  of  both the  backward-looking  and 
forward-looking formations are considered to coexist. This is called hybrid-type expectation 
formation. Based on past experiences, the aspect of backward-looking expectation formation 
is prominent in Japan. On the other hand, the government and the central bank have been 
strongly  pursuing  initiatives  to  work  on  forward-looking  expectations.  The  government  has 
been working to raise expectations for economic growth by increasing public spending and 
promoting regulatory and institutional reforms. The Bank has set the 2 percent price stability 
target and has been conducting large-scale monetary easing with the aim of achieving this 
target at the earliest possible time, and thereby continues to provide strong support from the 
financial side to ensure sustainable economic recovery. In the corporate sector, if there is a 
continuation  of  nonmanufacturing  firms’  innovations  and  fixed  investment  that  I  mentioned 
earlier, their labor productivity will rise further, which could lead to continuous improvement in 
the income outlook. 
Taken  altogether,  with  the  prospect  of  sustainable  improvement  in  economic  activity,  it  is 
possible  that  the  proportion  of  people  who  are  oriented  to  forward-looking  expectation 
formation  will  increase.  Of  course,  whether  Japan’s  economy  will  move  in  line  with  the 
scenario  I  mentioned  earlier  is  uncertain,  as  the  environment  surrounding  firms  and 
households  remains  severe.  At  the  same  time, however,  macro  data  and  information from 
interviews with firms – both of which indicate sustainable improvement in consumption and 
income – as  well as the recent gradual rise in  medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
suggest  that  Japan’s  economy  as  a  whole  seems  to  be  gradually  moving  in  line  with  this 
scenario.  Taking  account  of  this  mechanism,  I  see  some  possibility  that  medium-  to 
long-term inflation expectations will rise. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
II. 
Monetary policy 
Conduct of Monetary Policy 
A. 
Let  me  now  explain  the  policy  framework  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing 
(QQE) introduced at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 3 and 4, 2013, and the state 
of progress in its implementation (Charts 15 through 18). 
First, the Bank conducts money market operations so that the monetary base will increase at 
an  annual  pace  of  about  60–70  trillion  yen.  Second,  it  purchases  Japanese  government 
bonds  (JGBs)  so  that  their  amount  outstanding  will  increase  at  an  annual  pace  of  about 
50 trillion yen, and the average remaining maturity of the Bank’s JGB purchases will be about 
seven  years.  Third,  it  purchases  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate 
investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at an annual pace 
of about 1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. And fourth, for CP and corporate 
bonds, the Bank continues with these asset purchases until their amounts outstanding reach 
2.2 trillion yen and 3.2 trillion yen, respectively, by end-2013; thereafter, it will maintain these 
amounts outstanding. 
The Bank will continue with QQE, which consists of the measures I have just cited, aiming to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that 
target in a stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity 
and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. 
As a result, calculated on a stock basis, the monetary base and the amounts outstanding of 
JGBs as well as ETFs will double in two years. The ratio of the monetary base to nominal 
GDP is expected to increase to about 56 percent by end-2014. This not only stands above 
the other advanced economies, but also is more than three times larger than the ratio before 
the Lehman shock. 
The  amounts  outstanding  of  the  monetary  base  and  JGBs  at  end-October  2013  stood  at 
about  189  trillion  yen  and  about  132  trillion  yen,  respectively,  and  accumulation  of  the 
amount outstanding of the monetary base and purchases of assets have been progressing 
smoothly. 
Issues to be considered regarding QQE 
Policy effects of QQE 
B. 
1. 
More than six months have passed since the introduction of QQE, and its effects, together 
with  those  of  the  government’s  various  economic  measures,  have  emerged  in  the  form  of 
improvement  in  economic  activity  as  well  as  in  financial  market  developments.  In financial 
markets, long-term interest rates have been stable at a low level of around 0.6 percent. Stock 
prices have risen by more than 30 percent compared with at the beginning of 2013, and this 
growth  exceeds  that  in  European  and  U.S.  stock  prices.  Financial  institutions’  portfolio 
rebalancing has not made marked progress yet, but households are increasingly investing in 
financial assets such as investment trusts. In terms of economic activity, real GDP in Japan 
registered a relatively high growth rate for two consecutive quarters through the April–June 
quarter  of  2013. The  unemployment  rate  has  declined  to  around  4  percent  –  a  level  seen 
before the Lehman shock. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for 
all items less food and energy has improved to around 0.0 percent, and inflation expectations 
appear  to  be  rising  on  the  whole,  considering  market  indicators  and  the  results  of  various 
surveys.  Given  that  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  economic  activity  and  prices  appear 
with a time lag, these improvements in economic activity and prices can be partly attributable 
to the effects produced by successive monetary easing measures implemented before the 
introduction of QQE. In any case, it seems that the implementation of a large-scale monetary 
easing and a commitment to continuing with it as long as it is necessary for maintaining the 
2 percent  price  stability  target  in  a  stable  manner  are  underpinning  the  improvement  in 
economic activity and prices. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Communication regarding the conduct of monetary policy 
A final assessment of the effects of QQE on economic activity and prices can be made only 
after it is lifted, but I would like to explain at this point my empirical analysis on the effects of 
the  quantitative  easing  (QE)  policy  –  adopted  by  the  Bank  during  2001–06  –  on  the 
macroeconomy.5  The  result,  although  tentative,  showed  that  the  QE  policy  had  a  certain 
effect  on  economic  activity  (production),  and  that  a  transmission  channel  through  asset 
prices  –  namely,  stock  prices  and  foreign  exchange  rates  –  had  been  working.  The  QE 
policy’s  effect  on  prices,  however,  was  not  as  clear  as  that  on  economic  activity.  One 
possible  way  of  interpreting  this  result  is  that  prices  had  been  less  responsive  to  an 
improvement in economic activity brought about by the policy – that is, a slope of the Phillips 
curve had been relatively flat during the period of quantitative easing. 
Therefore, I think that the key issue is whether QQE will make the Phillips curve steeper than 
before or shift the entire curve upward in line with the mechanism I explained earlier. As I 
mentioned,  inflation  expectations  could  be  more  forward  looking  in  the  current  phase  of 
economic  recovery  that  is  led  mainly  by  private  consumption.  Initiatives  taken  by  the 
government  and  the  corporate  sector  to  achieve  economic  growth  are  likely  to  strengthen 
such effects by enhancing confidence in sustainable improvement in economic activity. I will 
continue  to  carefully  examine  efforts  made  by  each  economic  entity  as  well  as  future 
developments in the Phillips curve to see if there is any progress in terms of a change in the 
slope or an upward shift. 
2. 
Central banks in advanced economies are making efforts to increase transparency, aiming at 
appropriate  communication  to  the  public  regarding  their  policy  conduct.  Specifically,  such 
efforts include the following. First, clarifying the policy target by, for example, using numerical 
expressions.  Second,  explaining  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  associated  risks, 
which  form  the  basis  for  policy  decisions.  Third,  making  public  the  process  of  policy 
formulation  through  release  of  the  minutes  of  policy  meetings  and  through  press 
conferences.  And  fourth,  communicating  to  the  public,  as  necessary,  regarding  the  future 
conduct of monetary policy and factors relevant to policy decisions, such as guidance with 
regard to continuation of monetary easing. Through all these efforts, it becomes easier for 
market participants and the public to predict the future course of monetary policy and utilize 
such prediction in their decision-making. 
On the other hand, there are in fact challenges to central banks’ communication with financial 
markets  and  the  public,  as  uncertainties  surround  the  economy  and  policy  effects, 
particularly  in  the  current  situation  where  unconventional  policies  are  taken.  In  the  United 
States,  since  May  2013,  given  the  prospects  for  economic  recovery,  the  Federal  Reserve 
had  been  suggesting  the  possibility  that  it  might  start  reducing  the  pace  of  its  large-scale 
asset  purchases  –  known  as  “tapering”,  in  view  of  the  prospect  that  the  size  of  asset 
purchases  would  gradually  be  reduced  –  by  end-2013.  It  thus  enhanced  communication 
regarding economic conditions and economic indicators that were necessary to initiating the 
tapering. In response, financial markets rapidly factored in the future normalization of policy, 
thereby causing the surge in U.S. long-term interest rates. 
The  Federal  Reserve  postponed  the  start  of  tapering  in  September,  which  was  the  timing 
initially  considered  most  likely  by  the  markets,  due  in  part  to  the  slow  pace  of  recovery  in 
employment and the deadlock caused by the fiscal debate. The Federal Reserve might have 
been  aware  of  the  risk  that  the  greater-than-expected  rise  in  interest  rates  would  actually 
impair the economic recovery. Long-term interest rates edged down thereafter but have been 
at a level of around 1 percentage point higher than that seen before May. 
                                                
5  For details of the analysis and the result, see Ryuzo Miyao, “Central Banking Further into Uncharted Territory”, 
Speech at the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of Japan, Bank of Japan, May 28, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
A series of events the Federal Reserve has experienced seems to be instructive for the Bank 
of Japan for the future. The Bank will continue to aim at making better communication to the 
public. 
Concluding remarks: the economy of Nagano prefecture 
My concluding remarks will touch on the economy of Nagano Prefecture. 
The postwar development of the economy of Nagano Prefecture has been supported mainly 
by  manufacturing,  such  as  of  electric  machinery,  general  machinery,  and  transportation 
equipment.  However,  because  this  is  a  manufacturing-oriented  economy,  it  had  been 
experiencing  a  relatively  large  adverse  impact  from  the  Lehman  shock  and  the  yen’s 
appreciation  in  recent  years.  As  for  nonmanufacturing,  firms  had  been  facing  a  difficult 
situation  on  the  whole,  mainly  because  public  works  had  been  declining  due  to  the  fiscal 
consolidation  of  municipal  governments  and  because  the  number  of  tourists  had  been 
decreasing, reflecting a declining population of skiers. However, both the manufacturing and 
nonmanufacturing sectors have recently headed toward a moderate pick-up on the back of a 
recovery in exports and an increase in public works. 
Indeed,  Nagano  Prefecture  has  many  advantages,  such  as  a  high  level  of  technological 
capability in monozukuri, or manufacturing, and abundant resources related to tourism and 
agriculture. It also is worth noting that the average life expectancies for both men and women 
in the prefecture are the longest in Japan, and the employment rate of elderly people also 
ranks top  in  the  nation. This  suggests that  the  prefecture  possesses  the  latent  strength to 
maintain  its  economy’s  vitality  even  in  the  midst  of  such  structural  changes  as  the  aging 
population and declining birth rate. 
With the aim of making greater use of these advantages, Nagano Prefecture has formulated 
a strategic plan to promote monozukuri industry in the prefecture, encouraging cooperative 
efforts  among  those  in  industry,  government,  and  academia  to  improve  competitiveness, 
mainly in manufacturing, and to cultivate the industry’s next generation of human resources. 
Moreover, I heard that some financial institutions in the region have together established an 
investment fund to  enhance  support for  the  business  revitalization  of  small  firms. I  believe 
that both of these actions are of significant importance with regard to stimulating the regional 
economy. 
Turning to transportation infrastructure, Nagano Prefecture is going to have two big events: 
an extension of the Hokuriku Shinkansen line and the launch of the Linear Chuo Shinkansen 
line.  As  a  result,  Nagano  Prefecture  will  be  linked  much  more  closely  not  only  with  the 
Hokuriku region but also with the two major metropolitan areas of Tokyo and Nagoya. This 
could have an unprecedented impact on the industrial structure and demographic trends of 
Nagano Prefecture. I expect that the prefecture’s economy will make full use of its potential 
by viewing such changes as strategic opportunities. 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
 20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
