John McDermott: Shifting gear – why have neutral interest rates fallen? 
Speech by Dr John McDermott, Assistant Governor and Head of Economics of the Reserve 
Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  New  Zealand  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  CFO  and 
Financial Controllers Special Interest Group, Auckland, 2 October 2013.  
  “....most usefully thought of as a concept rather than as a number, as a way of thinking about monetary policy 
rather than as the basis for a mechanical rule” (Blinder, 1998).1 
Introduction 
1. 
I  want  to  thank  NZICA  for  providing  me  with  this  occasion  to  speak  about  neutral  interest 
rates,  why  they  appear  to  have  “shifted  gear”  in  the  last  few  years,  and  what  that  might 
mean.  Neutral  interest  rates  are  important  to  the  way  the  Reserve  Bank  thinks  about 
monetary policy – especially how stimulatory or contractionary interest rates are – and I want 
to share some insights from research my colleagues have been undertaking on this topic. 
First, let me recap the reasons behind our most recent monetary policy decision when we left 
the Official Cash Rate (OCR) unchanged at 2.5 percent. Looking ahead, we expect demand 
in  the  economy  will  be  boosted  by  further  reconstruction  in  Canterbury,  high  export 
commodity prices, momentum in the housing market and low interest rates. This pick-up in 
demand  will  be  partly  offset  by  fiscal  consolidation  and  continued  strength  in  the 
New Zealand  dollar,  and  the  starting  point  is  one  of  very  low  core  inflation.  Reflecting  the 
balance of these forces, the Reserve Bank believes that interest rate settings should remain 
stimulatory for some time yet and we noted in our September Monetary Policy Statement that 
we expect to keep the OCR unchanged in 2013. 
Interest rates, whether we look at the policy rate that the Reserve Bank sets or at the interest 
rates that households and businesses face, have been very low for the last four years, and it 
seems  difficult  to  imagine  that  rates  can  stay  at  such  low  levels.  We  believe  90-day  rates 
have been stimulatory since early 2009, when the OCR was first lowered to 2.5 percent in 
the wake of the global financial crisis (GFC). Indeed, we noted in the September Monetary 
Policy Statement that while we expect to keep the OCR unchanged in 2013, we do expect to 
increase the OCR next year. What average might we expect interest rates to head towards 
when we do eventually start to increase the OCR, and when would we expect to reach that 
level? 
Part of answering that question requires taking a position on just how much stimulus current 
interest rate settings are adding to the economy. If our economy were growing at a rate with 
no under- or over-utilised resources in aggregate (often referred to as a zero output gap) and 
inflation were close to the midpoint of our 1 to 3 percent target band, then interest rates that 
neither stimulated nor restricted the economy would be appropriate. Such a level of interest 
rates can be termed the neutral interest rate. Interest rates set below this “neutral” level tend 
to  boost  the  pace  of  activity  and  inflation  in  a  sluggish  economy  where  inflation  would 
otherwise  be  falling,  and  interest  rates  above  this  “neutral”  level  tend  to  slow  the  pace  of 
activity and inflation where inflation would otherwise be rising during economic upswings. 
Our latest forecasts project the output gap to be near zero and inflation to be close to the 
2 percent midpoint in March 2016 (figure 1). Consequently, the appropriate monetary policy 
setting at that time should be very close to neutral. Our projections suggest the level of the 
                                                 
1  See Blinder, A (1998) Central banking in theory and practice (MIT Press). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
nominal 90-day interest rate that achieves this is about 4½ percent.2 This is very close to my 
best  estimate  of  the  neutral  nominal  90-day  rate  at  present,  though  any  point  estimate  of 
neutral comes from a fairly wide confidence interval – perhaps 100 basis points or more.3 
At  this  point  I  think  it  is  useful  to  review  the  economic  factors  that  determine  neutral  and 
explain how the Reserve Bank estimates it. 
Figure 1 
A stylised view of monetary policy settings 
Source: RBNZ 
 What is a neutral interest rate? 
2. 
To set the scene, it is worth reflecting on exactly what interest rates are. Interest rates reflect 
the  price  of  shifting  resources  from  one  period  to  the  next.  Over  long  spans  of  history, 
changes in neutral interest rates have been a significant part of the variation in actual interest 
rates (figure 2). For example, the change we can see in real mortgage rates over the past 
90 years  or  so  is  greater  than  can  be  accounted  for  by  business  cycle  fluctuations  and 
monetary policy. 
                                                 
2  The uncertainty in estimating neutral can be gauged from past  work at the Bank  which has produced error 
bands  of  between  1  and  2  ½  percentage  points.  These  error  bands  are  based  in  some  cases  on  formal 
confidence  intervals.  In  others  they  are  based  on  the  range  of  results  produced  by  a  collection  of  different 
estimation  methods.  For  the  rest  of  the  talk  I’ll  only  refer  to  the  point  estimate,  but  it  should  be  taken  as 
understood that there is always a band of uncertainty around our estimate of neutral. 
3  Here  I  am  talking  about  neutral  nominal  interest  rates.  However,  for  the  rest  of  the  discussion  when  I  talk 
about  the  concept  of  neutral  interest  rates  I  will  mean  real  neutral  interest  rates.  Therefore,  if  we  were  to 
assume inflation expectations are anchored at 2 percent, then the corresponding neutral real 90-day interest 
rate would be 2½ percent.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Real floating mortgage interest rates over a long horizon* 
Figure 2 
Source: RBNZ 
* Nominal interest rates deflated by CPI inflation 
 Economic  theory  tells  us  that  changes  in  neutral  interest  rates  reflect  changes  in  real 
economic  factors  such  as  population  growth,  productivity  growth,  preferences  for  savings 
and  also  world  conditions.4  So  it’s  private  preferences  and  opportunities  that  determine 
neutral – the neutral rate balances the choices of all participants in the market, on average 
over time. 
How can savings and investment decisions of New Zealanders affect neutral interest rates? 
As a starting point, the interest rate can be thought of as the mechanism which reconciles the 
demand for funds (consumption and investment) with the supply of funds (savings). What we 
see  is,  in  general,  people  put  somewhat  more  value  on  consuming  today  than  deferring 
consumption  until  tomorrow.  This  means  a  positive  interest  rate  is  required  to  encourage 
people to save today. In that context, the fact that New Zealand interest rates normally tend 
to be higher than in some other advanced countries reflects New Zealanders’ tendency to 
invest more than we save.5 
As I have mentioned, interest rates can change over time. If there is a change in preferences 
so  that  people  now  have  a  greater  desire  to  save  today  and  consume  tomorrow,  a  lower 
interest  rate  will  be  required  to  equate  savings  and  investment.  And  if  at  the  same  time 
underlying  preferences  for  investment  remain  unchanged,  then  we  would  generally  expect 
the neutral interest rate to be lower. 
When the Reserve Bank sets the OCR, this affects other interest rates in the economy. We 
set the policy rate away from neutral when inflationary pressure is rising or falling, to slow or 
                                                 
4 
In classic models, such as Ramsey or Solow models, the neutral interest rate is associated with the long-run 
equilibrium interest rate. This is determined by factors such as productivity growth and household rate of time 
preference (i.e. the strength with which households prefer to consume more now). In New Keynesian models, 
the  neutral  real  interest  rate  is  determined  by  domestic  productivity  growth,  the  household  rate  of  time 
preference, and expected growth in the global economy. 
  See Galí, J (2008) Monetary policy, inflation and the business cycle (Princeton). 
5 
In an open economy the neutral interest rate in New Zealand is related to global neutral interest rates but need 
not be the same.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
accelerate demand growth and so alter inflationary pressure. Interest rates above neutral, for 
example,  will  generally  discourage  people  from  investing  and  consuming  and  encourage 
more  saving,  leading  inflation  to  slow.  So  if  the  policy  interest  rate  is  at  its  neutral  level, 
monetary policy will be neither expansionary nor contractionary. 
For  our  purposes,  then,  the  neutral  interest  rate  is  the  rate  consistent  with  inflation  being 
steady at, or close to, the midpoint of the inflation target band and a zero output gap.6 In the 
Reserve Bank’s framework we have a view of neutral levels for both the policy interest rate, 
represented by the neutral 90-day rate, to which I referred earlier, and the interest rates that 
households and businesses pay, which we typically proxy by the neutral floating mortgage 
rate. 
What might have affected neutral interest rates in New Zealand? 
3. 
As I have noted, when I think about whether neutral interest rates might have changed, the 
typical factors I look at are world conditions, domestic productivity growth, population growth, 
and  preferences  for  savings  and  investment.  While  our  research  indicates  that  the  main 
reason for the apparent fall in neutral interest rates currently looks to be weaker productivity 
growth, I will go through each of those factors to illustrate how they matter, and why I think 
the others have been less important for the recent change. 
World conditions 
a) 
Although there was a fall in gross domestic product (GDP) growth around the world at the 
onset of the GFC (figure 3), I do not see the world outlook as having more than a marginal 
effect on neutral interest rates in New Zealand. The fall in GDP growth following the crisis is 
certainly consistent with the drop in actual long-term interest rates seen throughout the world, 
but GDP growth in our major trading partners is expected to return to around its pre-crisis 
trend. However, we remain wary about the future growth prospects of our trading partners. 
The  global  economy  has  seen  many  adverse  shocks  in  the  past  few  years  and  many 
downside risks remain. 
GDP growth in selected trading partner economies 
Figure 3 
Source: Haver Analytics 
                                                  
6  This assumes that no new economic “shocks”, such as changes in global tastes for our exports, or financial 
crises, or changes in government spending here and abroad, push the economy away from that state. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 4 
Real 10-year government bond rates* 
Source:  Haver  Analytics,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St  Louis  FRED 
database, Bank of England, RBNZ 
*  Real  rates  are  nominal  rates  deflated  by  one-year-ahead  inflation 
expectations. 
 Productivity growth 
b) 
As  noted,  weaker  productivity  growth  looks  likely  to  be  the  main  explanation  for  a  fall  in 
New Zealand’s  neutral  rates.  In  the  past  few  years,  productivity  growth  has  fallen  in 
New Zealand when compared to the two business cycles before the crisis. And this story is 
not unique to New Zealand (figure 5). 
Why does a fall in productivity growth suggest neutral interest rates have fallen? A sustained 
fall in the pace of productivity growth will lower returns to investment, making it less desirable 
to  invest.  If  the  desire  to  invest  falls  and  the  desire  to  save  remains  unchanged,  a  lower 
neutral interest rate will be required reconcile savings and investment plans. 
Figure 5 
Multifactor productivity growth 
Source: OECD 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
Population growth 
c) 
World  population  growth  has  been  trending  downwards  since  the  1960s.  However, 
New Zealand population growth has only fallen more recently, and does not appear to be an 
important explanation for lower neutral rates in New Zealand (figure 6). 
Lower population growth decreases the number of people in the labour force, meaning less 
investment is needed to provide the necessary capital stock to employ the average labour 
force. As investment falls, a lower neutral interest rate – the one that equalises the supply of 
and demand for funds – will be required. 
Population growth in New Zealand over the last couple of cycles has tended to fluctuate in a 
way  that  does  not  match  the  apparent  movements  in  neutral  rates,  and  the  recent  fall  in 
population  growth  is  small  by  the  standards  of  past  movements.  At  the  same  time,  the 
longer-lasting  downtrend  in  world  population  growth  raises  interesting  questions  about  the 
implications for neutral rates abroad. 
Figure 6 
Population growth (5 year moving average) 
Source: World Bank 
 Preferences for savings 
d) 
As I have mentioned, if people decide to save more and consume less a lower interest rate 
would  be  required  to  boost  the  pace  of  activity  and  inflation  and  reconcile  saving  and 
investment plans. But while savings rates have changed since the crisis in New Zealand, this 
appears to be more for cyclical reasons than because of a change in underlying behaviour. 
For that reason I would not expect it to explain much if any of the fall in neutral interest rates. 
After the crisis hit, businesses and households became more cautious leading to a rise in the 
household  savings  rates  (figure  7),  with  the  household  sector  trying  to  reduce  debt  and 
exposure to financial risk.7 
                                                 
7  Higher  national  savings  also  reflects  higher  corporate  savings  but  this  might  well  be  more  because  of  the 
corporate sector responding cautiously to falls in domestic and global demand than because of a change in 
underlying preferences. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 7 
New Zealand savings rate by sector (share of 
Gross National Income) 
Source: Statistics NZ 
 During the aftermath of the crisis, the Reserve Bank recognised that it was difficult to assess 
how long-lasting household caution would be, with the possibility that behaviour could either 
be simply a typical cyclical response to a period of economic weakness, or the early stages 
of a more structural change in New Zealander’s attitude to debt. As such, we were restrained 
in how we changed our view of neutral interest rates (see section 4). 
Household  savings  rates  have  continued  to  rise.  But  national  savings  has  flattened  more 
recently,  driven  by  the  sharp  fall  in  the  government  savings  rate  (figure  8).  Given  that 
national  savings  are  what  matters  in  identifying  whether  neutral  interest  rates  have  fallen, 
preferences  for  savings  can  be  only  a  small  part  of  any  recent  change  in  neutral  interest 
rates. 
Figure 8 
Government OBEGAL (operating balance before 
gains and losses) 
Source: New Zealand Treasury, Budget and Fiscal Update 2013 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
To  re-cap,  of  the  four  factors  I  have  considered  today  the  most  likely  to  explain  a  fall  in 
neutral  interest  rates  in  New  Zealand  is  the  fall  in  productivity  growth.  World  conditions, 
domestic  population  growth  and  changes  in  preferences  for  savings  have  probably  not 
changed enough to influence New Zealand neutral interest rates materially even if they have 
generally moved in the right direction. That said, these other drivers do have the potential to 
affect  neutral  rates  in  the  future  if  recent  movements  are  in  fact  the  beginning  of  longer-
lasting  structural  changes.  These  factors  have  certainly  been  evident  in  the  general 
downward drift of neutral interest rates internationally. 
How has the Reserve Bank changed its view of neutral interest rates? 
4. 
Figure 1 showed how we at the Reserve Bank stepped down our view of the neutral 90-day 
rate over 2008 to 2010. Although we altered our neutral policy rate assumption, we made no 
change  to  our  assumption  about  the  neutral  interest  rate  faced  by  households  and 
businesses. We assumed that the increase in the spread between retail rates, such as the 
floating mortgage rate, and the policy rate was a result of the premium banks have had to 
pay on longer-term funding, with institutional savers being more wary about the risk of term 
investments  than  they  were  previously.  Consequently,  borrowing  costs  are  higher  for 
households and firms, relative to the 90-day interest rate, than in the previous business cycle 
(figure 9). 
Figure 9 
Spreads between nominal floating mortgage rates 
and 90-day rates 
Source: Haver Analytics, RBNZ 
 But  as  I  have  discussed,  we  now  have  more  information  on  the  underlying  trends  that 
determine  neutral  interest  rates  for  households  and  businesses  both  in  New  Zealand  and 
overseas. The evidence is pointing more and more to lower neutral interest rates. As a result 
we  have  now  adjusted  our  view  of  the  neutral  rate  for  households  and  businesses,  as 
proxied  by  floating  mortgage  rates,  downwards.  This  view  was  fully  factored  into  the 
September  Monetary  Policy  Statement.  Of  course,  because  spreads  remain  higher  than 
before  the  crisis,  we  have  reduced  the  neutral  floating  mortgage  rate  by  less  than  we 
adjusted the neutral 90-day rate down. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Measurement of neutral interest rates 
5. 
We have seen these changes in the real economy, but how in practice do we estimate the 
level of the neutral interest rate? Neutral interest rates are not observable in the way that the 
90-day rate or retail interest rates are. Instead, neutral has to be inferred from the economic 
information that we have available. Neutral can also change over time, and it may not always 
be clear whether the change is caused by cyclical movements or an underlying trend in real 
economic conditions. 
One  way  to  estimate  neutral  interest  rates  is  to  use  time  series  econometrics  to  extract 
trends  in  interest  rates  over  time,  and  to  look  at  these  in  the  context  of  behaviour  of  the 
drivers  of  neutral  rates  discussed  above.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  estimates  of  trends  in  real 
long-term interest rates do suggest the neutral real 90-day interest rate has fallen since the 
GFC,  both  in  New  Zealand  and  in  other  countries  (figure  10).8  And  estimates  based  on 
equations  that  describe  how  monetary  policy  has  responded  to  inflation  and  demand 
pressure in the past also suggest the neutral 90-day rate might be lower since the crisis.9 As 
I have discussed, adjustments in the Reserve Bank’s forecasting framework between 2008 
and 2010 incorporated much of this fall. During this time, the neutral 90-day rate assumption 
in our models was lowered by 150 basis points. Because of the rise in spreads of floating 
mortgage rates over the 90-day rate we have not reduced our assumption of neutral interest 
rates for households and businesses by as much. 
Figure 10 
Trend in New Zealand real 10-year 
government bond rates* 
Source: RBNZ 
* The real rate is a nominal 10-year rate deflated by one-year-ahead CPI 
inflation expectations. 
 Econometric techniques will always involve some estimation error. To give an idea about the 
wide  confidence  intervals  around  neutral  estimates,  between  2000  and  2008  the  Reserve 
                                                 
8  See Chetwin, W and A Wood (forthcoming, 2013) “Neutral interest rates in the post crisis period”, Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note. 
9  Kendall,  R  and  T  Ng  (2013)  “Estimated  Taylor  rules  updated  for  the  post-crisis  periods”,  Reserve  Bank  of 
New Zealand Analytical Note AN2013/04. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Bank’s published research has offered estimates of between 3 and 6 percent for neutral real 
90-day interest rates since the early 1990s (Chetwin and Wood, 2013, forthcoming, reviews 
these estimates). 
However,  we  have  processes  for  assessing  and  forecasting  economic  conditions  that 
manage  this  uncertainty.  As  I  talked  about  earlier  this  year,  we  draw  on  a  wide  range  of 
information  such  as  official  data,  surveys,  visits  to  businesses  and  labour  organisations, 
external  agencies  and  external  monetary  policy  advisors  to  form  a  coherent  picture  of 
international  and  domestic  conditions  and  a  macroeconomic  projection.10  This  information 
captures  our  view  of  the  most  likely  future  developments  in  inflation,  output,  employment, 
interest rates, the exchange rate and other key macroeconomic variables. We also forecast 
often  –  every  6  weeks  –  which  ensures  we  update  and  correct  our  view  of  real  economic 
conditions regularly. 
Despite all the sophisticated work my colleagues have done to estimate neutral, uncertainty 
can  never  be  removed  and  there  remains  the  chance  that  neutral  may  have  fallen  even 
further than we currently assume. This could be consistent with the weaker than expected 
inflation seen over the past year or so.11 But this low inflation could also be due to one-off 
factors such as telecommunication prices or driven by the high New Zealand dollar. This is 
why  the  Reserve  Bank  continues  to  watch  developments  very  carefully.  Indeed,  there  is 
some clear evidence that current interest rates are quite stimulatory to some types of activity 
– look at the Auckland housing market. 
There are many other  factors that complicate the measurement of neutral interest rates in 
addition to future developments in the real economy. These include the needs to derive real 
rates from nominal rates and account for risk premiums. In practice, the Reserve Bank needs 
an  estimate  of  the  real  neutral  interest  rate.  To  do  this  we  require  estimates  of  inflation 
expectations  which  are  also  unobservable  and  so  must  be  proxied  by  surveys  or  different 
measures of trends in actual inflation. 
We have also seen changes in risk behaviour since the GFC, which has affected risk premia. 
Although  changes  in  financial  market  sentiment  need  to  be  considered  when  making 
monetary policy decisions, the high frequency of changes in sentiment in financial markets 
offers little insight into whether neutral has changed or not. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Having a view on the neutral interest rate helps the Reserve Bank in reaching a view about 
where  actual  interest  rates  need  to  be  set.  We  constantly  use  a  wide  range  of  tools  
– economic theory, data and econometric methods – to examine whether neutral might be 
changing  so  we  have  the  most  up-to-date  view  on  the  economy  possible.  Nevertheless, 
because neutral is unobservable and estimates are uncertain, this process cannot be made 
into a simple mechanical exercise. Judgement will always be needed – indeed the same kind 
of judgement as is needed when making any economic forecast – when forming a view of the 
neutral interest rate. 
What I have talked about today highlights that over time, there can be changes in the level at 
which  interest  rates  switch  between  being  stimulatory  and  contractionary.  Lower  neutral 
interest rates are not necessarily a good or bad thing; it depends on the reasons for the fall. 
For example, if interest rates fall because of falls in productivity growth, that generally would 
not be seen as desirable. 
                                                 
10  See “The role of forecasting in monetary policy”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand speech, delivered to FINSIA, 
Wellington, 2013. 
11  See  Kergozou,  N  and  S  Ranchhod  (2013)  “Why  has  inflation  been  low?”,  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand 
Bulletin, 76 (3), September. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The evidence and research we have accumulated does point to neutral interest rates being 
lower than in previous cycles. The neutral level of nominal 90-day rates looks to have fallen 
to around 4½ percent, though there is a confidence band around that figure. Based on the 
uncertainty we’ve typically found in the past, the band might be in the order of ½ percentage 
point each side of the central estimate. We have lowered the view of neutral 90-day rates in 
our forecasting framework in line with that (figure 1). That estimate compares with figures in 
2003 of somewhere between 5½ and 6¼ percent. 
At the same time, we have reduced our view on the neutral lending rate for households and 
businesses  by  less  only  about  1  percentage  point.  That  is  less  than  the  drop  in  neutral  
90-day  rates  because  of  the  significant  increase  in  the  spread  between  the  two  since  the 
GFC. 
An  implication  of  a  lower  neutral  interest  rate  is  that  households  and  businesses  will  face 
lower interest rates “on average”, but this should not be read as a promise of lower interest 
rates  all  the  time.  Interest  rates  will  need  to  be  adjusted  in  response  to  the  state  of  the 
economy.  For  times  when  demand  in  the  economy  is  expanding  more  rapidly  than  the 
economy’s ability to meet that demand interest rates will need to be above neutral. Moreover, 
there is no reason to suppose how far interest rates move from trough to peak will be any 
different in the next business cycle than they moved in previous cycles.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
