Jan F Qvigstad: On institutions – fundamentals of confidence and trust 
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, Oslo, 12 November 2013. 
The  text  below  may  differ  from  the  actual  presentation.  This  speech  does  not  contain  assessments  of  the 
economic situation or current interest rate setting. 
 I have received valuable assistance in drawing up this speech, in particular from Mike Bordo, Arne Jon Isachsen, 
John  Llewllyn  and  Anders  Vredin  outside  Norges  Bank,  and  from  Norges  Bank  staff;  Øyvind  Eitrheim,  Amund 
Holmsen,  Marie  Norum  Lerbak,  Inka  Rogne,  Øystein  Sjølie,  Birger  Vikøren and Jan  Fredrik  Øksendal.  I  would 
also like to thank Helle Snellingen for the translation into English. 
Institutions 
The concept institution has many meanings. For example, there is an important distinction 
between its meaning as an abstract concept and as a concrete one. The judicial system in 
Norway  is  an  institution  in  an  abstract  sense,  while  the  Supreme  Court  is  concrete.  The 
Norwegian Opera & Ballet is a concrete cultural institution within our more abstract cultural 
heritage. In my own field, the monetary system is abstract whereas Norges Bank is concrete. 
I would like to speak about the role institutions can play in the economic advancement of a 
nation  and  use  the  central  bank  as  an  example.1  My  co-speakers  will  view  the  issue  from 
different perspectives and the ensuing debate will bring forth yet further aspects.2 
Good institutions provide sound frameworks that increase confidence and promote economic 
progress. This is so in relation to minor, everyday situations as well as to major life choices. 
At  the fishmonger’s,  the Norwegian  Metrology  Service  ensures that  you  pay  for the  actual 
weight of your cod fillet. When you buy a home, clarity about ownership and encumbrances 
is ensured by the land register.3 The Norwegian Industrial Property Office grants patents so 
that entrepreneurs can make profits on their innovations. In the absence of such institutions, 
each of us would have had to spend more time on taking precautions and fewer investments 
would have been profitable.4 
                                                
1   Among the many who have shed light on the role of institutions from this perspective is Douglass C. North, a 
1993  Nobel  laureate  in  economics  together  with  Robert  W.  Vogel.  In  his  work,  he  refers  to  institutions  as: 
“Institutions are the rules of the game of a society and in consequence provide the framework of incentives 
that  shape  economic,  political,  and  social  organization.  Institutions  are  composed  of  formal  rules  (laws, 
constitutions,  rules),  informal  constraints  (conventions,  codes  of  conduct,  norms  of  behaviour),  and  the 
effectiveness  of  their  enforcement.  Enforcement  is  carried  out  by  third  parties  (law  enforcement,  social 
ostracism),  by  second  parties  (retaliation),  or  by  the  first  party  (self-imposed  codes of  conduct).  Institutions 
affect  economic  performance  by  determining,  together  with  technology  employed,  the  transaction  and 
transformation (production) costs that make up the total costs of production.” See North, Douglass (1997) in 
Drobak, J. N. (Ed.): Prologue of Frontiers of the New Institutional Economics, p. 6. 
2   Economists use a basic and powerful theoretical construct to demonstrate that, at the most fundamental level, 
production takes place through the use of labour, capital and raw materials as well as through technological 
progress. Lying behind it – and often having a profound effect on it – is how firms and the society in which the 
firms  operate  are  organised.  And  organisation  is  about  institutions  in  the  broad  sense  –  everything  from 
society’s moral norms to how production is organised in each firm. 
3   Hernando  de  Soto  in  The  Mystery  of  Capital  (2000)  argues  that  a  lack  of  proper  land  registration  in  poor 
countries makes it impossible for the poor to obtain credit. As a result, a large proportion of the population is in 
effect barred from establishing a business. 
4   The Arab sociologist and diplomat Ibn Khaldûn analysed the relationship between institutions and economic 
progress. He published his major work The Muqaddimah in 1377. The book was published in Norwegian this 
year  on  the  initiative  of  Nils Holme, the  former  director  of  the  Norwegian  Defence  Research  Establishment 
(FFI). In 1759, in his work Theory of Moral Sentiments, Adam Smith wrote that institutions are the framework 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
However, in and of themselves, institutions are insufficient to ensure progress – the key is 
whether  they  are  strong  or  weak.5  This  is  also  the  starting  point  for  Daron  Acemoglu  and 
James  Robinson’s  book  Why  Nations  Fail.6  They  introduced  the  concepts  inclusive  and 
extractive institutions.7 
• 
Inclusive institutions do not forget why they exist: they remember that their purpose 
is  to  serve  the  people,  as  the  term  “public  servant”  aptly  illustrates.  A  well 
functioning  constitutional  state  makes  cooperation  and  transactions  simpler  and 
cheaper. 
Extractive institutions, on the other hand, are found in countries where rulers govern 
without notable opposition, where the judicial system is not fair, and where rights are 
not equal for all. 
 The authors refer to several examples where people groups with identical backgrounds and 
access  to  the  same  natural  resources  have  developed  differently  because  of  institutional 
differences.8 
                                                                                                                                                   
for progress. Good institutions promote confidence and thereby efficiency in society. The Norwegian American 
Thorstein Veblen, 115 years ago, described institutions as the building blocks of economic development (see 
The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study of Institutions). In newer Norwegian research, Halvor 
Mehlum, Kalle Moene and Ragnar Torvik have documented that institutions determine whether a country will 
manage  to  utilise  discovered  resources  (see  “Institutions  and  the  Resource  Curse”,  The  Economic  Journal 
116, pp. 1–20). 
5   The  young  and  already  internationally  renowned  economist  Jeffrey  Sachs  called  on  the  then  Secretary 
General of the OECD, Jean-Claude Paye, immediately after the collapse of the former Soviet Union. Sachs 
claimed  that  all  that  was  needed  to  get  the  economy  moving  was  to  liberate  Russia’s  animal  spirits.  Paye 
demurred,  saying  that  he  thought  that  institutions  would  matter  too.  Sachs  countered,  saying  “But  you  are 
French, and so you think that institutions are more important than they really are.” To which Paye replied “And 
you  are  young,  and  take  your  institutions  too  much  for  granted.”  And  then  he  added,  almost  as  an 
afterthought,  “If  you  do  not  have  good,  strong  institutions,  all  you  will  get  will  be  the  mafia.”  E-mail 
correspondence from John Llewellyn, former colleague of Paye’s, dated 3 November 2013. 
6   Acemoglu,  D.  and  J.  Robinson  (2012):  Why  Nations  Fail:  The  Origins  of  Power,  Prosperity  and  Poverty, 
Crown Publishers, New York. 
7   Acemoglu and Robinson are not alone in attempting to capture institutional differences using concept pairs. In 
a historically based social analysis, North, Weingast and Wallis use the distinction between natural state and 
open access societies as reference for stage of development. The former was a strongly hierarchical society 
with tightly woven personal bonds with a clear social order. Collaborating elites had a monopoly on violence 
and dictated the allocation of resources. In an open- access society, on the other hand, the state holds power 
but  there  are  institutional  constraints.  Political  leadership  has  support  from  relatively  broad  economic  and 
social groups, with more impersonal relationships and hence stronger competition and mobility. The authors 
argue that the transition between development stages to what they refer to as “the second social revolution”, a 
somewhat broader concept than the Industrial Revolution that gives weight to, inter alia, the Enlightenment 
and  Modernity,  started  over  200  years  ago,  and  that  it  is  still  underway.  In  many  countries,  society  has 
benefited from technological progress but is still captive of the old stage of development of personal power 
relationships. They point to a clear concurrence between the open-access society and economic prosperity. 
North  Douglass  C.,  Wallis,  John  Joseph  and  Weingast,  Barry  R.  (2009)  “Violence  and  Social  Orders:  A 
Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History”, Cambridge University Press. 
8   Nation-building is a difficult task if there is no trust in as vital an institution as the police. 
 
Johs Andenæs spent the spring semester of 1971 as a visiting fellow at Oxford, taking along his son Ulf, who 
was my schoolmate. That year, Leszek Kołakowski, one of the past century’s most famous philosophers, was 
also a visiting fellow at Oxford, and Johs Andenæs and Kołakowski became friends. 
  Although Kołakowski had been one of Marxism’s prominent post-war thinkers, by 1971 he had completely lost 
faith in the ideals of his youth. His relationship with the same Communist authorities that he had served as an 
ideologist  earlier  in  his  life  was  becoming  increasingly  difficult.  When  the  end  of  Kołakowski’s  visiting 
appointment neared, Johs Andenæs was told privately that Kołakowski was debating whether to defect and 
remain at Oxford. Kołakowski was particularly repelled by a fellow Pole who was also a guest professor and 
whose loyalty to the regime he believed was sheer opportunism. To Johs Andenæs, Kołakowski spoke of his 
countryman  thus:  “He  is  a  criminal.  He  cooperates  with  the  police!”  As  a  professor  of  criminal  law,  Johs 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This  leads  to  a  key  question:  what  are  the  principles  that  underlie  those  institutions  that 
actually fulfil their role and effectively serve society? 
A  relevant  starting  point  –  as  we  are  now  approaching  the  bicentenary  of  the  Norwegian 
Constitution – is 1814. This was the time when key nation-building institutions were founded, 
such as the Storting (Norwegian parliament), the Supreme Court, the University of Oslo and 
Norges Bank. By the mid-1800s, civil society was also developing rapidly, as illustrated by 
the surge in the number of associations. The historian Jan Eivind Myhre has described this 
development  in  his  book  on  Norway’s  history from  1814 to  1905.  He  relates, for  example, 
that 60 clubs and associations were established in Løten, Hedmark county, between 1850 
and  1898.9  These  ranged  from  shooting  clubs,  cycling  clubs,  choirs  and  agricultural 
associations  to  local  political,  missionary  and  workers’  associations.  An  array  of  common 
arenas boosts trust between people in a society. Trust in strangers helps oil the machinery. If 
you  are  able  to  trust the  other  party  to the  contract,  you  do  not  have  to  hedge  against  all 
possible outcomes.10 The wheels of business turn faster and more smoothly. 
The  1800s  were  characterised  by  upheaval  and  a  change  in  the  pace  of  economic 
development. In the old society, safety lay in close-knit networks and small institutions: the 
family, relatives and neighbours. Once the pace of development picked up, however, these 
networks and institutions were no longer sufficient. New ones were needed. 
Local  savings  banks  are  a  good  example.  Specialisation,  a  market  focus  and  new  tools 
demanded  more  financial  muscle  than  the  old,  family-based  networks  could  mobilise.  The 
solution was for villages to join forces to create savings banks, an institution rooted in the 
local community but reaching beyond the old networks. Løten savings bank opened in 1855. 
A good public school system is a prime example of an inclusive institution. In May this year, I 
had  the  pleasure  of  visiting  Stavanger  Cathedral  School.  The  head  teacher,  Turid  Myhra, 
showed  a  portrait  of  one  of  her  predecessors,  Johannes  Steen;  schoolmaster,  statesman 
and nation-builder.11 
Steen was notably a key driving force behind what was to become an important milestone in 
the  construction  of  Norway’s  collective  identity:  the  adoption  of  the  Primary  School  Act  in 
                                                                                                                                                   
Andenæs found this to be an interesting statement. Kołakowski, for his part, did not return to Poland when his 
visiting  fellowship  ended  soon  afterward,  but  defected  and  became  a  leading  critic  of  Marxist  theory  and 
practice and one of the intellectual fathers of Solidarity and the fall of Communism. 
9   Myhre,  Jan  Eivind  (2012):  “Norsk  historie  1814–1905:  Å  byggje  ein  stat  og  skape  ein  nasjon”  [Norwegian 
history 1814–1905: Building a state and creating a nation]. 
10   The level of trust in a society is influenced by many conditions. It may be that the recent years’ large migration 
flows  are  eroding  the  trust  that  has  prevailed  in  Norway  earlier.  However,  immigrants have  in  fact adopted 
surprisingly rapidly the level of confidence in their new home country. See also Dag Wollebæk (2013): Truer 
innvandringen tilliten? [Does immigration undermine trust?], Article in Aftenposten. Alexander Cappelen and 
Bertil  Tungodden  at  the  Norwegian  School  of  Economics  are  also  working  on  these  issues  (see  e.g. 
http://paraplyen.nhh.no/paraplyen/arkiv/2012/juni/tillitstesten/).  See  also  Algan  and  Cahuc  (2010):  “Inherited 
Trust  and  Growth”,  American  Economic  Review  100  (5),  pp. 2060–92,  who  document  a  strong  causal 
relationship between trust and economic prosperity. 
11   Johannes  Steen  (1827–1906)  was  born  in  Christiania  (now  Oslo).  After  completing  a  higher  degree  in 
philology at the University of Christiania in 1848, Steen held a number of positions in the school system and 
was for many years the headmaster of the Stavanger Latin School. Steen was also a member of the Storting 
and prime minister. Both as an educationist and as a politician, Steen made key contributions to the creation 
of  the  Norwegian  comprehensive  school.  Source:  Store  Norske  Leksikon,  http://nbl.snl.no/Johannes_Steen/ 
utdypning. 
Internationally, the Society of Jesus is known as the founder of the modern school system, with a curriculum 
tailored  to  the  child’s  age  and  previous  knowledge  and  schooling  characterised  by  systematic  progression. 
These pedagogical principles evolved gradually through the second half of the 1500s, culminating in 1598 with 
Ratio Studiorum, the official plan for Jesuit education (see O’Malley, J. W. (1993): The First Jesuits, Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts). 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
1889.  The  result  was  a  comprehensive  school  system  that  strengthened  our  collective 
identity.12  
For  Norwegians,  it  is  easy  to  take  inclusive  institutions  for  granted.  Throughout  human 
history, however, it is extractive institutions that have been the norm. There were attempts to 
achieve a balance of power in regimes as disparate as ancient Rome, China and Venice. But 
they remained attempts. The inclusive institutions were replaced by nepotism and abuse of 
power. 
The economists Acemoglu and Robinson point to the Glorious Revolution as a turning point 
in history.13 The British Parliament permanently curtailed the power of the Crown. The UK did 
not  become  a  democracy  in  the  modern  sense  overnight,  but  checks  and  balances  were 
introduced.  The  development  of  written  laws  and  a  judicial  system  featuring  independent 
courts started. Patent laws  were adopted and limited companies saw the light of day. The 
Bank of England, which was established in 1694, was controlled by the Crown’s creditors. 
This limited the Crown’s scope for printing money freely. Acemoglu and Robinson maintain 
that the Glorious Revolution paved the way for the Industrial Revolution.14 
The monetary system 
A man who makes pins on his own can make between one and 20 pins a day. However, if 
the  work  is  distributed  among  several  workers  such  that  one  produces  the  wire,  another 
straightens it, someone else cuts it to size, yet another sharpens it, and so on, ten men can 
produce 48,000 pins per day. 
This is Adam Smith’s famous example, taken from The Wealth of Nations, of how the division 
of labour is important for productivity and economic prosperity.15 In Smith’s example, all the 
operations take place within a single factory. But in a more complex society, one firm’s output 
is another firm’s input. An important prerequisite for such division of labour is that there are 
institutions that facilitate simple trading of what is produced. 
The monetary system is an institution that simplifies trade in goods and thereby promotes the 
division of labour, productivity and economic prosperity. We must bear in mind that money 
and the monetary system are not a goal per se. Money is like oil in the machinery. 
Nevertheless, of all the systems existing within a state, the monetary system is among the 
more mystical when examined closely. 
Historically, the King issued money, initially in the form of coins. His stamp turned the coins 
into a means of payment, and his power underpinned the monopoly on the issue of coins. 
Many  kings  managed  their  coinage.  One  example  is  Henry  VII,  the  father  of  the  modern 
English  coinage  system,  whom  historians  have  identified  as  an  early  proponent  of  healthy 
money.16 His son, Henry VIII, was not as successful. From school, we best remember him for 
                                                
12   Compulsory  military  service  is  also  often  quoted  as  a  common  area  in  which  people  from  different 
backgrounds  met  on  an  equal  footing,  and  often  formed  closer  bonds.  Accordingly,  the  Norwegian  Armed 
Forces have not only helped to protect the country, but also developed Norway’s social capital, at least that of 
half  the  population  (see  also  Langeland,  N.  R.:  “Møtet  med  krigens  ånd”  [Meeting  the  spirit  of  warfare], 
Morgenbladet, 1 November 2013). 
13   Hermann, Richard (1992): Med Skjebnen I hånden [With Destiny in Their Hands], Cappelen, Oslo. 
14   Not everyone agrees on this view of the Glorious Revolution. See, for example, Sussman, N. and Y. Yafeh 
(2004):  “Constitutions  and  Commitments:  Evidence  on  the  Relation  between  Institutions  and  the  Cost  of 
Capital”, CEPR Discussion Paper 4404. 
15   Smith,  Adam  (1776):  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  Book  I:  Division  of 
Labour. 
16   Sinclair, David (2001), The Pound. A Biography. The Story of the Currency That Ruled the World, London: 
Arrow Books 2001 pp. 141–2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
his  high  turnover  of  wives.  To  coin  collectors,  on  the  other  hand,  he  is  associated  with 
theGreat  Debasement,  whereby  the  silver  content  of  one  coin  after  another  was  diluted.17 
Neither the turnover among his wives nor the debasement of the coinage was conducive to 
building confidence. 
The  King  could  solve  a  short-term  financing  problem  by  issuing  debased  coins  and  more 
notes.  However,  with  ever  more  coins  and  notes  chasing  the  same  goods,  the  long-term 
consequence was rising prices. Economists refer to this as an inflation tax.18 
What happens when the powers that be unleash inflation? 
• 
in  Germany,  when  absolutely  everything, 
First, confidence in money as a store of value disappears. An extreme example is 
the  1923  hyperinflation 
including 
perishable food products, provided better security than money.19 
Second,  money  disappears  as  an  accounting  unit.  Goods  became  the  new 
standard. During the Napoleonic Wars, inflation was also very high in Norway, and 
the local history of the islands of Karlsøy and Helgøy shows that accounts were kept 
in silver or goods such as cod liver oil, Pollock and flour rather than speciedalers. 
Finally, money ceases to function as a means of exchange. After the Second World 
War,  German  industrial  workers  were  paid  in  the  businesses’  own  products. 
Cigarettes and nylons functioned as a general means of payment.20 
  I mentioned that the monetary system seems to be shrouded in a veil of mystique. Initially it 
was not. A coin’s value was equal to its weight in silver. In our day, the promise of precious 
metal has been replaced by the central bank’s promise of price stability. Underpinning this 
promise  is  an  institution,  that  is  to  say  a  bureau  of  statistics,  which  can  measure  general 
price  developments,  generally  by  means  of  a  consumer  price  index.  The  statistics  bureau 
must  be  independent  of  the  political  authorities,  unlike  in  Argentina  recently  where  the 
director was replaced because the government did not like the price figures.21 Or unlike the 
                                                
17   Between 1526 and 1542 the silver content of the circulation coin groat was reduced by 23.2 percent while the 
coin retained its nominal value of four pence. The King’s gross seigniorage increased from 2.1 to 20.1 percent. 
Glassman, Debra and Redish, Angela (1988) “Currency depreciation in early modern England and France”, 
Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 25, Issue 1, pp. 75–97. 
18   Normally, it is Parliament’s responsibility to appropriate money and the Crown’s prerogative to spend it. When 
taxation occurs through inflation, this rule is broken. 
19   One  of  the  classic  accounts  of  hyperinflation  is  provided  by  Fergusson,  Adam,  When  Money  dies.  The 
nightmare of the Weimar Hyper-Inflation, London: William Kimber & Co. 
20   Owing to a lack of reliable means of payment, the recovery of production capacity and commerce in Germany 
after the war came to a standstill. On Sunday, 20 June 1948, under the direction of Ludwig Erhard, a large-
scale  currency  reform  was  carried  out  in  the  western  zones  of  occupation.  The  introduction  of  the 
Deutschmark  was  followed  by  measures  to  deregulate  the  economy  and  dismantle  price  controls.  Virtually 
overnight, goods were available in the shops again. In the wake of these reforms, the Bank deutscher Länder, 
the  precursor  of  the  Bundesbank,  was  founded.  The  launch  of  the  Deutschmark  was  an  institutional 
prerequisite for the beginning of the postwar German Wirtschaftswunder. The successful reform bolstered the 
reputation of the monetary policy authorities and provided fertile soil for the trust the Bundesbank has enjoyed 
as a defender of stable money up to the present day. 
21   The  events  in  Argentina  in  2007  led  to  the  initiation  of  a  research  project  at  the  MIT  Sloan  School  of 
Management  to  collect  price  data  from  retailers  on  a  daily  basis  using  scraping  technology.  The  project, 
currently referred to as the Billion Prices Project (see http://bpp.mit.edu/) is primarily associated with the MIT 
researchers Alberto Cavallo and Roberto Rigobon. The project started on a very small scale where in 2007. 
Cavallo used the technology to collect price data from supermarkets across Argentina, and he showed that 
inflation in Argentina was between twice and three times as high reported in the official figures. 
Today, the project is being continued under the direction of the private company PriceStats, which provides 
data  collection  and  processing  services.  The  Billion  Prices  Project  currently  involves  the  collection  of  price 
information  from  more  than  70  countries  and  daily  inflation  series  are  published  for  over  20  of  them. 
Fortunately, Argentina proved to be the only country where price indices using the new scraping technology 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
situation in Norway in the 1950s, when the government subsidised some goods in the index 
to avoid automatic wage increases.22 
The monetary system has also become more intricate along another dimension. Today, cash 
accounts for only 5 percent of the money supply. Payments are primarily made using deposit 
money, which involves electronic signals created by the banks themselves, via cards, mobile 
phones  or  online  payments.23  Millions  of  transactions  between  individuals,  companies  and 
banks take place every day. These payments are settled at Norges Bank four times daily by 
transferring  money  between  banks’  accounts  in  Norges  Bank.  Norges  Bank  does  not 
regulate the issuance of deposit money directly. By setting the interest rate on banks’ sight 
deposits with Norges Bank and by securing settlements between the banks, the central bank 
is nevertheless the fundament of a vast and complex payment system.24 
The central bank/Norges Bank 
History  has  shown  that  monarchs  are  not  always  to  be  trusted  to  safeguard  the  monetary 
system.25 An institutional solution is to delegate the task of issuing money to a central bank 
and shield it from the authorities’ temptation to focus on short-term interests.26 
                                                                                                                                                   
were systematically on a much higher level than the official inflation figures. Thus, it appears that in today’s 
open  societies,  it  is  difficult  to  conceal  true  developments.  Incidentally,  Argentine  inflation  figures  from 
PriceStats  continue  to  show  much  higher  inflation  than  the  official  figures  (see  http://www.pricestats.com/ 
argentina-series). From February 2012, The Economist has replaced the official inflation figures for Argentina 
in its statistical tables with inflation figures compiled by PriceStats. 
22   Index manipulation is a demanding enterprise that often resulted in perverse economic incentives, sometimes 
with entertaining results. After 1945, a stabilisation strategy was one of the cornerstones of the Government’s 
economic policy, and prices were to be kept stable as a way of navigating through the economic cycle. In July 
1948, the Ministry of Trade received an offer to purchase a consignment of part-skim Danish Gouda cheese, a 
food item that was included in the cost-of-living index. Despite the bargain offer, the import price would have 
been higher than the selling price, so that subsidies would be necessary to avoid impacting the index. The end 
of the story was that a consignment of full-fat Gouda was imported, an item that was far more expensive, but 
that was not included in the index. Lie, Einar(1995): Ambisjon og Tradisjon. Finansdepartementet 1945–1965 
[Ambition and Tradition]. The Ministry of Finance 1945–1965], Oslo: Universitetsforlaget, p. 121. 
  A few years ago, the news website TV 2 Nettavisen revealed that the large grocery chains adjusted the prices 
of goods they knew were included in price tests conducted by the media in order to come out favourably in the 
tests. For example, the price of hand soap in a pump dispenser is lower than the equivalent quantity in a refill 
package: http://www.nettavisen.no/okonomi/privat/article373382.ece. 
23   According to the economist Stephen Quinn, secure central bank money triggered a spate of financial sector 
innovations. The central bank could offer notes with little risk regarding liquidity and public acceptance. On the 
other hand, notes were costly to use – an example is the considerable interest payments forgone when large 
amounts  are  held  in  cash. With  the  monetary  system  firmly  anchored,  private participants  could  offer more 
cost-effective payment solutions: deposit accounts, giro transfers, clearing and cheques. This system rested 
on confidence in central bank money. (Quinn, Stephen F., and William Roberds. 2005. “The Big Problem of 
Large  Bills,  the  Bank  of  Amsterdam  and  the  Origins  of  Central  Banking.”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Atlanta 
Working Paper 2005–16). 
24   Large-value  payments  between  banks are  settled  continuously  in  Norges  Bank.  See  also  Lerbak,  Marie  N. 
(2013): “Om pengemengden” [On the money supply], Norges Bank Staff Memo no. 14. 
25   A characteristic of money as a means of payment is its anonymous nature. Before the use of money became 
common  among  ordinary  people,  payments  usually  took  place  in  connection  with  commercial  transactions, 
whether for goods or services, via networks from which it might be difficult to extricate oneself. The farmer was 
usually indebted to a town merchant, which resulted in dependency and an obligation to deliver a portion of his 
produce. Labourers might receive partial payment for their efforts in kind, or at large mills, in scrip that could 
only  be  used  for  purchases  in  the  company  store.  The  monetisation  of  the  economy,  based  on  secure 
monetary values, severed many of these ties of dependency. With money in their pockets, accepted as legal 
tender  everywhere,  the  farmer  or  labourer  was  able  to  choose.  This  is  also  freedom.  Nor  did  the  party 
receiving payment, e.g. the town merchants to know more about the customer than that he had money in his 
pocket and could pay for the goods. Eitrheim, Ø. and L.F. Øksendal (forthcoming): On secure monetary values 
and freedom. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  Norway,  the  aim  of  shielding  the  monetary  system  from  the  government  was  already 
embodied  in  the  Constitution  of  Norway  adopted  on  17  May  1814.  The  drafters  of  the 
constitution  formulated  the  following  in  Article  75(c):  “It  devolves  upon  the  Storting  ...  to 
supervise the monetary affairs of the Realm”. 
This provision strongly censured the Danish King’s monetary policy during wartime. In future, 
representatives appointed by citizens, not the Crown, were to have final responsibility for the 
monetary system.27 The King’s scope for taxation by means of inflation was curtailed. 
The  Storting,  which  was  supposed  to  meet  every  third  year,  was  not  equipped  to  assume 
day-to-day responsibility for the monetary system. “Someone” had to do this on behalf of the 
Storting. That “someone” became Norges Bank, which was established in 1814. The Storting 
realised that the objectives of monetary policy could be best achieved if the monetary system 
was shielded from the arbitrary intervention of the monarchy. The distance between the seat 
of government in Oslo and the central bank in Trondheim was a perhaps deliberate twelve 
day journey.28 
                                                                                                                                                     
26   A  central  bank  requires  mechanisms  that  ensure  confidence.  Kydland  and  Prescott  demonstrated  that 
policymakers who tried to pursue an optimal plan for economic policy may have a strong incentive to deviate 
from the same plan at a later point in time. This will be the case, even in the absence of news that would 
warrant a change in the plan (see Kydland F.E. and E.C. Prescott (1977), “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The 
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, No. 3, pp. 473–491). 
The expression “tying oneself to the mast” encapsulates in a simple way how the central bank can avoid the 
dilemma that Kydland and Prescott describe. The traditional task of the central bank was to issue notes and 
coins and ensure a well-functioning payment system. But the payment system is only well-functioning when 
the public has confidence in the value of money. Thus, the primary duty of central banks is to ensure that the 
value of money is stable. The value of money relies on the confidence of the public that a responsible policy is 
being pursued. If a central bank is to keep its promise and deliver stable money, it is important that the political 
authorities stand behind it. Otherwise the central bank will be unable to keep its promise. 
Throughout  history,  central  banks  have  tried  various  mechanisms  for  tying  themselves  to  the  mast.  Being 
accountable  for  their  promises  in  the  form  reporting  and  follow-up  is  one mechanism  that  ensures  that  the 
bank is tied to the mast. Relinquishing the opportunity to break a promise makes that promise more credible. 
These are matters I touched on in my speech “On the topic of keeping promises” in 2008. Keeping a promise 
is difficult, because reneging on a promise will often be the tempting or rational choice in the short-term. The 
legal scholar and economist Michael Woodford has pointed out that in order to keep your word it is not enough 
to make a promise today and keep your word tomorrow. When making interest rate forecasts, we must also 
take into consideration the promises made yesterday. Only then can we fully use expectations to stabilise the 
economy  optimally.  This  is  referred  to  as  monetary  policy  from  a  timeless  perspective  (Michael  Woodford, 
2003: Interest and Prices, Princeton University Press). Today there is general consensus that price stability is 
[not only] the best contribution that monetary policy can make to economic stability over time, [but perhaps 
also the only promise the central bank can actually deliver]. 
In the long term, a stable value of money is the only promise that the central bank has the means to deliver. 
This promise was previously kept by regulating the supply of money issued. Today, the interest rate is the 
instrument.  The  central  bank  does  not  manage  real  wages,  the  labour  supply,  employment  or  the  level  of 
unemployment in the long run. But, if price-stability is firmly anchored, the central bank can help to reduce 
short-term economic fluctuations. While central bank independence promotes price stability, researchers do 
not find a discernible connection between central bank independence and real economic variables such as 
GDP growth or unemployment (see Alesina, A. and L.H. Summers (1993), “Central Bank Independence and 
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 25, 
No. 2., pp. 151–162). 
 27   The principle whereby the new state would have its own monetary system, separate from Sweden, was written 
into  the  November  Constitution  in  the  same  year.  Here  the  word  “bank”  is  also  used  for  the  first  time.  In 
keeping  with  the  emerging  liberal  thinking  of  the  time,  keeping  the  value  of  money  secure  was  considered 
essential, a prerequisite for the liberty of the citizenry. 
28   This journey time is for transport with a military escort. A post rider was able to make the journey considerably 
faster. Only after confidence in the new institution had been established – several generations later – was the 
Bank  moved  to  Kristiania.  Incidentally,  the  desire  to  compensate  for  the  loss  of  the  Bank  was  one  of  the 
reasons  that  Trondhjem  was  chosen  as  the  location  for  another  institution,  the  Norwegian  Institute  of 
Technology. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
At irregular intervals during the past 200 years, Norges Bank has faced defining moments  
– crossroads – that have defined the bank as an institution. At such defining moments, the 
central bank becomes what it is, both in its own awareness and in that of the general public. 
These  are  situations  where  it  sometimes  became  bigger  than  itself  or  took  on  too  much 
responsibility, or inversely became smaller than itself and did not fulfil its role. As is so often 
the case, it is only in retrospect that we can fully identify the defining moments and assess 
the wisdom of the choices made. 
Norges Bank faced its first defining moment early on. When it was first established, the Bank 
was unknown to the public at large. The new paper money, speciedaler notes, was linked by 
law to a specific amount of silver.29 Despite the fact that the silver tax had secured Norges 
Bank  a  considerable  silver  reserve,  the  authorities  were  afraid  to  permit  free  silver 
redemption.  The  fear  was  that  the  silver  fund  would  be  emptied  quickly.  The  notes  in 
circulation with the promise of silver redemption far exceeded the silver value of the silver 
forks and silver plates that had been collected. 
Confidence in the new notes waned, and in 1822 the Storting adopted a long-term strategy 
whereby the redemption rate in silver for the speciedaler would gradually be increased. The 
aim – the right to full silver redemption, i.e. that the same amount of silver would be paid out 
as stated on the face of the note – was first achieved 20 years later. I will call this period the 
“long promise”. The fulfilment of this long promise strengthened and consolidated the Bank’s 
reputation. Perhaps the strongest proof of increased confidence in the central bank was the 
domination of trade by notes following the introduction of free silver redemption.30 
The  remainder  of  the  19th  century  until  the  First  World  War  became  the  heyday  of  safe 
money.  Inflation  was  stable  throughout,  and  the  Bank  kept  its  promise  to  redeem  its  own 
notes, first in silver and, from 1874, in gold. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  1800s,  optimism  gained  the  upper  hand  in  Norway.  Increased 
exports and strong growth in manufacturing culminated in a wave of speculation in securities 
and  property.  In  particular,  the  capital  experienced  a  surge  in  economic  growth  and 
population, which resulted in the construction of large parts of the city as we know it today. 
The bubble burst in 1899. Under the leadership of the pharmacist.31 Karl Bomhoff, Norges 
Bank acted resolutely.32 For the first time, the Bank acted directly as a lender of last resort for 
banks  to  avert  a  banking  crisis.  Norges  Bank  provided  liquidity  to  troubled  banks,  thereby 
helping to ensure the orderly winding-up of the speculative banks that had sprung up. 
Bomhoff’s decision in 1899 was a defining moment for Norges Bank, which has since played 
an important role in dealing with a number of crises as bankers’ bank. 
                                                
29   This  was  not  the  first  time  Norwegian  authorities  established  a  silver  standard.  In  accordance  with  the 
regulation of King Haakon V of 1314, silver was to have a standard of purity of 13 ½ lødig, which is equivalent 
to .844 silver according to the modern method for calculating fineness (Halén, Widar (2009): “Arvesølvet og 
Peter  Wessel  Zapffes  sølvgave”  [The  family  silver  and  Peter  Wessel  Zapffe’s  gift  of  silver].  Lecture  at  the 
Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters. 
30   The speciedaler became legal tender shortly after Norges Bank was established. 
31   Adam Posen, a former member of the Bank of England Monetary Policy Committee, compares central banks 
to pharmacists: “[W]ith a limited medicine cabinet, and restricted by law from exceeding certain bounds, both 
must  make  sense  of  scrawled  prescriptions  from  differing  specialists,  decide  what  side  effects  to  take  into 
account, and then ultimately dispense the proper dosage of medicine to their customers, all without knowing 
or  controlling  everything  else  the  patient  is  consuming.”  See  Foreign  Affairs:  http://www.foreignaffairs.com/ 
articles/139465/adam-s-posen/the-myth-of-the-omnipotent-central-banker. 
32   Karl Bomhoff was appointed as the first Governor of Norges Bank in 1893. When Norges Bank’s head office 
was moved to Oslo, Bomhoff also moved to the head office, where there was more extensive expertise than 
earlier. This facilitated Norges Bank’s role as bankers’ bank. The theme of my speech is institutions. It might 
seem paradoxical to refer to physical persons, such as Bomhoff, and not decision-making bodies. However, 
there is a connection between “what is a central bank” and “who is the central banker”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
After  the  First  World  War,  inflation  and  large-scale  imports  of  goods  caused  a  loss  of 
confidence in the krone, which dropped considerably in value. When Nicolai Rygg became 
Governor of Norges Bank in 1920, he started work on putting the monetary system in order. 
In his view, the central bank was obliged to bring the gold value of the krone back to its pre-
war level – referred to as par policy.33 However, this ambitious aim entailed years of strong 
deflation and blight before the gold value was achieved in 1928. 
For 90 years, historians have discussed par policy. My contribution will have to be a present-
time analysis with the inherent scope and limitations.34 Was this a good policy? There is no 
doubt that the motives were good. Rygg considered that Norges Bank had a moral obligation 
to  keep  its  word,  as  it  had  done  a  century  earlier,  but  was  also  of  the  view  that  this  was 
rational  in  the  longer  term.  There  is  also  no  doubt  that  Rygg  adhered  to  the  rules  of  the 
game.  Par  policy  had  the  support  of  the  political  authorities.  Nevertheless,  an  action  must 
also be assessed by the outcome. The central bank was blinded by the old gold content as a 
guideline  for  monetary  policy  and  implemented  a  policy  that  inflicted  large-scale  real 
economic costs on the country. Many countries had suspended the gold standard during the 
war, but no other country pursued such an ambitious par policy in the 1920s.35 Norges Bank 
was deaf to growing contemporary criticism and sustained a substantial reputational loss.36 
As a consequence, the Bank’s ability to fulfil its role in society was weakened for decades to 
come. 
The par policy failure was an important reason behind the post-war opposition to allowing the 
central bank to make monetary policy decisions independently.37 
A  prominent  feature  of  the  post-war  period  was  the  conviction  that  the  economy  could  be 
micromanaged  by  coordinating  instruments  drawn  up  by  the  government.  At  the  time,  few 
people  considered  this  state  of  affairs  as  problematic.  Although  inflation  was  higher  than 
before,  unemployment  was  low  and  growth  strong.  This  approach  was  in  line  with  the 
dominant  philosophy  abroad,  although  the  Norwegian  variant  was  probably  taken  a  step 
further than in most other countries. 
                                                
33   Also  the  other  Scandinavian  countries  and  the  UK  embarked  upon  a  similar  policy  to  reintroduce  gold 
convertibility. However, there was a crucial difference. While the Swedish krona had depreciated marginally 
and sterling by only ten percent, the Norwegian krone had depreciated by 50 percent in terms of gold. In other 
words,  a  substantially  tighter  policy  was  necessary  compared  with  Sweden  and  the  UK.  It  is  also  an  open 
question whether returning the krone to gold parity after such a steep depreciation actually was in keeping 
with the orthodox understanding of the gold standard. During the great British debate on the gold peg after the 
Napoleonic Wars, even David Ricardo, the gold standard’s most ardent defender, warned against returning to 
earlier  parity  values  after  a  sharp  depreciation.  Friedman,  Milton  og  Schwartz,  Anna  Jacobson  (1963),  A 
Monetary History of the United States of America, 1867–1960, National Bureau of Economic Research, p. 82. 
34   Since  the  past  is  our  laboratory  and  the  source  from  which  we  draw  lessons,  it  is  more  fruitful  to  try  to 
understand the past on its own terms than to sit in judgement over it. Anything else would make history as a 
serious  branch  of  study  into  a  meaningless  exercise,  reducing  it  to  a  running,  constantly  changing 
contemporary commentary on what has been. 
35   In the opinion piece “Mytedannelsen om paripolitikken” [Myth-making and par policy], published in Aftenposten 
on 30 May 1998, Hermod Skånland wrote: “...The Bank’s newly appointed governor, Nicolai Rygg, was just as 
convinced as anyone else, both here in Norway and internationally, that pre-war conditions in the monetary 
system needed to be restored. (Skånland then shows that economic growth in Norway under par policy was 
actually stronger than in neighbouring countries.). Against this background, it may be difficult to understand 
that  par  policy  has  endured  as  the  great  destructive  blunder  of  the  1920s,  with  Nicolai  Rygg  as  the  man 
responsible for the hard times. (..) This had to do with the fact that the flexibility that could be obtained through 
monetary policy was more to the liking of leading economists in the 1930s and on up to the present day, than 
the stability and the long-termism that may result when one imposes constraints on oneself of the type Nicolai 
Rygg represented.” 
36   The Bank must on occasion be deaf to contemporary criticism in order to safeguard long-term considerations. 
But there will be a trade-off: which short-term costs are we willing to bear to keep our long-term promises. 
37   http://www.norges-bank.no/Upload/67282/Artikkel_Gjedrem_180408.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
The then Governor of Norges Bank Erik Brofoss had both time and energy to concentrate on 
matters that interested him but which differed from the traditional interests of a central bank. 
Brofoss was, for example, keen to solve the housing shortage problem following the war. He 
had visited England and been inspired by the New Towns.38 He asked the Bank’s lawyers to 
draft a Norwegian statutory bill based on the British act of 1946. 
Norges Bank Governor Knut Getz Wold was even clearer about the Bank’s reduced role in 
monetary policy. In a speech in 1972, he stated the following: 
“Cartels and price agreements play an increasing role in the setting of prices. The 
social partners exercise decisive influence over wage developments. Agricultural 
prices are set in negotiations between the agricultural organisations and the state 
(...)  In  these  circumstances,  it  is  almost  meaningless  to  talk  about  the  central 
bank’s special responsibility for inflation.”39 
The diminished role of the institution, which persisted well into the 1980s, must be seen in 
the  light  of  mixed  experiences  with  par  policy,  ambitious  aims  of  micromanaging  the 
economy,  and  the  conviction  that  lower  unemployment  could  be  achieved  by  accepting 
higher  inflation.40  At  the  same  time,  major  imbalances  were  building  up  in  the  economy. 
Fiscal  policy,  in  conjunction  with  credit  regulation  and  tight  political  control  of  business 
investment gradually undermined the monetary system as an institution. Later in the 1970s, 
these problems came to the surface. Growth declined, inflation surged and unemployment 
rose  sharply.  I  should  add  that  these  problems  were  not  confined  to  Norway.  In  1971  the 
Bretton Woods system collapsed. Two year later the first oil price shock occurred. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  1980s,  the  problems  in  the  Norwegian  economy  had  reached  a 
pinnacle. In May 1986, the Brundtland government decided to devalue the Norwegian krone 
by 10 percent. As was usual on such occasions, it was said that this would be the “last time”. 
Less usual was that it actually was the last time. Gro Harlem Brundtland, Gunnar Berge and 
Bjørn Skogstad Aamo had come to a decision. Devaluation policy was consigned to the past. 
Price  stability,  defined  as  low  and  stable  inflation  in  line  with  that  of  trading  partners,  was 
established as an anchor for economic policy.41 To implement this policy, both the monetary 
system and Norges Bank had to be re-established as independent institutions. 
Whether government gave or Norges Bank repossessed control over the policy instruments, 
especially the key policy rate, is subject for debate. But the result was that Norges Bank in 
fact gained independence in  interest rate setting to achieve the government-defined policy 
objectives. Inflation fell from double-digit figures around 1980 to 2–3 percent a decade later. 
During the banking crisis around 1990, Norges Bank played a key role, which Bomhoff had 
paved the way for 90 years earlier, as a provider of liquidity to troubled banks. 
During the 1990s, the intellectual basis for modern monetary policy was laid in Norges Bank. 
The  transition  from  exchange  rate  targeting  to  inflation  targeting,  with  an  explicit  price 
                                                
38   In a letter to Norway’s ambassador in London dated 1963, for example, he wrote: 
 
“As you may have seen from the Norwegian newspapers, I have in several lectures proposed that we should 
consider building entirely new towns as part of solving the problems of the districts.” Discussions with Viking 
Medstad on 3 January and 24 October 2013. 
39   http://www.nhh.no/Files/Filer/Om%20NHH/lehmkuhlforelesning/lehmkuhl_1972.pdf. 
40   Berg, Thomas N. (2011): “Mellom politikk og marked” [Between policy and market], Norges Bank Staff Memo 
no 19,  Norges  Bank.  http://www.norges-bank.no/Upload/Publikasjoner/Staff%20Memo/2011/StaffMemo 
1911.pdf , p. 62. 
41   In autumn 1987, Gro Harlem Brundtland and Gunnar Berge had to defend Norges Bank’s independence in 
interest rate setting to fellow party members, members of the Storting and the central committee during what 
was  called  the  “interest  rate  uproar”.  Rossavik,  F.  (2007):  Stikk  i  strid.  Ein  biografi  om  Einar  Førde  [At 
variance. A biography of Einar Førde]. Spartacus, Oslo. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
stability  objective,  occurred  gradually,  and  was  formally  introduced  in  March  2001.  A  new 
order  was  established.  Norges  Bank  was  again  responsible  for  the  monetary  system.  The 
institution was reconstituted. 
The  defining  moments  in  both  the  initial  and  latter  period  of  Norges  Bank’s  200-year 
evolution were thus quite long. I called the period 1822 to1842 the “long promise”. The period 
1986 to 2001 can be described as the “long return”. 
But we must not allow complacency to set in. 
The world economy is still marked by the financial crisis that took hold in 2008. This is the 
first major crisis to hit the West’s monetary system since the gold standard was abandoned 
in  1971.42  In  addressing  the  crisis,  many  central  banks  have  deployed  unconventional 
instruments.  Both  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England  have  lent  substantial 
amounts of money and implemented non-traditional measures. Central bank governors might 
feel that they have recently faced many defining moments in a short time span. Many might 
say  that  they  have  drawn  on  the  institutions’  accumulated  confidence.  Only  time  will  tell 
whether these defining moments have truly secured the monetary system and central bank 
independence. 
Conclusion 
Public  institutions  are  the  product  of  their  tasks  and  history.  The  monetary  system  was 
shaken  when  Norges  Bank  solely  focused  on  bringing  the  krone’s  value  back  to  par.  We 
might  say  that  the  institution  lost  sight  of  broader  social  responsibilities.  But  the  monetary 
system also suffered in the following period when the authorities took control and lost sight of 
the central bank. The conclusion with regard to the monetary system is that it must be both 
steered and guarded. The political authorities must define the objectives and the central bank 
must be the devoted guardian of the monetary system. The central bank must deliver price 
predictability, a robust payment system and a stable financial system. 
It is in its performance of this responsibility that the central bank contributes to realising the 
mandate issued by the Storting – to supervise the monetary system. 
Inspired by the former Governor of the Bank of England, Mervyn King, I will summarise my 
experiences  in  a  few  simple  principles,  which  if  followed,  would  enable  institutions  to  fulfil 
their role in society and serve its citizens:43 
1. 
It must know its social responsibility and restrict itself to the pursuit of the defined 
objectives and not be distracted by extraneous concerns – it must keep its promises. 
It must use its instruments and expertise44 to achieve the objectives – it must make 
good decisions. 
2. 
                                                
42   Philip Coggan (2012): Paper Promises: Debt, Money and the New World Order, Penguin, London. 
43   Many attempt to measure whether institutions are fulfilling their societal role, which is a difficult exercise. As a 
nation, Norway scores high. Individual institutions are also measured. If any of us has preconceived notions, 
at least mine bear out. The institutions I thought would be at the bottom of such lists are at the bottom, and 
vice versa – those I thought would be at the top are at the top. But this is not a static situation. Movement is 
possible – in both directions. 
44   The expertise must of the highest standard. A central bank’s competence does not always translate well into 
performance. There are two reasons, in particular, for this state of affairs: First, the Bank is a monopoly and 
there  is  no  domestic  benchmark.  Second,  it  has  a  potentially  very  generous  budget,  since  it  prints  its  own 
money. 
  Even though Norges Bank ranks high in terms of reputation and confidence, it may quickly slip into a state of 
complacency and then mediocrity. It is only the Bank itself that can establish the mechanisms that will prevent 
such a development. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
3. 
4. 
Leaders must be aware that the institution will be held accountable – it must practice 
transparency as a principle. 
Leaders  must  utilise  institutional  memory  and  staff  experience  –  they  must  learn 
from history and manage their wealth – their cultural heritage. 
These principles also summarise the six speeches I have given at the Academy of Science 
and  Letters:  a  good 
institution  keeps  promises,  makes  good  decisions,  practices 
transparency  as  a  governance  principle,  and  learns  from  its  own  history  and  manages  its 
cultural heritage. 
And the threads are gathered here. Today’s speech seeks to encompass all the themes in 
one  frame.  The  lessons  learned  from  Norges  Bank’s  first  200  years  and  the  criteria  I  just 
cited are useful both in Norges Bank’s daily work and in making longer-term assessments. I 
would  argue  that  these  general  principles  apply  to  other  institutions  too,  whether  legal, 
cultural  or  educational.  Decisions  that  are  made  in  these  institutions  determine  whether  a 
country’s citizens can live a life of freedom and prosperity. 
                                                                                                                                                    
The first measure is transparency. The Bank must expose itself to criticism by publishing the analyses behind 
 
its decisions. It must also be open about budgets and expenditure. 
The second measure is an international anchor. The Bank must be part of the international network of central 
banks and academic communities to compare itself with others, not only with itself. Erik Brofoss was perhaps 
a governor who was most concerned with issues other than central banking tasks. But it was he who laid the 
foundation for the “long recovery”- perhaps without realising the extent to which his pioneering efforts would 
bear forth. Brofoss believed that the young economists at the Bank had to go out into the world and learn. 
When these young economists returned home, they had learned that another world was possible. They had 
received key inspiration about the proper business of a central bank and the proper conduct of monetary and 
credit  policy.  Today,  the  Bank  has  a  Research  Unit.  The  research  is  useful  but  it  is  a  drop  in  the  ocean 
compared with the research taking place in the wider world. But the Research Unit is important for ensuring 
that we are vigilant. It is the Bank’s bridge to the academic world inside and outside Norway. Internationally 
recognised scholars  visit  the Bank on a  weekly  basis  to  relate the  latest  news  from  the research  front  and 
challenge our perceptions and ways of thinking. The actual presence of in-house researchers with specialist 
expertise in central banking sharpens the minds of other Bank staff. The Research Unit ensures that as an 
institution the Bank does not isolate itself and become inward-looking and self-satisfied. 
The third measure is to ensure that the Bank’s governing bodies and Bank staff work together as a team. Most 
of the literature on “making good decisions” focuses on the composition of the governing board (external vs. 
internal  and  governance  by  experts  vs.  general  governance  expertise)  and  work  structure  (collegial 
committees vs. individualistic committees). Just as important is how the governing board manages to make 
the most of staff expertise. 
If an institution like the central bank slowly slips into mediocrity, it will not be discovered until it is too late. 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
