Rundheersing Bheenick: Review of the year gone by and reflections on 
the present and future outlook 
Statement  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  Port  Louis, 
14 November 2013. 
 The financial year 2012–13 has been challenging for the Bank as I had anticipated in my last 
Statement, and we have continued to be tested by international and domestic pressures. The 
long-running financial crisis has now entered its sixth consecutive year. The global economy 
has  remained  under  stress  –  the  US  witnessed  timid  growth,  the  euro  area  temporarily 
slipped  into  recession,  the  UK  avoided  “triple-dip”  recession,  and  growth  in  emerging 
economies  moderated.  Occasional  bouts  of  volatility  in  financial  markets  complicated  the 
lingering global uncertainty. With monetary policy loose and fiscal space limited, particularly 
in  the  advanced  economies,  capital  flows  worldwide  have  been  relatively  more  volatile  as 
investors responded to uncertainty in major advanced economies. This impacted adversely 
on some emerging economies with rising inflation, capital outflows, and sudden depreciation 
of  their  currencies.  Policymakers  around  the  world  introduced  several  non-conventional 
measures to calm financial markets and provide confidence to investors. 
The Mauritian economy grew at a relatively healthy rate of 3.4 per cent in 2012 despite the 
negative  sentiment  that  prevailed  during  much  of  that  year.  Headline  inflation  came  down 
from  4.9  per  cent  in  July  2012  to  3.6  per  cent  in  June  2013  while  year-on-year  inflation 
stabilized,  decreasing  marginally  from  3.7  per  cent  to  3.6  per  cent.  The  increasingly 
diversified  nature  of  our  economy  in  terms  of  markets  and  products,  and  prudent  and 
appropriate 
the  year,  maintained 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  in  the  country.  We  benefited  from  a  steady  flow  of 
foreign  direct  investment,  not  far  from  previous  highs,  during  the  period.  Unemployment 
hovered around 8.1 per cent in 2012, a level that I do not consider alarming in the current 
context,  especially  if  account  is  taken  of  chronic  over-reporting,  continued  skills  mismatch, 
and labour market inflexibility which induces employers to have recourse to foreign labour. 
During the year, the Bank was called upon to respond rapidly to the changing dynamics at 
the international level as well as on the domestic front. 
fiscal  and  monetary  policies 
implemented  during 
Operation Reserves Reconstitution 
In  June  2012,  the  Bank  launched  the  Operation  Reserves  Reconstitution  (ORR)  –  an 
unconventional measure for the Bank of Mauritius which had pursued a free-floating foreign 
exchange regime until as recently as November 2011. The currency appreciation was getting 
quite  alarming  at  the  time  and  required  urgent  policy  responses  on  our  part.  The  ORR 
allowed  us  to  address  not  only  the  growing  appreciation  of  the  rupee  but  to  build  up  our 
reserves which crossed the Rs100-billion threshold in May 2013. We are today well on our 
way to achieve the target of six months’ import cover. 
The ORR resulted, however, in excess rupee liquidity in the domestic money market and the 
Bank had to conduct open market operations to mop up the surplus. We had to complement 
the  issue  of  Government  securities  with  our  own  paper  which  reached  a  record  level  of 
almost Rs19 billion. This came with a cost and weighed heavily on the Bank’s balance sheet. 
The continuation of open market operations at the same level as in recent months will rapidly 
become  unsustainable  for  us.  A  few  years  ago,  I  had  flagged  this  issue.  Today,  I  am 
renewing my call to the authorities to share the burden as it is certainly not in the interest of 
the nation to have a central bank with weak finances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ponzi Schemes 
At the beginning of 2013, we were hit by a spate of financial scams. Scammers, using the 
loopholes  in  the  regulatory  framework,  lured  the  public  into  investing  in  schemes  that 
promised extravagant returns ‒ which in fact turned out to be Ponzi Schemes. This was a 
wake-up call for regulatory and other authorities to review their operations as they relate to 
detecting  and  combating  financial  crime.  When  the  Ponzi  Schemes  were  uncovered,  the 
Bank  stepped  in  to  manage  the  crisis  and  reassure  victims  by  setting  up  a  help  desk  to 
attend to the grievances of the public. The number of known  victims of the six companies 
involved in the financial scams, who lodged complaints at the Bank reached 2,290 and the 
total defrauded amount stood at Rs835 million by 28 June 2013. The figure is rapidly nearing 
the Rs1 billion mark. 
We  undertook  a  series  of  actions  to  deal  with  the  problem;  most  notably  we  sought  the 
assistance of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), which has first-hand knowledge of the matter. 
The  RBI  team’s  recommendations  range  from  the  reinforcement  of  Know  Your  Customer 
procedures  and  due  diligence  in  banks,  the  setting  up  of  dedicated  cells  to  gather  market 
intelligence, to enhanced coordination among regulators. These recommendations are in line 
with  the  restructuring  and  redefining  of  our  mandate.  They  reinforced  our  commitment 
towards  financial  literacy,  consumer  education,  and  fair  treatment  of  consumers,  on  all  of 
which we had initiated work in early 2012. The Task Force on Unfair Terms and Conditions in 
Banking and related Financial Contracts was set up in July 2012 to investigate into the terms 
and conditions of contracts, including fees, commission and charges. The public was invited 
to make representations. We hope to be able to share the work of the Task Force with the 
public  in  the  course  of  the  coming  year  and,  hopefully,  pave  the  way  for  a  better  deal  for 
users of banking and financial services. 
Modernisation of the banking sector 
We pursued our efforts to modernise the banking sector and enhance the soundness of our 
banks. We granted our 21st bank licence to a new bank which started operations in February 
2013.  We  were  concerned  with  the  need  to  protect  the  cross-border  branches  of  foreign 
banks  operating  in  our  jurisdiction  from  potential  problems  of  their  parents  in  their  home 
country. We encouraged foreign bank branches to convert into subsidiaries. The proposal of 
Barclays  Bank  PLC  Mauritius  Branch,  to  convert  itself  into  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary 
provided us with the opportunity to expand our legal arsenal with new provisions to aid such 
restructuring. 
Our concern for ensuring financial stability further motivated us to consider the case of large 
and complex local banking institutions – an ever-present danger in a country where 65 per 
cent  of  bank  assets  are  controlled  by  two  banks.  We  are  in  the  process  of  putting  up  a 
framework  for  Domestic  Systemically  Important  Banks,  wherein  stricter  requirements 
including  the  imposition  of  capital  surcharge  will  be  applicable.  We  issued  a  consultation 
paper outlining our proposal to the industry for comments. 
We also brought important changes in the board room of banks, requiring diversity of board 
members, competence and periodic term renewal. I once reflected that a crisis is too good to 
be wasted – the global regulatory reforms were mirrored in our own efforts to strengthen the 
resilience of our banking sector. In May 2013, we issued a draft guideline on Basel III after 
we had circulated a consultation paper to the industry in October 2012. We continued our 
work on the setting up of Supervisory Colleges in Mauritius for our banks with cross-border 
operations. We expect to hold the first Supervisory Colleges later in the year. 
Our banking sector assets grew at the rate of 10.2 per cent. The month of May 2013 also 
saw  banking  assets  exceeding  the  Rs1.0  trillion  mark  for  the  first  time.  Profit  after  tax 
maintained its upward trend and the capital adequacy ratio of banks remained well above the 
regulatory requirement of 10 per cent. Nonetheless, the growing non-performing loans and 
the concentration of risks in our banking sector continued to raise financial stability concerns. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We  started  work  during  the  year  on  the  introduction  of  a  wide  range  of  macroprudential 
measures to contain banking sector risks. 
At the heart of a modern economy is a robust and efficient payments system. The Cheque 
Truncation  System,  introduced  the  year  before,  saw  the  end  of  physical  exchange  of 
cheques on the Bank’s premises on 31 January 2013. 
International regional role 
We  continued  to  participate  actively  in  regional  fora  organized  by  SADC,  COMESA  and 
AACB and brought our contribution to discussions relating to regional issues. The COMESA 
REPSS went live in October 2012. We were privileged to host in November 2012 the second 
meeting  in  Africa  of  OMFIF,  which  regroups  diverse  players  from  the  public  and  private 
sector, central banks of developed and developing economies, sovereign wealth funds, and 
academia. Nearly 100 delegates from Europe, Africa, Asia and Latin America participated in 
the meeting. 
On  30  August  2012,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  36th  Assembly  of  Governors  of  the  AACB  in 
Algeria, I  assumed  the Vice-Chair  of  the  AACB,  with  Governor  Mohammed  Laksaci  of the 
Bank of Algeria in the Chair. In August 2013, the Bank hosted the 37th Assembly of Governors 
of the AACB – the first time in its 45-year history that the AACB has held its meeting away 
from  Continental  Africa  –  and  I  took  over  the  Chair  for  a  one-year  term.  Almost 
simultaneously,  I  was  appointed  by  the  FSB  RCG  for  Sub-Saharan  Africa  as  its  non-FSB 
member co-chair for a two-year term starting 1 July 2013. 
Over and above the Governors who participated in OMFIF and AACB meetings in Mauritius 
during the year, I welcomed Ms Christine Lagarde, Managing Director of the IMF, Dr Duvvuri 
Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, and Mr Martin Redrado, former Governor 
of the Central Bank of Argentina. 
Monetary Policy Committee 
Since its inception in April 2007, the Monetary Policy  Committee (MPC) witnessed several 
changes. 30 meetings have been held of which 29 were interest-rate-setting meetings. The 
MPC  was  reconstituted,  for  the  second  time,  in  December  2012  and  the  total  number  of 
members was reduced from nine to eight, comprising namely, the Governor, the two Deputy 
Governors, two members appointed by the Prime Minister, and three members appointed by 
the Minister of Finance and Economic Development. It was also explicitly laid down in the 
Bank of Mauritius Act that the MPC has to take into consideration the views of the Bank, the 
Ministry,  and  any  other  appropriate  institution.  Furthermore,  the  MPC  adopted  a  Code  of 
Conduct for its members. 
During 2012–13, the MPC met on four occasions. At the first three meetings, the Key Repo 
Rate  (KRR)  was  left  unchanged  at  4.9  per  cent.  In  June  2013,  the  MPC,  at  its  second 
meeting  in  its  third  reincarnation,  took  the  decision  to  cut  the  KRR  by  25  basis  points  to 
4.65 per  cent  by  majority  vote  ‒  outvoting  my  two  Deputy  Governors  and  myself  who 
preferred to adopt a more prudent stance in the face of growing vulnerabilities in the financial 
system.  Monetary-policy-making  is  a  forward-looking  exercise,  requiring  objectivity  and 
independence  of  mind,  and  should,  in  my  view,  be  ideally  operationally-independent  of 
Government.  The  mandates  of  fiscal  and  monetary  authorities  are  not  necessarily 
incompatible – the overriding objective remaining the well-being of the nation. Indeed, fiscal 
and monetary coordination is a two-way traffic requiring mutual adjustment. At the June 2013 
MPC meeting, the representation of the Ministry weighed on the final assessment of MPC 
members  and  resulted  in  an  interest  rate  decision  that  the  Bank  did  not  consider fitting  in 
then economic circumstances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Transforming the Bank of Mauritius into a modern central bank 
We carried on the process of modernising our statistical operations. We pursued our efforts 
to meet the highest standards applicable to balance of payments and monetary and financial 
statistics in terms of quality and frequency – SDDS+. 
We  launched  our first  polymer  bank  notes,  a major  innovation  in  bank note  technology,  in 
August  2013. We  seriously  considered  this  alternative  as  far  back  as  2008  but  our  earlier 
attempts to  introduce  polymer  notes  ran  into  legal  hurdles  and  we  first had  to  change  the 
applicable law before we could proceed – thus missing our chance to be the first in Africa. As 
I write this Statement, polymer bank notes in three denominations of Rs25, Rs50 and Rs500 
are circulating in parallel with paper bank notes. 
In the wake of the global financial crisis, banking has become a 24-hr operation. Banks are 
evolving  in  an  extremely  dynamic  and  competitive  environment.  Financial  institutions  are 
more  and  more  stretching  regulations  to  outwit  regulators;  and  we  regulators,  need  to 
continuously strive to keep ahead of them. The demands on the Bank are becoming more 
and more exacting by the day. The restructuring of the Bank, which I initiated in 2007, is on-
going. Our headcounts are among the highest, on a per capita basis, amidst our peers and a 
more flexible approach is needed to attract new talents. Fresh skills have been recruited to 
complement our pool of talents in new areas of business, for example, reserve management. 
A review of the salary and conditions of service at the Bank was conducted to align them with 
market trends, attract new talents as well as retain existing ones. The salary review includes 
a Performance Management System which will be introduced this year, paving the way for a 
mechanism  that  relates  work  performance  and  remuneration.  These  developments  should 
translate into efficiency gains and allow the Bank to keep up to the mark when it comes to 
expected outcomes even if they exert pressure on our overhead expenses. 
Words of Appreciation 
In  May  2013,  our  Prime  Minister,  Dr  The  Honourable  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam,  GCSK, 
FRCP, appointed me for a third term of office. I am deeply touched by this mark of continued 
confidence in my abilities to lead the Central Bank. I will endeavor to uphold the trust placed 
in me and I am sincerely indebted to him for the unflinching support he extended to me since 
the beginning of my tenure of office. 
I have worked closely with the Honourable Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval, GCSK, Vice- 
Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic Development, and his team during the 
year.  We  have  often  had  diverging  views  on  our  assessment  of  the  economic  situation. 
Indeed it is common for Treasuries and Central Banks to have occasional differences when it 
comes to economic, financial and monetary policies ‒ which our lively local media, and some 
interested  lobbies,  magnified.  Here,  we  have  different  mandates  but  we  both  have  the 
economic welfare of the Mauritian population at heart. I thank the Honourable Minister and 
his  team  for  the  cordial  working  relations  between  ourselves  and  between  our  respective 
staff, in particular at the level of different regular joint working committees. 
I  have  a  special  word  of  appreciation  for  the  strong  bond  of  partnership  that  now  exists 
between  the  Central  Bank  and the  banking  community. Our regular  dialogue  and frequent 
consultations  have  strengthened  our  collaboration.  I  therefore  thank  all  stakeholders,  in 
particular,  Chief  Executives  of  banks  and  the  Chairman  and  the  Chief  Executive  of  the 
Mauritius  Bankers  Association,  for  joining  our  efforts  for  the  advancement  of  the  banking 
sector. 
Finally, I need to express my sincerest appreciation to my two Deputy Governors, the Head 
of my Governor’s Office, my Heads of Division, and the Staff of the Bank for their support 
and commitment throughout the past year. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Looking ahead 
There are increasing signs that we are nearing the end of the crisis with visible signs of what 
looks  like  a  sustainable  recovery.  I  never  tire  of  saying  that  the  best  contribution  that  the 
Central Bank can make to the nation is to maintain price and financial stability – this is our 
raison d’être. Our heightened profile at the international level puts us in a position where we 
can make a significant contribution to issues of relevance to central banks well beyond our 
own frontier. 
Over the years, we have transformed our economy to make it more diversified and resilient. 
Had  we  not  engaged  in,  at  times,  painful  reforms,  we  would  have  been  hit  harder  by  the 
crisis. We need to pursue these reforms and develop new drivers of growth that can take our 
economy out of the middle-income trap to a higher-income-level economy. Development, like 
life itself, is a journey and not a destination. The reforms must continue if we are to maintain 
our preeminent position in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
