Luis M Linde: A review of the Spanish economic situation; Spain’s 
Budget for 2014 
Testimony  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the  Senate  in 
connection with the draft State Budget for 2014, Madrid, 25 November 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
When  I  appeared  before  this  Senate  last  year,  the  Spanish  economy  was  undergoing  a 
phase  of  great  difficulty  and  uncertainty.  Developments  since  then  show  it  has  notably 
improved and, at present, it may be beginning to emerge from the second recession of this 
prolonged crisis. In any event, prudence advises avoiding any complacency since the risks 
have not disappeared and the momentum for a sustained recovery is still weak. 
The euro area and Spanish economies 
Several  reasons  explain  the  change  in  the  Spanish  economic  situation  in  recent  months. 
Firstly,  the  international  economic  setting  has  improved,  despite  the  uncertainty  over  the 
behaviour of the emerging economies. This improvement has, above all, affected the United 
States, Japan and, most importantly from the standpoint of the Spanish economy, the euro 
area. 
In the third quarter of this year euro area GDP posted limited growth, of 0.1 pp in quarter-on-
quarter  terms,  following  its  dynamic  performance  in  the  second  quarter,  with  0.3  pp  of 
growth,  which  surprised  most  analysts  and  ended  six  consecutive  quarters  of  contraction. 
Since  then,  the  indicators  have  broadly  tended  to  entrench  expectations  that  output  will 
continue  to  increase  at  positive  rates  in  the  immediate  future;  into  the  medium  term, 
however, forecasts anticipate very moderate growth rates, which will be insufficient to allow a 
rapid reduction in euro area unemployment levels, which remain very high. 
The positive effects that the turn for the better in the external environment have had on the 
Spanish economy have been reinforced by the headway in the economic governance of the 
euro, enabling the serious confidence crisis that gripped the Monetary Union in 2012 to be 
overcome. 
Admittedly, though, the degree of fragmentation persisting in euro area financial markets is 
still high and is not allowing monetary impulses to be transmitted efficiently to all countries in 
the  area.  Indeed,  the  Spanish  economy  as  a  whole  –  households, firms,  credit  institutions 
and  general  government  –  continues  to  face  financing  costs  which,  though  they  have 
moderated, remain excessive when taking into account the strongly expansionary stance of 
the ECB’s monetary policy. 
In this respect we may recall that at the start of this month the ECB decided once again to 
cut  its  official  interest  rates,  which  are  now  at  an  all-time  low.  In  combination  with  the 
continuation of the unlimited liquidity-providing policy it has maintained since the start of the 
crisis, the successive cuts in official rates have led money market interest rates to extremely 
low 
the 
announcement that the ECB expects official interest rates to remain at or below the new level 
for a prolonged period. 
Along  with  these  external  factors,  the  Spanish  economy  has  also  benefited  from  other 
developments that have helped temper the contractionary pressures on demand and activity 
during this year. 
Household spending began 2013 weighed down by the impact of the decline in employment 
on  income  from  work  and  by  the  debt-reduction  process.  However,  as  the  year  unfolded, 
levels.  The  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  was  strengthened  by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
improved confidence and the somewhat less unfavourable state of the labour market have 
meant that private consumption has begun to pick up. 
Further, according to the available indicators, investment in equipment has posted increases 
in the first nine months of the year. In a setting in which sluggish domestic demand, ongoing 
corporate  deleveraging  and  the  restrictions  on  access  to  financing  continue  to  check 
investment, this improvement stems, above all, from the strong pace of goods and services 
exports, which would have led to greater investment activity by exporting firms. 
Moreover,  construction,  as  a  whole,  has  continued  shrinking,  owing  to  the  adjustment  in 
residential investment and in public works. General government consumption spending has 
also  carried  on  falling.  As  a  result,  national  demand  has  continued  to  decline,  albeit  at  a 
progressively slacker pace. 
The positive contribution of the external sector to activity has increased in 2013. That reflects 
the  strong  dynamism  of  exports,  driven  in  recent  months  by  the  improvement  in  Spanish 
competitiveness and the buoyancy of the euro area markets; but it is also indicative of the 
weakness of domestic expenditure, giving rise to the contractionary behaviour of imports. 
As a consequence of these developments, Spain will show a net lending position against the 
rest  of  the  world  of  around  2%  of  GDP,  an  unprecedented  and  record  figure  in  recent 
decades. 
Over the past months, inflation, proxied by the CPI, has been declining notably, essentially 
as a result of the tapering off of the effects of the VAT increase over more than a year back. 
Thus,  in  October,  the  CPI  fell  by  0.1%.  Foreseeably,  however,  positive  though  moderate 
rates  of  change  will  resume  in  the  coming  months,  therefore  proving  compatible  with  the 
necessary  continuation  of  the  ongoing  improvement  in  competitiveness  our  economy 
requires. 
For 2014, a central scenario has been outlined in which the factors that have been affecting 
domestic demand progressively slacken. It is projected that the processes of adjustment in 
the  economy,  and  most  particularly  the  redressing  of  private-sector  debt  and  the  ongoing 
fiscal consolidation, will continue to influence the pace of recovery of demand and activity; 
but, at the same time, the reduction in uncertainty and the culmination of the restructuring of 
credit  institutions,  along  with  their  improved  results,  will  lay  the  foundations  for  improving 
financial conditions for the resident sectors. 
This  outlook  of  progressive  re-balancing  of  the  external  and  domestic  components  of 
demand  is  not  free  from  uncertainty.  In  particular,  while  the  likelihood  of  fresh  bouts  of 
instability in the euro area has lessened significantly, this cannot be ruled out completely in 
the future.  Moreover,  should  growth  in  certain  emerging  regions  be  checked more  sharply 
than  is  currently  projected,  this  might  have  consequences  for  Spanish  exports,  which  in 
recent  years  have  been  increasingly  underpinned  by  these  markets?  In  this  respect,  the 
potential  reduction  in  the  degree  of  monetary  expansion  in  the  United  States  might 
significantly affect the emerging countries, in their capital movements and in their exchange 
rates, most particularly Latin America. 
The State Budget for 2014 
It  is  against  this  macroeconomic  background  that  the  discussions  on  the  draft  Budget  for 
2014 are framed. I shall first refer to the forecasts for the end of the current budgetary year 
and the macroeconomic projections for the coming year. 
As regards 2013, the revised figure for the overall general government balance, in National 
Accounts terms, has been released for the second quarter. It shows a deficit of 2.8% of GDP, 
excluding the effect of the public assistance to financial institutions, compared with the figure 
of 3% recorded in the same period a year earlier, marking an improvement of 0.2 pp of GDP. 
More updated figures (to August) have also been released for overall general government, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
excluding local government. The cumulative deficit to August is estimated to stand at 4.8% of 
GDP. 
As indicated by the European Commission in its autumn projections and having regard to the 
budget  outturn  in  the  first  half  of  2013,  meeting  the  budget  deficit  target  of  6.5%  is 
achievable.  However,  as  the  Commission  has  stressed,  there  are  risks  of  slippage  arising 
from the weakness shown by revenue, meaning that, to meet the target, revenue will have to 
pick up in the closing months of the year. The effort involved in the final stretch of the year in 
compensating for the recovery by civil servants of their extra payroll should also be recalled. 
Let me now discuss the main items of the Budget for 2014. 
Since  my  appearance  in  Parliament  in  early  October,  the  overall  information  available  on 
general  government  budgetary  programming  for  2014  has  increased.  This  is  most  notably 
the case with the so-called 2014 Budgetary Plan, devised by the Government in compliance 
with  its  reporting  obligations  to  the  European  Commission,  derived  from  the  legislative 
package on budgetary oversight approved last May. 
The  Plan  includes  information  on  overall  general  government  revenue and  expenditure for 
2014,  based  on  the  draft  budgets  not  only  for  central  government  and  the  social  security 
system, as was habitually the case, but also for the regional governments. This information is 
necessary for making a proper assessment of the budget projection in Spain, given the high 
degree of decentralisation of our public sector: in 2012, central government was responsible 
for  27%  of  total  consolidated  public  spending;  the  social  security  system  for  32%;  the 
regional governments for 30%; and local government for 11%. 
As I indicated here a year ago, this Budget Plan marks an important step forward: over time, 
this  document  is  destined  to  play  a  key  role  in  the  overall  programming  of  total  public 
spending,  with  the  dual  aim  of  making  the  budgets  of  the  different  tiers  of  government 
consistent and offering this information in an accessible and transparent fashion to the public 
at large, analysts and institutions. 
The  macroeconomic  figures  accompanying  the  2014  Budget  project  real  GDP  growth  of 
0.7%, as a result of the positive 1.2 pp contribution of the external sector, offset in part by the 
negative contribution of national demand. These forecasts are prudent and in line with the 
above-mentioned central growth scenario and, broadly, with what may be inferred from the 
consensus reached by analysts. 
The  deficit  targets  for  2014  are  well-known  and  match  those  approved  by  the  European 
Council last July. 
The  overall general government  deficit  should  stand  at  5.8%  of GDP,  0.7  pp  down  on  the 
forecast for  2013.  In  terms  of  agents,  an  improvement  of  0.3  pp  of GDP  is  considered for 
social  security  funds  and  the  regional  governments,  to  1.1%  and  1%,  respectively,  while 
central government might post a deficit of 3.7% of GDP, compared with the figure of 3.8% 
projected for 2013; local government should run a balanced budget. 
The target for 2014 entails an improvement in the general government structural balance of 
between 0.1 and 0.3 pp of GDP. Following the considerable adjustment made in the past two 
years, when the structural deficit was cut by 6 pp of GDP, the budgetary plans for 2014 are 
more  conducive  to  the  entrenchment  of  the  recovery  and  compliance  therewith  will  help 
maintain agents’ confidence in fiscal consolidation. 
On the expenditure side, three budgetary items – namely pensions, unemployment benefits 
and the burden of interest on public debt – will continue to influence budgetary programming, 
given that they account for almost 50% of total overall general government spending. 
The adjustment is centred, in fact, on government consumption, with a projected reduction of 
0.4 pp in total spending on general government employee compensation, owing to the wage 
freeze  for  civil  servants  and  to  the  prolongation  of  the  austerity  policies  governing  public-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
sector employment; and of 0.3 pp in intermediate consumption, further to the maintenance of 
the restrictions on goods and services purchases at all levels of government. 
The budgetary plan projects maintaining the weight of public investment as a percentage of 
GDP, following the cuts seen in recent years; that said, the cuts would be prolonged in the 
case of the State. Likewise, the envisaged revision of pensions is set at 0.25%, in line with 
the floor set in the draft law defining the sustainability factor. 
As in previous years, the main challenges surrounding the budgetary projections arise from 
the course public revenue may take; despite the projected gradual recovery in activity and 
some  re-balancing  of  the  attendant  growth  factors,  revenue  will  remain  considerably 
influenced by the greater relative weight of exports and by the moderation of wage income, 
which will limit the response by public revenue to greater activity. 
To conclude, I have a comment on public debt and its implications for the fiscal drive still to 
be made. 
On  official  projections,  the  public  debt/GDP  ratio  might  rise  to  98.9%  in  2014  and  stand 
above 100% in 2015, beginning to turn down in subsequent years. 
Placing public debt below the ceilings set by the Stability and Growth Pact and the Stability 
Law will, in any event, require that high primary surpluses be maintained over a prolonged 
period of time. This is the indicator that best illustrates the scale of the challenges still ahead 
for  us.  It  also  highlights  the  importance  of  successfully  seeing  through  fiscal  consolidation 
and structural reform, so that the ongoing reduction in budgetary imbalances may combine 
with an improvement in our potential growth. 
In my view, these should remain the priorities of economic policy if we intend the incipient 
recovery in our economy to strengthen and be sustainable over time. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
