K C Chakrabarty: Welcome to India – state of the Indian economy, 
banking sector and factoring services 
Opening address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the International Factors Group’s Annual Conference, New Delhi, 7 October 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Smt. Lily Vadera is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Mr.  Gerhard  Prenner,  Chairman,  International  Factors  Group  (IFG);  Mr.  Pramod 
Bhasin,  Founder  &  Vice  Chairman,  Genpact  Limited;  Mr.  Sanjay  Chamria,  Co-founder  & 
CEO, Magma Fincorp Limited; Mr. Ravi Gupta, Managing Director, Blend Financial Services 
Ltd.;  delegates  to  the  conference,  ladies  and  gentlemen!  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to 
welcome  you  all,  especially  the  foreign  delegates,  to  India  and  to  this  historic  city  of  New 
Delhi for IFG’s Annual Conference. It is heartening to note that IFG, the global association for 
Commercial Finance with 150 members from more than 60 countries, has chosen to hold its 
annual conference in India, signifying the growing interest of the global financial institutions in 
India. At the outset, let me thank Mr. Ravi Gupta and Ms. Margrith Lütschg-Emmenegge, two 
people, who influenced me to enter into the realm of factor financing while I was serving as 
the  Chairman  and  Managing  Director  of  Punjab  National  Bank.  In  fact,  together  with 
FIMbank, which Ms. Margrith represented, we jointly laid down the foundation of a factoring 
company in India. So, when Mr. Gupta requested me to speak at this conference, I could not 
refuse the invitation. 
I have been asked to speak today on the topic “Welcome to India” - which, of course, 
2. 
I have already done! So, what next? I am told that the participants are interested in learning 
about the state of the Indian Economy, the barriers, opportunities and expectations for the 
near  future  as  well  as  the  Central  Bank’s  views  on  banking,  SME  financing  and  factoring. 
Therefore, during my address today, I intend to give you a brief lowdown on the prospects of 
the  Indian  economy,  the  structure  of  banking  sector  and  Reserve  Bank  of  India’s 
perspectives  on  the  issues  and  challenges  faced  by  the  Micro,  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises and the factoring sector in India. 
State of the Indian Economy – barriers, opportunities and expectations 
A. 
3. 
Over  the  years,  the  Indian  economy  has  gone  through  phases  of  remarkable 
transformation.  After  witnessing  the  Hindu  rate  of  growth  for  the  first  three  decades  post-
independence, the Indian economy got its first “big push” with the first phase of economic 
reforms in 1980s while the second major push came post 1991, following liberalisation of the 
economy, which helped it to move on to a sustainable higher growth trajectory. India made a 
radical  break  in  1991  from  its  past  policies  of  inward  orientation  and  started  a  process  of 
opening up to trade and foreign investment. The growth response emerged a decade later as 
the cumulative impact of the gradual reforms began to be felt on the investment environment. 
India’s GDP growth was of the order of eight-plus per cent per annum during 2001–11. In the 
five years prior to the global financial crisis of 2008, the Indian economy had averaged 9 per 
cent annual GDP growth. In the aftermath of the crisis, there has been a slowdown and a 
question  on  the  minds  of  most  observers  is  whether  this  slowdown  is  temporary  or  is  the 
economy moving to a lower growth rate in the medium term. While RBI estimates that the 
trend/potential  growth  rate  of  the  Indian  economy,  which  averaged  around  8.5  per  cent 
during  2005–06  to  2007–08,  dipped  gradually  thereafter  and  presently  stands  at  about 
7.0 per  cent,  the  draft  Twelfth  Five  Year  Plan  (2012–2017)  document  prepared  by  GoI 
indicates that India’s full growth potential remains around 9 per cent. 
4. 
Like  the  other  emerging  market  economies,  the  Indian  economy  is  also  facing 
certain  challenges:  inflation  is  high,  growth  is  down,  investment  is  slowing  down,  current 
account deficit is above the sustainable levels, fiscal deficit is high, and the exchange rate is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
under pressure. While, global slowdown is an important factor, the domestic factors are no 
less important. 
5. 
At the macro level, there are concerns. But we need to separate noise from signal. 
The fundamentals  of the  economy  remain  strong.  An  important  point  to  note  is  that  in  the 
more recent period, growth has become more broad-based across the many states of India, 
poverty  has  declined  but  financial  inclusion  has  emerged  as  a  major  concern.  There  has 
been much more spending on inclusion and social protection. 
6. 
Going forward, there are challenges – some old, some new. The ongoing challenges 
are:  (i)  providing  world-class  infrastructure  for  a  rapidly-growing  economy,  particularly  in 
telecom and power sectors, and (ii) macroeconomic management involving fiscal reform and 
monetary policy in an open economy context. 
7. 
The  new  challenge  are:  how  to  bridge  the  gap  between  a  growing  demand  for 
different skills as the economy resumes its journey on a high-growth path, and their supply. 
The  demographic  opportunity  needs  to  be  turned  into  a  dividend:  Today,  50  per  cent  of 
India’s  population  is  under  25  years  of  age.  Aspirations  are  rising.  The  demographic 
opportunity is increasing for India because the percentage of population of working age will 
continue to increase for another 40 years. This needs to be harnessed with greater focus on 
skill building, higher education, innovation, knowledge creation, and knowledge sharing. The 
Government of India’s National Skill Development Initiative uses public-private partnership to 
address  this  challenge.  India  is  uniquely  placed  for  attracting  investments  in  education 
because there is a hunger for education in emerging economies and a strong commitment to 
education  at  the  family  level.  Global  educational  institutions  will  have  to  look  at  building  a 
presence in India as they will have to gravitate where human resources are available. 
8. 
In  the  coming  years,  millions  of  people  in  India  are  expected  to  move  out  of  the 
agricultural sector and that jobs will have to be provided for them. India, therefore, needs to 
increase  its  manufacturing  capability.  Though  in  the  recent  past,  the  growth  of  the 
manufacturing sector has generally outpaced the overall growth rate of the economy, at just 
over 16 percent of GDP, the contribution of the manufacturing sector in India is much below 
its  potential.  Every  job  created  in  manufacturing  has  a  multiplier  effect  of  creating  two  to 
three additional jobs in related activities. Therefore, a thrust on manufacturing is integral to 
the  inclusive  growth  agenda  of  the  Government.  The  National  Manufacturing  Policy 
announced  by  the  Government  of  India  proposes  to  increase  the  sectoral  share  of 
Manufacturing in GDP to 25% over the next decade.1  
As  we  capitalize  on  these  strengths, I see India  delivering  on  the  aspirations  of a 
9. 
young and growing middle class. And we will do so while increasing our integration with the 
world.  India  is  now  closely  integrated  with  the  rest  of  the  world  both  by  way  of  financial 
integration and trade integration. It is the intent and objective of the Government of India to 
attract  and  promote  foreign  direct  investment  in  order  to  supplement  domestic  capital, 
technology and skills, for accelerated economic growth. 
While India can look at an 8% growth based on domestic opportunities, for a 9–10% growth 
to occur the external environment has also to be hospitable 
Banking structure in India 
B. 
10. 
The  existing  banking  structure  in  India  has  evolved  over  several  decades.  It  is 
elaborate and has been serving the credit and banking services needs of the economy. The 
Indian  banking  sector  has  come  a  long  way  since  independence,  more  so  since  the 
nationalisation of 14 major banks in 1969 and 6 banks in 1980. In the post financial sector 
                                                
1   National  Manufacturing  Policy  2011,  Department  of  Industrial  Policy  &  Promotion,  Ministry  of  Commerce  and 
Industry, Government of India. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
reforms  (1991)  phase,  the  performance  and  strength  of  the  banking  structure  improved 
perceptibly.  Over  the  years,  the  reach  of  banking  has  widened  significantly  to  include 
relatively  under-banked  regions,  particularly  in  rural  areas.  Commercial  bank  credit  as  per 
cent  of  GDP  picked  up  steadily  from  5.8  per  cent  in  1951  to  56.5  per  cent  by  2012.  The 
population per bank branch came down from 64,000 in 1969 to 12,300 in 2012 (RBI, 2013). 
The  key  feature  that  distinguishes  the  Indian  banking  sector  from  the  banking  sectors  in 
many  other  countries  is  the  fostering  of  different  types  of  institutions  that  catered  to  the 
divergent  banking  needs  of  various  sectors  of  the  economy.  Credit  cooperatives  were 
created to cater to the credit, processing and marketing needs of small and marginal farmers 
organised on cooperative lines. Cooperatives expanded also in urban and semi-urban areas 
in  the  form  of  urban  cooperative  banks  to  meet  the  banking  and  credit  requirements  of 
people with smaller means. Regional Rural Banks were created to bring together the positive 
features of credit cooperatives and commercial banks and specifically address credit needs 
of backward sections in rural areas. Further, there was an experiment of establishing Local 
Area Banks, albeit on a smaller scale, to bridge the gap in credit availability and strengthen 
the institutional credit framework in the rural and semi-urban areas. 
11. 
While  fostering  a  multi-tier  structure,  the  regulatory  effort  has  been  to  ensure 
stability and soundness by addressing weaknesses as and when they arose. The soundness 
of  the  system  was  evident from the  way  it  withstood  the recent financial  crisis  rather  well, 
even as the banking systems in many countries across the world were adversely affected. 
12. 
Notwithstanding the growth in number of branches opened by banks, Indian banking 
sector is yet to reach the desired level of banking penetration and inclusion as witnessed in 
most  advanced  and  some  of  the  emerging  economies.  It  is  estimated  that  rural  India  had 
only 7 branches per 1,00,000 adults in 2011 in  sharp contrast with most of the developed 
and  even  BRICS  economies  having  over  40  branches.  Regionally,  north-eastern,  eastern 
and central regions are more excluded in terms of banking penetration. Given the fact that 
there is a large unbanked population in the country and a large informal sector that still does 
not have access to the formal banking sector, there is considerable scope for the expansion 
of  India’s  banking  sector.  This  would  also  require  greater  presence  of  private  entities  at 
national and local levels. The assessment and comparison with other economies brings to 
the fore the need for imparting dynamism through expanding the commercial banking system 
in terms of its size and number of banks; need for expanding smaller banks in unbanked and 
under  banked  areas;  need  for  focus  on  consolidation;  need  to  relax  barriers  to  entry  for 
improving competition; and the need for enhancing operational efficiency. 
With a view to ensuring that the banking system grows in size and sophistication to 
13. 
meet the needs of a modern economy and improving access to banking services, Reserve 
Bank of India is considering giving some additional banking licences to private sector players 
subject to their meeting our eligibility criteria as announced by the Union Finance Minister in 
his Budget speech for the year 2010–11. Consequently, the Reserve Bank of India, released 
the Guidelines for “Licensing of New Banks in the Private Sector”2 on February 22, 2013. RBI 
is  in  the  process  of  issuing  new  bank  licenses  consistent  with  the  highest  standards  of 
transparency  and  diligence.  Further,  Reserve  Bank  has  recently  (on  August  27,  2013) 
released a Discussion Paper on “Banking Structure in India – The Way Forward”3 which is 
placed  on  the  website  for  comments  from  stakeholders.  The  document  explores  the 
possibility of differentiated licences for small banks and wholesale banks, the possibility of 
continuous  or  “on-tap”  licensing,  and  the  possibility  of  converting  large  urban  co-operative 
banks into commercial banks. We propose to carry forward these ideas and come up with a 
                                                
2   Guidelines for Licensing of New Banks in the Private Sector released by Reserve Bank of India on February  22, 
2013 and accessed from http://rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=28191. 
3   Discussion  Paper  on  “Banking  Structure  in  India  –  The  Way  Forward”  released  by  Reserve  Bank  of  India  on 
August 27, 2013 and accessed from http://rbi.org.in/Scripts/PublicationReportDetails.aspx?ID=713. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
detailed road map of the necessary reforms and regulations for freeing entry and making the 
licensing process more frequent after we get comments from stakeholders. 
14. 
As the real economy is dynamic, it is imperative that the banking system is flexible 
and  competitive  to  cope  with  multiple  objectives  and  demands  made  on  it  by  various 
constituents of the economy. From the financial inclusion perspective too, there is a pressing 
need  to  extend  the  reach  of  financial  services  to  the  excluded  segments  of  the  society. 
Viewed from this perspective, today’s banking structure in India has both the need and scope 
for  further  growth  in  size  and  strength. With  a  view  to  strengthen  the  banking  structure  in 
India,  based  on  the  lessons from the global  crisis, to  cater to the  needs  of  a growing  and 
globalizing  economy  as  well  as  deepening  financial  inclusion  a  Discussion  Paper  on 
“Banking  Structure  in  India  –  The  Way  Forward”  has  been  placed  on  our  website  as 
mentioned earlier. The discussion paper has identified certain building blocks for the revised 
banking structure with a view to addressing various issues such as enhancing competition, 
financing  higher  growth,  providing  specialized  services  and  furthering  financial  inclusion.  It 
also emphasizes the need to address the concerns arising out of such changes with a view 
to managing the trade off for ensuring financial stability. 
15. 
As  the  Indian  economy  expands  with  increasing  focus  on  manufacturing  and 
infrastructure, the credit intensity is higher and more resources will be needed for supporting 
the  growth  process.  In  order  to  support  an  annual  economic  growth  of  8  per  cent,  as 
envisaged by the 12th Five Year Plan, banking business needs to expand significantly to an 
estimated  Rs.  288  trillion  by  2020  from  about  Rs.115  trillion  in  2012.  Expansion  of  the 
existing banking business requires additional capital support. Indian banking is dominated by 
the public sector, which accounted for about 73 per cent of total assets of the banking sector 
at  end-March  2012.  Hence,  an  important  way  to  achieve  an  expansion  in  capital  of  the 
banking  sector,  while  managing  fiscal  consolidation,  would  be  to  widely  distribute  the 
ownership stake in banking. 
India also has a number of foreign owned banks, many of whom have been with us 
16. 
a long time and helped fuel our growth. They have been in the forefront of innovation, both in 
terms of improving productivity, as well as in terms of creating new products. We would like 
them to participate more in our growth, but in exchange we would like more regulatory and 
supervisory  control  over  local  operations  so  that  we  are  not  blindsided  by  international 
developments. The RBI will encourage qualifying foreign banks to move to a wholly owned 
subsidiary structure, where they will enjoy near national treatment. We are in the process of 
sorting out a few remaining issues so that this move can be made4. 
MSME Financing 
C. 
17. 
The critical role and place of the MSME sector in employment generation, exports 
and  economic  empowerment  of  a  vast  section  of  the  population  in  the  Indian  economy 
cannot be overemphasized. As per estimates released by the Ministry of MSME, there are 
about  36.1  million  enterprises  in  this  sector  employing  nearly  80.52  million  people5.  The 
sector accounts for 45 per cent of manufactured output and 8 per cent of the GDP. MSMEs 
contributed close to 40 per cent of all exports from the country. 
18. 
As availability of timely  and adequate bank credit without the hassles of collateral 
and third party guarantees is of essence to small first generation entrepreneurs, the Reserve 
Bank of India had enjoined upon banks to provide collateral free loans to Micro and Small 
                                                
4   Statement by Dr. Raghuram Rajan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, on taking office on September 4, 2013 and 
accessed from http://rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=29479. 
5   Annual  Report  2012–13  of  Ministry  of  Micro,  Small  and  Medium 
http://msme.gov.in/ANNUALREPORT-MSME-2012-13P.pdf. 
Industry  and  accessed 
from 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
enterprises with credit limits up to Rs.1 million. The Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro 
and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE), set up by the Government of India operates the “Credit 
Guarantee  Scheme”  (CGS)  which  guarantees  grant  of  collateral-free  and/or  third  party 
guarantee-free credit facilities to Micro and Small Enterprises by banks. 
19. 
The MSMEs primarily rely on bank finance for their operations and as such ensuring 
timely  and  adequate  flow  of  credit  to  the  sector  has  been  an  overriding  public  policy 
objective.  Over  the  years  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  credit  extended  to  this 
sector  by  the  banks.  As  at  the  end  of  March  2013  the  total  outstanding  by  all  Scheduled 
Commercial  Banks  (SCBs)  to  the  micro  and  small  sector  (MSE)  sector  stood  at 
Rs. 6847.96 billion as against Rs.5276.84 billion in March 2012, Rs.4785.27 billion in March 
2011 and Rs. 3622.91 billion in March 2010. Despite the increase in credit outstanding to the 
sector,  availability  of  timely  and  affordable  credit  is  still  one  of  the  issues  for  the  MSME 
sector. Recognizing the important role played by MSMEs in economic development and its 
sizeable contribution to employment and GDP, and realizing that financial access is critical 
for MSMEs growth and development, Government and Reserve Bank of India are taking the 
lead in supporting initiatives that improve access to finance. 
20. 
A  number  of  measures  have  been  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  facilitate  credit 
growth  to  the  sector.  As  the  level  of  financial  exclusion  is  high  in  the  micro  and  small 
enterprises  sector  (93%  as  per  the  Fourth  Census  of  small  enterprises),  drive  to  universal 
financial  access,  including  MSME  finance,  is  no  longer  a  policy  choice  but  a  compulsion. 
With an objective of ensuring uniform progress in provision of banking services in all parts of 
the country, banks were advised to draw up a roadmap to provide banking services through 
a banking outlet in every unbanked village having a population of over 2,000 by March 2012. 
Banks have successfully met this target and have covered 74398 unbanked villages. In the 
second phase, Roadmap has been prepared for covering remaining unbanked villages i.e. 
with population less than 2000 in a time bound manner. About 4, 90,000 unbanked villages 
with less than 2000 population across the country have been identified and allotted to various 
banks. The idea behind allocating villages to banks was to ensure availability of at least one 
banking outlet in each village. The Reserve Bank advised banks that such banking services 
need not necessarily be extended through a brick and mortar branch but could be provided 
also through any of the various forms of Information and Communication Technology (ICT)  
– based models, including Business Correspondents (BCs). 
21. 
The Government of India also set up an Inter-Ministerial Committee to boost exports 
from the MSME sector6 (Chairman: Shri R. S. Gujral, Finance Secretary). The Committee has 
since submitted its report which is being examined by the Government. 
22. 
As the incidence of sickness in the sector is high, timely identification of sick micro 
and  small  enterprises  and  their  rehabilitation  is  critical.  In  order  to  hasten  the  process  of 
identification  of  a  unit  as  sick,  early  detection  of  incipient  sickness,  and  to  lay  down  a 
procedure to be adopted by banks before declaring a unit as unviable, the revised guidelines 
for rehabilitation of sick units in the MSE sector have been issued for rehabilitation of sick 
units in the MSE sector. 
A structured institutional mechanism has been set up at the Reserve Bank, both at 
23. 
the Central office and Regional Office level, to monitor the issues concerning the sector. A 
Standing  Advisory  Committee  has  been  constituted  at  the  Central  Office  level  and  an 
Empowered Committee functions at the Regional Offices of the Bank with all stakeholders as 
members.  These  Committees  examine  issues  relating  to  improving  of  credit  to  the  MSME 
sector, difficulties / constraints being experienced and steps being taken to overcome them, 
etc. 
                                                
6   Report of the Inter-Ministerial Committee for boosting exports from the MSME sector by Ministry of Finance, GoI and 
accessed from http://dgft.gov.in/exim/2000/imc-EXPORT-sme.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
24. 
Further, a large section of Micro and Small Enterprises need handholding. The lack 
of financial literacy represents a formidable challenge for MSE borrowers underscoring the 
need  for  facilitation  by  banks  in  these  critical  financial  areas.  To  effectively  and  decisively 
address  these  handicaps,  Scheduled  commercial  banks  have  been  advised  to  either 
separately  set  up  special  cells  at  their  branches,  or  vertically  integrate  this  function  in  the 
Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) set up by them, as per their comparative advantage. With 
a  view  to  spreading  financial  literacy  in  the  MSE  sector  and  more  so  for  the  new 
entrepreneurs in this sector, we have made an endeavour to take out a guide book which 
answers  some  basic  questions  for  a  budding  entrepreneur  and  the  advantages  of  linking 
themselves  with  the  formal  banking  sector.  This,  we  hope,  will  be  used  by  banks  in  their 
MSME camps and by the industry associations to circulate to new entrepreneurs. 
While  a  number  of  initiatives  have  been  taken  a  lot  more  needs  to  be  done 
25. 
especially  in  the  area  of  access  to  equity  finance,  delayed  payments,  technology 
upgradation, skill building etc. 
26. 
Access to equity capital is a genuine problem. At present, there is almost negligible 
flow of equity capital into this sector. Absence of equity capital may pose a serious challenge 
to  development  of  knowledge-based  industries,  particularly  those  that  are  sought  to  be 
promoted by the first-generation entrepreneurs with the requisite expertise and knowledge. 
Such firms typically look for venture capital to provide them with the financing they need, to 
expand,  break  into  new  markets  and  grow  faster.  Thus,  the  ability  of  MSMEs  (especially 
those  involving  innovations  and  new  technologies)  to  access  alternative  sources  of  capital 
like angel funds/risk capital needs to be enhanced considerably to encourage and develop 
entrepreneurship. In the Union Budget 2012–13 the Finance Minister has announced to set 
up a Rs.50 billion India Opportunities Venture Fund with SIDBI to enhance the availability of 
equity  to  the  MSME  sector.  Based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  PM’s  Task  Force  on 
MSMEs, the Bombay Stock Exchange and the National Stock Exchange have also set up a 
separate dedicated exchange / platforms for listing and trading of shares of SMEs, making it 
easier for them to raise equity capital. 
27. 
Timely  payments  from  customers  will  help  SMEs  in  reducing  their  working  capital 
requirements leading to lower interest costs, improved profitability and a positive impact on 
the long-term health and sustainability of India’s SME sector. Delays in settlement of dues 
adversely  affect  the  recycling  of  funds  and  business  operations  of  the  SME  units.  It  is, 
therefore,  critical  to  ensure  that  the  small  entities  are  able  to  raise  liquidity  against  their 
receivables. This problem can be institutionally tackled by factoring, which provides liquidity 
to SMEs against their receivables and can be an alternative source of working capital. World 
over, factoring is a preferred route of accessing  working capital for SMEs and even larger 
organisations. Some banks and financial institutions in India have already launched factoring 
services and I would urge more banks to offer such services, particularly for the MSMEs. To 
provide a legislative framework for factoring services, the Parliament has recently passed the 
Factoring  Regulation  Bill  that  would  address  delays  in  payment  and  liquidity  problems  of 
micro and small enterprises. 
28. 
With the increasing competition, globalization and the uncertainty due to the global 
downturn,  SMEs  will  have  to  continuously  incorporate  the  latest  technology  into  their 
production processes as well as in their marketing and management functions, to cut costs, 
gain efficiency and consistency. The Prime Minister’s Task Force on MSMEs recommended 
several  measures  having  a  bearing  on  the  functioning  of  MSMEs,  viz.,  credit,  marketing, 
labour, exit policy, infrastructure/technology/skill development and taxation. 
29. 
The  ability  of  SMEs  to  adjust  to  the  competitive  pressures  that  come  with  trade 
liberalization and globalization will depend on the level of skills available domestically. Given 
the  growing  requirements  of  the  MSME  sector  and  the  huge  “demographic  capital”  we 
possess,  significant  efforts  are  still  needed  to  enhance  the  skill  and  entrepreneurship 
development. Investment needs to be made in a big way on skill and entrepreneurship. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Factoring in India and role of Reserve Bank 
D. 
30. 
Factoring service, which is perceived as complimentary to bank finance, enables the 
availability of much needed working capital finance for the small and medium scale industries 
especially  those  that  have  good  quality  receivables  but  may  not  be  in  a  position  to  obtain 
enough  bank  finance  due  to  lack  of  collateral  or  credit  profile.  By  having  a  continuous 
business  relationship  with  the  factoring  companies,  small  traders,  industries  and  exporters 
get the advantage of improving the cash flow and liquidity of their business as also the facility 
of  availing  ancillary  services  like  sales  ledger  accounting,  collection  of  receivables,  credit 
protection etc. Factoring helps them to free their resources and have a one stop arrangement 
for various business needs enabling smooth running of their business. 
31. 
The Kalyanasundaram Study Group set up by the Reserve Bank of India in January 
1988  to  examine  the  feasibility  and  mechanics  of  starting  factoring  organisations  in  the 
country  paved  the  way  for  provision  of  domestic  factoring  services  in  India.  The  Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 was amended to include factoring as a form of business in which the 
banks might engage. Reserve Bank of India issued guidelines permitting the banks to set up 
separate subsidiaries or invest in factoring companies jointly  with other banks. However, it 
was generally felt that absence of Factoring Law was one of the major impediments in the 
growth of factoring business of the country including the heavy stamp duty over assignment 
deed, ambiguity in the legal rights of Factors in respect of receivables etc. 
32. 
Government of India enacted the Factoring Act, 2011 to bring in the much needed 
legal framework for the factoring business in the country. It has provided definitions for the 
terms  factoring,  factor,  receivables  and  assignment.  The  Act  also  specifies  that  any  entity 
conducting  factoring  business  would  need  to  be  registered  with  RBI  as  NBFCs;  while 
exempting  banks,  government  companies  and  corporations  established  under  an  Act  of 
Parliament, from the requirement of registration with RBI for conducting factoring business. 
The  Act,  thus,  gave  clarity  to  the  activity  of  assignment  of  receivables  and  also  granted 
exemption  from  stamp  duty  on  documents  executed  for  the  purpose  of  assignment  of 
receivables  in  favour  of  Factors  thereby  making  the  business  more  viable.  The  Act  also 
envisages  that  all  transactions  of  assignment  of  receivables  shall  be  registered  with  the 
Central  Registry  established  under  the  SARFAESI  Act,  2002  to  reduce  the  possibility  of 
frauds and for strengthening the due diligence process for the clients. 
33. 
The Act has given powers to the Reserve Bank to stipulate conditions for “principal 
business” of a Factor as also powers to give directions and collect information from factors. 
Subsequent to the passing of the Act, the Reserve Bank has created a separate category of 
NBFCs viz; NBFC-Factors and issued directions for their regulation. The prudential norms as 
applicable  to  NBFCs  engaged  in  lending  business,  has  also  been  extended  to  the  NBFC-
Factors. Further, bank finance to factoring companies and the factoring business conducted 
by banks are also regulated by the RBI. 
Challenges faced by factoring sector 
34. 
Though the enactment of the Factoring Regulation Act has potentially removed all 
the major impediments that the factoring sector faced in the country, nevertheless, the sector 
has  few  other  items  on  its  wish  list,  the  primary  among  which  are  introduction  of  credit 
insurance  in  the  factoring  business  and  extending  the  scope  of  SARFAESI  Act  to  cover 
NBFCs  for  speedy  enforcement  of  security  interest7.  As  regards  credit  insurance,  the 
Finance Minister, in the Union Budget 2013–14, has made an announcement for setting up a 
Credit  Guarantee  Fund  with  SIDBI  for  factoring,  with  a  Rs  5  billion  corpus.  As  far  as 
                                                
7   Factors impending Factoring – “Why is factoring not picking up in India post enactment of the new Act?” by Nidhi 
from  http://india-financing.com/-
Bothra  and  Shampita  Das,  Vinod  Kothari  &  Company  accessed 
Factors_impending_factoring_why_is_factoring_not_picking_up_in_India_ post_enactment_of_the_new_act.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
extension of the provisions of the SARFAESI Act to NBFC is concerned, the final call rests 
with the Government of India. 
35. 
Low penetration of factoring business in the country still remains a challenge which 
could be on account of lack of awareness among the users. With the necessary law now in 
place, sincere attempts need to be made by the industry through its associations and other 
fora for articulating the benefits of factoring as not just an alternative source of finance but 
also an avenue for providing a bouquet of financial services vis-à-vis traditional finance, to 
small  scale  industries.  They  should  be  able  to  identify  the  untapped  potential  clientele, 
especially in various SME industry sectors, and create awareness on how the higher cost of 
factoring vis-à-vis the traditional finance is justifiable and cost effective for the businesses in 
the  long  run.  Factoring  companies  should  also  constantly  endeavour  to  upgrade  their 
expertise  on  both  technological  front  as  also  on  the  operational  level  for  offering  cost 
effective services to their clientele. 
36. 
I thank the IFG for holding its annual conference in India as I sincerely believe that 
organizing  more  such  events  would  have  two-pronged  benefits  of  one,  creating  general 
awareness about the potential benefits that the factoring services holds for the businesses in 
general  and  more  so  for  the  SME  segment  and  more  importantly,  helping  the  Indian 
companies  learn  from  the  experiences  of  their  counterparts  in  the  developed  economies 
where factoring business is well entrenched. I hope that the deliberations during the two day 
conference would throw up some practical ideas on increasing the penetration of factoring 
services in the country. I am quite sure that the distinguished speakers would bring a lot of 
valuable  inputs  to  the  table  about  what  could  be  the  most  appropriate  and  cost-effective 
delivery  model  for  the  factoring  services  in  its  nascent  stage  in  India.  However,  it  is 
imperative that the domestic factoring industry works hard to take the momentum generated 
by this conference forward by implementing the ideas emanating from the conference in right 
earnest. Only then will the gains from the conference be truly realized. 
I once again thank the organizers for inviting me and giving me an opportunity to share my 
thoughts on the subject. Thank you! 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
