Carlos da Silva Costa: Exiting the financial crisis and strengthening 
European integration 
Address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the Conference of 
the Portuguese Association of Insurers “Where is Europe going?”, Panel I “What is the future 
of the euro?”, Lisbon, 24 October 2013. 
 “The  countries  that  share  this  conception  should  be  able  to  go  further  together,  without 
excluding  the  others,  since  they  can  still  live  in  a  greater  community  of  exchange  and  
co-operation.” 
Jacques Delors 
the 
latest 
Introduction 
The financial crisis began five years ago now, but its effects are still felt today, both in 
the  financial  markets  and  in  the  real  economy.  The  international  financial  system  has 
gradually  returned  to  health,  but  fragilities  remain.  World  economic  growth  remains  weak, 
with  a  persistently  high  level  of  uncertainty  and  important  vulnerabilities  and  risks  with 
potentially significant consequences.  
Even though the financial crisis began across the Atlantic, the consequences for the euro 
area  were  considerable  and  still  persist.  Despite 
indicators  showing 
encouraging  signs  of  a  gradual  resumption  of  economic  activity,  unemployment  remains 
historically  high  (12%)  and  varies  widely  across  countries.1  Public  debt  is  above  90%  of 
GDP,2 which poses an additional challenge in a context of weak growth prospects. In turn, 
the financial markets remain highly fragmented, with continuing strong links between banks 
and their sovereigns. Thus we must stay vigilant and work consistently towards making the 
euro area more balanced and resistant to shocks, anchoring measures taken to a long-term 
strategy.  
The crisis has taught us important lessons, including the following: (i) the importance of 
financial  stability;  (ii)  the  negative  effects  of  high  levels  of  public  debt;  (iii)  the  scale  and 
speed  of  contagion  effects;  (iv)  the  flaws  and  inconsistencies  of  the  EMU’s  institutional 
architecture. 
The  challenges  brought  by  the  crisis  have  also  served  as  a  catalyst  for  unprecedented 
decision-making, which will define a new “design” for Europe, strengthening integration. 
The European Union of today is not the same as the one of five years ago and surely will be 
very  different  from  the  one  of  five  years  hence.  As  Jean  Monnet  wrote  in  his  memoirs, 
“Nobody can say today what the institutional framework of Europe will be tomorrow 
because  the  future  changes,  which  will  be  fostered  by  today’s  changes,  are 
unpredictable.” 
If we look at the history of European integration we can see that the times of crisis were 
also  the  moments  of  adjustment  and  reform  which  led  to  higher  levels  of  integration. 
Crises  are  opportunities  to  reflect  on  the  rules  and  institutions  in  force,  and  it  falls  to 
policymakers to take and manage these opportunities in a concerted manner. 
                                                
1  According  to  Eurostat  data,  the  lowest  values  in  August  were  in  Austria  and  Germany  (4.9%  and  5.2% 
respectively) and the highest were in Greece and Spain (27.9% (June) and 26.2%).   
2  Various pieces of research, using different methodologies, suggest that high levels of public debt, normally 
above 90%, have a negative effect on economic growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
So, when we ask “Where is Europe going?”, we have to start by asking, “Where has it 
come from?” That will give us a better understanding of what went right and wrong, and of 
which path to take to build a new, more sustainable future for Europe and the euro.  
The financial crisis and the institutional weaknesses of the euro area 
The way the euro area was shaken by adverse circumstances has revealed the existence of 
significant  flaws  and  inconsistencies  in  its  institutional  architecture  and  economic 
governance model. In a context of great uncertainty and financial instability, the limitations 
of  this  model  in  confronting  and  managing  exogenous  shocks  and  protecting  the  Member 
States and the euro area itself were laid bare.  
When the financial crisis hit, the lack of alignment and solidity of the euro’s foundations 
allowed  the  entire  structure  to  sway,  affecting  economic  agents’  confidence  and 
expectations  dramatically.  At  one  point,  with  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  intensifying  and 
spreading, the euro area became the centre of world attention and the sustainability of the 
integration process itself started to be questioned by the markets.  
The crisis exposed very clearly the weakness of the economic pillar, in other words the 
“E” of Economic and Monetary Union, making it necessary to urgently think of ways to make 
it  more  robust  and  more  balanced  with  “M”,  the  monetary  pillar.  In  effect,  the  single 
currency was founded on an unbalanced structure, comprising a solid monetary pillar 
and  a  weak  and  underdeveloped  economic  pillar.  The  monetary  pillar  has  been 
successful in carrying out its role: the euro has won its position as an international currency 
and price stability has been achieved. In contrast, the insufficiencies of the economic pillar 
have  allowed  inadequate  economic  policies  in  certain  Member  States,  unsustainable 
public finance positions, the accumulation of significant macroeconomic imbalances 
and large divergences in competitiveness.  
A  posteriori,  one  may  say  that  not  only  was  the  euro  area’s  institutional  framework 
insufficiently  robust,  but  also  its  implementation  was  weak  in  the  first  years  of  the 
EMU. Europe was unable to create effective mechanisms and institutions to ensure that the 
underlying conceptual framework was applied and complied  with. Therefore, the future of 
the  euro  depends  on  addressing  the  initial  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies, 
opening the way to a higher level of integration and mutual confidence. 
The national and European dimensions of building a new future for the euro 
But the Member States cannot wait for the problems to be addressed only at European level, 
in  Brussels,  in  Frankfurt  or  in  Strasbourg.  On  the  contrary,  exiting  the  financial  crisis  and 
defining  “where  Europe  is  going”  requires  consistent  and  coordinated  action  at 
Portuguese  and  European  level.  The  national  and  European  dimensions  cannot  be 
decoupled, they are complementary and mutually defined.  
Thus  it  is  key  that  the  public  understands  that  the  new  rules  and  mechanisms  being 
developed are not an external imposition and are vital for the survival of the group and 
of  each  one  of  its  members.  No  Member  State,  irrespective  of  its  economic  size  or 
importance, no European institution and no European citizen are exempt from this collective 
responsibility. 
At  national  level,  structural  reform  and  solid  and  sustainable  policies  are  needed. 
Countries like Portugal that have accumulated considerable macroeconomic imbalances in 
the past have to press ahead with efforts to “put their houses in order”, so as to recover 
credibility and confidence in the markets. This means that they have to set the high levels of 
public  debt  on  a  downward  path  (within  a  framework  of  credible  fiscal  strategies)  and 
proceed  with  structural  reform,  to  increase  medium-term  growth  potential  and  promote 
competitiveness.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But  it  is  also  important  to  ensure  that  national  policies  are  complementary,  so  that  a 
country’s policies, including fiscal policy, take account of the room for manoeuvre available, 
making the whole process more stable. In the euro area, this discipline means recognising 
and accepting that national economic policy-making is a matter of common interest. In 
the  absence  of  a  unified  centre  of  power,  the  effectiveness  of  the  policy  depends  on  the 
effectiveness of the coordination of the national policies and the fairness of the measures.  
At EU level, the way out of the financial crisis involves building a stronger and more resilient 
EMU,  both  when  faced  with  external  shocks  (common  or  specific)  and  risks  from 
inconsistency between Member States’ policies. For this, it is key to continue strengthening 
the institutional framework and the governance model in the euro area. 
Strengthening integration means strengthening rules and institutions  
Europe  needs  solid  and  effective  rules  and  institutions  that  preserve  the  fundamental 
values of the European project and that are able to manage the strong interdependence of its 
members,  in  a  context  of  collective  decisions.  Quoting  Jean  Monnet  again,  “nothing  is 
possible without individuals, but nothing is lasting without institutions”.  
The EMU is a complex construct, a union of sovereign states making up a single market and 
sharing  a  single  currency.  States  that  are  at  the  same  time  independent  and 
interdependent,  united  and  diversified,  whose  actions  are  linked  and  bound  by 
common rules and institutions, while retaining sovereignty. For this complex construct 
to  be  sustainable  and  balanced,  a  governance  model  is  needed  that  ensures  that  the 
Member  States  and  the  European  institutions  perform  their  roles  adequately.  This  means 
responsible  economic  policy-making  by  the  Member  States  and  rigorous  monitoring  and 
surveillance by the union.  
Consequently,  deepening  European  integration also  means greater  integration  through the 
rules and institutions. The euro area needs effective rules and institutions that frame and 
control  the  interdependence  between  the  stability  of  the  whole  and  the  stability  of 
each Member, preventing excessive imbalances from arising and limiting contagion effects. 
Institutions  able  to  ensure  the  collective’s  control  of  each  of  its  parts  (minimising  moral 
hazard),  but  also  the  scrutiny  of  each  of  the  parts  as  regards  setting  and  implementing 
shared goals.  
It  is  important  to  note  that  having  rules  is  a  necessary  but  insufficient  condition.  The 
rules  and  institutions  form  the  foundations  of  any  society,  but  they  must  be  applied 
effectively and respected. However, in society, the legal system and police authorities may 
compel the general public to follow those rules. This does not happen in the governance of 
the  euro  area,  the  mechanisms  for  monitoring  the  application  of  the  rules  are 
essentially political and have proved insufficient for ensuring that the national governments 
develop appropriate and consistent policies.  
Europe needs a strong institutional framework as well as the means and will to ensure that it 
is  complied  with.  This  means  creating a coherent and credible framework of rules and 
incentives,  using  a  stick  and  carrot  approach,  which  underpins  and  guides  national 
and institutional behaviour, aligning it with common interest. Stronger institutions, clearer 
and  fairer  rules  (equal  treatment  for  all  Member  States)  and  an  appropriate  stick/carrot 
system will help improve vital coordination of economic policies. 
Great progress has already been made towards strengthening rules (for example, the 
six-pack, the two-pack, the Fiscal Compact) and institutions (for example, the new financial 
supervision  architecture,  strengthening  the  role  of  the  Eurogroup).  However,  there  is  still 
much to do to build a new European institutional architecture. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The new institutional architecture 
Indeed, progress of the greatest importance has already been made, following the European 
Summit  of  June  2012,  the  so-called  “Four  Presidents’  Report”3  and  the  “Blueprint”4  of  the 
European  Commission.  One  might  also  say  that  the  June  Summit  was  an  important 
milestone  in  the  integration  process,  since  it  signalled  that  at  the  highest  level  the 
European leaders agreed to pursue wide-ranging institutional and governance reform which 
will mould the political and economic situation in Europe for generations to come.  
Europe’s physiognomy is being changed through four work-streams: (i) banking union; 
(ii)  fiscal  union;  (iii)  economic  union;  (iv)  strengthening  of  democratic  legitimacy  and 
accountability. I would like to briefly turn to these four work-streams.  
Banking union 
• 
The banking union work-stream is one of the most urgent and central aspects of this 
collective  reform  effort,  as  it  plays  a  key  role  in  effectively  and  sustainably  breaking  the 
negative two-way link between the banks and their sovereigns and re-establishing the normal 
functioning of the markets. 
Effectively, the fragmentation of the financial markets along national lines has been a 
dominant  feature  of  the  euro  area  crisis.  This  fragmentation  harms  the  transmission  of 
monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy  and  leads  to  unsustainable  differences  between 
Member  States  with  regard  to  credit  conditions  facing  households  and  enterprises  (in 
particular  SMEs)  of  comparable  quality  and  solvency,  creating  unequal  conditions  of 
competition. For the question posed to this panel (“What is the future of the euro?”) to have 
a  positive  answer,  it  is  crucial  to  restore  confidence  in  the  European  banking  sector  and 
eliminate  that  fragmentation.  The  solution  involves  creating  a  banking  union  that 
complements monetary union.  
An important development in this area was the ECOFIN Council’s approval on 15 October of 
this  year  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  under  which  the  ECB  becomes 
responsible  for  supervising  euro  area  credit  institutions.  This  is  a  fundamental  and 
indispensable pillar of banking union.  
However, to be complete, banking union has to include two further pillars: (i) a Single 
Resolution  Mechanism;  (ii)  a  Single  Deposit  Guarantee  System,  thereby  aligning 
supervisory  responsibilities  with  those  of  a  safety  net.  A  single  supervisory  mechanism 
that is not accompanied by European deposit guarantee and resolution mechanisms 
represents a banking union still under construction. Only a banking union based on all 
these pillars will create the conditions for economic agents to make decisions based not on 
expectations about the sovereign risk of the country where the banks are headquartered, but 
according to the risk profile of the bank itself, irrespective of location.  
Thus  it  is  important  to  continue  work  on  the  pillars  still  missing,  taking  the  proposals 
presented by the European Commission as a basis. On the other hand, we should not lose 
sight of the path leading to full banking union as a whole. The lessons learned from the 
financial  crisis  advise  us  to  redouble  our  efforts  in  exercising  prudence  and  good 
sense in managing the transition process. 
Fiscal union 
• 
Inadequate fiscal policies in certain Member States in the period before the crisis has shown 
the need for developing a European-level integrated framework of rules and procedures 
                                                
3   “Towards a Genuine Economic and Monetary Union”, December 2012. 
4 
“Blueprint for a deep and genuine Economic and Monetary Union”, European Commission, November 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
promoting  fiscal  policies  that  are  more  sound  and  sustainable  and  more  coherent. 
Indeed, in the absence of rules and institutions that ensure the continuity of the convergence 
process, different preferences tend to emerge among the euro area countries, jeopardising 
the stability of the whole. 
Some of the most important pieces of the fiscal “jigsaw” already exist (the six-pack, the two-
pack and the Fiscal Compact). I would highlight here the Treaty on Stability, Coordination 
and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union (commonly referred to as the Fiscal 
Compact),5  due  to  its  structural  importance  and  its  implications  at  national  level. 
Indeed,  with  regard  to  its  transposition,  Member  States  have  adapted  their  national 
legislation  and  fiscal  frameworks,6  with  most  countries  making  important  progress  also  in 
establishing  independent  monitoring  institutions. This is an example of the credibility of 
the  fiscal  strategies,  rules  and  procedures  outlined  at  national  level  benefiting  from 
the new European framework. 
However, despite notable progress made to date, further steps are still necessary to ensure 
that all the pieces of the fiscal jigsaw fit together into a complete and consistent whole and 
that nothing is missing or left over. In particular, it is necessary to ensure that the large set of 
rules approved to-date is complemented with institutions and mechanisms that allow them to 
be applied and complied with. I would say that Europe needs qualitative change towards 
fiscal union.  
Economic union 
• 
Building a true economic union that strengthens the “E” of the EMU requires an integrated 
economic  policy  framework  capable  of  monitoring,  assessing  and  coordinating 
essential economic measures and reforms. Emphasis must be placed on the areas with 
potentially  greater  impact  on  competitiveness,  economic  growth  and  employment,  while 
promoting  social  cohesion.  If  implemented  adequately,  structural  reform  may  contribute  to 
increasing  economic  growth  and  reducing  inequality,  thereby  creating  a  “double  dividend”. 
The “Euro-Plus Pact” and the “European Semester” are important milestones on the road to 
greater economic integration.  
Strengthening of democratic legitimacy and accountability  
• 
As  the  euro  area  moves  towards  greater  integration,  the  “political  work-stream”  gains 
additional  importance,  which  requires  the  strengthening  of  democratic  legitimacy  and 
accountability  in  joint  decision-making.  If  the  political  dimension  were  ignored,  Europe 
would not be able to evolve towards greater fiscal and economic integration, due to 
lack of legitimacy and accountability.  
The political dimension will have to reconcile two concerns: the need for responsiveness 
that  is  mandated  by  the  “whole”  and  the  need  to  ensure  that  all  parties  are 
represented and informed and take part in the decision-making process. That is why 
the European Parliament and the European Commission in the future will have to be more 
representative  and  answerable  to  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  However,  it  should  be 
understood that despite being inseparable from the other three work-streams, the “political 
work-stream”  has  its  own  different  and  slower  tempo,  like  any  sovereignty-sharing 
process, and must not hold back the others. 
                                                
5 
In force since 1 January 2013. 
6  With  varying  degrees  of  speed  and  taking  various  routes,  namely  in  terms  of  detail  of  the  rules  and  the 
hierarchy of instruments in the respective legal order. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Solidarity to protect group cohesion  
Before concluding, I would like to touch on an aspect that I see as fundamental to the future 
success  of  the  euro:  solidarity.  We  should  be  aware  that  even  with  adequate  rules  and 
institutions,  an  economic  and  monetary  union  is  not  immune  to  exogenous  shocks  and 
specific problems in each of its members. Aside from asymmetric shocks, even symmetric 
shocks may have asymmetric effects, penalising some countries more than others. Thus, 
measures  designed  to  strengthen  the  economic  pillar  must  also  include  solidarity 
mechanisms  which  support  Member  States  facing  serious  financial  difficulties  or  strong 
market pressures, protecting the stability of the euro area as a whole and preserving 
group cohesion.  
These  mechanisms  must  be  robust,  with  sufficient  financial  resources  and  designed  to 
respond quickly and effectively, while at the same time promoting accountability and avoiding 
moral hazard. The more robust and credible these "backstops" are, the less likely they 
are to be used for real. 
To address this concern, the first temporary European mechanisms were established in May 
2010:  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  and  the  European  Financial 
Stabilisation Mechanism (EFSM). Replacing these was the European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM),  created  in  2012,  now  a  permanent  facility.  This  mechanism  is  an  indispensable 
complement  to the  reforms mentioned  above  and  an  important  milestone  in  the  profound 
transformation under way in the euro area. 
As Robert Schumann stated in 1950: “Europe will not be made all at once, or according 
to a single plan. It will be built through concrete achievements which first create a de 
facto solidarity.” 
Final observations 
I would like to conclude, answering the question put to this panel (“What is the future of 
the euro?”) on a confident note. I am convinced that the euro area will not only survive this 
crisis but also will emerge stronger and more united than before. Europe has faced difficult 
crises in the past, while not of this magnitude, which were ultimately overcome and 
led to the bolstering of European integration. I believe that this time will be no different. 
The  European  project  is  still  a  work  in  progress  and,  as  we  have  seen,  has  flaws  in  its 
foundations.  We  cannot  miss  this  unique  opportunity  to  strengthen  these  foundations, 
through  profound  reform  that  is  key  to  increasing  stability  and  resilience  in  the  euro  area, 
completing  the  single  market  and  strengthening  the  European  Union’s  international  role. 
Coherent economic policy, sound, effective and accountable institutions and greater 
solidarity are crucial for Europe to overcome the crisis and restore sustainable growth 
and employment. 
We  should  ensure  that  the  European  Union  is  a  “positive  sum  game”,  in  which 
everyone benefits and where the distribution of gains between countries is balanced. 
As  an  integral  part  of  the  whole  that  is  the  European  Union,  the  euro  will  prevail  as  the 
common  currency  for  a  group  of  countries  that  share  a  single  monetary  policy;  that  will 
establish  banking  union;  and  that  will  operate  within  a  coherent  and  binding  framework  of 
rules and under institutions that ensure compliance with those rules. The future of the euro 
area  will 
legitimacy, 
increasingly 
accountability  and  solidarity, 
answerable for the “whole” and not only for the sum of its parts.  
The success of the European Union is important not only for Europeans but also for global 
geopolitical equilibria. 
Thank you very much. 
involve  greater  sharing  of  sovereignty,  with 
increased 
institutions  are 
in  which  European 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
