Andreas Dombret: Deutsche Bundesbank’s 2013 Financial Stability 
Review 
Opening statement by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the press conference of the Deutsche Bundesbank’s 2013 Financial Stability 
Review, Frankfurt am Main, 14 November 2013. 
 An overview of risks 
I am pleased once again to present, together with Ms Lautenschläger, this year’s edition of 
our Financial Stability Review.  
Compared  with  previous  Reviews,  this  year’s  is  brought  out  in  a  somewhat  calmer 
environment. The tension on the international financial markets has eased. This is beneficial 
to financial stability in Germany, in line with the degree of calm prevailing internationally after 
a period of turbulence. The situation is also reflected in the stress indicator for the German 
financial system. The indicator is well down from the levels it reached after Lehman and at 
the height of the European sovereign debt crisis. 
However, two major risk factors remain. 
• 
First,  the  low-interest-rate  environment.  This  is  placing  a  growing  strain  on  the 
German  financial  system.  On  the  international  financial  markets,  there  is  an 
increasing  risk  that  the  search  for  yield  will  result  in  excessive  behaviour  and  will 
give  further  impetus  to  the  shadow  banking  system.  German  banks  face  greater 
pressure on profitability. For life insurers, low interest rates are increasingly eating 
away at their financial buffers. 
Second, the European debt crisis is not yet over. The risk of contagion remains high. 
It  is  a  matter  for  concern  for  us  that  the  ties  between  governments  and  domestic 
banks have tightened again in several countries. 
 I would now like to discuss each of these issues in greater detail. 
Low-interest-rate environment affecting the financial system 
When  considering  the  low-interest-rate  environment,  people  may  be  tempted  to  say:  one 
man’s  joy  is  another  man’s  sorrow.  It  is  good  for  house  builders  and  buyers  and  for 
shareholders. For savers and endowments, it is not so good. Your personal view of the low-
interest-rate environment may therefore depend on which group you fall into. You can decide 
for yourself whether low interest rates are a boon or an annoyance. But we are not talking 
here  about  personal  finance.  We  are  concerned  with  the  longer-term  dangers  to  financial 
stability, and they affect everyone. 
Low interest rates have without doubt helped to stabilise the situation. But now the time must 
actually  be  used.  By  governments  to  consolidate  their  finances  and  to  strengthen 
competitiveness.  By  banks  to clean  up  their  balance  sheets, review  their  business models 
and reduce risky portfolios. 
But the longer the low interest rates last, the larger the undesired side-effects and the risks to 
financial stability. Low interest rates might induce market participants to enter into heightened 
levels of risk in the search for yield. This increases the danger of mispricing. In this way, the 
seed is sown for sudden corrections in asset prices. Things become dangerous when market 
participants grow accustomed to finance on these favourable terms and take them as a given 
for the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Germany’s banks have so far shown little sign of a distinct movement in search of yield. The 
kinds of investments typical of the search for yield – emerging market assets or corporate 
bonds – have thus far remained limited. German insurers, on the other hand, are investing to 
an  increased  extent  in  corporate  bonds.  This  could  be  detrimental  to  them  if  there  were 
increased  defaults  on  these  bonds  because  of  a  phase  of  economic  weakness.  However, 
insurers’ investment policies overall remain conservative. 
Banks, in particular, should arm themselves against potential losses in market value in the 
event of a turnaround in interest rates. In the case of investments via exchange-traded funds, 
liquidity risk must be monitored, particularly where less liquid underlyings are concerned. A 
striking example of the need for this monitoring was provided in the United States in June of 
this year. 
The issue of low interest rates is certain to influence financial stability for some time to come, 
as can be judged from the latest interest rate reduction by the European Central Bank. What 
is clear is that monetary policy has to adhere to its mandate. Safeguarding price stability in 
the euro area is its primary objective. 
It is all the more important to keep a watch on the impact of monetary policy measures on 
financial  stability  in  the  euro  area  or  in  individual  countries.  It  was  therefore  right  and 
important to create a macroprudential supervisory set-up in Germany and Europe in order to 
identify dangers to financial stability and propose countermeasures. At European level, the 
Frankfurt-based European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) is responsible for this. In Germany, 
the Financial Stability Committee was established at the beginning of the year. The Federal 
Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Federal  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  and  the  Bundesbank  are 
represented  on  the  Committee.  It  is  a  good  thing  that  new  macroprudential  tools  are 
available which can also be used at national level in particular and can be targeted at specific 
problems.  The  basis  for  the  practical  application  of  these  tools  has  only  been  partially 
elaborated and there is still work to do here in many cases. The Bundesbank is playing its 
part in this. 
is 
the 
low-interest-rate  environment 
Low-interest-rate environment puts German insurers under pressure 
Our  Financial  Stability  Review  highlights  how 
increasingly weighing on German life insurers. 
The low interest rates mean that it is ever more difficult for them to generate the guaranteed 
returns.  The  maximum  technical  interest  rate  for  life  insurers’  portfolios  –  which  generally 
equals the guaranteed returns – is an average of 3.2%. By way of comparison: the average 
current  yield  on  public  sector  bonds  with  an  original  maturity  of  more  than four  years  was 
recently around 1.3%. 
Insurers need to respond. Their capital buffers are shrinking. The coverage ratio, which is the 
ratio of regulatory capital to regulatory capital requirements, dropped from around 186% in 
2009  to  just  under  169%  at  the  end  of  2012.  Life  insurers  are  therefore  called  upon  to 
strengthen their capital resources and to review the level of distributions. 
In addition, the low interest rates are leading to high valuation reserves. These amounted to 
almost  €88  billion  at  the  end  of  2012.  Policyholders  are  entitled  to  a  half  share  of  these, 
although  the  valuation  gains  on  fixed-income  assets  are  nothing  but  paper  profits.  In  the 
interests  of  financial  stability,  a  sound  and  sustainable  regulatory  framework  should  be 
created for policyholders’ participation in valuation reserves in life insurance. 
We  have  carried  out  a  scenario  analysis.  It  enables  conclusions  to  be  drawn  about  the 
change in capital resources under Solvency I for various interest-rate paths. 
• 
A  mild  stress  scenario  simulates  government  bond  returns  like those  in  Japan.  In 
this  scenario,  12  life  insurers  with  a  combined  market  share  of  14%  would  fail  to 
meet the requirements of Solvency I by 2023. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 In the more severe stress scenario, the extremely low interest rates affect a wider 
range of asset classes. In this scenario, no fewer than 32 insurers fall short of the 
regulatory requirements by 2023. Their market share is 43%. Thus, in this scenario 
almost half of the market is affected. 
There  is  therefore  no  doubt  that  a  persistent  low-interest-rate  environment  harbours  a 
potential risk to the stability of German life insurers. 
It  also  needs  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  our  simulation  is  based  on  the  requirements  of 
Solvency  I.  Fair-value  accounting  under  Solvency  II  would  probably  lead  to  even  worse 
results. It is therefore important to configure the transition to Solvency II in a way which is 
compatible with stability.  
Banks under pressure 
When it comes to Germany’s banks, part of the job of this year’s Financial Stability Review is 
to  look  at  the  credit  risks  which  confront  us  at  the  present  time. To  an  extent,  these  risks 
reflect back on credit policies pursued in the past, such as in ship finance and securitisations. 
We also direct our attention to the future. For example, a constant watch needs to be kept on 
the  business  cycle,  since  a  recession,  for  instance,  would  obviously  have  an  impact  on 
banks. It is particularly important to us that loans for German residential property do not turn 
into a new source of conflagration. 
A  model  calculation  reveals  risks  in  the  event  of  another  severe  recession  in  Germany 
comparable to the one in 2009. The calculation covered the years 2013 to 2015. It is mainly 
the  12  major  German  banks  with  an  international  focus  which  would  be  affected  by  this 
simulated economic downturn. They would be faced in particular with value adjustments and 
write-downs. Compared with the baseline scenario, operating earnings would drop by almost 
€15 billion for 2014 and by over €5 billion for 2015. By way of comparison: in 2012, the banks 
in question recorded combined operating income of €11 billion. Thus, this recession scenario 
would bring the threat of losses, at least if the banks did not succeed in reducing their costs 
accordingly.  To  be  clear:  this  is  a  model  calculation.  It  is  not  a  stress  test  aimed  at 
establishing recapitalization requirements, and has nothing to do with the forthcoming EBA 
and ECB stress test. 
I can only recommend to Germany’s banks that they review their options for reducing risk 
and  for  building  up  capital  resources  and  put  these  options  into  practice  where  necessary  
– and the sooner the better. 
Default  risks  for  banks  could  arise  in  the  medium  term  from  mortgage  lending.  However, 
there  appears  to  me  to  be  a  distinct  public  awareness  in  Germany  that  a  spiral  of  rising 
property prices, lax lending standards and continued strong lending would undeniably lead to 
problems.  I  believe  the  Bundesbank  has  played  its  part  in  creating  this  awareness,  for 
instance through articles in last year’s Financial Stability Review and in the current October 
Monthly Report. 
We have also taken a look at the German housing market this year. In seven major cities  
–  Berlin,  Cologne,  Düsseldorf,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  Hamburg,  Munich  and  Stuttgart  – 
residential  property  prices  climbed  by  almost  a  quarter  overall  between  2009  and  2012  
– compared with a rise of just under 5% between 2005 and 2008. For 2013 we are expecting 
a  further  price  rise  of  around  9%.  The  Bundesbank  is  currently  assuming  that  housing  is 
overvalued in the major cities by up to 20%. Low interest rates have without doubt created 
incentives  for  property  investments  which  would  not  have  been  undertaken  under  normal 
interest rates. 
In Germany as a whole, the upward trend is continuing, though at a significantly lower level. 
Housing prices across Germany actually fell by 1% between 2005 and 2008. Between 2009 
and 2012 they then rose by more than 8% overall, and by 3% to 4% in the first half of 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
From the point of view of financial stability, however, it is not just the change in the price of 
residential  property  which  matters.  The  interplay  with  lending  is  crucial.  In  view  of 
households’  sound  levels  of  debt  sustainability  and  a  moderate  rate  of  growth  in  property 
lending, currently 2.2%, rising property prices do not at present harbour any excessive risks 
to financial stability. However, the possibility that property buyers, particularly in major cities, 
could experience wealth losses due to potential price corrections cannot be ruled out. 
We will therefore continue to monitor the situation on the German housing market closely. 
Surveys are currently being conducted at banks aimed at providing us with a more in-depth 
insight  into  the financing  of residential  property. Germany’s  banks  should  ensure that  they 
apply conservative standards when issuing property loans. 
Central counterparties gaining in importance 
Close and opaque ties in the over-the-counter derivatives markets are a potential source of 
danger to the stability of the financial system. The regulation of OTC derivatives markets sets 
great  store  by  central  counterparties.  They  bear  the  default  risks.  If  a  major  market 
participant defaults, the use of central counterparties is intended to lessen the shock waves, 
thus acting as a kind of breakwater. 
It  is  therefore  a  positive  development  that  ever  greater  use  is  being  made  of  central 
counterparties for clearing. In the case of new index credit default swaps arranged between 
major  derivatives 
through  central 
counterparties. 
However,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  central  counterparties  have  been  assigned  a 
systemically  important  role.  This  requires  safety  barriers.  Attention  should  be  given  to 
ensuring strict requirements globally for risk management at central counterparties. Suitable 
recovery and resolution regimes for central counterparties need to be established. We must 
not allow new systemic risks to build up at central counterparties and make us vulnerable. 
than  half  are  now  being  cleared 
traders,  more 
What needs to be done? 
In  conclusion,  let  us  look  at  the  most  important  tasks  facing  us  in  terms  of  safeguarding 
financial stability. 
One major risk factor is the European debt crisis and the risks of contagion it entails.  
The debt crisis is far from being over. How could it be otherwise? The underlying imbalances 
built up over a long period of time, and correcting them will therefore also be a long process. 
It is important that economic policy-makers in the euro area continue with the consolidation 
and reform process they have embarked on. Monetary policy can only buy time. It is our firm 
conviction  that  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  returned  to  its  core  task:  the  safeguarding  of 
price stability. 
The ties between governments and the domestic banking sector have actually tightened in 
some  countries  this  year.  The  preferential  regulatory  treatment  of  government  bonds  on 
banks’ balance sheets must therefore be phased out in the medium term. 
The other major risk factor is the low-interest-rate environment. 
Everyone  should  be  factoring  into  their  risk  assessments  the  normalisation  of  the  level  of 
interest rates and the potential for rising volatility on the financial markets.  
As I have explained, risks to financial stability as a result of low interest rates often emanate 
from the property market. Experience in other countries has shown that a prolonged period of 
low interest rates can result in price bubbles. 
The low interest rates are eating away at insurers’ financial buffers. They need to build up 
their capital resources and review their level of distributions. Efforts should be made to create 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
a sound and sustainable regulatory framework for policyholders’ participation in the valuation 
reserves. 
Finally, the new macroprudential tools need to be prepared for practical application. That is 
because  the  longer  the  period  of  low  interest  rates  lasts,  the  more  likely  it  is  that 
macroprudential instruments will be employed. One thing is certain: as soon as we see a risk 
to financial stability, we will act. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
