Deepali Pant Joshi: Financial education key to promoting financial 
inclusion and customer protection 
Keynote address by Dr Deepali Pant Joshi, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the College of Agricultural Banking Conference, Pune, 3 October 2013. 
 Thanks to General Manager, Ajay Kumar Misra, and Assistant General Manager, Geetha Nair, for their valuable 
inputs. 
I am happy to be able to address, though not real time, various stakeholders from across the 
country on this important subject and also congratulate the CAB for focusing on this topical 
issue.  Financial  Education  is  a  not  a  new  idea  for  those  present  here  but  the  enabling 
environment  in  terms  of  policy  focus  on  inclusive  growth  and  availability  of  technology  for 
cost  effective  delivery  of  both  banking  services  and  financial  education  is  of  recent  origin. 
There  is  a  strong  view  that  the  financial  crisis  occurred  because  many  of  the  NINJA 
borrowers in the United States were clueless as to the terms of the adjusted rate mortgage 
contracts they were signing leading to the global economic crisis and this has led to serious 
concerns  on  the  need  for  financial  education, financial  inclusion,  consumer  empowerment. 
This was also the backdrop for the passage of the Dodd Frank Act in the United States which 
is far reaching Wall Street reform in history, Dodd-Frank is expected to prevent the excessive 
risk-taking that led to the financial crisis. The law also provides common-sense protections 
for  American  families,  and  creates  a  new  consumer  watchdog  to  prevent  mortgage 
companies and pay-day lenders from exploiting consumers. The law focuses on consumer 
protection. It is designed to make sure that everybody follows the same set of rules, so that 
firms  compete  on  price  and  quality.  It  demands  accountability  and  responsibility  from 
everyone. It provides certainty to everybody, from bankers to farmers to business owners to 
consumers. If  you’ve  ever  applied  for  a  credit card,  a  student  loan,  or  a  housing  loan  you 
know  the  feeling  of  signing  your  name  to  pages  of  barely  understandable  fine  print.  What 
often happens as a result is that many people are caught by hidden fees and penalties, or 
saddled with loans they can’t afford. They are then, hit with a massive rate increase on their 
credit card balances even though they paid bills on time. Contracts which are simpler – will 
put an end to many hidden penalties and fees in complex mortgages – so common people 
are aware of what they’re signing. Students who take student loans should have clear and 
concise  information  about  their  obligations.  Ordinary  investors  –  like  you  and  me,  seniors 
saving for retirement – should be able to receive and understand information about the costs 
and  risks  of  mutual  funds  and  other  investment  products,  so  that  they  can  make  better 
financial  decisions  as  to  what  will  work  for  them.  Today  we  have  to  recognize  that  the 
greatest  threat  arises  from  the  asymmetries  of  information  and  power  between  financial 
institutions  and  poor  consumers,  an  imbalance  which  grows  as  customers  are  less 
experienced and the products they can choose are more sophisticated, an imbalance which 
holds  real  potential  for  negative  outcomes  due  to  institutional  abuses  or  ill-informed  client 
decisions.  Financial  education  is  an  important  tool  to  address  this  imbalance  and  help 
consumers  both,  accept  and  use  the  products  to  which  they  increasingly  have  access. 
Because  it  can  facilitate  effective  product  use,  financial  education  is  critical  to  financial 
inclusion.  It  can  help  clients  to  both,  develop  the  skills  to  compare  and  select  the  best 
products for their needs and empower them to exercise their rights and responsibilities in the 
consumer  protection  equation.  Financial  Education  spans  the  informal  and  formal  financial 
sectors,  supporting  clients’  access  to,  and  more  importantly,  use  of,  diverse  financial 
services. When we speak about financial education as a lay person, we are usually referring 
to  a  set  of  skills  that  allow  people  to  manage  their  money  wisely,  some  understanding  of 
essential financial concepts and an appreciation of the trade-off between risk and return. But 
let us ponder a bit deeper for a while, is it only this? Let us think from the point of view of a 
poor person who does not have any regular income, who is not actually literate and who has 
never accessed any formal source of banking services. Do we mean that such persons, and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
surely  they  form  a  significant  part  of  our  population,  have  no  financial  literacy.  Financial 
diaries studies, as presented in Portfolios of the Poor (Collins et al, 2009) a book available in 
the CAB library, I recommend you read or in Cash-In, Cash out: Financial Transactions and 
Access to Finance in Malawi (Stuart et al, 2011), have demonstrated that most poor people 
are  good  financial  managers  in  familiar  environments  where  a  majority  of  financial 
transactions  occur  either  informally  or  involve  money  stored  at  home.  You  will  all  agree, 
money has its own language and to understand it you need not necessarily be literate. It is 
almost  like  any  other  basic  need  such  as  hunger,  sleep,  etc.  the  understanding  of  which 
comes naturally to all. This is possibly the reason that we feel confident to impart financial 
literacy to all those also who are not formally literate.  
More  formally,  financial  education  and  awareness  can  take  many  forms,  which  include, 
instruction in personal finance concepts, the financial services landscape, the development 
of the skills, attitudes and behaviors needed to make the right decisions for the individual. 
Financial Education primarily relates to personal finance, which enables individuals to take 
effective action to improve overall wellbeing and avoid distress in financial matters. It is the 
ability to know, monitor and effectively use financial resources to enhance the well-being and 
economic  security  of  oneself,  one’s  family  and  one’s  business.  Financial  Education  is  not 
about just markets and investing, but also savings, budgeting, financial planning, basics of 
banking  and  most  importantly  about  being  “Financially  Smart”.  To  understand  financial 
planning, a person should be financially literate to understand the importance of preparing 
household budgets, cash-flow management and asset allocation to meet financial goals. 
In  India,  a  large  section  of  population  still  lack  access  to  basic  financial  services  from  the 
formal  financial  sector  and  hence  moving  towards  universal  financial  inclusion  is  both  a 
national  commitment  and  a  policy  priority.  Financial  Literacy  is  considered  an  important 
adjunct  for  promoting  financial  inclusion,  consumer  protection  and  ultimately  financial 
stability.  Financial  Inclusion  and  Financial  Literacy  need  to  go  hand  in  hand  to  enable  the 
common man to understand the need and benefits of the products and services offered by 
formal financial institutions. We in the RBI have defined financial inclusion as the access to 
appropriate  financial  products  and  services  needed  by  vulnerable  groups,  such  as  weaker 
sections and low income groups, at an affordable cost, in a fair and transparent manner by 
mainstream  institutional  players.  So,  from  the  financial  literacy  perspective,  it  essentially 
involves two elements, one of access and the other of literacy which enables usage. 
The most fundamental reason why  people should strive to become financially literate is to 
help them reach their personal financial goals. Whatever the specific goal, the payoff from 
financial  literacy  is  an  improved  standard  of  living  and  a  sense  of  confidence  about  the 
future. Financially literate individuals are more  likely to engage in sound financial planning 
early  in  their  lives.  This  enables  them  to  plan  for  retirement,  fund  the  education  of  their 
children, and accumulate more assets. From a national perspective, the payoff is large. 
Which is the target group?  
Everyone in the system, be it the users or the providers of financial products/services, need 
to  be  financially  literate.  In  the  Indian  context,  the  users  are  broadly  categorized  as  the 
financially  excluded  resource-poor,  the  lower  and  middle  income  groups  and  the  high  net 
worth individuals. 
For the resource-poor largely excluded population, financial literacy would invariably involve 
addressing deep entrenched behavioral and psychological factors that are major barriers to 
participating  in  the  financial  system.  For  the  purpose,  our  financial  literacy  efforts  are 
primarily  directed  towards  dissemination  of  simple  messages  of  financial  prudence,  in 
vernacular  languages,  through  large  awareness  campaigns  across  the  country  combined 
with vigorous roll out of financial inclusion plans by banks, insurance and pension funds, and 
others. However as briefly mentioned earlier, it is important to note that being literate is not a 
necessary prerequisite for attaining financial literacy as the basic financial messages can be 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
conveyed  through  various  alternate  means  without  relying  on  written  inputs.  Some  of  the 
basic messages we seek to deliver through our financial literacy drives are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Why Save  
Why save regularly and consistently  
Why save with banks  
Why borrow within Limits  
Why borrow from banks  
Why borrow for income generating purposes  
Why repay loans  
Why repay loans in time  
Why do you need insurance  
Why you will need regular stream of income post working life – pension  
Why you should keep money aside regularly and consistently during your earning 
life for pension in old age  
What is interest? How moneylenders charge very high interest rates?  
 
For the middle and lower-middle income groups that are participating in financial markets as 
either savers or borrowers or both, i.e. the financially included, financial literacy efforts should 
aim at enhancing their knowledge about the market and new products/services. For instance, 
there  is  a  large  section  of  our  population  that  has  a  bank  account  but  refrains  from 
participating in the capital market on account of lack of knowledge. Financial literacy, in such 
cases, would focus on creating awareness about the way the capital market functions and 
also  about  the  fact  that  the  equity  market  may  at  times  provide  relatively  higher  returns 
coupled with higher risks as compared to other investments.  
For  the  high  net  worth  individuals,  better  knowledge  of  the  financial  markets,  new  and 
innovative products and instruments is important as it helps them in making better use of the 
available  avenues  in  the  financial  markets.  This  knowledge  is  also  useful  for  taking  more 
informed decision in their quest for greater returns from their investments in the market and 
to avail credit at relatively cheaper rates. Whether saving or investing, the basic lesson that 
“higher  return  implies  higher  risks”  should  not  be  lost  sight  of.  Sometimes  we  have  a 
tendency to feel that high net worth individuals or resource rich corporate or bankers do not 
need financial education. Nothing could be farther from truth. To quote an example, many 
corporates  have  incurred  losses  because  they  had  not  hedged  their  foreign  currency 
exposures. 
Similarly,  in  these  times  of  financial  uncertainty  and  risk,  the  importance  of  educating  our 
people  about 
insurance  products  cannot  be 
underestimated. In our country even so called financially educated people, including many of 
us, still look at insurance, at least partly, as an investment avenue. It is difficult to convince a 
large number of us that insurance is risk coverage for our life and we should not expect any 
returns  after  the  insurance  policy  has  expired.  Our  insurance  penetration  is  far  lower  than 
expected. For a poor person not just life, health but livestock insurance are equally important 
but insurance penetration continues to be poor. 
While  financial  literacy  for  the  users  of  financial  services/products  is  of  paramount 
importance, financial education is also a must for financial service providers. Banks, financial 
institutions  and  other  market  players  too  need  to  be  literate  about  their  risk  and  return 
framework.  Every  bank,  in  order  to  expand  its  customer  base,  needs  to  understand  the 
requirements  of  its  customers  and  the  market,  credit  and  operational  risks  involved  in  its 
operations. They need to understand that for their business to survive, their customers must 
the  advantages  of  Life  and  Non-life 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
survive and for that, they need to understand the appropriateness of the products themselves 
to be able to explain it to their customers. Very often the frontline counter staffs of banks do 
not know all the features of the products being offered to the bank customers 
Institutional framework in India  
Now coming to the institutional framework created in India for the spread of financial literacy, 
I  would  like  to  mention  that  we  are  among  the  very  few  countries  where  an  apex  body 
namely  the  FSDC  chaired  by  the  Union  Finance  Minister with  heads of  all financial  sector 
regulators  as  members  has  been  mandated,  inter  alia  to  focus  on  spread  of  financial 
inclusion  and  financial  literacy.  Under  the  aegis  of  the  FSDC,  the  National  Strategy  for 
Financial Education (NSFE) for India has been prepared. The Strategy envisages ways of 
creating awareness and educating consumers on access to financial services; availability of 
various types of products and their features; changing attitudes to translate knowledge into 
responsible financial behavior; and making consumers of financial services understand their 
rights  and  obligations.  The  Strategy  calls  for  active  involvement  of  individuals,  financial 
sector  regulators,  educational  institutions,  NGOs,  financial  sector  entities,  multilateral 
international players and the Government at both Centre and State. 
Our National Strategy envisages a time frame of five years for its massive financial education 
campaign and aims at establishing initial contact with 500 million adults, educating them on 
key saving, protection and investment related products so that they are empowered to take 
prudent financial decisions. It also seeks to create awareness about the consumer protection 
and  grievances  redress  machinery  available  in  the  country.  Basic  financial  education  is 
aimed to be included in school curricula up to senior secondary level. This is based upon the 
premise that the most effective way is to weave financial education into the normal content of 
school  curricula.  Accordingly,  we  are  engaging  with  the  curriculum  setting  bodies  like  the 
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), Education Boards like the 
Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE), Central and State Governments to try and 
embed such concepts in the school curriculum. 
One of the objectives of the NSFE is to standardize the messages that various stakeholders 
seek  to  disseminate  through  their  financial  education  initiatives.  The  NSFE  document 
identifies certain simple messages let me reiterate such as why save; why invest; why insure; 
why  save  with  banks;  why  borrow  within  limits;  why  repay  loans  in  time;  why  borrow  for 
income  generating  purposes,  what  is  interest  and  how  moneylenders  charge  very  high 
interest rates, etc. It is a well recognized fact that the standardization will help in ensuring 
consistency in the messages reaching the target audience from various sources and making 
them more focused and powerful.  
We  have  already  done  some  work  in  this  direction.  In  order  to  ensure  consistency  in  the 
messages reaching the target audience of financially excluded people during the Financial 
Literacy  Camps,  we  have  issued  comprehensive  Financial  Literacy  Material  containing 
Guidance Note for Trainers, Operational Guidelines for conduct of Financial Literacy Camps, 
Financial literacy Guide, Financial Diary and a set of 16 posters. Banks have been advised to 
use  it  as  a  standard  curriculum  to  impart  basic  conceptual  understanding  of  financial 
products and services.  
Role of banks in spreading financial literacy 
RBI  has  adopted  a  planned,  structured  and  integrated  approach  of  achieving  Financial 
Inclusion through Financial Literacy by advising banks to setup FLCs with a view to scale up 
the  Financial  Literacy  efforts  throughout  the  country.  Banks  have  been  advised  to  setup 
Financial  Literacy  Centres  (FLCs)  in  the  630  plus  offices  of  the  lead  district  managers 
(LDMs).These offer face to face money advice Further we have mandated the 35,000 plus 
rural  branches  of  SCBs  including  RRBs  to  undertake  outdoor  financial  literacy  activities  at 
least  once  a  month  with  focus  on  financially  excluded  population.  In  order  to  link  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financially excluded segment with the banking system, RBI has devised model architecture to 
conduct  the  financial  literacy  camps  in  three  stages  starting  with  awareness  in  first  stage, 
account opening in second stage and monitoring the usage of accounts in the third stage. 
As  at  the  end  of  June  2013,  750  Financial  Literacy  Centres  (FLCs)  have  been  set  up  by 
banks and a total of 2.8 million people have been educated through indoor education in FLCs 
and  by  organizing  outdoor  activities  like  awareness  camps/choupals,  goshtis  baithaks 
,seminars, lectures etc. 
financially 
introduces  people 
literate.  Financial  Education 
In conclusion 
We have discussed that financial education is the key to promoting financial inclusion and 
customer protection. 
In  the  paradigm  of  the  post  crisis  world  at  the  current  global  economic  conjuncture  the 
synapses  between  financial  education,  financial  inclusion  and  customer  protection assume 
great  salience.  The  G20  discourse  is  increasingly  focused  on  financial  inclusion  and 
consumer protection as integral to achieving financial stability and integrity. This forms part of 
the  Global  Economy  Concerns  and  the  G20  Framework  for  Strong,  Sustainable  and 
Balanced Growth. The World Savings Bank Institute, 2010 has recognized Financial access 
as a “key accelerator” to meet the Millennium Development Goals. We have discussed that 
Financial  education  is  the  process  of  building  knowledge,  skills  and  attitudes  leading  to 
become 
to  good  money 
management practices with respect to earning, spending, saving, borrowing, and investing. 
The role of financial education is to enable people to determine their financial goals and shift 
from  reactive  to  proactive  decision-making  and  work  towards  fulfilling  these  goals.  By 
broadening  an  understanding  of  financial  products,  options  and  principles,  financial 
education  builds  skills  to  use  financial  products  and  services,  and  promotes  attitudes  and 
behaviors that support more effective deployment/use of scarce financial resources. When 
linked to the financial inclusion agenda the implicit argument is that financial education will 
motivate the learner to understand the advantages of transactions with mainstream financial 
institutions  and  adopt  available  formal  financial  services.  Financial  Inclusion  is  thus  the 
process of bringing people from the margin to the mainstream, linking them to mainstream 
financial institutions so that they become customers of Banks and are able to access the full 
range of services – Savings, Deposits, Loans which the Banks offer. Financial Education is 
key  to  promoting  Financial  Inclusion  which  is  a  step  towards  customer  protection  as  it 
ensures linkage with mainstream financial institutions so that the hapless borrower is not at 
the mercy of the informal service providers who charge notoriously high rates of interest... 
Building financial capability is a very great challenge – the combination of knowledge, skills 
and  attitudes  with  the  opportunities  to  apply  them  –  requires  input  from  multiple  sources 
including those that educate the consumer and those that sell the products. As a result, the 
responsibility  for  wise  decisions  regarding  financial  strategies  and  tools  does  not  lie  solely 
with the individual client. Building financial capabilities is not a unidirectional process while 
Customers  have  a  responsibility  to  be  informed  about  the  products  they  are  “purchasing”, 
financial service providers have a responsibility to understand their market, and respond with 
a  range  of  appropriate  and  affordable  services,  including  savings  and  credit  accounts, 
payment  services,  insurance  products  and  the  ability  to  send  and  receive  remittance 
payments cheaply. In sum, the Banks need to address the needs of the customer and tailor 
products  and  services  customised  to  their  requirement  without  adopting  a  one  size  fits  all 
approach.  They  need  to  apply  principles  of  transparency  in  a  way  that  facilitates  clients’ 
decision-making,  and  verify  assumptions  about  what  clients  understand  and  don’t 
understand about their products and the fine print in the contracts they sign. We at RBI have 
embraced  financial  education  to  protect  consumers  from  fraud  and  abuse.  The  RBI  has  a 
Banking  Ombudsman  Scheme  which  enables  grievance  redress  in  an  expeditious  and 
inexpensive manner and there is a proviso of appeal against the decisions of the Banking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Ombudsman.  The  power  of  appeal  vests  with  the  Deputy  Governor  in  charge  of  the 
Department. 
Thus, financial education and the financial literacy it builds leading to wider financial Inclusion 
and  greater  customer  empowerment  comprise  a  win-win  proposition  at  multiple  levels,  for 
several  stakeholders.  At  the  micro  level,  financial  literacy  helps  poorer  households  to  use 
scarce resources more effectively, choose the financial products that best meet their needs 
and become pro-active decision makers. At the macro level, the institutional level, informed 
customers definitely make for better clients; they help lower institutional risk and contribute to 
a stronger bottom line. At the market level, financially literate consumers are a key element in 
effective consumer protection; placing pressure on financial institutions for services that are 
both  appropriately  priced  and  transparent.  Public  agencies  such  as  central  banks,  must 
ensure  the  consumer  voice  is  heard  thus  aligning  financial  Inclusion,  financial  stability 
integrity  and  consumer  protection  policies.  Inclusion,  stability,  integrity  and  protection  ISIP 
are  core  objectives.  Financial  Education,  Financial  Inclusion  and  Financial  Stability  are  a 
continuum. I wish the conference great success and hope that you have extremely enriching 
deliberations over the course of the conference. Thank you for patient listening. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
