Yves Mersch: Economic and legal limits of central banking 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  IMFS  (Institute  for  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability)  Conference  on 
Monetary and Financial Stability, Frankfurt am Main, 26 November 2013. 
 Dear Professor Wieland, 
dear Professor Klump, 
dear Professor Remsperger, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The Financial Crisis has confronted us with major challenges. For central banks this has not 
only meant testing new waters, moreover it has opened up new responsibilities and tasks. 
But we indeed have to remind ourselves of our limits. 
We need to accept the economic limits what monetary policy can achieve, and we need to 
respect the legal boundaries of our mandate. 
In today’s remarks, I will talk about the institutional and legal foundations of the Economic 
and  Monetary  Union.  The  ECB’s  independence  and  the  price  stability  mandate  conferred 
upon us by the EU Treaty provided a firm anchor for our action during the stormy times of the 
crisis. But there were also shortcomings in the EMU institutional framework that the crisis has 
revealed. 
For some it might be tempting to go now for myopic reforms. However, we need to take the 
longer  view.  Therefore,  we  need  to  stay  ambitious  to  continue  institutional  and  structural 
reforms  in  order  to  facilitate  the  economic  recovery  and  reduce  fragmentation  in  the  euro 
area. 
In this vein the banking union has to ensure a functioning European financial market, where 
banks are properly supervised and can be wound up efficiently if necessary. 
This  will  not  only  ensure  greater  integration  and  stability  for  the  financial  market.  It  also 
means  putting  EMU  as  a  whole  on  a  sounder  footing.  And  for  us  as  central  bankers,  this 
avoids compromising the primacy of price stability. 
Sound institutional framework and legal framework crucial for sound money and 
sound monetary policy 
The legal set-up of the European Economic and Monetary Union acknowledged that a sound 
institutional framework is conducive to a stable and prosperous economy. 
In fact, this is the spirit of the Freiburg School and its conception of “Ordnungspolitik” that 
puts strong emphasis on sound institutions as a pre-condition for sound money that underlie 
the construction of EMU. 
Indeed, it was one of the founding fathers of the Freiburg School, Walter Eucken, who has  
–  in  his  book,  “Grundsätze”  –  provided  the  blueprint  of  a  competitive  order,  for  which  he 
views stability oriented monetary policy as crucial pre-condition. 
“Alle  Bemühungen,  eine  Wettbewerbsordnung  zu  verwirklichen,  sind  umsonst, 
solange  eine  gewisse  Stabilität  des  Geldwertes  nicht  gesichert 
ist.  Die 
für  die  Wettbewerbsordnung  ein  Primat” 
Währungspolitik  besitzt  daher 
(Grundsätze, p. 256). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
[“All endeavours to realize a competitive framework are in vain unless a certain 
level of monetary stability can be ensured. Monetary policy thus has primacy for 
the competitive order.”] 
These  principles  entail  stringent  rules  that  restrict  discretionary  policy  intervention.  They 
thereby provide a predictable environment for private savings, consumption and investment 
decisions. 
But  this  rule-based  approach  should  not  be  understood  as  restrictive  or  oppressive.  By 
contrast,  it  defines  the  scope  of  economic  freedom  and  aims  at  setting  incentives  to  the 
benefit of the individual and the whole society. In fact, economic freedom requires a sound 
legal  structure  and  a  law-enforcing  system  to  protect  the  property  rights  of  owners  and 
enforce contracts in an even-handed manner. 
The EU Treaty adheres to these ordo-liberal principles. The conduct of monetary policy was 
made independent. The members of the decision making body of the ECB, the Governing 
Council, were shielded from external influence on the highest level (Art. 1301). 
The  independence  of  monetary  policy  should  however  not  be  confused  with  a  “carte 
blanche”. The Treaty clearly defines boundaries. 
To counter-balance this high degree of freedom, the tasks are clearly defined. The ECB was 
assigned  a  precise  mandate:  to  maintain  price  stability2.  Likewise,  the  scope  of  action  is 
limited and some tasks are explicitly prohibited, e.g. the outright purchases of government 
bonds on the primary market, i.e. the monetization of public debt.3 
The EMU implied, however, a historically rare asymmetry. Monetary policy is conducted at 
the  European,  supranational  level,  whereas  most  other  areas  remained  largely  under 
national sovereignty. 
Would  that  asymmetry  matter?  There  was  a  broad-based  understanding  that  no  tensions 
would arise, because: 
• 
First, fiscal safeguards were set up. The Stability and Growth Pact should ensure 
solid and sustainable public finances. 
Second, national policies would counter regional imbalances, peer pressure would 
prevent negative spillover effects, and markets would discipline complacent national 
policies. 
Third,  the  prevailing  consensus  assumed  that  financial  crises  would  not  occur  in 
advanced economies but only in faraway places. 
                                                  
1   “When exercising the powers and carrying out the tasks and duties conferred upon them by the Treaties and 
the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB, neither the European Central Bank, nor a national central bank, nor 
any  member of  their decision-making bodies  shall  seek or take instructions  from  Union  institutions,  bodies, 
offices or agencies, from any government of a Member State or from any other body. The Union institutions, 
bodies, offices or agencies and the governments of the Member States undertake to respect this principle and 
not to seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies of the European Central Bank or of the 
national central banks in the performance of their tasks.” (Art. 130 TFEU) 
2   “The primary objective of the European System of Central Banks (hereinafter referred to as “the ESCB”) shall 
be to maintain price stability.” (Art. 127 (1) TFEU) 
3   “Overdraft facilities or any other type of credit facility with the European Central Bank or with the central banks 
of  the  Member  States  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  “national  central  banks”)  in  favour  of  Union  institutions, 
bodies,  offices  or  agencies,  central  governments,  regional,  local  or  other  public  authorities,  other  bodies 
governed by public law, or public undertakings of Member States shall be prohibited, as shall the purchase 
directly from them by the European Central Bank or national central banks of debt instruments.”(Art. 123: (1) 
TFEU) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The first decade of the EMU was promising. The favourable economic environment covered 
any weaknesses. Now we are wiser. The design of the institutional framework proved porous 
in particular in four places: 
• 
incentives 
for  prudent 
fiscal  policies  and 
First, the binding effect of the Stability and Growth Pact was insufficient to establish 
appropriate 
to  contain  national 
developments which can cause damage to the union as a whole. 
Second, the framework lacked a mechanism which obliges national economic policy 
to a long-term growth strategy. 
Third, our framework turned out to be incapable of recognising risks in the financial 
sector at an early stage and to prevent imbalances that in the end destabilised entire 
economies. 
Finally, the disciplining function of the financial markets failed: Even countries with 
drastic  losses  in  competitiveness  and  exuberant  debt  levels  had  to  pay  only 
marginally  higher  interest  rates  on  their  government  bonds  than  countries  with 
sound fiscal positions. 
   We painfully experienced how welfare is compromised if market principles are violated and 
the institutional framework proves inconsistent. 
Our  institutional  framework  is  being  revised.  While  much  remains  to  be  done,  the  reform 
effort and steps toward a re-design in EMU architecture are taken at a speed and dynamic 
that is unprecedented in European Post-War history. 
For this to be a success, we have to ensure a framework that sets the incentives both for 
private  and  public  actors  towards  a competitive  economy  within  a  system  of  stable  prices, 
reminding ourselves of core principles and to respect the respective limits of public policy for 
sustainable growth and employment. 
The treaty mandate is the guidepost for all monetary policy action 
Although  the  crisis  shook  our  economies,  driving  the  euro  area  into  a  period  of  deep 
recession  and  financial  instability,  the  institutional  framework  on  monetary  policy  has 
provided us with the necessary guidepost for action. 
It is precisely this pre-condition of price stability for economic welfare that has been at the 
heart  of  the  monetary  policy  decisions  by  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council.  Monetary 
accommodation  and  wide-ranging  non-standard measures  are  in  place  for  good  reason  to 
fulfil our given mandate explicitly defined in a pragmatic way. 
Moreover, all measures were in full compliance  with the legal boundaries laid down in the 
Treaty. Only the European Court of Justice has competence to issue a binding opinion on the 
boundaries. 
However,  the  effective  and  successful  conduct  of  monetary  policy  must  not  be  used  as  a 
pretext for complacency in other policy areas. 
First, it is up to the governments adopting the necessary reforms to increase competitiveness 
as well as addressing structural obstacles impeding growth and freeing resources for sound 
fiscal policies. 
Second,  as  regards  the  banking  sector,  the  ECB  should  ensure  that  its  liquidity  smoothly 
flows  to  the  banking  sector.  Excess  liquidity  policy,  however  useful  and  necessary  it  has 
been – and still is, should not become a permanent feature. It should be limited in time to 
avoid dressing-up non-performing loans or ever-greening bad assets that would undermine 
incentives to restructure or to address structural weaknesses in banks’ balance sheets. 
Let  me  add  in  this  context,  that  also  with  respect  to  our  most  recent  monetary  policy 
decisions, it is now up to the banks making use of the favourable financing condition that we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
provide, passing this on to households and firms to ultimately revive the flow of credit in the 
euro area. The ball is in the court of the private sector and the euro area governments. 
So  let  me  turn  to  how  we  can  rethink  the  financial  sector  architecture  in  Europe  for  long-
lasting stability and integration of the banking sector. 
Missing elements in architecture: the banking union 
The path towards a more sustainable architecture of EMU is still under-way. But much has 
been achieved. 
Indeed,  the  crisis  revealed  the  fragilities  and  flaws  in  the  foundations  of  the  European 
construction,  especially  in  the  financial  sector.  We  understood  that  national  laws  and 
regulatory frameworks proved inadequate. The lack of harmonised policies and centralised 
provisions  at  European  level  caused  a  situation  in  which  banks  operated  not  on  a  level 
playing  field.  More  importantly,  there  was  no  institutional  framework  to  deal  with  systemic 
risks  in  the  banking  sector,  be  it  domestic  and  cross-border.  In  fact,  some  of  the  biggest 
players virtually eluded any form of control or limits to their activity. 
The establishment of the banking union is therefore an important milestone towards genuine 
stability and integration of financial markets in the EMU. Just a few weeks ago the regulation 
establishing  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  entered  into  force  and  the 
construction of the Single Resolution Mechanism is on its way. 
The establishment of the SSM is a fundamental step within the new EMU architecture. Not 
only  because  it  will  be  vital  for  banking  stability  in  the  euro  area,  but  because  it  will  be 
housed in the ECB. This implies both major institutional and logistical consequences for our 
institution. 
Just  as for  single  monetary  policy,  common supervision  must  be  built  on  solid  institutional 
and  legal  footing.  Again,  a  stringently  defined  institutional  framework  will  set  out  a  clear 
mandate,  but  also  provisions  that  specify  the  boundaries  of  the  tasks  and  responsibilities 
needed  for  banks  to  operate  in  a  system  of  effective  supervision  providing  a  level  playing 
field across the euro area. 
Article  127(6)  TFEU  provides  that  the  Council  may  confer  specific  tasks  upon  the  ECB 
concerning  policies  relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  other 
financial institutions with the explicit exception of insurance undertakings.4 
Let me mention the foundation stones on which we have built the SSM and which will serve 
to ensure effective supervision: 
First,  the  ECB  should  remain  independent  in  carrying  out  all  its  tasks.  This  includes  the 
supervisory tasks conferred to the ECB. Independence is a key element to avoid leniency to 
any  type  of  political  pressures.  Such  pressures  would  undermine  the  effectiveness  of  the 
supervisory actions, which should only be guided by economic and technical considerations. 
Second,  the  ECB  should  be  able  to  carry  out  the  tasks  assigned  to  it  effectively  and 
rigorously without any risk to its reputation. 
Third, there must be a strict separation between the ECB’s new tasks concerning supervision 
and our monetary policy tasks assigned by the Treaty (Art. 25 SSM Regulation). ECB staff 
involved  in  supervisory  activities  shall  be  organisationally  separated  and  have  separate 
reporting lines. The operation of the Governing Council will be completely differentiated as 
                                                
4   “The  Council,  acting  by  means  of  regulations  in  accordance  with  a  special  legislative  procedure,  may 
unanimously, and after consulting the European Parliament and the European Central Bank, confer specific 
tasks  upon  the  European  Central  Bank  concerning  policies  relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit 
institutions and other financial institutions with the exception of insurance undertakings.” (Art 127 (6) TFEU) 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
regards monetary and supervisory functions. This includes strictly separated meetings and 
agendas.  In  this  way,  the  new  tasks  will  not  interfere  with  the  overriding  price  stability 
mandate. 
Fourth, consistently with the principle of conferral laid out in Article 5 of the Treaty and in line 
with the subsidiarity principles and proportionality, the SSM will be able to have full recourse 
to the knowledge, expertise and operational resources of national supervisory authorities and 
to use the national know-how as much as possible. 
Fifth, the SSM should operate in a manner fully consistent with the principles underpinning 
the  single  market  in  financial  services  and  in  full  adherence  to  the  single  rulebook  for 
financial services. The envisaged involvement in the SSM of non-euro area Member States 
on a voluntary basis shall be seen as a further element fostering integration in the EU. 
Sixth, the ECB is committed to comply  with the  highest standards of accountability for the 
supervisory  tasks.  Accordingly,  Inter-Institutional  Agreements  between  the  European 
Parliament and the ECB on the cooperation of procedures related to the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  obligate  the  ECB  to  engage  in  hearings,  reports,  answers  to  MEP  enquiries, 
information  disclosure  which  will  enhance  transparency.  Likewise,  the  ECB  signed  a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  with  the  EU  Council  of  Ministers.  Therein  the 
cooperation  on  procedures  related  to  the  SSM  is  defined,  similar  to  the  Inter-Institutional 
Agreement (IIA) with the European Parliament. 
At  the  same  time  preserving  confidentiality  is  necessary  when  dealing  with  highly  market-
sensitive  matters.  Indeed,  Article  27  SSM  Regulation  provides  that  the  ECB,  for  its 
supervisory  tasks,  is  subject  to  the  professional  secrecy  regime  in  the  ESCB  statute  and 
CRD  IV.  The  professional  secrecy  regime  of  the  SSM  Regulation  does  not  allow  the 
disclosure of confidential information. 
Now, looking at the future, what needs to be done next? 
While the ECB has already started to build up the new house, a number of challenges lie in 
front of us. 
Before officially taking up the new supervisory task, the ECB will conduct a comprehensive 
assessment of the banks’ balance sheets. This exercise will include three components. The 
first  is  a  supervisory  risk  assessment  addressing  key  risks  in  the  banks’  balance  sheets, 
including  liquidity,  leverage  and  funding.  The  second  is  the  asset  quality  review  that  will 
assess  credit  exposures,  on-  and  off-balance  sheet  positions  and  domestic/non-domestic 
exposures.  The  third  component  is  the  stress  test  that  will  build  on  and  complement  the 
asset quality review by providing a forward-looking view of banks’ shock-absorption capacity 
under stress. 
This process has already started. After a pilot phase during which the ECB called for – and 
subsequently integrated – feedback from the banks, the ECB on 18 November sent out the 
templates for data collection. 
Finally,  let  me  mention  the  second,  indispensable  pillar  of  the  banking  union:  the  Single 
Resolution Mechanism (SRM), which will represent a necessary complement to the SSM. In 
parallel  with  the  centralisation  of  supervision  at the  European  level,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
create  adequate  instruments  to  intervene  on  troubled  banks  at  a  centralised  level  as  well. 
Discussions on the rules of the SRM are still on-going and difficult, but we strongly support 
the envisaged time-line for the SRM to become effective in January 2015. 
The combination of these elements will be key to achieve a higher degree of transparency, to 
make the necessary repairs to balance sheets and to regain confidence. A more robust and 
safer financial sector in a strengthened monetary union will be the outcome under the new 
rules. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Conclusions 
The  legal  foundations  of  the  EMU  and  in  particular  the  independence  of  monetary  policy 
enshrined  in  the  Treaty  served  as  crucial  guideposts  for  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  also 
during  the  course  of  the  crisis.  Other  parts  of  the  EMU  institutional  framework,  however, 
proved  to  be  porous.  Those  foundations  should  also  guide  our  work  on  the  design  of  the 
banking union. The aim is to create a level playing field for all banks with no uncertainties or 
loopholes distorting competition in the Single Market. 
Both  banking  supervision  and  monetary  policy  share  a  number  of  institutional  foundations 
that  will  ensure  their  effectiveness:  a  precise  mandate,  independence  from  euro  area 
governments and strong accountability towards the European people. 
But let’s be also reminded that both banking supervision and monetary policy face limits to 
their  effectiveness.  Structural  reforms  fostering  economic  growth,  sound  fiscal  policies 
ensuring  sustainable  public  budgets  and  an  effective  resolution  mechanisms  to  deal  with 
non-viable banks without the involvement of tax-payers are the best to ensure both effective 
and  stringent  supervisory  policies  and  –  what  Walter  Eucken  has  called  –  the  primacy  of 
monetary policy, that is a monetary policy fully focused on the delivery of price stability. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
