Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Role of the Islamic financial system in 
supporting green technology 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia, at The Green Financing: Discover Green Technology Industry in Malaysia “Role of 
the Islamic financial system in supporting green technology”, Kuala Lumpur, 8 October 2013. 
 The recent haze that caused unhealthy air quality is the direct result of acute deforestation 
and  irresponsible  practices,  a  grim  reminder  of  the  unfolding  environmental  catastrophes 
confronting  us  and  our  future  generation.  Globally,  extreme  climate  change,  resource 
depletion  and  environment  degradation  have  increasingly  become  looming  threats  to 
livelihoods.  Greenhouse  gas  emissions  are  on  the  rise  and  atmospheric  carbon  dioxide 
concentrations are at its highest in three million years. It is reported that the global average 
temperature has risen by 0.74oC over the past century and is forecasted to rise by 1.8oC to 
4oC by year 2100. Severe deforestation issues across the continents and over dependence 
on non-renewable energy resources pose further challenges to the finite carrying capacity of 
the earth. Sustainable development has become an imperative. It is a global imperative given 
the interconnected world we live in. It affects everyone. No one is isolated. A united action is 
therefore  required  to  solve  these  major  ecological  problems  before  solutions  become 
impossible. 
I am pleased to be here today to speak at The Green Financing: Discover Green Technology 
Industry in Malaysia (GF 2013). I would like to congratulate the Islamic Banking and Finance 
Institute of Malaysia (IBFIM) and the Malaysian Green Technology Corporation (MGTC) for 
organising this conference, given the global surge in green technology activities as catalysts 
for  sustainable  developments.  The  aims  of  this  forum  are  to  narrow  the  gap  of  Islamic 
financial  institutions’  understanding  on  green  technology  and  to  provide  green  technology 
companies with the latest information on Islamic financing products and services. 
It was almost a year ago that I spoke at a similar Conference outlining on how the financial 
systems can play a catalyzing role in the development of green technology. I mentioned a 
number of broad key priorities and I am pleased to announce that encouraging progress has 
been made. 
Today, my remarks place emphasis on the current and future prospects of Islamic financing 
solutions that can support the vibrancy and dynamism of the green technology ecosystem. In 
Malaysia,  Islamic  financial  institutions  can  leverage  on  the  large  untapped  opportunities  in 
the  green  technology  sector  and  at  the  same  time  contribute  towards  the  country’s 
transformation into a high value-added economy. 
Increasing global importance of green technology 
Against  the  backdrop  of  current  climate  and  environmental  concerns  that  are  the 
consequence of unsustainable economic activities, green technology emerges as a winning 
proposition.  Green  technology  has  strong  potentials  to  stimulate  economic  growth  while 
mitigating  environmental  degradation.  National  and  international  efforts  to  promote  green 
technology as a new source of growth have intensified in recent years. There is a growing 
momentum  in  scaling  up  the  green  agenda  on  a  global  basis,  with  countries  such  as 
Denmark,  South  Korea,  Finland  and  Germany  already  embarking  on  green  technology 
movements  in  their  respective  countries.  Since  2007,  the  worldwide  market  for  green 
technology has grown on an average of 12% annually, and is now worth over EUR2 trillion. 
By 2025, it is forecasted to double to EUR4.4 trillion. The global market for renewable energy 
namely wind, solar photovoltaic (PV) and biofuels has grown by more than 30% in the recent 
few years and is estimated to reach nearly US$400 billion by 2021 . Economies that have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
strategically invested in the green technology sector are already reaping the benefits of the 
transition  to  green  initiatives.  Germany,  for  example,  has  a  green  industry  growing  at  an 
annual  average  of  12%  since  2007  and  a  global  market  share  of  15%.  Green  technology 
companies contributed 11% of its GDP and employing 1.4 million workers. In the case of the 
solar energy sector, Malaysia is now one of the top producers in PV manufacturing and this 
industry  has  generated  direct  foreign  investment  of  over  RM12  billion  and  created  over 
10,000 skilled and well paid jobs . 
Green technology offers specific solutions for pressing ecological and social challenges, and 
for this reason it is expected to continue to gain global importance. There are many forces 
that  would  drive  the  green  technology  industry  into  the  future;  demographic  change, 
urbanisation,  globalisation,  scarcity  of  resources  and  the  challenge  arising  from  climate 
change.  These  forces  would  inevitably  transform  society  towards  a  green  economy.  Its 
usage in traditional industries would promote the development of new technology and recast 
existing one. Green technologies have also proven to drive modernisation in the traditional 
industries, in terms of better utilisation of energy and natural resources and could prove to be 
a strategic advantage in doing business. 
Some have aptly compared the green revolution to the industrial revolution, an era that had 
profoundly  changed  our  civilisation.  Just  as  the  transformative  19th-century  innovations 
changed businesses, so too will green technologies alter industries, companies and societies 
for  the  environmental  good,  thus  with  these  changes  create  new  opportunities  for 
businesses. 
The  shift towards  a  green  economy  affects  all  stakeholders  –  decision makers,  and  policy 
formulators,  companies  and  their  customers.  Increasingly,  investors  are  emphasizing 
sustainability to the environment as an important investment criterion. In Malaysia, the New 
Economic  Model  incorporates  sustainability  as  one  of  its  key  principles  and  it  has  been 
identified  as  a  Key  Strategic  Reform  Initiative.  In  2009,  we  have  made  a  commitment  in 
Copenhagen to reduce up to 40% in terms of carbon emission intensity of GDP by the year 
2020.  The  National  Green  Technology  Policy  launched  during  the  same  year  provides 
direction and motivation for the growth of the green technology industry and to enhance its 
contribution to the national economy. Key agencies such as MGTC and Sustainable Energy 
Development Authority (SEDA) have been established to provide the required support and 
incentives to promote the industry. 
On the financing side, Bank Negara Malaysia has worked closely with the Ministry of Finance 
and the Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water to establish the Green Technology 
Financing Scheme (GTFS). The scheme is expected to benefit over 140 companies. With an 
initial allocation of RM1.5 billion, it was recently increased with an additional RM2.0 billion. 
The scheme was structured to reduce the financial risk borne by financial institutions, as the 
government  guarantees  60%  of  the  financing  amount  via  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation 
Malaysia  Berhad  (CGC)  and  bears  2%  of  the  total  interest  or  profit  rate.  This  financing 
framework aims to improve the preconditions for financial institutions to finance viable and 
innovative  green  technology  companies.  It  provides  avenues  that  help  bridge  information 
gaps between financiers and businesses, and introduces credit enhancements and financial 
incentives  to  address  any  market  short  comings  in  meeting  a  legitimate  economic  need. 
Efforts are also being carried out to strengthen the capacity of financial institutions to provide 
advisory support to businesses. The certification process that verifies the businesses which 
qualify for the GTFS is central to these efforts, as it not only verifies the technical capabilities 
of the businesses, but also assists in assessing its commercial viability. 
Since  the  introduction  of  the  GTFS  in  2010,  the  growth  of  green  technology  financing  in 
Malaysia is beginning to gain traction amongst financial institutions. To date, 109 approved 
projects have received financing worth RM1.5 billion by 22 banks, of which 17 projects are 
receiving  financing  worth  RM300  million  from  six  Islamic  banks  .  For  the  first  9  months  of 
2013,  33  companies  received  approved  financing  facilities  totaling  RM416  million.  The 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
approval  rate  for  the  financing  has  also  improved  from  54%  in  December  2012  to  59%  in 
September  2013,  reflective  of  the  positive  reception  of  financial  institutions  towards  green 
technology  financing.  The  recipients  of  the  financing  facilities  operate  in  a  broad  range  of 
green  technology  sub-sectors  that  covers  energy,  buildings,  transportation  and  water  and 
waste management. This financing initiative has also contributed to increasing employment, 
with  the  generation  of  nearly  1,400  jobs.  The  additional  allocation  of  RM2.0  billion  of  the 
GTFS therefore presents an opportunity for financial institutions, including Islamic banks to 
further expand financing into this new and exciting area of growth. 
is 
Strong potential for Islamic finance to support green technology 
This brings me to my next point – the role of Islamic finance in contributing towards a diverse 
and robust financing ecosystem for green ventures. In the Quran, verses 11 to 14 of Al-Fajr 
emphasise the need to care for the environment and the forms of life that Allah has created 
on this earth that includes proper usage of natural resources. Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W), 
in  a  hadith  in  Musnad  Ahmad  mentioned  that  mankind  would  be  rewarded  for  efforts  in 
improving greenery; making it incumbent on every Muslim to contribute towards such efforts. 
In terms of the relationship between mankind and the environment, the teachings of Islam 
basically promote preservation of natural resources and the need to respect all living things. 
Failure  to  do  so  would  be  detrimental,  as  stated  in  verse  41  of  Al-Rum  where  severe 
destruction of the land and sea would come upon those who mistreat the environment. It is 
therefore crucial for everyone, including Islamic banks to consciously play their role towards 
ensuring  environmental  sustainability.  Achieving  environmental  sustainability 
the 
responsibility of everyone and the banking industry must do its part. 
The role of Islamic banks extends beyond being a component of a financial system, but as 
part of a total value-based social system that is driven by the principle of public interest or 
maslahah.  This  system  seeks  to  enhance  the  general  welfare  of  society.  Environmental 
protection  and  sustainability  should  be  part  of  the  Islamic  finance  agenda  to  ensure  the 
fulfillment and establishments of the spirit of Islamic tenets. 
As the global economy is transitioning towards a low-carbon and more sustainable model, 
the industry can contribute immensely towards the greening of the world. Islamic financing 
facility for green technology is another growth area worth engaging and with the necessary 
incentives  and  infrastructure  in  place,  our  Islamic  banks  are  capable  of  becoming  a 
significant player. 
While  the  funding  of  green  technology  projects  from  conventional  banking  is  encouraging, 
the same cannot be said of Islamic banks, based on the latest data available. The approved 
GTFS projects indicate that only two projects have received financing from two Islamic banks 
in  2013,  compared  to  the  past  two  years,  where  six  and  seven  projects  were  funded  by 
Islamic  banks  in  2012  and  2011  respectively,  Moving  ahead,  due  to  the  increasingly 
complex,  diverse  and  rapidly-changing  nature  of  green  technology,  there  is  a  need  to 
develop  new  and  innovative  financial  solutions  to facilitate the  growth  of green  technology 
companies.  The  Islamic  banks  need  to  respond  to  these  needs  or  risk  missing  the 
opportunities brought about by the green technology revolution. 
Of late, greater use of equity-based models in Islamic financial solutions has been observed. 
This includes participatory or equity based contracts such as Mudarabah and  Musharakah 
that  support  entrepreneurial  ventures.  In  Malaysia,  the  adoption  of  these  contracts  has 
increased  from  1.4%  in  2008  to  5.2%  in  2012.  The  nature  of  these  contracts  provides 
immense  opportunities  for  Islamic  banks  to  leverage  on  the  ‘green  certified’  SMEs  to  use 
participatory  contracts  which  advocate  profit  and  risk  sharing  between  banks  and  the 
borrowers. 
The Mudarabah contract can be modeled for various financing purposes for the SMEs, such 
as  for  one-off  project  financing,  new  start-up  enterprises,  investment  funds  and  sukuk 
structure.  The  Musharakah  structure  is  applicable  for  private  equity  and  venture  capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
investments. The principles of these contracts can foster the spirit of entrepreneurship and 
promote  due  diligence  and  proper  management  of  funds  by  the  entrepreneur  whom  will 
benefit from the Islamic bank’s expertise in profit generation and financial management. The 
contracts  also  strengthen  the  fiduciary  duty  of  Islamic  banks  as  manager  of  the  business 
venture and help to align its focus on longer term value creation. 
Islamic banks ought to further explore the possibility of using Mudarabah and Musharakah 
contracts  to  finance  SMEs  involved  in  green  technology.  However  these  contracts  carry 
different sets of risks, therefore, it is important for Islamic banks to build its capacity in terms 
of talent and risk management capabilities to understand and manage new risks peculiar to 
the  profit  and  loss  sharing  contracts.  There  is  a  need  to  adopt  strong  governance, 
transparency  and  disclosure  practices  to  meet  the  due  diligence  requirements  for 
determining the viability of business and investment proposals. 
In  Malaysia,  the  recently  enforced  Islamic  Financial  Services  Act  2013  is  an  important 
milestone in providing an enabling environment to spur more risk-sharing transactions. This 
new legislation promotes certainty to the legal and regulatory treatment of Islamic financial 
transactions  by  providing  legal  recognition  to  the  contractual  requirements  in  accordance 
with the Shariah. There will also be issuance of Shariah and operational standards of each 
Shariah contract that provides greater clarity and transparency, therefore facilitating effective 
risk and profit sharing activities to take place. We aim to issue the relevant Shariah standards 
before the end of 2013. 
I  am  pleased  to  note  that  a  local  conventional  bank  and  an  Islamic  bank  have  recently 
embarked on an innovative financing for the renewable energy sector with the launch of a 
green mortgage to facilitate installation of solar systems for home owners to benefit from the 
nation’s  Feed-in  Tariff  plan.  This  positive  move  is  an  indication  that  banks  are  not  only 
looking at corporate but also retail green financing. In providing home owners the opportunity 
to directly participate in the renewable energy sector, this distinctive financing also helps to 
boost  investment  and  awareness  on  green  technology  in  Malaysia.  This  is  an  exciting 
prospect  for  further  achievements  in  the  field  of  renewable  energy,  one  which  provides 
Islamic  financial  institutions  the  opportunity  to  take  such  initiative,  in  support  of  the 
government’s aim to be environmentally sustainable. 
The sukuk market, which is a high growth segment in Islamic finance also has an important 
role  in  supporting  the  growth  of  the  green  technology  sector.  Sukuk  has  become  an 
important source of funding for long term development projects, ranging from infrastructure 
building, healthcare, transportation, telecommunication to education. The increasing role of 
the sukuk market in financing green and renewable energy projects illustrates the appeal of 
Islamic finance towards the growing socially responsible investment, sustainable investments 
and  ethical  finance.  There  is  strong  compatibility  between  sukuk  and  funding  of  green 
projects, which usually require large capital outlays  with long gestation periods. There has 
been a series of issuances since the debut of the green sukuk in France in 2012, including 
the issuance of a sukuk in  Malaysia earlier this  year that is part of a larger US$1.5 billion 
Multi-Currency Sukuk Issuance Programme for sustainable development that was ten times 
over-subscribed. 
Globally, the increasing involvement of governments across the Middle East and North Africa 
(MENA)  region  in  various  projects  for  renewable  energy  and  clean,  efficient  technologies 
indicate  strong  growth  prospect  for  sukuk  to  support  these  green  technology  projects. 
Backed by the international Green Sukuk Working Group that has been instrumental in the 
development and issuance of green sukuk since its establishment in 2012, this segment of 
the  Islamic  capital  market  that  advocates  for  greater  socially  responsible  investment  is 
expected to flourish further. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Reducing information asymmetry – a key pre-requisite for sustainable financing 
Islamic finance has strong potentials to contribute towards a sustainable financing ecosystem 
for the green technology sector. I have shared with you the different facets of Islamic finance 
that  can  meet  the  needs  of  green  businesses.  Key  to  this  is  the  need  to  reduce  the 
information  asymmetry  between  Islamic  financial  institutions  and  businesses.  The  GTFS 
framework  has  been  instrumental  in  assisting  to  bridge  the  information  gaps  between 
financiers  and  businesses.  Islamic  financial  institutions  now  have  to  build  its  capacity  and 
capabilities to assess the viability of the green projects despite its complexity. 
Green technology is a fledgling industry in this country and the banks require the knowledge 
and  expertise  to  conduct  thorough  evaluation  of  the  projects.  Training  institutions  such  as 
IBFIM  can  play  a  role  in  developing  talents  beyond  the  needs  of  traditional  business  and 
create  experts  in  the  assessment  and  evaluation  of  green  projects.  This  would  assist  the 
development of new skills for the credit officers and risk management personnel to effectively 
undertake competitive analysis of the prospects presented by green projects. Islamic banks 
could,  in  phases,  consider  to  adopt  the  Equator  Principles,  a  pledge  given  by  78  of  its 
international conventional peers to enhance their capability to provide financing to ventures 
which are both economically viable and environmentally friendly. 
Conclusion 
The growth potential of green technology in Malaysia is boundless with the strong prospects 
to contribute significantly to the country’s transformation into a high value-added economy. 
There  are  large  untapped  opportunities  in  this  sector  and  Islamic  financial  institutions  can 
allocate its resources into this segment to carve a niche market for Islamic finance. 
On that note, I hope for this conference to become an impetus to spark greater interest from 
Islamic financial institutions to further explore financing for green ventures and to generate 
new innovative Islamic financial solutions for this viable and promising new growth area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
