Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi: Strengthening financial sector supervision 
and current regulatory priorities 
Welcoming remarks by H E Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi, Governor of the Central Bank of 
the United Arab Emirates, at the 9th High-Level Meeting for the Middle East & North Africa 
Region  on  “Strengthening  financial  sector  supervision  and  current  regulatory  priorities”, 
organized  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking Supervision  (BCBS),  the  Financial  Stability 
Institute (FSI) and the Arab Monetary Fund (AMF), Abu Dhabi, 18 November 2013. 
 Good Morning 
Excellencies 
- 
 The  honorable,  Josef  Tošovský,  Chairman  of  the  BIS  Financial  Stability 
Institute, 
H.E. Dr. Jassim Al Mannai, General Manager & Chairman of the Arab Monetary 
Fund, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies & gentlemen, 
- 
- 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the UAE, especially those who traveled a long 
way to be here with us at the outset of this important high level meeting, and I would mention 
in  particular  the  honorable  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor,  Sveriges  Riksbank  and  the 
honorable Eric Rosengren, President & CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, and the 
distinguished speakers. 
First  of  all,  I  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  organizers  for  their  careful  selection  of  the 
meeting title: “Strengthening Financial sector supervision and Current Regulatory Priorities”, 
also for the choice of the excellent topics of discussion. I believe this meeting will definitely 
help  regulators  in  the  MENA  region  develop  appropriate  methodologies,  regulations  and 
macro-prudential oversight regimes that would help us all achieve our objectives, in a more 
efficient and improved manner. 
Regulatory development is currently a key focus for Central Bank of the UAE. Very briefly, I 
would like to mention our two recent Regulations, namely: 
Regulations regarding mortgage loans, and 
Regulations re monitoring large exposure limits 
1) 
2) 
I  would  not  go  into  details  of  these  two  Regulations,  as  their  details  are  available  on  the 
Central Bank website (or will be available very soon). 
However,  what  concerns  us  at  Central  Bank  of  the  UAE,  is  that  with  strengthening 
regulations and related supervision, extension of credit through the banking system will be 
impacted. And since we are operating in one of the developing economies in the region, we 
believe that we have to support economic and social development. For this reason we have 
to  focus  on  certain  initiatives  that  could  mitigate  the  impact  that  would  come  through 
strengthening regulations and related supervision, such as: 
1)  Financial  Inclusion:  In  this  respect,  and  although  the  UAE  is  well  developed  when  it 
comes  to  Financial  Inclusion,  there  are  still  unbanked  sectors  of  the  society  and  under 
banked geographical areas within the UAE. 
Therefore,  we  need  to  provide  the  infrastructure  necessary  for  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions  to  provide  their  services  including  credit,  to  all  sectors  of  the  society  and  in  all 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
geographical  regions  within  the  UAE.  This  will  be  achieved,  sometimes,  through  using 
electronic systems. 
2)  SME  Financing:  We  believe  that  SME  Financing  will  become  more  difficult  when  new 
global regulations are implemented, therefore, we have to find ways and means to improve 
SME  financing  outside  the  banking  system.  At  the  moment,  the  UAE  is  looking  at 
experiences of other jurisdictions and recently we have at a GCC Banking Conference which 
was  held  at  the  beginning  of  this month,  discussed  the  experience  of  Korea. We  are  also 
looking at the experiences of Italy and Malaysia. 
We believe that SME Financing is very important for job creation. Our region in particular will 
need to create more jobs in the future, due to relatively young population. 
3) Domestic Debt Market: The development of a domestic debt market is, in my view, of a 
national  priority.  Companies,  particularly  large  private  companies  and  GREs,  need  an 
alternative to bank lending. It is a more reliable source of funding and it is less costly for large 
corporations. Banks also would need instruments of the domestic Debt Market to fulfill the 
requirements  of  Basel  3  regarding  liquidity  ratios.  As  local  debt  markets  are  at  an  infancy 
stage  in  many  countries  in  the  region,  this  would  make  it  difficult  for  banks  to  hold  high-
quality liquid debt instruments as “preemptive” liquidity buffers against early signs of stress 
as required by Basel 3. 
Therefore, it is necessary for the UAE now to expedite the issuance of the public debt law 
and  to  set  up  the  needed  market  infrastructure,  as  a  first  step  on  the  way  to  a  vibrant 
domestic debt market. 
Excellencies 
Ladies & gentlemen 
With this I come to the end of my speech, but before I close, I would like to thank the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS),  the  FSI  of  BIS  and  the  AMF,  for  holding  this 
important high level meeting here in Abu Dhabi, UAE. 
I wish you all a successful meeting. 
Thank you for your attention… 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
