Haruhiko Kuroda: Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
Remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the International Council 
Meeting of the Bretton Woods Committee, Washington DC, 10 October 2013. 
 Introduction 
It is my honor to take part in this wonderful meeting as a panelist today. 
When I first looked at the list of questions prepared by the Committee to shape my remarks, I 
was stunned by the sheer number and scope of the questions. This points to the fact that we 
are  surrounded  by  daunting  challenges  in  this  interconnected  world,  and  it  is  our 
responsibility to sincerely meet those challenges. Given the time constraints today, my focus 
will naturally be on monetary policy. 
The  steering  of  policy  has  become  increasingly  difficult  in  recent  times,  and  many  of  my 
fellow central bankers have found themselves in uncharted waters. Since the outbreak of the 
Lehman  crisis,  major  central  banks  around  the  globe  have  introduced  unconventional 
monetary policy measures, including asset purchases, amid the constraints of a zero lower 
bound for nominal interest rates. The Bank of Japan has also implemented unconventional 
monetary  policy  several  times,  since  more  than  a  decade  ago,  and  has  successfully 
accumulated  ample  experience.  However,  we  have  not  been  successful  in  overcoming 
deflation.  To  this  end,  in  April,  immediately  after  I  became  the  Governor  of  the  BoJ,  we 
introduced  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing,  dubbed  the  QQE.  The  QQE  is 
markedly  different 
from 
unconventional monetary policies other central banks have been carrying out. Today, in the 
time allotted to me, I would like to explain the uniqueness of the QQE. 
the  past  and 
implemented 
the  policies 
the  BoJ 
from 
in 
Challenges and economic situation 
Japan’s  economy  has  been  mired  in  deflation  for  the  past  15  years.  In  the  meantime, 
people’s  inflation  expectations  declined  and  the  recognition  that  prices  will  not  increase  
– namely, deflationary expectations – became entrenched. Amid the situation of prices not 
increasing, the holding of cash or deposits became a better investment, and thus firms and 
households  hoarded  cash  and  did  not  make  other  productive  investments.  Persistent 
deflation  encouraged  behavior  to  stay  status  quo,  and  this  deprived  Japan’s  economy  of 
vitality. 
There  were  phases  of  economic  recovery  in  the  meantime,  but  they  did  not  lead  to  a 
sustainable increase in prices. The Phillips curve, which shows the relationship between the 
output gap and inflation, shifted downward in tandem with a decline in inflation expectations. 
The average inflation rate envisaged when the economy is at an average state has been 0 to 
0.5  percent  for  the  past  15  years  or  so.  Those  in  the  other  six  G7  countries  have  been 
anchored around the inflation target of 2 percent. 
The largest problem for Japan’s economy is that prices will not increase even if the level of 
economic activity rises. Therefore, the greatest challenge is to raise inflation expectations. 
Uniqueness of the QQE 
Based  on  this  recognition,  the  BoJ  introduced  the  QQE  in  April.  This  new  policy  aimed  at 
increasing  inflation  to  the  global  standard  of  2  percent  by  working  directly  on  inflation 
expectations.  Specifically,  the  policy  comprised  two  features.  First,  to  show  the  BoJ’s 
determination that it would overcome deflation at the earliest possible time through a strong 
and clear statement. Therefore, the period in which the BoJ  would achieve the target was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
clearly specified as “about two years.” The second feature, for the purpose of underpinning 
such  determination,  was  to  launch  massive  monetary  easing  that  clearly  differed  from  the 
past policies. Specifically, the BoJ declared that there would be a doubling in two years of the 
monetary base that it provides. As a result, Japan’s monetary base two years from now will 
become  270  trillion  yen,  or  2.8  trillion  dollars,  reaching  more  than  50  percent  of  nominal 
GDP. This ratio is 20 percent for the U.S. Federal Reserve and 23 percent for the Bank of 
England. As the BoJ will double the holdings of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) on its 
asset  side  when  increasing  the  monetary  base,  the  QQE  also  aims  at  putting  strong 
downward pressure on long-term interest rates. 
A  core  mechanism  of  the  policy  is  to  raise  inflation  expectations  and  contain  long-term 
interest  rates.  Under  the  BoJ’s  clear  commitment  and  a  new  phase  of  massive  monetary 
easing, inflation expectations will be raised, while an increase in long-term interest rates will 
be contained through massive purchases of JGBs. As a result, real interest rates will decline 
and this will create stimulative effects for economic activity. If this leads to an actual rise in 
price indices, it will in turn lead to an increase in inflation expectations. 
State of progress under the QQE 
Six months have passed since the introduction of the QQE, and this mechanism has steadily 
been operating. In Japan’s economy, real GDP has marked annualized growth of around 4 
percent for two consecutive quarters and the CPI inflation rate (excluding fresh food) turned 
positive in June for the first time in 14 months, accelerating to plus 0.8 percent. The outlook 
for economic activity and prices has improved and stock prices have risen by more than 30 
percent since the beginning of the year. While these should be factors that lead to increases 
in  long-term  interest  rates,  Japan’s  long-term  interest  rates  have  declined  from  about  0.8 
percent as of the beginning of the year to less than 0.7 percent. These rates have declined 
since end-May, even in a situation of long-term interest rates in the United States and many 
other  countries  having  substantially  increased  across  the  board.  The  break-even  inflation 
rate and expected inflation rates judged from various surveys have been increasing. Thus, 
the QQE has been exerting its intended effects and Japan has been steadily moving toward 
overcoming deflation. 
Concluding remarks 
The QQE is an unprecedented policy, in that it aims to increase inflation expectations in a 
situation  where  there  is  no  room  to  further  reduce  nominal  interest  rates.  While  this  is  a 
daunting  challenge,  developments  thus  far  have  been  encouraging.  With  the  aim  of 
achieving the 2 percent price stability target, the BoJ will continue with the QQE as long as it 
is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
