Andreas Dombret: The euro area – routes to a stable monetary union 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Banken-  und  Unternehmensabend  at  the  Bavarian  Regional  Office, 
Munich, 28 November 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
President Müller  
It  gives  me  great  pleasure 
the  Banken-  und 
Unternehmensabend  at  the  Bavarian  Regional  Office  here  in  Munich  on  the  topic  of  “The 
euro area – routes to a stable monetary union”. 
I’m sure we all agree on what the current action in the euro area is seeking to achieve: a 
stable monetary union. But have we taken the right route to make sure that we actually reach 
this  destination?  Everyone  knows  that  all  roads  lead  to  Rome,  but  the  routes  to  a  stable 
monetary union are few and far between. I believe that we are on the right path – at least 
what we can see by the wayside gives cause for hope. 
this  evening  at 
to  speak 
to  you 
The national level – some early signs of success 
2. 
Let’s take the problem of competitiveness. Significant imbalances have been evident in the 
euro-area countries’ current account balances in recent years. Countries like Germany or the 
Netherlands are consistently running surpluses, while others like Greece, Spain or Portugal 
have  produced  nothing  but  deficits.  These  imbalances  have  been  symptomatic  of  the 
differences in competitiveness between the individual countries. 
A topic which has made a comeback recently is the question of whether surplus countries 
should  also  contribute  towards  redressing  these  imbalances.  But  at  the  end  of  the  day, 
structural problems in the deficit countries were what brought about these imbalances – so 
that  is  where  the  adjustments  must  take  place.  We  must  ensure  that  the  other  countries 
make their economies as competitive as Germany’s, is how ECB President Mario Draghi put 
it. Doing the exact opposite simply wouldn’t work. 
And  casting  a  glance  at  the  crisis  countries,  we  can  see  that  many  of  them  have  already 
implemented necessary reforms, thereby boosting their competitiveness and narrowing their 
current  account  deficits.  The  European  Commission’s  latest  estimates  suggest  that  most 
crisis countries will run a current account surplus this year. 
Even  more  important  is  the  fact  that  this  adjustment  is  being  driven  not  just  by  shrinking 
imports but also by growing exports. All the crisis countries’ exports are likely to edge higher 
this year, with growth ranging from just under 1% in Portugal to roughly 4% in Spain. 
The crisis countries haven’t made quite as much progress in tackling their government debt. 
They  have  undoubtedly  made  dramatic  inroads  into  their  annual  fiscal  deficits  in  recent 
years. But despite all their efforts, they will all still be above the Maastricht Treaty’s 3% deficit 
limit this year. 
At  the  same  time,  their  debt  levels  continue  to  grow.  At  the  end  of  this  year,  Greece’s 
sovereign  debt  will  be  more  than  170%  of  the  country’s  annual  GDP.  And  things  are  not 
much  better  in  other  euro-area  countries.  At  the  end  of  2013,  government  debt  as  a 
percentage of annual GDP will be 131% in Italy, 128% in Portugal and 133% in Ireland. So 
this is an area where we have some way to go. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But  we  should  not  observe  the  crisis  solely  from  the  perspective  of  structural  problems  in 
individual  countries.  So  let’s  change  our  viewpoint  and  look  at  the  crisis  from  a  financial 
stability  angle  –  it  is  a  different  perspective,  but  the  structural  problems  of  individual 
countries, above all sovereign debt, are naturally also an issue here. 
A change of perspective – viewing the crisis from a financial stability angle 
3. 
From a financial stability angle, the contagion channels were the key hallmark of the crisis. In 
the  first  phase  of  the  financial  crisis,  beginning  in  2008,  banks  infected  each  other  –  first, 
because they were financially mutually highly interconnected, second, because there was a 
general  loss  of  confidence. The second  phase of  the  crisis then saw  banks  infect  the  real 
economy,  and  the  global  financial  crisis  triggered  a  global  recession.  In  Europe,  banks 
ultimately infected sovereigns – and sovereigns infected banks. It was this sovereign-bank 
nexus which fuelled the crisis in the euro area. 
Essentially,  what  we  are  talking  about  is  a  “doom  loop”.  If  government  budgets  run  into 
difficulties,  this  weighs  on  banks  –  for  example,  if  they  hold  government  bonds  on  their 
balance sheets. Looking at the loop from the opposite direction, if a host of banks – or an 
individual  large  bank  –  experiences  problems,  then  the  government  has  no  option  but  to 
come to the rescue if the worst comes to the worst. This puts pressure on the government 
budget. 
This doom loop is a key problem for financial stability in the euro area. But how can we sever 
it? Generally speaking, it can be severed in either direction – anti-clockwise or clockwise, you 
could say. 
Severing  the  anti-clockwise  loop  means  giving  banks  better  protection  against  distressed 
government budgets. Breaking through the clockwise loop, meanwhile, means making public 
finances more resilient to faltering banks. Let me take you on an imaginary journey, if I may, 
in both directions. 
Anti-clockwise doom loop – sovereigns infect banks 
4. 
If it is the anti-clockwise doom loop we are looking to tackle, there are essentially two ways in 
which  we  can  shield  banks  against  distressed  government  finances.  First,  we  can  make 
government budgets inherently more stable, thereby reducing the likelihood of them getting 
into  trouble.  Second,  we  can  introduce  regulatory  requirements  to  ensure  that  banks  are 
better protected in the rare event of a sovereign running into difficulties. 
Preventing fiscal distress 
4.1 
Safeguarding  the  stability  of  government  budgets  is  quite  a  challenge  in  the  euro  area  on 
account  of  the  specific  structure  of  monetary  union.  What  makes  the  European  monetary 
union special is that it combines a single monetary policy with national fiscal policies. 
The  monetary  policy  for  the  17  countries  of  the  euro  area  is  decided  by  the  Governing 
Council of the ECB in Frankfurt. However, the fiscal policies of the 17 members of the euro 
area are decided by the national governments and parliaments – each country decides itself 
on its own government revenue and expenditure. 
With such lopsided responsibilities, the individual countries have incentives to run up debt. At 
the end of the day, borrowing costs are distributed among all the member states of monetary 
union – either indirectly via higher interest rates for everyone or – as is now the case in the 
crisis – directly via the rescue packages. In the end, the community is jointly liable for the 
manner in which individual countries manage their budgets. Liability and control are out of 
step. 
Basically,  there  are  two  ways  to  realign  this  imbalance:  either  the  European  level  gains 
certain control rights over national budgets – which would mean deeper political integration. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Or we leave control of fiscal policy at the national level. But then the national level also has to 
assume  liability  for  its  policy  –  that  would  mean  strengthening  the  existing  framework  of 
monetary union. 
The first path would amount to what is known as a fiscal union. But that would depend on the 
countries  of  the  euro  area  transferring  national  sovereignty  to  the  European  level  –  for 
example,  by  giving  the  European  level  the  right  to  intervene  in  the  case  of  unsound 
government budgets. 
Such  a  waiver  of  sovereignty  would  be  a  radical  change  and  require  wide-ranging 
amendments to national and European legislation. But more than anything, such a change 
would need the support not only of policymakers but also of the general public. And, on this 
point, we should remain realistic. It is not possible to identify any will to do that at present – 
not in Germany or in any other country of the euro area. 
This  leaves  us  the  second  course  of  action:  an  improved  Maastricht  framework,  a 
“Maastricht 2.0”,  as  it  were.  Among  other  things,  that  means  strengthening  the  rules  on 
borrowing – the Stability and Growth Pact not only needs teeth, it also has to be able to bite. 
These rules have since been tightened – now they have to be applied and complied with. 
A  “Maastricht  2.0”  would  also  mean  taking  the  no  bail-out  principle  more  seriously  again, 
however: no euro-area country should be liable for the debts of another. But that calls for the 
possibility  of  sovereign  default  as  the  ultimate  logical  conclusion  of  individual  national 
responsibility.  Sovereign  defaults  have  to  be  possible  without  destabilising  the  financial 
system of the euro area as a whole. And this brings us to the question of how we can protect 
banks from situations like these. 
Protecting banks against distressed public finances 
4.2 
Fiscal  distress  is  particularly  problematic  for  banks  that  hold  government  bonds  on  their 
balance sheets. And more than anything, it was banks in the programme countries and in 
Italy  and  Spain  which  bought  up  huge  volumes  of  their  domestic  governments’  sovereign 
debt – even during the crisis. 
At  the  end  of  August, Italian  banks’  exposures  to  Italian  general government  amounted  to 
10% of their total assets. The equivalent figure for Spanish banks was 9%. What is more, it is 
chiefly weaker banks – poorly capitalised ones that are highly dependent on capital market 
funding – which bought up sovereign debt. 
So if we are looking to offer banks greater protection against distressed public finances, it is 
government bonds we must target. From the perspective of prudential regulation, there are 
two factors which play a role here. 
The first item regards banks’ capital. Under the current regime, banks do not need to hold 
capital against the risks of loans to sovereigns – unlike other loans. The thinking here was 
that  sovereign  borrowers  could  not  default  and  that  loans  to  governments  were  therefore 
risk-free. And, if no losses could develop, it wasn’t necessary to establish capital buffers. If it 
wasn’t already necessary beforehand, the crisis has certainly forced a rethink. 
Against  that  backdrop,  it  appears  urgently  necessary  to  change  the  rules.  If  banks  were 
required to hold capital against the risks of their government bond portfolios, this would make 
them more resilient to fiscal distress. At the same time, banks would have an incentive not to 
buy such large volumes of government bonds. 
And  this  takes  us  to  the  second  issue:  capital  alone  is  insufficient.  A  crucial  tool  of  risk 
management is diversification. The rule of thumb is “never put all your eggs into one basket”. 
A cap on loans to an individual sovereign should therefore also be introduced. 
Such caps have already been a fact of life for loans to the private sector for some time. They 
prevent  banks  from  becoming  overexposed  to  a  single  borrower.  This  makes  them  less 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
vulnerable to the default of that borrower – and this is something needed not just for private 
borrowers but also for government borrowers. 
Clockwise doom loop – banks infect sovereigns 
5. 
But  we  have  to  sever  the  doom  loop  in  the  other  direction,  too  –  clockwise.  We  have  to 
protect government budgets from problems in the banking sector. The Irish case showed us 
just how urgently necessary this is: in 2010 Ireland, in order to save its banking sector, ran 
up debt amounting to 30% of GDP – the fact that this is largely taxpayer funds we are talking 
about here does not make the problem any smaller, of course. 
Breaking  the  doom  loop  in  that  direction  requires  the  same  underlying  strategy  we  have 
already  applied.  First,  we  have  to  make  banks  more  stable  so  that  distress  is  less  likely. 
Secondly, we have to ensure that, if banks do run into trouble anyway, this does not put a 
burden on public budgets. 
Preventing bank distress 
5.1 
If we bring up the subject of how banks can be made more stable, we open up a large field 
which  reaches  far  beyond  the  boundaries  of  Europe.  Reforming  banking  regulation  is  a 
global topic and is being conducted at the global level. The G20 leaders have developed a 
comprehensive reform agenda, a large portion of which has already been completed. 
Discussing  regulatory  reform  in  detail  would  be  beyond  the  scope  of  this  speech.  With 
respect to banks, its central pillars are: new capital rules and new liquidity rules. And, here, 
we have come a long way since the crisis. The new rules under Basel III require banks to 
hold more and higher-quality capital than ever before. At the same time, we have agreed on 
an international liquidity standard for the very first time ever. As soon as the new rules are 
finally in place, banks will be much more stable. 
Yet rules are merely the foundation of a stable banking system. Someone also has to ensure 
that  the  rules  are  applied  –  that  is  a  matter  for  banking  supervisors.  And,  with  regard  to 
Europe, a further element enters the scene: the banking union. 
In  early  October,  the  EU  economic  and  finance  ministers  formally  agreed  to  establish  a 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  as  the  first  pillar  of  the  banking  union.  The  SSM  is 
scheduled to start its work in November 2014. 
Joint supervision will make it possible to supervise banks everywhere according to the same 
high  standards.  That  will  prevent  regulatory  arbitrage.  At  the  same  time,  it  will  prevent  a 
situation  in  which  a  purely  national  supervisor  unwittingly  cuts  domestic  banks  too  much 
slack without any justification. 
The banking union is unquestionably the largest European project since the introduction of 
the  euro.  We  should  therefore  exercise  particular  prudence  when  implementing  it.  This 
includes initially conducting a careful and comprehensive review of the state of the European 
banking system. This inventory has already begun, and it will ensure that all legacy problems 
are disclosed prior to the introduction of the SSM. The time schedule for the banking union 
project is certainly ambitious, but I am confident we will be able to keep to it. 
However,  neither  better  rules  nor  a  single  supervisor  can  prevent  individual  banks  from 
becoming distressed. And that is also a good thing: the possibility of failure is a cornerstone 
of  a  market  economy.  It  must,  therefore,  be  possible  for  banks  to  fail  without  rocking  the 
entire financial system. Looking at our vicious circle, this leads us to the question of how we 
can protect sovereigns from banks’ distress. 
Protecting sovereigns from banks’ distress 
5.2 
We are ultimately discussing a problem which already became relevant in the 2008 financial 
crisis: that of “too big to fail”. Banks can become so large or so highly interconnected that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
their failure can jeopardise the stability of the entire financial system. The collapse of Lehman 
Brothers showed us all what that can mean. 
In  order  to  prevent  the  financial  system  from  collapsing,  governments  can  be  forced  to 
rescue large banks in an emergency – also using taxpayer funds. That not only weighs on 
public budgets but gives banks distorted incentives. It encourages them to take greater risks. 
It is like the toss of a coin: heads, the bank wins; tails, the taxpayers lose. 
Finding  a  solution  to  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem  will  be  critical  in  order  to  protect  public 
budgets from banks’ distress. What we need is a resolution mechanism which will allow even 
large banks to be resolved without jeopardising the financial system or requiring the taxpayer 
to foot the bill. 
Looking towards Europe, this is where the second element of the banking union comes into 
play: a single recovery and resolution mechanism for banks. 
What will initially be decisive here is to define a clear liability cascade. Who is liable when 
banks founder?  Shareholders  and  creditors  undoubtedly  should  be  at  the  very  front  of  the 
line when it comes to shouldering losses. Taxpayers should be the last link in the chain, if 
they are even in the chain to begin with. 
A  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive,  which  would  cover  all  these  factors  and  thus 
represent a great step forward, is currently being discussed at the European level. The draft 
version currently on the table, however, still leaves discretionary scope in deciding the extent 
to  which  creditors  shall  be  held  liable.  In  the  interests  of  market  discipline,  that  should  be 
changed. It is also important that the resolution mechanism be introduced at the same time 
as the SSM, if at all possible. 
On  the  whole,  however,  the  banking  union  is  a  key  milestone  on  the  way  to  a  stable 
monetary union, not least because it will help to sever the sovereign-bank doom loop – at 
least clockwise. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  examined  the  crisis  from  the  perspective  of  financial 
stability. A key element is the doom loop of mutual contagion between banks and sovereigns, 
the vicious circle. 
We will have to pull levers at several different places in order to sever this loop. We have to 
improve the framework of monetary union, especially with regard to the rules for sovereign 
debt. We have to adapt banking regulation. We have to elevate banking supervision to the 
European  level.  And  we  have  to  establish  mechanisms  which  allow  banks  to  be  resolved 
without impacting on public budgets or taxpayers. 
We  should  remain  aware,  though,  that  we  will  not  be  able  to  solve  all  problems  through 
government  regulation  and  government  supervision.  Financial  stability  starts  first  and 
foremost  with  banks  themselves.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  banks  to  act  as  carefully  and 
prudently  as  possible.  And,  in  that  respect,  the  banks  squandered  much  in  the  way  of 
confidence during the crisis. 
Changes  are  needed  here,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  We  need  a  change  of  culture  in  the 
banking world. Banks have to return to the original role of the financial system: as a provider 
of services to enterprises in the real economy. 
Together with the exigencies already mentioned above, this change of culture will enable us 
to reach our destination: a stable monetary union enabling prosperity and growth for all. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
