Guy Debelle: Perspectives on financial markets 
Remarks by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  to  the  Centre  for  International  Finance  and  Regulation  (CIFR)  Forum,  Sydney, 
20 November 2013. 
 I would like to make a few general points about the financial regulatory agenda. 
A number of the regulatory changes in financial markets have increased the price of financial 
intermediation and the provision of financial services generally. This has very much been the 
intent, and not, to re-use one of the most overused expressions around at the moment, an 
unintended consequence. 
The price of intermediation was too low before the crisis; now it is higher. It was too low in 
the sense that risks were underpriced. These risks include liquidity risk and counterparty risk. 
Reforms  such  as the  Basel  III  liquidity  reforms or  the OTC  reforms  are  aimed  at  ensuring 
these  risks  are  more  appropriately  priced.  As  financial  institutions  are  adapting  to  these 
reforms, they are repricing many of the services they are providing to take fuller account of 
these risks. This repricing is gradually occurring only now in many cases and there is more to 
come. Hence end users of these services are only now starting to see the impact of these 
reforms in the form of higher prices. 
As in many markets, when a price goes up, the quantity tends to go down. Again, this is to be 
expected, and desired. It is not unintended. 
What is less clear is whether various regulations are having an impact on the market, above 
and beyond the effect caused by a higher price. The general aim is for the price element to 
do most of the work, but in some cases, regulations with a quantitative element are in place 
as a backstop. 
Let  me  give  as  one  example  of  this,  the  effect of  regulation  on  dealer  inventories  of fixed 
income. Liquidity regulation has caused some repricing in the market, with somewhat lower 
inventories, particularly of less liquid securities, as a result. So aspects of the regulation have 
increased the cost and you would expect that to increase the price of providing the service. 
In this case, that would be a wider bid-ask spread. In turn, you would expect that to lower 
turnover. 
Conceptually,  the  leverage  ratio  sits  there  as  a  backstop  limiting  the  overall  size  of 
institutions’  balance  sheets.  Whether  it  binds  in  practice  depends  on  the  structure  of  the 
whole balance sheet. Given the general tendency to fund inventory with repo, the leverage 
ratio can affect the size of the inventory a dealer is willing to hold to make a market. Whether 
there is a quantitative effect above and beyond the price effect I mentioned earlier is an open 
question which warrants answering. 
But in answering that question, the benchmark for the appropriate pricing and the appropriate 
degree of liquidity in the market is not the pre-crisis state of affairs. That was an environment 
of under-pricing and consequently, oversupply of this service. 
That said, it would appear that some significant share of the lower inventory in recent months 
has  resulted  from  self-imposed  constraints,  rather  than  those  resulting  from  regulation.  A 
number  of  institutions  appear  to  have  self-limited  the  size  of  inventories,  because  of  the 
resultant  mark-to-market  risk,  particularly  in  the  rising  yield  environment  that  was  present 
earlier  in  the  year.  So  in  a  number  of  cases,  that  was  the  binding  constraint,  not  the 
increased liquidity cost of funding inventory or the leverage ratio. 
The example of dealer inventories of fixed income is reflected in a number of areas of the 
market. It has often been the self-imposed limit which has been the binding constraint. The 
regulatory-imposed constraint serves more as a backstop for when memories of the recent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
crisis fade, as they surely will in time. The regulatory constraint is designed to ensure that 
risk does not disappear from pricing when the euphoria returns.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
