Ewald Nowotny: Financial cycles and the real economy – lessons for 
CESEE 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of  Austria,  at  the  Conference  on  European  Economic  Integration  (CEEI)  2013  “Financial 
cycles and the real economy – lessons for CESEE”, Vienna, 18 November 2013. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  this  year’s  Conference  on  European 
Economic Integration, which will be dealing with the topic of “Financial Cycles and the Real 
Economy: Lessons for CESEE.” 
Let  me  start  by  sharing  some  general  observations  and  thoughts  with  you.  The  economic 
situation in Europe in general and in the euro area in particular has started to improve over 
the  last  few  months.  At  the  same  time,  unemployment  rates  have  stabilized  in  most 
economies  of  the  European  Union  (with  the  exception  of  Cyprus,  where  macroeconomic 
adjustments  are  in full swing)  and  sentiment  indicators  point  toward  a  soft  recovery  in  the 
next few quarters and beyond. Although the heterogeneity of economic performance across 
the  euro  area  remains  a  cause  for  concern,  recent  forecasts  expect  some  rebalancing  in 
2014 on the back of a rather broad-based improvement in the macroeconomic outlook. As a 
consequence, of course, perceptions have started to change: During the Annual Meetings of 
the IMF and the World Bank this fall, Europe was no longer the focal point of concern. While 
this  is  encouraging,  the  situation  remains  greatly  diverse  across  individual  countries,  and 
efforts  now  need  to  focus  on  completing  ongoing  adjustments.  Likewise,  the  institutional 
changes in progress or envisaged at EU level need to be successfully implemented and put 
into practice. In a similar vein, Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe (CESEE) is also 
gradually  recovering.  There,  as 
in  Western  Europe,  economic  performance  varies 
substantially  between  individual  countries,  and  efforts  to  move  toward  a  balanced  growth 
model, which were at the center of attention at last year’s CEEI, need to be continued. 
The  recent  recovery  in  the  real  economy  is  also  supported  by  the  decrease  in  financial 
market  tensions  which  began  in  late  2012  not  least  because  of  a  very  accommodative 
monetary policy response. However, the institutional reforms that are currently being carried 
out in response to the crisis will have to remain a top priority for policymakers across Europe. 
At  the  moment,  one  of  the  key  institutional  reform  efforts  in  the  EU  is  the  creation  of  a 
banking  union. With the  establishment  of the  single  supervisory  mechanism,  the  SSM,  we 
have made a major effort to help this banking union to get on its way. The SSM is designed 
to be as open and as appealing to non-euro area EU Member States as possible, and we do 
hope  that  as  many  non-euro  area  countries  as  possible  will  participate.  Given  the  high 
degree of financial integration and interdependence in Europe, it is certainly in our common 
interest that the SSM cover as broad a set of countries as possible. 
To  reap  the  full  benefits  of  the  single  financial  market  in  Europe,  it  is  important  to  avoid 
measures that would have unintended side effects, e.g. in terms of market fragmentation. It 
is my conviction that ringfencing will not help us move forward. Regulatory and supervisory 
measures  with  regard  to  capital  and  liquidity  in  individual  countries  should  be  taken  in  a 
European  spirit,  for  the  better  of  Europe  as  a  whole.  The  reversal  in  European  financial 
integration, which we have seen over the past few years, needs to be stopped and in fact 
reversed  again,  so  that  cross-border  finance  in  the  EU  can  play  out  its  full  role  in  the 
common market. 
Those  banks  in  Europe  which  operate  in  more  than  one  country  should  no  longer  be 
considered Austrian, German or Italian banks and so forth. They are European banks. Not 
only  will  they  be  supervised  by  the  ECB  as  soon  as  the  SSM  takes  effect  (if  they  are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
headquartered in Member States that participate in the SSM), they are also European in the 
way they operate. For instance, the top management at their subsidiaries across Europe is 
no  longer  mainly  composed  of  members  that  come  from  what  we  still  call  the  “home” 
countries. In fact, the subsidiaries show a continuous trend toward multinational set-ups. To 
be more specific: Less than one-third of the top management of Austrian banks’ subsidiaries 
in CESEE are from Austria. That said, the vast majority of board members comes from either 
the  respective  host  countries  or  other  third  countries.  The  same  is  essentially  true  for  the 
subsidiaries of other European parent banks. In my view, this diversity is a big asset as it 
brings a greater variety of views and thus improves the decision-making process. 
All of this points toward a scenario in which the European perspective will be attributed an 
ever greater weight. Strengthening the European perspective may be a lengthy and, at times, 
an arduous process, but it is certainly the way to go – and will make an important contribution 
to  reviving  Europe  and  making  it  flourish  again.  One  challenge  along  the  way  is  that  of 
gaining a more comprehensive understanding of the financial cycle – which is the topic of our 
conference. The global financial crisis and subsequently the sovereign debt crisis have (once 
again)  strongly  highlighted  the  key  role  financial  developments  play  for  economic  activity 
and,  at  the  same  time,  the  necessity  to  review  our  understanding  of  the  finance-growth 
nexus. 
Let me briefly spell out what I mean by that. Prior to the crisis, most economists believed that 
financial deepening strengthens long-term growth as it improves the allocation of resources 
by facilitating the collection of information, the monitoring of projects, the trading, diversifying 
and managing of risks, the mobilization and pooling of capital and, finally, the exchange of 
goods and services within the economy.1 Consequently, most observers did not consider the 
strong growth of private sector credit and house prices in several euro area economies (like 
e.g. Spain or Ireland) prior to the global financial crisis to be overly problematic but were of 
the opinion that it was – at least largely – sustainable. 
In a similar vein, the credit boom in CESEE (which started around 2003) and the substantial 
increase in house prices in many CESEE economies before the global financial crisis were 
conceived as part and parcel of the catching-up process these economies went through – at 
least during the first years of the boom. Given the low starting levels of credit-to-GDP ratios 
and  of  house  prices  in  the  early  phases  of  the  transition  process  (as  compared  with 
fundamentals), there was general agreement that there was a need – and indeed room – for 
further financial deepening in CESEE. Aptly reflecting these considerations, the CEEI 2005, 
for example, dealt with the topic of “Financial Development, Integration and Stability.” While 
most  of  the  contributions  at  the  time  emphasized  the  considerable  potential  for  further 
financial  deepening  in  CESEE,  which  would  increase  growth  and  foster  economic 
convergence in the region, several discussants aired concerns that rapid credit growth and 
soaring house prices, if they continued unchecked, could breed instability further down the 
road.  OeNB  research  at  the  time  suggested  that  credit-to-GDP  levels  had  surpassed 
equilibrium values (as given by fundamentals) in some, but not in all, CESEE countries by 
2005/06 – while the credit boom went on until late 2007 in the Baltic countries and until the 
fall of 2008 in most other CESEE economies. However, the tendency to think that “this time 
is different”2 – a well-known phenomenon in late-boom episodes – caused these concerns to 
be widely ignored, and even those who acknowledged them hoped for a soft landing (rather 
than  a  deep  and  painful  correction).  Now  –  five  years  later  –  it  is  undeniable  that  several 
CESEE economies (as well as some peripheral euro area countries) experienced a severe 
                                                
1   Levine, R. 2005. Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence, in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds.). Handbook of 
Economic Growth. Elseview. Chapter 12. 865–934. 
2   Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff. 2011. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton 
University Press. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and rather protracted financial bust that is weighing on their recovery and also slowing down 
the convergence process – a topic we also discussed at the CEEI 2012 in Helsinki. 
Thus, the crisis has recalled a key point: The finance-growth nexus is not just a long-term 
phenomenon but has an important cyclical component that was widely underestimated prior 
to the crisis. In other words, sustainable output was systematically overestimated during the 
boom  years,  as  too  much  of  the  upturn  was  attributed  to  improvements  in  the  underlying 
trend  component  and  (much)  too  little  to  cyclical  factors.  This  happened  because  the 
financial cycle at work was not appropriately taken into account. This, in turn, led to (or at 
least contributed to) overly optimistic expectations and the build-up of excessive leverage – 
as expressed in strong credit and house price growth. The magnitude of the risks involved 
was  widely underestimated and, consequently, inappropriate policies and policy responses 
resulted  in  a  high  degree  of  vulnerability  in  quite  a  few  countries  as  soon  as  the  financial 
cycle went into reverse. 
Clearly, pre-crisis failures in regulation and supervision further aggravated the situation that 
has  developed  since  2008,  making  it  more  difficult  to  deal  with  banking  sector  problems 
without  either  risking  a  financial  sector  meltdown  or  tainting  public  sector  solvency.  In  the 
euro  area,  these  developments  led  to  substantial  euro  area-wide  frictions,  which  we  are 
currently  addressing  and  need  to  continue  to  tackle  until  the  crisis  is  fully  solved  and  a 
sustainable  new  growth  model  as  well  as  a  complete  and  robust  institutional  set-up  for 
Economic and Monetary Union are in place. On the global level, the regulatory agenda that 
emerged from the crisis is still unfinished business – and probably always will be, to some 
extent.  Continuous  efforts  are  therefore  needed  to  bridge  existing  regulatory  gaps,  e.g.  as 
regards  the  resolution  of  large  multinational  banks,  and  –  equally  important  –  to  address 
future regulatory challenges arising from ongoing financial innovation. 
Of course, the interaction between finance and growth depends on the time dimension. In the 
long  run,  financial  deepening  still  helps  growth.  This  finding  has  not  been  altered  by  the 
experience of the financial crisis. The positive impact of further financial deepening, however, 
may be smaller than we still thought a few years ago, and it may be much more conditional 
on the regulatory framework and the overall policy compound. This is an empirical question, 
and  it  is  certainly  important  to  revisit  this  debate.  Even  more  crucial,  however,  is  our 
understanding  of  short-  to  medium-term  developments.  Within  the  short-  to  medium-term 
horizon, the relation between finance and growth has become much more uncertain, given 
the risk that finance adds to or even causes boom-bust developments which can (and often 
do) entail substantial welfare costs. Both the IT revolution and global financial integration – or 
financial  globalization  if  you  prefer  –  have  added  to  financial  sector  dynamics  and  thus 
reinforced the impact financial developments can have on the real economy. 
Against this background, the CEEI 2013 focuses on the following questions: 
• 
Have  we changed the way  we think about the finance-growth nexus?  How do  we 
measure  the  financial  cycle  and  its  impact  on  sustainable  output  and  cyclical 
fluctuations?  In  other  words:  How  do  we  assess  whether  financial  deepening  and 
thus the level of economic output is sustainable? 
What is the “nature” of real estate bubbles, and why should we care about their pro- 
cyclical interactions with finance and economic activity? 
What are the lessons to be drawn for economic policy? How should we deal with the 
financial cycle on the national, the European and the global level – both with regard 
to financial upturns and downturns? Do we have to rethink our policy rules? 
At  the  current  juncture,  how  should  we  overcome  the  legacies  of  the  crisis  (and 
improve the resolution and/or recovery of nonperforming loans) and how should we 
lay the foundations for a better handling of future boom episodes? Is the necessary 
policy toolkit already in place? What do we know and what do we still need to know 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
about the functioning and the effectiveness of our new policy instruments, like e.g. 
many new macroprudential measures? 
As the CEEI series concentrates on CESEE, we are particularly interested in the lessons that 
will  have  to  be  drawn  for  this  region.  To  what  extent  did  the  financial  cycle  aggravate  the 
crisis  and  slow  down  recovery  in  these  countries?  Are  there  lessons  to  be  learned  from 
crises  in  other  countries  –  for  example  from  the  euro  area  periphery?  Given  the  fairly 
heterogeneous performance of CESEE economies since 2007/08, did policymakers in some 
CESEE  countries  anticipate  the  financial  cycle  better  than  their  counterparts  in  other 
countries?  And,  most  importantly,  what  can  we  gain  from  these  successful  country 
experiences? 
I really do hope that this year’s CEEI, which will discuss all these questions (and many others 
I had no time to mention), will help us shed new light on several of these issues and, at the 
same time, strengthen the case for dealing with them from a European rather than from a 
national  perspective.  I  am  looking  forward  to  a  fruitful  exchange  of  views  and  ideas  with 
academics, policymakers and financial experts and, of course, with the audience. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  now  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome,  our  first  keynote 
speaker,  Claudio  Borio,  Head  of  the  Monetary  and  Economic  Department  at  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements. He is an early contributor to the literature on the challenges that 
arise  for  monetary  policy  from  global  financial  markets,  cycles  and  crises,  and  I  am  truly 
obliged to him for being prepared to share his insights with us. Claudio, the floor is yours. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
