Daniel Mminele: Global trends and South African reserves management 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Standard  Bank  5th  African  Central  Bank  Reserves  Management  Conference,  Sandton, 
5 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. It is a pleasure to be here and to deliver the opening 
remarks this morning. I thought it may be useful, given that it is the start of the conference, to 
share  with  you  some  of  the  changes  that  we  have  been  observing  in  the  reserves 
management environment over the past year. I note from the agenda that many of the topics 
you  will  be  discussing  over  the  next  few  days  are  issues  that  we  at  the  South  African 
Reserve  Bank  have  been  dealing  with  directly  over  the  past  few  years:  we  have  just 
completed an external fund manager review and rolled out a new external fund management 
programme  for  the  next  three  and  a  half  years,  in  conjunction  with  the  roll  out  of  a  new 
Strategic  Asset  Allocation  (SAA).  We  are  also  nearing  the  end  of  the  Systems  Renewal 
Programme we embarked on a few years ago, and are currently at an advanced stage of a 
Custodian Review. 
My  remarks this  morning  will  focus  on trends globally  and  then  touch  more  specifically  on 
what has been happening at the South African Reserve Bank in the reserves management 
space, before concluding with some comments on asset purchase tapering and its potential 
impact on reserves management. 
Global foreign exchange reserve management 
2. 
I need not tell an audience such as yourselves about the explosive growth in central bank 
holdings of foreign exchange reserves over the past decade. The most recent data from the 
International Monetary Fund’s “Composition of Foreign exchange reserves” (COFER) is for 
the second quarter of 2013, and shows that global foreign exchange reserve holdings stood 
at  US$11  trillion,  compared  to  holdings  of  just  over  US$1.4  trillion  in  1995.  In  1995, 
approximately 65 per cent of foreign exchange reserves were held by advanced economies 
with more than 60 per cent of the allocated global foreign exchange reserves held in USD. 
Fast forward to 18 years later, and we find that 67 per cent of reserves are held by emerging 
market  countries  and  just  a  little  more  than  60  per  cent  of  the  allocated  global  foreign 
exchange reserves are held in USD. However, the unallocated portion of reserves has grown 
tremendously,  and  this  makes  it  difficult  to  compare  the  currency  composition  of  reserves 
over  time  on  a  like-for-like  basis.  The  Asian  financial  crisis  in  the  late  1990s  provided  the 
impetus for this growth, as reserve holdings were increased to provide a form of insurance 
against future Balance of Payments crises. The expansion in global liquidity since the 2008 
global  financial  crisis  further  provided  encouragement  to  increase  reserve  holdings,  as 
central  banks  tried  to  limit  appreciation  pressure  on  exchange  rates  emanating  from  the 
surge  in  capital  inflows, and  hence  intervened  in  the foreign  exchange markets  and by  so 
doing, increased their holdings of foreign currency. 
South  Africa  certainly  benefitted from  the  abundance  of global  liquidity  in  many  ways,  and 
also used this period to build up our foreign exchange reserve levels. This was done through 
a  combination  of  direct  purchases  (mostly  related  to  large  FDI  transactions)  as  well  as 
opportunistic  purchases  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  The  Bank,  together  with  the 
National Treasury, considers various formulae when assessing what should be the optimal 
level of reserves for a country such as ours. We look at both an adjusted Greenspan-Guidotti 
rule, as well as the Jean-Rancierre model, both tweaked to take into account the specifics of 
the South African economy. The level which is arrived at provides a guide to what would be 
an adequate level of reserves to hold to protect against external vulnerabilities, however, this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in 
towards  non-traditional 
the  currency  composition 
is not considered a hard target which has to be reached at all costs. It is for this reason that 
we have decided to not publicly release any such indicative levels or ranges. These numbers 
also  tend  to  change  quite  a  bit  from  year-to-year,  largely  influenced  by  the  assumptions 
made and various forecasts used. The costs involved in accumulating reserves are always 
considered  alongside  the  benefits  of  higher  reserves,  as  at  some  point,  the  costs  of 
accumulating reserves may far outweigh the benefits to be had. 
The composition of reserves assets has also changed over time and reserve managers have 
become more comfortable with and therefore gradually moved to riskier assets. Bearing in 
mind  the  low  yielding  environment  we  found  ourselves  in  post-2008,  with  increased  levels 
and  costs  associated  with  holding  reserves,  asset  allocation  decisions  were  influenced 
towards a greater focus on returns. Reserve managers have explored different avenues to 
achieve this, including: 
• 
Diversification 
reserve 
currencies  such  as  the  Korean  Won,  New  Zealand  Dollar,  Australian  Dollar  and 
Canadian Dollar. However, the diversification into alternative currencies as opposed 
to  traditional  currencies  remains  quite  small  as  an  overall  proportion  of  reserves, 
around 3 per cent, given that these non-traditional currencies markets are relatively 
small and have limited depth and liquidity as compared to that of the USD or EUR, 
for  example.  Nonetheless,  since  2008,  the  share  of  alternative  currencies  in 
reserves  assets  has  tripled.  The  IMF  has  started  showing  these  currencies 
separately in the Cofer release, in recognition of the growing role they play in foreign 
exchange reserves management. 
Gold  has  also  become  a  popular  diversification  strategy,  with  quite  a  few  central 
banks increasing their holdings of gold in recent years following two decades where 
central  banks  were  net  sellers  of  gold.  In  the  first  six  months  of  this  year  central 
banks have bought over 180 tonnes of gold, and on average have bought between 
70–160 tonnes per quarter for the last couple of years1. 
Investing  in  new  asset  classes  such  as  emerging  market  local  currency  debt; 
mortgage-backed securities and equities; 
using more sophisticated financial instruments to mitigate risk and at the same time 
to enhance returns by providing protection against rising interest rates; 
upgrading information technology and risk management systems to better manage 
risk; 
up-skilling staff through training, education and knowledge transfer with other central 
banks and private fund managers; and 
Following a more sophisticated approach to investment policy making and strategic 
asset allocation. 
      Experiences across central banks in dealing with the challenges of the global environment 
have been quite similar, although some have perhaps been more courageous than others in 
terms of the avenues in which they have chosen to diversify. What we of course need to be 
mindful of is that as central bank reserve managers we are custodians of public funds, and at 
all times have to be guided by prudent strategies which implies that there must be a limit to 
“thinking outside the box” in the quest for higher returns. 
                                                
1  ETF Daily News, Central Bankers trust gold more than money, 25 October 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
What has South Africa been up to? 
3. 
In managing its reserves, the South African Reserve Bank continues to adhere to the three 
main objectives: capital preservation; liquidity and return, in that order of importance. Capital 
preservation  is  the  most  important  objective  as  any  significant  erosion  of  capital  on  the 
reserves  will  not  only  dent  the  general  perception  of  the  Bank’s  ability  to  manage  its 
reserves,  but  also  harm  perceptions  about  South  Africa’s  external  vulnerability  position. 
Liquidity  is  important  for  the  Bank  to  be  able  to  meet  its  day-to-day  foreign-exchange 
commitments  and  to  manage  liquidity  within  the  domestic  money  market  arising  from  its 
monetary  policy  implementation  function.  Finally,  the  return  objective  has  become 
increasingly important in recent years as reserve levels have grown, and therefore there is a 
need to enhance returns within an acceptable and prudent risk tolerance so as to help defray 
the costs of accumulating and holding reserves. 
The  Bank  benchmarked  and  just recently  completed  a  review  of  its  Investment  Policy  (IP) 
and also reviewed the Strategic Asset Allocation (SAA), to take into account the current low-
yielding  environment  and  expectations  of  future  monetary  policy  actions  by  major  central 
banks. The review and benchmarking of the IP earlier this year proved to be very useful with 
much  of  the  feedback  from  various  central  banks,  the  World  Bank  and  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS) taken on board. A number of refinements were made to the 
IP, which largely related to improving on already well-structured governance arrangements. 
In  order to  meet  the three  objectives  of  capital  preservation;  liquidity  and  return,  the  Bank 
structured the reserves into various tranches. Prior to the rollout of the most recent SAA, the 
Bank  had  divided  the  reserves  into  3  tranches,  being  the  liquidity,  buffer  and  investment 
tranches. However, the rollout of the new SAA  saw the tranches cut down to two  instead, 
namely the liquidity and investment tranches. This change was really just a simplification of 
the structure and necessitated by the various scenarios informing assumptions made using 
the Jean-Rancierre model and the amount of reserves which needed to be held for liquidity 
purposes. In essence, the structuring remains very similar, as the liquidity tranche is divided 
into two sub-tranches, namely the buffer tranche and working capital tranche, the latter being 
held  largely  for  liquidity  purposes.  The  Bank  has  employed  the  Jean-Ranciere  model  in 
determining  the  appropriate  size  of  each  tranche,  and  within  this,  has  made  various 
assumptions regarding the probability of a sudden stop in capital flows, which then dictated 
the amount of reserves which should be held in the liquidity tranche. 
In order to determine the appropriate risk profile of the portfolios located within each tranche, 
the Bank uses a Strategic Asset Allocation (SAA), which it reviews roughly every 3 years or 
when market conditions necessitate a review. The purpose of the SAA is to maximize returns 
for  each  tranche,  while  being  subject  to  a  very  low  probability  of  capital  loss  over  a  given 
investment  horizon.  The  new  SAA  which  was  rolled  out  in  2013,  has  allowed  for  a 
diversification in the Bank’s currency exposure, while assumptions about credit risk had to be 
adjusted in light of the dwindling amount of AAA rated paper. For the first time in the Bank’s 
history,  a  portion  of  the  reserves  will  be  invested  in  the  Chinese  interbank  bond  market. 
South  Africa  was  the  first  African  central  bank  to  be  granted  an  investment  quota  for  the 
Chinese onshore market. The Chinese bond market is the world’s fifth largest, continues to 
grow  rapidly  in  both  depth  and  liquidity  and  the  onshore  market  provides  more  favorable 
yields.  An  agreement  between  the  Bank,  and  the  PBOC  allows  the  Bank  to  invest 
approximately  US$1,5bn  or  CNY9,3  billion,  which  is  roughly  3  per  cent  of  South  Africa’s 
official gold and foreign exchange reserves. 
The Bank has also taken steps to invest in new asset classes and new currencies other than 
the  Renminbi.  The  Bank  will  be  diversifying  into  currencies  such  as  the  Korean  Won, 
Australian Dollar and  New Zealand  Dollar. New asset classes that the Bank has begun to 
invest  in  include  covered  bonds  and  mortgage-backed  securities  and  we  have  recently 
began trading in bond futures to mitigate the potentially negative impact of rising bond yields 
on the reserves as well as for more efficient portfolio management. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Investing  in  these  instruments  demands  better  skilled  staff  and  more  sophisticated 
information  technology  and  risk  systems.  The  Bank  has  gained  a  great  deal  of  training 
through external fund managers, including the two official sector fund managers, being the 
Bank for International Settlements and the World Bank. The Bank has been part of the World 
Bank’s  Reserves  Advisory  and  Management  Programme  (RAMP)  since  2006  and  through 
this  engagement  Bank  staff  not  only  received  extensive  training  but  are  now  also  in  a 
position to provide training and engage in knowledge transfer with other central banks within 
the  SADC  region.  Being  a  member  of  the  RAMP  programme  has  greatly  enhanced  our 
efficiency in managing reserves. We also enjoy a very good relationship with the BIS, with 
whom we have previously partnered to host conferences around reserves management and 
also participate in their annual BIS Associate programme. 
The Bank has further made changes to the split in the proportion of funds managed internally 
and those managed externally. South Africa implemented its first External Fund Management 
Programme in 1999, mainly to build internal capacity through skills and technology transfer 
and for diversification purposes. As our level of foreign exchange reserves grew, especially 
in the period since 2004, so did the external fund management programme. In 2004, South 
Africa’s  gross  reserves  amounted  to  approximately  US$8  billion  and  this  had  grown  to 
US$50 billion by 2011. However, with the most recent review, which took place this year, we 
decided that the funds under external management would be reduced, primarily because the 
latest  SAA  supported  benchmarks  and  related  portfolios  that  could  largely  be  managed 
internally. 
Currently, we are at an advanced stage of reviewing the custodial arrangements we have in 
place, including the type of model which we would like to follow going forward. The custodial 
review entails: 
• 
benchmarking  services  received  from  custodians  against  current  world  custodial 
service standards; 
reviewing the current ratings of custodians against minimum ratings standards; 
reviewing  services  required 
requirements; and 
determining  the  capabilities  of  Custodians  to  provide  ancillary  services  such  as 
accounting,  performance  attribution,  settlements  and  risk  measurement  and 
reporting. 
from  custodians  against 
the  Bank’s  business 
  Prior  to  the  Custodial  Review,  the  Bank  embarked  on  a  comprehensive  systems  renewal 
project in order to upgrade the Bank’s IT and risk management systems, so as to create a 
superior reserve and risk management operational platform. The two projects, the Systems 
Renewal and Custodian Review, of course have a direct bearing on each other. We hope to 
make final decisions for the Systems Renewal later this year and hopefully be in a position to 
start implementing whichever system is chosen by the end of the year or early in 2014. The 
decision regarding custodial arrangements we also hope to make early next year. 
Asset tapering and reserves management 
4. 
What  will  keep  reserves  managers  up  at  night?  No  doubt  an  important  issue  for  reserves 
managers going forward is that of asset purchase tapering and the timing of policy tightening 
after  the  asset  purchasing  programme  has  been  completed.  The  implementation  of  asset 
purchases by the US Federal Reserve in a bid to dampen yields on the longer end of the 
yield curve resulted in significant increases in prices of US Treasuries, and prices of other 
advanced  economy  and  emerging  market  bonds.  In  such  an  environment,  it  was  not  too 
difficult for reserve managers to earn good returns as yields rallied substantially, albeit with a 
fair amount of volatility. But as they say, everything that goes up must come down. The mere 
expectation  of  tapering  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve  had  a  significant  impact  on  markets, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
introducing  significant  volatility,  with  practically  all  markets  selling  off  and  a  number  of 
emerging  market  central  banks  spending  some  of  their  reserves  trying  to  defend  their 
currencies. With over 60 per cent of foreign exchange reserves held in US dollars, this has 
important  implications  for  reserve  managers,  as  it  is  clear  that  tapering  will  remove  an 
important  source  of  support  for  US  Treasuries,  mortgages  and  other  asset  classes.  US 
Treasuries are the so called “risk free” assets, therefore, any rise in US Treasury yields is 
likely to push up yields elsewhere in the developed and developing world. Furthermore, most 
central  banks  are  heavily  invested  in  bond  markets,  which  as  we  know  are  highly  interest 
rate sensitive. While there has been some diversification of reserves across assets, this has 
been quite limited. 
JP  Morgan2  constructed several  portfolios  to  highlight  the  impact  of  what  they  call  a  rates 
crisis  on  different  portfolios  and  unsurprisingly  found  that  portfolios  extending  beyond  the 
fixed  income  universe  performed  relatively  well  in  an  environment  of  rising  interest  rates, 
showing  positive  expected  returns,  and  all  portfolios  that  included  only  fixed  income, 
performing  poorly  with  negative  return  expectations.  Having  said  this,  however,  the  author 
found  that  even  central  banks  whose  investment  universe  is  constrained  to  fixed  income 
assets can improve expected returns through diversification into different markets, credit risk 
exposures, and having some portion of holdings in cash. 
The South African Reserve Bank is acutely aware of the risks facing the global environment 
emanating from asset tapering, and with this in mind made a strategic decision to diversify its 
currency exposure so as to help insulate the reserves from this potential rise in US treasury 
yields.  From  a  more  operational  perspective,  the  internal  portfolio  managers  are  better 
equipped with the use of bond futures as a hedging instrument against rising yields. 
Conclusion 
5. 
In conclusion, the unique financial environment that we find ourselves in has created many 
new challenges for us as reserve managers. With the increase in the level of reserves came 
a much higher level of interest and scrutiny in how these reserves are managed, especially 
against  the  rising  opportunity  cost  of  holding  these  reserves.  At  the  same  time  the  yield 
differential between the cost of holding reserves and the return on the reserves necessitated 
an  increased  focus  on  return  enhancement  without  putting  at  risk  a  prudent  approach  to 
investing. 
Including  some  non-traditional  assets  in  investment  portfolios  has  meant  that  reserves 
management  has  become  more  complex,  resulting  in  central  bank  reserves  managers, 
including  ourselves,  needing  to  build  capacity  by  up-skilling  staff  and  investing  heavily  in 
sophisticated IT and risk management systems. 
While the recent impasse in US politics has passed, many of us realise that this stalemate 
situation will again cause undue volatility in the months ahead. For reserves managers this 
once  again  means  huge  fluctuations  in  global  financial  markets  and  unfortunately  large 
swings  in  the  valuation  of  our  reserve  assets.  However,  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  the 
need for investment processes to continue to be guided by sound investment principles and 
solid risk management policies and good governance and oversight structures. 
Conferences such as this one, which provide networking opportunities, facilitate knowledge 
transfer and capacity building therefore play a critical role. Looking at the agenda for the next 
few days, I’m sure that you will find this conference worthwhile and have a lot to take away to 
help  strengthen  reserves  management  operations  and  their  oversight  in  your  respective 
institutions. 
                                                
2  Anticipating the end of easy money: reserve management consideration, Robert Grava, Asset Management 
Strategy Group. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
I wish you a successful conference. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
