Deepak Mohanty: Economic and financial developments in Mizoram 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Aizawl Club, Mizoram, 19 December 2013. 
 The assistance provided by P.K. Nayak, S. Suraj and S. Nath is acknowledged. 
I am happy to be in this picturesque state of Mizoram, the land of rolling hills, valleys, rivers 
and lakes. The state has a strategic location as it shares much of its border with Bangladesh 
and Myanmar. It covers 0.6 per cent of the national geographic area and accounts for 0.1 per 
cent  of  national  population. With  second  highest  literacy  rate  in  the  country,  the  state  has 
great potential for economic development. 
Access to finance is an important prerequisite for economic development. In the recent years 
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has pursued the objective of financial inclusion with renewed 
vigour. Some progress has been achieved but there are miles to go. Governor Dr. Raghuram 
G. Rajan has emphasised financial inclusion as one of the five pillars of the RBI’s financial 
development plank : “… to expand access to finance to small and medium enterprises, the 
unorganised  sector,  the  poor,  and  remote  and  underserved  areas  of  the  country,  though 
technology,  new  business  practices  and  new  organisational  structure.”1  Financial  inclusion 
poses  additional  challenges  in  the  north-eastern  states  given  the  relatively  low  level  of 
banking  penetration  and  inadequate  infrastructure.  Against  this  background,  I  briefly 
delineate the economic and financial structure of the state, highlight our financial inclusion 
initiatives and conclude with some thoughts on policy challenges on the way forward.  
Economic structure 
India  experienced  accelerated  GDP  growth  rate  in  the  2000s.  Obviously,  this  growth 
experience  was  shared  by  many  states.  In  line  with  the  national  economy,  Mizoram  also 
experienced pick up in its growth. Even as the growth momentum at the national level was 
dented following the onset of global financial crisis in 2007–08, the performance of Mizoram’s 
economy  was  better  even  in  the  post-crisis  period.  Consequently,  the  share  of  Mizoram’s 
gross  state  domestic  product  (GSDP)  in  the  all-India  GDP  rose  from  0.08  per  cent  in  
2006–07 to 0.10 per cent during 2011–12 (Chart 1). 
                                                
1 
“The Five Pillars of RBI’s Financial Sector Policies”, speech by Governor Raghuram G. Rajan at BANCON 
2013 held at Mumbai on November 15, 2013. RBI Monthly Bulletin, December 2013. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
fluctuation 
All the three major sectors of the economy – agriculture, industry and services – contributed 
to  the  improved  growth  performance  of  the  state.  There  was,  however,  significant  year-to-
year 
is 
understandable  being  weather  dependent,  volatility  in  industrial  growth  needs  closer 
attention, given the low industrial base of the state (Chart 2). 
 
in  sectoral  growth  rates.  While  variation 
in  agricultural  growth 
  The  sectoral  composition  of  the  Mizoram  economy  has  broadly  changed  in  line  with  the 
national economy with declining share of agriculture and increasing share of services. While 
the  share  of  industry  has  picked  up,  it  remains  significantly  below  the  national  average 
underscoring the scope for further industrialisation (Chart 3). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 The most significant impact of growth has been improvement of per capita net state domestic 
product (NSDP) from ₹26,308 in 2006–07 to ₹39,546 in 2011–12 at 2004–05 prices, despite 
a  larger  decadal  population  growth  rate  of  22.8  per  cent,  which  is  higher  than  the  rate  of 
growth  at  17.6  per  cent  at  the  national  level.  Notably,  per  capita  income  of  Mizoram  was 
about 4.0 per cent higher than the corresponding average national per capita income during 
2011–12 (Chart 4). 
 
  
It is worthwhile to note that while the economy of Mizoram, in line with the national trend, is 
getting  increasingly  dominated  by  industry  and  services  sectors,  labour  force  is  still 
concentrated 
(Table 1).  Therefore,  creating  employment 
opportunities in the manufacturing and services sectors has become important. 
the  agricultural  sector 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Table 1  
Share of employment by broad industry group 
  A higher proportion of working age (ages 15–59) population in rural Mizoram as compared to 
rural  India  provides  a  favourable  condition  for  growth  (Chart  5).  But  for  this  to  happen, 
industry and services sectors should increasingly provide the employment opportunity. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Social indicators 
With greater urbanisation and higher literacy, indicators of human development in Mizoram 
are better than the national average (Chart 6). 
 
 
Share  of  households  having  access  to  the  basic  amenities  like  electricity,  television, 
computers,  telephones  and  four  wheelers  are  significantly  higher  in  Mizoram  than  the 
national  average  (Table  2).  On  the  other  hand,  proportion  of  population  having  access  to 
banking facilities, although improved during the decade 2001–2011, was below the national 
level. This is a policy challenge in the context of development with increasing emphasis on 
financial inclusion. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Table 2 
Standards of life indicators: Mizoram and India 
 State finances 
Mizoram is one of the 11 special category states which are characterised by low resource 
base and the cost disabilities due to their geography, sparse terrain and remoteness. In order 
to  overcome  these  inadequacies,  the  Centre  accords  special  consideration  in  devolving 
resources from the central pool. 
The  revenue  account  of  Mizoram  showed  significant  improvement  following  a  rule-based 
fiscal  policy  under  Mizoram  FRBM  Act  2006.  However,  the  correction  in  revenue  account 
was largely on account of higher transfers from the Centre, since own tax revenue continued 
to remain around 2.3 per cent of GSDP. From the perspective of growth and employment, a 
key concern is the decline in capital outlay in terms of GSDP (Table 3). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Table 3 
Fiscal position of Mizoram 
Banking developments 
The  banking  sector  penetration  in  Mizoram  may  be  seen  in  the  context  of  its  special 
characteristics of difficult terrain and economic structure. Agriculture is characterised by hill 
and mountain cultivation and industry is dominated by micro and small units. The population 
per bank branch in Mizoram declined from 11,400 in June 2001 to 9,100 by June 2013 and 
thus was much lower than the all-India average of 11,800 (Chart 7) reflecting better coverage 
of banking services. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
However, Credit-Deposit (C-D) ratio remained significantly lower than the all-India average 
(Chart  8).  Moreover,  C-D  ratio  in  Mizoram  has declined  in  the  more  recent  years. It  could 
partly be that deposits have grown faster. 
 
  The  annual  deposit  growth  rate  of  Mizoram  was  significantly  higher  than  the  national 
average.  However,  the  credit  growth  rate  has  fallen  short  of  the  national  average  after  
2007–08 (Chart 9). This underscores the need for a deeper analysis of credit information: Is 
it lack of demand or lack of supply which is constraining credit flow? 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 The  lower  credit  flow  is  also  mirrored  by  credit  to  GDP  ratio  which  is  another  measure  of 
financial  deepening.  The  credit-GSDP  ratio  in  Mizoram  has  improved  more  modestly  from 
13.7  per  cent  in  2004–05  to  18.7  per  cent  in  2011–12,  as  compared  to the  increase from 
39.0 per cent to 57.3 per cent at the national level (Chart 10). 
 
 Financial inclusion 
The Reserve Bank is committed to Financial Inclusion (FI) so that the banking services touch 
every section of our society. It is imperative to bring the poor and under-privileged section of 
population under the banking fold for inclusive growth and development. In this regard, the 
Reserve Bank has adopted a structured approach towards financial inclusion predominantly 
through  a  bank-led  model  by  leveraging  appropriate  technology,  changing  the  mode  of 
delivery and increasing financial literacy. In this context, I may highlight four key elements. 
First,  ensuring  branch  expansion  in  the  rural  areas  by  giving  full  freedom  to  the  banks  to 
open  branches  in  villages.  In  fact,  recently  the  branch  authorisation  policy  has  been  fully 
liberalised subject to banks opening at least 25 per cent of their branches in the rural areas. 
In  addition,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  enabled  commercial  banks  to  operate  through  their 
Business Correspondents (BCs) thus taking banking to the door step in the rural areas. 
Second,  for  providing  universal  coverage  and  facilitating  Direct  Benefit  Transfer  (DBT)  by 
leveraging  Aadhar  identification,  banks  have  been  advised  to  draw  up  their  Financial 
Inclusion Plans (FIPs) for the period 2013–16 with greater emphasis on opening of branches 
in unbanked rural centres. 
Third,  provision  of  suitable  financial  products  aimed  towards  the  vulnerable  section  of 
population  such  as  no-frill  account,  credit  through  General  Credit  Card  (GCC)  and  Kisan 
Credit Card (KCC). Moreover, Know Your Customer (KYC) norm required for opening of a 
bank account has been relaxed especially for rural and under-privileged population. 
Finally,  efforts  are  made  towards  spread  of  financial  literacy  including  internet  based 
curriculum for financial literacy in schools and organising financial literacy camps. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
In this direction, banks have covered all the unbanked villages with population over 2,000. 
The second phase of this movement aims to achieve the target of financial inclusion in about 
4,90,000 villages with population less than 2,000. The identified villages have been allotted 
to  various  banks  to  ensure  availability  of  at  least  one  banking  outlet  in  each  village.  The 
detailed achievement in the recent financial inclusion drive is summarised in Table 4. 
 
Table 4  
Progress made under financial inclusion plans 
Progress of financial inclusion in Mizoram 
Keeping  in  mind  the  topographic  challenges  and  locational  disadvantages  for  the 
development  of  extensive  banking  outreach,  banks  have  been  advised  to  adopt  special 
measures  for  FI  in  the  north-eastern  region  of  India.  Since  December  2009,  the  domestic 
scheduled commercial banks in the country, excluding RRBs, were permitted to open branch 
in any location in the region without taking permission from the Reserve Bank. Let me now 
turn specifically to progress of financial inclusion in Mizoram. 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As a part of the Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP) adopted in Mizoram, all the unbanked villages 
in the state with population of 2,000 or more have been covered by banking facility by end-
March  2012.  Another  700  villages  having  population  below  2,000  have  already  been 
identified. Out of these villages, 106 have been proposed to be covered through brick and 
mortar model while rest would be covered through Business Correspondence (BC) model. 
As  at  end-September  2013,  there  were  2,  27,812  Basic  Saving  Bank  Deposit  Accounts 
(BSBDAs)  in  Mizoram,  while  another  10,777  such  accounts  with  overdraft  facilities  are 
targeted  to  be  opened  during  the  year  2013–14.  In  addition,  11,642  KCC  and  GCC  are 
targeted to be provided to the households during 2013–14. Out of the 8 districts in the State, 
so  far  5  financial  literacy  centres  (FLCs)  have  been  opened.  As  of  end-September  2013 
cumulatively 3,063 Self Help Groups (SHGs) were credit-linked and have been provided with 
total credit of ₹1,650 lakh. 
Policy challenges 
Mizoram  economy  has  performed  well  in  the  recent  years.  However,  keeping  in  view  the 
young  population  and  high  literacy  and  strategic  location,  there  is  considerable  scope  for 
growth and development. Let me conclude by drawing attention to a few challenges. 
First, the dominant feature of the hill and mountain farming in Mizoram is sloping marginal 
farmlands  under  rain-fed  farming.  Subsistence  farming  on  these  lands  is  pervasive. 
Expansion of land for cultivation in an environmentally sustainable manner may be limited. 
The emphasis in agriculture, therefore, may shift towards high value added horticulture for 
which  there  is  tremendous  potential.  This  will  also  require  greater  penetration  of  credit  in 
agriculture. 
Second, industrial development in Mizoram started late in the 1990s, mainly after attaining 
statehood. The industrial landscape is dominated by micro and small industries. There is a 
need to reinforce this process by facilitating access to markets and formal credit. 
Third, weak market linkages with the rest of India coupled with lack of good quality road and 
absence  of  railway  network  inhibits  the  effective  marketing  of  goods.  Therefore,  priority 
should be given to the development of infrastructure, especially roads and also provision of 
post harvest management, cold storage and processing facilities. There is also the need to 
further  harness  the  hydro-power  capacity.  Better  accessibility  will  also  help  develop  the 
services sector, particularly tourism, which could become a significant source of employment 
and revenue. 
Finally,  the  topography  of  the  state  and  infrastructure  bottlenecks  together  work  as  a 
deterrent for the development of physical banking and financial infrastructure. Hence, greater 
reliance  may  need  to  be  placed  on  technology  to  make  banking  more  accessible  to  the 
majority of the population. This will require improvement in telecommunication facility. 
I thank you for inviting me to share my thoughts on financial inclusion in the state. Tomorrow, 
I hope to see some of you at our outreach programme at Tanhril village. With the combined 
effort  of  state  administration,  banks  and  the  Reserve  Bank  we  could  together  make  a 
significant impact in financial inclusion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
