Benno Ndulu: Addressing the challenges of financial inclusion in 
Tanzania 
Welcome and opening remarks by Mr Benno Ndulu, Governor of the Bank of Tanzania, at 
the  official 
Inclusion  Framework,  Dar Es Salaam, 
12 December 2013. 
the  National  Financial 
launch  of 
 Your Excellency, Dr. Mohamed Gharib Bilal, Vice President of the United Republic of 
Tanzania; 
Your Majesty, Queen Máxima of the Netherlands; 
Honorable Ministers of  Agriculture Eng.  Christopher Chiza  and  Minister  for  Finance 
Ms. Saada Mkuya, 
Your Excellency Ambassador of Netherlands to Tanzania; 
Ms. Ertharin Cousin, Executive Director, World Food Program (WFP), 
Maria Helena Semodo, Deputy Director General, FAO 
Mr. Adolfo Brizzi, Director, Policy and Technical Assistance, IFAD 
Dr. Alfred Hannig, Executive Director Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 
Heads of the UN Agencies 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps; 
Permanent Secretaries; 
Deputy Governors; 
Chief Executive Officers; 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  greatly  pleased  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  important  event  to  officially  launch  the 
Tanzania  National  Financial Inclusion Framework. Please accept my profound appreciation 
for  accepting  our  invitation  to  attend  this  event.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  thank  your 
Excellency,  Dr.  Mohamed  Gharib  Bilal,  the  Vice  President  of  the  United  Republic  of 
Tanzania,  for  finding  the  time  to  grace  and  open  this  occasion.  Special  gratitute  to  your 
Majesty,  Queen  Maxima  of  the  Netherlands  who  is  the  UN  Secretary  General’s  Special 
Advocate  for  Financial  Inclusion  for accepting  to be the guest of honor to this event. I wish 
to recognize  a  great  friend  of  financial  inclusion  Dr.  Alfred  Hannig, the Executive Director 
of  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  who  has  helped  to  establish  and  grow  an  initiative 
that  has  enabled  to  engender  not  only  global  peer  learning  but  also  peer  pressure  to 
achieve  ambitious  targets. Also  for  special  recognition  are  the three  guests,  Executive 
Director  of  World  Food  Program  (WFP),  Ms.  Ertharin  Cousin,  Deputy  Director  General, 
Ms. Maria Helena Semedo  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  (FAO)  and  Director, Policy 
and  Technical  Advisory  Division  of  International  Fund  for Agriculture Development (IFAD) 
Mr. Adolfo Brizzi. 
Your Excellency, Your Majesty, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The Framework has been developed through an elaborate process  that  involved  all  key 
financial  inclusion  stakeholders  in the  country  with  special  support  from  Financial  Sector 
Deepening Trust (FSDT); I thank FSDT for extended cooperation and assistance.  We  have 
together  as  stakeholders  identified  barriers to  financial  inclusion  and  their  corresponding 
core  enablers  that  will  be  implemented  in  a  coordinated  manner  to  overcome  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
barriers.  These  have  been  put  together  in  the  document  that  you  will  today  witness  its 
launch. 
Financial stakeholders realized that  financial inclusion couldn’t be achieved  with everyone 
working  in silos.  Rather  it requires  a concerted  cooperative  approach  that  will  be  used 
to  address  the  challenges  of  financial  inclusion  in  Tanzania  systematically  and  in  a 
coordinated manner. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Financial inclusion is important to the economy, it enables improving the welfare of the poor, 
– contribute to financial stability; and  to  growth  of  micro-business  that  ultimately  stimulate 
growth of other sectors in the economy. 
Tanzania  has  made  significant  strides  to  enhance  the  proportion of adult population who 
are  formally  included  (adults  with  accounts  in  formal  financial  institutions).  In  2006  the 
proportion stood at 9%, 12% in 2009 and in 2012 it was 17%, or 22% formal inclusion  if  we 
include  SACCOS.  Cognizance  of  this  low  rate  of formal  financial  inclusion,  we  identified 
a  number  of  barriers  that  account  for  such  state  of  affairs.  These  include:  supply  side 
barriers  ranging  from,  high  interest  rates,  services  that  don’t  meet  demand  side  needs, 
costs,  to  inefficiencies  of  service  delivery.  Demand  side  barriers  include,  information 
asymmetry,  irregular  income  patterns,  and  financial  literacy.  Structural  and  regulatory 
barriers  include,  stringent  or  lack  of  proportionate  requirements  for  client  on-boarding, 
lack  of  regulatory  framework  for  broad  based  micro-finance  services,  lack  of  centralized 
national identification system to mention but a few. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
In  order  to  build  impetus  and  push  for  acceleration  of  financial inclusion  we  made  an 
international  commitment  under  the  AFI auspices  (the  Maya  Declaration)  to  increase 
formal  access  of financial  services  to  50%  by  2015.  The  AFI  network,  that  has more 
than  100  countries’  regulators  and  policy  makers  as  its members, has enabled us to 
gain knowledge in financial inclusion through  peer-learning  and  peer-pressure. It  has  also 
enabled  us  to  host  international  forums  for  the  establishment  of  Africa  Mobile  Phone 
Financial  Service  Policy  Initiative  (AMPI)  in  February  2013  in  Zanzibar.  AMPI  has  been 
instrumental  as  a  platform  to  share experiences on  how  countries  in  Africa  may  scale  up 
the  use  of mobile  money  for  financial  inclusion.  Tanzania  has  been  used  as one  of  the 
success  stories  in  using  mobile  telephony  to  deliver  financial  services.  And  we  have 
already  hosted  some central banks  in  attachments  to  learn  from  our  experiences  of 
taking advantage of leveraging on the use of this mobile technology as a platform to facilitate 
payment services to the majority of the population far and wide, including those that were 
hitherto  underserved  or  unbanked.  The  mobile  financial  services  operated  by  non-banks 
and  banks  has  now  enabled  by  September  2013,  90%  of 
the  adult  population  in 
Tanzania  to  have  access  to  a  mobile  money  accounts  with  43%  (or  9.8  Million) 
adults  being  active  users.  Most  of  these,  however,  are  still  unbanked.  Although  mobile 
telephony  financial  service  has  its  limitations  as  it  is  still widely  used  for  payment  based 
services  only,  current  initiatives are  being  deployed  to  expand  its  use  as  a  platform 
to  deliver other financial products from mainstream banking. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Overall,  the  level  of  access  to  formal  financial  inclusion  in  Tanzania  is  relatively  low. 
According to  2012 World  Bank  survey 24%  of  adults  in  Africa  have  an  account  at  a 
formal  financial  institution  as  of  2012.  As  pointed  out  earlier,  in  Tanzania  17%  of  adults 
have  accounts  with  a  formal  financial  institution. In  2006 this  proportion  was  significantly 
lower at 9%. Including SACCOS this proportion in Tanzania rises to 22%. 
The provision of SME and Agribusiness finance likewise has been lower than necessary to 
support significant growth in this important  sector  of  the  economy.  Based  on  National 
Baseline Survey  Report  (2012)  only  10.6  %  of  MSMEs  have  access  to finance  from 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
formal  institutions.  And  based  on  AgFims  Tanzania  Headline  Findings  (2011)  32.4%  of 
agri-businesses have access to formal credit. 
We  believe  that  strategies  to  address  challenges  behind  these low  levels  of  financial 
inclusion  are  articulated  in  the  National  Financial  Inclusion  Framework  that  will  be 
launched  today.  In preparing this framework we  have  the  advice and  challenges that His 
Excellency Dr. Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete, the President of United Republic of  Tanzania raised 
in  Arusha  in  November  2012  in  the  Conference  for  Financial  Institutions  and  in  Dar  es 
Salaam in  July  2013  at  the  Smart  Partnership  Global  Dialogue.  In  both events, financial 
inclusion  was  the  central  theme;  and  the  President challenged us  to  increase  the  level  of 
financial  inclusion  within  the  shortest  time  possible.  This  Framework  is  the  results  of  that 
advice and we are pleased that Her Majesty and His Excellency the Vice President are here 
to witness its launch. 
Your Excellency, Your Majesty; Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The  Framework 
inclusion  stakeholders  in 
Tanzania  from  the  private  and  public  sector,  who  are  here  present  today.  They  have 
documented  the  barriers  and  key  core  enablers  to  be  implemented  with  the  objective  of 
spurringfinancial inclusion in Tanzania. An Action Plan that articulates key priority areas will 
be implemented by each stakeholder. The priorities areas for implementation include: 
• 
is  a  commitment  voice 
financial 
from 
Proximity:  Enhancing  and 
implementing  access  channels,  such  as  Agent 
banking, mobile telephony financial  services, point  of  sales,  stand  alone  ATMs, 
POS  and  a regulatory framework that  creates  conducive environment for  growth 
of financial inclusion; 
Robust  Electronic  Platforms:  Improving,  developing  ICT  payment  platforms 
that  facilitate  cost  effective  and secure access to financial services; 
Robust information and easy client on-boarding: Implementing, monitoring and 
enhancing use of credit bureaus,  proportionate  Know  Your Customer requirements 
and  improved ID  system that  is  linked  to  financial systems; and 
Informed  customers  and  consumer  protection:  Implement  financial  consumer 
protection mechanism and national financial education framework. 
   Your Excellency, Your Majesty; Ladies and Gentlemen: 
In order to ensure that we achieve results, the Framework has set targets for financial access 
of  50%  by  2016,  echoing  our  international  commitment  that  we  made  in  Riviera  Maya, 
Mexico in  2011  under the  AFI  initiative-Maya Declaration. Specific targets are  also  made 
for  specific  core  enablers  that  stakeholders  are  required  to  implement  and  achieve 
within a  span  of  3  years from today.  It  is  worth  noting  that  some  barriers  are  planned 
to  be addressed  within  six  months  from  the  launch  of  the  Framework, while  others  are 
being  addressed  as  I  speak  for  example  the regulatory  frameworks  for  the  cyber  laws 
and  national  payment systems law. 
The Framework also provides an elaborate measurement mechanism  that  will  be  used  in 
the  assessment  of 
level  of  financial  inclusion  in  Tanzania.  Based  on  an  all 
encompassing working  definition  of  financial  inclusion  key  indicators  that  include usage of 
financial  services  have  been  developed.  This  is  important  to  ensure  that  the  efforts  that 
stakeholders  are  making  towards  implementing  the  Action  Plan  have  an  impact  on 
the ground. 
Your Majesty, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
A  coordinating  structure  is  also  established  to  oversee  and  supervise  the  implementation 
process;  where  an  apex  organ:  the  Financial  Inclusion  National  Council  comprising 
eleven  member  institutions,  from  various  ministries  at  Permanent  Secretary  level  and 
heads  of  other  financial  regulatory authorities. This  National Council has responsibilities of 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
ensuring  that  stakeholders  implement  the  Action  Plan  as  articulated  in  the  Framework. 
The  coordinating  structure  upholds  accountability  and  applies 
tools  such  as  periodic 
reporting  and  assessments.  An  Impact  Assessment  will  also  be  conducted  after  the 
3  years target: mid- term review shall be conducted to assess impact of the interventions  of 
the  financial  inclusion  initiatives  included  in  the  Framework  and  inform  the  National 
Council  on  the  appropriate directives to issue to the key stakeholders for implementation. 
Your Excellency, Your Majesty; Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Development of the Framework has been  a  very fruitful process; we  have  witnessed,  from 
the  members  of  the  Council  and  other  national  technical  committees,  great  enthusiasm, 
commitment, energy  and  desire  to  increase  the  level  of  financial  inclusion  in Tanzania. 
We therefore  expect that the official launch of the Framework  shall build more impetus  to 
fulfill our objective  of improving the level of financial inclusion in Tanzania. 
With  this  remarks,  I  now  have  the  honor  to  welcome  Honorable,  Ms.  Saada  Mkuya, 
Acting  Minister 
to  deliver  her  remarks  and  welcome  His  Excellency,  Dr. 
Mohamed Gharib Bilal, the  Vice  President  of  the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania,  to  deliver 
his  opening  speech  and  thereafter  welcome  the  guest  of  honor  her  Majesty  Queen 
Máxima  of the  Netherlands  to  deliver  the keynote address. 
Honorable Minister; Ms. Saada Mkuya, welcome. 
for  Finance 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
