Spencer Dale: The UK’s economic recovery – why now; will it last; and 
what next for monetary policy? 
Speech by  Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director, Monetary Policy, and Chief Economist of 
the Bank of England, at the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) East of England Midwinter 
Lunch, Newmarket, 13 December 2013. 
 I would like to thank John Lewis, Matt Trott and Gavin Wallis for their considerable help in preparing this speech. 
The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Monetary Policy 
Committee. 
I thought I would start today with a short reminiscence about the late Eddie George, who was 
Governor of the Bank of England between 1993 and 2003. 
Soon  after  becoming  Governor,  Eddie  gave  an  interview  in  which  he  was  asked  how  he 
would  judge  the  success  of  his  Governorship.  Now  this  was  before  the  advent  of  the 
Monetary Policy Committee, so he couldn’t frame his response simply in terms of hitting the 
inflation target. Instead, Eddie replied that “My personal ambition is that the rate of growth of 
output should be above the rate of inflation for three years in a row”.1 
At  the  time,  this  seemed  a  fairly  tall  order:  prior  to  Eddie  taking  over,  this  hadn’t  been 
achieved even once since the Second World War. 
But as it turned out, growth was stronger than inflation in every single year of Eddie’s 10-year 
reign. And that continued for the next few years after he’d retired. Indeed, during the halcyon 
days of the so-called Great Moderation that preceded the financial crisis, it started to seem 
that Eddie’s ambition was no longer quite so demanding. 
But – as you all know – then came the crisis! That, combined with a commodity price boom 
and a sharp depreciation in sterling, meant that the days of GDP growth outstripping inflation 
quickly became a thing of the past. We’ve failed to live up to Eddie’s ambition for each of the 
past six years. 
The good news is that recent developments – on both growth and inflation – mean that we 
appear to be heading back towards an environment of which Eddie would have approved. 
Over the past six months, output has grown at an annualised rate of almost 3%, almost a 
quarter  of  a  million  new  jobs  have  been  created  and  indicators  point  to  a  continuation  of 
strong growth.  At the  same  time,  inflation  has fallen  sharply  and,  at  2.2%  in  October,  CPI 
inflation is as low as it’s been for four years. 
In  terms  of  growth,  the  obvious  question  this  raises  is,  why  now?  Why,  after  throwing 
everything bar the kitchen sink at the economy over the past few years, has the economy 
started to grow only now? Even more importantly, will the recovery last? Having seen a few 
false dawns over recent years, has the recovery really taken hold this time? And what does 
all  this  mean  for  monetary  policy.  In  particular,  what  does  the  MPC’s  so-called  forward 
guidance, which we announced in the summer, mean for you – the businessmen and women 
driving this recovery? 
And that’s the plan for today: to consider three key questions about the economic recovery 
that we’re now finally enjoying – why now, will it last, and what next for policy? 
                                                
1  Securities and Investment Review, September 1993. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Why now? 
First, why now? Why after several years of frustration and disappointment has the economy 
begun to grow? It’s hard to be certain: this time last year we were not predicting such a sharp 
turnaround in growth and there’s a danger of appearing to be wise after the event. But, at 
least with the benefit of hindsight, two developments in particular seem important in driving 
the turnaround: an easing in credit conditions; and a reduction in economic uncertainty. 
Let me say a few words about each, starting with credit conditions. 
Improved credit availability 
Although it’s still patchy and there’s further to go, we’ve observed a marked improvement in 
the ability of many companies and households to access credit over the past 18 months or 
so. Some of that stems from a lessening of tensions within the euro area, which has helped 
to  ease  pressures  on  banks  both  sides  of  the  channel.  It’s  also  been  aided  by  domestic 
polices, including the Funding for Lending scheme, a series of regulatory actions to improve 
the  strength  and  resilience  of  our  banking  system  and,  more  recently,  the  Government’s 
Help-to-Buy policies. 
I fully recognise that the ability of many SMEs – perhaps many of you here today – to access 
credit  at  reasonable  rates  still  remains  impaired.  But  even  here  my  sense  is  that  some 
progress  has  been  made.  That’s  the  message  from  surveys  of  small  businesses,  from 
reports by the Bank’s Agents, and indeed that I get from my own conversations with many 
businesses around the country. We’re not there yet – and the Funding for Lending scheme 
remains in place to encourage banks to lend more to companies, particularly SMEs – but we 
have taken a step in the right direction. 
For households, the improvement has been more marked. Interest rates of new mortgages, 
especially  those  for  fixed-rate  mortgages  and  those  with  higher  loan-to-value  ratios,  have 
fallen by well over a percentage point since the summer of 2012. Unsecured personal loan 
rates have fallen by even more. The greater ease with which many families can access credit 
has  fed  through  to  the  housing  market,  which  until  recently  had  been  in  a  state  of  deep 
freeze.  Housing  transactions  fell  very  sharply  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis  and 
subsequently flat lined. Nominal house prices moved sideways for several  years. But over 
the past six months or so, there’s been some thawing. Housing transactions and mortgage 
approvals have started to show signs of life. House prices have picked up. 
A  healthy  housing  market  is  good  for  our  economy  and  will  help  to  support  the  recovery. 
Most  importantly,  it  will  underpin  further  increases  in  house  building,  which  has  played  an 
important role in driving the economic growth we’ve enjoyed this year and which, as a nation, 
we need to see. It will foster greater labour mobility by allowing people to move more easily 
to where new jobs are being created. It will help to support consumer confidence. 
But let’s not be naive. Anyone with more than a passing interest in British economic history is 
aware that the UK housing market has a sort of microwave type quality to it, with a tendency 
to turn from lukewarm to scalding hot in a matter of a few economic seconds. The Bank is 
fully aware of this risk. The good news, however, is that it’s far better equipped to respond to 
these types of risks than in the past. In particular, the new Financial Policy Committee (FPC) 
– the sister Committee to the MPC – has explicit responsibility for maintaining the resilience 
of  the  financial  system.  And,  together  with  the  other  regulatory  bodies,  the  FPC  has  the 
policy  instruments  which  can  address  potential  excesses  in  the  housing  market  –  and  in 
other markets – which pose a threat to the stability of the financial system. 
So although there are risks and there is further to go, particularly for SMEs, credit conditions 
for  many  companies  and  households  have  eased  over  the  past  18  months  and  this  has 
helped to stimulate activity, particular so within the housing market. 
Consider  next  the  reduction  in  economic  uncertainty  which  has  probably  played  a  greater 
role in turning the economy around this year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Reduced economic uncertainty 
It  seems  clear  that  economic  uncertainty  has  diminished  over  the  past  year  or  so.  Think 
back, for example, to the middle of last year, when the euro area appeared once again to be 
teetering on the edge. Or even as recently to the beginning of this year, when all the talk at 
home was of the possibility of a triple dip. 
To some, appealing to “reduced uncertainty” as a driver of the economic recovery may sound 
rather vague and nebulous. A convenient ex post rationalisation perhaps for something we 
don’t really understand. 
But it seems clear to me that uncertainty and fear greatly amplified the initial impact of the 
financial crisis.2 How else, for example, can we explain the speed with which a failure of a US 
investment bank in September 2008 led to output and orders up and down our country, and 
indeed around the world, “falling off a cliff” within a matter of months?3 
More  generally,  speaking  to  companies  over  recent  years,  I’ve  been  left  in  no  doubt  that 
heightened  uncertainty  has  served  as  a  significant  brake  on  their  activity  and  plans  for 
expansion. And for good reason. 
Most  obviously,  when  faced  with  greater  uncertainty  about  the  economic  outlook,  many 
companies may hold off undertaking new investments or starting new ventures and wait for 
the uncertainty to be partially resolved before deciding whether or not to go ahead. The value 
of  waiting  –  or keeping your  options  open  –  is especially  marked  when  considering  lumpy 
investment projects which are hard or costly to reverse once made.4 
Uncertainty may delay actions and investment within companies, even if managers are not 
waiting for it to be resolved. Take, for example, a company deciding whether to invest in, say, 
a new IT system. It may be that at current levels of orders and activity, it’s too close to call 
whether this investment will pay off, and so the decision is put on hold until orders increase 
sufficiently  to  tip  the  balance  decisively.  But  suppose  the  economic  outlook  is  particularly 
uncertain, so the company is very unsure whether, even if orders were to rise, that strength 
would  continue.  In  that  case,  the  company  is  likely  to  require  an  even  bigger  increase  in 
orders before taking the plunge. As a result, heightened levels of uncertainty will tend to push 
down on aggregate investment.5 
More generally, many companies faced with a more uncertain economic outlook may adopt a 
defensive strategy, hunkering down to ensure that they survive the economic storm. Sure, 
this may mean deferring potentially profitable business opportunities for a while, but better 
that than risk your long-term future. In this context, it’s worth remembering that it’s the most 
                                                
2  For more a detailed discussion of the role increased uncertainty may have played in contributing to the depth 
of  the  recession,  see  the  recent  article  by  Abigail  Haddow,  Chris  Hare,  John  Holley  and  Tamarah  Shakir 
(2013) in the Bank of England’s Quarterly Bulletin. 
3  This phrase was used by Mervyn King in evidence to the Treasury Select Committee in November 2009: “At 
the  beginning  of  the  year  we had  experienced  two  quarters  when  the  world economy, in  the  words  people 
around the world have used, fell off a cliff”. 
4  For example, Dixit and Pindyck (1994) show that for a company to undertake an investment project its net 
present value must not merely be positive, but must be greater than the implied option value of waiting until 
the next period. 
5  Bloom (2009) shows that higher uncertainty tends to lead to lower investment because it widens the “zone of 
inaction”  associated  with  companies  waiting  for  the  economic  environment  to  move  decisively  in  once 
direction  or  the  other.  The  partial  irreversibility  of  investment  means  that  there  are  more  companies  at  the 
margin deciding whether to invest than those at the corresponding disinvestment margin. Widening this region 
of  inaction  causes  more  new  investments  than  disinvestments  to  be  cancelled,  and  hence  lowers  total 
investment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
successful companies with the brightest futures that are likely to be most affected in this way, 
since they have the most to lose.6 
As  I  said,  the  good  news  is  that  the  cloud  of  uncertainty  has  started  to  lift.  And  just  as 
heightened  uncertainty  greatly  amplified  the  downturn,  this  reduction  in  uncertainty  can 
provide a powerful spur to the recovery. 
This leads to our second question for today: will the recovery last? 
Will it last? 
The  reduction  in  uncertainty  and  the  easing  of  credit  conditions  appear  to  have  started  to 
unlock pent-up demand and so fuel a recovery. 
That recovery to date has been largely driven on the household side: high-street sales have 
increased modestly as consumers have spent a greater share of their pay, and investment in 
residential housing has increased significantly. The dominant role of the household sector in 
the early stages of the recovery is not particularly surprising: businesses are likely to need a 
sustained pickup in demand before they have either the need or the confidence to increase 
capacity. But the durability of the recovery will depend on the baton of growth being handed 
over  to  the  corporate  sector,  whose  spending  and  investment  will  help  to  foster  stronger 
growth in productivity and real incomes. 
And  here  the  reduction  in  uncertainty  may  continue  to  play  an  important  role.  It’s  perhaps 
easy  to  see  how  reduced  uncertainty  may  help  to  prompt  a  one-off  increase  in  business 
spending, as companies move away from defensive,  wait-and-see strategies and blow the 
cobwebs off plans for deferred investment projects. But the impact of diminished uncertainty 
may stretch beyond simply a short-run boost. 
In part that reflects the possibility that the combination of reduced uncertainty and increased 
spending  by  households  and  companies may  become  self-reinforcing:  reduced  uncertainty 
helps to spur additional spending and investment, which in turn further reduces uncertainty 
about future demand and so on.7 
Movements in uncertainty can amplify the recovery just as they amplified the downturn. 
This virtuous circle may be enhanced by the benefits reduced uncertainty can have for the 
supply-side  of  our  economy.  Increased  investment  will  add  to  our  productive  capacity.  A 
strengthening labour market may give employees confidence to move jobs, so better aligning 
available skills with vacancies. Companies may lift 
the shutters and start to take the types of risks and entrepreneurial activities necessary for 
our  long-run  prosperity.8  Such  improvements  in  the  supply  performance  of  our  economy 
would greatly enhance the durability of the recovery. 
Diminished uncertainty may also bolster the impact from the past easing in monetary policy. 
The  MPC  has  loosened  monetary  policy  aggressively  since  the  financial  crisis,  both  by 
cutting Bank Rate to historically low levels and by the use of more unconventional tools, such 
                                                
6  The  costs  associated  with  bankruptcy  means  that,  in  times  of  high  uncertainty,  a  firm  may  opt  to  adopt  a 
strategy  which  is  most  robust  to  their  view  about  the  world  being  proved  wrong,  sometimes  referred  to  as 
“robust satisficing” (See Ben Haim (2010) for an overview). 
7  My colleague David Miles (2013) made a similar point in a recent speech. 
8  Bloom et al (2001), Bond and Lombardi (2004) and Gilchrist et al (2010) all discuss the constraining impact 
uncertainty can have on business investment. Reduced uncertainty may also make companies more willing to 
enter new markets. Disney, Haskel and Heden (2003) provide evidence that such activities are an important 
source of productivity growth. Lazear and Spletzer (2011) show that reduced uncertainty can prompt greater 
“churn” in the labour market leading to more efficient matching of skills to jobs. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
as Quantitative Easing and the Funding for Lending scheme. But if, over recent years, many 
companies have been largely focussed on survival, waiting for some of the uncertainty to be 
resolved before actively considering opportunities to invest and expand, it’s possible that the 
easing  of  borrowing  costs  brought  about  by  these  policies  has  not  yet  fully  translated  into 
spending decisions. As uncertainty lessens, past monetary policy actions may gain greater 
traction, thus further supporting the recovery. 
So there are good reasons for thinking that the reduced uncertainty may help to facilitate this 
handover to business spending we need to see, and that some of those effects may be long 
lasting. 
But  we  also  need  to  be  alive  to  the  possibility  that  the  events  of  the  past  few  years  may 
colour and contaminate business behaviour for many years to come. It may be a long time 
before  companies  look ahead  with  the  same  confidence  that they  did  during the  period of 
remarkable  stability  prior  to  the  crisis.  Before  their  trust  is restored that  the  authorities  are 
able  to  stop  really  bad  things  from  happening.  Before  they  rebuild  their  relationships  with 
their banks. 
On this final point, many companies were let down by their banks during the financial crisis, 
and  I  fear  that  many  will  be  reluctant  to  return  to  a  business  model  which  relies  on  their 
banks  providing  liquidity  and  support  in  times  of  need.  The  reluctance  today  of  some 
companies to borrow from their banks may be less a lack of demand and more a breakdown 
of  trust.  Although  an  understandable  response  to  the  events  of  the  past  few  years,  an 
increased  prevalence  of  self-insurance  is  not  good  for  the  efficient  functioning  of  our 
economy. 
The scarring effects of the financial crisis and the uncertainty it brought with it, together with 
the fiscal consolidation and the weakness of the euro area, are likely to continue to weigh on 
the recovery over the next few years. Yes: our economy appears to have turned a corner. 
And yes: there are good reasons for optimism that the recovery will persist. But we can’t take 
it for granted: there’s still a long way to go. And that sense of how far there is to go underpins 
the policy guidance provided by the Committee earlier this year and takes us to our third and 
final question: what next for monetary policy? 
What next for monetary policy? 
The primary objective of monetary policy remains to hit the Government’s 2% target for CPI 
inflation.  Despite  missing the  target for much  of  the  past five  years, I’ve  no  doubt that  the 
credible  nominal  anchor  it  provided  served  our  economy  well  during  the  crisis.  Indeed, 
without  that  credibility  it  wouldn’t  have  been  possible  to  loosen  monetary  policy  as 
aggressively as we did in order to support output and jobs. 
As we have seen, the good news is that inflation has fallen sharply over the past few months 
and the 2% target is now in sight for the first time in over 4 years. But this isn’t a time for 
complacency.  To  repeat,  inflation  has  been  above  the  2%  target  for  most  of  the  past  five 
years. There are good reasons why policy wasn’t tightened in order to bring inflation back to 
target more quickly. But ultimately, the MPC will be judged by the success of our actions, not 
the elegance of our arguments. We need to demonstrate our commitment to bring inflation 
back to target and to keep it there. 
But we have also needed to trade off the speed with which we bring inflation back to target 
against  the  support  that  monetary  policy  can  provide  to  the  recovery.  The  MPC’s  forward 
guidance gives greater clarity about our view of the appropriate trade-off. 
More  important for us  today,  our guidance  is  rooted  in  the recognition  that  it’s  a  long  way 
back  to  the  economy  being  fully  recovered.  The  damage  and  losses  associated  with  the 
financial  crisis  and  the  years  of  frustration  and  disappointment  that  followed  won’t  be 
reversed simply by one or two quarters of strong growth. Our guidance makes clear that we 
intend to maintain the current exceptionally stimulative stance of monetary policy until we’ve 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
seen  a  sustained  period  of  strong  growth  and  the  margin  of  slack  in  the  economy  has 
narrowed significantly, as long as this does not pose risks to either price or financial stability. 
As you may know, our guidance was framed in terms of so-called thresholds and knockouts. 
The MPC intends not to raise Bank Rate or reduce the stock of asset purchases at least until 
the unemployment rate reaches a threshold of 7%, subject to three knockouts designed to 
guard against risks to price and financial stability. 
But abstracting from the details of these thresholds and knockouts, our message to you – the 
businessmen and women driving this recovery – is clear. You can plan for the future in the 
knowledge that the MPC intends to keep interest rates low until we have seen a prolonged 
period of strong growth, unemployment is significantly lower, real incomes are higher. 
Based on some of the reporting, you might be forgiven for thinking that forward guidance is 
far more complicated than this. To take just one example, let me read to you the opening 
sentence of an article last month reporting on the MPC’s November Inflation Report. Under 
the headline “Forward guidance fails”, the article began: “The Bank of England now expects 
the  economy  to  grow  strongly  next  year,  highlighting  the  fact  that  its  policy  of  forward 
guidance has effectively failed.” 
Strong growth, falling unemployment: if that’s failure, I wish I’d failed long before now! 
The aim of the Committee’s guidance isn’t to provide a commitment that interest rates won’t 
rise until some particular date in the future. Monetary policy has to respond to the changing 
state  of  the  economy.  We  can  no  more  commit  to  keeping  our  prices  and  quantities 
unchanged  irrespective  of  economic  circumstances  than  you  can.  Rather,  our  guidance 
should  reassure  you  that,  absent  risks  to  either  price  stability  or  financial  stability,  we  will 
tighten policy only when we are well along the road to recovery. Yes: interest rates will rise at 
some point. But only against a far stronger economic backdrop, when your output is higher, 
your order books are fuller, and you and your customers are better able to withstand a rise in 
borrowing costs. 
Moreover, although still some way in the distance, we shouldn’t look at the prospect of an 
eventual rise in interest rates with a sense of dread and fear. Assuming that interest rates 
rise  due  to  the  vigour  and  durability  of  the  recovery,  rather  than  concerns  about  either 
inflation or financial stability, we should see interest rates beginning to rise as a sign of the 
strength of our economy. As a sign that that we are well on the way to making a full recovery. 
As  a  sign  that  the  emergency  life-support  measures  put  in  place  since  the  crisis  are  no 
longer required. 
The MPC is fully aware that extraordinary low interest rates are likely to be needed for some 
time yet. But when they cease to be, this will be a sign that we have finally turned the corner 
for home. 
Conclusion 
Let me summarise 
At long last, we appear to be moving back to an economic environment of which Eddie would 
have approved. One in which the economy is growing robustly and inflation is close to target. 
A  recovery  appears  to  have  finally  taken  hold,  spurred  by  reduced  uncertainty  and  easier 
credit conditions. There are good reasons for optimism that the recovery will be durable. But 
the journey back to full recovery is long and many challenges still remain. Monetary policy is 
there for the long haul. That is the essence of our forward guidance. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
References 
Haddow, A., Hare C., Holley, J., and Shakir, T. (2013) “Macroeconomic uncertainty: what is it, 
how can we measure it and why does it matter?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2013 Q2. 
Ben Haim, J. (2010) “Info-Gap Economics: An operational introduction”, Palgrave McMillan 
Bloom, N. (2009) “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks”, Econometrica 77:3, pp 623–685 
Bloom,  N.,  Bond,  S.  and  Van  Reenen,  J.  (2001).  “The  dynamics  of  investment  under 
uncertainty”, IFS Working Paper, No. W01/05. 
Bond, S.R. and Lombardi, D (2004) “To buy or not to buy? Uncertainty, irreversibility and 
heterogenous investment dynamics in Italian company data”, IMF Working Paper no. 04/104. 
Disney, R, Haskell, J and Heden, Y (2003), “Restructuring and productivity growth in UK 
manufacturing”, Economic Journal, Vol. 113, Issue 489, pages 666–94. 
Dixit, A. and Pindyck, R. (1994) “Investment Under Uncertainty”, Princeton University Press 
Gilchrist,  S,  Sim,  J  and  Zakrajsek,  E  (2010),  “Uncertainty,  financial  frictions,  and 
investment dynamics”, 2010 Meeting Papers No. 1285, Society for Economic Dynamics. 
Lazear, E and Spletzer, R (2011), “Hiring, churn and the business cycle”, NBER Working 
Paper No. 17910. 
Miles,  D.  (2013),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Forward  Guidance  in  the  UK”,  speech  given  at 
Northumbria University, Newcastle, 24 September.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
