Ravi Menon: Singapore as a global insurance marketplace 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  12th  Singapore  International  Reinsurance  Conference,  Singapore, 
6 November 2013. 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
 Asia’s changing risk landscape 
These  are  interesting  times  for  the  insurance  industry.  The  operating  environment  has 
become more challenging. 
• 
Underwriting  results  are  being  pressured  by  a  combination  of  sluggish  economic 
growth, softening rates, and rising claims. 
Investment  returns  are  being  depressed  by  the  low  interest-rate  environment.  In 
Europe, for instance, returns on long-term safe assets are at their lowest since the 
creation of the European Economic and Monetary Union. 
Regulatory and capital requirements are being tightened as the world shifts toward 
risk-based regimes like Solvency II. 
  At the same time, the growth potential has never been better. At a time, when questions are 
being raised globally as to whether the financial industry has grown too big, no one is asking 
the same of insurance. Much of the world remains under-insured. 
The prospects in Asia are especially bright. The Asian risk landscape is transforming rapidly, 
generating robust demand for insurance and re-insurance. 
• 
Over the next decade, the insurance business in Asia is projected to grow at about 
8% per annum. 
By 2020, Asia is likely to account for almost 40% of the global market. 
• 
There are three large factors driving insurance demand in Asia. 
First, Asia is growing. Developing Asia is still growing at double the global average. Rising 
affluence  and  a  growing  middle  class  will  underpin  a  steady  increase  in  insurance 
penetration  rates  that  are  still  well  below  the  global  average.  Continued  industrialisation, 
expanding  cross-border  trade,  and  infrastructure  development  will  drive  demand  for 
insurance solutions to mitigate a variety of business risks. 
Second, Asia is vulnerable. Asia is highly prone to natural catastrophes. 
• 
Asia accounted for 52% of global economic losses from disasters between 2000 and 
2009, and 81% in 2011 alone. 
Only  about  35%  of  the  economic  losses  from  2011  were  insured,  resulting  in  a 
heavy economic burden for affected countries. 
 A growing risk awareness, coupled with rising asset values, will lead to greater demand for 
catastrophe insurance and reinsurance, including alternative risk transfer solutions. Following 
the 2011 catastrophes, several Asian countries have already established insurance pools for 
key catastrophe risks. 
Third,  Asia  is  ageing.  Asia  is  facing  a  rapidly  ageing  population.  By  2050,  Asia  and  the 
Pacific will be home to 62% of the world’s elderly population, with one in four persons aged 
60  and  above.  This  will  lead  to  greater  demand  for  health  insurance,  annuity  and  other 
retirement security products. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
As  the  leading  insurance  centre  in  Asia,  Singapore  is  well-placed  to  serve  the  burgeoning 
insurance  needs  of  the  region.  The  insurance  industry  is  one  of  the  brightest  stars  in  the 
constellation of Singapore’s financial sector. The industry has done remarkably well, but its 
story is not well known. 
I  want  to  briefly  sketch  the  journey  of  Singapore’s  insurance  industry  from  writing  pure 
domestic risks to becoming a regional underwriting hub in just ten years. I will then share our 
vision  and  strategies  for  the  next  phase  of  the  industry’s  growth  –  to  become  a  global 
insurance marketplace at the heart of Asia. 
The journey to a regional underwriting hub 
In  the  early  days,  the  Singapore  insurance  industry  was  focused  on  servicing  domestic 
business,  with  life  insurance  being  the  mainstay.  In  fact,  MAS  had  adopted  a  closed-door 
policy to direct insurers since 1990. In 2000, MAS liberalised the insurance industry, lifting 
the  closed-door  policy  on  direct  insurers  and  the  49%  foreign  shareholding  limit  in  locally 
owned direct insurers. 
Singapore’s development as a regional insurance hub took off. 
• 
Since 2000, offshore business has been on a steady uptrend, growing an average of 
13% per annum to US$5.4bn in 2012. The share of offshore non-life business has 
increased from 50% in 2000 to 65% in 2012. 
Major  insurance  groups  across  different  segments  of  the  industry,  from  direct 
insurers to reinsurers and brokers, have sited their regional operating and business 
hubs here. 
 Today,  Singapore  is  recognised  as  the  leading  reinsurance  hub  in  Asia.  Amongst  the  top 
25 reinsurers in the world, 16 have regional hubs here. 
The market has built up significant expertise in specialty insurance, namely marine, energy, 
catastrophe, credit and political risks. For example, Singapore is the second largest market 
for structured credit and political risk worldwide after London. 
The  number  of  global  and  regional  positions  in  Singapore  has  grown.  Most  underwriting 
decisions can be made on the ground instead of being referred back to headquarters. This 
has  enabled  the  Singapore  market  to  respond  more  quickly  to  clients’  needs.  Most  Asian 
risks,  including  entire  large  reinsurance  programmes  and  specialty  risks,  can  now  be  fully 
placed in Singapore. 
Towards becoming a global marketplace 
Our  vision  is  for  Singapore’s  insurance  industry  to  become  a global  marketplace  by  2020, 
with the ability to accept not just regional, but global risks. 
To achieve this, we are pursuing four strategies with clearly laid out initiatives. 
• 
First, to increase supply-side capacity, in both volume and expertise. 
Second, to promote insurance demand, both locally and in the Asia-Pacific. 
• 
Third,  to  develop  a  true  marketplace,  where  sellers  and  buyers  come  together  to 
• 
negotiate and trade risks. 
Fourth, to foster a conducive business environment. 
 Increase capacity 
Let me begin with our plans to increase supply-side capacity. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We are focused on increasing the quality and diversity of underwriting expertise here. Having 
expert underwriters on the ground enables insurers to be more responsive to their clients and 
make  underwriting  decisions  quickly.  They  will  also  have  a  better  understanding  of  the 
market environment and underlying risks. 
Recent  events  highlight  the  need  to  build  up  a  deeper  understanding  of  Asian  risks.  For 
example,  prior  to  the  devastating  floods  of  2011,  Thailand  had  not  been  viewed  as 
catastrophe-prone. The scale of the floods and the knock-on effects of natural catastrophes 
on  global  supply  chains  came  as  a  rude  surprise.  The  floods  damaged  more  than 
7000 industrial  and  manufacturing  plants  in  40  separate  provinces.  This  affected  countries 
with significant manufacturing capabilities in Thailand, most notably Japan. 
The  majority  of  the  insurance  losses  therefore  came  not  from  property  damage,  but  from 
business interruption claims arising from the disruption to manufacturing and supply chains. 
It is therefore important that insurers have senior experts in the region who understand Asia’s 
multi-faceted  and  inter-connected  risks.  This  will  enable  the  industry  to  better  price  and 
underwrite regional risks, and achieve sustained growth. 
MAS  will  seek  to  increase  the  depth  of  expertise  in  Singapore  by  continuing  to  work  with 
existing  players  to  build  up  their  specialty  and  reinsurance  underwriting  and  broking 
capabilities as well as expand their regional hubs. 
MAS  will  also  seek  to  increase  breadth  in  the  industry  by  promoting  growth  in  emerging 
business lines, such as cyber risks. 
Lack  of  data  is  a  key  hurdle  for  cyber  insurance  in  Asia.  MAS  is  working  with  industry  to 
create a test-bed for cyber risks where insurers and potential clients can come together to 
simulate loss events. 
• 
Cyber  insurers  will  be  able  to  generate  sets  of  valuable  loss  data  and  raise 
awareness about the value of specialty cyber insurance cover. 
Clients  will  get 
the 
responsiveness of existing coverage to losses, and gain an appreciation of potential 
losses and the need for cyber insurance cover. 
their  systems,  assess 
the  opportunity 
to  stress-test 
 Promote Asian demand 
Next, we want to promote insurance demand in Asia. 
Asia is already leading the world in premium growth. We seek to catalyse the development of 
insurance demand in the region via a three-pronged approach. 
First,  enhancing  cross-border  access  to  regional  markets.  The  ASEAN  economies  are 
working together on a comprehensive insurance liberalisation framework. 
• 
We aspire to achieve substantial liberalisation by 2020 for all insurance sub-sectors, 
namely  life  insurance,  non-life  insurance,  reinsurance  and  retrocession,  insurance 
intermediation, and insurance auxiliary services. 
Insurers  can  expect  to  benefit  from  easier  cross-border  provision  of  services  and 
substantial  access  across  the  ASEAN  customer  base  from  offices  in  any  ASEAN 
member country. 
The  framework  is  expected  to  be  discussed  at  the  ASEAN  Finance  Ministers’ 
Meeting next year. 
  Second, increasing the pool of Asian risk data. Modelling and loss simulation are key tools to 
help insurers manage and price their exposures. Accurate and timely data are critical for risk 
models to predict the impact of a loss event. For example, to predict the vulnerability of an 
insured risk to catastrophes, a wide variety of data is required, such as geographic location, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
soil  structures,  rainfall,  construction  materials  and  urban  density,  just  to  name  a  few. 
However, there is a severe paucity of data on Asian risks. 
Singapore  is  addressing  this  gap  by  setting  up  several  research  institutions  to  gather  and 
analyse data in specific areas of risks. 
• 
For example, the Institute of Catastrophe Risk Management (ICRM) at the Nanyang 
Technological  University  is  currently  undertaking  research  projects  for  flood  and 
earthquake risk assessment in selected Asian cities. 
In addition to collecting and analysing the data, ICRM conducts on-site studies and 
risk  assessments  of  the  cities  in  question,  and  develops  hazard  maps  and  risk 
models. 
To ensure that its research is relevant to the industry, ICRM actively reaches out to 
industry players through seminars and workshops. 
  Third, increasing risk awareness. MAS supports efforts to raise risk management awareness 
in the region. 
• 
I am pleased to note that Asia’s first association for risk managers, the Pan-Asian 
Risk and Insurance Management Association (PARIMA), was set up in Singapore in 
April, with strong support from the insurance industry. 
As  a  platform  for  dialogue  between  risk  managers  and  the  insurance  industry, 
PARIMA will help to enhance risk culture and risk management capacity in Asia. 
 Develop the marketplace 
I  will  now  move  on  to  our  efforts  to  develop  the  insurance  marketplace  in  Singapore.  We 
have three key thrusts for marketplace development. 
First, expanding the broker network. Singapore already has a vibrant broking cluster, which 
has  played  a  central  role  in  facilitating  business  flows. We  play  host  to  over  70  insurance 
brokers. Four of the top five brokers in the world have their regional hubs in Singapore. 
Today, brokers are not just intermediaries, but also high-value service providers who drive 
innovation and collaboration in the industry. 
• 
Many  brokers  provide  a  wide  range  of  risk  management  services.  These  include 
dynamic  financial  analysis,  risk  management  and  actuarial  consultancy,  portfolio 
and financial modelling, and catastrophe modelling. 
Some brokers have also begun to tap alternative risk transfer solutions to manage 
more complex and larger risk exposures and liabilities. 
 We are keen to encourage brokers to use Singapore not just as a placement centre, but also 
as a centre of excellence for innovation. 
• 
A  good  example  of  this  is  Aon,  which  recently  established  its  Analytics  and 
Innovation  Center  in  Singapore  to  provide  analytics  solutions  to  the  Group’s 
business units on a global basis. 
Second, encouraging a subscription market. To underwrite large and complex risks, insurers 
need to collaborate. Risk sharing enables market participants to diversify their portfolios. We 
want  to  promote  a  true  subscription  market,  where  insurers  not  only  share  risks,  but  also 
expertise.  The  subscription  concept  leverages  both  the  deep  expertise  of  the  lead  insurer 
and  the  supporting  capacity  of  the  other  insurers  to  cover  a  variety  of  large  and  complex 
risks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Such  deep  collaboration  requires  contract  certainty.  Contract  certainty  ensures  the 
finalisation  of  terms  and  conditions  of  the  policy  prior  to  inception  of  risk  and  therefore, 
serves to minimise ambiguity and disputes over claim and coverage. 
• 
I  am  pleased  that  our  industry  players  have  come  together  to  form  a  workgroup, 
which issued earlier this year a set of guidelines and best practices for reinsurance 
contract certainty. 
The  workgroup  is  now  monitoring  the  industry’s  progress  in  achieving  contract 
certainty  via  monthly  submissions  by  industry  players  on  the  level  of  contract 
certainty in their reinsurance transactions. 
This is a sterling example of industry collaboration. MAS supports this initiative and 
has been working with the industry to implement the new standards. 
  Third,  creating  more  platforms  to  bring  buyers  and  sellers  together.  This  conference  is  a 
good  example.  The  Singapore  International  Reinsurance  Conference  has  become  Asia’s 
version of the Baden-Baden Meeting and the Monte-Carlo Rendezvous. It is a key platform 
for insurance players not just to share knowledge, but also to negotiate renewals and explore 
opportunities for collaboration. 
Foster a conducive business environment 
Finally, I will touch on our efforts to foster a conducive business environment for insurance. 
There are two critical success factors. 
The  first  is  Talent.  The  insurance  industry  already  has  in  place  some  good  talent 
development programmes at the undergraduate and fresh graduate levels. 
• 
Take for  instance,  the  Global  Internship  Programme (GIP)  offered  by  the  General 
Insurance  Association.  This  is  a  structured  internship  programme  which  gives 
selected undergraduates exposure in general insurance companies both locally and 
overseas. 
MAS,  in  partnership  with  the  industry,  has  recently  developed  an  Insurance  Talent 
Development Framework, which maps out training and career progression pathways for both 
new  entrants  and  existing  insurance  professionals.  New  industry-wide  programmes  will  be 
launched in 2014 across a spectrum of roles and seniority levels. 
At the entry level, we will have two programmes. 
• 
The Insurance Executive Assistant Programme (IEAP) will prepare diploma holders 
for  junior  entry-level  positions.  It  will  complement  the  GIP,  which  is  targeted  at 
university graduates. 
The  Insurance  Management  Associate  Programme  (IMAP)  will  place  and  train 
top-tier fresh graduates through a structured apprenticeship programme. 
 For existing industry professionals, there will also be two new programmes. 
• 
The  Insurance  Specialist  Programme  will  deepen  participants’  specialist  and 
technical knowledge in key functions such as underwriting and claims, as well as in 
specialist lines such as trade credit, political risks, aviation and marine risks. 
The  Hi-Po  Leader  Programme  will  provide  those  with  leadership  potential  with  a 
series of programmes to prepare them for senior management roles in the insurance 
industry. 
 The second critical success factor is Regulation. Strong prudential and regulatory standards 
have  always  been  a  source  of  Singapore’s  competitive  advantage  as  a  financial  centre. 
Through  promoting  sound  risk  management  and  a  safe  environment,  regulation  fosters 
confidence in the industry and helps attracts business. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Singapore was one of the early movers to a risk-based supervisory and capital framework for 
insurance, in 2005. Since then, MAS has been actively refining the regulatory framework and 
approach. We are currently undertaking a comprehensive review to enhance the risk-based 
capital  framework,  taking  into  account  evolving  international  standards  and  market 
developments. In particular, we are seeking to improve the comprehensiveness of the risk 
coverage and the risk sensitivity of the framework. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The operating environment – be it for individuals or enterprises – is becoming more complex 
and  uncertain.  Managing  risk  has  become  an  increasingly  important  part  of  our  existence, 
and doing it well has become a key determinant of success. Insurance – at its core – is about 
managing risk. You are in an industry that serves a larger public purpose. 
You are also in an industry that has great promise. Asia offers tremendous opportunity for 
the insurance industry. As the leading insurance and reinsurance hub in Asia, Singapore is 
well-equipped to serve the growing needs of the region. But to become a global marketplace 
for insurance, we have to continually reinvent ourselves. 
The industry’s support and partnership are critical to the achievement of this vision. Let us 
work together to build a truly global insurance marketplace in Singapore. Thank you.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
