Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s recent economic and financial 
market developments 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the technical meeting to 
promote regional cooperation in the framework of Vienna Initiative II, Tirana, 3 October 2013. 
 Dear representatives of supervisory authorities, 
I take this opportunity to thank you for your participation in the first regional meeting on the 
Vienna Initiative. 
The  performance  of  EU  and  regional  economies  over  the  last  few  years  have  clearly 
demonstrated  that  in  Europe’s  highly  interconnected  markets,  the  financial  tensions, 
regardless of their origin, go beyond local or regional boundaries. The euro area sovereign 
crisis, which started as a localized episode in the euro area periphery, evolved gradually into 
a  European  predicament  involving  almost  all  European  Union  (EU)  members,  heavily 
affecting  non-EU  member  countries  in  the  CESEE  region  as  well.  At  the  core  of  the 
transmission mechanism of financial pressures from EU to non-EU countries are large euro 
area  banking  groups,  which  operate  throughout  the  continent  with  their  branches  and 
subsidiaries. In a matter of months, the sovereign-bank vicious cycle encompassing the euro 
area was exported to non-EU host countries, first through lower risk tolerance and second 
through  interruption  of  lending  to  our  economies  by  euro  area  banks  that  operate  in  our 
region through their branches and subsidiaries.  
In some countries, lending dampened in the form of the so-called deleveraging, i.e. reduction 
of  lending  by  EU  bank  subsidiaries  to  non-EU  host  countries,  through  the  simultaneous 
reduction  of  their  foreign  liabilities.  In  other  countries,  such  as  in  Albania,  where  EU  bank 
subsidiaries  relied  heavily  in  domestic  retail  funding  (domestic  deposits),  the  reduction  of 
lending occurred without the corresponding reduction of liabilities. This led to an outflow of 
domestic funding sources towards EU economies. In both cases, the phenomenon illustrates 
the  reduction  of  banks  exposure  to  risk,  i.e.  the  derisking  process,  driven  by  financial 
pressures from the parent banks, which they tried to mitigate in part through their business 
strategy  in  non-EU  host  countries.  This  phenomenon  was  largely  exacerbated  by 
macroprudential  decisions  and  regulatory 
level. 
Requirements  of  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  for  additional  capital  on  large 
internationally active banks prompted these EU-based banks to adopt restrictive measures 
on their activity in the periphery “to save” regulatory capital, under conditions when raising 
additional  capital  would  be  too  costly  or  even  impossible  in  the  market.  To  illustrate  the 
magnitude of the reduction of exposure, I will bring an example from Albania. Last year, the 
largest EU-based bank operating in our country decided to contribute to meeting the group’s 
required  capitalization  levels  through  reducing  its  exposure  to  the  Albanian  government 
securities by almost 3% of the GDP, within a very short period of time.  
Apparently, a more coordinated approach to implementing these requirements, implying the 
presence of non-EU host countries at an early stage of macroprudential decision making at 
the EU level, would contribute to a less painful absorption of the subsequent effects in our 
countries’ financial systems.  
To address the pressing issues facing home and host country relations in this context, the 
Vienna Initiative was relaunched as “The Vienna Initiative II”. It focuses on fostering home-
host  authority  coordination  to  support  stable  cross-border  banking,  and  help  protect  the 
economy from disorderly deleveraging. 
As a member of the Steering Committee of the Vienna Initiative II, I have underlined the need 
for a more effective home-host coordination, promoting Albania’s position as a host country. 
Given  the  geographical  proximity  and  high  exposure  to  recent  developments  in  the  EU 
incentives  undertaken  at 
the  EU 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
regional  perspective  on 
risks  and  opportunities  arising 
financial  markets,  I  am  confident  that  our  countries  would  significantly  benefit  from 
developing  a 
from  such 
developments, and major supervisory reforms at the regional level. In this context, Albania’s 
membership in the Steering Committee of the Vienna Initiative, and the Working Group on 
Banking Union and Emerging Europe is a solid foundation to build upon and synthesize the 
common concerns of our countries vis-á-vis EU authorities. 
Allow  me  now  to  summarize  the  insofar  position  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  articulated  in  the 
framework of the Vienna Initiative II, and propose a number of discussion topics, which I am 
confident will lead to a fruitful exchange of views today. 
The Bank of Albania has called for effective mechanisms to restore healthy lending to 
the  economies  of  non-EU  countries,  where  systemic  subsidiaries  of  EU  banking 
groups operate. In this context, EU authorities and EU banking groups should provide their 
active contribution. This is not merely a short-term objective, but rather an important anchor 
for  the  region’s  economic  recovery  with  significant  effects  on  both  the  economies  of  the 
region and the banking groups, which have declared their commitment to our region. 
We are currently witnessing a period of massive reforms in the EU supervisory architecture, 
with the establishment of the Banking Union. These reforms correspond to the reactivation of 
the Vienna Initiative II, hence providing a great opportunity to convey our relevant views as 
host countries to EU authorities. To support the Steering Committee of the Vienna Initiative, 
a  Working  Group  has  been  established  to  take  stock  of  the  Banking  Union  implications, 
especially on non-member countries. We consider the creation of the Banking Union as both 
an ambitious challenge, and a great opportunity to lay down the groundwork for better and 
more coordinated supervision, especially in a cross-border context. The Banking Union shall 
involve  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  under  the  guidance  of  the  ECB,  charged 
with supervising systemically important EU banks involved  in cross-border operations. The 
measure  is  expected  to  change  the  coordination  framework  between  home  and  host 
supervisors.  This  means  that  the  insofar  relationship  of  host  countries  with  a  number  of 
national supervisory authorities will now be concentrated on bilateral relationships with the 
SSM  in  the  case  of  branches  or  subsidiaries  of  systemically  important  EU  banks.  In  this 
respect,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  emphasized  the  need  to  establish  a  permanent 
working relationship with the ECB, and, possibly, appropriate mechanisms to achieve 
this.  Our  experience  with  regard  to the  effects arising from  EU  banking  groups’  activity  in 
response to EBA’s requirements has provided a useful lesson for the future. In meetings on 
the  Vienna  Initiative  II,  we  have  many  a  times  iterated  that  macroprudential  policies 
undertaken  in  the  euro  area  must  take  into  account  the  relevant  impact  on  non-EU  host 
countries  where  systemically  important  EU  bank  subsidiaries  operate.  The  home-host 
cooperation  framework  must  help  achieve  better  policy  harmonization  in  the  future,  or,  at 
least, provide for an early exchange of information in order to allow host countries to prepare 
in  response  to  potential  shocks.  Furthermore,  the  functioning  of  supervisory  colleges 
should provide for an effective exchange of supervisory information, and barriers to 
successful  participation  by  non-EU  host  countries  must  be  eliminated  through 
combined efforts. 
Your  institutions’  position  on  each  of  these  issues  is  extremely  valuable  to  provide  a 
comprehensive  view  of  the  implications  of  EU  authorities’  policies  and  banking  groups’ 
activity in our region, as well as to assess the implications of the banking reforms currently 
underway in the EU. More specifically, I think that it would be useful for us to discuss along 
the following lines:  
• 
What mechanisms may we use to revive credit growth in our economies, and what 
contribution do you expect by EU authorities and EU banking groups in this regard?  
How can we practically establish a permanent mechanism for coordination with the 
ECB,  in  the  framework  of  the  Banking  Union?  What  characteristics  should  this 
mechanism have to better serve the needs of our countries?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
   How  were  the  effects  of  euro  area  macroprudential  measures  transmitted  to  our 
countries? How can we achieve better policy coordination with EU authorities?  
What  is  our  insofar  experience  of  participation  in  supervisory  colleges?  How 
effective would you consider these colleges, and what are your concerns about their 
functioning? 
A  clear  understanding  of  each  country’s  perspective  and  experience  so  far  shall  be  very 
helpful in that respect. I hope the discussions today will be of practical relevance, and allow 
us  to  converge  on  more  concrete  proposals  for  consideration  in  future  Vienna  Initiative 
meetings.  
In  conclusion,  I  am  confident  that  today’s  meeting  is  an  important  step  to  build  a  regional 
approach  for  addressing  our  common  challenges.  Sharing  experiences  will  help  us  all  to 
better understand our own national challenges through putting them in the right context. We 
may  tap  into  significant  synergies  in  this  context,  which  may  be  leveraged  only  through 
constant cooperation. Most importantly, regional cooperation is a prerequisite for achieving 
better  coordination  with  EU  authorities,  through  better  technical  expertise,  comprehensive 
region-wide  experience,  and  better  negotiating  power.  As  a  member  of  the  Steering 
Committee of Vienna Initiative II, allow me to reiterate my commitment to be a good advocate 
of our common stance, in this authoritative forum.  
Thank you!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
