Raghuram Rajan: Financial sector reforms 
Talk by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Delhi Economics 
Conclave 2013, Delhi, 11 December 2013. 
 The economy is stabilizing, but there is no room for complacency. Some part of improvement 
in the CAD has happened due to suppressing gold imports. Not all the measures to reduce 
fiscal deficit are of high quality. We have considerable work to do still. At the same time the 
country faces elections next year. A stable government post elections, while likely, cannot be 
taken for granted. This implies that all parties have to work together today to ensure that any 
government that emerges post-election has the time to come to terms with the challenges of 
managing the Indian economy. Otherwise, markets and rating agencies may not be willing to 
cut the new government any slack. 
More  generally,  it  would  be  overly  complacent  and  possibly  dangerous  for  parties  to 
postpone  necessary  legislation  with  the  idea  that  they  will  pass  bills  post-election.  Post-
election  politics  may  become  even  more  challenging,  whoever  assumes  power.  Similarly, 
any slowdown in putting large stalled projects back on track before the elections or any fiscal 
slippage, will only amplify the already large challenges the new government will have to face. 
It  will  benefit  the  nation  enormously  if  parliament  passes  key  bills  and  if  the  current 
authorities  continue  to  take  actions  to  improve  growth  and  fiscal  health,  including  raising 
diesel prices to market levels and eliminating other poorly targeted subsidies. 
This  Conclave,  however,  is  about  the  medium  term.  Looking  to  the  medium  term,  our 
measure of success should be the jobs that are created; Created not by giving government 
subsidies  or  protections  to  labour-intensive  industries  or  sectors  but  by  developing  a 
facilitating, competitive, environment that will encourage efficiency and creativity. 
The job agenda requires a disciplined focus on 4 issues: 
1)  
We need to improve the quality of our infrastructure, especially the logistical support 
and power that industry and services need. Grand plans are on the anvil, such as 
the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor. We need to complete such projects on time, 
and within budget. The success of the New Delhi Metro suggests that timeliness and 
cost control are not foreign to the Indian psyche. 
Our youth need education and training for the jobs that will be created. Some of this 
will  be  higher  degrees,  not  just  computer  science  but  also  design  or  civil 
engineering. Some of it will be appropriate vocational education that teaches them 
to  be  good  plumbers  and  electricians  rather  than  unemployable  low-skilled 
engineers.  In  fact,  teaching  our  citizens  can  be  a  stepping  stone  to  teaching  the 
world. India can be at the forefront of providing mass technology-enabled education 
with our professors providing appropriate human inputs to achieve the best mix of 
automation and customisation for learning. 
We need better business regulation. This does not always mean less regulation but 
it  means  regulation  that  is  appropriate  to  the  objective  and,  that  is  enforced. 
Entrepreneurs tell me about boiler inspectors showing up at software outfits, asking 
for the location of the boiler. The lack of change may be sheer inertia, but it may be 
more sinister rent-seeking. All too often, we have too much regulation on the books 
and  too  little  regulation  in  practice,  with  the  worst  of  the  regulated  finding 
unscrupulous ways around the regulation while the honest are stymied. 
Even opening a business legitimately requires an enormous number of clearances 
and paperwork. In the same way as we have Saral form for filing income tax, could 
we  have  a  Saral  one  page  disclosure for  opening  a  small  business,  with  a  single 
authority giving all necessary permissions? 
2)  
3)  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
4)  
And  finally,  we  need  a  better  financial  system,  which  will  finance  the  needed 
infrastructure  and  the  expansion  of  every  producer  ranging  from  the  kirana  shop 
owner to the industrialist. But finance is not only about credit. Equally important is for 
households to be able to save safely with positive real returns, insure themselves 
against  health  emergencies  or  old  age  costs,  and  borrow  at  low  cost  to  finance 
consumption. They should be able to make remittances cheaply and pay at low cost. 
Importantly, the financial system should not require constant subsidies to bail it out. 
In the rest of this talk, I want to focus on what we, at the Reserve Bank, are doing to improve 
the financial system. We plan to build the Reserve Bank’s developmental measures over the 
next few quarters on five pillars. These are: 
1.  
2.  
Clarifying and strengthening the monetary policy framework. 
Strengthening banking structure through new entry, branch expansion, encouraging 
new  varieties  of  banks,  and  moving 
into  better  regulated 
organizational forms. 
Broadening  and  deepening  financial  markets  and  increasing  their  liquidity  and 
resilience so that they can help allocate and absorb the risks entailed in financing 
India’s growth. 
Expanding  access  to  finance  for  small  and  medium  enterprises,  the  unorganized 
sector,  the  poor,  and  remote  and  underserved  areas  of  the  country  through 
technology, new business practices, and new organizational structures; that is, we 
need financial inclusion. 
Improving the system’s ability to deal with corporate distress and financial institution 
distress by strengthening real and financial restructuring as well as debt recovery. 
3.  
4.  
5.  
foreign  banks 
Let me elaborate on each of these measures a little. 
First, we are among the large countries with the highest consumer price inflation in the world, 
even  though  growth  is  weaker  than  we  would  like  it  to  be.  Much  of  the  inflation  is 
concentrated  in  food  and  services.  Our  households  are  turning  to  gold  because  they  find 
financial  investments  unattractive.  At  the  same  time,  many  industrial  corporations  are 
complaining about high interest rates because they cannot pass through their higher costs 
into higher prices for their products. 
We  can  spend  a  long  time  debating  the  sources  of  this  inflation.  But  ultimately,  inflation 
comes  from  demand  exceeding  supply,  and  it  can  be  curtailed  only  by  bringing  both  in 
balance. We need to reduce demand somewhat without having serious adverse effects on 
investment and supply. This is a balancing act, which requires the Reserve Bank to act firmly 
so that the economy is disinflating, even while allowing the weak economy more time than 
one would normally allow for it to reach a comfortable level of inflation. The weak state of the 
economy, the recent stability of the rupee, as well as the good Kharif and Rabi harvest this 
year, will generate disinflationary forces that will help, and we await data to see how these 
forces are playing out. No single data point or number will determine our next move. 
I think the market understands what we are trying to do. But we do need a more carefully 
spelled out monetary policy framework than we currently have. Action on the framework will 
follow the submission of the Dr. Urjit Patel Committee report, which is expected to submit its 
report by end December 2013. 
Second,  we  have  already  announced  measures  to  free  bank  branching.  We  also  want  to 
incentivize  foreign  banks  to  incorporate  domestically,  which  RBI  has  been  planning  since 
2005. This will allow us to regulate them better and reduce the risks of contagion, stemming 
from  foreign  shores.  This  is  a  necessary  measure  to  ensure  the  stability  of  our  banking 
system. It is a measure which many other countries have embarked. Going forward, we have 
to  give  our  public  sector  banks,  which  are  a  national  asset,  the  means  to  improve  their 
competitiveness.  Many  of  them  have  made  enormous  strides  in  the  last  decade  –  for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
instance, the extent to which they have digitized their operations is extremely praiseworthy – 
but because competition in the banking sector is likely to increase in the next few years, they 
cannot rest on their laurels. In the coming months, we will discuss with stakeholders in public 
sector banks about what needs to be done to further improve their stability, efficiency and 
productivity. 
Third, we need to enlist markets in the aid of financial institutions. Liquid markets will help 
banks  offload  risks  they  should  not  bear,  such as  interest rate  or  exchange risk. They  will 
also allow banks to sell assets that they have no comparative advantage in holding, such as 
long term loans to completed infrastructure projects, which are better held by infrastructure 
funds,  pension  funds,  and  insurance  companies.  Liquid  markets  will  help  promoters  raise 
equity,  which  is  sorely  needed  in  the  Indian  economy  to  absorb  the  risks  that  banks 
otherwise  end  up  absorbing.  Rather  than  seeing  markets  as  being  inimical  to  the 
development of the banking sector, we have to see them as complimentary. 
In the coming weeks, we will roll out more measures to improve the liquidity and depth of the 
G-Sec market. We  will  then  turn to money  markets  and  corporate  debt markets. We  have 
introduced  new  variants  of  interest  rate  futures  and  products  like  inflation  indexed 
certificates,  and  we  will  continue  to  work  to  improve  liquidity  in  derivative  markets.  As  the 
exchange  markets  became  unstable,  we  imposed  restrictions  on  participation  in  these 
markets. We will remove these restrictions in a calibrated fashion. 
Fourth,  we  have  to  reach  everyone,  however  remote  or  small,  with  financial  services. 
Financial  inclusion  does  not  just  mean  credit  for  productive  purposes,  it  means  credit  for 
paying a doctor to heal your child or to pay lumpy school or college fees. It means a safe 
mode  of  remunerated  savings,  and  an  easy  way  to  make  payments  and  remittances.  It 
means insurance and pensions. It also means financial literacy and consumer protection. 
We have made great strides in inclusion, but we are still some distance from our goal. We 
have  adopted  a  branch  based  strategy  for  inclusion,  but  it  is  not  enough.  Too  many  poor 
people in so-called “over-branched” urban areas still do not have access to banking services. 
We  have  many  experiments  under  way  to  use  technology,  mobile  phones,  new  products 
such as mobile wallets, and new entities as business correspondents to link people up to the 
formal financial system. Much as with cell phones where we created a frugal Indian model, 
we  need  a  frugal,  trustworthy,  and  effective  Indian  model  for  financial  inclusion.  The 
Dr. Nachiket Mor Committee is helping us think through possible models, and I am hopeful 
that when we outline measures based on its recommendations, our fine banks, NBFCs, IT 
companies and mobile players will rise to the occasion. The key will be to encourage entities 
to  compete  to serve  the  customers  at  the  bottom  of the  pyramid. We  should  tolerate  their 
making profit but not profiteering, and we will enhance our efforts in consumer protection and 
consumer literacy accordingly. 
And last but not the least, we have to deal better with distress; We have to ensure that the 
system  recognizes  financial  distress  early,  takes  steps  to  resolve  it,  and  ensures  fair 
recovery for lenders and investors. We could wish for a more effective judicial process or a 
better  bankruptcy  system,  but  while  we  await  that,  we  have  to  improve  the  functioning  of 
what we have. Next week, we propose to put out a paper for discussion that will focus on 
putting real assets back to work in their best use. The key elements to deal with distressed 
borrowers will include: 
(i)  
Early  formation  of  a  lender  committee  with  timelines  for  reaching  agreement  on  a 
plan for resolution. 
Stronger incentives for lenders to agree collectively and quickly to a plan – this will 
involve  better  regulatory  treatment  of  stressed  assets  if  a  resolution  plan  is 
formulated and agreed to, accelerated provisioning if no agreement can be reached. 
(ii)  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
(iii)  
(iv) 
(v) 
A  mandated  independent  evaluation  of  large  value  restructurings,  with  a  focus  on 
plan  viability  and  a  fair  sharing  of  losses  (and  future  possible  upside)  between 
promoters and creditors. 
More  expensive  future  borrowing  for  wilful  defaulters  or  uncooperative  defaulters 
who  do  not  work  with  lenders  to  achieve  an  efficient  and  equitable  resolution  of 
distressed assets. 
More liberal regulatory treatment of asset sales and more encouragement for new 
entities to purchase or refinance assets. 
The  lesson  of  every  period  of  financial  stress  across  economies  has  been  that  early 
recognition and resolution of problems gives the economy its best chance of robust recovery. 
Through the measures that will be outlined next week, the RBI intends to help promoters and 
banks deal effectively with the financial stress that has built up. 
Let me conclude. I will depart from the usual conservatism of a central banker to predict that 
the best of India is yet to come. We will be a healthier, better educated, and richer nation, not 
just in absolute terms, but even relative to other countries. This is not a jingoistic statement 
based  on  some  intrinsic  Indian  superiority  but  a  sober  recognition  that  we  are  still  much 
poorer than other countries, and catching up is always easier than drawing away from the 
pack. But we can achieve these outcomes only if we go about addressing the challenges we 
face  methodically,  with  discipline  and  a  sense  of  national  purpose.  In  the  coming  years,  I 
hope that is what we will do. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
