Chris Salmon: The UK payments landscape 
Remarks by Mr Chris Salmon, Executive Director for Banking Services and Chief Cashier of 
the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  C  D  Howe  Institute  Special  Policy  Conference  “Canadian 
Payment Systems”, Toronto, 4 November 2013. 
 I would like to thank Nicholas Constantine, Andrew Dent, Rosey Jeffery, Simon Rickenbach and Peter Williams 
for their comments and contributions. 
Introduction 
Today’s  conference  provides  an  opportunity  to  review  how  the  Canadian  payments 
landscape could evolve. On the basis that there will be some relevant crossovers, perhaps 
the most helpful contribution I can make is to summarise some of the challenges we face in 
the United Kingdom. In line with this session’s focus, I will cover the core sterling payments 
infrastructure,  defined  as  the  key  wholesale  and  retail  payment  schemes  that  the  Bank 
oversees,  and  focus  on  integrity,  which  is  at  the  heart  of  a  central  bank’s  interest  in 
payments. 
As a precursor it may be helpful to give a brief overview of the current set-up of the UK’s 
payments  landscape.  The  Bank  of  England  operates  the  UK’s  real  time  gross  settlement 
infrastructure,  RTGS.  CHAPS,  our  high  value  payment  system,  has  settled  on  a  real  time 
gross  basis  since  1996,  and  CREST,  our  securities  settlement  system,  since  2001.  They 
settle in central bank money across accounts their members hold in RTGS. While high value 
payment systems (HVPS) in many countries are owned and operated by the central bank, 
CHAPS is run by “CHAPS Co,” a non-profit-making, private company owned by its members. 
Its role includes setting system rules, monitoring compliance and administrating membership. 
The  Bank  of  England  was  given  statutory  oversight  responsibilities  in  the  Banking  Act  of 
2009 and CHAPS Co are formally overseen on this basis. To reiterate, in the UK, although 
the Bank of England owns and runs the RTGS infrastructure, CHAPS Co is responsible for 
the provision of CHAPS. There is a parallel with Canada here, where the HVPS (“LVTS”) is 
managed by the Canadian Payments Association (CPA) instead of the Bank of Canada. This 
parallel is limited though as the CPA both manages and also runs the infrastructure behind 
LVTS. 
There are also a number of privately-operated retail payment systems in the UK which settle 
across RTGS accounts on a deferred net basis. These include Bacs, which handles direct 
debits and credits over a three day clearing cycle; Faster Payments (FPS), a near real-time 
retail  payment  service  which  operates “24/7”;  and  systems for  clearing  cheques,  interbank 
ATM  obligations  (LINK),  and  card  payments  (Visa  Europe  currently  settles  over  RTGS 
though Mastercard does not) – all are industry owned. Except for Visa Europe, each of the 
systems  that  settle  with  the  Bank  has  a  contractually  separate,  industry-run  payment 
scheme, which manages its rules, while their operational infrastructure is ‘outsourced’ to a 
supplier  company.  For  Bacs,  FPS  and  LINK,  this  supplier  is  VocaLink,  a  specialist 
infrastructure provider split out from Bacs in 2003, which remains owned by the banks. The 
Bank oversees Bacs and FPS, but not Visa Europe or LINK. 
The  sterling  payment  schemes  which  settle  across  RTGS  have  limited  membership,  each 
having somewhere between ten and thirty direct member banks. To put things into context, 
the  gross  value  transferred  by  these  systems  each  day  is  around  £280  bn  of  CHAPS 
payments, £420 bn of payment obligations arising from securities settlement in CREST, and 
in the order of £20 bn for the retail systems. 
Although there are similarities between the UK’s structure and those seen in other countries, 
it has unique aspects. This reflects the high-degree of path dependency in the way different 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
countries’ payments systems evolve. So while internationally we have harmonised oversight 
standards through the work of organisations like the Committee on Payment and Settlement 
Systems  (CPSS),  the  structure  of  payment  systems  across  countries  is  diverse.  As  a 
consequence  we  all  face  slightly  different  challenges  when  considering  structural  change 
within  our  payments  landscape:  what  is  pressing  in  the  UK  may  or  may  not  resonate  in 
Canada  and  vice  versa.  With  that  caveat  in  mind,  let  me  start  by  reviewing  the  focus  of 
recent activities in relation to the core payment systems, before pulling out some of the key 
elements of our forward work programme. 
Recent priorities 
Amongst the numerous lessons from the financial crisis were: don’t under-estimate tail risks, 
do worry about contagion, and liquidity matters. Although the payments systems in the UK 
(and elsewhere) performed well during the crisis, those insights prompted us to address a 
number  of  credit,  liquidity,  and  operational  risk  issues  within  our  core  systems  with  more 
vigour than previously, and have shaped much of our recent work programme. 
Concerns about tail risks and contagion have prompted changes in both the wholesale and 
retail  spheres.  In  the  wholesale  sphere,  the  recent  focus  has  been  on  tiering.  Historically, 
CHAPS had a very tiered structure, with the majority of payments being made by settlement 
banks on behalf of their customers, a practice which generated significant intraday credit and 
liquidity  exposures  between  direct  participants  and  their  customers.  This  model  also 
concentrated operational risks, given that an outage at one of the big settlement banks would 
have prevented its customers from making payments. These risks would be exacerbated in 
periods of stress, potentially contributing to contagion as payment services were withdrawn 
or  collateral  suddenly  demanded.  Since  the  crisis,  the  Bank,  working  with  the  scheme 
manager  CHAPS  Co,  has  acted  to  reduce  tiering.  Five  banks  have  become  direct 
participants  of  CHAPS  since  2007,  and  a  further  five  have  given  us  formal  indication  that 
they will do so soon. As a consequence, the proportion of CHAPS payments made by direct 
members on their own account is set to increase from around 40% in 2007 to approaching 
70%, substantively addressing the tiering risks that had previously existed in the wholesale 
sterling markets. 
In  relation  to the  retail  systems,  we  have  also  sought  to  address  latent contagion  risks  by 
reforming  the  arrangements  covering  member  default  in  two  of  our  largest  retail  payment 
schemes (Bacs and Faster Payments). As currently structured, these default arrangements 
contain a heavy “survivors pay” element, where the other members of the payment scheme 
assume  a  portion  of  a  failing  member’s  payment  obligations  (either  temporarily,  a  liquidity 
risk, or permanently, a credit risk). This creates a clear contagion risk. Recently, the schemes 
have  agreed  to  move  to  a  full  “defaulter  pays”  model,  where  all  obligations  are  fully 
collateralised  in  advance,  in  cash,  segregated  in  each  bank’s  account  with  us.  The  move 
from survivors to defaulter pays will take place in the next year or so. 
Separately,  but  driven  by  the  same  philosophy,  we  have  sought  to reduce  the  operational 
risks that we ourselves run as the core infrastructure provider within the sterling system. The 
Bank of England currently runs the UK’s RTGS infrastructure from twin operational sites so 
we can continue to provide RTGS settlement in the event of a problem at either. While this is 
a highly resilient arrangement, it would be vulnerable to a catastrophic failure which took out 
both  sites  simultaneously.  To  counter  this  risk  SWIFT,  the  telecommunications  firm,  is 
developing a product – known as the Market Infrastructure Resiliency Service (MIRS) – that 
will act as virtual third site for the Bank on an independent IT platform. Moreover, because 
SWIFT  would  operate  MIRS  from  one  of  its  European  operating  centres,  it  would  not  be 
affected  by  IT  failure  affecting  both  of  our  locations,  increasing  the  degree  of  latency  that 
MIRS will offer compared to a traditional model for a third site. MIRS will be available from 
January 2014, and we are the first central bank to take advantage of it. The Bank’s costs in 
relation to this project have been funded by the CHAPS member banks, who will benefit from 
the additional resilience MIRS will provide. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Turning  to  the  lesson  that  ‘liquidity  matters’,  we  introduced  a  Liquidity  Saving  Mechanism 
(LSM)  in  April  this  year.  There  are  some  technical  similarities  to  the  Canadian  “Jumbo 
algorithm”,  which  periodically  looks  to  offset  high-value  (“Jumbo”)  payments  in  bilateral 
queues, speeding up their settlement and reducing collateral requirements. The LSM in our 
RTGS  system  is  an  offsetting  mechanism  that  seeks  to  match  groups  of  payments, 
regardless  of  size,  via  bilateral  and  multilateral  algorithms  that  run  in  short  cycles  around 
275 times each day. All the payments matched by the algorithms will settle individually and 
simultaneously  at  the  conclusion  of  the  matching  cycle.  Since  the  implementation  of  our 
LSM, participants’ average peak intraday usage in CHAPS has fallen by around 20%, so this 
innovation  has  provided  a  technical  means  of  saving  liquidity,  reducing  incentives  to 
otherwise adopt receipt-reactive behaviour. 
On-going and future priorities 
If the post-crisis initiatives I have discussed so far have been, or are, close to completion, 
one area of work where we have further to go is in ensuring continuity of access to payment 
services  for  banks  that  are  in  recovery  or  resolution.  In  the  UK’s  case,  a  new  resolution 
regime  was  introduced  in  the  Banking  Act  of  2009  which  gave  the  UK  authorities  tools  to 
address  the  risks  of  discontinuity.  Nevertheless  there  is  a  good  case  that  the  effective 
statutory  framework  could  be  usefully  supported  by  private  sector  initiatives  (whether 
contractual  or  otherwise)  to  enhance  further  the  ability  of  central  banks,  supervisors  and 
resolution authorities to maintain continuity in payment, clearing and settlement services in 
recovery and resolution. 
For banks in recovery, that would involve avoiding “cliff-edges” in contracts that automatically 
exclude banks from payment schemes in the event of (say) a ratings downgrade. For banks 
entering resolution, we want to ensure that critical economic functions in the firm which rely 
on access to financial market infrastructure are not dislocated or denied. This is relevant not 
only for banks that are direct members of payment schemes, but also for indirect participants 
that rely on other banks for payment and other quasi-infrastructure services. And it applies to 
small and large banks alike, though for large banks there is not only the question of ensuring 
access in domestic systems but also ensuring that payment services that are provided on a 
cross-border basis or require access to financial market infrastructure in other jurisdictions 
can  be  maintained.  The  Bank  is  considering  how  best  to  address  these  issues  both 
domestically and, alongside Canada and other countries, at an international level. 
Looking forward, there are three issues around the core payments systems that the Bank is 
beginning  to  look  at.  One  relating  to  risk,  specifically  cyber  risk;  one  about  infrastructure 
provision, in terms of reviewing the operating hours of the UK’s RTGS system; and one in the 
field of regulation, which is focused on the changing regulatory landscape for payments in 
the United Kingdom. 
Although  cyber  risks  have  long  existed,  over  the  past  year  or  so  in  UK  circles  they  have 
rapidly  become  a  central  issue,  so  much  so  that,  in  June  the  Bank’s  Financial  Policy 
Committee made a formal recommendation to put in place a new program of work on cyber 
security  for key  UK  financial  infrastructure1.  The Bank  of  England  has  set  each  scheme  a 
specific priority regarding cyber risk and we and the payment schemes need to deepen our 
resilience to cyber risks. The prompt for this change is probably obvious: the evidence shows 
that  cyber  attacks  on  the  financial  sector  have  increased  markedly  in  frequency  and 
sophistication  over  the  past  two  years  or  so.  Although  some  key  payment  systems  are 
probably  less  vulnerable  to  generic,  non-bespoke  attacks2  than  most  financial  firms,  given 
their  limited  reliance  on  the  internet,  the  consequences  of  a  successful  attack  could  be 
                                                
1   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/records/fpc/pdf/2013/record1307.pdf. 
2   Such as “distributed-denial-of-service” (DDoS) attacks – which affected some banks earlier this year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
severe.  Addressing  this  cyber  threat  will  not  be  just  about  IT  security  and  system 
enhancement, but also people, processes and culture, posing challenges to the managers of 
FMIs as well as their overseers. For systemically important systems, recovery arrangements 
are  particularly  important,  and  this  is  an  area  where  alternative  technology  such  as  MIRS 
could come to the fore. 
The next issue relates to the times at which the Bank’s RTGS system can be accessed by 
settlement  banks.  Currently  it  operates  for  around  ten  hours  each  business  day,  with  the 
most recent change occurring in 1999. 
Since  we  made  that  change,  a  number  of  central  banks  have  lengthened  their  RTGS 
operating  hours  quite  considerably,  most  obviously  driven  by  the  demands  of  the 
internationally-harmonised CLS cash settlement window, and also by a more general desire 
to operate with a greater overlap with major markets in other time-zones. And in the UK the 
move to a cash pre-funded model for two of our largest retail systems may create a latent 
demand to access the RTGS system outside of its current operating hours. Faster Payments, 
which  operates  24/7,  often  provides  confirmation  to  customers  almost  instantly.  In  a  cash 
pre-funding world, settlement banks will only be able to accept further payment instructions if 
they have sufficient funds in their account with us. 
Given  the  changes  coming  to  our  retail  systems,  and  recognising  that  a  number  of  other 
central banks have moved away from a traditional daylight business day, we have recently 
decided  to  review  the  pros  and  cons  of  extending  the  operating  hours  for  the  RTGS 
infrastructure  in  the  UK.  This  is  not  a  review  with  a  preferred  end  in  sight:  it  is  entirely 
plausible we will conclude that no changes are warranted, but we do want to understand if a 
longer  RTGS  hours  would  permit  beneficial  change  in  the  various  wholesale  and  retail 
payments systems which connect into it, and so to the wider financial system operating in the 
UK.  The  review  is  a  form  of  sensible  housekeeping,  being  an  issue  that  the  core 
infrastructure provider should periodically address. My presumption is that we will draw our 
initial conclusions within a year, with a further implementation lag following that, were we to 
conclude that significant change were appropriate. 
The final area of focus is country specific: last month, the UK government introduced draft 
legislation  to  create  a  new  regulator  for  UK  payments  focused  on  competition,  innovation, 
and the interests of end-users. This will replace the previous regime which had relied on a 
self-regulatory body, the Payments Council, to achieve these public policy goals. 
The new regulator will be created under the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), and will 
have  extensive  powers  over  payment  scheme  companies,  infrastructure  providers  and 
individual  scheme  members.  The  government  has  already  asked  it  to  undertake,  as  a 
priority,  studies  in  relation  to  account  portability  and  the  ownership  of  payment  systems  – 
whether partial or full divestment by banks would address market failures in competition or 
innovation. 
As  with  all  situations  where  there  are  two  regulators  for  a  single  activity,  effective 
coordination will be required. This is recognised in the clauses put before Parliament which 
ensure “the Bank of England will retain effective rights of veto over anything the Regulator 
might  do  impacting  upon  [its  stability  objectives]”3. This recognises that the  integrity  of the 
payments system has to be the first priority, but, most of the time, integrity and the important 
competition  and  innovation  objectives  will  align  without  difficulty.  For  example,  increasing 
direct  membership  of  CHAPS  improves  integrity  in  terms  of  mitigating  liquidity,  credit  and 
operational  risks,  while  also  enabling  greater  competition  in  the  market.  And  similarly  pre-
                                                
3   Paragraph  2.22  of 
the  HM  Treasury  response 
to 
the  “opening  up  UK  payments”  consultation, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/249085/PU1563_Opening_up_
UK_payments_Government_response.pdf. This is clause 85 in the Financial Services (Banking Reform) Bill, 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/lbill/2013–2014/0054/14054.pdf. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
funding in retail systems improves integrity as members do not have to take on defaulters’ 
liquidity obligations, and also removes a potential barrier to entry. But more fundamentally, to 
be  successful,  we  and  the  new  payments  regulator  will  need  to  extend  the  cooperative 
working relationship we already enjoy in other areas to payment matters. 
Let me stop at this point: I have tried to draw out some of the idiosyncrasies of the payments 
environment in the UK and the highlights of our recent and prospective work to protect the 
resilience  of  our  core  sterling  payment  systems.  Hopefully  there  have  been  some relevant 
crossovers to the Canadian context, which are helpful for today’s deliberations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
