Mugur Isărescu: Financing investment projects in the Danube region 
Speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the 
3rd Danube Financing Dialogue, Bucharest, 30 October 2013. 
 Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am pleased and honored to welcome you at the National Bank of Romania. Allow me thank 
the organizers for giving me the opportunity to open the 3rd Danube Financing Dialogue. 
Time has come for Bucharest to host this important event, after Vienna and Belgrade. The 
place  has  changed,  but  the  venue  remained  the  central  bank,  the  agenda  and  the 
conference  framework  being  quite  the  same.  This  gathering  enables  both  European  and 
local  financing  institutions  and  small  and  medium  enterprises  from  the  Danube  Region  to 
reach a common language in order to find the most suitable solutions to specific projects. 
This  conference,  like  the  two  others  that  preceded  it,  would  like  to  put  an  emphasis  on 
Danube’s enormous potential for doing business. 
• 
Danube  rises  in  the  Black  Forest  mountains  of  western  Germany  and  flows  for 
2,857 km  to  its  mouth  on  the  Black  Sea.  Danube  is  Europe’s  only  major  river, 
flowing west to east, from Central to Eastern Europe and having its basin roughly 
twice the size of California. 
In addition to the 83 million people that live in the river basin, Danube is home to 
47 cities and 10 countries, passing through 4 national capitals (Vienna, Bratislava, 
Budapest and Belgrade) and 20 cities only in Romania, 
There  are  120  tributaries  that  drain  805,000  square  kilometers  of  basin  into  the 
Danube  river,  the  most  prominent  and  fully  navigable  being  Inn,  Drava,  Morava, 
Tisa, Sava and Prut rivers. 
Danube  played  a  vital  role  in  the  settlement  and  political  evolution  of  central  and 
southeastern  Europe.  Its  banks,  lined  with  castles  and  fortresses,  formed  the 
boundary  between  great  empires,  and  its  waters  served  as  a  vital  commercial 
highway between nations. 
The river’s  majesty  has  long  been  celebrated  in  music,  poetry,  painting and  other 
forms  of  art.  It  inspired  famous  artists  such  as  the  Strauss  family,  the  Danube 
School of painters, Richard Wagner and Franz Liszt, etc. 
    The Danube Delta includes exceptional habitats and globally important species of flora and 
fauna (including the white pelican and the Beluga sturgeon). It has been explored by many 
scientists.  Perhaps,  the  most  complete  survey  of  the  river  was  carried  out  by  Captain 
Jacques  Cousteau  and  a  team  of  forty  European  researchers  and  experts,  from  1990  to 
1992.  They  investigated  the  problems  linked  to  energy,  pollution,  navigation  and  the 
protection  of  natural  areas.  The  outcome  was  a  large  amount  of  conclusions  that  were 
distributed  to  over  a  thousand  scientists,  decision-makers  and  journalists.  It  had  specific 
recommendations for each country involved. 
It was for the first time when such a complete vision of the Danube was unveiled. 
All  these  facts  constitute  reasons  that  lead  the  European  Commission  to  recognize  the 
importance  of  Danube  as  being  “the  single  most  important  non-oceanic  body  of  water  in 
Europe” and “a future central axis for the European Union”. But there still remains a major 
issue  regarding  this  subject  –the  Danube  basin  is  still  not  used  to  its  full  potential.  Its 
remarkable  business  prospective  is  yet  to  be  taken  advantage  of  in  terms  of  agriculture, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
energy sources, wastewater disposal, industrial or even recreational purposes. This massive 
potential  alone  is  not  enough  to  implement  a  business  plan;  it  certainly  needs  vision  and 
funding. And financing is exactly the main issue upon which the today conference focuses. 
For instance, one could take inspiration in the Rhine basin management project which turned 
the Rhine into Europe’s most densely navigated shipping route. It connects world’s largest 
seaport, Rotterdam, with world’s largest inland port, Duisburg, although the Rhine’s length is 
less than a half of Danube’s. 
And while large sections of the Upper Danube in Germany and Austria have been regulated, 
the areas of the lower and middle Danube were not. I strongly believe that middle and lower 
Danube  and  the  Danube  Delta  offer  a great  business  potential for  investment  projects. To 
refer only to big projects some have been finalized, as it is the case of the Danube-Black Sea 
Canal,  which  runs  from  Cernavodă,  on  the  Danube,  to  Constanţa  (southern  arm,  as  main 
branch),  and  to  Năvodari  (northern  arm),  on  the  Black  Sea.  Other  big  projects  are  still  in 
progress,  such  as  the  Danube–Bucharest  Canal,  a  73-kilometre  long  canal  project  that  is 
planned  to  link  Bucharest  to  the  Danube  via  Argeş  River.  Thus,  at  the  completion  of  this 
project Danube could become home for five capitals, including Bucharest. 
This conference has two main objectives. One is to bring together Romanian financial sector 
representatives  and  project  initiators;  the  other  one  is  to  find  appropriate  financial 
instruments to better highlight the remarkable business potential of the lower Danube basin. 
I do hope this conference is going to offer you all the opportunity for successful networking 
and may you find appropriate solutions for vital issues regarding the agenda. 
I  desire  you  all  success  with  the  materialization  and  accomplishment  of  your  present  and 
future projects and I conclude by wishing all the foreign guests at this conference a good stay 
in Romania. 
I  am  now  giving  the  floor  to  Mr  Kurt  Puchinger,  Coordinator  of  the  EU  Strategy  for  the 
Danube Region and chair of the first session, to start the conference. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
