Luis M Linde: Reflections on the planned Banking Union in Europe 
Address  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  First  Bank  of  Spain-
OMFIF Economists Club Meeting, Madrid, 21 October 2013. 
 Dear colleagues and friends, ladies and gentlemen: 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  host  this  first  Banco  de  España-OMFIF  Economists  Meeting.  I  am  fully 
confident  that  it  has  provided  an  excellent  opportunity  to  review  and  assess  the  latest 
developments  in  the  Spanish  and  European  economy  and  the  present  situation  of  the 
Spanish Financial System.  
I would like to share with you some reflections on the Banking Union in Europe which is, as 
we all know, a very important matter for the present European financial scenario. 
The thrust for the design of such a fundamental reform as the Banking Union in the economic 
governance  of  the  European  Union  has  come  from  the  crisis,  both  international  and 
European. The euro zone financial and sovereign-debt crisis has shown the shortcomings of 
the  European  institutional  framework,  triggering  a  wave  of  reforms  that  would,  otherwise, 
most probably, not have taken place.  
Last year, the Presidents of the Council, ECB, European Commission and Eurogroup agreed 
on the milestones for building a new Economic and Monetary Union, based, in principle, on 
four blocks: the banking union is the first of those blocks, to be complemented, according to 
the  political  design,  a  later  stage,  with  a  fiscal  union,  an  economic  union  and,  finally,  a 
political union.  
The Heads of State and Government of the European Union committed to a banking union in 
June 2012. Since then, major steps have been taken, within a very challenging timeframe, to 
set  the  basis  for  common  supervision,  through  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  and 
common  resolution  arrangements;  as  for  harmonized  rules  to  protect  depositors,  they  are 
also on the agenda, but the progress is clearly lagging behind. Let me now address each of 
these three pillars of the Banking Union. 
Single Supervisory Mechanism 
Last week the European Council adopted the Regulation establishing a Single Supervisory 
Mechanism (or SSM). Within one year, the ECB will, together with the national supervisory 
authorities,  assume  broad  supervisory  competences  over  the  whole  banking  sector  of  the 
Euro area and of those other EU countries which decide to opt-in. 
The  ECB  will  be  the  central  player  within  this  new  mechanism.  Those  credit  institutions 
deemed to be significant according to the criteria laid down in the Regulation will be directly 
supervised by the ECB with the assistance of the national supervisory authorities, while the 
rest of the system will be indirectly supervised by the ECB through the national supervisors. 
In  numbers,  out  of  approximately  6,000  credit  institutions  in  the  Eurozone,  the  ECB  will 
directly supervise around 130 banks, covering around 85% of total banking assets.  
The  single  mechanism  will  be  based  on  the  idea  of  centralised  supervision,  offering  a 
common view for the supervision of the whole sector, while building on the knowledge and 
expertise which exist at national level. This common view will be established in a set of rules 
and standards which will be laid down and developed by the EBA and the ECB itself. With 
the Single Rulebook as a basis, other instruments will also ensure that the same approach is 
used  in  the  supervision  of  all  banks.  This  will  include  the  Supervisory  Manual  and  ECB 
regulations, guidelines and general instructions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Resolution of credit institutions 
Single resolution, the second pillar of the banking union, is a necessary complement of single 
supervision. It is essential that if a bank enters into difficulties, it may be efficiently resolved 
with  no  or  minimal  costs  for  European  taxpayers  and  with  little  impact  on  the  European 
financial system and on the real economy.  
The  draft  Regulation  on  Single  Resolution,  submitted  by  the  European  Commission  to  the 
Council  and  the  Parliament  last  July,  builds  on  the  concept,  envisaged  by  the  European 
Council  more  than  a  year  ago,  that  is,  a  resolution  system  comprising  a  single  resolution 
authority and a single resolution fund.  
In such a system, resolution will be based, first and foremost, on common EU “bail in” rules, 
whereby  banks’ shareholders  and  creditors  should first  bear  the  cost  of a  bank resolution. 
Only if this were not enough, would the single resolution fund – meaning, the Industry – step 
in, making the fiscal backstop the very last resort.  
This  “bail  in”  principle  is  embodied  in  the  proposal  of  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution 
Directive which was approved by the ECOFIN last June; we expect that it will be approved 
shortly by the European Parliament. Obviously,  this Directive  will enter into force in all EU 
member  countries,  independently  of their  participation  in  the  Banking  Union.  However,  the 
Regulation establishing the framework for a Single Resolution Mechanism or Authority and a 
Single Bank Resolution Fund is just beginning to be negotiated, after, as I said before, a draft 
was  presented  by  the  Commission  in  July.  Ideally,  the  Regulation  should  be  in  force  by 
January  2015,  but  we  all  know  that  there  are  difficult  political  and  technical  problems,  in 
particular  in  relation  to  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  and  the  role  of  the  European  Stability 
Mechanism. 
Deposit guarantee scheme 
A functioning banking union also needs to properly address depositors’ protection.  
A first step was made in the middle of the crisis to harmonise coverage of European deposit 
guarantee schemes up to €100,000 per deposit.  
Later  on,  the  Commission  presented  in  July  2010  a  Draft  Directive  on  deposit  guarantee 
schemes.  This  reform  mainly  deals  with  harmonisation  and  simplification  of  protected 
deposits, faster payout and improved financing of schemes. After a controversial first reading 
in  the  European  Parliament  in  February  last  year,  the  legislative  process  was  delayed 
pending agreement being reached for the Resolution Directive. At a later stage, we will have 
also to move on this. 
Challenges to turn this framework operational 
Let me now move on to challenges for this framework to become operational. 
We have been working since the end of 2012, on the preparation of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism. Now that the Regulation has finally been approved by the European Council, the 
challenge is to turn this new framework operational before the ECB assumes its supervisory 
tasks.  
This poses, first, a logistical challenge as a new institution has to be created and numerous 
professionals  have  to  be  recruited.  But  most  importantly,  a  complete  set-up  has  to  be 
developed  to  underpin  the  supervisory  decision-making  process,  keeping  it  properly 
separated from the monetary policy structures at the ECB. And last but not least, before the 
SSM  is  fully  operational  by  November  next  year,  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the 
European banking system will be performed by the ECB.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
From domestic to joint supervision 
The transfer of responsibilities from the National Authorities to the ECB should be a smooth 
process.  
The National Authorities have the expertise in the supervision of credit institutions. We will 
have to provide information, knowledge and staff, and we should not preclude the possibility 
of running certain processes in parallel for a while. Both the ECB and the National Authorities 
should seek to attain mutual confidence and understanding. 
The ECB supervisory powers will cover all tasks relating to the prudential supervision of all 
credit institutions. This entails supervising over 6,000 institutions. 
We  will  have  to  devise  a  system  to  make  ECB  responsibility  compatible  with  a  rational 
division  of  work,  so  the  ECB  will  have  the  direct  oversight  of  significant  banks  with  the 
cooperation  of  the  national  competent  authorities.  The  direct  supervision  of  the  Less 
Significant  Institutions  is  for  the  National  Authorities,  which  will  have  to  comply  with 
regulations,  guidelines  and  general  instructions  issued  by  the  ECB.  In  fact,  the  ECB  will 
indirectly supervise such banks, having access to their data and the power to assume, if so 
decided, the direct supervision of any of them.  
It is important to underline that this is not going to be a two-tier system, but a single one with 
a distribution of tasks; this is not going to be a “confederation” of supervisors, but an “Union” 
of supervisors under a single European authority.  
Preparatory work already done to launch the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
At this point, I will briefly describe the work we have done, how the SSM is going to be set up 
in organisational terms, and the work ahead of us. 
Steered  by  a  High-Level  Group  on  Supervision,  chaired  by  the  President  of  the  ECB,  a 
preparatory structure has laid down the work schedule regarding the following areas:  
(i) 
The mapping of all the EU banking institutions, to determine the supervisory regime 
applicable under the Single Mechanism Regulation.  
The  preparation  of  the  organisational  framework,  which  will  include  the  practical 
arrangements for cooperation between the ECB and the National Authorities, within 
six months of the entry into force of the Single Mechanism Regulation. 
The  drafting  of  the  ECB  Supervisory  Manual,  which  will  address  procedural  and 
methodological  matters,  including  the  risk  assessment  system  that  the  Single 
Mechanism  will  implement,  on-site  inspections  and  other  processes  that  form  an 
integral part of the supervisory review process. 
The  introduction  of  the  Technical  Standards  on  prudential  and  accounting 
Supervisory  Reporting,  which  will  allow  a  significant  degree  of  cross-country 
consistency to be achieved regarding the periodic confidential reports that banks file 
with supervisory authorities.  
A comprehensive assessment of the credit institutions of the participating Member 
States,  including  a  balance-sheet  assessment  at  a  given  point  in  time.  I  will 
elaborate on this in a moment.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Integrating  seventeen  national  supervision  systems  (some  of  them  made  up  by  two 
authorities)  along  with  the  ECB  in  order  to  set  up  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is, 
indeed, a major challenge. 
The centrepiece of this integration has been the concept of Joint Supervisory Teams (JSTs), 
which are going to take care of the direct supervision of the significant banks. These teams 
will be made up of supervisors from the ECB and from the National Authorities; under the 
guidance of an ECB coordinator, they will be entrusted with the supervision of each of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
significant banks. These Teams are, therefore, to be the backbone of the direct supervision 
by the ECB of significant banks.  
The  ECB  plans  to  devote  two  Directorate  Generals  to  this  direct  supervision  of  significant 
banks, DGs I and II. Additionally, a DG III will be created to deal with the indirect supervision 
of the Less Significant institutions. Finally, a DG IV will carry out horizontal functions such as 
supervisory  quality  assurance,  methodology  and  standards,  enforcement  and  models 
approval.  
Overall,  including  the  Secretariat,  the  ECB  will  need  around  1,000  new  staff,  750  of  them 
directly involved in supervision.  
As  said  before,  each  Joint  Team  will  be  responsible  for  the  overall  supervisory  activity  in 
respect of a credit institution. To conduct such supervision, the JST will first determine the 
risk  profile  of  the  bank.  In  this  regard,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  to  have  a  common 
assessment system that guarantees consistent valuation across the population of banks and 
the  different  jurisdictions.  To  that  end,  part  of  the  effort  in  the  preparatory  work  is  being 
devoted to designing a “risk assessment system” anchored in objective data and ratios.  
Some final remarks on key issues  
Let me conclude with some comments on the comprehensive assessment of all banks that 
will come under direct ECB supervision. This will consist of three elements: a supervisory risk 
assessment, a balance sheet assessment and a stress test, and shall be concluded before 
the ECB assumes its supervisory functions in a year from now.  
The Supervisory Risk Assessment will incorporate supervisory judgment on all risk factors, 
aiming to evaluate measures and summarise in a comparable form across banks all potential 
sources  of  risk.  This  risk  assessment  will  also  be  used  for  the  portfolio  selection  to  be 
undertaken as part of the balance sheet assessment. 
The second element, the Balance Sheet Assessment, will be carried out at a given point in 
time  and  on  an  accounting  basis.  This  assessment  will  be  broad  and  inclusive,  covering 
credit  and  market  exposures,  on  and  off-balance  sheet  positions,  domestic  and  significant 
non-domestic  exposures.  One  key  issue  is  going  to  be  the  capital  threshold  used  for  this 
exercise, which, in accordance with the definitions of the Capital Requirements Regulation 
and  Capital  Requirement  Directive  IV,  based  on  Basel  III  recommendations,  will  take  into 
account the need for a demanding threshold. The main content and details of this exercise 
will be made public in the next few days.  
The  third  element,  the  Stress  Test,  will  review  the  major  risks  of  banking  groups  under 
various  scenarios,  testing  the  sensitivity  of  bank  balance  sheets  to  hypothetical  external 
shocks.  The  features  of  the  stress  test  will  be  defined  in  conjunction  with  the  EBA,  and 
publicly disclosed at a later stage. 
The results of the assessment will be published once finished and prior to the ECB assuming 
its supervisory role.  
The  ECB  will  manage  and  oversee  the  exercise  in  close  cooperation  with  the  National 
Authorities and with the support of an international consultancy firm. The National Authorities 
will conduct the exercise at the national level, on the basis of data requirements and centrally 
developed  methodology,  and  may  ask  for  the  support  of  third  parties  if  they  deem  it 
necessary.  To  ensure  consistency  in  execution  across  banks  and  countries,  quality 
assurance  processes  will  be  in  place  at  every  stage.  It  is  in  the  interest  of  all  that  this 
exercise  be  rigorous  and  transparent,  so  as  to  fully  restore  confidence  in  the  European 
banking sector.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusions 
We have in front of us a year “fully loaded” – to use the jargon we all use in connection with 
of  the  Regulatory  Basel  Framework.  The  European  Union  is  trying  to  make  a  big  step 
forward and we will need the intelligence and best cooperation of all for this great design to 
be carried out. 
Thanks again to the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum and to his Chairman, 
David Marsh, and to all the participants. I wish all of our visitors a very good stay in Madrid. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
