Barry Whiteside: Providing Fijians with innovative banking services 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
opening of BRED Bank (Fiji) Limited’s Nausori branch, Nausori, 19 October 2013. 
 Director BRED Bank Paris, Mr Sébastien Nahon 
The Chief Executive Officer, Mr Satish Deb 
Management and Staff of BRED Bank (Fiji) Limited 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory comments 
Good Morning, Bonjour and Bula Vinaka to you all. 
I wish to thank Satish for the kind invitation to officiate at the opening BRED Bank’s newest 
branch, right here in Nausori. 
Almost a year ago, I had the pleasure of also officiating at the opening of BRED Bank’s first 
branch at MHCC, followed just recently by its first kiosk bank in the Tappoo City Building in 
Suva. You may recall at the MHCC occasion that I had mentioned BRED Bank had a vision 
to  invest  in  Fiji  due  to  the  countries  relatively  developed  market  size  and  appealing future 
economic prospects. Today marks another milestone of this vision being brought to reality. 
Being the only locally incorporated Bank in Fiji, BRED Bank boasts strong support from its 
parent  company,  Compagnie  Financiere  de  la  BRED  (COFIBRED),  a  wholly  owned 
subsidiary  of  BRED  Banque  Populaire  and  the  largest  regional  co-operative  bank  of  the 
Banque Populaire Group of France. 
Only 11 months old in our banking system, BRED Bank is showing real signs of progression, 
currently employing around 68 staff with 100 percent local Management. I am told that the 
institution now has eight ATMS around the greater Suva area with new EFTPOS machines 
also currently being tested before deployment. 
BRED Bank’s Nausori Branch 
BRED  Bank  has  always  indicated  that  it  would  provide  the  people  of  Fiji  with  innovative 
banking  services.  The  opening  of  this  new  branch  in  Nausori  is  a  clear  testament  of  this 
commitment,  synonymous  with  its  catchy  slogan  “It’s  All  About  You!”  I  would  like  to 
emphasise  that  initiatives  such  as  this  today  also  dovetail  with  our  National  Financial 
Inclusion Taskforce goal to reach 150,000 unbanked Fijians by the end of 2014. 
BRED  Bank’s  presence  in  Nausori  will  bring  about  further  competition  in  the  financial 
services  sector  in  this  area.  Customer  choice  and  banking  services  will  certainly  widen. 
Employing  around  seven  staff,  this  new  branch  will  offer full  commercial  banking  services, 
ranging from personal and business banking, to loans and foreign exchange services. 
I am pleased to hear that this is just the beginning and that several other branches are on the 
drawing board for other locations around Fiji. 
Concluding remarks 
To the Nausori business community and the people of the three provinces of Naitasiri, Rewa 
and Tailevu, you now have a new bank in town. I encourage you to check out the services 
that Bred Bank will provide to your advantage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I again emphasise that such commitment and effort by our financial sector institutions need 
to  be  applauded  and  I  thank  the  Board  and  Management  of  BRED  Bank  for  having  the 
ongoing confidence in our Fijian economy. 
Thank you again Satish for the kind invitation to be here today. 
I extend my warmest congratulations to the BRED Bank Team on the establishment of this 
new branch. I wish your institution the very best in its future endeavours. 
Official opening 
I  now  have  much  pleasure  in  declaring  BRED  Bank  (Fiji)  Limited’s  Nausori  Branch,  open. 
Thank You, Merci and Vinaka Vakalevu. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
