Luis M Linde: Overview of the Spanish economy against the background 
of the euro crisis 
Testimony  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the  Parliamentary 
Budget  Committee  in  connection  with  the  draft  State  Budget  for  2014,  Madrid,  4  October 
2013. 
 My first appearance as Governor of the Banco de España before this Committee was last 
year, amid a very difficult situation for the Spanish economy and a serious euro crisis. Since 
then, fortunately, the situation has improved and the most serious uncertainties surrounding 
the future of the common currency have been dispelled. 
Allow  me  to  begin  by  stressing  the  importance  that  strengthening  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union and Spain's participation in it has for our economy and for the well-being of 
Spanish society. 
The difficulties we are facing should not mask the benefits the Spanish economy has reaped 
from its participation in the European project and in its most significant institution in terms of 
integration, namely monetary union. It is worth citing some figures. 
In  the  1986–1990  period,  Spanish  per  capita  GDP  stood  at  78%  of  the  average  of  the 
countries then comprising the European Union. In the 2007–2012 period, despite the severity 
of the crisis in Spain, the percentage figure relative to the same group of countries, which are 
the richest in the Union, was at 93%. And if we focus on infrastructure, which is so important 
for any country's growth potential, the last 20 years have seen the weight of investment in 
infrastructure  in  Spain far  exceed  the  European  Union  average.  Specifically,  over  the  past 
two  decades,  the  weight  of  public  investment  in  GDP  in  Spain  has  held,  year  by  year,  at 
1.25 pp  above  the  European  Union  average.  That  has  allowed  almost  full  convergence  in 
terms  of  our  public  capital  endowment,  in  proportion  to  our  population,  with  the  core 
European countries. 
From  this  standpoint,  which  we  should  not  lose  sight  of,  I  shall  refer  to  the  economic  and 
financial  situation  in  Europe  and  to  recent  developments  in  the  Spanish  economy,  with 
particular reference to economic policies and to the draft budget for 2014. To conclude I have 
some comments, which I feel bound to make, on the headway in our bank restructuring. 
The euro area 
For  some  months,  the  economic  and  financial  situation  in  Europe  has  shown  some 
improvement, against an international background marked by signs of recovery in the United 
States  and  Japan,  and  by  some  loss  of  momentum  in  the  emerging  economies,  most 
particularly China. 
Following  six  consecutive  quarters  of  contraction,  euro  area GDP growth  has  moved  back 
into positive territory. Underpinning this change in sign is a pick-up in internal demand, which 
has  added  to  the  progress  in  net  exports.  The  growth  of  0.3  pp  in  euro  area  GDP  in  the 
second quarter of 2013 has, naturally, been a positive surprise and plots a favourable course 
for the Spanish economy. But its duration and intensity are by no means assured. Indeed, 
recently revised medium-term forecasts for the euro area as a whole continue to augur very 
moderate GDP growth rates and overly high unemployment levels. 
In the financial domain, the degree of market fragmentation is lessening considerably, but is 
still  not  fully  compatible  with  the  normal functioning  of  a  monetary  union  and  with  efficient 
monetary  policy  transmission.  The  cost  at  which  households,  credit  institutions  and  the 
different  levels  of  government  can  currently  finance  themselves  in  the  countries  subject to 
most tension is still above what the ECB monetary policy stance would warrant. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  ECB  has  in  fact  continued  to  reinforce  its  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance 
throughout  the  year,  both  through  conventional  conduct  and  through  non-conventional  or 
extraordinary measures. 
In May there was a fresh cut in official interest rates which, along with the maintenance of the 
unlimited liquidity provision policy, is serving to set money market interest rates at extremely 
low levels. 
In July the ECB Governing Council decided to take a further step in its strategy of reinforcing 
its  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  with  the  use  of  a  new  instrument,  known  in  the 
parlance as “forward guidance”. Thus, after the May cut in rates, in July the ECB announced 
that the Governing Council expected rates to remain at the new level, or at a lower level, for 
a protracted period. 
In any event, the contribution monetary policy can make to resolving the problems at the root 
of  the  crisis  is  limited,  and  can  hardly  go  beyond  providing  the  time  needed  for  other 
economic policies to bear fruit, policies that do have the wherewithal to curb these problems. 
For  full  normalisation  of  the  area  to  come  about,  Member  States  must  successfully  see 
through  the  adjustments  to  their  domestic  economic  policies  to  adapt  them  to  what  a 
monetary union requires to function. 
From this perspective, I believe we should assess the progress made towards banking union 
in  Europe. In  the  coming  days, the  European  Union  Council  will  approve  the  legislation  to 
underpin the creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). That will formally set in 
train  the  process  that  will  culminate  in  the  assumption,  by  the  ECB,  of  microprudential 
supervision in the euro area in autumn next year. 
There  is  virtual  consensus  around  the  conviction  that  the  banking  union  will  be  a  decisive 
instrument  for  breaking  the  loop  between  banking  risks  and  sovereign  risks,  enabling  the 
degree  of  financial  fragmentation  still  prevailing  in  the  area  to  be  reduced  and,  we  trust, 
ultimately eliminated. But to harness the full potential of the banking union, it is important to 
ensure the quality of the bank review exercises to be conducted before the ECB assumes its 
new supervisory responsibilities. 
But the banking union will not reach its full potential if progress is not made in the design of 
its  other  component  parts,  most  notably  a  single  resolution  mechanism  and  fund,  i.e.  a 
harmonised or common procedure for the treatment of bank crises. 
Spain 
I shall now turn to the situation of our economy. 
The  Spanish  economy  is  showing  signs  of  improvement,  although  the  momentum  for  a 
sustained  recovery  remains  weak.  During  the  current  year  the  rate  of  contraction  of 
economic  activity  has  eased,  posting  a  quarter-on-quarter  decline  of  only  0.1  pp  in  the 
second  quarter.  The  as  yet  incomplete  data  for  the  third  quarter  suggest  that  this 
improvement has continued in recent months, meaning activity in Spain may have ceased to 
fall in the July-September period and may have even posted a slight increase, following two 
years of continuous declines. 
I  thus  believe  it  is  not  unwarranted  to  state  that  the  Spanish  economy  appears  to  be 
overcoming the second recession of this protracted crisis. 
Several  factors  lie  behind  this  change.  Undoubtedly,  the  pick-up  in  euro  area  activity  has 
contributed, along with a highly favourable tourist season. But the sound course of exports, 
and  to  non-euro  area  destinations  moreover,  indicates  that  the  most  notable  gains  in 
competitiveness are contributing considerably to this improvement. 
The labour market figures for the past two quarters offer positive signs. They indicate that the 
pace of job destruction has been curbed along with a fall of 1 pp in the unemployment rate, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
which still stands at slightly over 26% of the labour force. The greater momentum of hiring 
habitually seen  in the summer months and the decline in the labour force have influenced 
these developments; but they no doubt also reflect a favourable reaction by employment to 
the adjustment under way in labour costs. 
As  the  Banco  de  España  has  previously  indicated  and  reiterated  just  a  few  days  ago, 
evaluating the results of the labour reform approved last year requires prudence for two key 
reasons: it is a structural reform, whose effects, in any event, can only be felt in the medium 
and long term; and it was implemented amid a full-blown recession. That said, the analysis 
that  can  now  be  conducted  shows  better results  –  a  lower  fall  in  employment  and  greater 
wage  restraint  –  than those  indicated  by  forecasting models.  As  previously  stated  in  other 
parliamentary appearances, I believe the reform was vital, that it has been correctly oriented 
and,  most  essentially,  that  practically  all  experts  and  international  organisations  had  been 
stressing its necessity for several years. I believe its effects will be positive and that this will 
be clearly perceived once activity begins to pick up. 
Comparing  the  present  situation  with  that  a  year  ago,  there  has  evidently  been  notable 
progress  in  restoring  confidence  in  the  Spanish  economy.  The  growing  normalisation  of 
external  funding  flows  and  the  fall  in  the  sovereign  risk  premium  clearly  illustrate  this. 
However, the pass-through of this improvement in overall financing conditions is still proving 
limited,  whereby  the  financial  restrictions  continue  to  weigh  down  most  significantly  on 
private-sector spending and investment decisions in Spain. 
All told, the slowing trend in inflation has continued over recent quarters and further headway 
has been made in correcting the main imbalances. 
The increases in the annual rate of the consumer price index in the first half of this year have 
slackened as the effects of the tax rises and increases in administered prices from July to 
September last year have been stripped out. According to the flash estimate, the CPI rate 
stood  at  0.3%  in  September.  It  is  therefore  likely  that  its  annual  rate  of  change  will  stand 
below  1%  in  December.  Running  such  a  moderate  inflation  rate  evidently  contributes  to 
alleviating the impact of weak incomes on households’ and firms’ purchasing capacity. The 
legislation on the deindexation of the economy will be a valuable instrument for entrenching 
this trajectory. 
But the clearest example of the marked re-balancing the Spanish economy is undergoing is 
the  elimination  of  the  external  deficit.  In  2013  to  date,  we  have  achieved  a  net  financing 
position with the external sector, a trend which will foreseeably continue and become more 
accentuated over the rest of the year, to the point of placing the overall balance of payments 
on current and capital account for the whole of 2013 at over 2% of GDP. Nonetheless, the 
accumulation of major external deficits between 2007 and 2011 (amounting, over these five 
years,  to  €328  billion,  32%  of  our  GDP  in  2012)  has  led  to  a  high  debit  international 
investment  position,  and  years  will  be  needed  to  reasonably  reduce  our  dependence  on 
external saving. 
Private-sector  deleveraging  continues  to  progress,  although  the  unfavourable  course  of 
income  is  checking  the  speed  of  the  process.  It  is  moreover  likely  that  debt/income  re-
balancing  will  prolong  the  contraction  of  credit  at  the  aggregate  level,  although  we  may 
expect  its  impact  to  be  increasingly  less.  This  is  compatible  with  a  reallocation  of  funds 
towards the more productive agents with healthier financial positions. In any event, measures 
are  needed  aimed  at  reallocating  funds  towards  firms  with  greater  potential  in  terms  of 
activity  and  employment  and  with  financing  difficulties,  a  situation  particularly  prevalent 
among small and medium-sized enterprises. 
Fiscal consolidation 
Let me now address the public finances situation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The general government deficit target for 2013, at 6.5% of GDP, entails a reduction of almost 
5 pp from its 2009 of 11.2% of GDP. The reduction is difficult because it is taking place in a 
highly adverse macroeconomic setting, therefore equating to a real adjustment on a much 
greater scale, as indicated by the decline in the cumulative structural primary deficit in this 
period, which can be estimated at around 7 pp of GDP. 
Progress here has called for the adoption of numerous measures, both on the revenue and 
expenditure sides. 
On the revenue side, it has been sought to offset the effects on tax receipts of the collapse in 
the real estate sector, and of the weakening of tax bases. To this end, there have been rises 
in practically all taxes. On the expenditure side, measures have been aimed at correcting the 
unsustainable  dynamics  that  had  begun  to  take  root  in  the  pre-crisis  phase  and  at 
compensating for the strong upward pressure that the crisis exerted on all items, such as the 
higher interest burden and unemployment benefits. 
Fiscal consolidation has also been pursued through far-reaching changes to our budgetary 
framework,  with  the  constitutional  reform  and  the  approval  of  new  budgetary  stability 
legislation,  which  have  made  for  great  progress  in  transparency  and  have  broadened  the 
range of instruments available to strengthen public spending discipline. 
Slippage in the budget deficit targets set between 2009 and 2011 affected the credibility of 
the adjustment process. The greater degree of success in meeting targets last year gave rise 
to unquestionable benefits in terms of restored credibility. That has contributed to easing the 
pressure on the risk premium and smoothed the way for agreements in Europe, under the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  Excessive  Deficit  Procedure.  The  European  authorities 
agreed last July to allow a milder fiscal adjustment path for Spain, in particular for 2013 and 
2014, which is more consistent with the current macroeconomic conditions and those that will 
prevail in the coming years. 
For this improved credibility to take root, the deficit targets must be met. Information on the 
budget outturn in 2013 is still limited. In the first half of the year, the deficit improved relative 
to  the  same  period  a  year  earlier  (without  considering  the  impact  of  the  assistance  to  the 
financial sector which, as is known, does not count for these purposes). The budget outturn 
in  the  second  half  of  the  year  must,  therefore,  be  very  strict  at  all  levels  of  government  if 
slippage is to be avoided at the end of the year. While there are risks, I trust we can meet the 
target this year of cutting the deficit to 6.5%. 
The headway in budgetary consolidation should not mask the fact that the effort needed to 
ensure Spanish public finances are redressed is still most considerable. Let us not forget the 
distance still existing between the present situation and the requirement set in the Stability 
Pact  and  in  the  new  Budgetary  Stability  Law  for  the  medium  term,  which  is  to  have  a 
structural  balance  in  equilibrium.  Closing  this  gap  will  require  further  adjustments  that  will 
never prove easy because restoring growth will be a gradual process. 
We must also be mindful of the problems posed by the dynamics of the public debt/GDP ratio 
and its perspectives in the short term. So far, and as is usual in the initial phases of fiscal 
consolidation processes, this ratio has continued growing, with a forecast for 2014 of 98.9% 
of  GDP.  Reversing  this  trajectory  is  vital  for  ensuring  the  future  sustainability  of  public 
finances, but it will require running primary surpluses for a prolonged period; naturally, the 
sooner  we  achieve  sustained  economic  growth,  the  smoother  this  adjustment  process  will 
be. 
To tackle these challenges, institutional developments geared to ensuring budgetary rigour 
must be pursued. The independent fiscal responsibility authority, which will foreseeably start 
up in 2014, must reinforce the quality and independence of budgetary programming. Here I 
would like to mention the planned review of regional government financing arrangements and 
the creation of the committee of experts for the reform of the tax system, who are expected 
to submit their report in the coming months. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As  for  the  public  pension  system,  I  shall  reiterate  what  I  said  before the  Economic  Affairs 
Committee last June on the presentation of the Annual Report of the Banco de España. 
The public pension system is a fundamental factor of economic and social stability and it is in 
everybody's  interest  to  address  the  risks  of  shortfalls  arising  as  a  result  of  demographic 
developments.  The  sustainability  of  the  pension  system  –  i.e.  certainty  as  to  the  ability  to 
fund it appropriately – is essential for giving stability to public finances and for the credibility 
of any programme to consolidate total public spending. 
For  the  system  to  be  sustainable,  it  must  find  a  way  to  accommodate  its  key  elements, 
namely  the  retirement  age,  the  means  of  calculating  pensions  and  the  so-called 
"sustainability  factor".  I  hope  and  trust  that  political  forces  will  continue  working  on  this 
delicate and very important matter, in the spirit of the Toledo Pact agreed almost 20 years 
ago, and which has repeatedly been supported by our parliamentary institutions. 
The major budgetary figures and the macroeconomic aggregates for 2014 
The  2014  Budget  is  the  first  to  be  drawn  up  following  the  entry  into  force  of  the  latest 
European  budgetary  governance  reform,  which  introduces  into  countries'  budgetary 
procedures  an  assessment  by  the  European  Commission  of  draft  general  government 
budgets. 
In Spain's case, this reform will lead to the availability of a single document drawing together 
the  main  budgetary  items  of  all  levels  of  government,  i.e.  one  that  includes  the  regional 
governments.  In  a  country  as  decentralised  in  terms  of  public  spending  as  Spain,  as 
decentralised  or  more  so  than  other  countries  with  a  federal  political  structure,  the 
preparation  of  this  documentation  is  a  fundamental  requirement  for  the  appropriate 
assessment  of  budgetary  forecasts.  According  to  the  agenda  set,  this  document  will  be 
available, at the European level, in the coming days. I shall therefore refer solely to the State 
and Social Security budgets. 
The draft State budget for 2014 is set against a macroeconomic background in which real 
GDP is forecast to grow by 0.7%. This macroeconomic scenario, whose central forecast is 
export growth above 6%, is prudent and in keeping with the forecasts of most national and 
international agencies. It outlines a gradual recovery in activity and employment in a setting 
in which the ongoing budgetary adjustment and the deleveraging of households and firms will 
continue, and in which the competitiveness regained in 2012 and 2013 will not be lost. 
In step with our European commitments, an overall general government budget deficit target, 
in National Accounts terms, has been set at 5.8% of GDP, against the figure of 6.5% forecast 
for 2013. In terms of the different agents, a National Accounts deficit target of 3.7% of GDP 
has  been  set  for  central  government,  against  3.8%  in  2013,  and  in  the  case  of  the  social 
security system and the regional governments the figures mark an improvement of 0.3 pp of 
GDP, taking the respective deficits to 1.1% and 1%. Local governments should maintain in 
2014 the balanced budget already forecast for 2013. 
As in previous years, three expenditure items – the public debt interest burden, pensions and 
unemployment benefits – will continue to condition budgetary programming. Indeed, while in 
the initial consolidated State budget for 2013 these three items accounted for around 18.2% 
of GDP, in 2014 they are expected to represent around 18.5% of GDP and close to 55% of 
total consolidated public spending. The budgetary adjustment will therefore continue to focus 
on government consumption, for which a real-terms reduction of 2.9% is projected in 2014 
for  overall  general  government,  based  partly  on  the  civil  servant  wage  freeze  and  on  the 
extension of austerity policies in relation to public-sector employment; and, moreover, on the 
reduction  in  public  investment.  A  further  expenditure-containing  factor  will  stem  from  the 
envisaged revision of pensions, set at 0.25%, in line with the floor established in the draft law 
defining the sustainability factor. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
How do these figures compare with those for the euro area as a whole? In terms of GDP, the 
weight of unemployment benefits continues to stand far above the euro area average, as a 
result of our high unemployment. Interest payments on debt in Spain are also expected to 
exceed the euro area average, while spending on pensions would continue to be below the 
average, given that demographic developments in our country remain more favourable. 
On the revenue side, a 2.4% increase in total tax receipts (including the share of regional 
and local government) is forecast, with very few tax changes. These are concentrated in the 
broadening  of  corporate  income  tax  bases  approved  last  June.  In  the  case  of  personal 
income  tax  and  VAT  receipts,  increases  of  1.7%  and  2.7%  are  projected.  As  to  social 
security contributions, the main regulatory change consists of a 5% increase in the maximum 
contribution bases. 
Progress in the reform of the banking system 
Before concluding, I shall briefly mention the progress in the reform and strengthening of our 
banking system. This task is at the heart of the responsibilities and concerns of the Banco de 
España,  and,  as  we  all  know,  it  has  required  a  most  considerable  contribution  of  public 
funds. 
At present we are at a most advanced phase in the ongoing recapitalisation and restructuring 
of our banking sector. 
As  you  know,  the  starting  point  was  in  2009,  when  the  FROB  (the  Fund  for  the  Orderly 
Restructuring of the Banking Sector) was created, and the process moved up a gear in 2011 
further  to  Royal  Decree-Law  2/2011  on  the  strengthening  of  the  financial  system,  which 
raised capital requirements. But the decisive steps were taken in 2012, with Royal Decree 
Laws  2/2012  and  18/2012  on  the  clean-up  of  the  financial  system,  the  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  agreed  in  July  with  the  European  Commission,  and  the  financial  support 
facility  of  up  to  €100  billion  annexed  to  this  agreement;  and,  finally,  Law  9/2012  on  the 
restructuring and resolution of credit institutions. 
Against this background, each bank's capital needs were identified on the basis of a rigorous 
stress  test  and,  in  accordance  with  the  European  authorities,  restructuring  or  orderly 
resolution plans were drawn up and approved for those banks requiring them. 
In 2012, backed by public financial assistance, the institutions classified under “group 1” of 
the Memorandum of Understanding were recapitalised, and their problem construction and 
real estate development-related assets were transferred to SAREB (the asset management 
company for assets arising from bank restructuring). 
Into  2013,  the  “group  2”  institutions  subject  to  the  exercise  have  been  recapitalised,  their 
troubled  assets  have  been  transferred  to  SAREB  and  the  hybrid  instrument  management 
(burden-sharing) exercises have been conducted at all banks requiring them, except at one, 
where they began recently and will be concluded in the coming days. 
The public financial assistance to financial institutions in various forms of capital, since May 
2009, has risen to €61.37 billion, €38.83 billion of which were under the Financial Assistance 
Programme agreed with the European authorities. Verification by the international authorities 
of the fulfilment of the conditions agreed in the July 2012  Memorandum of Understanding, 
the last round of which concluded only a few days ago, confirms that the Memorandum and 
its deadlines have been strictly adhered to and that the main objective, the restructuring and 
recapitalisation of our banking system, has progressed satisfactorily. 
As  earlier  stated,  the  Council  of  the  European  Union  will  shortly  approve  the  Regulation 
governing the SSM, which will commence operating after a transitory period of one year. It is 
envisaged  that  more  than  90%  of  the  Spanish  banking  system,  measured  by  volume  of 
assets, will be supervised by the SSM. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Prior to the ECB effectively taking over supervisory responsibilities, a bank asset review and 
valuation is planned which will give rise to the requirement of a level of capital to be met by all 
banks subject to the review and, where necessary, to the setting up of additional coverage. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  our  banks  are  starting  from  a  very  reasonable  level,  both  from  the 
perspective of the accounting classification of their assets, and from that of asset coverage 
and provisioning, the result of the review conducted last year under the stress tests and of 
the above-mentioned recapitalisation processes. Recently, banks’ review of refinanced loans 
has  also  concluded,  a  process  which  contributes  to  shoring  up  their  position  ahead  of the 
forthcoming evaluation of the quality of their assets. 
Likewise, and once more with a view to reinforcing the solvency of our banking system, the 
Banco  de  España  has  recommended  that  banks  moderate  the  distribution  of  dividends 
during 2013 and that, in any event, the cash dividends paid out should not exceed 25% of 
attributable consolidated profit. Naturally, all banks are following this recommendation. 
The solvency position of Spanish banks has clearly improved in 2013. Average core capital 
in our banking system will stand at around 10.5% as at December 2013, more than 1 pp up 
on the same figure a year earlier. 
Further,  since  the  start  of  2013  liquidity  conditions  at  Spanish  banks  have  improved,  and 
there has been a re-balancing of their funding sources. This is the outcome of the diminished 
tensions on the sovereign debt markets and of improved confidence, along with the lesser 
fragmentation of euro area money and capital markets. 
In  this  respect,  retail  deposits,  which  fell,  especially  in  the  summer  months  of  2012,  have 
since been faring better. Since early 2013, they have been posting positive rates of change. 
The pick-up in deposits has seen the retail funding gap – i.e. the percentage of credit that 
banks cannot cover with deposits – narrow. That allows them to reduce the need to resort to 
less stable funding sources, such as the wholesale markets. 
Against this backdrop, the resort to Eurosystem funding, though holding at still-high levels, 
has diminished most significantly from its peak last summer, registering a decline of 31% in 
the first eight months of 2013. 
In terms of profitability, the exceptional drive by banks in 2012 to comply with provisioning 
requirements exerted a significant impact on their profit and loss accounts. Indeed, for the 
year as a whole, losses of over €40 billion were recorded. The first half of 2013 has marked a 
change in this tendency. Banks' consolidated profit rose to somewhat more than €8.2 billion, 
despite  the  fact  that  provisions  continue  to  adversely  affect  profit  and  loss  accounts  in  a 
period in which the proportion of non-performing assets remained high. 
The signs of improvement in the sector are not free from risks. In a setting characterised by 
low  economic  growth,  sluggish  activity  and  relatively  low  interest  rates,  banking  sector 
margins will continue to be subject to downward pressures. Foreseeably, moreover, doubtful 
assets will continue to increase in the short run, although their impact in terms of provisions 
will be less than in the recent past. Against this background, banks must persevere in their 
efforts  to  improve  efficiency  and  contain  operating  costs.  In  particular,  it  is  essential  that 
banks subject to restructuring and recapitalisation plans strictly comply with the requirements 
established in those plans. 
Conclusions 
The difficulties the Spanish economy has been facing call for efforts to be made by all. The 
Budget you are to discuss is pivotal to the continuation of these efforts and to an exit from 
the  crisis.  The  analysis  I  have  attempted  to  convey  seeks  to  show  that  these  efforts  are 
beginning to bear fruit in the gradual strengthening of the recovery. I believe if we manage to 
maintain  the  policy  of  expenditure  control,  structural  reforms  and  the  reinforcement  of  our 
financial  system,  the  year  2014  may  mark  the  start  of  the  recovery  in  activity  and 
employment. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
