Haruhiko Kuroda: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business 
leaders, Osaka, 5 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  this  opportunity  to  address  such  a  distinguished  gathering  of 
business leaders in Osaka today. I would like to start by expressing my deep gratitude to you 
for your cooperation with our branches in Osaka, Kobe, and Kyoto. 
What I recognized most strongly when I assumed the role of the Governor of the Bank of 
Japan in March this year was that we must bring Japan’s economy out of deflation that has 
lasted for almost 15 years. Amid protracted deflation, Japan’s economy has been deprived of 
vitality. The greatest challenge facing Japan’s economy in the immediate future is a prompt 
overcoming of deflation, and the role the Bank has to play to that end is critical. Based on 
such  recognition,  a  new  policy  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE)  was 
introduced  in  April.  While  pursuing  this  policy,  the  real  economy,  financial  markets,  and 
people’s  sentiment  and  expectations  have  been  improving,  and  thus  the  QQE  has  been 
steadily  exerting  its  intended  effects.  As  for  the  outlook,  as  shown  in  the  Outlook  for 
Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (Outlook  Report)  released  last  week,  Japan’s  economy  is 
expected  to  grow  above  its  potential,  as  a  trend,  amid  a  continued  virtuous  cycle  among 
production, income, and spending, and is likely to steadily follow a path toward achieving a 
2 percent price stability target. 
Today,  before  exchanging  views  with  you,  I  would  like  to  explain  the  Bank’s  view  on 
economic activity and prices, followed by thoughts on the QQE. 
I. 
Developments in domestic and overseas economies 
Outlook for Japan’s economy 
Let me start with the outlook for Japan’s economy. 
The  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately  as  domestic  demand  has  been  firm  and 
overseas economies have gradually been picking up. Since the turn of the year, real GDP 
has registered high growth of about 4 percent on an annualized basis for two consecutive 
quarters. Comparing external demand with domestic demand, while exports have generally 
been picking up at a somewhat slower pace, domestic demand, notably private consumption 
and public investment, has been firm. Compared with what was anticipated at the time of the 
Outlook Report six months ago, external demand has been somewhat weaker and domestic 
demand has been somewhat stronger. 
Looking ahead, while domestic demand is likely to maintain firmness as external demand is 
expected to increase, albeit moderately, the virtuous cycle among production, income, and 
spending  is  likely  to  be  maintained.  In  terms  of  the  real  GDP  projections  in  the  Outlook 
Report  released  last  week,  that  for  fiscal  2013  is  somewhat  high,  at  2.7  percent,  partly 
reflecting a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike. Thereafter, 
real GDP is expected to decline in fiscal 2014 to 1.5 percent, partly reflecting a drop following 
the  tax  hike,  and  should  be  1.5  percent  in  fiscal  2015  (Chart  1).  Therefore,  while  the 
economy will be affected by a swing of the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in 
demand prior to and after the two scheduled consumption tax hikes, it is likely to continue 
growing  at  a  pace  above  its  potential,  which  is  estimated  to  be  around  0.5  percent,  as  a 
trend. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Two points that deserve particular attention in looking to the future of Japan’s economy are 
the sustainability of firm domestic demand and the outlook for overseas economies. 
Sustainability of firmness in domestic demand 
First is the sustainability of domestic demand. 
The major feature of the recovery this time is that, starting with domestic demand such as 
private consumption and public investment, the nonmanufacturing sector has been leading 
the  recovery.  This  differs  from  typical  patterns  of  postwar  recovery  in  Japan,  in  which  the 
recovery  started  with  an  increase  in  exports  and  production  and  was  led  mainly  by  the 
manufacturing sector. In fact, while production in the manufacturing sector has remained at 
about  80  percent  of  its  peak  prior  to  the  Lehman  shock,  the  indices  of  Teritiary  Industry 
Activity, which show developments in the nonmanufacturing sector, have recovered to a level 
close to that seen prior to the Lehman shock. Looking at the diffusion index (DI) for business 
conditions in the Tankan survey, the DI for the nonmanufacturing sector has been better than 
that for the manufacturing sector in this recovery phase (Chart 2). 
Of this firm domestic demand, private consumption had been supported by an improvement 
in consumer confidence and wealth effects from the rise in stock prices since the turn of the 
year, while buoyant consumption by the elderly, notably baby boomers, had been serving as 
an underlying factor (Chart 3). Recently, it also has begun to be backed by improvement in 
the employment and income situation. 
Namely,  the  employment  situation  continues  to  improve  moderately  but  steadily,  with  both 
the unemployment rate and the ratio of job offers to applicants having almost recovered to 
the level observed prior to the Lehman shock. There has also been an increasing sense of a 
labor  shortage  on  the  firms’  side  (Chart  4).  This  improvement  in  the  employment  situation 
has  started  to  influence  wages.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  nominal  wages  per 
employee  has  gradually  stopped  declining  on  the  whole,  partly  due  to  growth  in  summer 
bonuses for the first time in three years.  Meanwhile, scheduled wages per employee as a 
whole have remained negative year-on-year, and this is partly attributable to a shortening in 
hours worked due to the increased labor participation of women and the elderly in the form of 
part-time  workers.  Nevertheless,  as  the  number  of  employees  has  been  increasing, 
employee  income  –  the  number  of  employees  times  wages  per  employee  –  has  turned 
positive year-on-year (Chart 5). Thus, the income situation as a whole has been gradually 
improving. 
Going  forward,  an  improving  trend  in  the  employment  situation  is  likely  to  continue  as  the 
economy  recovers  moderately,  and  nominal  wages  per  employee  are  expected  to  be  put 
under  upward  pressure  gradually.  From  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective,  wages  will 
likely show a clear uptrend as the effects of tightening supply and demand conditions in the 
labor market emerge and inflation expectations rise. While we are intrinsically aware of the 
severe  competitive  environment  surrounding  firms,  we  expect  that  wages  will  increase, 
supported by improving corporate profits, and also by initiatives pursued through cooperation 
among the government, workers, and employers. 
Another important point in considering the future of domestic demand is the developments in 
business  fixed  investment  in  the  corporate  sector.  Reflecting  the  major  feature  of  the 
economic  recovery  this  time,  business  fixed  investment  has  been  resilient  in  the 
nonmanufacturing  sector,  and  recently  there  also  are  signs  of  improvement  in  the 
manufacturing sector, which has been lagging, and thus business fixed investment has been 
picking up on the whole (Chart 6). 
Regarding 
fixed  environment, 
accommodative financial conditions under the QQE are expected to underpin business fixed 
investment.  In  the  context  of  investment  profitability,  the  extent  of  the  monetary  easing 
stimulus to encourage investment is likely to strengthen, reflecting a rise in the rate of return 
on  capital  due  to  economic  recovery,  together  with  declining  real  interest  rates,  partly  in 
the  situation  surrounding  business 
the  outlook 
for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
reflection of a rise in inflation expectations. In addition, the effects of various anticipated tax 
reduction measures for businesses are likely to support business fixed investment through a 
decline in capital costs and stronger-than-expected cash flows. Furthermore, reflecting past 
restraints  on  firms’  investment  attitude,  existing  equipment  has  aged  and  thus  potential 
demand  for  maintenance  and  replacement  is  likely  to  be  strengthened.  If  the  level  of 
economic activity further elevates and the improvement in corporate profits continues, such 
potential demand becomes more likely to surface cyclically. 
Overseas economies 
Next, I will turn to the outlook for overseas economies. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  with  regard  to  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy,  while  domestic 
demand  is  likely  to  maintain  firmness,  external  demand  is  expected  to  increase,  albeit 
moderately. This is based on the assumption that overseas economies are expected to pick 
up  gradually  as  financial  markets  remain  generally  stable.  In  its  world  economic  outlook 
released last month, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects that the world economy 
will  gradually  see  an  acceleration  in  its  pace  of  growth  from  2.9  percent  in  2013  to 
3.6 percent in 2014, and to 4.0 percent in 2015 (Chart 7). 
Looking  at  respective  regions,  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately  on  the 
back  of  firm  private  demand  under  accommodative  financial  conditions,  despite  the  fiscal 
drag. The economy is expected to gradually see an acceleration in its pace of recovery, as 
accommodative financial conditions will be maintained and the fiscal drag will gradually fade. 
Nevertheless, as uncertainty regarding the fiscal problem remains, such as the federal debt 
ceiling issue, future developments warrant attention. 
The  European  economy,  which  had  been  receding  slowly,  has  finally  bottomed  out,  and 
there has recently been movement toward a pick-up. Households’ and firms’ sentiment are 
improving as financial markets have remained stable. In addition, changes in the stance of 
fiscal austerity have been made to some extent and the fiscal drag has weakened somewhat. 
Exports, especially in Germany, are bottoming out. Although it is necessary to pay attention 
to  the  consequence  of  the  European  debt  problem,  as  it  has  not  yet  been  fundamentally 
resolved,  the  European  economy  is  expected  to  gradually  pick  up  on  the  back  of  the 
aforementioned developments. 
The Chinese economy is likely to maintain stable growth at around the current pace, as the 
government,  while  progressing  with  reforms  in  structural  problems  such  as  excess 
production  capacity  and  excess  debt  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  is  expected  to  carry  out 
various  policy  measures  to  underpin  economic  activity  in  the  event  it  weakens  during  the 
process.  Meanwhile,  growth  in  other  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  has 
been lacking momentum compared with a while ago, partly due to such problems as excess 
debt.  In  addition,  financial  conditions  have  been  on  a  tightening  trend  –  particularly  in 
economies with current account deficits – such that progress in currency depreciation and 
declines  in  stock  prices  were  partly  observed,  reflecting  speculation  about  the  direction  of 
U.S. monetary policy, and in some economies, policy interest rates were raised in response 
to the currency depreciation. Therefore, these economies will likely lack growth momentum 
for the time being. From a longer-term perspective, however, growth rates are expected to 
pick up again as the U.S. and other advanced economies improve. 
As  mentioned,  each  country  and  region  has  its  own  respective  risks,  but  the  baseline 
scenario is that overseas economies, particularly the advanced economies, are expected to 
pick  up  gradually.  In  this  situation,  with  regard  to  Japan’s  economy,  external  demand  is 
expected to increase moderately. 
Effects of the consumption tax hikes 
At the beginning of October 2013, the government decided to raise the consumption tax rate 
to 8 percent in April 2014 as initially scheduled. The rate hike is a part of the government’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
efforts  to  secure  stable  financial  resources  for  social  security  functions  and  to  establish  a 
sustainable  fiscal  structure  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  and  the  Bank  considers  the 
government’s decision as extremely meaningful. 
In the October 2013 Outlook Report, on the assumption that the consumption tax rate will be 
raised twice, the Bank considered that, while there will be a swing due to the front-loaded 
increase and subsequent decline in demand, Japan’s economy is likely to continue growing 
at a pace above its potential, as a trend. It is true that the consumption tax hikes will have 
adverse effects on households’ real disposable incomes. However, the adverse effects are 
expected to be mitigated to some extent, partly because (1) various economic measures are 
scheduled  to  be  taken  by  the  government,  (2)  the  tax  hikes  seem  to  have  already  been 
factored in substantially among households, and (3) the rate hikes are expected to have the 
effect  of  alleviating  households’  future  concerns  over  the  fiscal  condition  and  the  social 
security system. 
Price developments in Japan 
II. 
Let me now turn to the price developments in Japan. 
The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items excluding fresh 
food)  turned  positive  in  June  2013  for  the  first  time  in  14  months  and  has  recently  been 
accelerating  to  the  range  of  0.5–1.0  percent.  While  it  is  true  that  a  rise  in  the  prices  of 
energy-related goods such as petroleum products and electricity has contributed to lifting the 
index, there has been an improvement in a wide range of items as the economy continues to 
recover moderately, as seen in resilient private consumption. In fact, the year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI (all items excluding food and energy) saw a steady reduction in the extent 
of its decline and became 0 percent in September (Chart 8). In addition, taking into account 
market  indicators  and  various  surveys,  inflation  expectations  appear  to  be  rising  on  the 
whole.  The  expected  rate  of  inflation  measured  by  using  an  inflation-indexed  government 
bond  for  which  principal  and  interest  changes  according  to  future  inflation  rates  –  the 
so-called  break-even  inflation  rate  –  has  been  maintaining  an  uptrend  viewed  from  a 
somewhat  longer-term  perspective.  Also,  in  surveys  on  economists,  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations have been rising (Chart 9). 
At present, in Japan’s economy, it seems that there is still a negative output gap – namely, a 
situation in which labor force and production capacity are in excess (Chart 10). However, as 
the economy continues to grow above its potential growth rate, labor and capacity utilization 
will  further  rise  and  thus  the  output  gap  is  likely  to  turn  positive  in  the  future.  In  such  a 
situation,  a  tightening  of  supply  and  demand  conditions  of  goods  and  services  as  well  as 
labor  will  become  evident,  and  prices  and  wages  are  likely  to  rise.  Furthermore,  a  rise  in 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations will also contribute to a rise in prices and wages. 
Under the QQE, medium- to long-term inflation expectations will follow an uptrend, supported 
by an actual rise in observed inflation, and will gradually converge on the price stability target 
of about 2 percent. 
Taking  these  points  into  consideration,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI,  on  the 
basis of excluding direct effects of the consumption tax hikes, is likely to follow an increasing 
trend and reach the price stability target of about 2 percent through the second half of the 
projection  period  up  to fiscal  2015.  To  cite  the  figures in  the  October Outlook  Report,  it  is 
projected to be 0.7 percent in fiscal 2013, 1.3 percent in fiscal 2014, and 1.9 percent in fiscal 
2015 (Chart 11). 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
Lastly, I would like to talk about the conduct of monetary policy. 
The  biggest  challenge  facing  Japan’s  economy  is  to  overcome  deflation.  Over  the  nearly 
15 years of deflation, inflation expectations of firms and households have declined and the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
deflationary  mindset  has  been  firmly  embedded  in  their  minds.  Under  deflation,  holding  of 
cash  and  deposits  has  become  a  relatively  better  investment.  In  fact,  the  total  amount  of 
currency  and  deposits  held  by  Japanese  firms  has  reached  230  trillion  yen,  equivalent  to 
nearly 50 percent of the nominal GDP. The protracted deflation has created an environment 
in  which  maintaining  the  status  quo  is  better  than  embarking  on  new  challenges  through 
investment,  and  this  has  deprived  Japan  of  economic  vigor.  In  order  to  exit  such  an 
environment, it is vital to dispel the deflationary expectations embedded in the people. 
To address the challenge of overcoming deflation, the Bank introduced the QQE in April. The 
QQE  has  two  pillars:  first,  it  commits  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  in 
terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI at the earliest possible time, with a time 
horizon of about two years; second, it represents pursuit of a new phase of bold monetary 
easing in order to underpin such commitment. Specifically, the Bank declared that it would 
double the monetary base, the amount of money it directly provides, in two years. In order to 
do  so,  it  decided  to  make  massive  purchases  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs) 
including those with long remaining maturities. For the last six months since it introduced the 
QQE,  the  Bank  has  been  progressing  with  the  provision  of  the  monetary  base  and  the 
purchase of JGBs as scheduled (Chart 12). 
The  effects  of  the  QQE  are  expected  to  carry  through  the  economy  via  several  different 
routes. The most important of these is to lower real interest rates. Here, I would like to spend 
some time to explain the mechanism behind this. First of all, by committing to achievement of 
the  2  percent  price  stability  target  at  the  earliest  possible  time  and  announcing  the 
continuation of a new phase of monetary easing into the future to underpin that commitment, 
the Bank aims to drastically change people’s expectations and raise inflation expectations. 
Second, the Bank will put strong downward pressure on nominal long-term rates through the 
massive purchases of JGBs. Consequently, real interest rates could be lowered if the extent 
of  a  pickup  in  nominal  rates  could  be  contained  within  the  extent  of  a  rise  in  inflation 
expectations. 
As  the  spending  behavior  of  firms  and  households  is  influenced  by  real  interest  rates,  the 
decline  in  real  interest  rates  will  stimulate  business  fixed  investment,  housing  investment, 
and  household  consumption,  thereby  providing  a  strong  backing  to  the  economy.  If  the 
supply  and  demand  balances  in  goods  and  services  as  well  as  labor  supply  and  demand 
conditions  tighten  as  the  economy  recovers,  there  will  be  upward  pressure  on  prices.  If 
actual prices rise, this will further lead to raising the people’s inflation expectations. In sum, 
triggered by a rise in inflation expectations through a new phase of monetary easing, we will 
generate  a  virtuous  cycle  of  a  decline  in  real  interest  rates,  an  improvement  in  economic 
activity, a rise in actual prices, and a rise in inflation expectations. 
For the last six months, our endeavor on this front has been successful. As I said before, 
inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole. By contrast, long-term rates remain 
stable  at  a  low  level  of  around  0.6  percent  in  Japan  despite  the  rise  in  long-term  interest 
rates in other economies (Chart 13). Bank lending rates have declined to a historic low level. 
In such situation, real interest rates should be declining. With such stimulative effects coming 
from  monetary  easing,  Japan’s  economy  has  entered  a  recovery  phase  and  the  CPI  has 
turned  positive.  What  contributes  to  a  rise  in  people’s  inflation  expectations  is  not  just  the 
Bank  saying  that  it  will  achieve  the  2  percent  inflation,  but  also  the  fact  that  actual  prices 
have been rising. 
As I have explained to you today, the QQE has been exerting its intended effects. Under the 
QQE,  Japan’s  economy  has  been  following  the  path  toward  achieving  the  2  percent  price 
stability  target  as  expected.  The  Bank  will  continue  with  the  QQE,  aiming  to  achieve  that 
target,  as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for  maintaining  it  in  a  stable  manner.  It  will  thoroughly 
examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  make 
adjustments  as  necessary  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target.  With  such  conduct  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
monetary  policy,  the  Bank  will  surely  manage  to  overcome  deflation,  which  has  been  the 
challenge for nearly 15 years. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
