Andreas Dombret: Current developments in Europe 
Introductory  remarks  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the German Embassy, Paris, 11 December 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Let  me  kick  off  the  discussion  by  offering  some  thoughts  on  the  current  state  of  play  in 
Europe, and the euro area in particular. Many challenges have by now been overcome, yet 
some still remain ahead. Let me mention a few of them. 
First, the markets are still concerned about the quality of banks’ balance sheets and possible 
forbearance policies. The lack of transparency about true asset quality is certainly an issue. 
Price-to-book ratios of less than one testify to this. 
Second, it is true that we have seen significant improvements in market access and funding 
costs  during  recent  months.  However,  signs  of  fragmentation  between  the  so-called 
periphery and other countries of the euro area are still evident. That is, financing conditions 
for sovereigns, banks and corporates continue to diverge along national borders. 
Third, in many parts of Europe the necessary deleveraging process still has to continue. The 
corporate and private household sectors in some European economies are still riddled with 
debt  from  previous  exuberance.  Likewise,  public  deficits  and  sovereign  debt  levels  are 
uncomfortably high in many countries. 
Finally, growth, when measured on an annual basis, in the euro area remains subdued. The 
European Commission expects euro area real GDP to shrink by 0.4% in 2013. And in 2014, 
growth may well amount to a mere 1.1%. This adds to the challenges facing bank balance 
sheets and public finances. 
So, is it all gloom and doom? Far from it, I would argue, as long as policy makers take the 
right steps. Let us take a short look at what has been done so far and what remains to be 
done. 
Let me begin with the issue of monetary policy, as you would probably expect from a central 
banker.  Only  few  would  dispute  that  the  measures  taken  by  the  Eurosystem  have  greatly 
reduced tail risks in the financial markets. However, I cannot conceal the concern that these 
measures come with diminishing rates of return. In fact, we may soon reach a point where 
their risks outweigh their benefits. 
In the end, monetary policy cannot solve the crisis. Everyone agrees on this. All monetary 
policy can do is to buy time. And in doing so the Eurosystem has entered unchartered and 
dangerous territory. 
Thus, policy makers should make good use of the time that monetary policy is buying. And 
indeed, Europe is proceeding with a comprehensive reform agenda to tackle the root causes 
of the remaining challenges. 
One of these challenges is the close link between banks and sovereigns. Breaking this link is 
important for making the euro area more stable. 
To achieve this objective, we have to adjust the regulatory treatment of sovereign exposures 
over the medium term. Two steps are important: first, an upper limit for banks’ exposure to 
individual sovereigns should be introduced. Second, banks’ investments in sovereign bonds 
should be backed with capital. 
But there is more to do. A banking union can represent another major step to break the link 
between banks and sovereigns. Centralising supervisory powers over large banks can foster 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
a  comprehensive  view  and  unbiased  policy  action  that  is  not  held  hostage  by  national 
interests. 
A first step in this direction will be the Balance Sheet Assessment under the auspices of the 
ECB. It is important to conduct this exercise in an impartial and unprejudiced manner. The 
German  banking  industry  has  already  spent  considerable  efforts  on  cleaning  its  balance 
sheets  –  some  as  part  of  the  Commission’s  state  aid  decisions,  some  in  reaction  to  EBA 
stress tests, some for other reason. Thus, banks are in a better condition now than they were 
a  few  years  ago.  I  am  not  afraid  of  huge  surprises.  But  for  all  banks  subject  to  the 
assessment  it  cannot  be  excluded  that  problems  still  remain.  We  need  to  uncover  and 
address these problems now, before the single supervisory mechanism is launched. 
Meanwhile,  a  comprehensive  banking  union  has  to  comprise  more  than  just  an  effective 
single  supervisory  mechanism.  It  needs  to  be  complemented  by  a  single  resolution 
mechanism. 
This is a necessary step to solve the too-big-to-fail-problem. Large banks must be able to fail 
without  endangering  the  stability  of  the  whole  system.  Otherwise,  the  government  would 
have to step in to prevent a systemic crisis. This would create an asymmetry: Heads, banks 
win, tails, taxpayers lose. 
Against  this  backdrop,  establishing  a  clear  hierarchy  and  minimizing  discretion  in  the 
handling of bank creditor bail-ins is indispensable to win back lost trust. Based on  the EU 
finance  ministers’  agreement  of  June  2013,  the  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  is  now 
close to being adopted. It might ultimately turn out to be a net positive, as it provides clear 
orientation  for  markets.  Moreover,  it  might  even  have  positive  effects  for  banks’  financing 
conditions. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  banking  union  is  a  major  step  forward  in  designing  a  better 
framework for monetary union. However, we also need structural reforms at the national level 
which are key to restore competitiveness and sound public finances. It is certainly true that 
reaping the fruit of success comes with a time lag. But experience from Germany – which ten 
years ago was nicknamed the “sick man” of Europe – shows that the benefits will come to 
the fore sooner or later. 
And  lately,  growth  data  from  the  euro  area  have  been  indicating  that  a  silver  lining  is 
appearing on the horizon, Macroeconomic rebalancing in the euro area is underway. 
Importantly, the euro area left recession, with 0.1% growth in the third quarter. In, Italy and 
Greece  contraction  slowed  down,  while  Spain  joined  Portugal  and  Ireland  in  leaving  the 
recession behind. 
At  the  same  time,  exports  are  increasing.  All  the  crisis  countries  –  except  Cyprus  –  are 
projected to see some export growth this year, ranging from just 1/2% in Ireland to almost 
6%  in  Portugal.  These  achievements  are  reflected  in  current  accounts  reverting  more  and 
more to positive balances. 
Competitiveness  has  also  improved  in  most  peripheral  countries.  Since  2009  Greece  has 
seen  its  unit  labour  costs  diminish  by  over  8%,  in  Ireland,  Spain  and  Portugal  unit  labour 
costs declined by 11%, 7% and 6% respectively. The structural reforms implemented are a 
key explanation for these successes. 
Thus, at the center of the crisis, the situation is improving. But what about the two largest 
economies in the euro area; what about France and Germany? 
Looking at France, we see good potential: the country is home to many renowned firms, it 
has  a  strong  domestic  market,  and  it  has  favourable  demographics  –  in  particular  when 
compared to Germany. 
However,  it  also  faces  structural  challenges.  The  unemployment  rate  stands  at  more  than 
10%  and  France’s  world  market  share  of  exports  has  declined  significantly  over  the  past 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
10 years. And despite the consolidation efforts of the past years, public debt stands at more 
than 90% of GDP – a level that could become a significant burden on economic growth. 
Additionally,  France  has  acknowledged  the  importance  of  a  competitive  economy.  The 
government has embarked on a number of reforms to increase the competitiveness of the 
economy. Furthermore, the social partners agreed on labour market reforms which could be 
an important step toward achieving a better functioning labour market. 
Looking at Germany, the current situation seems to be quite pleasing: Germany’s economy 
is in infinitely better shape than just ten years ago. Nevertheless, I do believe that we need a 
more level-headed assessment – Germany, too, faces structural challenges. 
There  are  four  important  areas  we  have  to  address:  First,  Germany  has  to  cope  with 
unfavourable demographics, which will be increasingly felt in the coming years. Second, due 
to  globalisation  firms  are  going  to  face  increasing  pressure  from  emerging  market 
competitors. Third, fiscal policy will have to bring down high public debt. And fourth, Germany 
is trying to completely change its energy policies. This change will have a profound impact on 
the competitiveness of industry and the purchasing power of households. 
Thus, focusing on those countries in the center of the crisis might distract us from the fact 
that all countries in Europe face structural challenges – including France and Germany. At 
the  end  of  the  day,  Europe  can  only  work  if  all  of  us  move  in  the  same  direction.  Only 
together  can  France  and  Germany  act  as  the  driving  forces  of  European  integration.  And 
only together can France and Germany help to solve the current crisis. 
The  positive  developments  I  highlighted  in  my  speech  show  the  payoffs  of  staying  on  the 
path of reform. And they give us the necessary backing to do what most Europeans know 
needs to be done: use the window of opportunity of relative market calm. Use it to further 
push forward reforms, both, at the national and at the European level. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
