Sabine Lautenschläger: The European sovereign debt crisis and its 
implications for the younger generation 
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
Junger Wirtschaftstag of the CDU. Frankfurt am Main, 26 October 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to speak today, at the Junger Wirtschaftstag of the CDU, about a topic which I 
believe  has  not  yet  been  adequately  discussed  in  the  chosen  context,  namely:  what  the 
European  sovereign  debt  crisis  means  for  the  younger  generation.  Not  only  should  this 
question  in  particular  be  placed  at  the  heart  of  many  debates  about  the  financial  and 
sovereign debt crisis – the envisaged solutions, too, need to be measured in terms of their 
implications  for  young  people.  After  all,  they  are  the  ones  who  will  have  to  shoulder  the 
burden if we delay resolving the crisis from the present to the future. 
Allow me to begin my thoughts on the sovereign debt crisis and on its implications for the 
younger generation with the following quotation. 
“The  progress  of  the  enormous  debts  which  at  present  oppress,  and  will  in  the  long-run 
probably ruin, all the great nations of Europe, has been pretty uniform.” 
If  anyone  here  believes  this  to  be  an  especially  bleak  description  of  the  situation  brought 
about by the European sovereign debt crisis that has persisted for more than three-and-a-
half years now, he or she is mistaken by 237 years. This quotation is not a recent one – it 
dates from the year 1766 and is taken from the most important piece of work by the famous 
Scottish economist Adam Smith, who is considered the founder of classical economics. And 
yet  today,  much  more  than  200  years  later,  the  transmission  mechanisms  of  a  sovereign 
debt crisis have seen very little change. Yet to be precise, when considering the present-day 
situation  in  the  euro  area,  we  should  really  speak  of  crises  in  the  plural,  since  what  we 
experienced was the mutual reinforcement of a banking and a sovereign debt crisis. And only 
if we carefully analyse the causes and consequences of the crisis can we learn from past 
mistakes and find solutions. Thus I would like to examine, briefly, the three main reasons for 
the crisis. 
1. 
Unsound  developments  that  were  home-grown  persisted  unchecked  for  years  in 
individual  euro-area  member  countries.  The  competitiveness  of  the  present-day 
problem  countries  became  eroded  as  a  result,  and  the  state  of  public  finances 
deteriorated. 
Major flaws became visible in the framework of monetary union. 
Nor did the situation in the financial system or in financial market regulation look any 
better. 
2. 
3. 
The crisis still has the euro area in its grip, although first signs are becoming apparent of an 
improvement in some member states. 
The younger generation was, and still is, the hardest hit – on two accounts. 
 
Many  young  people  in  the  crisis-hit  countries  are  currently  experiencing  great 
difficulty finding jobs, as youth unemployment is disturbingly high in many countries. 
But the sovereign debt crisis, too, casts a shadow over our young people’s future, as 
the last few years have seen sovereign debt rise dramatically throughout Europe. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
These  debts  will  have  to  be  shouldered  by  the  younger  generation  in  the  future,  and  the 
interest burden and redemption payments will narrow fiscal policy leeway substantially. 
Clearly, then, the causes of the crisis need to be eliminated once and for all in the interests, 
not  least,  of  the  younger  generation.  Only  then  can  we  can  be  sure  not  to  impose  an 
excessive  burden  on  young  people,  for  whom  we  should  actually  be  creating  sound 
foundations for economic growth and prosperity. 
Against this backdrop, I see three areas which are in need of reform, and which I would now 
like  to  examine  in  more  detail.  These  are  the  labour  market,  public  finances  and  the 
institutional framework for monetary union. 
The need for reform in the labour market 
2. 
Let me turn first, then, to the labour markets as we currently find them in a number of crisis-
hit countries. In the years before the crisis, those countries slowly but surely suffered a loss 
of  price  competitiveness.  This  development  was  of  their  own  making,  because  for  many 
years wages rose at a much faster rate than productivity, driving unit labour costs up sharply 
as a result. 
However, the hazardous nature of this development was recognised very late – too late, as it 
turned out. In the years that followed the introduction of the euro, the crisis-hit countries at 
first experienced vibrant economic growth. In fact, in many of today’s problem countries, the 
booming economy masked the fact that their competitiveness was waning. 
By contrast, ten years ago, Germany was referred to as the “sick man of Europe”, and there 
were good reasons for that sobriquet. Particularly between 2001 and 2005, German growth 
was weaker than that of just about any other euro-area country. In our economic policy staff 
paper  entitled  Ways  out  of  the  crisis  and  published  in  2003,  we,  the  Bundesbank,  wrote: 
“Germany  has  fallen  far  behind  European  partner  countries  in  terms  of  key  data  such  as 
GDP growth, employment and the government deficit.” Far-reaching reforms were initiated in 
Germany  to  tackle  this  period  of  structural  weakness.  These  included  the  Agenda  2010 
reform programme, which was controversial at the time and included the so-called “Hartz IV” 
legislation.  This  was  accompanied  by  a  ten-year  period  of  wage  moderation  running  from 
1997 to 2007, which addressed the location-related problems that faced key industries and 
the high level of entrenched unemployment at that time. 
The  situation  on  the  German  labour  market  has  improved  considerably  in  the  meantime 
thanks to the reforms that were introduced back then as well as to wage moderation. 
 
The number of persons in work has risen by 3 million since 2005 and now stands at 
an all-time high. 
The number of registered unemployed has fallen from almost 5 million in 2005 to 
less than 3 million today. 
And the average duration of unemployment has receded sharply. 
 
Germany  has  gained  considerably  in  competitiveness  over  the  past  10  years,  for  which 
reason it is now often seen as a model for reforms in the crisis-hit countries. Nevertheless, I 
do not wish to recommend Germany’s reform agenda as a “template” for other countries to 
apply directly and uncritically to their own situation. 
After all, the starting situation differs from one country to the next. Tailored, country-specific 
solutions  need  to  be  found  for  each  individual  country’s  problems.  And  yet,  some  general 
recommendations  for  the  crisis-bound  countries  may  certainly  be  gleaned  from  Germany’s 
experience with reforms. 
Some countries will ask how the unit labour costs that rose excessively in the countries that 
were later hit by the crisis might be cut – and where this has already happened. How can 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
fact 
illustrates 
in  particular 
in  Germany.  This 
they  avoid  repeating  past  mistakes in  the  form of  excessive  wage  and  salary  increases  in 
future? Because that is the only way to restore and maintain price competitiveness. 
What is more, in some countries rigid labour markets are in need of reform. In particular, the 
disturbingly  high  level  of  youth  unemployment  in  the  crisis-hit  countries  shows  the  urgent 
necessity of reforms in this area. Without reform, young people will be denied the prospects 
they desperately need after obtaining their school or university qualifications. We must make 
it easier for them to enter the labour market. 
The longer it takes them to make the transition from school or university to the labour market, 
the more difficult the transition becomes. Policy makers in Europe have launched the Youth 
Guarantee scheme, a kind of promise of employment, to combat the youth unemployment 
problem. 
Measures  of  this  kind  may  afford  short-term  relief,  but  they  will  not  create  jobs  that  are 
profitable  on  a  long-term  basis.  The  sobering  truth  is  that  the  high  level  of  youth 
unemployment in the crisis-hit countries can only be checked by radical reforms. Looking into 
the  past  we  see  that  ten  years  ago,  for  example,  youth  unemployment  in  many  southern 
European  countries  was  higher  than  their  overall  unemployment  level.  By  contrast,  in 
Germany  at  that  time  –  when  the  country  was  caught  up  in  a  phase  of  weak  growth  and 
serious  structural  problems  –  the  exact  opposite  was  true.  In  2003,  when  Germany  was 
known  as  the  sick  man  of  Europe,  German  youth  unemployment  was  lower  than  general 
level  of  unemployment 
that  youth 
unemployment  has  a  lot  to  do  with  structural  causes,  but  very  little  to  do  with  cyclical 
influences. 
What exactly is meant by structural causes? Where do the biggest problems lie? 
The three most important problem areas for the southern European labour markets may be 
outlined as follows. 
1.  
high job protection. 
What  is  undoubtedly  an  advantage  for  them,  however,  proves  to  be  a  major  obstacle  for 
young people in search of a permanent position. Consequently, young job-seekers are often 
only offered temporary  employment contracts which are easy to terminate when economic 
activity slackens. 
2.  
Legal  or  negotiated  minimum  or  entry-level  wages  for  young  workers  are  often 
relatively high in those countries. This can be an obstacle to employment. In Germany, by 
contrast, it is customary for apprentices to receive a distinctly lower starting wage. 
3.  
In many of the crisis-hit countries, vocational training is mainly school-based and is 
often  not  sufficiently  geared  to  enterprises’  needs  in  terms  of  labour  and  qualifications.  In 
countries with dual training systems such as Austria, Switzerland and Germany, on the other 
hand, youth unemployment is very low by international standards. 
While there is therefore a lot to be said for a dual training system, the countries concerned 
cannot, of course, change their system overnight. For this reason, measures to introduce a 
new  training  system  would  only  improve  the  job  prospects  for  young  people  in  the  longer 
term. 
But what about Germany? What needs to be done here? 
I will begin with the most obvious point. We should welcome young, well-trained job-seekers 
from crisis-hit countries with open arms. The result would be a win-win situation. People from 
the crisis-hit countries would find jobs here, and may possibly one day return to their home 
countries  with  the  knowledge  and  experience  they  have  acquired  here.  And  employers  in 
Germany would find the right employees for the posts they want to fill. 
The labour markets are strongly segmented, and give established, older employees 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
But,  in  Germany  as  elsewhere,  there  is  more  to  do  than  that:  we  in  Germany  need  to 
continue to tackle the ongoing challenges of globalisation, and we also need to do more to 
deal with the challenges of demographic change. We, like others, cannot sit idly by. 
Therefore, this is no time for resting on our laurels. We also have to continue to think about 
how  we  can  ensure  that  our  enterprises  can  find  sufficient  numbers  of  skilled,  motivated 
employees, given that Germany’s potential labour force is steadily shrinking for demographic 
reasons. 
 
First, then, we should try to increase labour force participation amongst women and 
older people …  
 
… and, second, we should make it easier for skilled workers to migrate to Germany.  
However, it is not just a matter of slowing the shrinkage of the labour force – what are also 
required  are  measures  to  enhance  labour  productivity.  Here  I  am  thinking,  in  particular,  of 
expenditure on education. But it is less about the level of spending on education, and more 
about the targeted use of resources, particularly in the provision of pre-school support. 
Another important challenge is in integrating the low-skilled and the long-term unemployed 
into the world of work.Looking ahead, there will also have to be a discussion about how the 
German economy can be better equipped to deal with ongoing structural shifts. If we are to 
hold  our  own  in  the  international  competitive  environment,  we  will  need  to  enable  workers 
from shrinking industries to migrate as smoothly as possible to new growth industries. That 
requires a labour market which is not just flexible on the edges. Now I have looked at the 
need for reform in the labour market, I must, of course, turn to the issue of public finances. 
The need for reform in public finances 
3. 
As a result of the financial crisis and the ensuing economic collapse, the budget deficits of 
many  euro-area  countries  expanded  significantly.  In  2010,  the  deficit  was  above  the 
threshold of 3% of gross domestic product in 14 out of the 17 countries. 
Indeed, in Ireland action to rescue the domestic banking system pushed the deficit up to just 
under  31%  of  GDP  in  2010.  The  concomitant  increase  in  the  debt  ratio  and  doubts  about 
debt  sustainability  led  the  capital  markets  to  demand  very  high  interest  rates  in  return  for 
financing Greece, Ireland and Portugal. 
These countries decided to request assistance from the other euro-area countries – though, 
of course, subject to strict austerity conditions. What is sometimes felt to be an imposition in 
the countries concerned is ultimately in the interests of the crisis-hit countries themselves. 
After all, putting off the necessary consolidation affects the younger generation. For instance, 
this generation would have to pay higher taxes to service government debts. 
Even if John F Kennedy rightly pointed out that it is the fate of every generation to live in a 
world under conditions it did not create, this should in fact be an incentive to create the best 
conditions possible for the next generation.That includes, for instance, sound public finances 
– as well as healthy economic structures, of course. For this reason, the work of reducing 
budget deficits and public debt needs to be done now. 
Thus,  the  more  stringent  European  fiscal  rules  and  national  requirements  such  as  the 
German  debt  brake  are  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  However,  they  will  only  be  useful,  of 
course, if they are actually adhered to and do not just exist on paper. I am not unaware of the 
criticism  often  levelled  at  what  is  perceived  as  “austerity  dogma”,  and  the  frequently 
expressed fears of slash-and-burn spending cuts leading to recession. In my view, there is 
no  alternative  to  sustained  consolidation  in  public  finances.  “Business  as  usual”  in  fiscal 
policy would sow doubts on the financial markets about the sustainability of public finances in 
some  of  the  crisis-hit  countries,  and  thereby  only  exacerbate  the  crisis  in  confidence. 
Consolidation and growth are not mutually exclusive in the medium term – in fact, they are 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
mutually dependent. Just as stronger growth will benefit public finances, so sustained solid 
growth  is  impossible  without  sound  government  finances.  Having  briefly  set  out  why  fiscal 
consolidation and structural reform are, in my view, the only way to go, let me make a few 
comments about the institutional framework of the euro area. 
The need for reform in the institutional framework 
4. 
The crisis has shaken the euro area to its core and the institutional structure of the monetary 
union  has  developed  cracks.  These  weak  spots  need  to  be  rectified.  It  is  crucial  that  the 
repairs are not just cosmetic. 
The monetary union needs to stand on a firm foundation if it is to be stable in the long term 
and  flourish.  Of  central  importance  to  this  is  that  appropriate  account  be  taken  of  the 
incentive system underlying all human behaviour: those who bear responsibility must answer 
for it. Economists and lawyers call this the principle of liability. 
In  other  words:  the  right  relationship  between  control  of  the  decisions  made  and  the 
concomitant  liability  for  the  consequences  thereof  is  not  only  a  constituent  element  of  any 
market economy. 
It  is  also  essential  to  the  structural  design  of  the  European  monetary  union.  In  sum,  it  is 
about those who enjoy the benefits also bearing the costs. A simple principle, but one which 
is the basis for prudent and responsible individual behaviour. 
Freedom of choice and liability belong together as a conceptual pair; they are two sides of 
the same coin. The relationship between control and liability in the monetary union has got 
out of kilter. With the crisis measures over the past three-and-a-half years, the shared liability 
of  all  member  states  for  unhealthy  fiscal  and  economic  policy  developments  in  individual 
member states has been expanded. 
Despite increasingly mutualised liability, however, the scope for mutualised control has not 
been  expanded  to  the  same  extent.  In  order  to  restore  the  balance  between  control  and 
liability, there are two basic options available. 
 
 
Either we take the step towards deeper fiscal integration, or … 
… we further develop the existing institutional framework and strengthen individual 
countries’ responsibility for themselves. 
However,  a  deeper  fiscal  union  must  not  simply  mean  extending  mutualised  liability.  This 
would  be  a  transfer  union,  without  mutualised  control,  and  would  not  have  the  requisite 
disciplinary effect on the individual countries. 
Instead, taking the creation of a deeper union seriously implies that the member states would 
transfer  national  sovereignty  to  community  level;  this  should  apply  at  least  if  individual 
countries request assistance from the community.  
In  concrete  terms,  this  means,  for  instance,  that  the  community  would  acquire  the  right  to 
make the necessary interventions. However, a transfer of authority of this kind would require 
amendments both to national constitutions and to the EU Treaty. 
I do not currently see any broad political support for this in the member states. As long as 
there  is  no  willingness  for  a  far-reaching  cession  of  sovereignty  in  fiscal  matters,  then  the 
principle of individual national responsibility enshrined in the Maastricht framework must be 
strengthened. 
The fiscal compact, which was beefed up last year, is to be welcomed in this respect. Now it 
is a question of implementing the more stringent rules and ensuring they are adhered to. 
It is the task of the European Commission to keep an effective watch on compliance with the 
rules. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
However,  it  is  not  only  the  new  fiscal  rules  which  aim  to  bolster  the  principle  of  individual 
responsibility – this is also part and parcel of the major institutional project going by the name 
of  European  banking  union.  For  me,  banking  union  entails  a  single  European  banking 
supervisory mechanism and a single European recovery and resolution mechanism. I regard 
the notion of a single deposit guarantee scheme as premature at best. Banking union, too, is 
a step in the right direction for me. And here, as elsewhere, it is now a matter of putting the 
plan  into  practice.  If  designed  properly,  the  banking  union  will  lend  considerable  added 
strength to supervision and make it more efficient; and it will help to make it easier to wind up 
banks. 
If a bank insolvency should prove unavoidable – and no supervisor in the world should be 
trying  to  ensure  no  bank  ever  exits  the  marketplace  –  then  the  purpose  of  the  European 
recovery and resolution mechanism is to enable the bank to be wound up without significant 
danger to financial stability.In a “European resolution” scenario like this, banks’ owners and 
creditors are to bear a sufficient share of the losses. European taxpayers must no longer be 
the first line of defence – they should be the last resort. 
Conclusion 
5. 
The crisis has placed a considerable burden on the population, particularly in the crisis-hit 
countries. This has affected the younger generation in particular. Far-reaching reforms are 
essential if the crisis is to be overcome in a lasting fashion. 
 
The reforms must start with the labour markets in particular. There are signs of initial 
success, but the pace of reform must not drop off. 
In addition, governments must clean up their finances. 
Finally, the institutional framework of the monetary union needs to be strengthened 
in order to enable it to cope better with future crises.  
 Admittedly, none of this is an easy task which can be completed in a short space of time. The 
problems  have  built  up  over  many  years,  and  the  path  of  reform  before  us  is  therefore 
correspondingly  long  and  stony.  The  work  by  Adam  Smith  which  I  quoted  from  at  the 
beginning of my speech is called The Wealth of Nations. To ensure that European monetary 
integration can give a lasting step-up to the wealth of Europe, what is needed is a monetary 
union which is also a stability union. The Bundesbank is doing all it can to achieve this – in 
the interests of all, including the younger generation. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
