Glenn Stevens: The United Kingdom and Australia – shared history, 
shared outlook 
Remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
British Chamber of Commerce, Sydney, 18 October 2013. 
 I thank Alexandra Rush for assistance in preparing these remarks. 
It could have been the Dutch who started European settlement in Australia. In their journeys 
to the East Indies numerous Dutch traders saw the western and northern coastlines of the 
continent  and  some  came  ashore.  But  the  conditions  were  not  hospitable  and,  finding 
nothing in the way of commodities that they could exchange for value at home, they left. 
Or it could have been the French: Jean-François de Galaup La Perouse arrived in Botany 
Bay only a few days after Arthur Phillip’s fleet in 1788. Apparently the English and French 
mariners, despite the rivalry of their countries, enjoyed cordial relations for a brief interlude 
before La Perouse sailed off into the South Pacific, never to be seen by Europeans again 
(Dyer 2009). 
But it was the English who came to start a colony. Eighteen years after James Cook landed 
at Botany Bay, the First Fleet anchored there in January 1788. After only a few days, finding 
the shallow, sandy bay too exposed and short on potable water, they sailed 20 kilometres or 
so north to Port Jackson, which they regarded as a superior location to found the settlement. 
Looking at Sydney Harbour today, it appears they made the right call. 
The  contrast  with  today’s  prosperity  could  not,  however,  have  been  more  pronounced.  In 
time the Great South Land would help to feed the world, but in 1788 the new arrivals couldn’t 
feed themselves. Geoffrey Blainey’s book The Tyranny of Distance records how the fledgling 
settlement nearly starved – and how, later in 1788, HMS Sirius was sent to a suitable supply 
station to bring back food and seed. That station was the Cape of Good Hope (now Cape 
Town,  South  Africa)  –  11,000  kilometres  away  –  a  measure  of  the  degree  of  isolation  the 
First  Fleeters  must  have  felt.  The  return  journey  took  about  seven  months,  shorter  than  it 
would  have  been  had  Captain  Hunter  not  ignored  the  advice  of  his  superiors.  After 
proceeding south from Sydney, he turned east, rather than west, so picking up a favourable 
wind for the outward journey. He sailed more miles, but in a shorter time. 
And  so  began  the  inflow  of  people,  capital,  and  know-how  that  ultimately  resulted  in  the 
modern Australian nation. Today Australia is still a nation of immigrants, where almost one-
quarter  of  our  23  million  inhabitants  were  born  somewhere  else  (ABS  2012).  Just  about 
every nationality is here and we face the “Asian Century” with the sense that – for the first 
time in our modern history – our geographical position is an economic advantage. 
For a long time, the economic and financial relationship with the UK dominated, despite the 
distance. In colonial times, the UK was by far Australia’s most prominent trading partner – in 
the 1880s the UK was the source of 70 per cent of Australia’s imports and the destination for 
up to 80 per cent of exports (Vamplew 1987). By the turn of the 20th century still more than 
half of Australia’s trade was with the UK. Though overall Australia accounted for less than 
10 per  cent  of  the  UK’s  bilateral  trade  in  the  19th  and  early  20th  centuries,  Australia  was 
among  the  UK’s  largest  sources  of  wheat  imports  and  at  times  accounted  for  more  than 
50 per cent of the UK’s wool imports (Mitchell and Deane 1962; Mitchell and Jones 1971). 
The Australian Pound was linked to the pound sterling and the Australian banks kept reserve 
balances  in  sterling  –  “London  funds”.  In  time,  Australia  created  its  own  central  banking 
arrangements,  and  by  the  1930s  the  Commonwealth  Bank  was  serving  as  a  basic  central 
bank (though without, at that time, the same full central banking mandate and obligations that 
the RBA has today). Still, the links with Britain were strong. The decision not to devalue the 
Australian  currency  with  sterling  in  1967  was  a  departure  from  previous  practice.  When 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
influence 
Australia  got  into  financial  difficulties  meeting  its  obligations  in  the  late  1920s,  Sir  Otto 
Niemeyer was despatched from the Bank of England in 1930 to offer advice to the Australian 
Government. Niemeyer’s diagnosis – that Australia had lived beyond its means, and should 
accept lower living standards in order to service its international debts – was not, shall we 
say,  universally  welcomed,  but  his 
lived  on.  The  monthly  statement  of 
Commonwealth Government finances, which he devised, was still known as the “Niemeyer” 
statement until well into the 1980s, when I was a junior economist in the Reserve Bank. 
So  the  links  were  strong.  But  of  course  the  world  was  changing. Two  world  wars  saw  the 
UK’s financial strength diminish and its weight in the global economy decline, as that of the 
United States rose. In the 1970s the UK also increasingly turned towards Europe, with EU-
directed  trade  increasing  strongly  in  the  two  decades  after  joining  the  EEC.1  By  then, 
Australian trade had long turned towards first the US, then Japan. Trade with the USA had 
been increasing steadily since the late 1940s and the USA replaced the UK as Australia’s 
largest bilateral trading partner in the mid 1960s. Similarly, trade with Japan grew rapidly and 
overtook  that  with  the  UK  by  the  1970s  (and  began  to  rival  that  with  the  US  as  well) 
(Vamplew 1987; RBA 1996). 
In the subsequent decades Australia’s trade focus continued its shift towards Asia generally 
and, in the past decade especially, towards China in particular. Today nearly three-quarters 
of our trade is with the Asia Pacific, while half of the UK’s trade is with Europe (ABS 2013b; 
ONS 2013). 
Historically, the UK was a top destination for Australians travelling abroad – “falling towards 
England” as Clive James memorably described it. In 1950 around 30 per cent of Australian 
outbound  tourists  were  destined  for  the  UK  and  Ireland.  That  had  fallen  to  6  per  cent  by 
2013. Australians’ travel to the USA has remained fairly consistent since the 1970s at around 
10 per cent. Travel to Asia increased dramatically with destinations in South-East Asia now 
accounting for more than 30 per cent of the total. The UK is, though, still a major source of 
tourism for Australia. Despite a decline since the GFC, UK citizens account for around 10 per 
cent  of  all  arrivals  in  Australia,  remaining  close  to  the  historical  (post-1950)  average  of 
around 15 per cent. These days, China is the biggest source of Australia’s inbound arrivals 
after  New  Zealand,  and  is  usually  the  fastest  growing.  Interestingly,  however,  recent  data 
show  that  in  the  year  to  August  2013,  UK  arrivals  grew  faster  than  arrivals  from  China 
(Vamplew 1987; ABS 2013c). Those picture postcards of sun and blue skies must be very 
appealing during the European winter! 
It will take a good deal more time yet for these shifts in trading relationships to be mirrored in 
the  accumulated  stock of  invested  capital. The UK’s  foreign  investment  in  Australia  during 
the  country’s  formative  years  was  large,  even  for  the  UK.  Between  1870  and  1913  about 
8 per  cent  of  Britain’s  total  foreign  investment  went  to  Australia.  As  recently  as  the  mid 
1950s, the UK’s investment in Australia dwarfed that from any other country, and was more 
than  double  the  investment  of  our  second  largest  investment  partner,  the  USA  (Vamplew 
1987; RBA 1997; Ukhov and Goetzmann 2005). As at the end of 2012 the stock of foreign 
invested capital that came via the UK amounted to almost $500 billion, and it is still growing 
(it rose at an annual average compound rate of more than 6 per cent over the past 10 years) 
(ABS 2013a).2 The stock of Chinese inbound investment has been growing at 20 per cent 
over the past decade, but is estimated at only 2 per cent of the combined total from the US 
and UK. Similarly, and perhaps more surprisingly, the stock of Australian investment abroad 
                                                
1  
IMF Direction of Trade Statistics. 
2  
It should be noted that the country level data in ABS (2013a) are based on the country of residence of the 
creditor or the debtor. Since London is an international financial hub, for some transactions the ultimate owner 
or recipient may reside in another country. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
remains concentrated in the UK and the US – though that is beginning to change now, with a 
bigger focus on Asia. 
That accumulated inbound investment has helped Australia become a very affluent nation, 
augmenting our own national savings to a significant extent. According to Angus Maddison’s 
data set, within 80 years of the founding of a penal colony on the shore of Sydney harbour, 
about a kilometre from our present location, Australia’s real GDP per head matched the UK’s 
(Maddison  2003).  Today,  Australia’s  real  GDP  per  head  of  about  $44,600,  measured  at 
purchasing power parity, is noticeably higher than the UK’s ($36,900), though for the UK that 
comparison is adversely affected by the economic weakness in recent years.3 
Such  an  outcome  is  perhaps  not  surprising  given  the  endowment  of  land  and  natural 
resources  that  Australia  has.  Opening  up  of  large  areas  of  land  for  agriculture  enabled 
Australia to enter powerfully the markets for grain and wool. Agriculture was a major source 
of wealth over most of our history (and many predict will play a big role in future). The gold 
rush  of  the  mid-nineteenth  century  helped  to  propel  the  city  of  Melbourne  in  particular  to 
globally significant size and affluence (though there were later excesses that led to a serious 
depression).  The  things  the  Dutch  and  others  couldn’t  see  under  the  ground  when  they 
surveyed  the  inhospitable  northwest  four  centuries  ago  are  the  source  of  massive  wealth 
today.  About  1.5 million  tonnes  of  iron  ore,  valued  at  about  $150 million  at  current  prices, 
leave  those  shores  each  day  in  ships  about  250  times  the  size  of  Cook’s  Endeavour.  A 
combination of those endowments with a willingness to accept international capital, including 
very  prominently  from  the  UK,  has given  Australians  the  opportunity to grow  our  economy 
quickly. 
But it  wasn’t just money, land and minerals. There are other countries with resources and 
land that do not enjoy the same incomes. And there are nations with very little in the way of 
resources or land that is wealthy. It was other things about the British heritage that were of 
higher value. 
It  turns  out  that  the  English  language  is  just  about  everyone’s  second  language,  which 
means  even  with  our  broad  accent,  we  can  communicate  with  educated  people  virtually 
everywhere and engage in commerce in most places. The common law and parliamentary 
democracy provide a foundation for the sorts of property rights and governance processes 
that  are  widely  and  rightly  regarded  as  fundamental  to  building  a  prosperous  modern 
economy.  That  property  rights  could  become  so  well  established  in  a  society  in  which  the 
“immigrants” of 1788 had no such rights is, perhaps, an ironical outcome. And we are still 
coming to terms with the property rights of those descended from the inhabitants who were 
here before 1788. 
But  the  point  is  that  this  heritage,  so  important  for  enterprise,  is  something  we  have  in 
common with the UK. One has to observe as well that Britain traded with and invested in her 
former colonies, however imperfectly, rather than simply extracting the rents. The fact that so 
many  prominent  English-speaking  former  colonies  are  counted  among  the  rich  of  the 
advanced world today is perhaps not entirely a coincidence (Grier 1997; Acemoglu, Johnson 
and Robinson 2001 and 2005).4 
In my own field of central banking, we have a good deal in common. The Bank of England 
and the Reserve Bank of Australia conduct monetary policy using the approach of a medium-
term  target  for  consumer  price  inflation,  endorsed  by  government,  with  operational 
                                                
3   World Bank, World Development Indicators, September 2013; figures are for 2012. 
4   Acemoglu et al (2001) assert that “settler colonies” (such as Australia, Canada, USA and New Zealand) have 
had better economic outcomes compared to colonies set up for resource extraction (giving the example of the 
Belgian  Congo).  Recent  literature  identifies  that  economic,  trade  and  education  policies,  as  well  as  the 
institutions set up by Britain and other colonial powers have been important to economic performance today 
(see Grier (1997) and Acemoglu et al (2005) as examples). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
independence for  the  central  bank,  and  a flexible  exchange rate. We  are  not  alone  in this  
– there are quite a few countries that follow a version of this approach these days – but the 
Bank of England and the RBA were, after the central banks of Canada and New Zealand, 
fairly early adopters of the approach. There is a very practical level of cooperation between 
the two institutions, exemplified by staff exchanges as well as contact at the highest levels. I 
well remember a phone call from Mervyn King on the morning of 15 September 2008, to ask 
how our markets were absorbing the news of the Lehman failure that had been announced 
just after trading started. (The answer was: reasonably calmly, initially, but that subsequently 
changed.) 
In the ensuing five years, Australia and the UK have both faced the challenges arising from 
the global financial crisis (GFC). For various reasons the UK has had a harder time of it, with 
bigger problems in its banking system, which  is also bigger relative to its economy, and a 
higher exposure to a troubled Europe, in contrast to our exposure to a resilient Asia. Hence, 
while Australia has experienced growth, albeit slower than average, in the years following the 
GFC, the UK suffered a painful and rather protracted recession. It seems of late though that 
there  are  more  signs  of  expansion  in  the  UK  economy,  which  will  no  doubt  be  very  much 
welcomed by citizens and policymakers alike. 
The  UK  still  warrants  the  label  “major  economy”.  Its  GDP  is  still  among  the  top  10  in  the 
world.  Perhaps  more  significantly  London  remains  easily 
the  world’s  pre-eminent 
international financial centre. New York, being in the US, boasts bigger domestic markets of 
course, but London services the world. In the councils of global governance the UK holds an 
important position – in bodies like the IMF, the BIS, the UN and others, it holds its own seat 
and acts with influence. Australia, with a third the UK’s population and about half its absolute 
GDP, as the eighteenth largest economy,5 and with a correspondingly more modest stature 
on  international  bodies,  cannot  see  itself  in  quite  the  same  way.  We  have  well-developed 
financial  markets  and  there  are  plans  to  develop  more  as  a  regional  financial  centre,  but 
realistically Sydney will never rival London. 
Nonetheless  we  have  our  contribution  to  make,  and  our  UK  partners  have  always  been 
welcoming in hearing it. And this has to be because there is so much in common today, in 
the modern world. The ties that bind are not just history. They extend beyond a fascination 
and  affection  among  Australians for the  royal family  –  strong  though  that  is  –  or the  long-
contested rivalry between “old enemies” for one of the world’s smallest sporting trophies. 
There is a real sense in which the UK and Australia share an outlook, at a very basic level, 
on how an economy should be organised and governed. They share a perspective on the 
role – and the limits – of markets in setting prices and allocating resources. They share a 
commitment  to  a  world  economy  in  which  trade  is  free  and  capital,  in  general,  is  free  to 
move.  We  have  had  some  differences  of  nuance  in  recent  years  about  matters  financial, 
reflecting mainly our differing experiences of the crisis, but in the broad the perspective of the 
role of the financial services sector in facilitating the real economy is very much shared. The 
business  communities  of  the  two  countries  have  strong  links,  evidence  for  which  is  your 
attendance here today. I’m sure that this association will continue to strengthen and mature 
over the years ahead, even though the two countries are at opposite ends of the globe. 
Perhaps the most important thing the two countries have in common is the strong belief that 
societies  prosper  when  policies  are  debated  in  an  open  way,  when  evidence,  reason  and 
judgement can be brought to bear on decisions, and where accountability and evaluation are 
key attributes of the process. 
                                                
5  
IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2013; figure is for 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
That set of commonly held values will be important for us over the year ahead, as Australia 
assumes  the  chair  of  the  G20.  What  issues  will  be  on  the  agenda?  And  how  can  the 
business communities of the two countries contribute? 
The full agenda is of course for the Australian Government to determine, in consultation with 
other G20 member governments. It will certainly have a strong focus on growth, and on the 
role of the private sector in driving growth, including its role in infrastructure investment. So I 
expect there will be significant call for engagement of the business communities of Australia 
and the UK, and other member economies, over the year ahead. I will make just two points 
here. 
First, in the area of financial regulation, there is a major agenda for reform, on which very 
good  progress  has  been  made,  but  on  which  there  is  still  much  work  to  do.  In  my  view, 
having developed a very substantial pipeline of work since 2008, our energies need now to 
be devoted to careful and systematic implementation of the already agreed reforms. That is 
not  to  preclude  new  regulatory  initiatives,  which  are  still  being  put  forward.  But  the 
implementation task arising from the pipeline of reforms already agreed, either in detail or at 
a conceptual level, is very large indeed. Of these, the most important ones are the Basel III 
package,  the  reforms  for  OTC  derivatives  trading  and  clearing,  establishing  appropriate 
oversight of “shadow banking”, and work to address the problem of “too big to fail”, including 
cross-border resolution of systemically important financial institutions. 
This  by  no  means  exhausts  the  list  of  work  streams,  but  these  are  the key  ones.  Each  is 
individually  very  demanding for  regulators  and  industry  players  alike. Taken together,  they 
are, in a word, daunting. We need to avoid reform fatigue, and to sustain our support to those 
doing the hard grind of devising the new rules and making them work. To do that, we need, 
in  my  opinion,  to  contain  the  growth  in  the  regulatory  agenda,  and  to  respond  only  to  the 
most important calls for further major work streams, at least for the next little while. 
Let me be clear this is NOT a call for current reform efforts to stop, or to be watered down. It 
is  about  ensuring  we  focus  our  finite  energies  and  resources  on  the  most  important 
problems, and getting industry to do the same. 
The second point is that the business community, both in the UK and Australia, and generally 
under the auspices of the “B20”, can contribute to meaningful progress towards the G20’s 
broader goals. That contribution will be most constructive if it can avoid being dominated by 
particular national or industry interests, if it can adopt a genuinely global perspective, if it can 
have realistic aspirations and if it can understand the constraints under which policymakers 
operate.  A  contribution  like  that  will  be  key  to  achieving  the  G20’s  goals:  an  open  world 
economy, characterised by strong, sustainable and balanced growth. I hope that Australian 
and UK business leaders, along with their peers from around the other G20 countries, will 
seize that opportunity and that responsibility. 
References 
ABS  (Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics)  (2012),  “Migration,  Australia,  2010–11”,  ABS  Cat 
No 3412.0, August. 
ABS (2013a), “International Investment Position, Australia: Supplementary Statistics, 2012”, 
ABS Cat No 5352.0, Tables 2 and 5. 
ABS  (2013b),  “International  Trade  in  Goods  and  Services,  Australia,  Aug  2013”,  ABS  Cat 
No ABS 5368.0, Tables 14a and 14b. 
ABS (2013c), “Overseas Arrivals and Departures, Australia, Aug 2013”, ABS Cat No 3401.0, 
Tables 5 and 9. 
Acemoglu  D,  S  Johnson  and  JA  Robinson  (2001),  “The  Colonial  Origins  of  Comparative 
Development:  An  Empirical 
Investigation”,  The  American  Economic  Review,  91(5),  
pp 1369–1401. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Acemoglu D, S Johnson and JA Robinson (2005), “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of 
Long-Run  Growth”,  in  P  Aghion  and  SN  Durlauf  (eds),  Handbook  of  Economic  Growth, 
Vol 1A, Chapter 6, Elsevier BV. 
Blainey  G  (1983),  The  Tyranny  of  Distance:  How  Distance  Shaped  Australia’s  History, 
Macmillan, Melbourne. 
Dyer  C  (2009),  The  French  Explorers  and  Sydney,  University  of  Queensland  Press, 
Brisbane. 
Grier  RM  (1997),  “Colonial  Legacies  and  Economic  Growth”,  Public  Choice,  Vol  98,  
pp 317–335. 
Maddison A (2003), The World Economy: Historical Statistics, Development Centre Studies, 
OECD Publishing. 
Mitchell  BR  and  Deane  P  (1962),  Abstract  of  British  Historical  Statistics,  Cambridge 
University Press, London. 
Mitchell BR and Jones HG (1971), Second Abstract of British Historical Statistics, Cambridge 
University Press, London. 
ONS  (Office  for  National  Statistics)  (2013),  “UK  Trade,  June  2013”,  Statistical  Bulletin, 
August, pp 1–51. 
RBA  (Reserve  Bank  of  Australia)  (1997),  “Australian  Economic  Statistics  1949–50  to  
1996–97”, Reserve Bank of Australia Occasional Paper No 8. 
Ukhov A and WN Goetzmann (2005), “British Investment Overseas 1870–1913: A Modern 
Portfolio Theory Approach”, NBER Working Paper No 11266. 
Vamplew  W  (1987),  Australians:  Historical  Statistics,  Fairfax,  Sync  &  Weldon  Associates, 
Sydney. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
