H R Khan: Payment systems in India – reflecting on some recent trends 
and future challenges 
Inaugural address by Mr H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
International  Seminar  on  “Adoption  of  ISO  20O22  in  RTGS”,  held  at  the  College  of 
Agricultural Banking, Pune, 30 September 2013. 
 The  speaker  acknowledges  the  contributions  of  Ms.  Nilima  Ramteke,  Smt.  Nikhila  Koduri  and  Shri  Jayakumar 
Yarasi of the Reserve Bank of India. 
1.  On  behalf  of  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  it  is  my  privilege  to  welcome  all  the  distinguished 
participants  to  India,  to  the  city  of  Pune  and  to  the  College  of  Agricultural  Banking  –  a 
premier  training  establishment  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  focussed  on  rural  and  co-
operative  financial  sector  development  besides  general  banking  with  emphasis  on 
technology  led  business  processes.  It  is  also  a  matter  of  great  privilege  for  me  to  be 
inaugurating this important International Seminar on Adoption of ISO 20022 in RTGS. 
2.  We  are  all  aware  of  the  importance  of  language  in  communication.  Language  is  the 
medium  or  a  tool  that  carries  information  from  sender  to  receiver  and  the  efficacy  of 
communication depends upon the efficacy of the language. The oft quoted example “hang 
him  not  leave  him”,  where  a  simple  change  in  the  placement  of  a  comma  could  decide 
between life and death, emphatically points to the criticality of effective communication. As 
much  as  it  is  important  in  our  social  lives,  the  language  is  also  very  critical  in  financial 
transactions where even seemingly small lapses could lead to huge implications. There is a 
great  need  for  a  robust  financial  messaging  system  which  could  serve  as  a  common 
language  of  communication  in  payment  systems  and  I  am  sure  ISO  20022,  which  is  the 
focus of the Seminar, would help in building a safe and secure payment system through a 
commonly  understood  messaging  medium  in  structured  formats  (syntax)  and  meanings 
(semantics). 
3.  As  you  are  aware,  the  Reserve  Bank  of India  is  in  an  advanced  stage  of  adoption  and 
implementation of ISO 20022 in its Next Gen RTGS. We have adopted this standard as this 
is  based  on  Extensible  Markup  Language  (XML),  a  technical  solution  that  constructs  a 
document according to certain rules and makes it legible for both computers and end users. 
XML does not use a fixed definition, which is an important advantage because it allows for 
the  ISO  20022  standard  to  be  expanded  or  changed  in  the  future  for  supporting  new 
developments. From a system point of view, XML messages are actually easier to work with, 
than  other  formats.  For  most  contemporary  systems,  XML  is  the  default  format  when 
exporting data. It is, therefore, easier to create a file in this format. Hence for our RTGS, it 
was a natural choice. 
4. I am sanguine that this Seminar would provide a common platform for sharing experiences 
across  various jurisdictions  and  will  be  a  learning  experience for  each  one  of  us.  Reserve 
Bank is, perhaps one of the few, if not the first, Central Banks to adopt ISO 20022 messaging 
standards for RTGS. This is the result of a successful collaboration and hard-work of officers 
of Reserve Bank, banks and other stake holders in the country. 
Adoption of technology in clearing operations: from manual to mainframe 
5.  India  has  made  rapid  strides  in  adoption  and  leveraging  of  technology,  especially  in 
financial sector. A couple of decades ago, our banking and payment systems were driven by 
manual processes – we had clearing houses at district levels where bankers would sit across 
tables  and  conduct  the  cheque  clearing  operations.  With  the  advent  of  Core  Banking 
Solutions  (CBS)  and  other  innovative  measures  which  leveraged  technology,  clearing 
operations  have  been  computerised  and  a  wide  array  of  products,  such  as,  MICR  based 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
clearing, Speed Clearing, etc. have been introduced. Another innovative clearing mechanism 
is our grid based Cheque Truncation Project (CTS) which is operational in three grid centres, 
viz., New Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai. As you would appreciate, the grid based CTS clearing 
operations are heavily dependent on technology and has little scope of manual intervention. 
Further,  in  order  to  bring  homogeneity  in  the  security  features  of  cheques  and  reduce 
incidence  of  frauds  in  the  CTS  clearings,  new  cheque  standards  –  CTS  2010  have  been 
implemented.  Over  the  years  a  number  of  electronic  products  have  gained  popularity. 
Similarly,  there  have  been  a  number  of  developments  in  manner  of  processing  electronic 
payments viz., moved from ECS (local) to NECS (centralised). The other electronic payment 
systems which have gained popularity are the NEFT and RTGS. 
Encouraging electronic payments 
6. Reserve Bank remains committed towards providing a safe, efficient, accessible, inclusive, 
interoperable  and  authorised  payment  and  settlement  systems  for  the  country.  Today,  our 
payment systems are driven by demands of convenience and ease of use & access. This 
necessitates  convergence  of  e-payment  products  by  leveraging  on  innovation,  capabilities 
and  integration  of  various  systems  through  unified  solution  architecture  and  technology. 
Payment  System  Vision  Document  2012–15  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  articulates  the 
orientation  of  overall  regulatory  policy  stance  towards  promoting  a  less  cash/less  paper 
society, the “green” initiative which is also echoed by the Reserve Bank’s IT Vision document 
2011–17.  This  places  greater  emphasis  on  the  use  of  electronic  payment  products  and 
services that can be accessed anywhere and anytime by all at affordable prices. 
7.  The  growing  volumes  of  electronic  payments  reflect  customer  acknowledgement  of 
convenience and trust. Electronic payments, whether Person to Person (P2P) or Person to 
Business (P2B), generally take one of the two forms – online payments carried out through 
internet,  and,  proximity  payments  facilitated  by  the  use  of  cards  (card  payments).  Internet 
and mobile banking channels are very widely used and are increasingly becoming popular. 
These channels are used by customers for both account information services and payment 
initiation  services.  Data  collected  from  a  few  banks  indicates  that  substantial  number  of 
customers are registering for internet banking facility and there has been a significant growth 
in the usage of internet banking for funds transfer through NEFT and RTGS. 
8. The RTGS system, implemented in March 2004, has become the backbone for settlement 
of  large  value  payments.  In  2012–13,  RTGS  handled  68.52  million  transactions  of  value 
Rs.1026  trillion  with  a  growth  rate  of  24%  in  volume  terms.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  in  the 
process  of  implementing  the  Next  Generation  RTGS  (NG-RTGS)  built  on  ISO  20022 
standards with advanced liquidity management functions, future date functionality, scalability, 
etc. NG-RTGS has several functions for banks to manage their liquidity position. 
9.  The  growing  popularity  and  acceptance  of  the  NEFT  system  for  the  interbank  funds 
transfers  is  reflected  in  the  volume  and  value  handled  by  the  system,  which  increased  by 
74% (volume) and 62% (value) in the year 2012–13 compared to the year 2011–12. NEFT 
handled record volume of 47.61 million transactions during August 2013. Given that NEFT 
has become a flagship remittance system in the country catering to the needs of individuals, 
corporates and governments alike, many efficiency enhancements have also been made in 
the system. Hence, NEFT at present processing 12 batches on weekdays and six batches on 
Saturdays. With the introduction of the feature of continuous release of credit messages, the 
participants have been given additional time window to process the transactions. 
10. Similarly, there has also been a surge in the customers registered for mobile banking. 
The  mobile  payments  in  2012–13  have  reached  53.30  million  in  volume  terms  and 
₹ 59.90 billion  in  value  terms.  The  growth  rate  in  2012–13  has  been  108%  in  volume  and 
229% in value terms. The overall share of mobile payments in the payment system, however, 
is minuscule. Given the huge potential of mobile banking to be game changer, Reserve Bank 
of  India  has  constituted  a  Technical  Committee  on  Mobile  Banking,  chaired  by  Shri  B. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Sambamurthy, Director, IDRBT. The Committee will examine the challenges faced by banks 
in  increasing  the  usage  of  mobile  banking  including  the  usage  of  USSD  (Unstructured 
Supplementary Service Data) channel. The Committee will examine various options including 
the feasibility of using encrypted SMS based applications for funds transfer that can run on 
any type of handset for expansion of mobile banking in the country. 
11.  The  volume  of  electronic  transactions  has  increased  to  1.7  billion  in  2012–13  from 
1.2 billion  in  2011–12,  indicating  a  growth  of36  per  cent.  The  total  value  of  electronic 
transactions has increased to ₹ 1212.37 trillion in 2012–13 from ₹ 967.52 trillion in 2011–12 
registering a growth of 25.31 per cent. In the year 2012–13, the share of electronic payments 
in the overall non-cash payments, at 56.4 per cent, has surpassed the paper based payment 
systems. During the previous year (2011–12) the electronic payments represented 48.2 per 
cent of over-all non-cash payments. The trend clearly indicates rising consumer acceptance 
for the e-modes of payments. On the flipside, however, the growing importance and usage of 
electronic payments has increased the vulnerability towards risks and threat of frauds. 
Securing electronic payments 
12. In 2011, a Working Group on Information Security, Electronic Banking, Technology Risk 
Management  and  Cyber  Frauds  (Chairman:  G  Gopalakrishna)  made  comprehensive 
recommendations for enhancing security in internet banking. The recommendations included 
authentication methodologies, changes in mobile phone numbers, beneficiary management 
aspects,  etc.  Based  on  these  recommendations,  instructions  have  been  issued  to  banks 
offering  electronic  banking  services  to  their  customers.  Taking  cognisance  of  the  recent 
developments and attendant unpredictability of cyber-attacks and vulnerability of electronic 
payments to misuse, Reserve Bank instructed banks to introduce certain minimum checks 
and balances to mitigate the impact of such attacks. Banks have also been instructed to put 
in place customer induced caps on value of transactions, limit on number of beneficiaries to 
be added in a day, sending alerts when beneficiary is added, velocity check on number of 
transactions,  introduction  of  additional  factor  of  authentication,  etc.  Banks  have  also  been 
instructed to consider feasibility of using digital signatures for large value payments in RTGS 
and  capture  of  IP  address  as  an  additional  validation  check.  The  Reserve  Bank  has 
mandated  additional  factor  of  authentication  for  all  Card  Not  Present  (CNP)  transactions. 
Several measures have already been initiated to secure the Card Present (CP) transactions 
through  implementation  of  recommendations  of  the  “Working  Group  on  Securing  Card 
Present transactions” (Chairperson: Gowri Mukherjee) in a time bound manner. 
13.  It  becomes  the  responsibility  of  all  the  stakeholders  to  ensure  timely  completion  of  all 
tasks  mandated  towards  fool-proofing  the  ecosystem  for  electronic  payments.  One  of  the 
measures for securing card present transaction is implementation of UKPT (Unique Key Per 
Terminal)  or  DUKPT  (Derived  Unique  Key  Per  Transaction)  and  TLE  (Terminal  Line 
Encryption)  to  secure  the  technology  infrastructure.  While  most  banks  have  implemented 
these measures, 100 per cent achievement is likely to materialise soon leading to a safe and 
secure environment for electronic payment systems in our country. 
14.  While  it  is  critical  that  technological  measures  are  put  in  place,  what  is  equally,  if  not 
more,  important  is  creating  awareness  amongst  the  consumers/customers  using  these 
electronic payment methods. Reserve Bank has initiated a series of awareness programmes 
– e-BAAT (Electronic Banking Awareness Training) alongwith banks and other stakeholders. 
At  the  same  time,  serious  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  related  issues  of  consumer 
protection,  grievance  redressal  mechanisms,  and  issues  of  consumer  liability  in  case  of 
negligence or complicity in the event of unauthorised/fraudulent transactions. 
Challenges in Indian payment systems ecology 
15. There are several issues which need to be addressed to make the electronic payment 
system infrastructure in India more efficient and integrated; the crucial ones being building 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
dexterity  of  payment  systems  through  standardisation,  interoperability,  and  creation  of 
common infrastructure. 
16. In India, there are different types of messaging solutions and formats specific to each of 
the  payment  systems.  Consequently,  banks/system  participants  are  required  to  develop 
application  specific  APIs  (Application  Program  Interface)  to  integrate  with  these  payment 
systems. In the current system, however, it may be a challenge to achieve portability, i.e., a 
seamless switchover in the case of failure of one payment system into another. It is in this 
context  that  adoption  of  common  message  format  and  messaging  solution,  which  is  the 
theme  of  this  Conference,  assumes  a  lot  of  importance  in  developing  portability  and 
interoperability. 
17. We  have  taken  several  steps  to  promote  interoperability  and  development  of  common 
infrastructure.  ATMs  in  India  are  national  infrastructure  and  are  connected  through  ATM 
networks. We have permitted interoperability of Business Correspondents. The micro-ATMs 
used by the BCs have been standardised to facilitate interoperability. There is, however, a lot 
of scope for further developments, such as, linking the non-bank payment systems with the 
inter-bank payment networks, etc. We are working towards putting in place GIRO payment 
systems which will integrate common infrastructure for bill payments. 
18. We recognise the importance of standardisation, portability and interoperability which will 
not  only  lead  to  harmonisation  of  payment  processing  across  systems  but  also  will  bring 
several  benefits.  Convergence  of  various  payment  systems  could  make  payments  truly 
channel agnostic. 
Summing up 
19. Before I conclude, I intend to flag a few issues for you all to discuss and deliberate: 
• 
Will  the  implementation  of  the  ISO  20022  message  standards  reduce  the 
complexities  and  compress  application  development  time  required  to  manage  our 
payment architecture? 
Will  adapting  to  such  global  standard  also  enable  us  to  substantially  increase 
security and improve internal processes? 
Will upgrading the payment architecture to comply with ISO 20022, also allow other 
businesses to realise the efficiency gains? 
Further,  how  can  implementation  of  global  ISO  20022  message  standards  in  the 
BFSI 
forward 
standardisation, automation and dematerialisation in other sectors? 
(Banking,  Financial  services  and 
Insurance)  areas  drive 
   With these thoughts, I would like to wish you all the very best for productive deliberations in 
this important Seminar. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
