Mario Draghi: The euro area economy – current prospects and 
challenges ahead 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Economic Club 
of New York, New York, 10 October 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be here with you today and I would like to take this opportunity to talk about 
what is happening in Europe right now. 
As you know, the euro area as a whole is undergoing a process of fundamental reform. The 
overarching  objective  is  to  lay  the  foundation  for  recovery  and  more  jobs,  foster  financial 
stability and fiscal sustainability and enhance international competitiveness for the benefit of 
all parts of the economy and wider society. 
Reform will be a lengthy process but while it is far from complete, perhaps for the first time 
we are seeing signs of significant progress. 
National policy-makers in Europe are able to focus a little less on short-term difficulties and a 
little more on their longer-term responsibilities to strengthen the resilience of their domestic 
economies while developing their growth potential. 
And the monetary policy that we at the European Central Bank (ECB) are implementing will 
accompany  the  reform  process  by  maintaining  the  degree  of  accommodation  that  is  most 
appropriate, given our economic outlook and the risks that surround it. 
The economic situation and outlook 
So  let  me  start  with  an  overview  of  the  current  situation  and  outlook  for  the  euro  area 
economy. 
Recent data releases support our baseline outlook of a nascent economic recovery over the 
coming months. Following six quarters of negative output growth, euro area real GDP rose 
by 0.3% in the second quarter of this year. 
Although more recent data has pointed to a fairly slow start in the third quarter, survey-based 
confidence indicators give some comfort that the turning point in economic activity that we 
saw earlier in the year is not reversed. 
Taken together, incoming information has confirmed the growth outlook from the September 
ECB staff projections. While these projections still see real GDP shrinking by 0.4% this year, 
a positive growth rate of 1% is expected for 2014. 
But the pace of recovery is going to be subdued and uneven across countries for as long as 
it is meaningful for us to look into the future. The unemployment rate, currently standing at 
12.1%, remains unacceptably high, and the risks around the outlook continue to be tilted to 
the downside. 
In keeping with the broad-based weakness in aggregate demand, underlying price pressures 
remain subdued as well. Annual euro area headline inflation is projected to reach 1.5% this 
year, before declining to 1.3% in 2014. 
These  levels  are  historically  very  moderate,  and  remain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  range  of 
values  that  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  has  identified  as  consistent  with  the  ECB’s 
quantitative definition of price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
That  said,  inflation  expectations  continue  to  be  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of 
maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. And the risks to the 
outlook for price developments are expected to be broadly balanced. 
Finally, monetary and, in particular, credit dynamics remain weak. The annual growth rate of 
loans to the private sector has remained well in negative territory; and the pace of contraction 
has actually accelerated over recent period. 
Certainly, weak loan dynamics can largely be explained by the current stage of the business 
cycle  but  we  have  to  be  attentive  to  alleviate  structural  and  supply-side  factor  that  may 
hamper credit provision. The significant improvement in the funding situation of banks since 
the summer of 2012 has partly offset supply-side restrictions. But it will be some time before 
the more permissive funding conditions faced by many banks will be turned into an active 
spur for credit creation. 
to 
fragile 
respond 
the  still 
this  background,  how  should  policy-makers 
The strategy of euro area policy-makers 
Against 
macroeconomic recovery? 
In my view, we need a three-pronged strategy: 
First,  monetary  policy  has  to  remain  consistently  supportive  of  the  baseline  outlook  and 
mitigate the risks that surround it. Our price stability mandate is sufficiently precise to keep 
us concentrated on that mission. 
But preserving monetary accommodation is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the 
recovery to take hold. 
A  second  essential  ingredient  is  that  countries  continue  the  adjustment  of  their  domestic 
policies in a way that removes structural impediments to their economic potential and fosters 
long-term fiscal sustainability. 
Monetary  accommodation  can  accompany  and  facilitate  such  regime  shift  in  economic 
policy. But we know it can never replace it. 
Third and equally important, Europe has to continue the reform process in its banking sector. 
Sound finance is part and parcel of a dynamic economy and banks remain a major conduit of 
finance  in  the  euro  area.  Hence,  we  must  establish  conditions  that  align  incentives  of 
individual financial institutions with those of society. 
Let me explain the measures that European policy-makers are taking in each of these areas: 
monetary policy; fiscal and structural adjustment; and banking reform. 
Monetary policy 
Let me start with monetary policy. 
As  you  know,  the  Treaty  clearly  prioritises  price  stability  as  the  ECB’s  primary  objective. 
Within this disciplining framework, we tailor our policy response to the challenges at hand. 
In response to the events of the past six years, we’ve taken swift and resolute action. We cut 
the main policy rates to record lows. We provided funding support to euro area banks over 
long time horizons. And we counteracted and removed unwarranted fears of a breakup of the 
euro area. 
In July this year, we again expanded our toolkit to protect the nascent recovery from the risk 
that it could be choked off prematurely by an unwelcome restriction in monetary conditions. 
To  that  effect,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  adopted  explicit  communication  on  how  it 
expects its key interest rates to evolve in the future. In particular, we have communicated our 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
expectation that the key interest rates will remain at present or lower levels for an extended 
period of time. 
This expectation is based on our assessment that the subdued inflation outlook extends into 
the  medium  term,  given  the  broad-based  weakness  in  the  real  economy  and  subdued 
monetary dynamics. 
What was the rationale for adopting “forward guidance”? 
In  June  and  July,  we  observed  substantial  volatility  in  money  market  rates.  The  pricing  of 
term interbank credit in the money market – the first stage of the transmission of monetary 
policy  to  the  broader  economy  –  had  become  increasingly  divorced  from  euro  area 
fundamentals. 
Markets tended to  overreact to  news  that  was  either  not  directly  relevant  to  the  euro  area 
macroeconomic outlook or simply confirmed our baseline scenario. 
Against  this  background,  our  forward  guidance  aimed  at  better  aligning  money  market 
conditions with our policy intentions. 
In interpreting our forward guidance, there are three essential elements. 
First, it acknowledges the scope for further cuts in our key interest rates. In other words, the 
adoption of forward guidance does not imply that we’ve reached the effective lower bound. 
Indeed,  the  opposite  is  the  case:  the  Governing  Council  has  unanimously  agreed  to 
incorporate an easing bias into our forward guidance that explicitly provides for the possibility 
of further rate reductions, should the volatility in money market conditions return to the levels 
observed in the early summer. 
Second,  our  forward  guidance  is  specifically  tailored  to  the  ECB’s  mandate  and  monetary 
policy strategy: the path of the policy rates remains conditional on the outlook for inflation; 
and  it  will  be  reviewed  over  time  against  the  analytical  framework  underlying  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy strategy. 
This means that we assess whether the medium-term outlook for inflation remains subdued 
against  two  types  of  metrics.  On  the  one  hand,  economic  indicators  pointing  to  persistent 
slack  in  the  real  economy.  On  the  other  hand,  monetary  indicators  pointing  to  persistent 
subdued dynamics in money and credit. 
The  third  element  of  our  forward  guidance  is  that,  by  confirming  our  policy  framework,  it 
refocuses attention on what matters most for our monetary policy, namely the medium-term 
inflation  outlook  in  the  euro  area.  On  our  side,  it  induces  the  sort  of  prudent  language  in 
communicating  about  the  economy  and  the  type  of  balanced  and  steady  response  to 
economic news that is needed in the exceptional circumstances in which we currently have 
to steer our monetary policy course. 
The observed decline in market uncertainty about future short-term rates indicates that our 
forward guidance has helped to anchor market expectations. 
Going  forward,  we  will  carefully  assess  developments  in  money  markets  and  liquidity 
conditions. We have to ensure that interest rate expectations remain firmly anchored around 
a path that does not add to downside risks to the recovery. 
Thus, our monetary policy stance will continue to be geared towards maintaining the degree 
of accommodation warranted by the outlook for price stability and promoting stable money 
market conditions. It thereby provides support to a gradual recovery in economic activity. 
Fiscal consolidation and competitiveness 
But preserving monetary policy accommodation is not sufficient in itself for the recovery to 
take hold and become self-sustaining. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
This  leads  me  to  the  second  element  of  the  policy  response:  repairing  the  fiscal  and 
structural problems that hold back individual euro area economies. 
A painful lesson from the last few years is that we all underestimated the destructive potential 
that myopic national policies could exert on the euro area’s collective body, and on the world 
economy as a whole. 
It is time to remove the institutional shortcomings that allowed imbalances to build up in the 
national economies and escalate into systemic threats in the first place. 
In the euro area, two such shortcomings were particularly consequential. 
First, the EU fiscal rules were weakly enforced and, as such, incapable of promoting prudent 
fiscal policies in times of favourable economic conditions. Second, there was no mechanism 
to prevent and correct macroeconomic imbalances within the EU. 
This resulted in an incentive vacuum. 
Rather  than  exploiting  the  advantages  of  monetary  union  for  a  modernisation  of  domestic 
economies, several countries simply delayed necessary adjustments. 
And the elimination of exchange rate fluctuations and the levelling-off of spreads in sovereign 
borrowing  costs  that  preceded  the  downturn  deactivated  the  market  forces  that  previously 
had disciplined macroeconomic policies at the country level. 
European policy-makers are addressing these issues. 
Due  to  a  recent  strengthening  of  the  EU  fiscal  rules,  Member  States  now  face  stronger 
incentives to adopt sound budgetary policies. 
Moreover, a new “Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure” has been established at EU level. 
It  requires  governments  to  adopt  competitiveness-enhancing  policies  and  tackle  potential 
sources of financial instability in their domestic economies. 
Reflecting  this  reform  momentum  at  the  European  level,  governments  are  tackling 
imbalances  in  their  domestic  economies.  They  are  implementing  reforms  to  reverse  the 
misguided policies of the past and to create sustainable long-term growth. 
Progress is steady and the data increasingly show that governments are heading in the right 
direction. 
Euro  area  countries  have  cut  their  fiscal  deficit  ratios  by  half  since  their  peak  in  2009. 
Excluding interest payments, euro area Member States on aggregate are expected to run a 
small surplus by the end of this year. 
This is clearly in contrast to other industrial economies, such as the US or Japan, which last 
year still recorded primary deficits of 6% and 8% of GDP, respectively. 
We  are  also  seeing  some  noteworthy  improvements  in  competitiveness  and  external 
positions. 
The countries under full EU-IMF programmes have seen their unit labour costs fall by more 
than  10%  since  2008,  relative  to  the  euro  area  average.  Their  current  accounts  have 
improved by around 8% of GDP since then. 
In short, there is progress towards more solid economic fundamentals in the euro area. 
But maintaining the current momentum of reform is essential for ensuring stability in the euro 
area. 
Bank balance sheets and banking union 
Finally, a sustainable recovery requires healthy financial institutions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We have seen much progress in the banking sector of the euro area. Since the beginning of 
the financial crisis in 2007 euro area banks have raised around €225 billion of fresh capital 
and another €275 billion has been injected by governments. All in all, this amounts to more 
than 5% of euro area GDP. As a result, the average Core Tier 1 ratio of the largest euro area 
banks currently stands well above 11% and the majority of euro area banks already comply 
with the minimum capital requirements of the fully implemented Basel III framework. 
Furthermore, in countries under financial assistance programmes, problematic legacy assets 
have  been  removed  from  banks’  balance  sheets  to  ensure  that  they  will  no  longer  curb 
banks’ lending to profitable businesses. 
More progress is on its way in terms of the institutional architecture. Europe’s Economic and 
Monetary Union (EMU) will be complemented by a European banking union. 
Last month, the European Parliament cleared the way for the single supervisory mechanism, 
which tasks the ECB with overseeing major parts of the European banking system. 
By  placing  this  responsibility  with  an  independent  institution  at  European  level,  the  new 
supervisory  mechanism  will  allow  for  more  stringent  and  consistent  supervision.  This  will, 
ultimately, afford an earlier identification of financial risk – in both individual institutions and 
the financial sector as a whole. 
Looking  forward,  two  objectives  need  to  be  addressed:  First,  we  need  to  create  full 
transparency  about  the  risks  on  banks’  balance  sheets.  And,  second,  we  need  to  align 
investors’ incentives with those of society. 
A  comprehensive  balance  sheet  assessment  will  be  a  crucial  preparatory  step  before  we 
begin our new supervisory task in autumn 2014. This will serve to strengthen transparency 
and  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  the  possible  emergence  of  problem  banks  in  the  early  days  of 
operation  of  the  new  supervisory  mechanism.  This  balance  sheet  assessment,  to  be 
conducted by the ECB together with national supervisors and an independent third party, will 
consist of a supervisory risk assessment and a thorough asset quality review that in turn will 
be  an  input  for  a  stress  test  to  be  jointly  carried  out  with  the  European  Banking  Authority 
(EBA). The three elements combined will ensure a comprehensive assessment, identifying 
remaining risks on banks’ balance sheets. 
To  strengthen  incentives,  the  institutional  architecture  will  be  augmented  by  the  single 
resolution  mechanism.  As  a  first  step  to  overcoming  the  existing  problems  of  incentive 
incompatibility,  harmonised  rules  and  procedures  for  bank  recovery  and  resolution  are 
currently  being  developed  at  European  level.  These  harmonised  frameworks  should  be 
implemented at national level as soon as possible. 
But to ensure a fully consistent and effective application of these rules, their implementation 
should  be  placed  within  the  remit  of  an  independent  authority  that  reinforces  the  new 
supervisory framework at a European level. 
To that effect, the EU’s institutional architecture should be augmented by a single resolution 
mechanism that executes bank resolution in a timely and impartial manner and formulates its 
decisions from a clear, encompassing European perspective. 
By  enhancing  transparency  and  incentive  compatibility,  the  combination  of  the  single 
supervisory  mechanism  and  the  single  resolution  mechanism  will  help  Europe  return  to  a 
situation  in  which  investment  decisions  will  be  based  on  business  prospects,  not  on 
geographical location. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  recovery  remains  in  its  infancy.  Given  the  prolonged  build-up  of  macroeconomic 
imbalances in the past, we have to be prepared for a protracted and anaemic process in the 
future. 
Yet we should also not exaggerate the euro area’s challenges. While the unemployment rate 
has increased more in the euro area than in the US during the crisis, the employment rate in 
the US has fallen further than in the euro area, which makes the figures difficult to compare. 
Moreover, the euro area has a strategy to return to sustainable growth and employment, and 
that strategy is being executed. What is essential is that all policy-makers in the euro area 
play  their  part  and  stay  the  course.  The  rewards  that  will  result  from  the  reform  of  our 
economic institutions cannot be overestimated. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
