Mugur Isărescu: The Transatlantic renaissance – Romania as a faithful 
partner and ambitious player 
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the 
Conference “The Transatlantic Renaissance: Romania as a Faithful Partner and Ambitious 
Player”, Bucharest, 9 December 2013. 
 Prime Minister Ponta, 
Mr. Kennedy, 
Your Excellences, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for the National Bank of Romania, and an honor for me and the board 
members, to welcome such a distinguished audience. I salute the presence of Victor Ponta, 
Prime  Minister  of  Romania,  who  will  be  the  keynote  speaker  today  and  that  of  Craig 
Kennedy,  the  President of  German  Marshall  Fund  of the  United  States.  Allow  me  to greet 
their Excellences, members of the diplomatic corps, as well as the other notable guests who 
represent an important array of successful domains of activity. 
A special welcome to Mircea Geoană, President of Aspen Institute Romania and his team of 
young, talented and hardworking professionals. 
Today’s gathering has a challenging topic: “The Transatlantic Renaissance: Romania as a 
Faithful Partner and Ambitious Player”. 
Here,  at  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  we  take  pride  in  having  always  been  a  forum  for 
debating, in an open and profound manner, the themes and trends defining our age. Thus, it 
is the perfect venue to host such a conference as this one, which encourages individuals to 
reflect  on  ideals  and  ideas  that  define  good  society  through  leadership,  dialogue, 
entrepreneurship and regional stability. 
I  have  read  two  papers  prepared  by  Aspen  Institute  and  the  German  Marshall  Fund:  the 
report  “Dialogues  on  the  national  interest.  Recommendations  of  public  policies”  and  the 
program “East-West Gateway”. They generate the object of the forthcoming debates. 
Allow  me  to  make  some  remarks  regarding  the  national  interest  and  the  transformations 
within the financial sector that are currently taking place in Europe. 
The national interest goes beyond its economic dimension, although it is also true that the 
smooth  functioning  of  the  economy  is  not  only  an  objective  per  se,  but  also  a  means  to 
achieve  the  other  objectives  subordinated  to  the  national  interest.  As  any  other  European 
central  bank  we  are  focused  on  price  and  financial  stability.  Obviously,  monetary  and 
financial  stability  is  an  essential  ingredient  of  economic  performance.  This  is  all  the  more 
relevant for a catching-up economy, such as Romania. On the one hand, progress towards 
convergence is impossible to imagine without capital accumulation from local and external 
sources alike, and it cannot be achieved in the absence of a viable financial system. On the 
other  hand,  investments  imply  a  long-term  outlook,  whereas  high  and  volatile  inflation  or 
fragile financial sector hampers long-term planning. 
Moreover,  the  recent  global  crisis  has  shown  that  it  is  far  cheaper  to  prevent  financial 
instability than to rescue financial institutions in distress. Financial crises are even costlier in 
emerging  economies  than  in  industrialized  countries,  as  their  ability  to  bear  such  costs  is 
severely  constrained  by  spillovers  between  the  banking  system  and  sovereigns  and  the 
related vicious circle of escalating risk premia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The crisis has also revealed that effective policy remedies have a transnational perspective. 
In  the  European  Union  the  idea  of  a  Banking  Union  emerged  as  a  solution  to  break  the 
above-mentioned  vicious  circle,  thus  putting  a  stop  to  financial  fragmentation  and  helping 
restore the normal capital flow from the core EU countries to the periphery. In addition, the 
Banking Union has the merit of removing the contradiction between the pan-European nature 
of banking activity and keeping banking supervisory and resolution tasks at the national level. 
In  this  context,  Romania’s  membership  in  the  Banking  Union  comes  as  a  natural  choice, 
given that euro area banks hold three fourths of the total assets of the Romanian banking 
system and two thirds of its capital. 
As  was  the  case  with  EU  membership,  the  national  interest  may  be  better  served  in  the 
banking  sector  by  relinquishing  some  of  the  national  policy  prerogatives.  In  the  context  of 
such a high financial integration, preserving the banking supervisory powers at national level 
would only entail suboptimal results, due to the limited access to information on parent banks 
and  the  lack  of  a  cross-border  perspective.  Furthermore,  Romania’s  membership  in  the 
Banking Union would ensure the country has an active voice in the decision-making process; 
as such decisions would affect it anyway, regardless of its membership status. 
I will end here my brief comment. 
Once  again,  we  take  pride  in  hosting  what  will  be  a  substantial  dialogue  about  the  role 
Romania  will  take  within  the  transatlantic  renaissance  as  a  faithful  partner  and  ambitious 
player. 
I wish you fruitful discussions and to enjoy the Leadership Awards and Gala dinner tonight, 
hosted in the beautiful Marble Hall of the Old Palace of the National Bank of Romania. Built 
in the late half of the 19th century, following the French architectural style, it has harbored 
the  central  bank  from  the  moment  it  was  founded.  The  National  Bank  of  Romania  is  the 
16th oldest central bank in the world, established 33 years before the Federal Reserve. 
I do remember, two years ago, on December, 5th, when Aspen Institute Romania celebrated 
five  years  of  operations,  I  was  presented  with  the  “Values-based  Leadership”  award  on 
behalf of Aspen Network of International Partners. I cherish that memory and what this award 
stands for. 
I would like to thank each and every one of you for joining us. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
