Sarah Dahlgren: Five years since the crisis – where are we now? 
Remarks  by  Ms  Sarah  Dahlgren,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution 
Supervision Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Institute of International 
Bankers’  Seminar  on  “Risk  management  and  regulatory/examinations  compliance  issues”, 
New York City, 8 October 2013. 
 Thank you Sally. It’s great to be here again this year to open up the IIB’s annual seminar on 
Risk  Management  and  Regulatory/Examinations  Compliance  Issues.  I  appreciate  the 
opportunity to address this group and to continue the dialogue that we’ve been having over 
the past several years. 
Given that we are celebrating the five-year mark of what was probably the worst part of the 
financial crisis, I thought I’d take this opportunity to take a step back and reflect a bit on how 
far we’ve come since the crisis in addressing some of the most pressing issues. Then I’d like 
to share with you some of my thoughts on areas that still need to be addressed and where I 
think more concerted effort is needed. 
As  always,  my  remarks  reflect  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. 
It’s  hard  to  believe  that  it  has  already  been  five  years  –  and  I’m  not  sure  whether  it  feels 
longer or shorter than that! But one thing I’m certain of is that a lot has changed in those five 
years – and much of it for the positive in terms of addressing some of the key weaknesses 
that led to the crisis.  
Where progress has been made 
I thought I’d start first by reflecting on several areas where we’ve seen progress. Importantly, 
the balance sheet repair that was necessary is underway. 
• 
Banks  are  building  capital  –  both  the  quantity  and  the  quality  of  capital  have 
improved markedly in the past several years. For example, by some measures, the 
largest banks in the U.S. have more than doubled capital levels over the past four 
years.  
Banks are also building liquidity, and liquidity levels far exceed those that most firms 
had going into the crisis in 2008.  
While  progress  on  both  fronts  is  somewhat  uneven  across  jurisdictions,  there  are 
efforts  underway,  including  through  such  mechanisms  as  the  Basel  rulemaking 
process and EU initiatives, to continue to make bank balance sheets more resilient 
to stress in the future.  
  their  own  operations, 
including  strengthening 
In the area of recovery and resolution, with the second round of plans in for the largest firms 
(and the first round in or due shortly for the remaining firms), a lot of learning has happened 
through this process. Firms have made good progress in better understanding the complexity 
of 
the  overall  management  of 
organizational/legal  structures,  identifying  all  legal  entities  (and  this  was  huge  for  some 
firms),  and  beginning  the  difficult  task  of  identifying  additional  impediments  to  resolving  a 
large internationally active firm.  
I think there’s also good recognition that the financial system is more than just banks, with 
processes  at  both  the  domestic/U.S.  level  and  globally  to  identify  the  set  of  systemically 
important  financial  institutions  (non-banks  like  insurance  companies  for  example)  and  to 
ensure that stronger regulation and oversight is exercised over these firms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Locally, within the New York Fed, I noted last year that some of the changes we had made to 
our supervisory processes were yielding some good results, and I’m pleased to share with 
you today that progress has continued on a number of fronts. 
• 
We have continued to increase our interactions with senior management and boards 
of directors of the firms we supervise, including most of the largest foreign firms. We 
have built important channels of communication with senior management and board 
members  –  and  we  appreciate  the  enhanced  level  of  dialogue  and  candor  that  is 
resulting from these interactions. And, we know that board members also appreciate 
the engagement and frank dialogue.  
Of course, we’ve been working closely with home country supervisors to ensure we 
have good communication and are coordinated in our messaging.  
Through  the  work  of  our  business  line  specialists,  we  are  developing  a  better 
understanding  of  the  businesses  you  all  are  engaged  in,  including  improving  the 
dialogue with the front office and getting to know those business leaders. This has 
given us a much improved window into your strategies – into how you are thinking 
about  the  changes  you  will  make  and  need  to  make  in  the  face  of  increased 
regulation, increased regulatory pressure, competition and future economic growth.  
  Areas where work remains 
Of course, there are many more areas where progress is being made, but those are the ones 
that I would highlight for you today. And, while I tend to be a “glass half-full” kind of person, I 
am also a realist and recognize the tough road ahead to continue implementing the kinds of 
changes  needed  across  the  system  to  achieve  the  end  state  of  a  more  resilient,  better 
managed  and  less  complex  financial  system.  In  this  regard,  I’d  highlight  four  areas  where 
additional work is needed across firms and supervisors/regulators: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Resolution planning  
Coordinating supervision across global organizations  
Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering (AML/BSA) compliance  
Culture of firms and the system  
Resolution planning  
1.  
I noted earlier that resolution planning was an area where progress had been made – and it 
has. At the same time, though, the complexities of resolution planning, including resolving a 
number of cross-border issues, make this one of the more difficult issues facing both firms 
and regulators/supervisors and there is still considerable work to do. 
Through the reviews we’ve done thus far, we identified five capabilities that we asked firms to 
focus on in the near-term to enhance resolvability. These include: 
Collateral management  
• 
Firms need to have systems capable of tracking and analyzing collateral received 
from or due to other parties – not just by counterparty, but also by legal entity and by 
jurisdiction.  
In  addition,  firms  need  to  have  the  analytical  capabilities  to  understand  collateral 
requirements  –  both  inflows  and  outflows  –  under  a  variety  of  stress  scenarios, 
including resolution.  
And,  in  addition to the  systems  and  analytics, firms  need  to  have  the  people  with 
sufficient  knowledge  of  legal  and  operational  differences  in  managing  collateral 
across jurisdictions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  2 
 Effective MIS around payment, clearing and settlement activities  
• 
Firms should have a full understanding of all obligations and exposures associated 
with  payments,  clearing  and  settlement  activities.  This  should  include  (but  is  not 
limited to):  
– 
Information  by  legal  entity  for  all  customers  and  counterparties  for  these 
activities;  
Financial market utility memberships and participation; and  
Analyses  on  liquidity  needs  and  operational  capacity  required  to  meet  all 
payments,  clearing  and  settlement  obligations, 
including  under  stress 
scenarios.  
 Stronger analytics around funding  
• 
Inter-affiliate funding arrangements;  
Firms should have be able to produce analyses by material legal entity on a timely 
basis about its funding arrangements, including:  
– 
–  Where liquidity reserves are held;  
– 
– 
Stressed funding and liquidity outflows and inflows at the legal entity level; and  
Impact  of  restrictions  on  transfer  of  liquidity  between  entities  imposed  by 
regulatory or resolution regimes.  
MIS by legal entity  
• 
Firms should be able to produce on a timely basis detailed monthly balance sheets 
by material entity, as well as identify all credit exposures with a level of specificity 
including type of exposure, counterparty and maturity.  
Firms  should  also  have  inventories  of  key  management  and  support  functions; 
property  owned,  leased  or  licensed;  internal  shared  services;  and  key  third  party 
contracts.  
Finally, firms should have inventories of key legal information, including legal entity 
types,  purpose  and 
regulator,  senior 
management and directors; and applicable resolution regime and authority, as well 
as  sufficient  information  on  legal  agreements,  such  as  parties  to  the  agreements, 
key terms of agreements, and any relevant interdependencies.  
licenses,  physical 
location, 
relevant 
Arrangements for shared or outsourced services  
• 
The final area for additional work is ensuring robust arrangements for the continued 
provision of shared or outsourced services needed to maintain operations.  
Firms should understand and have sufficient information available on its internal and 
external  dependencies,  including  continuity  or  replacement  strategies  for  each 
service,  as  well  as  contingency  arrangements  in  place  to  retrain  or  replace 
personnel or services needed to maintain operations.  
While  there  are  many  areas  that  supervisors/regulators  and  legislators  need  to 
continue to work on to make cross-border resolution a reality, these five areas are 
ones that we have highlighted for near-term focus by firms.  
And just a note for firms in the next tiers, including the wave two and three filers – as 
I  know  that  concerns  have  been  raised  about  the  depth  and  breadth  of  work 
required  –  particularly 
foreign  banking 
organizations (FBOs):  
the  “non-systemically 
important” 
for 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 As we’ve indicated in our discussions, our reviews of your plans, which 
we are conducting jointly with the FDIC, will be a learning experience for 
us – as much as it is for you. We are viewing this process as iterative – 
as it has been for the first wave filers, and we expect to learn quite a bit 
through  the reviews,  including  much  more  about  your  U.S.  operations, 
that will help us and you ensure a robust planning process that works for 
each firm.  
Challenges of coordination  
2.  
Turning now to the second area where I think more work needs to be done – coordinating the 
supervision and oversight of the large systemically important institutions. While the crisis has 
provided a great opportunity to enhance our dialogue across supervisory boundaries, there 
are still impediments to realizing a more seamless and coordinated approach. 
Among the impediments are the challenges in information sharing, where there continue to 
be  barriers  to  freely  sharing  information  among  supervisors.  While  some  of  these 
impediments  are  cultural  –  or  trust-related  –  ones,  there  are  still  legal  barriers  to  sharing 
information  that  need  to  be  addressed.  We  need  to  address  the  legal  impediments  for 
supervisors on the ground to be able to share information in a more routine and natural way. 
We also need to continue to build the working relationships among the supervisory teams on 
the  ground.  Much  of  this  kind  of  dialogue  is  underway,  but  more  could  be  done  to  move 
ahead on this issue. In this vein, we need to work more collaboratively together, be candid 
about  concerns  we  have,  and  agree  on the  range  of  work  necessary  across these  largest 
firms. 
Steps  in  this  direction,  some  of  which  we  have  already  started  implementing,  include 
embarking on efforts like joint examinations or concurrent examinations, with similar scopes 
across legal entities/jurisdictions, to ensure a more holistic understanding of issues can be 
obtained. 
We also need to make supervisory colleges more effective, including: 
• 
Constructing  the  colleges  with  the  appropriate  members  reflecting  the  key 
jurisdictions based on the scale or criticality of activities;  
Ensuring robust dialogue between supervisors and firms in college settings;  
Providing  direct  and  candid  feedback  to  firms  and  supervisors  following  from  the 
interactions; and  
Agreeing  on  key  messages  to  firms  or  areas  of  supervisory  focus  to  ensure 
consistency across home and host supervisors.  
  I  don’t mean  to suggest  that  coordination  isn’t  underway  already  –  because  there  is  –  but 
there are many reasons to be hopeful that even more progress will be made in the near-term. 
There are efforts such as those of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the Senior 
• 
Supervisors  Group 
information  sharing  and 
collaboration among supervisors.  
I’m  particularly  excited  about the  recent  opening  of the  BIS’s  Data  Hub –  a move 
designed to provide a more efficient and practical mechanism for supervisors – and 
eventually central banks and other relevant bodies – to share information on global 
banks’ activities and exposures.  
to  promote  enhanced 
(SSG) 
 AML/BSA compliance  
3.  
A third area I wanted to touch on is one that I raised last year – AML/BSA compliance. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Last year, I noted that I had had a similar conversation almost ten years ago with a nearly 
identical audience – in which I raised the question of whether the industry was going to finally 
tackle this issue and get it right. 
I find myself here again this year wondering the same thing. But, rather than just raising the 
question,  I  thought  I’d  offer  a  couple  of  areas  where  we  –  collectively  –  could  be  thinking 
about how to “get it right.” 
First, I do think this is an area that got short shrift during and following the crisis. Much of 
management’s  attention  was  directed  at  the  issues  of  the  day,  and  decisions  on  where  to 
invest  resources  were  directed  at  the  most  pressing  –  and  most  obvious  –  areas.  Thus,  I 
think we are where we are: an area of compliance that didn’t get sufficient attention, didn’t 
keep  up  with  evolving  standards  and  now  we  find  ourselves  in  a  race  to  get  it  right.  So, 
increased attention and investment is obviously needed. 
Many firms continue to make the mistake of treating AML compliance as a static exercise, 
while  AML  standards  and  best  practices  continue  to  evolve.  Two  critical  areas  where  this 
mistake  appears  to  keep  being  made  are  failures  to  update  customer  due  diligence  and 
transaction monitoring programs as the firms’ business model changes. 
Second,  this  is  an  area  where  the  fragmentation  in  supervision  is  quite  apparent.  Multiple 
supervisory agencies examine BSA/AML compliance, oftentimes at a single firm, which can 
result in mixed messages, delays, and overlapping and redundant work for you and for us. 
This is an area that warrants additional attention. 
Third, there are several other areas where the industry and supervisory community should 
consider working together, including issues like conflicting laws/regulations associated with 
an international footprint; subjectivity in some of the AML guidance that drives differences in 
approach by firms and by supervisors; and, the potential negative impact of AML compliance 
on the ongoing provision of vital banking services. 
And, finally, I still wonder whether communication has reached far enough into organizations 
to  ensure  that  decisions  made  at  both  the  top  of  the  house  and  at  the  ground  level  don’t 
expose firms to ongoing AML/BSA risks.  
Weak BSA/AML compliance programs are often attributable to the failure by the boards of 
directors and senior management to actively and meaningfully promote AML compliance as 
a  priority  and  take  responsibility  for  it.  AML  needs  to  be  managed  on  an  enterprise-wide 
basis, while also addressing the unique aspects of every business line.  
Culture 
4.  
This last point brings me to my final thought – on culture.  
I think it’s pretty safe to say – after one reads the newspaper on any given day – that we may 
be at a low point of confidence and trust between the public and the financial sector – with a 
series  of  high  profile  events  over  the  past  18  months  that  raise  issues  of  both  basic 
compliance  with  laws  and  regulations  and  of  governance  and  culture  in  firms  and  in  the 
system more broadly. 
Culture can be a complex topic – and I know it’s one that firms are spending a lot of time 
thinking through and trying to figure out how to ensure a strong culture. As we are thinking 
about it, we’re asking ourselves a series of questions – and I thought I’d share a couple of 
these with you as food for thought on this topic.  
Culture starts at the top of the organization – “the tone at the top” 
• 
• 
Do the directors/CEO set the right tone for behavior at the organization?  
Is there effective challenge and debate at the board meetings/committee meetings?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Do  personalities  interfere/get  too  big  within  the  company  for  effective  risk 
management?  
What’s the dialogue like between supervisors and the firm?  
• 
In a strong risk culture, incentives within the firm set the right expectations for behavior. 
• 
• 
How are audit and supervisory findings handled?  
Does the performance management system reward both good behavior and punish 
bad behaviors or lapses?  
At the end of the day, culture is fundamentally about people. 
• 
No organization can fully identify all policies or procedures for every type of issue 
that might occur.  
The culture needs to be embedded deeply enough in the organization and be strong 
enough to ensure that sound decisions are made throughout the organization – from 
top to bottom and from side to side.  
So, a strong culture identifies risks or issues that are new or unexpected and quickly 
escalates problems. Bad news needs to travel quickly.  
  Culture can be a difficult characteristic to measure, but there is good work underway at the 
international level to further the dialogue on risk culture in particular. Following on the FSB’s 
work  on  risk  appetite,  the  FSB’s  Supervisory  Intensity  and  Effectiveness  group  has 
undertaken  additional  work  on  risk  culture  and  how  firms  and  supervisors  should  be 
assessing risk culture within firms – and we expect to see the results of that work in the next 
month or so.  
FRBNY organizational changes 
I’d like to close with a couple of comments about some recent changes we’ve made to our 
internal  organization.  Earlier  this  year,  we  formed  two  new  units  within  the  Financial 
Institution Supervision Group – the Large International Financial Institution (LIFI) unit and the 
Regional, Community and Foreign Institution (RCFI) unit.  
The LIFI area is currently is responsible for roughly the top 23 foreign firms based here in 
New York with the largest U.S. presence (outside of the four firms that are covered in our 
Complex Financial Institutions portfolio); and, the RCFI unit is responsible for the remaining 
large group of smaller foreign firms. 
Our rationale for making this change was three-fold:  
First,  we  wanted  to  better  tailor  our  supervisory  approaches  to  the  firms  in  each  of  these 
portfolios. 
• 
In this regard, the LIFI portfolio approach will use a combination of on-site and off-
site  monitoring  over  the  course  of  the  year,  as  well  as  examinations  –  but  the 
program  will  evolve  over  time  as  the  rules  are  finalized  for  applying  enhanced 
prudential standards for FBOs.  
The  RCFI  approach  will  largely  be  point-in-time  examinations,  using,  where 
possible,  a  more  streamlined  process,  more  off-site  analysis,  and  continued 
coordination with our colleagues at the other supervisory agencies.  
 Second,  we  wanted  to  leverage  the  portfolio  approach  to  ensure  better  dialogue  with 
supervised firms, as well as to develop better cross-firm metrics and benchmarks that we can 
use to evaluate firms and to provide more robust feedback on key issues.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
And, third, it provides an opportunity to realize efficiencies across our supervisory activities, 
with  similarly  sized  (and  similar  complexity)  organizations  examined  by  a  common  core  of 
examiners; this also gives us more targeted training and development for our staff. 
Conclusion 
I think I’ve covered a lot of ground in my remarks this morning. I look forward to continuing 
our  dialogue  in  the  coming  year  –  and  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  talk  with  you  this 
morning. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
