Andrew Bailey: Regulating international banks 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer of the Prudential Regulation Authority at the Bank of England, at the British Bankers 
Association Annual International Banking Conference, London, 17 October 2013. 
 Today is the BBA’s annual international banking conference, and I therefore want to stick to 
that  theme  and  explain  the  PRA’s  thinking  on  issues  concerning  the  pressures  on 
international  banking  business  and  the  establishment  and  supervision  of  foreign  bank 
branches in London. 
Let me start with the luxury of a wider reflection. Before I joined the Bank of England over 
28 years ago, I was an economic historian, with a specialism in nineteenth century economic 
history. All a bit esoteric you might say. Well, it is the case that the late nineteenth century 
world economy was more open – and, to use a phrase I don’t much like, “more globalised” – 
than at any time in at least the first fifty years of the twentieth century. Moreover, the rate of 
openness  in  the  world  economy  probably  only  truly  approached  late  nineteenth  century 
levels in the last twenty or thirty years. The backlash to greater openness that came in the 
first  half  of  the  twentieth  century  is  quite  often  attributed  to  the  actual  or  perceived 
distributional effects of greater cross-border trade, flows of capital and flows of people. The 
world economy in many ways went backwards in the first half of the last century. 
Why  does  this  historical  detour  matter?  The  five  or  six  years  since  the  outbreak  of  the 
financial crisis have seen signs of a reversal of some aspects of the greater openness we 
had  seen  in  the  1980s  and  1990s.  And  probably  none  more  so  than  the  decline  in  cross-
border bank lending. Moreover, the UK experience in terms of lending has been amongst the 
more pronounced. But again, does this matter? My answer is yes. First, because many of us 
do believe in the economic benefits of free trade and capital flows, as well as the contribution 
of migration to balancing supply and demand in the economy. Second, and closer to home, 
the City of London and its financial markets benefit hugely from, and are at the hub of, the 
open world economy. For example, whatever you think about the more troublesome recent 
innovations  of  banking,  basic  trade  finance  remains  a  core,  simple  and  essential  service 
provided by banks, and the City has for a very long time been a leading centre for providing 
this finance to support world trade. 
International wholesale banking is therefore an important part of maintaining and developing 
the world economy, just as it was in the nineteenth century. Yet, we have to recognise that in 
the last five or six years of the crisis we have gone backwards. Cross-border bank lending 
has  declined  more  sharply  than  overall  lending  –  home  preference  has  set  in.  And,  the 
banking system has become more fragmented or “balkanised”, with a preference for banks to 
subsidiarise  in  countries  beyond  their  home  state,  and  for  regulators  to  wish  for  –  and 
achieve – the location of more capital and larger pools of liquid assets in their jurisdictions. 
We should not be surprised by this, but nor should we accept that it is inevitably with us as a 
permanent feature. The reasons why we have seen these changes are not hard to explain. 
Major  concerns  about  sovereign  creditworthiness  undermine  stable  banking  activity  across 
borders, another important lesson of history. Combined with that, as authorities we have had 
bad  experiences  in  trying  to  deal  with  and  resolve  failed  banks  headquartered  in  other 
countries. It is not surprising that the natural reaction is to make sure in future we have “got 
the money”. 
Moreover, no one country is particularly responsible for this trend – the honest thing is to say 
that many of us have contributed to it because the alternative available at the time looked 
worse.  And,  writing  rules  to  say  that  such  actions  should  not  be  taken,  irrespective  of  the 
underlying  reasons  for  them,  is  not  likely  to  be  a  success.  This  amounts  to  contradicting 
basic human nature. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But, and this is the important point, we should not design the world as if fragmentation and 
balkanisation are inevitably always likely to be with us. That is a counsel of despair, and it 
contradicts everything I said earlier about the benefits of free trade. How, therefore, should 
we  think  about,  and  act  upon, this  design  challenge?  A key  issue  here  is  bank resolution. 
Indeed,  arguably  it  is  the  cornerstone  of  making  progress.  The  reason  is  that  without 
confidence  in  how  we  would  in  future  resolve  banks  operating  across  borders  –  typically 
therefore the larger banks – we are unlikely to break down the trend towards fragmentation. 
This  is  because  some  of  the  most  difficult  legal  and  structural  issues  in  bank  resolution 
concern enabling cross-border solutions to take effect, and this is true whether the resolution 
plan involves holding the firm together – Single Point of Entry unitary resolution – or breaking 
it up under a Multiple Point of Entry resolution. For instance, either way it will be important to 
effect a stay on triggering default clauses in contracts. 
For  me,  the  big  point  here  is  to  achieve  resolution  planning  which  creates  sufficient 
confidence  among  national  authorities  that  there  is  greater  trust,  and  therefore  a  greater 
willingness to assume, for instance, that capital and liquid assets are moveable and can be 
employed  across  countries  when  needed.  It  is  an  essential  pre-condition  for  confidence  in 
cross-border bank activity and likewise it provides an important counterweight to policies that 
trap capital and liquid assets in host jurisdictions. In turn this allows a more neutral stance on 
the subsidiarisation versus branching issue. 
Resolution is the toughest nut to crack in the financial reform package, but it is also the one 
that  I  think  does  more  to  unlock  other  issues,  including  the  appropriate  steady-state  end-
point for the bank capital regime. Put simply, the answer in my view is different in a world of 
effective resolution that ends too big to fail. But in the alternative outcome, where too big to 
fail remains with us and there are doubts around the effectiveness of resolution, it is hard to 
avoid  the  conclusion  that  higher  capital  requirements  will  follow,  and  cross-border 
establishment will be through subsidiaries. 
Let me also say that we have made more progress on resolution in the last few years than 
many people expected. To say that we are not there yet should not conceal the real progress 
made.  And,  an  important  credit  on  this  goes  to  Paul  Tucker  who  has  led  much  of  the 
international  policy  thinking  on  resolution.  Paul  leaves  us  at  the  end  of  the  week  for  the 
calmer environment of Harvard – we shall miss him in many ways, and I hope that when we 
get  to  an  outcome  on  bank  resolution  that  meets  our  wish  to  reject  the  permanence  of 
fragmentation, we will remember how much Paul did to get us there. 
The real progress that we have made on resolution issues makes it reasonable to start to 
take steps towards planning for a safe resumption of the growth of cross-border banking in 
ways  that  had  been  in  some  senses  discouraged,  and  sometimes  with  a  history  of 
discouragement  going  back  before  the  onset  of  the  crisis.  A  good  example  of  this  is  our 
approach towards branches from outside the European Economic Area (remember that EEA 
branches are governed by the Single Market legislation). Earlier this week, it was announced 
that the PRA will be prepared to see Chinese banks open branches here (recognising that 
the Bank of China already has a branch in London). 
I want to describe how this change can come about, and in doing so it should be clear that 
this is not a special arrangement for China – rather it is part of a broader policy. 
Branches of foreign banks (both non-EEA and EEA) have a large presence here in the UK. 
Currently, they account for around one third of total UK resident banking assets. Supervision 
of branches has therefore always been an important issue for the UK authorities. In the run-
up to the launch of the PRA, in April, we set out our approach to supervising subsidiaries and 
branches from overseas, and in this context the announcement on China is not a surprise. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Let me read to you the relevant three paragraphs from our Approach document published in 
April: 
“For UK branches of non-EEA firms, the PRA’s authorisation applies to the whole firm. At the 
point at which a non-EEA branch seeks initial authorisation in the United Kingdom, the PRA, 
will, as a first step, form a judgement on the adequacy of the home regulator, including its 
ability  and  willingness  to  share  confidential  information.  Where  it  considers  the  home 
supervisor not to have a regime broadly equivalent to that of the United Kingdom, the PRA 
will  refuse  authorisation  of  the  branch.  It  may  instead  decide  to  authorise  a  stand-alone 
subsidiary, in which case it may limit the interlinkages with the rest of the group or ring-fence 
the  subsidiary  (for  example  if  it  considers  the  home  supervisor  not  to  deliver  effective 
consolidated  supervision).  In  assessing  a  non-EEA  firm  against  the  Threshold  Conditions, 
the PRA may also have regard to the opinion of an overseas regulator in a country in which 
the  firm  carries  on  regulated  activities.  In  considering  how  much  weight  to  attach  to  such 
opinions, the PRA must have regard to the nature and scope of the supervision exercised by 
the overseas regulator.” 
“For existing UK branches of non-EEA firms where the home regime is not considered to be 
equivalent, the PRA’s supervisory work is aimed at mitigating the risks of non-equivalence in 
the  relevant  areas.  Its  supervision  focuses  on  issues  such  as  the  financial  strength  of  the 
whole  firm,  including  the  adequacy  of  its  liquidity  and  the  resolution  plan  for  the  firm 
(collaborating with the Special Resolution Unit and home authorities to develop such plans in 
colleges or Crisis Management Groups as applicable), taking into account the importance of 
the firm to the PRA’s objective.” 
“For  UK  branches  of  non-EEA  firms  where  the  PRA  is  satisfied  that  the  home  regulatory 
regime  is  equivalent,  and  where  the  PRA  has  assured  itself  over  resolution  plans  and  the 
home  regulator’s  supervisory  approach,  the  PRA  relies  where  possible  on  the  home 
regulator’s  prudential  supervision.  In  these  cases,  the  PRA  focuses  on  collaboration  with 
home regulators (including via supervisory colleges) and on resolution plans. In addition, the 
PRA  takes  a  close  interest  in  liquidity  and  ensures  that  there  are  senior  individuals  in  the 
United Kingdom that are clearly responsible for management of both the UK operations and 
business  booked  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  PRA  discusses  and  agrees  with  the  home 
regulator the areas in which it will seek to rely on the home regulator’s supervision”. 
This  Approach  document  concluded  that  the  PRA  would  in  due  course  publish  a  fuller 
statement on our approach to the supervision of overseas firms operating in the UK. To take 
that forward, over the summer the PRA Board, acting in its new statutory capacity considered 
our  policy  further.  It  endorsed  the  account  I  have  read  from  the  Approach  Document,  but 
added one important further condition, namely that we do not wish to see non-EEA branches 
undertaking  critical  retail  banking functions  (like  taking  deposits)  beyond  de  minimis  levels 
unless there is some good reason and importantly there is a very high level of assurance on 
resolution. In particular, we think that new non-EEA branches should stick to straightforward 
wholesale banking, of the type that supports world trade and capital flows. 
Resolution will be a key deciding factor in the PRA’s judgements, and it is thus where we will 
place emphasis when forming a view on our risk appetite towards branches operating in the 
UK. We will therefore expect assurance from the home state regulator over the recovery and 
resolution  plans  and  assess  if  the  plans  adequately  cover  the  UK  branch’s  activities.  For 
banks with small UK activities we will expect to gain a level of assurance that is relative to 
the scale of the UK activities. 
The PRA’s policy towards branches is part of our general approach set out in the light of the 
experience of the crisis. It places emphasis on recovery and resolution, and we will expect 
very clear and credible assurances from the parents of banks wishing to operate as branches 
and  from  the  home  state  authorities.  It  limits  the  range  of  activities  that  branches  can 
undertake, but not I think in ways that undermine the ability of such branches to undertake 
safer forms of wholesale banking, which is the preference of most banks in that position. We 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
have a clear policy framework for taking these decisions and our approach to all branches 
will  be  consistent  with  our  objectives  of  safety  and  soundness.  Our  stance  is  sensibly 
cautious, but not I think restrictive. And, let me reiterate that it is a general policy, not a China 
policy, and it is consistent with promoting the benefits of an open world economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
