Andreas Dombret: The yin and yang of resolving the European sovereign 
debt crisis 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Peterson Institute, Washington DC, 17 October 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you  for  having  me  here  today.  It  is  a  great  honour  to  speak  at  an  institution  as 
distinguished  as  the  Peterson  Institute.  For  more  than  30  years  now,  the  institute  has 
provided essential analytical input for the work of policymakers around the world. 
And when I say policymakers, I explicitly include central banks, as the institute’s President, 
Adam Posen, has intimate knowledge of our trials and tribulations. He served on the Bank of 
England’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  has  worked  with  many  other  central  banks 
including the Bundesbank. He is therefore in a unique position to provide analysis and advice 
to central bankers such as myself. 
Such advice is especially valuable in turbulent times such as these. Looking back, we see a 
crisis  that  has  spanned  more  than  six  years.  It  began  with  turbulence  on  the  US  housing 
market, followed by a global financial crisis, a global recession and a sovereign debt crisis in 
the euro area. It is this last episode I would like to focus on in my speech. 
Mark Twain once said: “A man who carries a cat by the tail learns something he can learn in 
no other way”. Applied to the euro area, it seems that we have had the cat by its tail more 
often than not over the past three years. And as Mark Twain predicted, we have learnt a lot. 
We  have  learnt  a  lot  about  the  inner  workings  of  the  European  monetary  union  –  both 
economically and politically. True, everybody looks at the crisis from a slightly different angle 
but it seems that most of us have learnt the same lessons. At least in terms of the causes of 
the crisis, most of us seem to have made the same diagnosis. 
According to this diagnosis, the main causes of the crisis can be found at the national and at 
the  European  level.  At  the  national  level,  there  was  high  public  debt  and  a  lack  of 
competitiveness in those countries that are now at the centre of the crisis. At the European 
level, there were weaknesses in the institutional framework of monetary union. 
But  if  most  observers  agree  on  the  diagnosis  of  the  crisis,  why  can’t  they  agree  on  the 
appropriate therapy? Why is such a vast array of cures proposed? In my speech, I would like 
to offer an explanation for this puzzle and apply it to two of the ongoing debates on how to 
resolve the crisis. 
The fault line: equity versus efficiency 
2. 
My starting point is one of the classic fault lines in economic theory: the fault line between 
equity  and  efficiency.  Equity  is  mostly  about  redistributing  resources  among  members  of 
society;  efficiency  is  mostly  about  allocating  resources  to  their  most  productive  use. 
Together, equity and efficiency are the yin and yang of economics. 
And  as  in  Chinese  philosophy,  the  economic  versions  of  yin  and  yang  are  not  opposing 
forces but interrelated concepts. In the end, it is not a matter of “either/or” but a matter of 
degree.  And  this  is  at  the  core  of  the  debate  on  how  to  resolve  the  sovereign  debt  crisis. 
Some  analysts  tend  more  towards  equity  or,  more  specifically,  towards  burden  sharing. 
Other analysts tend more towards efficiency, that is, towards setting the right incentives to 
ensure a stable monetary union in the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This tug of war between burden sharing and efficiency defines nearly all debates on how to 
resolve  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis.  It  is  present  in  the  debate  on  how  the  rescue 
mechanisms  should  be  constructed;  it  is  present  in  the  debate  on  a  banking  union,  it  is 
present in the debate on a fiscal union, in the debate on monetary policy, in the debate on 
how to rebalance current accounts and in the debate on the introduction of Eurobonds. 
In order to illustrate my point, I would like to address the last two issues. Let us begin with 
the debate on how to rebalance current accounts in the euro area. 
3. 
The case of current account imbalances 
The problem 
3.1 
Before the crisis, there were large imbalances in the current accounts of euro-area countries. 
Some  countries,  such  as  Germany,  the  Netherlands  and  Austria,  ran  persistent  current 
account  surpluses.  Other  countries,  such  as  Greece,  Ireland  and  Spain,  ran  persistent 
current account deficits. 
In principle, current account surpluses or deficits are not a problem in themselves. However, 
those we observed prior to the crisis were an expression of underlying barriers to sustainable 
growth. At the same time, they added an element of instability to monetary union. Hence the 
need to “rebalance Europe”. 
One channel through which unsustainable current account positions can be rebalanced is the 
exchange rate. In a monetary union, however, using the exchange rate is obviously no longer 
an option. The only option left is an internal adjustment through prices, wages, employment 
and output. 
Such internal adjustment certainly places a burden on the economy of the affected country. 
There is consequently an intense debate as to which countries should adjust – those with a 
current  account  deficit  or  those  with  a  surplus.  And  in  essence,  this  debate  is  the  debate 
between burden sharing and efficiency. 
There are many who fear that it would be too much of a burden for the deficit countries alone 
to adjust. They therefore suggest that surplus countries should also adjust so that the burden 
can be shared. 
I would like to challenge this view by raising two objections: one relating to the effectiveness 
of such an approach and the other relating to its consequences. 
One suggestion, two objections 
3.2 
In  order  to  share  the  burden  of  adjustment,  commentators  such  as  Paul  Krugman  have 
suggested that surplus countries should lower their competitiveness. More specifically, they 
suggest  that  Germany  should  increase  the  wage  level  by  more  than  is  warranted  by 
conditions on the German labour market. 
The  idea  behind  this  is  that  competitiveness  is  relative:  one  country’s  loss  is  another 
country’s gain. Thus, rather than just some countries going all the way in terms of adjusting 
their competitiveness, all countries should meet in the middle – those with a current account 
surplus should become a bit less competitive, those with a deficit should become a bit more 
competitive. The burden of rebalancing would be shared. 
But how far would that approach take us? Well, I am afraid to say that it would probably not 
take us very far. To gauge the effectiveness of this approach, we ran our own estimates, and 
the results were rather disappointing. 
We assumed an additional wage increase in Germany of 2 percentage points above what 
would  normally  be  expected  as  the  outcome  of  bargaining.  Then  we  used  our  economic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
models  to  calculate  the  effect  of  this  increase  on  the  exports  of  peripheral  euro-area 
countries. 
Given the nature of trade flows within the euro area, the effect turned out to be close to nil. 
Only Ireland could expect a moderate rise in exports. At the same time, Germany’s economy 
would take a hit. Depending on the model, employment would ultimately fall by as much as 
1%, and output by ¾%. There would be no free lunch in terms of higher wages in Germany 
and higher exports of deficit countries. 
And the notion of a free lunch takes us directly to my second objection against the burden-
sharing approach. To see the argument, we have to look beyond the borders of Europe. 
After all, Europe is not an island but part of a globalised world. And at the global level, we are 
competing with economies such as the United States and China. Now, what would happen if 
the  euro-area  countries  followed  the  approach  of  meeting  in  the  middle  in  terms  of 
competitiveness? Well, ultimately the euro area as a whole would become less competitive 
vis-à-vis the rest of the world. 
In my view, this is not the right path to follow. To succeed, Europe as a whole has to become 
more  dynamic,  more  inventive  and  more  productive.  Any  attempt  to  shield  one  European 
country  from  competition  by  lowering  the  competitiveness  of  another  would  be  doomed  to 
fail. 
Adjustment is under way 
3.3 
Now, what is my conclusion with regard to burden sharing and efficiency? Have I just been 
arguing for efficiency while rejecting the notion of sharing the burden? Well, again it is not a 
matter of “either/or” but a matter of degree. 
True, in my view, the initial adjustment has to take place in the deficit countries. At the end, 
they  operated  an  unsustainable  model  based  on  structural  deficiencies.  Reforming  this 
model  is  the  most  promising  approach  to  facilitate  rebalancing.  Not  every  deficit  country 
needs the same structural reforms, of course, but all require some sort of adjustment. 
And a number of reforms have already been undertaken. The process of rebalancing through 
structural reforms is therefore well under way. The current accounts of deficit countries have 
improved dramatically since 2008. The improvements range from nearly 9 percentage points 
of  GDP  in  Ireland  to  more  than  15  percentage  points  in  Greece.  According  to  recent 
estimates by the European Commission, most crisis countries will achieve a current account 
surplus this year. 
Even more importantly, this adjustment is being accomplished not only by shrinking imports, 
but also by growing exports. All the crisis countries are projected to see some export growth 
this year, ranging from just under 1% in Portugal to about 4% in Spain. 
And when the current accounts of deficit countries improve, the current accounts of surplus 
countries will automatically adjust. In the end, not every country can have a current account 
surplus. In a sense, we will consequently meet in the middle eventually. 
Moreover, the burden of the initial adjustment, though not being shared in the narrow sense 
of the word, is at least being alleviated. What are the rescue packages other than publicly 
guaranteed interim loans to facilitate the adjustment? Thus, at the end, we have both yin and 
yang: the burden is being shared and efficiency is enhanced. 
4. 
The case of Eurobonds 
The problem 
4.1 
Let us now look at another example of the debate between burden sharing and efficiency: 
the discussion on the introduction of Eurobonds. Some commentators argue that Eurobonds 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
would solve many of the euro area’s problems. George Soros, for instance, made that point 
at the Global Economic Symposium in Germany three weeks ago. 
In my view, however, Eurobonds would be another case of burden sharing that would come 
at the expense of efficiency and would endanger the stability of monetary union. 
Eurobonds would aggravate the problem 
4.2 
In  order  to  understand  the  core  of  my  argument,  it  is  important  to  be  familiar  with  the 
particular features of the European monetary union. The European monetary union is special 
in that it combines a single monetary policy with national fiscal policies. 
The  monetary  policy  for  the  17  countries  of  the  euro  area  is  decided  by  the  Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB  in  Frankfurt.  However,  the  fiscal  policies  of  the  17  euro-area  member 
states  are  a  matter  for  the  national  policymakers  –  each  country  decides  on  its  own 
government revenues and expenditures. 
This imbalance of responsibilities gives individual countries an incentive to borrow – a “deficit 
bias”  is  introduced  into  the  system.  Our  objective  should  be  to  counter  that  deficit  bias  to 
ensure a stable monetary union. This can only be achieved by realigning responsibilities – 
liability and control have to be in balance. 
Would  Eurobonds  contribute  to  this  objective?  Granted,  Eurobonds  would  offer  temporary 
relief to heavily indebted member states of the euro area. But eventually they would distort 
the  already  lopsided  balance  between  liability  and  control  even  further.  While  spending 
decisions  would  essentially  remain  a  national  prerogative,  liability  would  become  truly 
European. Incentives to incur further debt would thus be strengthened, not weakened. 
Other ways forward 
4.3 
If  we  really  want  to  realign  liability  and  control  to  stabilise  monetary  union,  we  have  two 
options.  The  first  option  would  be  to  match  European  liability  with  European  control.  Only 
then would incentives be aligned sufficiently, as the IMF pointed out in a recent report. 
This  would  amount  to  what  is  known  as  a  fiscal  union.  Creating  a  fiscal  union,  however, 
would  depend  on  the  countries  of  the  euro  area  transferring  national  sovereignty  to  the 
European level – for example, by giving the European level the right to intervene in the case 
of unsound public finances. In such a set-up, Eurobonds could indeed be a logical next step. 
However,  giving  up  sovereignty  in  this  way  would  represent  a  radical  change  and  require 
wide-ranging legislative changes nationally and at the European level. Such changes would 
need the support not only of policymakers but also of the general public. And, on this point, 
we should be realistic. There is no willingness to do that at present – not in Germany or in 
any other country of the euro area. Thus, a fiscal union is a long way off. 
For  the  time  being,  that  leaves  us  with  the  second  option:  implementing  both  liability  and 
control  at  the  national  level.  This  would  mean  strengthening  the  original  Maastricht 
framework, creating a “Maastricht 2.0”. Among other things, that would require strengthening 
the rules on borrowing – not only does the Stability and Growth Pact need teeth, it also has 
to be able to bite. The rules have since been tightened – now they have to be applied and 
compliance has to be ensured. 
Let me mention something as an important side note at this point: European integration is 
certainly making progress. On Tuesday this week the EU finance ministers formally adopted 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism, which will be a central pillar of the envisaged European 
banking union. Thus, a major step has been taken in improving the framework of monetary 
union. 
Now, what is my conclusion in this particular case of burden sharing versus efficiency? Well, 
the  Bundesbank’s  position  has  always  been  clear  and  consistent.  Sound  incentives  are 
indispensable for countering the biases inherent in the euro area’s architecture. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Some  burden  sharing  is  necessary,  and  it  is  being  implemented  through  the  rescue 
mechanisms  that  grant  financial  assistance.  But  if  burdens  are  shared  in  a  manner  that 
distorts incentives even further, no lasting resolution of the crisis will be possible. Introducing 
Eurobonds would shift the balance closer to burden sharing and further from efficiency. In the 
long run, this would destabilise the whole monetary union and harm all of us. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we all see the same crisis and we all share the same explanations for 
it – more or less. Nevertheless, the proposed solutions seem to be rather different from each 
other. In my speech, I have argued that most of these differences can be traced back to the 
tug  of  war  between  sharing  the  burden  and  setting  the  right  incentives,  in  other  words 
between equity and efficiency. 
I  have  also  argued  that  these  two  concepts  are  similar  to  the  yin  and  yang  in  Chinese 
philosophy:  they  are  not  mutually  exclusive  but  complement  each  other.  The  debate  is 
therefore ultimately not a question of “either/or” but of the right degree. 
Solidarity and burden sharing are important values in European integration, especially in a 
crisis.  But  European  integration  is  also  about  building  a  stable  future  –  and  this  requires 
efficient structures. We thus have to strike a delicate balance between these two concepts. 
Nevertheless, in the end, both sides of the debate are not that far away from each other. And 
most importantly, we all share the same objective: a stable monetary union. Thus, to return 
to Mark Twain, let us stop carrying the cat by its tail and grab it by the neck instead. 
Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
