Paul Fisher: Financial markets, monetary policy and credit supply 
Speech by Mr Paul Fisher, Executive Director for Markets of the Bank of England, Member of 
the Monetary Policy Committee, to Richmond University, London, 2 October 2013. 
 Thank you for having me back at Richmond University. In this lecture today, I aim to review 
the behaviour and development of financial markets over the past year, including the period 
of heightened volatility since May and the introduction by the Monetary Policy Committee of 
explicit forward-looking monetary policy guidance in August. I will also assess the working 
and impact of the Funding for Lending Scheme over its first year of operation. 
Developments in financial markets 
When I spoke to you a year ago, financial markets were still scarred by the crisis years and 
there remained a number of significant downside tail risks to the global economy. Contacts 
were citing: the risks of a breakup of the euro-area; the possibility of a “fiscal cliff” in the US; 
a slowing in China, alongside already weak growth in the advanced economies; and tensions 
in the Middle East – especially around the Straits of Hormuz. But those tail risks were seen to 
be  offset  in  large  part  by  the  commitment  of  central  banks  to  respond.  The  ECB  had 
announced  its  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  programme  and  had  been  interpreted  as 
publicly  committing  to  do  whatever  it  takes  to  keep  the  euro-area  together.  The  FOMC 
similarly committed to keep the US economy growing, with state-contingent forward guidance 
being  issued  in  December  2012.  The  MPC  had  voted  to  increase  its  stock  of  asset 
purchases  to  £375  billion  in  July  2012  and  introduced  the  Funding  for  Lending  Scheme 
(FLS).  Taken  together  these  factors  were  generating  a  growing  “hunt  for  yield”,  initially 
cautious  and  focussed  on  relatively  simple,  liquid  financial  instruments  but  gradually 
expanding,  especially  in  terms  of  credit  risk  –  for  example  “high  yield”  bonds  were  in 
particularly high demand, leading to historically compressed spreads. 
Since then, we have seen a game of two halves. If I move on to around April this year, the 
picture had changed substantively relative to the autumn. The previously perceived tail risks 
were  fading  from  discussions.  Europe  was  making  progress  on  a  number  of  structural 
reforms, including moving towards a banking union. A mini-crisis in Cyprus had been dealt 
with,  without  too  many  spillovers.  Spreads  over  bunds  for  sovereign  debt  of  the  larger 
vulnerable euro-area economies had narrowed considerably. The US “fiscal cliff” at end-2012 
had passed by with some relief (although concerns about the processes associated with the 
US  fiscal  deficit  have  now  resurfaced).  While  fiscal  consolidation  might  have  slowed  US 
growth somewhat, the process of adjustment around the turn of the year had been smoother 
than  feared  and  the  macroeconomic  repercussions  rather  less.  China  had  injected  some 
renewed  stimulus  and  Japan  had  introduced  a  far  reaching  new  economic  framework  of 
quantitative  and  qualitative  easing  to  improve  the  outlook  there.  At  that  time,  Middle  East 
tensions  had  not  induced  further  Western  military  intervention  and  the  oil  price  had  been 
relatively  stable,  falling  to  around  the  $100pb  mark.  One  could  argue  that  central  banks  
– and other authorities – had validated expectations. 
During  this period  from  the  Autumn  of  2012  to  the  Spring  of  2013,  financial  markets  were 
relatively  calm  but  periods  of  “risk  on”  were  lasting  for  longer  and  leading  to  greater  risk 
taking.  Equities  and  other  risky  asset  prices  generally  rose.  Interest  rates  were  low  and 
stable  at  the  short  end  and  increasingly  depressed  at  longer  maturities  as  the  FOMC 
maintained its asset purchase programme. The hunt for yield intensified, especially down the 
credit  spectrum,  with  some  investors  being  driven  by  return  targets,  mandates  and 
benchmarks  rather  than  a  true  reflection  of  risk-adjusted  returns.  The  volatility  of  market 
prices also became compressed during this period (Chart 1). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Chart 1 
Implied volatility from various asset markets 
27 Feb 2009
01 May 2013
16 Jul 2013
Japan long rates
Japan short rates
US long rates
Standard deviations from mean 
since 2006
USDGBP
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
JPYUSD
USDEUR
FTSE 100
US short rates
S&P 500
UK long rates
Nikkei 225
UK short rates
 Chart  2  shows  a  “heat  map”  constructed  by  colleagues  in  the  Bank’s  Financial  Stability 
Directorate,  showing  how  market  functioning  has  changed  over  time  based  on  issuance 
levels and spreads. It tracks how most markets have continued to improve towards normal 
levels  (on  these  indicators  at  least).  An  interesting  exception  is  markets  for  bank  funding 
instruments in Europe, which have become subdued as commercial banks have de-levered 
and  central  bank  operations  have  provided  cheap  medium-term  funding  in  large  scale. 
Perhaps the worst functioning is the market for CMBS which has still not really returned in 
the UK (in contrast to CLOs which have made a comeback this year). 
Market functioning “heat map” based on issuance and spreads data(a)(b) 
Chart 2 
P
R
I
M
A
R
Y
S
E
C
O
N
D
A
R
Y
Corporate bonds
Bank bonds, 
unsecured
RMBS
CMBS
Corporate bonds
Bank bonds, 
unsecured
RMBS
CMBS
United States
United Kingdom
Euro area
United States
United Kingdom
Euro area
United States
United Kingdom
Euro area
United States
United Kingdom
Euro area
United States
United Kingdom
Euro area
United States
United Kingdom
Euro area
United States
United Kingdom
Euro area
United States
Euro area
N
NN NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN NN
N N
N NNNNNNNNNNN
N N NNNNNNNNNNN N
N NN
N N
N
N NN N N N
N NNN
N
NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN
NNN NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN N
Very loose
2007
Loose
08
Normal
09
T ight
10
11
Very tight
12
13
No Issuance
 Sources: Bloomberg, Dealogic, JP Morgan Chase & Co, Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Bank calculations. 
(a)  Shading is based on a score that reflects gross issuance (relative to nominal GDP) and spreads in primary 
markets,  and  spreads  in  secondary  markets,  expressed  as  a  number  of  standard  deviations  from  its  historical 
averages, using as much data as available data from January 1998. Primary market indicators reflect the past 
three months, so smooth volatility. Where spreads are not available, indicators are based solely on issuance. 
(b)  Latest data point is August 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Given such benign conditions it seemed natural to ask whether firms were prepared for the 
risk of a sudden change in conditions – in particular the possibility of a snap back in interest 
rates  at  some  point.  In  early  April,  such  questions  to  contacts  usually  evoked  a  blank 
response! Those who had been betting on rates rising had consistently lost money and such 
positions generally had been cut. There were few visible signs of any increase in hedging 
activity other than reports that some investors preferred floating rate rather than fixed rate 
products at the margin. A lot of faith seemed to be enshrined in the ability to anticipate the 
FOMC: that it would signal clearly and early what its strategy would be, leading to a smooth 
exit from its policy stance. Altogether the market was ripe for some volatility consequent to a 
change in the policy outlook. That volatility duly arrived. 
The initial catalyst was the strong US non-farm payrolls data on May 3rd after which longer 
term  yields  started  to  rise.  But  there  was  not  a  wider  market  reaction  at  that  point.  It  was 
Bernanke’s comments on May 22nd that the FOMC could begin tapering its asset purchases 
“in the next few meetings” which caused a widespread reassessment of risk positions. What 
followed was a good illustration of what can happen when there is a general sell-off. Initially 
asset  price  correlation  increased  and  liquidity  became  poor  across  markets.  Because  the 
news  related  to  a  prospective  policy  tightening,  risk-free  yields  generally  rose  (Chart  3), 
although at least some of this was a change in term premia rather than rate expectations. 
Equity  markets  fell.  Some  contacts  described  conditions  as  highly  volatile.  EME  assets  in 
particular were badly affected as leveraged investors cut their risk positions quickly in those 
markets (Chart 4). Eventually, as conditions settled, there was more discrimination between 
and within asset classes. For example, there has been much more distinction between those 
EMEs whose fundamentals were seen to be relatively sound and those who were seen to 
have challenges – in this latter group were especially those with both a large external deficit 
and high inflation. 
Chart 3 
Selected ten-year government 
bond yields(a) 
Chart 4 
Emerging market equity indices 
Indices:  22 May 2013 = 100
Spain
Italy
UK
Per cent
May 22nd
US
Germany
May
3rd
May
22nd
Jan Mar May
Jul Sep Nov
2012
Jan Mar May
13
Jul Sep
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Source: Bloomberg. 
(a)  Yields 
government bonds 
to  maturity  on 
ten-year  benchmark 
South Africa 
Korea
China - Shanghai
India
Mexico
Brazil
Turkey
Indonesia
Feb. Mar.
Apr. May.
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Jan.
2013
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations 
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
Although  the  sell-off  has  been  wide  ranging  and  left  several  EMEs  with  difficult  policy 
challenges,  I  don’t  sense  any  long-lived  market  dysfunction.  Market  infrastructures worked 
and prices adjusted to the revised policy outlook. Yes, volatility rose, but not to levels which 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
are particularly unusual for such episodes (Chart 1). The most highly leveraged positions – 
such as in mortgage REITs1 – were reported to have liquidated quickly, and some ETFs2, 
primarily  fixed-income,  came  under  liquidity  pressure.  Those  institutions  with  short  trading 
horizons and leveraged positions may have found conditions very difficult at times to adjust 
portfolios. Although it is clear that a number of firms must have made substantial losses on 
the positions they had, there have not been many visible signs of severe financial distress. 
For most longer-term investors the stress has been seen as rather limited. Credit spreads 
have not particularly blown out with rising “risk-free” rates. For example, yields on Italian and 
Spanish  bonds  were  remarkably  stable  for  most  of  this  period;  advanced  economy  equity 
prices largely recovered; and “cov-lite” loans have continued to be issued at a record pace. 
Overall  the  system  seems  to  have  survived  in  reasonable  shape  and  for  many  market 
participants the “shock” is seen as a healthy correction to what had become a complacent 
outlook. 
As reported in the record of the recent FPC meeting published yesterday, staff from the FCA, 
PRA and Bank have carried out some analysis of the sensitivity of borrowers and financial 
institutions  to  upward  movements  in  long-term  interest  rates  and  credit  spreads.3  That 
preliminary work suggested that “a moderate rise in long-term interest rates did not pose an 
immediate  threat  to  major  banks  and  insurance  companies.  But  borrowers  would  become 
more  exposed  to  an  increase  in  interest  rates  were  debt  levels  to  rise.  And  counterparty 
classes  with  higher  leverage  or  exposures  to  market  liquidity  risk  or  credit  spreads  were 
more affected...”. The Committee did not draw too much comfort from this assessment and 
has asked that more detailed work be done to assess the risks. 
What have we learned from this episode? I will pick out a few of the highlights for discussion. 
First let me note that the “stress” so far has not involved any actual exit from accommodative 
policies in the advanced economies. The change in the outlook was initiated by speculation 
about the possibility that the FOMC might start to slightly reduce the rate at which it is adding 
stimulus! It would have been a more severe stress if policy rates had actually been changed. 
Many  firms  for  whom  maturity  transformation  is  a  major  part  of  their  business  model  will 
actually  be  better  off  if  the  short-term  rates  at  which  they  fund  themselves  are  relatively 
unchanged while longer-term rates rise. 
Have markets got it wrong? If so then in my view that was not obviously in the price reactions 
since May (although the extent of the fixed-income sell-off may turn out to have been over-
done,  especially  for  the  UK)  –  rather  it  was  the  expectations  that  had  become  embedded 
prior to May which had become overly certain even if, at that time, it supported the intent of 
monetary policy in both the US and Europe. 
It is important to remember that monetary policy is about decision making under uncertainty. 
Considerable uncertainty. Policy makers get surprised by economic developments just like 
everyone else, and that news is often visible to the market before the authorities can even 
think  about  the  right  responses,  let  alone  respond  to  them.  If  I,  as  a  policy  maker,  am 
uncertain about how policy will evolve, how can the market be so much more certain? I am 
continually struck by the degree of certainty some market participants seem to have about 
prospective  monetary  policy  decisions,  particularly  those  of  the  FOMC.  In  general, 
communication from monetary policy setters aims to convey details of our reaction functions 
– how policy might change in reaction to future data or other news – it is not aimed to convey 
the outcome of a decision that has yet to be made! The best we can usually do is to set out 
how we are thinking about the outlook so that market participants and others might be able 
                                                 
1  Real Estate Investment Trusts 
2  Exchange Traded Funds 
3  Record  of  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  meeting,  18  September  2013  (http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/ 
Documents/records/fpc/pdf/2013/record1310.pdf) 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
dynamically  to  gauge  our  response  as  the  data  and  events  reveal  themselves.  Forward 
guidance, on which more shortly, can add to that understanding but the actual outcome for 
policy will always be dependent on how the economy, and hence the outlook, evolves. 
Can  we  learn  anything  about  the  impact  of  large  scale  asset  purchases  –  or  quantitative 
easing – from this recent episode? More work will have to be done on this as a case study 
but,  at  face  value,  the  fact  that  US  Treasury  yields  could  move  by  over  100bps  just  on 
speculation of a small reduction in the rate of purchases, confirms that asset purchases in 
the US must have been having a very sizable effect on market prices, at least as large as the 
quantitative estimates that have previously been made.4 And the degree of reaction in UK gilt 
yields makes it clear that there have been large international spillovers – a point which some 
previous  research  has  also  noted.5  The  degree  of  correlation  since  May  has  been  striking 
and  for  shorter-term  rates,  it  is  possible  that  it  has  been  exacerbated  by  poor  liquidity  in 
money markets and hence over-done. Given how the recoveries have differed in scale and 
nature – the US economy has grown much more than the UK since the recession, and has 
not suffered the same collapse in productivity – one would surely expect the prospects for 
monetary policy to be quite different in the two jurisdictions. 
A  final  issue  I  want  to  raise  is  whether  market  behaviour  has  been  affected  by  regulatory 
changes. Over the past year or so many of the reforms being introduced internationally have 
been implemented or anticipated. In particular the future rules on capital and liquidity have 
become  clearer,  and  proprietary  trading  has  largely  relocated  away  from  the  traditional 
intermediaries  as  a  result  of  the  “Volcker  Rule”.  The  past  five  months  has  been  the  first 
stressful  period  since  those  changes.  Many  market  contacts  have  suggested  that  liquidity 
during the recent sell-off has been worse than it would have been because the dealers are 
no longer willing or able to absorb volatility by taking client positions onto their balance sheet. 
They  argue  that  the  dealers’  ability  and  willingness  to  make  markets  has  been  much 
reduced. This is a subject of ongoing consideration in the official community. But we have to 
bear in mind that in a rapidly moving market, regardless of the regulations, no one has ever 
really wanted to “catch the falling knife”. And investors have always needed to be aware that 
crowded trades will hit a bottleneck if everyone tries to exit at the same time. On EME assets 
for example, liquidity during a “risk off” period has always been limited. In my view, we can’t 
draw any hard conclusions on this topic yet and more evidence is needed. 
Forward guidance 
It  was  in  an  environment  of  increased  volatility  that  the  MPC  decided  at  its  August  policy 
meeting to provide some explicit guidance regarding the future path of our monetary policy 
instruments.  Since  our  announcement  it  has  been  suggested  that  this  policy  is  overly 
complicated. I disagree. The policy was summarised in a single sentence in our explanatory 
document:6 
“In essence, the MPC judges that, until the margin of slack within the economy has narrowed 
significantly, it will be appropriate to maintain the current exceptionally stimulative stance of 
monetary  policy,  provided  that  such  an  approach  remains  consistent  with  its  primary 
objective of price stability and does not endanger financial stability.” 
                                                 
4  For  example,  Gagnon,  Raskin,  Remache  and  Sack  (2010)  estimated  that  the  Fed’s  first  round  of  Large  Scale  Asset 
Purchases  reduced  10-year  term  premium  by  somewhere  between  30  and  100  basis  points,  with  most  estimates  in  the 
lower and middle thirds of this range. 
5  For  instance,  Neely  (2010)  finds  evidence  of  significant  spillovers  from  the  Federal  Reserve’s  LSAPs  to  other  advanced 
economy sovereign bond markets, with yields falling on average  by around half the associated fall in US 10-year yields, 
while Moore, Nam, Suh and Tepper (2013) find that emerging economy government bond yields fell by around a sixth. 
6  Monetary  Policy  Trade-Offs  and  Forward  Guidance,  Bank  of  England,  August  2013  (http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
publications/Documents/inflationreport/2013/ir13augforwardguidance.pdf) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In case that’s not sufficiently simple, let me put it the other way round: we remain committed 
to returning CPI inflation to its 2% target in line with our remit but, in doing so, we will not act 
in  a  way  which  would  risk  choking  off  the  recovery  prematurely,  given  the  potential  for  a 
substantial amount of spare capacity in the economy. 
The  technical  details  of  the  policy  are  needed  to  make  this  precise  so  that  it  can  be 
implemented and monitored: the MPC intends not to raise Bank Rate from its current level of 
0.5% at least until the Labour Force Survey headline measure of the unemployment rate has 
fallen  to  a  threshold  of  7%.  The  MPC  stands  ready  to  undertake  further  asset  purchases 
while the unemployment rate remains above 7% if it judges that additional monetary stimulus 
is warranted but will otherwise maintain the stock of asset purchases and will reinvest the 
cash flows associated with all maturing gilts held in the Asset Purchase Facility. 
This  guidance  linking  Bank  Rate  and  asset  sales  to  the  unemployment  threshold  would 
cease to hold if any of the following three “knockouts” were breached: 
 
if, in the MPC’s view, it is more likely than not, that CPI inflation 18 to 24 months 
ahead will be 0.5 percentage points or more above the 2% target; 
if medium-term inflation expectations no longer remain sufficiently well anchored; 
if the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) judges that the stance of monetary policy 
poses  a  significant  threat  to  financial  stability  that  cannot  be  contained  by  the 
substantial  range  of  mitigating  policy  actions  available  to  the  FPC,  the  Financial 
Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority in a way consistent with 
their objectives. 
 Explicit forward policy guidance can enhance the effectiveness of monetary stimulus in three 
ways. First, it provides greater clarity regarding the MPC’s view of the appropriate trade-off 
between the speed with which inflation is returned to the target and the support given to the 
recovery. Second, it can reduce uncertainty about the future path of monetary policy as the 
economy  recovers.  And  third,  it  delivers  a  robust  framework  within  which  the  MPC  can 
explore the scope for economic expansion without putting price stability and financial stability 
at risk. 
This latter point is especially important to grasp in order to understand the intent of the policy. 
Since 2008, aggregate productivity in the UK – measured as output per hour worked – has 
behaved unlike any previous recession/recovery. The level of productivity in the economy as 
a whole today is around 15% below where it would have been on an unchanged long-term 
trend. We don’t know how much of this productivity gap can be reclaimed. But if even only a 
small part could be recovered then output should be able to grow strongly for some years 
without  generating  much  inflationary  pressure.  In  particular,  firms  should  collectively  be 
carrying  enough  spare  labour  to  expand  output  without  putting  pressure  on  the  labour 
market.  Unemployment  would  consequently  fall  slowly  relative  to  normal  experience,  for  a 
given rate of output growth. 
It is important to stress that forward guidance is not a guarantee to hold rates where they are 
for a set period of time, as has been widely mis-reported. The guidance is given in the form it 
is  precisely  because  the  outlook  is  uncertain  –  it  allows  us  to  explore  how  much  spare 
capacity there really is in the economy before raising Bank Rate. 
Much  has  been  made  of  the  market  reaction  to  forward  guidance  since  its  launch,  with 
market prices currently implying that Bank Rate will rise by 25 basis points by the middle of 
2015, around six months earlier than at the time of our August meeting. I think there are a 
range  of  reasons  for  that  and  it  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  forward  guidance  “isn’t 
working”. First, gauging the “market reaction” depends who you ask. Surveys of economists 
by Thompson Reuters and by Bloomberg have indicated that the median expected timing of 
the first increase in Bank Rate has been pushed later since our announcement (Chart 5). 
Second, there has been UK specific news which might have justifiably caused UK rates to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
have risen somewhat: the positive flow of economic data since the start of August has been 
consistently stronger than market expectations. Third, UK rates have clearly been pushed up 
by  international  developments.  The  correlation  in  short  rates  between  the  UK  and  US  is 
unhelpful  given  the  relatively  subdued  recovery  in  the  UK  and,  as  I  have  already  noted, 
somewhat  puzzling.  It  probably,  in  part,  reflects  continuing  poor  liquidity  in  sterling  money 
markets  over  this  period.  It  may  well  be  the  case  that  these  rates  decouple  in  future  as 
liquidity improves and the outlook for each economy develops further. 
Chart 5 
Indicators of when Bank Rate is expected to have risen 
Implied by OIS(a)
Latest Reuters poll(b)
August
Inflation 
Report
Date
2017
Mar
2013
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
2016
2015
 Sources: Bloomberg, Reuters and Bank calculations 
(a)  Series  is  calculated  as  the  first  date  at  which  instantaneous  forward 
OIS rates equal or exceed 0.75% 
(b)  Reuters poll shows the median of economists’ expectations of the first 
rise in Bank Rate. This is based on a survey of economists’ responses to 
the question: “When do you expect the Bank of England to change rates 
next?” 
Whatever the explanation for the recent rise in interest rates, we do not intend to maintain a 
running commentary on whether the market has got it right or wrong in relation to when Bank 
Rate will rise. Monetary policy is a medium-term game, and its success or failure cannot be 
judged over a matter of weeks or by volatile price movements. If market expectations are in 
the wrong place then market participants will realise that in due course and rates will adjust. 
In any case, in my personal view, the biggest impact from forward guidance was never going 
to be from trying to shift the sterling market curve around – it is still pretty flat for 2 years 
ahead.  The  important  thing  is  to  get  the  message  across  to  businesses  and  households 
about what the outlook for monetary policy really is. Concern that interest rates will rise as 
soon as growth returns may well have been a factor already holding back the recovery. 
It’s  a  case  of  so  far,  so  good,  on  that  front.  The  early  reactions  we  are  getting  from 
individuals or groups of business people generally suggest that they have got the message 
and that will be adding to confidence. For example, the Bank’s latest public survey shows a 
marked reduction in the proportion of people expecting a rise in interest rates over the next 
year – it’s currently the lowest reading since Bank Rate was cut sharply in late 2008 at the 
height of the financial crisis. So in terms of supporting the real economy, I think the policy is 
working. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Forward guidance is an important part of the broader mixed strategy the Bank is employing, 
using many of its tools to secure the recovery while not taking risks with inflation or financial 
stability.  For  example,  the  FPC  and  PRA  have  been  working  to  ensure  UK  banks  and 
building societies have sufficient capital to help support and sustain the recovery. And they 
will  remain  vigilant  to  make  sure  that  macroeconomic  stimulus  does  not  translate  into 
imprudent lending behaviour. Another strand of policy is the Funding for Lending Scheme, 
which is where I would like to turn now. 
The Funding for Lending Scheme: one year on 
It  was  on  the  day  of  this  lecture  last  year  that  the  Bank  of  England  announced  the  first 
13 banks and building societies to have signed up to the FLS. There are now over 40 firms 
participating,  representing  over  80%  of  the  stock  of  lending  to  the  UK  economy.  The  total 
amount of outstanding drawings under the Scheme is over £17bn and rising. The MPC has 
been using a wide range of indicators at various stages of the transmission mechanism to 
help assess the extent to which credit conditions have improved since its launch. Let me run 
through those. 
Stage 1: bank funding costs 
Our first objective was to reduce bank funding costs – and this phase has been remarkably 
successful. Over the past year, those costs have fallen sharply (Chart 6). Of course, they are 
likely  to  have  been  affected  by  developments  internationally,  including  Mario  Draghi’s  “do 
whatever it takes” remarks in July 2012. But usually sterling funding markets would react by 
less than euro-denominated markets to European developments. In fact, UK unsecured bond 
spreads fell further in the UK than in core euro-area countries – indicative of an additional 
boost from the FLS over and above general market developments. 
Indeed,  funding  conditions  have  improved  so  much  (not  just  in  prices  but  in  terms  of 
quantities) that it is safe to say that bank funding is no longer a constraint on lending for most 
UK banks – the larger banks tell us that they are “awash” with liquidity. If you were to go back 
around two years, tightening funding conditions for the banking system was one of the big 
issues policy makers and banks were discussing, and it’s striking to see how conditions have 
changed  completely  since  then.  Costs  have  come  down  so  much  that  some  banks  have 
been able to get funding in the market as cheaply, or cheaper, than we are providing in the 
Scheme. This is important to understand – it means the scale of FLS draw downs is not a 
measure of success. In fact the more stressed market conditions are, and the higher market 
funding  costs  rise,  the  more  we  would  expect  banks  to  draw  from  the  Scheme.  Going 
forward, the FLS should help to keep funding costs down by serving as a backstop marginal 
funding source if market funding costs were to rise. 
Stage 2: quoted terms and credit availability 
The second stage in achieving our objective was a reduction in lending rates to the economy 
and an improvement in credit availability. This has happened, albeit more slowly than initially 
anticipated. On average we’ve seen rates on two-year fixed rate mortgage products come 
down by around 110bps since the FLS was announced, and floating rate mortgages by a bit 
less  (around  60bps)  (Chart  6).  The  availability  of  household  credit,  particularly  secured 
credit, has improved according to recent Credit Conditions Surveys by the Bank of England. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 6 
Changes in quoted mortgage rates and indicative UK bank 
funding costs over the first year of the FLS(a) 
Change in mortgage rate
Change in bank funding cost(b)
Percentage
points
75% LTV 
two-year 
floating-
rate 
mortgage
75% LTV 
two-year 
fixed-rate 
mortgage
75% LTV 
five-year 
fixed-rate 
mortgage
90% LTV 
two-year 
fixed-rate 
mortgage
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
 Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg and Bank calculations. 
(a)  Change between 30 June 2012 and 30 June 2013. 
(b)  For  fixed-rate  mortgages,  calculated  as  the  sum  of  indicative  UK  bank 
secondary market bond spreads and the swap rate corresponding to the term 
of  the  mortgage.  For  floating-rate  mortgages,  three-month  Libor  is  used  in 
place  of  a  swap  rate.  For  more  details  see  Chart  1.8  of  the  August  2013 
Inflation Report. 
It’s harder to measure what has happened to lending rates to businesses as the borrowers 
and  loan  products  available  are  less  homogenous  than  in  the  household  sector.  Lenders 
report that loan spreads have fallen for companies of all sizes, and that credit availability has 
increased,  but  the  improvement  has  been  less  marked  for  small  and  medium-sized 
businesses.  We  have  seen  banks  take  different  approaches  to  SME  loans:  one  bank  has 
scrapped some of its arrangement fees, another is offering guaranteed discounted borrowing 
costs and another offers a cash back scheme. So one can’t capture the impact of the FLS on 
the  cost  of  borrowing  for  businesses  in  a  single  simple,  headline,  interest  rate  measure. 
Survey evidence from the Federation of Small Businesses suggests that the pricing of loans 
for small businesses was more favourable in 2013 Q2 than in mid-2012 – but availability was 
reportedly  poor.  So  it’s  a  mixed  picture  overall  for  SMEs.  Going  forward,  SME  credit 
conditions  should  be  supported  by  the  extension  to  the  FLS  announced  in  April,  which 
provides additional incentives for participants to increase lending to SMEs both this year and 
in 2014. A large proportion of FLS participants have indicated their intention to participate in 
the extended Scheme. 
It is likely that any person or business who has borrowed from a bank since the middle of last 
year will have done so at a cheaper rate than they would have done in the absence of the 
Scheme. If so then the FLS will have had a monetary impulse on the economy. We think that 
the FLS will continue to bear down on lending rates to households and businesses in the rest 
of this year and beyond. 
Stage 3: loan applications and approvals 
The next stage is for the reduction in rates to induce an increase in the demand for credit. A 
key parameter for the response in quantities is the price elasticity of demand for credit. We 
have  been  hearing  lots  of  positive  comments  about  the  state  of  demand  in  the  housing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
market  since  early  in  the  year:  from  builders,  estate  agents,  lenders  and  contacts  of  our 
regional network of Agents, and this has recently reflected into an improvement in the data. 
Let  me  note  that  although  the  housing  market  is  clearly  gathering  momentum,  and  house 
prices  have  started  to hit  the  headlines,  I  must  say  that  don’t  see  any  evidence  of  bubble 
behaviour as yet, with mortgage lending still subdued relative to what is likely to be normal 
levels  of  activity.  The  housing  market  is  recovering  from  a  number  of  years  of  very  low 
transactions, with house prices having risen well below the inflation rate. It is not surprising if 
we see an adjustment of relative prices when the market recovers and of course London has 
special demand pressures which are not present elsewhere in the UK, especially for high-
end housing. But we may well see a response in new housing supply in due course, limiting 
the  effects  of  demand  on  house  prices.  Let  me  assure  you  that  the  Bank  will  not  be 
complacent about allowing financial stability risks to build through an over-expansion of the 
housing  market.  Both  borrowers  and  lenders  need  to  be  careful  not  to  over-stretch 
themselves. In line with the recent FPC statement, we will be keeping a very close eye on 
developments,  and  the  Bank  has  a  range  of  tools  that  can  be  used  in  mitigation  of  those 
risks. 
Stage 4: the flow of credit 
Annual growth in the stock of lending to households and businesses has remained close to 
zero since mid-2012, similar to rates seen in the run-up to the launch of the FLS. But it is 
important to bear in mind that prior to the announcement of the FLS, the Bank judged that 
UK  bank  lending  was  more  likely  to  decline  than  increase  over  the  following  eighteen 
months.  The  profile  of  lending  seen  to  date  has  been  broadly  in  line  with  our  original 
expectations: the trend in household net lending has been somewhat stronger than expected 
before the launch of the FLS and net lending to businesses has been perhaps a little weaker. 
We were also conscious that the stock of credit depends on both supply and demand. We 
were sure that the FLS would shift supply but the demand effects were always less certain. 
The price elasticity for firms in particular is likely to be low. It is possible at the margin that 
some firms will be better able to repay or refinance loans if their borrowing costs are a bit 
lower, but this effect is probably small relative to the importance of expected demand for a 
firm’s products. So the scale of response in the overall flow of credit to businesses depends 
in part on a wider confidence effect shifting the demand curve. We may finally be seeing that 
restoration of business confidence in which case the flow of credit to businesses should pick 
up. 
Beneath that aggregate narrative, there are some revealing stories in the details. The data 
we  publish  each  quarter  reveal  material  differences  in  net  lending  volumes  across 
participants in the Scheme. 
The  main  lenders  are  in  quite  different  places  (Chart  7).  For  example,  30  out  of 
41 participating groups have had positive net lending since the launch of the scheme, despite 
the slight contraction in the aggregate numbers. Together, these groups lent a net £25bn to 
the UK real economy, while the eleven groups that contracted their net lending did so by a 
combined £28bn. That in part reflects a desire by several major UK lenders to reduce the 
scale of their so-called “non-core” loan portfolios following the financial crisis, or a need to 
comply  with  State  Aid  conditions.  So  these  banks  may  not  see  material  increases  in  their 
total lending, even if they use the FLS to the full to support their core activities.  
There are other factors at play. For example, nearly half of bank and building society lending 
to businesses is to the commercial property sector and a good part of the rest will be secured 
on  property.  Pre-crisis,  banks  lent  too  much  money,  too  cheaply,  to  too  many  borrowers, 
especially in this sector. Many of those assets remain impaired and are being run off or sold 
off  where  possible,  negatively  impacting  banks’  lending  figures.  And  given  the  losses 
suffered by most banks on these portfolios, there is a natural reluctance to increase lending 
to that sector again. One reason we’ve not yet seen a significant expansion in total lending is 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that  banks  have  tightened  their  credit  assessment  criteria  since  the  crisis  and  have  not 
changed them following the launch of the FLS. Some borrowers will find that frustrating. But 
from the banks’ point of view it is a prudent thing to have done, so they don’t get back into 
the troubles they were in before. 
Chart 7 
Net lending by FLS participants(a) 
 (a)  Net  flows  of  sterling  lending  to  UK  households  and 
private non-financial corporations. Non-seasonally adjusted. 
(b)  The  sum  of  net  lending  by  those  participants  with 
positive net lending during the quarter. 
(c)  The  sum  of  net  lending  by  those  participants  with 
negative net lending during the quarter. 
When  considering  the  corporate  lending  numbers,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  many 
companies  (particularly  large  firms)  are  making  increased  use  of  capital  markets  to  raise 
finance. Bond issuance by UK businesses remained strong in 2013 Q2, following a Q1 figure 
which was the highest since 2009 Q2. And the Bank’s Agents have heard reports of some 
smaller businesses preferring to seek out non-bank alternatives for finance, including peer-
to-peer  lending,  insurance  companies  and  investment  funds  to  diversify  their  funding 
sources.  So  when  assessing  trends  in  credit  supply,  it  is  important  to  consider  flows  of 
lending  from  all  sources,  not  just  the  banks.  The  extension  to  the  FLS  to  include  lending 
related  to  non-bank  credit  providers  (including  finance  leasing  corporations  and  factoring 
companies) recognises the importance of some of these forms of lending to SMEs. 
Finally, there are a number of small “challenger” banks who are successfully using the FLS 
to help expand and take market share from the more traditional lenders. 
You sometimes see the phrase “the banks are not lending to SMEs”. That is simply not true 
when you look into the details. The data on SME lending is not fully comprehensive nor of 
the best quality. But the data we do have suggest that since the launch of the Scheme, gross 
lending to SMEs has been around £40bn, although repayments have been slightly higher, so 
the overall picture of slightly negative net lending is the difference between two much larger 
numbers.  Within  that  aggregate  picture  there  are  many  individual  banks  which  have 
expanded their net lending to SMEs whilst others have contracted. That is partly why I have 
been advising business contacts to “shop around” for credit if they can. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Overall,  I  believe  the  FLS  has  successfully  shifted  the  supply  of  credit  to  households  and 
businesses  over  the  past  year,  and  is  achieving  its  policy  objectives.  Loans  have  been 
available  at  lower  cost  than  previously  and  a  range  of  indicators  suggest  that  credit 
conditions are steadily improving for households and firms. How much more borrowing there 
is in total will depend in part on what happens to the demand for credit, and also (crucially) 
on  banks’  assessment  of  the  creditworthiness  of  borrowers.  Bank  staff  projections  for  net 
lending  to  the  real  economy,  consistent  with  the  MPC’s  outlook  for  growth  in  the  August 
Inflation Report and with recent improvements in indicators of credit conditions, suggest that 
overall  credit  growth  is  likely  to  pick  up,  becoming  modestly  positive  overall  during  the 
second  half  of  the  year.  This  is  also  consistent  with  the  collective  views  of  the  FLS 
participants. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  we  have  seen  some  very  significant  developments  over  the  past  year. 
Financial  markets  have  become  less  stressed  about  tail  risks  in  the  global  economy  and 
more  stressed  about  the  outlook  for  monetary  policy,  particularly  in  the  US.  In  the  UK  we 
appear to have seen an abrupt resurgence in business and consumer confidence associated 
with renewed growth, albeit only at around trend rates so far. The MPC remains committed to 
achieving its 2% inflation target but subject to that, and to continuing financial stability, Bank 
Rate  will  not  be  raised  until  we  have  seen  unemployment  fall  to  at  least  7%  so  we  can 
explore just how much spare capacity there is in the economy. Meanwhile the Funding for 
Lending Scheme continues to support the supply of credit in the UK and has become more 
focussed  on  encouraging  lending  to  SMEs.  The  outlook  –  as  always  –  remains  very 
uncertain. But it is certainly a brighter picture than it was a year ago, and with policy set to be 
supportive, there are good reasons for expecting that improvement to continue.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
