Manuel Sánchez: Mexico’s prospects for economic growth 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  United 
States-Mexico Chamber of Commerce, New York City, 18 October 2013. 
 I  am  grateful  to  the  United  States-Mexico  Chamber  of  Commerce  in  New  York  for  the 
opportunity to speak to you today. Your invitation is especially gratifying as members of your 
organization are indispensable in promoting investment in both our countries. 
My remarks will focus on Mexico’s prospects for economic growth. The subject is timely and 
important  as  the  Mexican  economy  is  currently  in  a  slowing  phase.  Also,  perhaps  more 
crucially,  for  many  years  the  country’s  economic  performance  has  been  disappointing 
relative to its own history as well as to that of other emerging economies. It is natural to ask: 
Are  there  any  indications  of  possible  improvement  for  the  immediate  and  longer-term 
horizons? 
In order to address this issue, first, I would like to comment on the ongoing downturn and 
immediate  outlook  for  the  Mexican  economy;  second,  I  will  examine  the  implications  of 
recent developments in international financial markets for the country; third, I would like to 
take a longer view and examine the agenda for structural reforms; and, finally, I will make a 
few observations on monetary policy and inflation in Mexico. 
The economic downturn and outlook 
Since the middle of last year, Mexico’s economic activity has been decelerating significantly. 
The slowdown has been deeper and faster in 2013, with virtually no growth during the first 
quarter and a contraction in the second quarter. Recent GDP shrinkage coincided with the 
first  reduction  in  both  the  services  sector  and  consumer  expenditures  observed  during  the 
post-crisis recovery. 
The  origin  of  the  current  downturn  can  be  traced  back  to two  negative  shocks  that  began 
roughly at the same time. The first has to do with the softening of external demand during the 
second half of 2012, and in particular, of manufacturing exports, which account for around 
80 percent  of  the  country’s  total  shipments  abroad  and fueled  a  considerable  slowdown  in 
manufacturing production. However, exports have gradually gained steam during the present 
year, reducing the negative impact on the economy. The fact that manufacturing output has 
been expanding since last May could be a reflection of the external improvement. 
The  second  shock  has  been  domestic  and  more  enduring,  expressed  in  a  continuous 
contraction of public investment since the third quarter of 2012 and weak private investment. 
Behind  this  development  lie  declining  public  works  expenditures  and  the  worsening  of  an 
already  decreasing  trend  in  private  housing  construction.  Expansion  in  investment  in 
machinery and equipment has been insufficient to compensate for a fall in total construction 
spending. 
A recent drop in consumption was preceded by lower consumer confidence, which may have 
resulted from a stagnant real wage bill and low growth in total employment, both connected 
with the described shocks. 
Available  data  suggest  that  economic  growth  may  have  picked  up  in  the  third  quarter. 
Encouraging  information  includes  the  strengthening  of  manufacturing  production,  exports, 
and  PMIs.  Additionally,  services  output  and  investment  spending  grew  in  July,  while  retail 
and wholesale sales have been increasing since May. 
Prominent  concerns  center  on  the  deterioration  in  construction.  As  in  any  economy,  an 
upsurge in this sector is essential for a sustainable recovery. So far there is no indication that 
improvement in output is forthcoming, although public construction may soon bounce back 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
as  government  expenditures  align  with  budgeted  outlays.  On  the  other  hand,  a  revival  of 
private  construction may  not  be  immediate.  Housing  has  been  on  a  weakening  path since 
2008,  major  developers  now  face  solvency  problems,  and the  restructuring  of the  industry 
will likely take time. 
On the other hand, the U.S. economy has continued to show signs of strength, in particular in 
industrial production, which may have a positive impact on Mexico’s economic activity. Thus, 
most  analysts  estimate  that  the  current  downturn  will  be  short-lived  with  a  clear  rebound 
coming  next  year.  However,  downside  risks  to  this  scenario  seem  to  prevail,  including  a 
pause in the U. S. economic recovery,  which may  limit the expansion of Mexican exports, 
and a deeper deterioration of the domestic construction industry.1 
The impact of international financial conditions 
As  in  other  emerging  economies,  Mexico’s  financial  markets  have  been  affected  by  the 
extraordinary  monetary  expansions  undertaken  during  the  last  five  years  by  major  central 
banks, most prominently the U.S. Federal Reserve. Until last April, these policies constituted 
an  important  factor  behind  substantial  capital  flows  directed  to  emerging  markets  in  the 
search for higher yields. 
Obviously,  greater  capital  availability  benefits  recipient  countries,  potentially  providing 
additional  and  cheaper  means  for  financing  investment.  Nevertheless,  significant  portfolio 
inflows  may  also  pose  risk  if  they  result  in  macroeconomic  imbalances  or  financial  asset 
price rises that depart considerably from underlying fundamentals. 
Although symptoms of overheating and macroeconomic imbalances have surfaced in several 
countries,  other  emerging  economies  seem  to  have  fared  well  in  the  midst  of  the  recent 
capital  bonanza.  In  particular,  Mexico  was  one  of  the  preferred  destinations  of  portfolio 
capital inflows, as reflected by unprecedentedly high levels of peso-denominated government 
bonds held by foreigners. 
There  are  no  clear  signs  of  financial  disequilibria  in  Mexico  that  might  have  arisen  as  a 
consequence of portfolio capital inflows, given the relative stability of indebtedness indicators 
such as the ratios of the current account balance, public-sector liabilities, and total external 
debt to GDP. Additionally, growth in lending to the private sector was hardly affected by the 
capital inflows, as most were des-intermediated and, in any case, banks have shown prudent 
risk-taking while also complying with stringent regulatory requirements. 
Nor has the Mexican peso appreciated consistently, thereby harming export competitiveness. 
Other factors, such as recurrent pessimism surrounding the U.S. economic recovery, have 
often pushed the peso in the opposite direction. 
By  far,  the  financial  asset  price  most  influenced  by  capital  inflows  has  been  that  of 
government  bonds,  as  shown  by  substantial  downward  shifts  in  the  Mexican  yield  curve 
occurring  since  2010  in  tandem  with  U.S.  yield-curve  shifts.  In  turn,  lower  real  long-term 
interest  rates  and  foreign  appetite  for  higher  risk-adjusted  returns  provided  favorable 
conditions for corporate financing in Mexico and abroad. 
Since May, market anticipation that the Fed would soon start tapering its monetary stimulus 
has translated into lower prices for many financial assets, hitting those of emerging markets, 
previously considered darling destinations for international capital flows, especially hard. 
Mexico’s financial adjustments to this change in market sentiment, though significant, have 
occurred in an orderly way. From May to mid-September of this year, ten-year government 
                                                
1   From June to September of this year, the median analysts’ estimate of GDP growth for 2013 fell from 2.8 to 
1.5 percent, while for 2014 it decreased only from 4.0 to 3.7 percent. See Banco de México, Encuesta sobre 
las expectativas de los especialistas en economía del sector privado, June and September. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
bond  yields  increased  by  more  than  160  basis  points,  financial  volatility  widened 
considerably,  and  the  Mexican  peso  depreciated  vs.  the  U.S.  dollar.  However,  capital 
outflows  were  not  extraordinary,  foreign  holdings  of  government  bonds  declined  only 
modestly, and the foreign-exchange market remained highly liquid. 
The Fed’s decision in September to postpone tapering, needless to say, came as a surprise. 
This  development  has  reduced  market  pressures  somewhat.  However,  given  uncertainty 
over the future course of U.S. monetary policy, new bouts of volatility cannot be ruled out. 
Additionally, tapering may pose some risks to Mexico’s economic rebound if the effect of less 
benign  international  financial  conditions  is  not  sufficiently  offset  by  that  of  a  stronger  U.S. 
economic outlook. 
A long view on structural reforms 
During the last few months, Mexico has seen significant momentum on a structural reform 
agenda,  a  phenomenon  that  has  not  occurred  in  about  two  decades.  The  scope  of  the 
initiatives is wide and progress already achieved, noteworthy. 
The ongoing reform movement is a fortunate development as the pursued transformations 
seek to tackle the most important underlying problem behind the disappointing performance 
of the Mexican economy during the last three decades: stagnant productivity. 
Indeed, the objectives of the reforms, which involve many sectors of the economy, center on 
fostering competition and market flexibility, thereby allowing for a more efficient allocation of 
resources as well as lower prices of productive inputs and of final goods and services. The 
welfare gains from these changes, if fully implemented, could be significant. 
Without  attempting  to  provide  a  complete  picture  of  the  reforms,  I  would  like  to  highlight 
some of the salient features of three new legislative changes and a bill recently submitted to 
the Mexican Congress, all of which seem particularly promising in terms of potential benefits. 
A first reform, approved in November 2012, seeks to make labor relations more flexible by 
reducing  obstacles  to  job  mobility  and  labor  market  efficiency.  In  particular,  the  new 
legislation allows for new hiring practices such as trial, training, and temporary contracts, and 
the  possibility  of  part-time  employment  and  hourly  wages.  Also,  it  prohibits  a  union 
membership  requirement  for  hiring,  and  promotes  wage  increases  based  on  productivity 
rather than seniority. 
At the same time, the approved legislation reduces wage compensation after labor disputes. 
Greater  ease  in  hiring  and  dismissal  is  expected  to  increase  formal  employment,  which  is 
typically  more  productive  than  informal  work.  The  combination  of  these  measures  may 
increase not only formal employment, but also potential GDP growth as well.2 
A second reform, approved in 2013, aims at improving the skills and commitment of teachers 
in  public  schools  for  all  levels  of  pre-college  education.  The  reform  establishes  new 
conditions  for  teachers  to  be  hired,  keep  their  jobs  and  become  promoted.  In  particular, 
admission  to  the  field  will  be  granted  through  competitive  exams,  thereby  eliminating  the 
practice of guaranteeing automatic job placements to graduates of public teaching schools, 
and the inheritance or sale of teaching positions. 
An  independent  institution  will  be  in  charge  of  evaluating  teacher  performance  in  order  to 
keep a position. Also, conditions are established on salaries and penalties in case of lack of 
fulfillment  of  duties.  These  basic  changes  point  in  the  direction  of  improving  the  quality  of 
education, a highly necessary step given the importance of investment in human capital to 
                                                
2   For an estimation of possible medium- and long-term effects of the labor reform on potential growth and formal 
employment, see Banco de México (2013), Inflation Report: October–December 2012, February. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
enhance  productivity  and  the  worrisome  results  obtained  in  educational  achievement  tests 
and evaluations in Mexico.3 
A third reform, also approved this year, pursues greater competition in key economic areas, 
with  a  special  emphasis  on  telecommunications.  The  reform  strengthens  the  institutional 
framework  of  the  Federal  Economic  Competition  Commission  in  order  for  it  to  effectively 
monitor and take legal action against possible anticompetitive practices in all areas except 
telecommunications, over which a separate authority will preside. 
Particular focus is placed on eliminating barriers to competition in telecommunications. The 
legislation opens the door to new operators interested in all types of services, and to current 
players seeking to offer additional, previously excluded services, provided that certain market 
non-concentration requirements are satisfied. Limits to foreign direct investment in telecom, 
satellite,  and  radio  communications  are  reduced.  Additionally,  new  national  television 
networks will be auctioned. 
A more competitive telecommunications industry is expected to generate wider and cheaper 
access to efficient communications, potentially improving productivity, while at the same time 
providing the consumer with more choice. 
A significant initiative recently submitted to Congress concerns the energy sector. For oil and 
hydrocarbons,  the  proposal  envisions  private  participation  in  exploration  and  extraction 
through contracts based on result sharing. Additionally, it opens the possibility of permits to 
private  participants  in  gas  processing  and  oil  refining,  as  well  as  transportation,  storage, 
distribution, and commercialization. 
For electricity, the bill proposes allowing private participation in generation and sale to third 
parties  through  access  to  the  public  transmission  network.  If  approved,  this  reform  may 
substantially  boost  investment  for  several  years  and  reduce  the  costs  of  basic  productive 
inputs, yielding wide benefits to the economy. 
Inflation and monetary policy 
During the last decade, monetary policy has been oriented towards achieving a three percent 
permanent inflation target. A variability interval of plus or minus one percentage point around 
this  objective  accounts  for  price  fluctuations  which  could  mainly  arise  from  the  non-core 
components of the National Consumer Price Index. 
Focused  on  its  constitutionally  mandated  primary  objective  of  price  stability,  the  Bank  of 
Mexico  has  set  its  policy  interest  rate  taking  into  account,  among  other  factors,  how  the 
cyclical  phase  of  the  economy  may  affect  future  inflation.  Hence,  in  the  midst  of  the  big 
contraction  of  2009,  the  central  bank  lowered  its  policy  interest  rate  from  8.25  to 
4.50 percent, and in 2013 it has further reduced it to 3.75 percent. 
In the last ten years, annual inflation has remained much lower than historical levels. This 
has  been  possible  thanks  to  the  support  of  a  prudent  fiscal  stance,  a  prerequisite  for  the 
credibility of monetary policy in any country and, hence, something which should continue to 
be safeguarded in the future. 
In 2013, after a spike resulting from agricultural price shocks, annual inflation has recently 
fallen,  reaching  3.4  percent  in  September.  As  in  previous  years,  medium-  and  long-term 
inflation expectations have remained relatively stable, though above the permanent target. 
In  the  future,  several  risks  need  to  be  assessed  for  maintaining  inflation  under  control, 
including possible pressures from renewed financial volatility and new shocks from non-core 
price components. In any case, the Governing Board of the Bank of Mexico has repeatedly 
                                                
3   See, for example, OECD (2010), PISA 2009 at a Glance, OECD Publishing. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
stated  that  it  will  continue  to  be  vigilant,  acting  in  a  timely  way  if  shocks to  relative  prices 
could potentially contaminate inflation expectations and put convergence to the permanent 
inflation target at risk. 
Concluding remarks 
To conclude, after a year of economic slowing, the 2013 third quarter has seen encouraging 
signs of improvement. The outlook for the Mexican economy includes a recovery next year, 
although  downside  risks  prevail,  including  an  adverse  external  scenario  and  protracted 
difficulties for construction-sector restructuring. 
Although domestic financial markets have operated in an orderly way in the face of changing 
international  sentiment  toward  emerging  economies,  further  bouts  of  volatility  may  pose 
some  challenges  to  both  inflation  control  and  the  strengthening  of  a  recovery  in  the  short 
term. Finally, Mexico’s current momentum in structural reform is highly promising, as both the 
changes approved and those under discussion seek to enhance productivity growth, a key 
element for underpinning greater long-term economic expansion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
