Benoît Coeuré: Interview in Die Zeit 
Interview with Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, in Die Zeit, conducted by Mr Mark Schieritz and published on 9 December 2013. 
 Mr Cœuré, do you know what the interest rate on savings accounts in Germany is? 
Very low, probably close to 0%. 
That’s  correct.  Some  banks  pay  0.25%  or  even  less.  Can  you  relate  to  savers  in 
Germany being annoyed that the European Central Bank (ECB) is making them foot 
the bill for the crisis? 
Rates  are  very  low  because  the  euro  area  economy  is  weak.  Take  the  example  of  low 
long-term interest rates on German government bonds, which are important for life insurance 
contracts and pensions. 
Why exactly is the weak economy responsible for low rates? 
If growth is weak, there are few profitable investment opportunities. As savings need to be 
invested in order to achieve returns, this means that returns are low. Low market rates also, 
however,  create  the  conditions  for  new  growth  and  this  will  also  boost  future  returns  on 
savings. 
So you are saying that German savers benefit from the ECB’s low rates? 
My  message  is:  it  is  important  to  differentiate  between  long-term  rates  for  savers  and  the 
policy  rate  of  the  ECB.  Long-term  rates  are  low  because  the  economy  is  weak.  In  such 
circumstances, the ECB has to set its policy rate in such a way as to ensure price stability. 
Thereby  we  support  the  economy  and  create  the  conditions  for  profitable  investment 
opportunities – and this is also of benefit to German savers. 
So what would you say to Germans who are worried about their retirement provision? 
I would tell them that the best way to improve the return on their savings is for the crisis to be 
solved  as  quickly  as  possible.  This  means  that  the  economic  reforms  have  to  be 
implemented  in  the  stressed  countries,  but  it  also  means  that  we  have  to  complete  the 
measures  designed  to  make  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  safer.  We  need,  above  all,  a 
functioning  banking  union  so  that  German  government  bonds  are  not  the  only  safe  haven 
assets in the euro area anymore. 
If Germany still had the Deutsche Mark, interest rates would be higher. 
I  don’t  want  to  speculate  on  hypothetical  issues.  Our  currency  is  the  euro.  But  look  at 
Switzerland:  the  country  has  its  own  currency  and  interest  rates  are  extremely  low 
nevertheless, namely because investors consider it a safe haven like Germany. 
You mentioned price stability. Inflation is currently very low. Where’s the harm in that? 
It is, above all, a question of confidence. The ECB is committed to maintaining price stability, 
by which we mean keeping inflation below, but close to, 2% – and we have achieved this 
objective. Average inflation since the introduction of the euro is 2.03%. This has contributed 
to  economic  stability  in  Europe.  If  we  were  to  miss  our  objective,  people  would  start  to 
question our commitment. That also holds if we were to tolerate inflation rates that were too 
low. We cannot risk such a loss of confidence. 
The main reason for the current low level of inflation is price and cost adjustment in 
the crisis countries, thereby enabling these countries to become more competitive. 
It is good that the economies needing to regain competitiveness adjust. But the adjustment is 
much easier if inflation in the euro area as a whole stands at 2%, rather than, say, 1%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Why? 
We know from experience that, at least in Europe, it is very difficult to cut nominal wages. If 
prices are rising, you get the desired effect – the cost of labour declines in real terms – just 
by holding nominal wages constant. This is why there is no major central bank in the world 
that seeks to eliminate inflation completely. Inflation should be at a low, but positive level. 
The inflation rate in the euro area is currently at 0.9%. If we take you at your word, the 
ECB is in fact not doing its job. 
It is true that, as a result of the weak economy, there is little scope for prices to increase. But 
we expect the rate of inflation to come back to 2% over the medium term. 
According to your staff projections, inflation will be below the target until 2015. What 
do you mean by medium term? 
We are not giving a more precise time frame, but we are certainly not talking about a decade 
or a generation. 
If  the  countries  in  the  south  have  lower  inflation  rates  and  the  ECB  wants  to  keep 
overall inflation at 2%, then that means logically that Germany has to accept higher 
inflation. 
It is not a goal of our policy to artificially increase inflation in Germany. But if the German 
economy  keeps  doing  well,  and  wages  increase,  inflation  will  naturally  also  increase 
somewhat.  That  is  a  result  of  market  decisions.  What  is  important  for  us  is  that  average 
inflation in the euro area as a whole returns to our objective. 
And what if it does not? 
We cut interest rates last month because we came to the conclusion that inflation would stay 
below target for too long. Looking ahead, if we come to the conclusion that this remains the 
case, we would have to act again. This is not our scenario at this stage, however. We are 
confident  that  inflation  will  gradually  come  back  to  2%,  mainly  because  the  euro  area 
economy  will  come  out  of  recession.  But  of  course  we  have  to  monitor  the  situation  very 
carefully. I do not want to rule out further steps. 
Interest rates are already close to zero. What could you do? 
There are a number of things we could do. We could cut interest rates again, by, say, moving 
the  deposit  rate  into  negative  territory,  and  we  could  provide  additional  liquidity  to  the 
banking  sector.  Which  of  these  options  –  if  any  –  we  will  use  depends  on  the  economic 
developments. We could also combine these measures. 
As for the crisis in Europe, would you say that the worst is over? 
I would say that the worst of the financial crisis in a narrow sense is over. The main task of 
European authorities this year and last year was to stabilise financial markets. This has been 
largely  successful:  markets  are  much  calmer  and  have  more  confidence  in  European 
recovery now. The main task next year will be to get the economy going. 
Some people in Germany say that France, your home country, is the biggest risk for 
the Monetary Union. 
I would certainly not call France a risk in terms of financial stability. The French financial and 
banking  system  is  resilient.  There  is  currently  no  danger  whatsoever  that  the  country  may 
lose access to financial markets. The problem is that growth could remain weak if reforms 
are  not  taken  forward.  Companies  have  to  increase  their  competitiveness  and  the 
government has to get the budget under control by cutting public spending.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
