Øystein Olsen: Macroprudential regulation and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Centre  for  Monetary  Economics  (CME)/BI  Norwegian  Business  School,  Oslo,  7  October 
2013. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. Original presentation is on Norges Bank (Central 
Bank of Norway) website. Charts in pdf 
International  economic  developments  in  recent  years  have  presented  a  challenge  to  the 
economic policy framework. An important lesson from the financial crisis is that regulation of 
the financial system must be improved and that the macroprudential perspective in particular 
needs  to  be  strengthened.  Development  of  macroprudential  regulatory  frameworks  is 
therefore underway in a number of countries, including Norway. Experience shows, however, 
that  financial  crises  are  very  difficult  to  predict  and  prevent.  The  aim  of  macroprudential 
regulation  is  to  reduce  the  probability  of  a  crisis  and  counteract  harmful  effects  in  the 
financial system when a crisis occurs. 
A  related  issue  is  how  monetary  policy  should  respond  to  financial  imbalances,  and  more 
specifically, what the implications of the new macroprudential policy tools will be for monetary 
policy. How monetary policy is conducted and communicated is also evolving, both abroad 
and in Norway. Norges Bank has decided to launch a major research project with a view to 
further  developing  the  framework  for  flexible  inflation  targeting.  I  will  return  to  this  topic 
towards the end of this address. 
Since Norges Bank will be providing the Ministry of Finance with concrete advice regarding a 
countercyclical  capital  buffer,  I  would  like  to  devote  some  time  to  stating  the  reasons  why 
such  a  buffer  is  necessary,  and  why,  more  generally,  regulation  of  the  banking  sector  is 
necessary.  Then  I  shall  touch  upon  the  interaction  with  monetary  policy  and  will  also  add 
some brief comments about some of the challenges facing monetary policy in the wake of 
the financial crisis. 
Why capital regulation? 
A  well  functioning  financial  market  is  essential  for  virtually  all  other  economic  activity  in  a 
market economy. Banks are a key component of the financial system. Banks channel money 
from savers to investors. Banks determine who should be given credit and closely monitor 
borrowers  and  their  projects.  This  is  a  task  that  would  be  difficult  for  small  savers  to 
undertake. 
Resilient banks and prudent banking are important for a solid and stable economy. If banks 
end up with insufficient equity capital following substantial losses in bad times, they will have 
to  tighten  lending.  This  may  serve  to  amplify  the  downturn,  as  is  currently  the  case  in  a 
number of European countries. 
Compared with other enterprises, banks have limited equity capital. It is often more costly for 
banks to fund lending with equity capital than with deposits and borrowing from the market. 
As deposits are readily available to depositors and many deposits are covered by a deposit 
guarantee, depositors accept a relatively low interest rate. The insurance premium banks pay 
for  the  deposit  guarantee  bears  little  relation  to  the  risk  the  bank  takes.  In  addition,  since 
investors can expect that the authorities will come to the aid of banks in distress, they may 
be satisfied with a lower return. The result is an underpricing of risk, potentially  leading to 
excessive risk-taking. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Low  equity  ratios  reduce  loss-absorbing  capacity  and,  at  the  same  time,  strengthen  the 
incentive  to  take  risks.  While  owners  cannot  lose  more  than  their  equity  stake,  there  is  a 
potential  for  high  returns  on  the  equity  capital  they  have  invested.  Banks’  owners  lack 
incentives to take full account of the risk imposed on creditors. 
To avoid a situation where banks hold inadequate equity capital, banks are subject to capital 
requirements.  Each  bank  should  hold  capital  in  proportion  to  its  risk  exposure.  This  is  the 
basis of microprudential bank regulation. 
But  even  if  each  individual  bank  appears  to  be solid  on  its  own,  the  banking  system  as  a 
whole  may  be  vulnerable.  Risk  in  the  system  has  several  sources.  Externalities  between 
banks are one important source. Banks are exposed to one another and can inflict losses on 
one  another  directly.  Banks  can  also  inflict  substantial  losses  on  one  another  if  they  have 
shared  exposures  outside  of  the  banking  system.  This  was  clearly  evident  during  the 
financial  crisis.  When  a  bank  is  forced  to  sell  off  assets,  these  assets  fall  in  value.  This 
weakens the balance sheets of other banks holding the same type of assets. 
Systemic  risk  also  arises from  externalities  in  the  interaction  between  the  financial  system 
and  the  real  economy.  Financial  crises  generally  occur  following  a  period  of  mutually 
reinforcing  increases  in  credit,  property  prices  and  demand  for  goods  and  services, 
culminating  in  a  bubble  that  reaches  bursting  point.  Each  individual  loan  makes  a  scant 
contribution to overall risk, but gradually, as debt burdens increase, the economy becomes 
more  vulnerable  to  shocks.  Chart  1  shows  that  Norway  has  also  experienced  periods  of 
especially  strong  credit  growth  that  have  been  interrupted  by  financial  crises.  The 
subsequent losses in the real economy have been substantial. 
Ahead  of  both  the  banking  crisis  of  the  1990s  and  the  financial  crisis,  lending  growth  far 
outpaced  growth  in  deposits.  Banks  relied  increasingly  on  short-term  wholesale  funding, 
exacerbating the vulnerability of the banking system itself. Wholesale funding often dries up 
or becomes considerably more expensive in turbulent times. 
Banking regulation must therefore include a macroprudential perspective. The purpose is to 
dampen  the  build-up  of  systemic  risk  and  ensure  that  the  banking  system  as  a  whole  is 
resilient  to  shocks.  In  a  number  of  countries,  frameworks  are  now  being  established  for 
macroprudential regulation, along with efforts to put policy instruments in place. In Norway, 
the  Financial  Institutions  Act  has  recently  been  amended,  with  effect  from  July  2013.  The 
amendments have been harmonised with new EU regulations. The amended act sets higher 
capital requirements for Norwegian banks and includes a countercyclical capital buffer. The 
amendments also authorise the Ministry of Finance to issue regulations on the use of other 
macroprudential instruments. 
Preferably, such instruments should focus directly on the sources of systemic risk. This is the 
principle  that  is  applied  when  taxes  are  imposed  directly  on  environmentally  hazardous 
products. However, in practice, this is difficult to accomplish in the financial system. Systemic 
risk  can  be  difficult  to  identify  and  has  numerous  sources.  The  financial  system  and  its 
interaction  with  the  real  economy  is  complex,  and  problems  spread  across  borders.  The 
financial crisis was a clear reminder of this. We have experienced on previous occasions that 
some financial sector operators find ways to evade regulations. New sources and forms of 
systemic  risk  may  also  arise.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  instruments  that  can  fully  prevent 
financial  crises  from  developing.  Yet  it  is  still  appropriate  to  increase  banks’  resilience  to 
losses  when  systemic  risk  increases.  This  is  the  primary  purpose  of  the  countercyclical 
capital buffer. 
Countercyclical capital buffer 
The  new  framework  contains  a  number  of  new  capital  adequacy  requirements.  There  are 
new buffer requirements in addition to the minimum Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
ratio  requirement.  Banks  that  do  not  meet  the  buffer  requirements  will  face  restrictions  on 
distributing dividend and paying out bonuses. 
The capital conservation buffer is permanent and independent of systemic risk. The systemic 
risk buffer is designed to act as a buffer against more persistent systemic risk and will apply 
to  all  Norwegian  banks.  In  addition, the  largest banks  will  be  subject to  a  separate capital 
buffer  requirement.  Finanstilsynet  (Financial  Supervisory  Authority)  has  been  given  until 
1 November  of  this  year  to  assess  criteria  for  identifying  systemically  important  financial 
institutions.  These  assessments  are  being  done  in  collaboration  with  Norges  Bank.1  The 
countercyclical capital buffer is designed to act as a buffer against systemic risk that varies 
over  time.  The  size  of  the  buffer  is  to  be  assessed  each  quarter,  and  will  normally  be 
between 0 and 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets. 
On  4  October,  a  regulation  relating  to  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  was  issued  by  the 
Government.  Norges  Bank  has  been  tasked  with  preparing  a  basis  for  the  buffer  decision 
and  providing  advice  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  regarding  the  buffer  four  times  a  year.  In 
preparing its advice, Norges Bank will exchange relevant information and assessments with 
Finanstilsynet. Since March of this year, Norges Bank has published an assessment of the 
need  for  a  countercyclical  capital  buffer  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  in  addition  to  its 
monetary policy assessment. Norges Bank will give its first advice on the level of the buffer to 
the Ministry of Finance in connection with the next Monetary Policy Report, to be published 
at the beginning of December. 
In  line  with  the  purpose  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  Norges  Bank  has  formulated 
three  criteria  for  setting  an  appropriate  countercyclical  capital  buffer.  The  buffer  should 
ensure that the resilience of banks is strengthened during an upturn. The buffer requirement 
(size  of  the  buffer)  should  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  other  requirements  applying  to  banks, 
particularly when new requirements are introduced. One of the most important purposes of 
the capital buffer is to alleviate stress in the financial system. 
History shows that the groundwork for banking crises is laid during upturns. When financial 
imbalances build up, this increases the likelihood of substantial losses in the entire banking 
system. In an environment characterised by large losses, insufficient equity capital may force 
banks to curtail lending to households and enterprises, amplifying a downturn. Banks should 
therefore hold larger capital buffers when financial imbalances are building up or have built 
up. 
Norges  Bank’s  advice  regarding  the  buffer  will  primarily  be  based  on  four  key  indicators: 
Total  credit  as  a  percentage  of  mainland  GDP,  the  wholesale  funding  ratio  of  Norwegian 
credit  institutions,  the  ratio  of  house  prices to  disposable  income  and commercial  property 
prices. 
Both economic theory and historical experience from a number of countries provide support 
for the view that these indicators capture systemic risk. The chart shows the indicators along 
with an estimated trend and a mean.2 The greater the positive gap above trend, the stronger 
is the signal of vulnerability and imbalances. 
In  line  with  the  recommendations  from  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and 
from  the  European  Commission,  there  should  not  be  a  mechanical  relationship  between 
developments in the indicators and Norges Bank’s advice on the buffer. The advice will build 
on the Bank’s professional judgement and take into account factors other than the indicators 
mentioned.  The  weight  given  to  different  indicators  may  vary.  As  we  gain  experience  and 
insight, the set of indicators can be developed further. 
                                                
1   http://www.regjeringen.no/en/dep/fin/news/news/2013/systemically-important-credit-institutio.html?id=726797. 
2   The trend is estimated using a one-sided Hodrick-Prescott filter (lambda = 400000) extended using a forecast. 
The mean is for the entire period in the chart. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Uncertainty  and  the  need  for  resilience  suggest  that  the  buffer  should  not  be  reduced 
automatically  even  if  there  are  signs  that  financial  imbalances  are  receding.  In  periods  of 
prolonged  lending  growth  and  low  losses,  banks  should  normally  hold  a  countercyclical 
capital buffer. 
Banks will be allowed to draw on the buffer in the event of an economic downturn and large 
bank losses. If the buffer functions as intended, banks will tighten lending to a lesser extent 
in a downturn. This may mitigate the procyclical effects of tighter bank lending. The four key 
indicators  are  not  well  suited  to  signalling  whether  the  buffer  should  be  reduced.  Other 
information,  such  as  market  turbulence  and  loss  prospects  for  the  banking  sector,  will  be 
more relevant. 
The benefits of higher capital requirements for banks must be weighed against any costs the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  imposes  on  the  economy.  Several  analyses,  such  as  those 
conducted  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  suggest  that  higher  capital 
requirements  will  not  give  rise  to  considerable,  permanent  economic  costs  in  the  longer 
term.3 In the short term, higher capital requirements may result in lower growth in credit and 
overall  GDP.  Analyses  conducted  by  Norges  Bank  using  Norwegian  data  find  similar 
patterns.4 
When  credit  growth  is  strong,  a  higher  buffer  requirement  may  restrain  the  build-up  of 
financial  imbalances.  But  if  capital  requirements  are  raised  too  quickly,  the  result  may  be 
excessive credit tightening. The level of the buffer must therefore be considered in the light of 
other capital requirements. 
The decision basis for setting the countercyclical capital buffer has been harmonised with the 
international  regulatory  framework  from  the  Basel  Committee  and  the  EU.  In  the  EU,  the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  is  responsible  for  formulating  guidelines  for  EU 
countries. Norges Bank and Finanstilsynet have been invited to participate in key committees 
and working groups under the ESRB to assist in the development of this framework. 
The  impact  on  the  economy  of  a  higher  buffer  will  depend  on  how  banks  adjust.  Roughly 
speaking, banks can raise their capital ratios in two ways. They can increase equity capital or 
reduce risk-weighted assets. 
Banks  can  increase  equity  capital  by  raising  fresh  equity  or  by  boosting  earnings  and 
withholding dividends. When it is more expensive to fund lending with equity capital than with 
deposits or other debt, increasing the buffer will increase banks’ funding costs. These costs 
will, to some extent, be passed on to customers, dampening credit demand. 
Banks  can  also  improve  their  capital  ratios  by  reducing  risk-weighted  assets.  This  can  be 
done  in  two  ways.  Banks  can  reduce  lending  volumes.  Banks  can  also  change  the 
composition  of  their  lending  portfolio  by  shifting  into  lower  risk-weighted  assets,  by,  for 
example, tightening lending to enterprises and increasing lending to households. 
Norwegian banks are well on the way to adjusting to new and higher capital requirements, 
including  a  countercyclical  capital  buffer.  Developments  in  banks’  earnings  indicate  that 
banks can increase their CET1 ratios by around 1 percentage point a year without reducing 
lending growth.5  
                                                
3   Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  An  assessment  of  the  long-term  economic  impact  of  stronger 
capital and liquidity requirements, August 2010. For an updated collection of references to studies of the costs 
and benefits of macroprudential regulation, see Annex 1 in IMF Working Paper WP/13/167, by Arregui et al. 
“Evaluating the Net Benefits of Macroprudential Policy: A cookbook”, July 2013. 
4   See Norges Bank Memo No. 1 2013 for further discussion and references. 
5  
In the calculation there is an assumption of an annual increase in banks’ risk-weighted assets of around 4%, 
earnings  in  line  with  2012  and  all  profits  are  used  to  increase  equity  capital.  It  is  also  assumed  that  the 
transitional arrangement is retained and is binding. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Capital requirements and monetary policy 
The  countercyclical  capital  buffer  and  the  key  policy  rate  are  two  instruments  serving 
different objectives. The objective of the countercyclical capital buffer is to increase banks’ 
resilience to losses in a downturn. The primary objective of monetary policy is low and stable 
inflation. The key policy rate is set with a view to keeping inflation close to 2.5 percent over 
time  without  triggering  excessive  fluctuations  in  output  and  employment.  Monetary  policy 
also  seeks  to  be  robust  and  take  into  account  the  risk  that  financial  imbalances  in  the 
economy build up. 
Even though the objectives differ, both of these instruments work through banks’ responses. 
The level of the countercyclical buffer may therefore affect the conduct of monetary policy. 
Increased buffer requirements may induce banks to increase their lending margins or restrict 
access to credit in other ways. More restrained lending growth will dampen economic activity. 
This  will  in  turn  contribute  to  lower  inflation.  Thus,  an  increase  in  capital  requirements 
resulting  in  rising  lending  margins  suggests,  in  isolation,  a  lower  key  policy  rate.  Other 
developments in the economy may amplify or dampen this effect. 
Allow me to refer to a recently developed version of our model for the Norwegian economy, 
NEMO,  to  illustrate  this  point.  In  this  version  of  NEMO,  the  credit  market  is  modelled 
explicitly.6 Households and enterprises can borrow from banks, but only against equity. For a 
household, the value of their dwelling is important as collateral. A rise in house prices can 
thereby  allow  households  to  borrow  more,  increasing  their  debt.  This  mechanism  is  an 
example of what is referred to in the literature as a financial accelerator.7 In the model, banks 
also face capital requirements that affect their capital costs. 
Let us take as our starting point the following scenario, which has similarities to the economic 
situation over the past few years. Interest rates abroad have fallen and there are prospects 
that  they  will  remain  low  for  an  extended  period.  At  the  same  time,  higher  capital 
requirements  for  banks  have  seemed  likely  for  some  time  and,  in  response,  banks  have 
increased their lending margins. 
In  this  chart,  we  have  used  the  NEMO  model  to  analyse  how  these  factors  affect  the 
economy,  including  the  interest  rate.  Low  interest  rates  abroad  widen  the  interest  rate 
differential against other countries. This points towards a stronger exchange rate, which will 
result  in  lower  inflation  and  output  further  ahead.  At  the  same  time,  banks  keep  lending 
margins higher than normal for a period in order to build up capital. 
Higher  bank  lending  margins  and  lending  rates  dampen  growth  and  inflation.  Both  higher 
lending margins and lower interest rates abroad imply a lower key policy rate in Norway. 
In this scenario, the central bank reduces the key policy rate, but by less than the decrease 
in interest rates abroad. As a result, the krone appreciates. This leads in the short term to 
lower activity and inflation, but a lower key policy rate and slightly lower bank lending rates 
will  gradually  result  in  higher  capacity  utilisation  and  higher  inflation.  Borrowers,  however, 
only  experience  a  limited  reduction  in  bank  lending  rates  because  of  the  assumed  rise  in 
bank lending margins. Somewhat lower interest rates and higher output nonetheless result in 
increased credit growth. 
What  if  capital  requirements  had  not  been  tightened?  The  results  in  this  scenario  are 
indicated by the blue lines in the chart. Without higher capital requirements, banks’ lending 
margins would have been more stable. 
                                                
6   For  a  more  detailed  description  of  the  improved  version  of  NEMO,  see  Brubakk,  L.  and  P.  Gelain  (2013): 
“NEMO  –  A  monetary  business  cycle  model  with  financial  frictions”.  Forthcoming  in  the  Norges  Bank  Staff 
Memo series. 
7   See for example Bernanke, B., M. Gertler and S. Gilchrist (1999): “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative 
Business Cycle Framework.” Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier, pp. 1341–1993. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Lower interest rates abroad suggest a reduction in the key policy rate. Bank lending rates 
largely track the key policy rate. This leads to higher demand and output and accelerating 
debt growth. These factors suggest that the reduction in the key policy rate should now be 
smaller  than  in  the  scenario  involving  increased  capital  requirements  and  higher  lending 
margins. As a result, the appreciation of the krone is more marked, and inflation will deviate 
more  widely  from  the  target.  The  effects  on  capacity  utilisation  and  credit  growth  are  also 
slightly  more  pronounced.  In  simplified  terms,  it  can  be  said  that  without  higher  capital 
requirements,  monetary  policy 
trade-offs  become  more  demanding  and  economic 
developments somewhat less balanced. 
The  model  example  illustrates  a  general  point.  When  several  instruments  are  available  in 
economic  policy,  several  goals  can  be  achieved  at  the  same  time.  Stricter  capital 
requirements  could  influence  monetary  policy  in  a  number  of  ways.  First,  a  tightening  of 
capital  requirements  would  counteract  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances.  Second,  the 
countercyclical  buffer  could  cushion  the  adverse  effects  of  a  future  downturn  on  bank 
lending.  Third,  higher  levels  of  equity  capital  will  increase  banks’  resilience  and  thereby 
reduce the likelihood of financial crises. 
The  example  also  sheds  light  on  conditions  that  have  been  important  to  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy  in  recent  years.  Low  interest  rates  internationally  are  an  important 
explanation for the low key policy rate in Norway. At the same time, banks have increased 
their lending margins in anticipation of higher capital requirements. 
Let  me  emphasise  that  capital  adequacy  requirements  are  only  one  of  several  factors 
influencing bank lending margins and rates. And bank lending rates are only one of many 
factors that are given weight when the key policy rate is set. The relationship between capital 
requirements and the key policy rate is not straightforward. 
The example above shows that it may be appropriate to lower the key policy rate while at the 
same time tightening capital requirements for banks. But situations could also arise where it 
would  be  appropriate  to  raise the key  policy  rate  while  at  the  same  time  tightening  capital 
requirements for banks. This could be the case if the economy was booming, with prospects 
for high inflation and a concurrent risk of a build-up of financial imbalances. Conversely, in a 
sharp downturn with higher bank losses, it may be appropriate to reduce both the key policy 
rate and the countercyclical buffer. 
The countercyclical capital buffer is not a stabilisation policy instrument. The buffer is more 
likely to vary over longer credit cycles than follow the normal business cycle. Furthermore, 
knowledge  and  experience  of  macroprudential  regulation  is  incomplete  and  at  an  early 
stage.8  And  we  know  from  experience  that financial  market  participants often find  ways  to 
evade  regulations.9  Taking  the  risk  of  a  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  into  account  will 
therefore  continue  to  be  one  of  the  criteria  for  an  appropriate  interest  rate  path  and  an 
important element in a robust monetary policy framework. 
                                                
8   For a review of our currently limited experience of macroprudential instruments, see for example Smets, F. 
(2013): “Financial stability and monetary policy: How closely interlinked?” Lecture at a conference arranged by 
Riksbanken. 
9   Jeremy Stein, member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, has pointed out that it is more difficult to 
evade the interest rate: “while monetary policy may not be quite the right tool for the job, it has one important 
advantage relative to supervision and regulation – namely that it gets in all of the cracks... changes in rates 
may  reach  into  corners  of  the  market  that  supervision  and  regulation  cannot.”  See  Stein,  J.  (2013): 
Overheating  in  Credit  Markets:  Origins,  Measurement,  and  Policy  Responses.  Speech  at  a  research 
symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Interest rate paths and communication 
Our  problems  in  maintaining  a  balance  in  economic  policy  in  Norway  are  nonetheless  still 
small  compared  with  the  challenges  facing  other  countries.  Key  rates  are  close  to  zero  in 
many  countries,  and  a  number  of  central  banks  have  employed  unconventional  tools. 
Unconventional  monetary  policy  tools  have  taken  two  main  forms:  the  first  expansion  of 
monetary policy is often referred to as quantitative easing, or balance sheet policy. I spoke 
about this when I was here a year ago. The second expansion involves communication with 
regard to monetary policy. This has become a particularly relevant topic as the central banks 
in  the  US,  UK  and  euro  area  have  increasingly  signalled  their  policy  intentions,  known  as 
«forward guidance».10  
In Norges Bank we have openly communicated our view of interest rate developments ahead 
for many years. The Bank’s interest rate forecasts have been published since 2005. The way 
in which large central banks abroad now communicate policy intentions is similar to ours, but 
there are also differences. 
As a central bank, we can influence the shortest money market rates by changing the key 
policy  rate.  Saving,  investment  and  consumption  decisions  taken  by  households  and 
enterprises, however, are influenced by expectations regarding future interest rates, i.e. the 
yield curve. Monetary policy is more effective when market participants know and understand 
the central bank’s response pattern. If economic developments differ from our assumptions, 
market interest rates can then adjust in a manner consistent with achieving the objectives of 
monetary policy. By comparison, without predictability, a central bank would have to change 
the key policy rate more frequently or by larger increments. Monetary policy would be less 
effective. 
Norges  Bank’s  publication  of  interest  rate  projections  is  an  important  part  of  achieving 
predictability in monetary policy in Norway. We also give an account of the criteria on which 
the interest rate forecast is based and we explain changes in the forecast. 
Changes in money market rates on the day the Executive Board’s interest rate decision is 
published are a simple indicator of predictability in monetary policy. Ideally, these changes 
should  be  modest.  On  average,  the  changes  in  money  market  rates  in  connection  with 
interest rate decisions have been somewhat smaller after we began to publish our interest 
rate  forecast,  despite  the  considerable  market  unrest  we  experienced  during  the  financial 
crisis. 
One of the main reasons why large central banks in other countries now publish forecasts of 
future interest rates is that they want to achieve greater clarity in their response pattern. Their 
objective is to make monetary policy more effective in an environment of very low capacity 
utilisation  and  near-zero  key  rates. To  provide  extra  stimulus  to  the  economy  under  these 
conditions, the natural course is to seek to influence longer-term interest rates more directly. 
Specific signals from central banks concerning the likely path of the interest rate can result in 
lower market rates through lower key rate expectations. Risk premiums may also decrease. 
The Federal Reserve, and recently the Bank of England, have also developed central bank 
communication  by  linking  any  introduction  of  monetary  policy  tightening  to  specific 
unemployment  thresholds.  In  August,  the  Bank  of  England  clearly  stated  that  it  does  not 
intend  to  raise  the  key  rate  until  the  unemployment  rate  falls  below  7  percent.  But  the 
promise  was  not  without  conditions.  Significant  changes  in  the  prospects  for  inflation  or 
                                                
10   The  forms  of  forward  guidance  have  been  referred  to  as  either  «Delphic»,  after  the  oracle  at  Delphi,  or 
«Odyssean», after Odysseus, who bound himself to his ship’s mast to avoid the seductive song of the Sirens. 
Delphic guidance means only stating what you believe about future interest rates. Odyssean guidance also 
includes  a  binding  promise  about  future  interest  rate  developments  (see  Campbell,  J.  et  al.  (2012): 
Macroeconomic  Effects  of  Federal  Reserve  Forward  Guidance.  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity, 
Spring 2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
financial  stability  may  lead  to  monetary  policy  tightening  before  unemployment  falls  below 
7 percent.11  
In  theory,  the  announcement  of  such  thresholds  could  be  particularly  effective  when  the 
central  bank’s  normal  response  pattern  implies  that  monetary  policy  would  have  been 
tightened  before  the  threshold  had  been  reached.  By  «binding  oneself  to  the  mast», 
monetary policy can provide an extra stimulus to the economy in a situation where there is 
otherwise limited room for manoeuvre.12  
Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  projections  are  a  conditional  forecast  and  not  a  promise. 
Economic agents can only expect the interest rate to be in line with the projection if economic 
developments are in accordance with our assumptions. But the interest rate path may also 
differ from that projected if new information emerges about the functioning of the economy or 
the effect of monetary policy. 
As shown in this chart, actual interest rates have often deviated from assumptions. This has 
been  the  case  for  both  Norges  Bank  and  other  central  banks  that  publish  interest  rate 
forecasts.  Over  the  past  five  years,  the  deviations  have  been  considerable,  owing  to  the 
financial crisis and other shocks to which the economy has been exposed. 
The  public  announcement  of  thresholds  for  changes  in  the  interest  rate  is  probably  an 
instrument  more  suited  to  a  situation  where  the  key  rate  is  close  to  zero  and  additional 
measures are needed to keep long interest rates low. The Norwegian economy is in a more 
favourable  situation  than  the  large  advanced  economies  I  have  mentioned.  Capacity 
utilisation  is  estimated  to  be  close  to  a  normal  level. We  still  have  room for manoeuvre  in 
interest rate setting. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion:  the  financial  crisis  has  shown  beyond  a  doubt  that  regulation  of  banks  and 
financial markets is necessary. However, we must not believe that problems in the financial 
sector can simply be regulated away, and we must not have exaggerated faith in our ability 
to fine-tune the economy. But an important contribution will be to ensure that those who take 
financial risks on behalf of others hold more capital. 
Monetary policy has faced considerable challenges in recent years. We think it is important 
to learn from history and from the experience of other countries and to apply those lessons in 
the further development of monetary policy. This is why we are launching a research project, 
“Flexible inflation targeting: challenges and possibilities”. 
An  important  part  of  the  background  for  this  project  is  the  fact  that  international  monetary 
policy  research  has  often  focused  on  closed  economies,  with  more  relevance  for  large 
countries  such  as  the  US.  Our  small,  open  economy  presents  particular  challenges.  How 
does  this  restrict  the  room  for  manoeuvre  in  monetary  policy?  And  how  should  monetary 
policy respond to changes in the terms of trade? 
The project will include analysis of some of the issues I have mentioned today. There is a 
need for more research on how financial stability should be taken into account in monetary 
policy.  The  project  will  also  draw  on  the  experience  we  have  gained  over  the  past  
10–15 years as the Norwegian economy was exposed to a financial crisis and a number of 
supply-side shocks. Monetary policy communication is also developing. 
                                                
11   See Bank of England: Monetary policy trade-offs and forward guidance, August 2013. 
12   See  Eggertsson,  G.  and  M.  Woodford  (2003):  The  Zero  Bound  on  Interest  Rates  and  Optimal  Monetary 
Policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2003:1, pp. 139–211, and Krugman, P. (1998): It’s Baaack: 
Japan’s  Slump  and  the  Return  of  the  Liquidity  Trap.  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity  1998:2,  
pp 137–205. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I want to reiterate here that monetary policy in Norway will continue to be oriented towards 
low  and  stable  inflation.  This  objective  provides  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor. With 
firmly anchored inflation expectations, monetary policy can contribute to stable developments 
in the real economy. Since the inflation target was introduced in 2001, inflation has varied to 
some extent, but has, on average, remained close to 2.5 percent. And monetary policy has 
been  able  to  respond  rapidly  to  changes  in  the  economic  situation.  The  monetary  policy 
mandate provides room for flexibility and discretion.In the light of the international debate on 
the role of monetary policy, Norges Bank, as the country’s central bank, should also conduct 
a  thorough  assessment  of  the  framework  for  flexible  inflation  targeting  within  our  current 
mandate. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
