Luis M Linde: Recent economic developments in the euro area and in 
Spain, and important financial system projects 
Address by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the Annual Conference 2013 
of the Asociación de Mercados Financieros, Madrid, 25 November 2013. 
 Let  me  first  thank  the  Asociación  de  Mercados  Financieros,  and  its  Chairman,  my  good 
friend  Enrique  Prados,  for  kindly  inviting  me  to  accompany  you  today  in  this  Annual 
Conference.  The  Association  –  which  draws  together  a  large  number  of  financial  market 
professionals – performs important work in channeling initiatives aimed at contributing to the 
better working of those markets. Their active collaboration with regulators in devising rules, 
their participation in public consultations and their educational role are all to be welcomed. 
My address today will be brief, so as not to outstay my welcome and encroach on your first 
course. It shall focus on three projects of particular importance for our financial system in the 
area  of  market  infrastructures.  But  allow  me  first  to  comment  on  recent  economic 
developments in the euro area and in Spain, developments that point, as we know, to a turn 
for the better. 
To the euro area first. After six consecutive quarters of contraction, second-quarter GDP in 
the  area  this  year  posted  positive  growth  of  0.3%  in  quarter-on-quarter  terms;  in  the  third 
quarter it has held at a positive rate, albeit one of only 0.1%. The recovery thus seems to be 
holding,  but  it  should  be  acknowledged  that  expectations  for  economic  growth  in  the  area 
continue to be very moderate in the short and medium term. 
The ECB continues with an expansionary policy stance. We have reached an all-time low in 
the  interest rates  on the  main  refinancing  operations,  now  at  0.25%;  since  July,  a forward 
guidance  policy  has  been  pursued,  conveying  to  economic  agents  the  ECB’s  decision  to 
keep interest rates low for a prolonged period and to maintain generous liquidity provision. 
Maintaining and stepping up this expansionary monetary policy has naturally had to do with 
the recent course of inflation, proxied by the consumer price index, which stood in October at 
0.7% for the euro area as a whole, a rate substantially off the target of 2%. 
Against  this  background,  the first  signs  of the  start  of  a  recovery  in  the  Spanish  economy 
have begun to emerge. 
As you know, in the third quarter of this year Spain posted its first positive quarter-on-quarter 
rate of change in GDP since mid-2011. 
In  the  past  two  quarters,  consumer  spending  has  shown  signs  of  stabilising,  and  even  of 
picking  up  slightly.  This positive  trend  should  continue  over  the  coming year,  although  the 
need  for  households  to  carry  on  reducing  their  debt  will  probably  check  the  expansionary 
behaviour of this demand component. 
Turning to the external sector, which remains our main source of growth, the adjustment of 
relative  costs  and  prices  under  way  in  the  Spanish  economy,  and  the  subsequent 
improvements in competitiveness, is allowing sales abroad to grow at a higher rate than that 
of the markets to which we export. Even if there is a rise in imports in the remainder of the 
year, this will provide for a strong correction of the current account balance, which will run a 
significant surplus this year of around 2% of GDP. 
In addition to achieving this improvement in competitiveness, households, firms and financial 
institutions  are  deleveraging  and  the  Spanish  economy  is  undertaking  major  reforms, 
furthering the fiscal consolidation drive, which must in any case continue through to 2015 but 
which will evidently prove easier if the recovery firms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Before  moving  to  the  second  part  of  my  address,  and  to  conclude  my  comments  on 
developments  in  activity,  I  should  like  to  refer  to  the  2012  results  of  our  Central  Balance 
Sheet  Data  Office,  and  its  preliminary  results  for  2013,  which  have  been  published  this 
morning. 
The 2012 figures illustrate the severity of the crisis that year. In 2012, Gross Value Added fell 
4.5%, 3 pp more than in 2011, and the Net Profit for the year was practically zero. 
For  2013,  however,  the  estimate  provided  by  the  quarterly  information  from  the  Central 
Balance Sheet Data Office points to a turnaround in activity and in business profits. 
In the first nine months of the year, the fall in Gross Value Added has eased across virtually 
all the productive sectors, with the principal exception of energy. Leaving this sector aside, 
Gross  Value  Added  is  expected  to  have  declined  by  2.2%,  thereby  breaking  the  trend 
towards increasingly bigger contractions in this aggregate. 
This turnaround  in  Gross  Value  Added  is  closely  related  to the  momentum  of  exports  and 
reflects the fact that sales abroad, and, especially, those targeted on countries outside the 
European  Union,  have  increased  their  relative  weight  in  net  turnover.  On  the  figures  to 
September, Net Profit rose to account for almost 12% of the sector’s Gross Value Added. 
In  short,  the  Central  Balance  Sheet  Data  Office  results  published  today  corroborate  the 
turnaround in the Spanish economy suggested by other macroeconomic indicators, although 
they  also  confirm  that  the  momentum  of  expansion  is  still  weak;  accordingly,  we  must 
persevere with the reforms and policies that have enhanced our competitiveness, the main 
engine of the improvement witnessed these past months. 
I shall now very briefly comment on three important projects for our financial system. 
The first is part of the process of reform of securities clearance, settlement and registration in 
Spain. I refer to the introduction of a central counterparty (CCP) for stock market operations. 
The use of an entity of this type has been habitual in the derivatives markets and also, more 
recently, in bond markets. With the extension of this service to equity operations, a market 
segment that  had  hitherto  remained  on  the fringes  and  set  us  apart from  more  developed 
markets has been covered. 
Through its intercession in each operation, acting as a buyer against the seller and a seller 
against  the  buyer,  the  CCP  considerably  facilitates  the  management  of  counterparty  risk. 
This centralising function, which has a major bearing on post-trade operating arrangements, 
will be subject to most stringent regulatory requirements, in line with European legislation. 
Other  objectives  it  pursues  are  to  provide  the  Spanish  securities  market  with  the  tools  to 
compete on an equal footing and with the same resources as other European markets. It is 
scheduled to come on stream in October 2015. 
On  the  European  front  I  should  like  to  mention  the  “TARGET2-Securities”  project.  As  you 
know, this project takes its name from the European payments system that came into being 
with the Monetary Union, and its aim is to use the TARGET 2 system for the settlement of 
securities operations using the accounts held by banks at central banks. 
Despite the ongoing development of post-trade infrastructure in Europe, an excessive level 
of fragmentation remains. TARGET2-Securities will considerably reduce this fragmentation, 
allowing cross-border securities settlement to be equated to domestic settlement in terms of 
costs,  efficiency  and  safety.  Moreover,  it  will  reduce  institutions’  collateral  and  liquidity 
requirements. 
TARGET2-Securities  is  the  most  ambitious  European  securities  market  integration  project 
undertaken to date. It will commence operating in June 2015, when the first migration wave 
takes place. So far, 24 European central securities depositories, accounting for practically all 
euro area markets, have committed themselves to taking part. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The second European initiative I would like to mention is SEPA, the Single Euro Payments 
Area. 
The  goal  of  the  SEPA  Project  is  to  make  electronic  payments  as  easy,  convenient  and 
straightforward for the residents of any euro area member country to carry out as are their 
cash payments in other countries in the union. The initial aim is to eliminate the differences 
between making a national payment and a cross-border one, although the benefits extend 
also  to  payments  made  in  the  national  arena.  What  is  involved  is  a  further  step  in  the 
ongoing integration of financial services in Europe. 
To achieve this, we must adapt to a new set of rules and uniform standards in Europe. But 
we have very little time remaining: Community legislation envisages SEPA being in place as 
from 1 February next year. 
It  is  a  far-reaching  project,  necessitating  changes  in  the  relationship  between  payment-
services  users  and  providers.  That  involves  efforts  and  investment  on  the  part  of financial 
institutions, but also affects users, irrespective of their size. 
It is important that banks should strive to make the transition by their customers easier. In 
this  connection,  communications  and  advice  to  customers  must  be  stepped  up,  informing 
them  of  the  new  circumstances  ahead  and  offering  them  the  necessary  support  in  their 
migration to the new payments scenario. 
Our Eurosystem central banks are firmly committed to SEPA, among other reasons because 
we  believe  it  will  contribute  to  shoring  up  confidence  in  the  single  currency,  by  helping  lift 
obstacles and promoting competition. 
And now I hope you all enjoy your meal. I believe there will be a round of questions – easy 
ones I trust – after dessert. 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
