Deepali Pant Joshi: Financial inclusion 
Speech by  Dr Deepali  Pant Joshi, Executive  Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Vth Dun & Bradstreet Conclave on Financial Inclusion, Kolkatta, 28 October 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Ms. Sushma Vij, Mr. Bipin Nair and Ms. Mruga Paranjape, is gratefully acknowledged. 
Introduction 
1.  
Mr. Sampath Kumar, Ms Preetha Mishra and my dear ladies and gentlemen. I am 
delighted to be with you this morning for the inaugural session of the fifth Dun and Bradstreet 
Financial  Inclusion  Conclave.  I  extend  warm  congratulations  to  Dun  and  Bradstreet  for 
hosting the event in the beautiful city of Kolkata. 
2.  
Financial Inclusion is not a new dispensation. Bank Nationalisation in 1969 and the 
tremendous push for branch building which followed in its wake were attempts at including 
the  excluded.  Despite  geographical  and  functional  reach  of  the  Commercial  Banks,  large 
numbers  of  people  remain  excluded.  Small  and  Marginal  farmers,  women,  unorganised 
sector workers, artisans, self-employed, unemployed, pensioners, etc. remain excluded from 
the opportunities and services provided by the formal financial sector. 
3.  
If  this  is  something  we  have  been  working  on  since  1969  what  is  the  difference 
now? Critically its technology which enables undreamt of outreach. For financial Inclusion to 
succeed  and  an  effective  Business  and  Delivery  model  to  be  in  place  it  is  essential  that 
servicing  costs  are  brought  down  and  large  numbers  covered  rapidly.  This  exponential 
growth is a possible dream with the use of technology. 
4.  
Banks  including  RRBs,  have  migrated  to  Core  Banking  System  (CBS),  have 
developed in built capability to provide remittances using electronic payment systems such 
as  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  System  (RTGS),  National  Electronic  Funds  Transfer 
(NEFT), National Electronic Clearing Service (NECS), Immediate Payments Service (IMPS), 
Aadhaar  Enabled  Payment  Systems  (AEPS)  etc.  Banks  are  increasingly  using  alternate 
channels of delivery; the number of ATMs is even more than the number of branches. All the 
rural branches are expected to have an e-ATM in place in the near future. 
5.  
Access to finance for those who are getting crowded out of the credit markets is an 
equally important element. Therefore, the Reserve Bank has reinforced its efforts to improve 
financial access, especially for small businesses and individual households. The RBI has set 
up  a  Committee  on  Comprehensive  Financial  Services  for  Small  Businesses  and  Low 
Income  Households  under  the  Chairmanship  of  Dr.  Nachiket  Mor  a  Director  on  the  RBI 
Central  Board  of  Directors.  The  mandate  of  the  Mor  Committee  is  to  frame  a  clear  and 
detailed vision of financial Inclusion and Financial Deepening in India and to lay down a set 
of design principles that will guide the development of institutional frameworks and regulation 
for ensuring these outcomes. 
6.  
Financial  Inclusion  is  defined  by  the  RBI  “as  the  process  of  ensuring  access  to 
financial services and timely and adequate credit where needed by vulnerable groups such 
as  the  weaker  sections  and  low  income  groups  at  an  affordable  cost  from  Mainstream 
financial institutions.” 
7.  
In January 2010, the Reserve Bank advised all public and private sector banks to 
submit  a  Board-approved  three-year  Financial  Inclusion  Plan  (FIP)  starting  in  April  2010. 
They were advised to devise FIPs congruent with their business strategy and comparative 
advantage and to make FIPs an integral part of their corporate plans. These plans include: 
self-set  targets  for  rural  brick  &  mortar  branches  opened;  BCs  deployed;  coverage  of 
unbanked  villages  with  population  above  and  below  2,000  through  branches/  BCs/  other 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
modes; no-frills accounts opened, including through BC-ICT; Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) and 
General  Credit  Cards  (GCC)  issued;  and  other  products  designed  for  financially  excluded 
segments.  Banks  were  advised  to  integrate  the  Board-approved  FIPs  with  their  business 
plans  and  to  include  the  criteria  on  financial  inclusion  as  a  parameter  in  the  performance 
evaluation of their staff. 
8.  
We have adopted a planned and structured approach to achieve Financial Inclusion 
through the financial inclusion Plans, as a self set targeted intervention with measurable and 
monitor  able  outcomes.  The  implementation  of  these  plans  is  closely  monitored  by  the 
Reserve  Bank  on  a  monthly  basis  through  a  quantitative  reporting  format.  The  qualitative 
aspects  of  the  FIPs  are  monitored  through  a  qualitative  report  submitted  by  banks  every 
quarter. 
Periodic  monitoring  of  progress  –  Quantitative  and  Qualitative  parameters.  These 
Board approved plans are the subject of an annual comprehensive review -Deputy Governor 
Dr  Chakrabarty  holds  one  to  one  meetings  with  CMDs  of  major  banks  to  discuss  the 
progress  made  by  them  against  their  own  self  set  goals,  the  barriers  to  progress,  the 
initiatives of their Banks and the way forward. RRBs, having migrated to CBS in the end of 
2011, have also formulated similar comprehensive FIPs. 
Progress: 
9.  
2013) on key parameters itself speaks of the journey travelled so far:- 
• 
A snapshot of the progress made by banks under the 3-year FIP (April 2010–March 
Banking outlets in villages have increased to nearly 2,68,000 from 67,694 outlets in 
March 2010. 
About 7,400 rural branches have been opened during this 3-year period compared 
with a reduction of about 1300 rural branches during the last two decades. 
Nearly  109  million  Basic  Savings  Bank  Deposit  Accounts  (BSBDAs)  have  been 
added,  taking  the total number  of  BSBDA  to  182  million.  The  share  of  ICT-based 
accounts  has  increased  substantially.  The  percentage  of  ICT  accounts  to  total 
BSBDAs increased from 25 per cent in March 2010 to 45 per cent in March 2013. 
With the addition of nearly 9.48 million farm sector households during this period, 
33.8 million households have been provided with small entrepreneurial credit as at 
the end of March 2013. 
With  the  addition  of  nearly  2.24  million  nonfarm  sector  households  during  this 
period, 3.6 million households have been provided with small entrepreneurial credit 
as at the end of March 2013. 
    About  490  million  transactions  have  been  carried  out  in  ICT-based  accounts  through  BCs 
during  the  three-year  period.  The  number  of  transactions  through  ICT-based  BC  outlets, 
though increasing, is still very low when compared with the manifold increase in the number 
of banking outlets and the number of accounts. The focus on monitoring is now more on the 
usage  of  these  accounts,  which  is  to  be  monitored  through  the  number  and  value  of 
transactions in BSBDAs and on the credit disbursed through ICT-based BC outlets. 
Financial inclusion plan 2013–16 
10.  
The first three-year Financial Inclusion Plan of banks for the period 2010–2013 has 
ended. Although there has been reasonable progress in the penetration of banking services 
and  opening  of  basic  bank  accounts,  the  number  of  transactions  through  ICT-based  BC 
outlets  is  still  low.  To  continue  the  process  of  ensuring  access  to  banking  services  to  the 
excluded, banks are to draw up a 3-year FIP for the period 2013–16. Banks have now been 
advised that their FIPs should be disaggregated to the branch level. The disaggregation of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the plans is being done to ensure the involvement of all stakeholders in the financial inclusion 
efforts. 
Direct benefit transfer: 
11.  
The  Reserve  Bank  has  played  a  proactive  role  in  the  rollout  of  the  Direct  Benefit 
Transfer  (DBT)  scheme.  State-Level  Bankers’  Committee  (SLBC)  Convenor  Banks  were 
advised  to  co-ordinate  with  the  government  functionaries  for  implementation  of  Aadhaar-
enabled payments. Banks have to expedite the process of opening bank accounts in camp 
mode and seeding of accounts with Aadhaar numbers. The status of the rollout of Aadhaar-
enabled  payments  is  a  regular  agenda  item  for  discussion  in  SLBC  meetings  as  part  of 
Financial  Inclusion/  Electronic  Benefit Transfer  (EBT)  implementation. The  DBT  was  rolled 
out  in  43  districts  in  the  first  phase  from  January  1,  2013,  and  has  been  extended  to 
78 districts from July 1, 2013. Eventually, all districts in the country will be covered. 
12.  
High-Level  Financial  Inclusion  Advisory  Committee  moving  towards  universal 
financial  inclusion  has  been  a  national  commitment  as  well  as  a  policy  priority  for  the 
Reserve Bank. In order to spearhead efforts towards greater financial inclusion, the Reserve 
Bank has constituted a Financial Inclusion Advisory Committee (FIAC) chaired by a Deputy 
Governor.  The  FIAC  has  a  few  Directors  from  the  Central  Board  of  the  Reserve  Bank, 
experts drawn from NGOs and civil society representatives as members. The expertise and 
experience  of  the  members  will  be  leveraged:  to  develop  viable  and  sustainable  banking 
service delivery models that provide accessible and affordable financial services; to develop 
products and processes for rural as well as urban consumers who are currently outside the 
banking network; and to create an appropriate regulatory framework to ensure that financial 
inclusion and financial stability move together. 
Financial literacy: 
13.  
Building financial capability through financial literacy is a key component of financial 
inclusion.  It  means  providing  financial  education  so  that  individuals  can  identify  and  use 
appropriate financial products and services in order to build and preserve their assets over 
time.  It  should  make  people  better  informed,  better  educated  and  more  confident,  able  to 
take greater responsibility for their financial affairs and able to play a more active role in the 
market for financial services. 
14.  
718  FLCs  have  been  set  up  as  at  the  end  of  March  2013.  A  total  of  2.2  million 
people  have  been  educated  through  indoor  education  to  walk-in  persons  and  through 
outdoor activities such as awareness camps/choupals, goshtis , seminars and lectures in a 
one-year period, from April 2012 to March 2013. It has advised all FLCs and rural branches 
of scheduled commercial banks to conduct a minimum of one outdoor financial literacy camp 
every month. 
National Strategy for Financial Education (NSFE): 
15.  
The NSFE has been prepared under the aegis of a Technical Group of the Financial 
Stability  Development  Council  (FSDC).  The  NSFE  will  be  implemented  in  a  timeframe  of 
five years and aims to establish initial contact with 500 million adults and educate them on 
key savings, protection and investment-related products so that they are empowered to take 
prudent  financial  decisions.  It  also  seeks  to  create  awareness  about  consumer  protection 
and  the  grievance  redressal  mechanisms  available  in  the  country.  Under  the  NSFE,  a 
National Centre for Financial Education (NCFE) is proposed to be set up as an institutional 
mechanism to co-ordinate the efforts of all financial sector regulators. The NCFE will launch 
a common website on financial education for the country. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Year 
ended 
March 13 
40837 
221341 
6276 
268454 
27143 
100.80 
164.69 
81.27 
18.22 
3.95 
1.55 
33.79 
2622.98 
3.63 
76.34 
250.46 
233.88 
Now to flag some issues: 
16.  
The World bank (2012) Findex Survey on ,”Measuring Financial Inclusion Indicators” 
World bank Policy Research Working paper #6025 states thatin India only 35% of adults had 
access  to  a  formal  Bank  account,  only  2%  of  adults  use  a  formal  account  to  receive 
remittances from relatives and 4% use an account to receive government payments. These 
are 2011 figures and further ground has been covered but the challenges still remain. 
17.  
 
 SR   
Financial Inclusion Plan – Summary progress of all banks including RRBs 
 Particulars 
  Year ended 
Mar 10 
 Year ended 
Mar 11 
Year ended 
Mar 12 
Banking Outlets in Villages - Branches 
Banking Outlets in Villages - BCs 
Banking Outlets in Villages - Other Modes 
Banking Outlets in Villages -TOTAL 
Urban Locations covered through BCs 
Basic Savings Bank Deposit A/c -branches (No. In millions) 
Basic Savings Bank Deposit A/c - branches (Amt. In billions) 
Basic Savings Bank Deposit A/c - BCs (No. in millions) 
Basic Savings Bank Deposit A/c - BCs (Amt. in billions) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10  OD facility availed in BSBDA's (No. In millions) 
11  OD facility availed in BSBDA's (Amt. in billions) 
12  KCCs - (No. in millions)  
13  KCCs - (Amt In billions)  
14  GCCs - (No. in millions)  
15  GCCs - (Amt In billions)  
16 
17 
ICT A/Cs-BC- Transaction -No. in millions 
ICT A/Cs-BC- Transactions -Amt in billions 
 4 
 33378 
34174 
142 
67694 
447 
60.19 
44.33 
13.27 
10.69 
0.18 
0.10 
24.31 
1240.07 
1.39 
35.11 
26.52 
6.92 
34811 
80802 
595 
116208 
3771 
73.13 
57.89 
31.63 
18.23 
0.61 
0.26 
27.11 
1600.05 
1.70 
35.07 
84.16 
58.00 
37471 
141136 
3146 
181753 
5891 
81.20 
109.87 
57.30 
10.54 
2.71 
1.08 
30.24 
2068.39 
2.11 
41.84 
155.87 
97.09 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 18.  
The  first  of  many  questions  is  why  this  specification  of  Mainstream  Financial 
Institutions,  why  a  bank  led  model?  For  three  reasons  inter  alia,  firstly  Bank  deposits  are 
guaranteed  by  the  Deposit  Insurance  Guarantee  Corporation  and  the  depositor’s  money 
remains  safe  and  secure.  Secondly,  Banks  are  Regulated  and  well  capitalized  institutions 
subject  to  RBIs  direct  control  exercised  through  the  processes  of  onsite  and  offsite 
inspections and supervision. Regulation is aimed at protecting depositors’ interests, orderly 
development  and  conduct  of  banking  operations  and  fostering  the  overall  health  of  the 
banking system. Thirdly we have a robust widespread banking system unlike several other 
countries. For these countries where the Banking brick and mortar network is not present the 
only way forward is to leverage technology. Itis simpler to build digital gateways across Africa 
while  for  us  let  me  say  we  use  the  Banking  System  because  it  is  there  as  we  have 
penetrative  outreach  through  Commercial  banks,  with  vast  network  of  branches  we  have 
followed a multi pronged approach to financial inclusion and this has enabled real gains. 
19.  
Thirdly, why the close supervision of the BC Model and restriction of the area within 
which the BC must operate. Firstly, because it is operationally feasible for the BC to provide 
intensive  services  within  a  defined  radius  and  secondly  because  Cash  management  is  a 
major issue. Cash collected by the BC is ultimately the Banks cash and it is the credibility of 
the Bank which is at stake. Thirdly, the customer is not a customer of the BC but of the Bank. 
The  BC  is  envisaged  merely  as  a  pass  through  agent  who  enables  extension  in  the 
penetrative  reach  of  the  Bank  and  through  the  ICT  model  and  by  using  a  hand-held 
technology device enables banking services and other services such as the electronic benefit 
transfer services at the doorstep of the borrower. 
Combination of branch and branchless banking 
20.  
As a prerequisite to the implementation of the DBT, every eligible individual should 
have a bank account. Further, to make disbursements at the doorstep through the ICT-based 
BC model, banking outlets, either through brick & mortar branches or the branchless mode, 
are required in all villages across the country. For this to succeed, it is important that quality 
services  are  provided  through  the  new  ICT-based  BC  outlets.  Therefore,  an  intermediary 
low-cost brick-and-mortar structure is required between the base branches and BC locations. 
This will provide timely support to BC outlets, ensure close supervision of BC operations and 
give them credibility and increase people’s confidence in BC services. Hence, banks have 
been  advised  to  plan  for  an  increase  in  the  proportion  of  branches  that  cover  unbanked 
areas.  Banks  have  also  been  advised  to  consider  setting  up  Financial  Inclusion  Centres, 
which would act as centres exclusively focussing on customers serviced through BC’s. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
21.  
To step up the opening of branches in rural areas, RBI has mandated banks to open 
at least 25 per cent of the branches in unbanked rural centres. To help facilitate in achieving 
this  mandate,  banks  have  been  advised  to  open  small  intermediary  brick  and  mortar 
structures between the base branch and the unbanked villages. The idea is to create an eco-
system for ensuring efficient delivery of services, efficiency in cash management, redressal 
of customer grievances and closer supervision of BC operations. To further encourage the 
banks  in  pursuing  this  mandate,  banks  have  been  advised  to  consider  frontloading 
(prioritizing) the opening of branches in unbanked rural centres over a three year cycle co-
terminus with their FIPs. This is expected to facilitate quicker branch expansion in unbanked 
rural centres. 
22.  
Along with increasing brick and mortar presence through branch expansion, RBI has 
also encouraged banks to adopt other branchless modes such as BC outlets, other modes 
such  as  Kiosks,  off-site  Rural  ATMs,  mobile  vans,  etc.  so  as  to  resolve  the  last  mile 
connectivity issues. 
Enlarging the universe of BC’s 
23.  
We have enlarged the universe of BCs as we go along and we have enabled the 
entry of For Profit companies in 2010. We have done this as we want to leverage their well 
established  distribution  networks  especially  in  the  rural  heart  land  for  the  extension  of 
Financial Inclusion to reach the unreached. 
Tapping technology platforms 
24.  
To  enable  a  successful  financial  inclusion,  innovation  of  products  for  the  specific 
needs of the poor is not only necessary but also an essential condition. Today, banks can 
provide a bouquet of financial services through the various networks of agents and branches 
by  leveraging  and fine  tuning technology  platforms. Technology  holds  the  key  to  providing 
models  for  efficient  delivery  of  small  value  transactions  in  large  volumes  while  reaping 
economies  of  scale.  The  implementation  of  such  effective,  scalable  and  platform-
independent  technology  will  help  drive  down  the  cost  of  providing  banking  services  to  the 
poor. 
25.  
The Immediate Payments Service (IMPS), an instantaneous 24x7 electronic funds 
transfer system has been developed by the National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI). 
IMPS facilitate customers to use mobile instruments as a channel for accessing their bank 
accounts  and  put  high  interbank  fund  transfers  in  a  secured  manner  with  immediate 
confirmation features. 
Aadhaar Enabled Payment Systems (AEPS) 
26.  
The AEPS architecture designed by Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) 
in collaboration with the NPCI is a platform which banks can leverage upon for expanding 
their  financial  inclusion  initiatives.  The  basic  premise  of  AEPS  is  that  one  BC  Customer 
Service Point (CSP) will have the ability to service customers of many banks based on the 
unique bio-metric identification data stored in the Aadhaar database. The AEPS platform is 
expected  to  empower  a  bank  customer  to  use  Aadhaar  as  his/her  identity  to  access  the 
respective  Aadhaar  enabled  bank  account  and  perform  basic  banking  transactions  like 
balance enquiry, cash withdrawal and deposit through the BC. 
Conclusion 
RBI has adopted a Bank led model but one which is essentially Model Neutral. We 
27.  
have  tried  to  create  an  enabling  environment  that  facilitates  competition  and  fosters 
innovation. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
28.  
Once  the  financial  Inclusion  plans  are  implemented  customers  will  be  able  to 
transact  electronically  with  each  other  as  well  as  with  individuals  and  firms  outside  the 
village. This will in days to come reduce dependence on Cash and High volumes will lower 
the costs of transactions. 
29.  
International experience reflects that digitising social transfers is an effective way of 
bringing  the  excluded  within  the  financial  system  the  Business  Case  for  Banks  in  this 
segment, as of now, depends on government payments. Going forward we hope that Banks 
will introduce new products and services crafted to the needs and income streams of poor 
borrowers which will enable self sustaining financial inclusion. 
30.  
As Banking is a public good this is essential in the interests of Public Policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
