Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Development and deployment of Malaysia’s 
ATM network 
Speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at 
the launch of MEPS (Malaysian Electronic Payment System) ATM Initiative, Kuala Lumpur, 
21 October 2013. 
 Pooling of resources through MEPS 
The launching of MEPS’ ATMs marks an important milestone as this will be the first time that 
MEPS, a non-bank entity owned by the banking industry, is deploying ATMs, instead of by 
individual  banks.  This  initiative  is  indeed  a  welcomed  move  as  it  facilitates  the  pooling  of 
resources  by  the  banking  industry  for  a  common  objective  of  developing  and  deploying 
industry-wide banking infrastructure. It promotes efficiency and cost effectiveness. Widening 
the  ATM  network  through  shared  resources  will  also  benefit  the  public  by  having  more 
convenient points of access to banking products and services. 
MEPS  had  in  the  past  a  history  of  coordinating  industry-wide  infrastructure  development 
efforts.  An  outstanding  achievement  was  made  when  it  coordinated  the  industry-wide 
migration  of  the  ATM  cards  from  magnetic  stripe  to  chip-based  technology  in  2001  to 
eradicate  the  numerous  fraud  involving  magnetic  stripe  technology.  This  move  was  a 
significant strategy for the country, as Malaysia was amongst the first, to adopt a chip-based 
technology to reduce fraud and boost public confidence in the use of the ATM and payment 
cards. MEPS should continue to perform this role, as builder of payment infrastructure for the 
banking industry. 
As an industry, banking institutions should continue to share infrastructure cost and compete 
on providing quality products and services. Basic payment infrastructure should not be a tool 
for competitive edge but rather as a means to reduce cost and adopting common standards. 
Migration to E-Payments to achieve cost savings 
Accelerating the migration to e-payments is one of the key strategies in the Financial Sector 
Blueprint.  On  numerous  occasions  we  had  highlighted  that  a  successful  migration  has  the 
potential  to  drive  further  efficiency  gains  and  cost  savings.  It  will  improve  the  country’s 
competitive position. Research has suggested that successful migration to e-payments can 
save the country in terms of costs (of about 1% of GDP annually). 
Today, cheques and cash remain prevalent in Malaysia. Based on the last 3 years data, an 
average  of  205  million  cheques  totalling  to  about  RM2  trillion  were  issued  on  an  annual 
basis. Our preliminary estimates showed that at RM2.70 cost per unit, the banking industry 
spends at least RM544  million annually on extending cheques issuing services. This is an 
expensive way of doing business. 
In terms of cash, over the last 3 years, an average of 547 million cash withdrawals at ATMs 
were made amounting to RM276 billion per annum. This represents 93% of the total financial 
transactions conducted at the ATMs, while only 7% of the ATM transactions were for non-
cash  withdrawal.  These  included  funds  transfer,  bill  payment,  card  and  loan  repayment, 
purchase of share application and reload of mobile prepaid applications, which was valued at 
RM37  billion  on  average  per  year.  So  the  usage  of  ATM  for  e-payment  purposes  was 
underutilised and the industry should do more to improve this situation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
ATMs to cater to those that have not adopted online banking 
92% (or 18.4 million) of the total adult population in Malaysia has banking accounts and of 
these, the internet banking population accounts for about 74% (13.7 million) of bank account 
holders. Whilst 74% of the bank account holders have internet banking access but only 43% 
(5.9  million)  of  the  internet  banking  subscribers  are  active  users  in  conducting  financial 
transactions.  Still  a  long  way  to  go  to  encourage  users  to  adopt  electronic  means  in 
conducting  their  banking  transactions.  In  this  regard,  we  have  to  do  more  to  reach  critical 
mass where the public are familiar with or comfortable in using internet banking to conduct 
their financial transactions. 
To  achieve  this  aim,  banks  should  continuously  increase  their  efforts  to  educate  their 
customers and businesses on the safety of online banking practices and provide incentives 
to  them  to  migrate  away  from  cheques  and  cash.  MEPS’  initiative  on  widening  the  ATM 
network would also provide convenient access points across the country to enable those who 
have not yet adopt online banking to migrate to cashless banking services. In particular, the 
target  groups  are  the  SMEs  and  microenterprises.  Banks  should  extend  all  necessary 
assistance to help these groups to migrate to the e-payment platform. 
To realise the full potential of the payment network, banks that offer cheque issuing and ATM 
cash  withdrawal  facilities  should  provide  the  full  suite  of  funds  transfer  and  electronic 
payment  functionalities  over  the  ATMs.  Of  the  20  banking  institutions  that  offer  ATM 
services,  17  of  them  today  provide  the  IBFT  service,  a  real  time  interbank  funds  transfer 
service that enable customers to transfer funds via the ATM in a safe and secure manner. 
Banking institutions are strongly encouraged to also offer the Interbank GIRO (IBG) via their 
ATMs as a lower cost option to the IBFT. 
With over 1,400 new ATMs deployment by MEPS over the next 5 years, in addition to the 
current 12,000 installed nationwide, there is a significant potential for the ATMs to be used as 
convenient  access  points  to  the  public  to  conduct  electronic  payment  and  funds  transfer 
transactions. The widespread availability and reach of the ATMs network should serve the 
needs of the public not just in the urban areas but also in the rural towns. 
ATM cards to be used for purchases at Point-Of-Sale terminals 
Whilst Malaysia has a population of about 29 million, we have a high penetration of 39 million 
ATM cards. The ATM cards issued by banks that are used for cash withdrawals also have 
the domestic debit card application which can be used at merchants’ Point-Of-Sale terminals 
to  make  purchases.  In  this  regard,  the  public  can  use  their  ATM  cards  at  participating 
merchants  to make  purchases. This  would  lessen  the  need  for  the  public  to  carry  cash  in 
their wallets, as well as, reduce the number of cash withdrawals from ATMs. 
As  ATM  card  is  a  safe  payment  card,  users  ought  to  use  PIN  for  the  authorisation  of 
purchase  transaction,  similar  to  ATMs  withdrawals.  In  the  event  a  user  lose  their  cards, 
fraudster would not be able to illegally transact banking services without the PIN. MEPS and 
the  banking  industry  should  also  promote  the  use  of  the  ATM  cards  at  the  Point-Of-Sale 
terminals. Industry effort should be made to increase the number of Point-Of-Sale terminals 
to provide the public with the convenience of using their ATM cards for purchases of goods 
and services and to reduce the need for cash usage. 
Banks need to address ATM robberies 
Over the last 24 months, there was a rise in the number of ATM robbery cases. There were 
only  5  cases  in  2010  and  in  2011.  These  numbers  had  increased  to  63  cases  between 
January  –  September  2013  (51  cases  in  2012).  This  is  a  serious  trend.  If  the  banking 
industry does not tackle this issue quickly, it could dent public’s confidence in the safety of 
the ATMs services. Banking institutions ought to take this matter seriously and take remedial 
measures immediately. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The banking industry should step up its effort to counter these incidences, including the use 
of ink staining technology that renders the cash stolen to be worthless. This technology has 
been  implemented  successfully  in  countries  such  as  the  Netherlands,  South  Africa  and 
Belgium  with  good  results.  Attempted robberies would  cause  the  notes  in  the  ATMs  to  be 
stained,  rendering  it  valueless.  Stained  banknotes  should  not  be  accepted  by  retailers  for 
payments  and  by  the  banks  as  deposits.  This  will  serve  as  deterrent,  sending  a  strong 
message to would be robbers. 
We had recently issued a guideline on the use of Ink Staining Technology for the industry. 
With this issuance, the banking industry should be ready to implement this initiative. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude my speech by congratulating MEPS for the successful launch of this new 
initiative. 
MEPS’ can play an important role as the catalyst for the development and deployment of the 
ATM  network.  We  hope  that  MEPS  will  also  continue  to  collaborate  and  coordinate  the 
pooling  of  resources  for  the  banking  industry.  The  banking  institutions  should  give  MEPS 
their full support as well. 
It now gives me great pleasure in officiating the launch of MEPS ATM initiative. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
