Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Greater financial integration and financial stability 
Opening remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
SEACEN 30th Anniversary Conference “Greater financial integration and financial stability”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 20 October 2013. 
 Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  honoured  to  welcome  you  to  the  SEACEN  30th  Anniversary 
Conference  on  “Greater  Financial  Integration  and  Financial  Stability”.  We  are  especially 
honoured by the presence of Governors and senior officials who are here today, despite the 
pressing  demands  on  our  institutions  during  this  period  of  persistent  uncertainties  in  the 
global  financial  and  economic  environment.  We  continue  to  face  challenging  and  often 
testing times. Over the recent five years, we have been confronted with recurring episodes of 
turbulence, followed by phases of transitory recoveries. We have seen, and have been part 
of,  extensive  collaborative  measures  and  reforms  pursued  at  both  the  regional  and  global 
level. Yet, the calm after the storm continues to evade us. 
The SEACEN and Asian economies have seen significant structural adjustments and wide 
ranging financial reforms in this decade. During this period intra-regional trade activity has 
rapidly increased, signifying the deepening of economic ties within the region. Intra-regional 
trade in East Asia has expanded from an average of 44% of total trade in 1995, to 50% in 
2012.  Intra-regional  investment  activity  has  also  been  on  an  uptrend.  Asia’s  young  and 
increasingly urban and increasingly more affluent population, supported with policy initiatives 
to  strengthen  social  safety  nets  –  including  for  healthcare  and  retirement  –  will  further 
enhance  domestic  demand  in  the  region.  This  will  further  unlock  our  trade  and  growth 
potential. Our diversity also continues to be an important source of strength for the region. 
The complementarities between the economies in the region provide significant opportunities 
for  greater  shared  prosperity  and  mutually  reinforcing  regional  growth.  The  progressive 
liberalization of the domestic financial sectors, the development of domestic capital markets 
and the integration of payments and settlement systems have opened up new channels for 
regional  financial  institutions  and  markets  to  intermediate  funds  across  borders.  These 
developments  have  facilitated  the  recycling  of  surplus  funds  from  the  region  for  economic 
development in the region, while also enabling greater diversification of risks. 
The lessons drawn from the Asian financial crisis more than 15 years ago also continue to 
shape  our  financial  sector  reforms,  liberalization  and  economic  and  financial  integration  in 
the region. The focus is on developing a financial sector that serves the needs of the real 
economy,  and  which  is  built  on  solid  foundations  of  sound  risk  management  and  strong 
financial buffers. An important precondition for financial liberalization and integration in the 
region has been ensuring that we build the capacity and financial infrastructure that would 
enable  us  to  respond  to  emerging  risks  while  also  minimising  their  contagion  effects.  The 
recent global financial crisis and its aftershocks remind us that these lessons remain relevant 
and that we need to stay firmly on course in strengthening our foundations and resilience. A 
gradual and phased approach to financial liberalization and integration has served the region 
well, allowing time for the building blocks to be put in place, and flexibility to set the pace at 
which  our  financial  systems  can  continue  to  grow  and  expand  in  line  with  the  capacity  to 
manage the attendant risks of a more open and interconnected financial landscape. 
To date, financial integration in Asia has mainly manifested itself in the form of the increased 
regional  presence,  with  increase  participation  of  indigenous  Asian  banks  in  the  regional 
financial system and increased participation in regional financial markets. The prospects for 
such  greater  regional  financial  integration  are  significant  given  that  large  flows  of  capital 
currently  continue  to  be  directed  to  developed  economies  outside  the  region.  This  is  in 
contrast to the trade patterns in the region where intraregional trade flows account for more 
than half of total trade in the region. Promoting greater financial integration in Asia will not 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
only  serve  to  reinforce  economic  integration,  but  also  enhance  the  depth  and  breadth  of 
Asia’s financial markets, contribute to the development of more sustainable funding sources 
for  economic  development,  and  potentially  improve  terms  of  trade  by  reducing  transaction 
and information costs. 
The  strategy  and  path  towards  greater  financial  integration  in  Asia  seeks  to  preserve  the 
strengths inherent in the diversity of the region, while raising the standards which promote 
financial  stability  in  the  region.  Recognizing  the  various  stages  of  development  across  our 
economic  and  financial  systems,  the  Asian  financial  integration  model  for  the  ten  ASEAN 
economies is focused on: (i) strengthening preconditions through collective capacity building 
to promote more open market access; (ii) progressively reducing barriers to facilitate cross-
border  trade;  (iii)  developing  the  market  infrastructure  and  an  enabling  environment  to 
promote  the  efficient  and  effective  intermediation  of  cross-border  financial  flows;  and 
(iv) establishing appropriate safeguards for financial system stability. Two distinct elements 
of  this  process  are  important.  The  first  is  that  it  allows  for  different  speeds  of  integration 
depending  on  the  state  of  readiness  of  respective  member  countries.  The  second  is  the 
commitment  of members  to  support  each  other  in  developing  the  preconditions  that  would 
make financial integration viable for the group as a whole in the long run. These elements 
are important for achieving a process and outcomes that will be sustainable. 
The modernization of Asian financial systems during this period has also been accompanied 
by  significantly  strengthened  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks,  improved  financial 
safety  nets,  more  effective  surveillance  of  financial  stability  risks  and  stronger  legal 
underpinnings.  These  reforms  supported  the  transition  towards  more  market-oriented 
financial systems that are anchored in stronger institutions, risk management capacity and 
governance.  Today,  our  financial  markets  are  better  able  to  intermediate  volatile  financial 
flows  and  our  financial  institutions  are  supported  by  stronger  financial  buffers  to  withstand 
adverse  developments  and  shocks.  Significant  strides  also  continue  to  be  made  in 
strengthening consumer protection frameworks, promoting financial inclusion, and enhancing 
market  discipline.  These  developments  continue  to  support  the  region  through  the  recent 
episodes of turbulence in the global financial markets. 
The region has also made important strides in enhancing monetary and financial cooperation 
arrangements to address regional financial stability issues and global policy spillovers. Much 
has been accomplished in the areas of surveillance arrangements, financial safety nets and 
crisis prevention, management and resolution. We have already experienced the important 
benefits  of  having  these  arrangements  in  place  as  the  region  came  together  to  respond 
where needed to events that were unfolding during the global financial crisis. The authorities 
in the region remain committed to build on these foundations to bring regional cooperation to 
higher levels not only to reap its benefits but to also preserve financial stability in the region. 
In this effort, the current priorities for cooperation include improving information flows on risk 
assessments; advancing regional financial infrastructure and capacity building; and providing 
a regional voice on key international developments that may affect the region. 
As  financial  integration  gains  pace,  the  demand  will  increase  for  greater  convergence  in 
regulatory and supervisory approaches and standards, including their implementation across 
borders.  An  important  objective  of  such  regulatory  convergence  is  to  ensure  that  cross-
border  financial  linkages  act  to  foster  regional  growth,  while  mitigating  the  propagation  of 
systemic  risk  across  borders  through  such  linkages.  The  convergence  of  standards  has 
proceeded in different ways in different parts of the world. In Europe, regulatory convergence 
has  been  driven  by  EU-level  bodies  and  agencies,  including  the  European  System  of 
Financial Supervisors and the European Systemic Risk Board. The EU-wide prudential rules 
are  formulated  and  implemented  through  directives  and  regulations  legislated  by  the 
European Parliament and European Council, with limited room for member states to apply 
“national  discretion”.  Recent  proposals  to  establish  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  for 
banks  led  by  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  a  single  resolution  mechanism,  will  further 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
reinforce the role of EU-level institutions in the management of financial stability in the Euro 
area. 
With  significantly  more  diverse  economies  and  financial  systems,  promoting  greater 
regulatory  convergence  in  Asia  is  more  likely  to  proceed  on  the  basis  of  a  set  of  shared 
principles  for  developing  and  maintaining  sound  financial  systems,  while  providing  for  the 
unique  and  distinct  legal,  financial,  social  and  economic  structures  of  individual  countries 
within the region. It will be important to have clarity around the key principles, an inclusive 
process  in  agreeing  on  these  principles,  and  mechanisms  that  support  their  effective 
implementation  in  individual  countries.  Under  such  an  approach,  individual  countries  will 
have  the  necessary  degree  of  flexibility  to  tailor  national  implementation  approaches  to 
reflect the specific characteristics of their respective economies, while committing to uphold 
the essential regulatory and supervisory principles that underpin financial stability. 
With  Asia’s  varied  experience  in  weathering  financial  crises,  in  developing  our  financial 
systems and in implementing the various regulatory reforms, valuable lessons can be drawn 
from  the  region  to  advance  the  progress  and  development  of  our  respective  financial 
systems and of the region as a whole. SEACEN has had an instrumental role for more than 
30 years in the efforts to share this knowledge and experience widely among its members 
through providing a platform for such information sharing and through its research, training 
and capacity building initiatives. Today, SEACEN takes yet another important step forward in 
advancing this agenda with the launch of the SEACEN Financial Stability Journal. We live 
in a world in which the management of financial stability is a highly complex undertaking, and 
its  dimensions  have  continued  to  evolve  in  an  environment  that  is  rapidly  changing.  It  is 
hoped that the Journal will contribute ideas, perspectives and insights and thus generate the 
intellectual dialogue and discourse on financial stability issues. As a region, Asia has many 
unique  perspectives  and  experiences  to  share  with  others  facing  similar  challenges  in 
managing financial stability. I congratulate the SEACEN Centre on this important initiative. I 
wish it every success and look forward to contributions from SEACEN members and from the 
other parts of the world. The Journal can have a significant influence in drawing attention to 
the financial stability issues that are most important and thus contribute towards the thinking 
and responses on these issues. It is a process that should have an inclusive participation in 
this important agenda of financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
