Klaas Knot: Central bank independence and unconventional monetary 
policy – challenges for the European Central Bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Klaas  Knot,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank,  at  the  Bank  of  Mexico 
international  conference  “Central  bank  independence  –  Progress  and  challenges”,  Mexico 
City, 15 October 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure for me to have been invited to speak at this conference of the Banco de 
México. Especially so as this event marks the 20th anniversary of its autonomy. And I gladly 
congratulate the Banco de México on this important milestone. 
The topic of this Conference – central bank independence: progress and challenges – is very 
well chosen, I would say. 
For  from  the  dawn  of  the  financial  crisis,  back  in  the  summer  of  2007,  the  role  of  central 
banks and particularly the relationship with governments has been controversial. 
In light of the theme of this session, my remarks will focus on one of the most independent 
central banks of the world, the ECB. I do so as the ECB’s unconventional actions have also 
sparked intense debate about its independence. 
The main question I try to address is how the ECB should respond to today’s complex and 
challenging environment in which its independence could be at risk. 
I would like to start off my remarks by reminding people the long-standing wisdom that it is 
imperative to protect central bank independence. 
Already  in  the  early  19th  century,  the  economic  theorist  David  Ricardo  explained  why  it 
wasn’t  a  good  idea  to  entrust  governments  with  the  power  to  issue  paper  money.  For 
governments,  he  argued,  would  almost  certainly  abuse  this  power.  For  instance,  if 
circumstances compelled them to create money, such as at times of war. 
Instead,  Ricardo  reasoned,  central  banks  must  be  governed  by  individuals  who  should  be 
“entirely  independent”  of  the  government,  and  who  “should  never,  on  any  pretence,  lend 
money to the Government, nor be in the slightest degree under its control or influence”. 
Clearly,  Ricardo’s  original  ideas  are  still  valid  today,  for  most  of  the  world’s  major  central 
banks  enjoy  a  substantial  degree  of  independence.  In  fact,  it  is  generally  undisputed  that 
central  bank  independence  is  the  way  to  protect  governments  against  the  temptation  to 
misuse monetary policy  for short-term goals – for example, by creating sudden inflation to 
ease  budget  pressures.  By  granting  monetary  policy  to  the  discretion  of  an  independent 
central bank, the focus can be on long-run stability. 
Research  has  also  shown  that  independence  enables  central  banks  to  run  more  credible 
monetary policy, making it “easier” to achieve their goals. 
A final merit of central bank independence, especially relevant in the current juncture, is the 
scope it creates for unorthodox measures during crisis periods. 
In fact, the greater a central bank’s independence and credibility in normal times, the greater 
its flexibility and credibility to engage in unconventional monetary policy during critical times. 
Thus, during crises, an independent central bank has much more flexibility to take actions 
that might otherwise fuel inflationary fears. 
This brings me to the essence of this session. Much of the current controversy surrounding 
central bank independence is related with central banks’ ability to engage in unconventional 
monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
As many have argued, their large-scale purchases of financial assets and other unorthodox 
measures have taken central banks into “unchartered waters” and explicitly challenged the 
notion of central bank independence. 
The unprecedented expansion of central banks’ balance sheets since the start of the crisis is 
certainly revealing. It shows that central banks’ balance sheets are becoming more and more 
exposed to economic risk and political pressure. Eventually, this may result in a substantial 
amount of negative capital in a central bank’s balance sheet. This is undesirable, because it 
could  undermine  a  central  bank’s  credibility  and  independence.  On  the  one  hand,  a 
government  guarantee  to  cover  potential  losses  would  protect  a  central  bank’s  financial 
position.  But,  if  the  government  has  to  invoke  this  guarantee,  the  fiscal  dimension  of 
monetary  policy  becomes  very  visible,  and  the  previously  solid  line  between  fiscal  and 
monetary policy will be blurred. 
An additional concern for central banks is that unconventional monetary policy increasingly 
comes with some sense of “public unease” about the role central banks play. 
While  the  majority  of  the  public  doesn’t  understand  the  way  central  banks  operate,  many 
consider central banks at the same time as the only player with room for maneuver. The fact 
that  criticism  of  central  banks  is  creeping  more  and  more  into  the  mainstream  debate  
– whether or not this is justified – implies that the public is looking increasingly critically at 
central banks. 
While  this may  not  put central  banks’  independence  or  room for maneuver  immediately  at 
risk, it does signify that central banks may need to step up their efforts on transparency and 
accountability. This is a topic I will return to later. 
Now  I  would  like  to  turn  to  how  central  banks  should  operate  in  this  more  complex  and 
challenging environment with a particular focus on the ECB. 
In my view, there are six points of special interest for the ECB, which I will deal with in the 
remainder of my remarks. 
To start with, it is imperative that the ECB sticks to its mandate to maintain price stability over 
the  medium  term.  This,  despite  the  many  calls  to  widen  its  mandate  to  explicitly  include 
financial stability considerations and/or domestic employment goals. 
In theory, delegation of a task to an independent authority is more acceptable 
– 
when  the  delegated  task  is  clearly  specified  and  has  no  overlap  with  other  policy 
tasks; 
when there are relatively few distributional implications; 
and when a clear-cut measure of accountability can be achieved. 
– 
– 
These conditions are largely satisfied when monetary policy is primarily geared at achieving 
price  stability.  Especially  if  we  compare  this  with  monetary  policy  disciplined  by  a  dual 
mandate,  which  is  –  in  Volcker’s  words  (2012)  –  “operationally  confusing  and  ultimately 
illusionary”. 
Second,  the  ECB  should  continue  to  explain  the  rationale  behind  its  unconventional 
monetary  policy  measures  to  the  public.  While  most  major  central  banks  have  employed 
unconventional  monetary  policy  in  response  to  the  crisis,  the  exact  measures  and 
foundations have differed significantly across central banks. 
The  ECB’s  approach  differs  from  that  of  the  other  major  central  banks  in  that  its 
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  aim  to  support  the  effective  transmission  of 
monetary policy to the economy, instead of delivering a direct stimulus. 
In this sense, ECB’s unconventional monetary policy measures are a complement to, rather 
than  a  substitute  for,  standard  monetary  policy.  They  aim  to  restore  a  more  normally 
functioning  transmission  mechanism  and  contribute  to  an  environment  where  standard 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
measures  can  operate  effectively.  Underlying  this  approach  is  the  euro  area’s  financial 
structure: in the euro area, banks are the main agents for channeling funds from savers to 
borrowers, while in many other countries market-based financing predominates. The largely 
bank-based structure of financing in the euro area is reflected in the ECB’s monetary policy 
and in the design of its unconventional monetary policy. 
It could hence be argued that ECB’s unconventional monetary policy measures are “purely” 
monetary policy. And, I would add, should also remain there. 
Third,  the  ECB  should  take  the  specific  modalities  of  the  unconventional  monetary  policy-
measures into account. For these modalities might influence the extent to which central bank 
independence is at risk. 
After  all,  large-scale  outright  asset  purchases  will  result  in  a  different  risk  profile  for  the 
central  bank’s  balance  sheet  than  unconventional  monetary  policy  directed  at  providing 
liquidity  support  to  the  banking  system  in  collateralized  operations.  In  my  view,  one 
particularly  nice  feature  of  the  bulk  of  ECB’s  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures 
concerns its “natural” or “embedded” exit. 
This makes the ECB less sensitive to political pressure than in a situation in which it would 
have to make an explicit choice for unwinding. 
For  instance,  one  of  the  key  elements  of  the  ECB’s  response  to  the  intensification  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis was the design of the Longer-Term Refinancing Operations or LTROs. 
These LTROs ensured that banks had sufficient liquidity over the medium term, while at the 
same time embedding phasing-out as a design feature. Or in other words, the exit was taken 
into account up-front. 
Fourth,  the  ECB  should  be  clear  about  the  limits  of  monetary  policy  and  manage 
expectations of what it can achieve. 
This  is  important  because  central  banks  are  –  undeservedly  –  considered  to  be  the  only 
player with room for maneuver and therefore subject to unreasonable expectations of what 
monetary  policy  might  achieve.  These  expectations  should  be  downplayed  to  avoid 
disappointment with the public and the political pressure that might follow. 
In particular, the ECB should stress that the problems in the euro area are not problems that 
monetary policy can completely solve, as they are rooted in weaknesses in banks’ balance 
sheets, weak government finances and supply side rigidities in many economies. All the ECB 
could do is provide “breathing space” for banks and governments to act, and it has done so. 
Fifth point, at the same time, the ECB should try to sustain or provide the right incentives to 
governments and banks. As regards governments, sound public finances are an important 
underpinning of central bank independence. Conducting an independent monetary policy is 
made significantly more difficult in the event of large budget deficits. A similar story could be 
told for labour and especially product market reforms. 
That is why I very much argued for and welcomed the explicit conditionality in the form of an 
ESM  programme  in  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  scheme.  This  ensures  that 
governments  make  the  necessary  efforts  to  restore  the  sustainability  of  public  finances, 
reform of the supply side of their economies and in doing so contribute indirectly to central 
bank independence. 
For  banks,  such  conditionality  hasn’t  been  used  so  far.  However,  given  that  it  is  very 
important to provide the right incentives, it might be worthwhile to explore whether some kind 
of conditionality might be introduced for banks in the as yet unforeseen case of new liquidity 
stress  in  the  euro  area.  For  instance,  it  might  be  investigated  whether  the  provision  of 
additional liquidity could be made conditional on strict asset quality reviews or efforts to build 
up adequate capital. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
This  would  contribute  directly  to  restoring  the  health  of  the  financial  system  and  the 
transmission  mechanism.  As  a  consequence,  this  would  lessen  the  need  to  sustain 
unconventional monetary policy over a longer period, and hence also contribute indirectly to 
reducing the pressure on central bank independence. 
Finally,  such  an  approach  would  help  to  address  the  unpleasant  side-effects  of  earlier 
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures.  [I’m  referring  for  instance  to  how  banks  have 
used  LTROs  to  buy  higher-yielding  sovereign  bonds,  and  thus  contributed  to  the  diabolic 
loop between governments and banks instead of having provided an impulse to lend to the 
real economy.] 
Finally, as we all know, central bank independence is sustainable only if it is accompanied by 
strong accountability and a high level of transparency. 
As the ECB’s role in policy making has increased significantly during the crisis, it needs to 
find  ways  to  further  enhance  transparency  and  accountability.  The  public  needs  to  be 
explained in the clearest possible terms why the ECB has opted, or not opted, to take certain 
measures. 
A  richer  way  of  communicating  our  deliberations  would  definitely  contribute  to  this.  More 
openness  would  also  give  the  public  a  more  balanced  impression  of  the  discussions 
conducted  in  the  Governing  Council.  This,  in  turn,  would  support  the  predictability  and 
credibility of our monetary policy. 
At  the  same  time,  we  should  avoid  that  more  openness  about  the  deliberations  in  the 
Governing Council leads to enormous pressure on the Governors of national central banks 
and puts the independence of individual Governing Council members at risk. Members are 
acting in the interest of the euro area as a whole, but often have to explain these decisions to 
a predominantly national audience. 
A  richer  way  of  communicating  our  deliberations  will  sharpen  the  European  mandate. 
Increased transparency should not jeopardize this important building block of our institution. I 
therefore  believe  we  should  stick  to  the  principle  of  collective  rather  than  individual 
accountability. 
Let me conclude: “Independence can’t just be a slogan”. 
The preservation of central bank independence in a democratic society ultimately depends 
on  asking  reasonable  deliverables  from  the  central  bank.  At  the  same  time,  as  society 
changes, the interpretation of “reasonable deliverables” might change over time, and hence 
the preference for central bank independence. 
This has implications for both central banks and governments. Central banks should not take 
their independence for granted, but protect it continuously. 
Governments, on the other hand, should not put all their hopes on central banks. 
Instead, they should explain the fundamental reasons behind their choice to delegate powers 
to an independent central bank, and at the same time do their own job. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
