Benoît Cœuré: Lessons from East Asia for the euro area 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Asia Europe Economic Forum on “Challenges and prospects for Asian and European 
economies”, Beijing, 28 October 2013. 
 I would like to thank Ine Van Robays for her contribution. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained 
herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The global economic and financial crisis confronted the world economy not only with financial 
turbulence,  loss  in  output  and  social  distress  on  a  scale  not  seen  since  the  Great 
Depression. It also created a series of challenges for policy-makers. Across the euro area, it 
exposed  structural  and  institutional  weaknesses  that  had  remained  hidden  during  the 
preceding era, the “Great Moderation”.  
Times of crisis are times of hardship – but they are also times of change and opportunity. 
This seems particularly true for Europe, where progress has often come in this way. 
The Second World War was the impetus for the European Coal and Steel Community, which 
was established to prevent another war between France and Germany. It formed the nucleus 
of today’s European Union. The demise of the Bretton Woods system in the 1970s was the 
catalyst for a European single currency, which was eventually introduced in 1999.  
I’ll be talking today about the effects of the present crisis and the various challenges it has 
presented for the euro area. I’ll compare it with the East Asian crisis of 1997. In my view, 
there  are  similarities  that  yield  useful  policy  lessons  for  the  euro  area.  But  there  are  also 
differences that need to be kept in mind. 
What can we learn from the Asian crisis?  
What are the parallels between the Asian crisis in 1997–1998 and the euro area crisis? 
The  economies  of  emerging  Asia  were  characterised  by  buoyant  growth  and  a  brisk 
expansion of credit (see Chart 1). This rise in debt was facilitated by considerable inflows of 
foreign capital, which financed significant external deficits (see Chart 2). This led to growing 
financial imbalances, and in particular to currency and maturity mismatches on the balance 
sheets  of  local  banks.  In  addition,  the  economic  boom  prevailing  at  that  time  was 
accompanied by a loss of competitiveness of the region’s export sector. Investors typically 
under-priced  potential  risks  as  they  had  overly  optimistic  expectations  of  the  medium-term 
growth prospects. They did not identify systemic vulnerabilities such as the risk of sudden 
stops in capital flows or of twin crises of the banking system and the balance of payments, 
which eventually materialised.1  
Except for currency mismatches, similar developments were evident in the euro area before 
2009  –  if  not  at  the  regional  level,  at  least  in  those  countries  that  later  ran  into  financial 
difficulties.  It  was  widely  believed  that  sudden  stops  in  capital  flows,  not  to  mention  twin 
                                                 
1  See Calvo, G. (1998). “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops”, 
Journal of Applied Economics 1(1), pp. 35–54, and Kaminsky, G. and C. Reinhart (1999). “The Twin Crises: 
Causes  of  Banking  and  Balance-of-Payments  Problems”,  American  Economic  Review,  89,  pp.  473–500.  A 
well known example of complacency about East Asian growth is the 1993 World Bank report on “The East 
Asian Miracle”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
banking and balance of payments crises, could not happen in advanced economies.2 And yet 
this is exactly what happened in Europe ten years after the Asian crisis (see Chart 2).  
It  seems  therefore  useful  to  look  also  at  East  Asia’s  response  to  its  crisis  and  see  what 
lessons can be learned. 
One lesson is that a deep and fundamental restructuring of the domestic financial 
sector is necessary  
Given  the  financial  nature  of  the  Asian  crisis,  this  was  a  key  element  in  resolving  it.  Non-
viable  financial  institutions  were  closed,  viable  institutions  recapitalised  and  strengthened, 
value-impaired  assets  dealt  with  and  the  corporate  sector  restructured,  including  through 
foreign  investment.3  These  measures  were  implemented  decisively.  They  were  associated 
with a painful adjustment process in the crisis countries but, at the same time, they made a 
swift recovery possible. 
This experience contrasts with Japan’s experience in the late 1980s. Following the bursting 
of  Japan’s  asset  bubble,  there  was  by  and  large  no  rapid  write-down  of  non-performing 
assets. Due to the low profitability of banks, it was believed that an immediate write-off of bad 
loans  would  prevent  compliance  with  capital  requirements.  The  recognition  of  losses  was 
postponed  and,  as  a  consequence,  capital  continued  to  be  allocated  to  investments  with 
limited  positive  impact  on  Japan’s  long-term  growth  potential,  which  some  have  called 
“zombie  lending”4.  Ultimately,  this  resulted  in  Japan’s  “lost  decade”,  namely  an  extended 
period of anaemic growth (see Chart 3). 
A second lesson is that institutional and structural reforms are essential  
Early  in  the  crisis,  emerging  Asian  economies  strengthened  prudential  regulation  and 
supervision, together with bank governance and market transparency and discipline, in order 
to prevent further instability and bring domestic standards closer to the international norms.5  
Furthermore,  they  generally  acknowledged  that  their  economic  “miracle”  before  the  crisis 
was  not  sustainable.  It  was  driven  by  over-investment  encouraged  by  Colbertist  policies, 
implicit  government  guarantees,  and  too  often,  opaqueness  and  political  interference  in 
market mechanisms.6 As a result, at the macro level, growth was led by capital accumulation 
in the wrong sectors and not by a rise in total factor productivity. In Paul Krugman’s words, 
the Asian miracle was “the fruit of perspiration, not of inspiration”7.  
To address the root causes of the crisis, structural reforms aimed at improving governance 
and  challenging  vested  interests,  both  in  public  policy-making  and  in  the  corporate  sector, 
                                                 
2  See FRBSF Economic Letter (2011). “Could We Have Learned from the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997–98?”, 
February 2011. 
3  See  Lindgren,  C.-J.  et  al.  (1999).  “Financial  Sector  Crisis  and  Restructuring.  Lessons  from  Asia”,  IMF 
Occasional Paper, 188. 
4  See  Fukao,  M.  (2003).  “Japan’s  Lost  Decade  and  its  Financial  System”,  The  World  Economy,  26,  
pp.  365–384,  and  Caballero,  R.,  T.  Hoshi  and  A.  Kashyap  (2008).  “Zombie  Lending  and  Depressed 
Restructuring in Japan”, American Economic Review, 98:5, pp. 1943–1977. 
5  See footnote 4. 
6  See  Krugman,  P.  (1999).  “What  happened  to  Asia?”,  in  Sato  R.  et  al.,  Global  Competition  and  Integration, 
Kluwer  Academic  Publishers,  pp.  315–327.  Already  in  1590  Hong  Zicheng’s  Càigēntán  claimed  that  “water 
that is clear has no fish.” 
7  See Krugman, P. (1994). “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle”, Foreign Affairs, 73:6 (1994: November/December). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
were essential.8 The lesson to be learnt was that sustainable growth can only be achieved by 
fostering an environment that encourages open markets, innovation and entrepreneurship. 
A third lesson is that re-nationalisation and protectionism are not the solution to a 
crisis  
Indeed, there is empirical evidence that more open economies recover faster from the output 
contraction  that  usually  accompanies  a  sudden  stop  of  capital.9  As  such,  the  most  open 
Asian  economies,  such  as  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore,  were  among  the  least  severely 
affected and fastest to recover from the Asian crisis.10 In other words, despite the attendant 
risks,  globalisation  in  trade  is  still  the  best  way  to  achieve  progress  and  economic 
development, and open financial markets can support it provided they are backed by strong 
prudential supervision. Open trade policies in the crisis helped Asian economies to benefit 
from the upswing in global trade and growth towards the turn of the millennium (see Chart 4), 
which in turn supported the post-crisis recovery.  
However, while there may be lessons to learn, what are the important differences 
between emerging Asia of the 1990s and the euro area today? 
Emerging  Asian  economies  had  greater  policy  leeway  than  euro  area  countries  in  dealing 
with their crises, in that they had flexible exchange rate regimes. Some might argue that this 
makes it hard to say which part of the Asian experience is relevant for Europe. But I would 
have a different interpretation: a lack of nominal exchange rate flexibility does not preclude 
real exchange rate adjustment. Sharing a currency entails a fundamental trade-off. It brings 
considerable microeconomic benefits but it creates responsibilities for participating countries. 
They  should  run  prudent  policies  to  make  asymmetric  shocks  less  frequent,  ensure  that 
relative  prices  can  adjust  if  such  a  shock  nevertheless  occurs,  and  be  prepared  to  insure 
each other against extreme outcomes when the former mechanisms are not enough. 
The conditions were unfortunately not met in the euro area. National policies were run on the 
misguided  assumption  that  countries,  companies  and  households  could  borrow  forever.  In 
spite  of  needing  more  flexible  markets  with  its  single  currency,  Europe  faced  stronger 
nominal rigidities than East Asia in labour and product markets.11 This limited the ability of 
euro  area  countries  to  adjust  to  asymmetric  shocks,  especially  as  cross-border  labour 
mobility was low and public debt levels were already high. And finally, no mutual insurance 
mechanism was in place. 
But, and here comes the good news, unlike emerging Asia in the late 1990s, Europe had a 
well-established  regional  political  framework  to  address  its  crisis.  The  framework  of 
integration  and  cooperation  among  EU  members  is  old  and  dense,  building  on  the 
experience gained with the European Monetary System12. This made it possible to create the 
necessary  instruments  (the  EFSF  and  ESM)  for  financial  support  for  domestic  adjustment 
programmes  to  come  mainly  from  within  the  Union,  with  the  IMF  focusing  on  monitoring 
conditionality. 
                                                 
8  See Kochpar, K., P. Loungani and M. Stone (1998): “The East Asian Crisis: Macroeconomic Developments 
and Policy Lessons”, IMF Working Paper 98/128. 
9  See  Cavallo  E.A.  and  J.  A.  Frankel  (2008).  “Does  Openness  to  Trade  Make  Countries  More  Vulnerable  to 
Sudden Stops, Or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 
Volume 27, Issue 8, pp. 1430–1452. 
10  See  Loong,  L.S.  (2000).  “Post  crisis  Asia  –  The  way  forward”,  BIS  William  Taylor  Memorial  Lecture, 
21 September 2000. 
11  See Heinz, F.F. and D. Rusinova (2011): “How flexible are real wages in EU countries? A Panel Investigation”, 
ECB Working Paper No 1360. 
12  See James, H. (2012): “Making European Monetary Union”, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Some will remember the IMF Annual Meetings in 1997 in Hong Kong, when calls to create an 
“Asian  Monetary  Fund”  were  judged  incompatible  with  the  IMF’s  universal  mandate.13 
Contrary to Asia in the late 1990s, Europe had the political infrastructure in place to sustain 
the sharing of sovereignty that makes mutual insurance mechanisms possible. This is not to 
say that all the discussions were easy, far from it, as might be expected in times of crisis. 
Europe’s  sense  of  commonality  was,  and  still  is,  under  severe  strain.  But  the  political 
framework was there to produce decisions, and most importantly, a legal framework was also 
there to implement them. 
The  lesson  from  this  is  that  regional  integration,  regional  rule  of  law,  and  the  sense  of  a 
common project are sources of stability.14 In East Asia, things have moved on since the late 
1990s,  with  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  multilateralisation.  The  G20  has  taken  stock  of  the 
Asian  and  European  experiences  and  acknowledged  the  relevance  of  regional  financial 
arrangements. 
The road ahead for the euro area 
Based on the lessons learnt from the Asian crisis, what are the main challenges we face in 
the euro area? Let me consider them one by one. 
Restructuring Europe’s financial sector 
To begin with, we need to reform Europe’s financial sector. 
We have, so to speak, come to a crossroads in Europe. In one direction lies the Japanese 
experience, and in the other direction that of emerging East Asia. The authorities can either 
choose between swiftly auditing and repairing the banking sector, which will help to restore 
credit flows, or they can allow forbearance, which will harm the long-term prospects for our 
economy. 
I do not mean to downplay the significant restructuring and recapitalisation that has already 
taken place in Europe. Since the onset of the global financial crisis, euro area banks have 
raised  around  €225  billion  of  fresh  capital  and  a  further  €275  billion  has  been  injected  by 
governments, equivalent in total to more than 5% of euro area GDP. Today, the median Core 
Tier 1 capital ratio of the largest euro area banks stands close to 12%. But there is some way 
to go. To ensure that we take the right road, I see three responses as key. 
The first is to carry out a comprehensive clean-up of the banking system so that the price 
mechanism  is  no  longer  obscured  by  uncertainty  about  asset  valuation  and  bank  funding 
models, and banks can free up balance sheet capacity to extend new loans.  
The ECB will take up its supervisory responsibilities in about a year from now, and as part of 
this  we  will  conduct  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  128  significant  credit  institutions 
covering  85%  of  euro  area  bank  assets.  We  announced  the  details  of  this  exercise  on 
Wednesday last week.15 It aims to increase transparency, to identify the necessary corrective 
actions and to build confidence in the banking system.  
                                                 
13  See Sakakibara, E., 2000, Nihon to Sekai ga Furueta Hi, Chuo Koron Shinsha. 
14  “G20  Principles  for  Cooperation  between  the  IMF  and  Regional  Financing  Arrangements  as  endorsed  by 
G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors”, 15 October 2011. 
15  The comprehensive assessment entails three broad elements. First, a supervisory risk assessment to review 
key  risks  including  liquidity  and  funding.  Second,  a  balance  sheet  assessment  to  enhance  transparency  in 
banks’  balance  sheets  and  their  asset  quality,  collateral  valuation  and  provisions,  and  so  on.  And  third,  a 
stress test to examine banks’ resilience to adverse scenarios. See European Central Bank (2013). “ECB starts 
comprehensive assessment in advance of supervisory role”, 23 October. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
With such steps, and provided that sources of capital are clearly identified, including public 
backstops  when  private  sources  have  been  exhausted,  I  firmly  believe  we  can  put  the 
banking system on a sounder footing and enable it to support the economy’s recovery. 
The second response is to reduce financial fragmentation. Despite having a single market for 
capital in Europe, liquidity is not fully fungible between and even within cross-border banks. 
This means that liquidity usage is not optimised – surpluses in some countries are not used 
to fund deficits in others. The result is a greater divergence in bank funding costs and lending 
rates  than  would  be  warranted  by  the  underlying  economic  fundamentals,  and  euro  area 
companies being unable to tap a single pool of savings to fund their development. 
The third response is to explore avenues for non-bank financing – that is, to develop debt 
and  equity  capital  markets  in  Europe.  Around  75%  of  firms’  external  financing  in  the  euro 
area  comes  from  banks,  which  makes  the  economy  particularly  vulnerable  to  crises  that 
spread  through  the  banking  system.  Measures  are  being  introduced  in  Europe  to  develop 
capital markets for long-term financing and deepen markets for the securitisation of loans to 
small and medium-sized enterprises.16 
However, having a well-functioning financial sector is only one part of the story. To leave the 
crisis behind us, we also have to ask: what in fact does that sector finance? Again, we can 
learn from the Asian crisis: we need to foster growth and total factor productivity with new 
business models. 
Fostering growth: new business models  
Due to its length and severity, the economic downturn has already caused a permanent loss 
in output and a rise in structural unemployment, and we cannot rule out that the growth rate 
of potential output has been affected too. To repair this damage, investment in both physical 
and  human  capital  has  to  be  a  key  component  of  the  recovery.  Clearly,  there  is  spare 
capacity in the euro area economy. Total investment in the euro area is currently 17% lower 
than it was in 2007. But some of this capacity is in sectors which will not be future engines of 
growth – such as commercial real estate in some of the stressed countries. What we need is 
investment  in  new  business  models  that  will  raise  total  factor  productivity  and  provide  the 
sources of future growth. 
Politicians are not the best placed to decide what these business models will be. The market 
economy  will  take  care  of  that.  The  important  thing  is  that  we  create  an  environment  that 
encourages  innovation  and  entrepreneurship  so  that  new  models  can  emerge,  and  capital 
and  labour  can  be  reallocated  to  a  more  efficient  use.  This  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the 
people of Europe, both as workers and as savers, beginning with those who have been hit 
hardest by the crisis. It nevertheless implies changes at both national and European levels. 
At  national  level,  we  need  to  prioritise  public  spending  towards  productivity-enhancing 
investment,  ensure  that  labour  and  goods  market  are  flexible,  cultivate  a  supportive 
regulatory,  judicial  and  educational  environment,  and  open  our  economies  to  spur 
competition and encourage the emergence of new actors.  
Opaqueness and vested interests17 are not only defining features of developing economies. 
Successful reform in European economies hinges on efforts to curb rent-seeking behaviours. 
For example, doesn’t the Single Supervisory Mechanism have the objective of freeing bank 
supervision from national politics? 
                                                 
16  See European Commission (2013). Long term financing of the European economy, Green Paper, March. 
17  I refer here to the concept of “limited access social orders”, see North, D., J. Wallis and B. Weingast (2009). 
Violence and Social Orders: A Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History, Cambridge 
University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
At  European  level,  we  need  to  provide  a  framework  that  supports  and  incentivises  the 
introduction of such national policies. This is the role of economic union in the euro area, the 
“E” of EMU. I would stress, however, that economic union does not mean defining a single 
economic model across all countries. On the contrary, its purpose is to create the conditions 
for each country to identify and develop its comparative advantage. Paradoxically, it is only 
by  encouraging  difference  –  comparative  advantage  –  that  the  euro  area  can  achieve 
convergence – that is, a more even distribution of economic outcomes. 
Avoiding re-nationalisation and protectionism 
Let  me  finally  address  the  third  lesson  learnt  from  East  Asia.  Europe  needs  to  avoid 
protectionist  temptations  and  calls  for  re-nationalisation.  Protectionism  and  beggar-thy-
neighbour policies would lead to further losses of welfare at both European and global level. 
Fortunately,  there  has  been  no  significant  surge  in  barriers  to  global  trade  in  recent  years 
 –  unlike  during  the  Great  Depression  –  thanks  to  global  and  regional  policy  coordination. 
These  efforts  remain  important.  Barriers  to  trade  in  goods  and  services  cannot  be  raised 
within  Europe  thanks  to  our  Single  Market  and  competition  rules  which  are  enshrined  in 
European laws, but the Single Market can be further enhanced.  
Savings have been partly re-nationalised as a consequence of financial fragmentation. This 
is a trend that, if left unchecked, can be fatal to the Single Market. Completing the Banking 
Union  is  key  to  halt  it,  and  I  welcome  EU  leaders’  resolve  to  swiftly  agree  on  a  Single 
Resolution Mechanism.  
Finally,  Europe  should  remain  open  to  the  world.  Further  progress  on  bilateral  or  regional 
free  trade  agreements,  and  cooperation  in  implementing  the  new  financial  regulatory 
standards, are the best signal in this respect. 
Conclusion 
Let me draw to a close by re-emphasising that crises, despite their negative consequences, 
can  have  positive  effects.  They  can  galvanise  efforts  and  focus  minds.  They  can  drive 
change  and  bring  about  progress.  They  can  pave  the  way  for  innovative  solutions.  But  to 
secure these gains, cooperation across national borders is crucial, in other words, there must 
be  a  willingness  to  work  towards  common  goals  and  to  learn  from  each  other  and  resist 
protectionism. This spirit will be essential to tackle the challenges still ahead of us, not only in 
the euro area but also at a global level. 
It is often claimed that the Chinese and Japanese word for crisis, wēijī or kiki (危机 or 危機), 
is  made  of  the  two  characters  meaning  “danger”  and  “opportunity”.  While  there  can  be  no 
doubt that wēi means “danger”, I would rather understand jī as meaning the critical moment 
when  things  have  to  change  –  the  ancient  Greeks’  kairos.  This  critical  moment  has  now 
arrived for Europe. Europe has emerged from the danger zone. It’s time for us to get our act 
together, to reform, and to grow. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 1  
Credit growth to the private sector in East Asia  
and the euro area 
(in percentage changes, year to year) 
  Sources: IMF WEO and Haver Analytics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Chart 2 
Current account balances in East Asia and the euro area  
(in % of GDP, East Asia in 1996, euro area in 2008) 
  Sources: IMF WEO and Haver Analytics. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 3 
Real GDP growth in East Asia and Japan before,  
during and after their crises  
(in percentage, year to year) 
  Source: Haver Analytics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Chart 4 
Export and Import volumes of goods and services in East Asia  
(in percentage changes, year to year)  
  Sources: IMF WEO and Haver Analytics. 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
