Lars Rohde: Reflections on Denmark’s sixth bank rescue package 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Rohde,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 2 December 2013. 
 A few months ago, the sixth Danish Bank Rescue Package was neatly wrapped up. I would 
like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  acknowledge  the  political  responsibility  shown  in  that 
connection. 
Danmarks Nationalbank welcomes the agreement. It broadly observes the recommendations 
of  the  SIFI  Committee  to  identify  systemically  important  financial  institutions  and  impose 
extra requirements, including stricter capital requirements, on these institutions. 
The agreement is an important milestone in the follow-up of the crisis, but it is too early to put 
our feet up. As the agreement indicates, there are still important issues that the parties need 
to  settle,  presumably  in  2014.  These  include  crisis  management  and  crisis  management 
buffers. The final level of the Danish SIFI requirements will also be reviewed in 2017 at the 
latest.  If  it  does  not  match  the  level  of  comparable  European  countries  such  as  Sweden, 
Germany and the UK, it will be adjusted. 
Compared with the rest of the Nordic region, Denmark is imposing lower capital requirements 
on SIFIs and phasing them in more slowly. But besides the regulatory requirements there are 
market  requirements.  Particularly  for  SIFIs,  which  often  operate  internationally,  market 
standards  are  typically  one  step  ahead  of  financial  regulation.  I  am  convinced  that, 
irrespective  of  the  regulatory  requirements,  the  market  will  ensure  that  actual  capital 
adequacy is evened out over time. 
The countercyclical buffer differs from the other capital requirements. It is not an immediate 
requirement, but a framework that can be activated if credit developments and the economic 
situation call for it. Unlike the other Nordic countries, Denmark is phasing in this framework 
gradually. In other words, new legislation will be required if economic developments in the 
transitional period until 2019 require a larger countercyclical buffer than the limitation of the 
framework for that year. 
*** 
In the same way as Bank Rescue Package 6 underpins the largest credit institutions, the bill 
to  address  the  mortgage  banks’  refinancing  risk  is  an  important  contribution  to  financial 
stability. 
The immense popularity of loans that are not prefinanced has led to a potential refinancing 
risk. Unlike in the old days, mortgage banks have a continuous need for refinancing in the 
market, and they might experience a situation resembling a “run” on a bank. It is very unlikely 
that this will happen, but the consequences could be enormous. At Danmarks Nationalbank 
we have pointed out this risk, and the rating agencies have also focused on it. 
Let me make it very clear that in Danmarks Nationalbank’s opinion compulsory, conditional 
maturity extension provides a solution to this problem. 
The bill leaves no doubt as to what will happen if interest rates suddenly rise very sharply or 
an auction fails. The refinancing risk is transferred to investors. For the mortgage banks, risk 
is, once again, limited to credit risk, which was the original idea behind the balance principle. 
It is important that the bill includes an interest-rate trigger, so that maturity extension takes 
effect  in  connection  with  very  large,  but  well-defined  interest-rate  rises.  This  makes  it 
possible for investors to determine the price of maturity extension. 
This structure does not affect Danmarks Nationalbank’s role as lender  of last resort, but it 
ensures that the mortgage banks’ business model does not rely on Danmarks Nationalbank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
as back stop. In connection with the preparatory work, Danmarks Nationalbank indicated that 
the bill does not in itself give reason to change Danmarks Nationalbank’s collateral basis. 
The bill also presents a credible resolution model. All doubts will be eliminated as to what will 
happen to mortgage bonds that have not been prefinanced if a mortgage bank is wound up. 
The bonds will be converted into long-term fixed-rate bonds with the same payment series as 
the underlying loans. 
Irrespective  of  the  bill,  borrowers  with  variable-rate  loans  will  remain  sensitive  to  general 
developments  in  interest  rates.  As  long  as  the  Danish  economy  is  in  synch  with  the 
international  economy,  increased  interest-rate  sensitivity  may  dampen  fluctuations  in  the 
economy  and  have  a  stabilising  effect.  Variable-rate  loans  have  unquestionably  helped  to 
stabilise the housing market during the financial crisis. 
Variable-rate loans entail a payment risk for the borrower, while fixed-rate loans entail a price 
risk.  In  order  to  maintain  investor  confidence  in  the  mortgage-credit  system,  the  mortgage 
banks should take a portfolio view when assessing their total lending. The future Supervisory 
Diamond  for  mortgage banks  will  lay  down  the  overall  framework for  the  mortgage  banks’ 
risk profile, but first and foremost it is the mortgage banks themselves that are responsible 
for their own risk management. 
In  the  interests  of  investor  confidence  and  financial  stability  the  mortgage  banks  should 
generally stay well within the statutory limits – also after this bill has been passed. 
*** 
During the last 18 months, the Danish Productivity Commission has analysed the reasons for 
many years’ low productivity growth in Denmark. Some sectors are more severely affected 
than  others.  The  Commission  has  also  presented  a  long  list  of  proposals  for  improving 
productivity in various parts of the economy. 
The  financial  sector  plays  an  important  role  in  Danish  society  as  a  provider  of  capital  to 
households  and  firms,  and  it  also  offers  products  such  as  pension  saving  schemes  and 
hedging  of  various  types  of  risk.  In  addition,  the  sector  ensures  that  domestic  and 
cross-border  payments  can  be  transacted  efficiently.  So  from  society’s  point  of  view  it  is 
important that this sector is as efficient as possible – which means that its production costs 
should be as low as possible. 
A  rough  indicator  of  developments  in  labour  productivity  in  the  financial  sector  can  be 
obtained  by  looking  at  domestic  lending  –  or  alternatively  financial  assets  –  relative  to 
employment  in  the  sector.  Calculated  in  this  way,  labour  productivity  was  more  or  less 
constant in the decades before the liberalisation of the financial markets, which really took off 
in the early 1980s. 
Liberalisation  of  capital  flows  across  borders  and  deregulation  of  the  financial  sector  in 
Denmark  have  provided  considerable  welfare  gains.  These  gains  are  the  result  of  lower 
prices  and  a  larger  product  range, coupled  with  better  opportunities for planning  individual 
savings,  consumption  and  investment.  At  the  same  time,  financial  sector  productivity  has 
increased substantially. 
In  fact,  since  1980  productivity  has  grown  by  an  average  of  4–5  per  cent  annually  in  the 
financial  sector.  But  in  recent  years  lending  by  banks  and  mortgage  banks  relative  to 
employment has been stagnant or shown a weak trend compared with previously. Domestic 
lending by banks relative to employment has even fallen. 
Compared with the rest of the EU, Denmark is among the member states with the largest 
balance-sheet sum or domestic lending per employee. But in terms of cost-to-earnings ratio, 
Denmark is in the middle of the table. This could indicate that, at least on average, there is 
scope for further efficiency improvements in Danish credit institutions in the coming years. 
However, there are large differences within the sector. Comparisons of individual Danish and 
foreign  banking  groups  show  that  some  Danish  banks  are  fully  able  to  match  the  most 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
efficient foreign banks. But at the same time a number of Danish banks are less efficient than 
the  top  Danish  and  foreign  banks.  For  these  banks,  the  scope  for  improvement  is  even 
greater than the average numbers indicate. Badly managed banks have been a key factor 
behind  the  sector’s  problems  in  the  years  after  the  financial  crisis  and  the  preceding 
overheating  of  the  economy.  I  welcome  the  Danish  Bankers  Association’s  new  code  of 
management.  In  your  own  words,  this  code  is  to  address  the  “individual  cases  of  bad 
management,  mismanagement  and  inexpedient  management  structures  seen  during  the 
crisis”. 
*** 
Turning to the international agenda, negotiations on a banking union are currently underway. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  is  following  these  negotiations  closely.  No  decision  has  yet  been 
made  about  Danish  participation,  but  the  banking  union  will,  in  any  case,  have  great 
importance for Denmark. Even if Denmark opts out, two of the largest banks in Denmark will 
be  subject  to  supervision  by  the  ECB  in  relation  to  considerable  parts  of  their  euro  area 
activities. At present, these two banks account for more than 50 per cent of total lending by 
Danish banks. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  essential  to  all  EU  member  states  that  the  project  is  a  success. 
Financial stability in the euro area is a prerequisite for financial stability throughout the EU 
and has a large impact on future growth in the EU. At the same time, it is important that the 
banking union strengthens the single market for financial services. 
A  well-functioning  banking  union  requires  strong  confidence  in  the  single  supervisory 
authority. An important step will be taken with the ECB’s assessment of the assets and risks 
of credit institutions subject to direct supervision; this will take place in the coming year. A 
credible  exercise  of  that  nature  will  give  the  banks  involved  a  solid,  and  in  some  cases 
much-needed, stamp of quality. 
It is positive that the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority plans to replicate this exercise 
for  the  large  Danish  banks,  to  the  extent  that  it  is  possible.  In  this  context  I  would  like  to 
mention  the  results  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  most  recent  stress  test,  which  will  be 
published soon. They show that in all the stress scenarios the large banks have a Common 
Equity Tier 1 ratio of more than 8, which is the threshold in the ECB’s stress test. Recent 
years’ improved capitalisation is a major reason for this. 
Danmarks Nationalbank generally takes a positive view of the banking union outlined. It is an 
important  step  towards  strengthening  the  single  market  for  financial  services  and  hence 
cross-border competition. Competition forces both banks and firms to be “on their toes” and 
improve their skills. That is healthy and good for everyone. 
It is important that euro area and non-euro area member states can participate in the banking 
union on equal terms. Otherwise, there is a risk that the single market for financial services 
becomes fragmented. 
In  addition,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  finds  it  essential  that  the  banking  union  includes  an 
insurance element in relation to the systemic institutions in Denmark. A single, strong bank 
resolution fund could ensure that. For the euro area member states, the ESM – the single 
euro rescue fund – provides extra insurance and will act as the ultimate back stop when all 
other  funds  have  been  depleted.  Again,  it  is  important  to  ensure  equal  treatment  of 
participating euro area and non-euro area member states. 
*** 
Now I would like to turn to the economy. The USA is in an upswing and growth accelerated a 
little in the 3rd quarter. Both the OECD and the IMF expect activity to pick up further over the 
next year. The upswing is being driven by private investment and consumption, supported by 
rising employment and an improved housing market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In  the  euro  area,  macroeconomic  developments  have  matched  expectations,  which  is 
something we have not seen for quite a while. The weak positive growth is set to continue 
into the 2nd half of 2013, but still with large differences within the area. Especially German 
domestic demand is beginning to fuel growth. Unemployment is low in Germany and wage 
inflation  rising,  but  Germany’s  competitiveness  remains  strong.  The  UK  has  seen  a 
continuous  series  of  positive  economic  indicators,  and  so  has  Sweden  to  some  extent, 
although the Swedish economy did slow down in the spring. Overall, the outlook is getting 
brighter in some of Denmark’s largest export markets. 
*** 
In Denmark, both households and firms have begun to take a more optimistic view of their 
own finances and the Danish economy in the last six months, but for the households this has 
not really been reflected in increased spending yet. All the same, the stage seems to be set 
for increased private sector spending. Households and firms have been consolidating for a 
while,  and  the  level  of  unemployment  is  stable  and  not  high  by  historical  standards. 
Moreover, financial conditions are strongly expansionary with a low level of interest rates. 
The  housing  market  has  shown  positive  signs  over  the  last  year  with  rising  cash  prices. 
However,  there  is  wide  regional  variation.  So  far,  prices  have  predominantly  risen  in  the 
Copenhagen area, while no improvement has yet been seen in the areas outside the cities. 
Presumably it will come if the market continues to pick up. All the same, there are regions in 
Denmark where the population is declining as many, especially young, people migrate to the 
cities. Outside the cities, the supply of homes for sale is high in many places, and there are 
no indications that the situation will change. 
For  the  corporate  sector,  the  outlook  is  slightly  better,  possibly  because  investments  have 
been  brought  forward  before  the  investment  window  closes  at  the  end  of  the  year.  But 
activity remains low in the construction sector. Firms have accumulated considerable savings 
surpluses,  and  the future framework for  banks and  mortgage  banks  is to  a  large  extent  in 
place. So it is not lack of financing opportunities that is dampening the level of investment. 
Another positive factor is that some of Denmark’s largest export markets seem to be keeping 
up steam, as I have already mentioned. All in all, there is reason for cautious optimism about 
the Danish economy, although we still have little tangible proof that the upswing has started. 
Inflation  has  been  very  low  over  the  last  year,  both  in  Denmark  and  in  the  euro  area.  In 
Denmark, a number of factors – from energy prices to indirect taxes – are keeping inflation at 
bay.  With  low  inflation  and  well-anchored  inflation  expectations,  the  ECB’s  Governing 
Council expects to keep the ECB’s key interest rates at the current level or lower for some 
time yet. 
*** 
The  financial  markets  and  the  financial  sector  are  now  on  a  stable  course,  so  Danmarks 
Nationalbank plans to phase out the additional  borrowing options introduced in connection 
with the financial crisis. 
The  6-month  loans  which  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  offered  to  credit  institutions  since 
2011 will be phased out from July 2014. Loans already raised will run until they mature. 
At  the  same  time,  the  list  of  assets  eligible  as  collateral  for  loans  from  Danmarks 
Nationalbank  will  be  restored  to  normal.  This  means  that  banks’  credit  claims  and  sector 
company shares will be phased out of the collateral basis. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  carefully  considered  these  changes  and  assessed  the 
consequences  for  the  sector  overall  and  for  the  individual  credit  institutions.  In  Danmarks 
Nationalbank’s assessment, the credit institutions can handle these changes. Use of 6-month 
loans has been very limited, and the assets to be phased out have only to a modest extent 
been pledged as collateral to Danmarks Nationalbank. And the credit institutions will still be 
able to meet the statutory liquidity requirements. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Overall, both the sector as such and the individual institutions will still have sufficient eligible 
assets  for  execution  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  monetary  policy  and  settlement  of 
payments. 
*** 
Finally, I would like to touch upon our concerted efforts in relation to the new retail payments 
infrastructure. This year, it became possible for citizens and firms to transfer money within 
the  same  day.  If  we  meet  at  the  same  time  next  year,  I  expect  real-time  transfers  to  be 
possible  around  the  clock.  These  initiatives  will  bring  productivity  gains  for  banks,  for 
Danmarks  Nationalbank,  for  citizens  and  for  firms  in  Denmark.  I  take  this  opportunity  to 
express my appreciation of the sector’s work on this project and of our good cooperation. 
*** 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
