Karnit Flug: Important goals to achieve for the Israeli economy 
Address by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, for the Appointment Ceremony of 
the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel  at  the  President’s  Residence,  Tel  Aviv,  13  November 
2013. 
 President  Peres,  Prime  Minister  Netanyahu,  members  of  the  Government,  distinguished 
guests, and dear family: 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  President  of  the  State  of  Israel  who  accepted  the  Government’s 
recommendation to appoint me as the ninth Governor of the Bank of Israel. I thank the Prime 
Minister  and  the  Minister  of  Finance  for  their  earlier  remarks.  I  would  also  like  to  offer  a 
special thank you to my predecessor in the position, Professor Stanley Fischer, who left a 
magnificent legacy at the Bank of Israel. It is a great honor and privilege for me to serve in 
this role, and I will make every effort to justify the confidence that the Government of Israel 
and the President of the State have placed in me, and to serve the Israeli economy to the 
best of my ability. I express my gratitude as well to the many people who have congratulated 
me and have wished me luck since my appointment to the position was announced. 
I would like to open by telling you a bit about my parents – my father, Noah Flug, of blessed 
memory, and my mother, Dorota, may she live and be well. They were both born in 1925 in 
the city of Lodz, in Poland. During World War II, they joined the youth underground in the 
Lodz  ghetto.  Later  on,  my  father  was  imprisoned  in  Auschwitz,  Gross-Rosen,  and 
Mauthausen,  while  my  mother  was  in  Auschwitz,  Bergen-Belsen,  and  Salzwedel.  In  1958, 
when I was three, we made aliyah and moved to Israel. 
My  father  worked  in  the  civil  service  for  30  years,  as  an  economist  in  the  Budgets 
Department  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  as  an  economic  advisor  to  the  Knesset  Finance 
Committee, as an economic Consul in Zurich and at the Israeli Embassy in Bonn. My mother 
worked around the clock as a pediatrician. 
After retiring from government service, my father worked to protect the rights and honor of 
Holocaust  survivors  and  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  the  Holocaust.  To  the  day  he  died, 
about  two  years  ago,  he  served  as  Chairman  of  the  Center  of  Organizations  of  Holocaust 
Survivors in Israel.  
Over  the  years,  I  heard  my  mother  speak  straightforwardly  to  her  little  patients.  From  my 
father, I learned to focus on a goal, to concentrate on what is truly important, but also to be 
pragmatic and reach agreements, because there is no need for unnecessary battles. I hope 
to bring these principles with me to the role of Governor of the Bank of Israel. 
There are many important goals to achieve for the economy and the Bank of Israel, which is 
one  of  the  most  important  institutions  in  the  economy.  The  new  law  defines  the  Bank’s 
objectives  and  functions  clearly  and  unequivocally.  The  main  objective  of  the  Bank  is  to 
maintain  price  stability.  In  recent  years,  this  goal  has  generally  been  achieved,  though  we 
must not take this for granted. We all remember very well the consequences of high inflation 
for Israel’s economy. The Bank of Israel will continue to maintain inflation within the target, 
and no less importantly, the public’s confidence in the Bank’s commitment to price stability. 
The economic literature and historical experience indicate that in the long term, price stability 
is a necessary condition for a growing and thriving economy. Given price stability, the law 
defines  the  additional  objectives  of  the  Bank  of  Israel  –  to  support  the  Government’s 
economic policy and the stability of the financial system. These issues are at the forefront of 
our considerations when we decide the Bank of Israel’s policies. Just as in recent years, the 
Bank  of  Israel  will  continue  to  support  the  growth  of  the  economy,  while  maintaining  the 
stability of the financial system in general, and the banking system in particular. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The Governor of the Bank of Israel is also, by law, the economic advisor to the government. 
Our  Research  Department  leads  the  research  on  Israel’s  economy,  and  will  continue  to 
delineate the research basis for the public discussion in areas on the agenda of economic 
policy  makers.  There  are  many  issues,  and  I  will  attempt  to  focus  on  the  most  important 
ones: 
First and foremost, we must find the ways to increase the growth rate of productivity in the 
Israeli economy. There is tremendous potential lying within the Israeli worker, but GDP per 
employee  does  not  match  that  of  the  most  advanced  economies,  and  as  a  result,  the 
economy  does  not succeed  in  allowing  citizens a  standard of  living  in  line  with  that  of  the 
most  developed  economies.  We  must  find  the  way  to  increase  the  attractiveness  of 
investment  in  the  economy  and  to  increase  capital  stock,  to  improve  the  competitive 
environment in which the business sector operates, and to reduce the bureaucratic burden. 
We must continue our efforts to increase the participation in employment of those population 
sectors which are still characterized by low employment. The expected demographic trends 
do not support a high rate of growth in the coming years, and we will need to act to offset the 
effects on growth of those trends in order to continue to grow at a satisfactory rate. 
High growth rates are not enough; it is very important that the fruits of growth are divided 
more equally by all parts of the population, so that they will support the reduction of poverty 
and  of  inequality  in  income  distribution.  We  want  inclusive  growth,  which  supports  the 
cohesion  between  various  population  groups,  and  within  the  groups  themselves.  Social 
cohesion  is  a  prerequisite  for  national  strength,  and  for  forming  a  society  in  which  our 
children, as well, will want to live and raise their children. Increasing labor force participation 
has an important role in this regard as well. 
In recent years, the cost of living has also been placed the top of the public agenda. This is 
partly related to the issues I already mentioned. Improvements in productivity and the rate of 
growth will necessarily bring with them an improvement in the purchasing power of the Israeli 
worker, in particular if the growth will be distributed more equally. But the cost of living is also 
partly related to the structure of the economy, to the level of competitiveness and the level of 
concentration  of  the  economy.  We  must  continue  to  strive  toward  an  economy  with  a 
competitive  environment,  in  which  every  producer  can  rely  on  its  relative  advantages  and 
offer the best products and services, and in which every consumer has the access and ability 
to choose the cheapest and most appropriate goods and services. In recent years, we have 
seen  important  reforms  in  this  area,  and  we  must  continue  to  carry  out  reforms  which  will 
reduce the concentration and increase competition. In the banking industry, as well, changes 
are  occurring  which  increase  competitiveness  and  the  consumer’s  ability  to  compare  and 
choose the best and cheapest service. Alongside these changes, it is important to continue 
the efficiency measures in the banking system, so that competitiveness will increase while 
maintaining the stability of the system – stability which is a necessary condition for a growing 
and thriving economy. 
Housing prices have increased in recent years at an accelerated pace, and have also been a 
significant component in the rise in the cost of living. The Bank of Israel, in the framework of 
its  economic  advice 
the  barriers  and 
recommending the policy required to increase the supply of housing at a rate which can meet 
demand. Within the framework of setting monetary policy, and its responsibility for financial 
stability and banking system stability, the Bank of Israel deals with the consequences of a 
low  interest  rate  environment,  which  is  derived  to  a  great  extent  from  the  monetary  policy 
adopted  in  major  economies  worldwide.  The  regulatory  steps  taken  by  the  Bank  of  Israel 
helped  to  reduce  the  risk  to  which  both  borrowers  and  the  banking  system  are  exposed. 
Ultimately, the solution will need to come from bringing the supply of homes in line with the 
basic  demand  for  housing  services,  and  we  must  hope  that  the  steps  being  taken  by  the 
Government in this area will bear fruit. 
the  government,  assists  with  diagnosing 
to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Israel’s agenda also includes the discussion about the size and the role of the public sector 
in  the  economy,  and  the  structure  of  the  tax  system.  After  several  years  of  reducing  the 
share  of  government  expenditure  in  GDP  and  reducing  the  tax  burden,  voices  are  heard 
calling for expanding the scope of services that the government provides for its citizens. The 
optimal size of the government cannot be calculated by one economic model or another – an 
economy  with  a  small  government  and  low  tax  burden  can  grow  and  thrive,  as  can  an 
economy  in  which  there  is  a  larger  government  and  greater  tax  burden.  The  size  of 
government expenditure, ultimately, is the result of society’s preferences. However, we must 
remember that the size of government and the tax burden go hand in hand. If we choose a 
large government which will provide public services with high quality and quantity, will invest 
in infrastructure, and will be actively involved in supporting engines of growth, we will have to 
bear a higher tax burden. It is not a simple choice, primarily because we will not be able to 
allow ourselves large deficits and a growing public debt – those will endanger the financial 
stability of the economy, and negatively impact growth and quality of life in the long term. 
The global economic crisis taught us another lesson about the importance of the stability of 
the  financial  system.  We  learned  that  we  must  map  out  and  understand  the  connections 
between  various  financial  institutions,  and  locate  possible  points  of  failure  which  may 
influence  the  financial  system’s  stability.  Supervision  of  the  financial  system  in  Israel  is 
dispersed among several entities. This situation is liable to lead to cracks in the supervisory 
systems, and to lead to a situation in which risks which are protected against adequately in 
one  part  of  the  financial  system  are  growing  in  another.  The  various  regulators  cooperate 
with  each  other  and  work  professionally  and  collaboratively.  With 
that,  we  must 
institutionalize  the  collaboration  and  information  sharing  through  a  Financial  Stability 
Committee with the participation of the Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Israel, and the Israel 
Securities  Authority.  Such  a  committee  will  help  to  significantly  reduce  the  probability  of  a 
threat to financial stability in Israel’s economy in the future. 
Dealing successfully with all these challenges requires the continued effective and productive 
cooperation that the Bank of Israel has with the relevant government ministries, particularly 
the Ministry of Finance. 
Alongside  setting  monetary  policy  and  providing  economic  advice  to  the  government,  the 
Governor of the Bank of Israel is also charged with the responsibility of managing the Bank. I 
am proud that the corporate governance regime at the Bank of Israel has undergone a real 
revolution in the past two years. Policy decisions are not made by the Governor alone, but 
within  the  framework  of  the  Monetary  Committee.  The  Supervisory  Council  oversees 
important administrative decisions. Nonetheless, there are also internal challenges facing the 
Bank  of  Israel  over  the  coming  years.  First  and  foremost,  we  will  need  to  find  a  way  to 
maintain the attractiveness of the Bank of Israel as a workplace which the very best will want 
to  join.  The  Bank’s  main  asset  when  it  comes  to  serve  the  Israeli  economy  is  the  human 
resource which lies within its employees. We must ensure that this resource does not erode. 
Bank  of  Israel  employees  come  to  work  each  day  in  order  to  serve  the  economy  and  the 
citizens – whether it is an employee in the Currency Department, which is charged with the 
regular  supply  of  banknotes  and  coins  to  the  economy,  or  the  economist  in  the  Market 
Operations Department, which carries out, in actuality, monetary policy and is charged with 
managing the foreign exchange reserves which are the Israeli economy’s insurance policy, 
or the staff of the Banking Supervision Department, whose dedication and professionalism 
are  the  guarantee  that  Israeli  citizens’  funds  which  are  deposited  with  banks  are  in  sure 
hands. We all take it as a given that the check that we deposit, or the funds transfer which 
we carry out, always reach their destination, but this would not happen if not for the control of 
the Accounting, Payment and Settlement Systems Department at the Bank, and there is no 
substitute for the analytical talents and policy recommendations of the Research Department 
economists,  who  work  constantly  to  try  to  provide  answers,  to  both  the  urgent  policy 
questions and the longer term issues in the Israeli economy. All these, with the help of the 
people  in  Statistics,  IT,  and  various  administrative  units,  are  the  human  resource  that  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Bank of Israel places at the service of the Israeli economy. I have no doubt that the staff of 
the Bank of Israel will continue to serve Israel’s economy with professionalism and dedication 
in the coming years, and I will be proud to lead them in this effort. 
I would like to conclude my remarks by expressing my gratitude to my spouse, Shaul, and to 
my  children  Maya  and  Michael,  without  whose  support  over  many  years,  despite  their 
shunning  of  public  exposure,  it  is  doubtful  I  would  be  standing  here  today  and  taking  on 
myself the position of Governor of the Bank of Israel. 
Thank you very much. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
