Jörg Asmussen: Introductory statement for the panel discussion on “The 
G20 and the future of global economic governance” 
Statement by Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the IIF Annual Membership Meeting, Washington DC, 12 October 2013. 
 It is a pleasure to be on this panel today to discuss the G20’s future. This is a topic to which I 
feel  close:  I  have  been  involved  in  G20  meetings  of  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank 
Governors since this forum first met in Berlin in 1999. I also had the honour to serve as the 
German Chancellor’s Sherpa in the Leaders’ Summit in Cannes in 2011. 
The elevation of the G20 as the premier forum for international economic cooperation 
in  the  Pittsburgh  Leaders’  Summit  was  a  welcome  development  in  its  own  right.  It 
reflects the recognition of the growing importance of emerging economies and the need to 
foster a continued informal dialogue between them and advanced economies.  
The  G20’s  earlier  achievements,  especially  at  the  Washington  (2008),  London  and 
Pittsburgh  (both  2009)  to  the  Seoul  (2010)  Summits,  were  quite  impressive,  both  as 
regards  the  content  and  the  time  frame  in  which  they  were  accomplished.  They 
included inter alia a coordinated policy response to the cyclical downturn, the launch of the 
IMF’s governance reform and an increase of IMF resources, as well as political impetus to a 
broad financial reform agenda. Questions about the G20’s legitimacy were raised at times by 
countries not represented. But the group’s effectiveness in pushing ahead reforms provided 
the  necessary  backing  in  “leading  by  example”  and  what  one  could  call  the  “output 
legitimacy” of the G20.  
More recently, however, the G20 seems to have lost its earlier momentum.  The case 
for  acting  in  unison  has  diminished  now  that  the  most  acute  phase  of  the  global  financial 
crisis  is  behind  us.  What  we  observe  is  a  quite  common  phenomenon,  however.  While 
informal formats gain importance in times of crisis, there is a clear tendency to revert back to 
the “input legitimacy” of the more formal formats and gatherings of pre-crisis times. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook  this  time  speaks  about 
increasing heterogeneity1 in countries’ economic performance whereas only six months ago 
the talk was of a 3-speed recovery and three years ago we had a one-speed economic cycle 
in the global economy. Against the background of this changed global environment some of 
the intrinsic features of the G20 come again to the fore: the G20 is composed of countries 
with  different  economic  structures,  different  political  systems  and  different  short-term 
interests.  
Such diversity makes it obviously harder to reach consensus, harder for instance than at the 
level of the G7 which is a similar forum, whose death was also declared prematurely.  
The  G20  remains  important  for  policy  dialogue  with  a  view  to  reaching  a  common 
understanding on economic challenges shaping the outlook. Such a common understanding 
is  a  key  condition  for  being  ready  to  act  in  a  globally  cooperative  manner  when  the  need 
arises. Therefore, the main question now is how to further improve the G20’s effectiveness 
as an informal forum for economic policy dialogue.  
                                                 
1   The  IMF  points  to  the  fact  that  “growth  dynamics  further  diverge”  at  the  global  level  and  states  that,  in 
particular. “the advanced economies have recently gained some speed, while the emerging market economies 
have slowed [and that] the emerging market economies, however, continue to account for the bulk of global 
growth. Within each group, there are still broad differences in growth and position in the cycle” (see WEO, 
October 2013, Chapter 1). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Let me throw out, for discussion among the panellists, three ideas:  
First, it is essential to return to a more focused agenda. The G20 should concentrate on 
topics  where  it  can  bring  genuine  value  added  compared  to  the  activities  of  the  formal 
institutions which, at the global level, deal with economic policy matters. Since the core of the 
G20 remains the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors’ meetings, the G20 is not 
ideally  placed  to  deal  with  e.g.  food  security  or  labour  issues.  Thus,  the  number  of  work 
streams and working groups should be reduced. 
But the group is well placed to discuss global economic and financial challenges, such as 
financial regulatory reform, tax issues, macroeconomic policies and global financing.  
What  we  need  is  an  effective  division  of  labour  between  the  G20  and  the  international 
organisations, with the latter providing technical/analytical input to the informal setting of the 
G20, but also receiving political signals on key orientations for an effective functioning of the 
international  organisations  in  the  global  economy,  e.g.  that  the  IMF  should  refine  its 
surveillance of the global economy; what the priorities and timetables of the FSB should be in 
terms of global financial regulation; what route the OECD should take on tax evasion or tax 
transparency. 
My second idea – which I have mentioned on earlier occasions – is the creation of a 
permanent secretariat for the G20.  
This would help to stay focused and avoid proliferation of new topics, which each new G20 
Presidency introduces, often with limited results. It would also foster continuity on technical 
topics,  especially  on  work  streams  which  span  over  several  years,  such  as  financial 
regulation.  These  advantages  would  of  course  need  to  be  weighed  against  the  risks  of 
increasing  bureaucracy  and  less  ownership  by  the  countries  participating  in  the  G20, 
including  the  Presidencies.  But,  learning  from  the  experiences  of  other  secretariats  to 
international bodies or forums, I believe it should be possible to strike the right balance and 
reach agreement on a small, dedicated G20 office. 
A third idea I would like to advance is that the G20 should strive towards concrete and 
measurable objectives for policy action. Achieving this goal would not only be helpful in 
order to reduce the scope for multiple interpretations and hence strengthen the consensus 
building, but it would also enhance the credibility of the G20 as well as its legitimacy via the 
channel of stronger output legitimacy to which I referred earlier. To give one obvious recent 
example,  a  more  ambitious  agreement  at  the  St  Petersburg’s  Summit  on  how  fiscal 
strategies  of  G20,  notably  advanced  economies,  should  evolve  in  a  post-Toronto  world 
(which  has  no  more  deficit  targets  post-2013  and  hence  no  guideposts  for  medium-term 
public debt consolidation paths) would have been particularly welcomed. 
I  am  aware  that  some  of  these  suggestions  might  be  difficult  to  implement  quickly.  But  a 
discussion about their feasibility cannot come too soon. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
