Jörg Asmussen: Introductory remarks at the press conference on the 
completion of the EU-funded cooperation programme with the National 
Bank of Serbia 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  press  conference  on  the  completion  of  the  EU-funded  cooperation 
programme with the National Bank of Serbia, Belgrade, 12 December 2013. 
 Governor Tabaković, 
Ambassador Davenport, 
Ambassadors, 
Ladies and gentlemen, representatives of the media, dear colleagues, 
Last week, Governor Tabaković was in Frankfurt for the ECB’s high-level conference where 
we discussed with governors and senior central bankers from all over the world the role that 
technical  cooperation  and  central  bank  cooperation  more  broadly  can  have  in  raising  staff 
and  institutional  capacities.  The  consensus  was  that  the  impact  can  be  high  when 
cooperation  is  open  and  honest,  and  there  is  strong  commitment  and  dedication  on  both 
sides. 
A highly successful programme 
Today it is my pleasure to be in Belgrade on the occasion of the closing of the ECB-
coordinated technical cooperation programme with the National Bank of Serbia. The 
programme has received funding from the European Commission through the Instrument for 
Pre-Accession  Assistance. The  aim  of  our  work has  been  to support  the  National  Bank of 
Serbia in its efforts to bring its rules, procedures and processes closer to EU central banking 
standards  and  to  support  the  bank  in  preparing  new  legislation  that  implements  the  legal 
framework of the European Union. This very programme has been characterised by all the 
positive things that we agreed last week in Frankfurt would be important for success. 
The  programme  we  are  closing  today  has  been  the  ECB’s  most  complex  and 
ambitious programme to date. It has covered 13 different central banking areas and has 
been implemented in partnership with 21 national central banks from the European System 
of Central Banks. More than 170 experts from EU central banks have been providing input 
and  guidance  to  their  Serbian  colleagues  and  around  150  Serbian  colleagues  have  been 
visiting their EU counterparts to get hands-on exposure to systems and procedures used by 
them  in  their  respective  central  banks.  Together,  these  experts  have  developed  an 
impressive number of handbooks, guidelines and procedures, models for economic analysis, 
statistical systems and new primary or secondary legislative acts; this whole framework has 
helped the National Bank of Serbia take an important step forward towards implementing EU 
central banking standards. 
Looking back, the project got underway on 1 February 2011, when we committed to working 
together for 24 months. As we were approaching the end, we saw that we had reached all of 
our  targets  and  objectives  in  a  very  effective  and  efficient  way.  We  therefore  agreed  to 
extend the contract by 11 months and to deepen the work in three areas. This work has now 
too been fully completed and we are ready to close the programme. 
In most of the areas covered during this time, the National Bank of Serbia will continue 
to implement work that we started together. You can, for instance, look forward to new 
and updated statistics for the balance of payments and for the financial accounts, which the 
National  Bank  of  Serbia  plans  to  start  publishing  in  the  next  few  years.  It  also  has  new 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
analytical tools for both macroeconomic and financial stability analysis, allowing it to speak 
with  a  stronger  voice  in  the  national  and  international  debate.  These  are  only  a  couple  of 
examples  of  what  this  programme  has  achieved.  Obviously  the  work  does  not  end  here. 
There are still areas within the National Bank of Serbia that need upgrading before it joins the 
European  System  of  Central  Banks.  In  addition,  the  EU  continues  to  update  rules, 
regulations and best practices, which means that the target is always moving. 
Let me turn to a few points that are not directly linked to the programme, but are important as 
they relate to current challenges in the EU as well as in Serbia. 
framework 
institutional 
that  ensures 
Common challenges in the euro area and in Serbia 
While central banks have done what they can to limit the most devastating effects of 
the global financial crisis, there are limits to what the central bank can do. The ECB 
can  keep  interest  rates  low  and  resort  to  non-standard  measures  as  warranted  by 
exceptional  circumstances,  in  line  with  our  mandate  of  price  stability.  Maintaining  price 
stability  is  the  best  contribution  that  a  central  bank  can make  to  support  economic  growth 
and  employment.  We  cannot,  however,  address  by  ourselves  the  underlying  root 
causes of the problems that relate to fiscal and macroeconomic imbalances, a lack of 
competitiveness,  low  growth  and  high  unemployment.  Governments  of  EU  Member 
States have to do their part of the work through structural reforms and fiscal consolidation to 
return the economy to long-term sustainable growth and to boost employment. 
While the challenges are obviously not identical, these same issues are also relevant 
for  Serbia.  Structural  reforms  to  enhance  competitiveness  and  support  growth  potential, 
fiscal consolidation and ultimately sustainable convergence are challenges to be addressed 
by the political authorities in this country in their endeavour to move closer to the EU. The 
best contribution the National Bank of Serbia can make to support this is to achieve 
price  stability,  based  on  a  sound 
its 
independence. 
Turning back to the euro area, the crisis also revealed that the institutional framework 
of our Economic and Monetary Union – in which the ECB is the central bank tasked 
with  ensuring  price  stability  –  needs  to  be  strengthened.  The  Heads  of  State  or 
Government  have  therefore  embarked  on  reforms  of  euro  area  governance,  including,  for 
instance,  the  fiscal  framework  governing  Member  States’  fiscal  policies  with  a  view  to 
enhancing fiscal discipline. They have also embarked on the creation of a banking union that 
will centralise critical functions relating to the banking sector at the European level, thereby 
severing the direct link between sovereigns and their banking sectors that proved to be an 
Achilles heel during the crisis. 
Following  the  necessary  political  decisions,  the  ECB  has  now  started  building  a 
banking supervisory function that will be responsible for the direct supervision of around 
130 systemically relevant banks in the euro area, as well as for the indirect supervision of 
banks  that  are  not  considered  systemically  relevant.  The  ECB  will  assume  this  role  in 
November  next  year  and  will  implement  the  new  harmonised  model  together  with  the 
national competent authorities, whether central banks or non-central bank supervisors. We 
call this the single supervisory mechanism (SSM). 
This also has implications for EU candidate countries and potential candidates in the 
Western Balkans, including Serbia, given the role of banks headquartered in the euro 
area in the banking sectors of the region. The establishment of the SSM implies that for 
many foreign-owned banks operating in Serbia, the ECB will become the “home” supervisor 
and they will no longer be supervised by different national supervisors depending on where 
they have their headquarters. In addition to enhancing the quality of the supervision of parent 
banks,  the  SSM  has  the  potential  to  facilitate  home-host  country  cooperation  in 
banking  supervision  –  thereby  strengthening  the  relationship  between  the  ECB  and 
the National Bank of Serbia in this area as well. In parallel, work is underway on a bank 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
recovery and resolution regime, which in our view is a crucial component in severing the link 
between sovereigns and banks and will be a complement to the SSM. 
An immediate priority in the euro area is to repair the balance sheets of commercial 
banks,  where  necessary.  The  ECB  is  conducting  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  bank 
balance sheets before assuming the supervisory responsibility and we have made it clear on 
many occasions that we need to have a European recovery and resolution regime in place 
by the time the SSM assumes its responsibilities. 
Turning to Serbia again, recent developments show that similar challenges apply to 
the Serbian financial sector, where the level of non-performing loans is high and the 
National Bank of Serbia together with the relevant national authorities are improving 
the recovery and resolution framework. 
In other words, we have some common challenges that we need to address over the coming 
years. And from the ECB’s side, I can assure you that we will want to remain in close contact 
with the National Bank of Serbia, continuing our open and honest communication – also in 
view of the opening of accession negotiations with Serbia. 
Conclusion 
Let me finish with a few acknowledgements and by expressing my thanks to all those who 
have played such an important role in making this project a success: 
• 
first, to the national central banks that have provided such a large number of experts 
to help us implement the programmes; 
to  the  technical  cooperation  coordinators  at  the  national  central  banks  who  have 
supported  the  steering  committee  in  its  monitoring  and  guidance  on  programme 
implementation; 
to the European Commission’s EU Delegation that provided funding to allow us to 
recover some of our costs; 
to the National Bank of Serbia and Governor Tabaković, who, with their open and 
cooperative  spirit  and  ownership  of  the  programme  outcomes,  have  been  a  real 
pleasure to work with; and 
last but not least, to the two teams within the ECB and the National Bank of Serbia, 
who have been coordinating this programme on an ongoing basis. 
    I congratulate all of you on the impressive results you have achieved. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
