Rundheersing Bheenick: Looking beyond vision 2020 
Address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Annual 
Dinner in honour of Economic Operators, Pailles, 6 December 2013. 
 “Without  …  extra  resources,  the  only  OMO’s  that  your  Central  Bank  will  be  able  to 
undertake will be, not Open Market Operations, but Open Mouth Operations – with no 
money to put where our mouth is!”  
1. 
Before we begin may I ask you all to rise to pay our respects and tribute to that great 
leader in this region, Nelson Mandela, who passed away last night and whose character and 
example in his Long Walk to Freedom have inspired so many in Africa and the world. Nelson 
Mandela, Madiba, Thank you! Now let me welcome you all here tonight. For I want to bring 
some  cheer  to  a  year  marked,  once  again,  by  the  dismal  lingering  legacy  of  the  global 
financial crisis. Tonight, I want us to raise our vision from the immediate past, beyond the 
immediate  horizon,  and  even  beyond  Vision  2020,  to  a  longer-term  perspective  for  the 
country and for its people.  
Global revenge on the banksters abroad 
2. 
For  banksters  abroad,  it  has  been  a  year  of  retribution,  regulatory  condemnation, 
and  multi-billion-dollar  penalties:  their  just  deserts!  But  here,  in  Mauritius,  it  has  been 
different. We have suffered no contagion from questionable practices and misdemeanors 
which had become common currency in the top echelons of global banking and finance. 
By judicious regulation, by innovative intervention, by much prudent action by our banks 
themselves − and also, I must say, by a fair bit of luck − we have managed to avoid the 
calamitous plight of so many hard-hit countries in the world.  
3. 
declared that to politicians – not with us tonight –  
The Economist, examining some of the worst excesses of casino banking abroad, has 
“banks are both incompetent behemoths waiting for public bailouts and conniving 
profiteers, pulling a fast one on their customers”1  
The Economist might think that… But I could not possibly say so… could I? As we well 
 
know, our banks, here, are not too-big-to-fail, and are engagingly customer-friendly, most of 
the time. And they had better be, as I am pleased to see that the competition is really hotting 
up. Even as I speak, we have half a dozen different applications for bank licenses pending – 
a record number for us.  
Elsewhere,  bankers  have  traded  recklessly  −  with  other  people’s  money.  They  have 
4. 
been guilty of LIBOR rigging. You would have thought that the forex market – the largest and 
most liquid market in the world, with a daily trading volume of USD 4 trillion – would have 
been immune to market-rigging. Well, you would have been wrong! Bank forex trading desks 
fixed  that,  too.  Bankers  may  yet  be  found  guilty  of  commodity  price  rigging  as  well.  They 
have made whole countries broke from the huge cost of the bank bailouts, spreading misery 
and devastation. You know, it’s almost as if these foreign banksters and traders have taken 
that Hollywood vamp, Mae West, as their mentor. Remember her quip?  
“Between two evils, I always pick the one I never tried before.”  
5. 
The jury is still out, as they say, on the punishment for bank fraud. Business Week, in 
November  this  year,  estimated  that  US  banks  have  paid  out  USD  93  billion  in  fines  and 
                                                
1  The Economist, 27 July 2013 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
penalties. The toll is still rising. Early this week, EU antitrust authorities fined eight banks a 
combined total of USD 2.5 billion for collusion to manipulate benchmark interest rates. Some 
in the West are now in jail. Four Iranian bank fraudsters copped the death penalty last year. 
And the Wall Street Journal reports that over 450 US banks have failed since 2008.  
6. 
In the UK, Barclays has paid out over USD400 million in fines to US regulators. It also 
sacrificed its Chairman and Chief Executive. Little wonder, then, that the UK Parliamentary 
Commission  on  Bank  Standards  proposes  to  criminalise  reckless  misconduct  in  bank 
management  and  has  recommended  that  all  bankers  should  be  licensed  and  sign  up  to 
standard rules.  
7. 
But  I  suppose  one  thing  that  can  be  said  after  all  this  litany  of  misdemeanors  and 
malfeasance,  is  that  banking  is  no  longer  a  boring  subject.  We  have  certainly  all  become 
more financially-savvy. Who would have thought that grand larceny on a global scale would 
have had such a favourable impact on financial literacy?  
A makeover for the real economy 
8. 
But, tonight, it is not my intention to pillory the banksters abroad. We can safely leave 
that  to  the  fearsome  foreign  regulators,  the  civil  courts,  and  in  some  cases  the  criminal 
courts.  Indeed  the  regulators,  exacting  such  heavy  fines,  seem  to  be  following  the  advice 
Ivana Trump gave to wronged wives:  
“Don’t get mad: get everything!”  
 
Moving  closer  home,  some  believe  that  a  bash  like  this  dinner  tonight  could  not  be 
complete without a dose of bank bashing – I wonder why? Let me assure you there is no 
such item on the menu tonight! What a sigh of relief I hear from our bankers present here! 
My subject tonight is the real economy in Mauritius and its future. Does it need a makeover?  
Lifting our eyes to the future 
9. 
How  well  are  we  doing?  Let  us  step  back  a  little  to  gain  some  perspective.  Let’s 
measure our progress against the where we thought we would be in our Vision 2020 some 
fifteen  years  ago,  which  I  had  the  privilege  to  develop  with  many  of  you.  Many  of  you, 
present here tonight, contributed to developing Vision 2020, as we looked ahead to what our 
country  could  become  in  the  span  of  25  years.  Ownership  could  not  have  been  more 
widespread. In what was probably a unique feature, Vision 2020 bridged the party-political 
divide. Conceived and conducted under Prime Minister Sir Anerood Jugnauth – who actually 
attended  a  working  meeting  with  his  entire  Cabinet  −  it  was  delivered  under  the  Prime 
Ministership of Dr Navin Ramgoolam who gave it a ringing endorsement in an enthusiastic 
preface, commending the final report to the nation.  
10.  Vision  2020  has  remarkable  come  to  pass.  Since  December  1990,  our  GDP  has 
grown  nine-fold,  while  GDP  per  capita  shot  up  from  Rs37,000  to  Rs266,000  −  more  than 
seven  times. We  were  spot  on  when  we  predicted  that  tourism  and  ICT  would  emerge  as 
major contributors to jobs and incomes. They now account for an average of 8.2% and 6.4% 
of GDP. In parallel, King Sugar has been dislodged from its pedestal, falling from 10.3% of 
GDP  in  1990  to  just  1.6%  in  2012.  Manufacturing  also  fell  from  23.6%  to  16.7%.  As 
anticipated, our economy transformed into a more service-oriented economy, with the weight 
of  the  services  sector  increasing  from  57%  in  1990  to  73%  in  2012.  Our  openness  and 
readiness  to  adapt  to  globalisation  pressures  to  maintain  our  competitiveness,  saw  us 
judiciously  combining  foreign  labour  with  the  domestic  labour  force.  The  share  of  foreign 
labour  in  total  employment  thus  increased  from  0.2%  in  1990  to  4.1%  in  2012.  Our 
transformation has been remarkable.  
I  believe  that  Vision  2020  served  as  a  guiding  star  for  our  economic  operators  and 
11. 
policy-makers as we set out on separate, but convergent, ways to address the succession of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
obstacles that we encountered. Obstacles, of course, there will always be. The international 
environment  confronting  us  today  is  extremely  challenging.  Uncertainty  has  increased.  So 
has competition for market share as countries adjust to the new competitive requirements of 
global supply chains.  
12  As we edge our way out of the still-lingering financial crisis, I believe the time is ripe for 
us to embark on a new visioning project to look Beyond Vision 2020 to realise the further 
promise  of  our  potential.  Our  public-private  partnership  has  gained  in  maturity.  I  see  no 
reason why a thriving private sector cannot take the lead in setting our perspective for the 
future.  Don’t  wait  for  government.  Set  up  your  own  think-tank  on  strategic  issues.  Let  the 
government  be  the  facilitator  of  change.  I  believe  that  we  have  now  reached  a  stage  of 
development where we can best flourish with government responding to your strategy, your 
initiatives, and your vision. This is my call to our private sector partners tonight, re-echoing 
the call at the launch of Vision 2020, that the private sector should take the lead in future 
national visioning exercises.  
Extending the miracle 
13.  We might begin by asking how well are we responding to current challenges. A new 
IMF working paper on Mauritius, tauntingly entitled “Mauritius: The Drivers of Growth – Can 
the  Past  be  Extended”?2  examines  our  growth  record  as  the  economy  revved  up  from  an 
average growth rate of 2.4% in the 1960’s to 6% in the 1970’s, to then decelerate to 4.4% in 
the  2000’s.  It  uses  the  growth-accounting  framework  to  decompose  the  respective 
contributions  of  capital  and  labour.  It  dissects  the  sources  of  past  growth,  and  projects 
growth  to  2030.  It  concludes  that  growth  will  most  likely  be  in  the  3–4%  range.  It  could 
possibly  reach  5%  but  this  can  only  happen  if  strong  pro-active  policies  are  taken  in  five 
areas. First is an increase in investment rates. Second comes an increase in savings rates. 
Third  is  labour  market  reform.  Fourth  is  education  reform.  And  fifth  is  the  need  for  further 
reforms  to  reduce  bottlenecks  and  increase  productivity.  Except  for  the  much-needed 
increase  in  our  domestic  savings  rate,  now  alarmingly  below  15%  −  or  nearly  half  its 
historical  peak  –  the  measures  are  of  a  structural  nature  and  not  within  the  domain  of 
monetary  policy.  The  Bank  has  long  been  fighting  to  normalise  interest  rates  to  induce  a 
greater savings effort but much of the time, as you are aware, it has unfortunately been a 
losing battle.  
14.  To return to the question put, can the past Mauritian “miracle” – be extended into the 
future?  How  are  our  institutions  faring?  Are  we  getting  the  best  from  our  state-owned 
enterprises? They command such a large chunk of our national resources that they impact 
national competitiveness. Are we doing enough bench-marking with the best in the world?  
 
How  far  are  our  firms  cutting  costs,  increasing  competitiveness,  and  improving 
productivity?  Embarrassing  as  some  of  the  answers  may  be,  such  questions  must  be 
confronted  head-on  so  that  “the  miracle”,  if  such  it  is,  can  be  projected  for  generations  to 
come?  
15.  The  message  of  the  past  is  adaptation  or  disaster.  In  the  last  two  decades,  in  both 
commerce  and  banking,  we  have  been  confronted  by  seeming  miracles  of  technological 
change.  We  have  had  the  microchip,  the  fibre-optic  cable,  the  World  Wide  Web,  satellite 
media,  the  smart  phone,  CCTV  systems,  videoconferencing,  call  centres,  on-line  sales, 
nano-technology,  and  so  on  and  on.  Some  of you  have  been  quick  to  pick  up  the kit  and 
adapt it to your needs, but much of the old Mauritius still surrounds us, with a reluctance to 
change.  
                                                
2  Svirydzenka K., and M. Petri, “Mauritius: The Drivers of Growth – Can the Past be Extended?”, IMF Working 
Paper, October 2013 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Innovations in banking 
16. 
In banking, I am pleased to report, we are in the midst of, not merely a spring cleaning, 
but  a  veritable  banking  reformation.  It  is  a  reformation  that  embraces  the  instant  digital 
process  of  trade  in  bills  of  exchange,  letters  of  credit,  and  the  emergence  of  a  global 
payments and settlements system. Mobile payments, electronic wallets, and internet banking 
are here to stay. We are moving into paperless banking and, indeed, to a cashless society. A 
new digital currency, Bitcoin, made headlines this year, challenging governments’ monopoly 
in the issuance of currency. Which means that even the new polymer notes may go the way 
of the Dodo. The financial management of commerce and banking is now being transformed 
in  a  generation  by  the  very  best  in  the  business.  But  if  we  are  all  to  be  part  of  this  new 
Mauritian miracle, then we must beware of being left out. 
The legacy of the global crisis: central banks taking a hit 
17.  Even  as  we  ready  up  to face  new  threats, the  legacy  of the global  crisis  is  still  very 
much with us. Many central banks themselves have taken a hit. First, the revenue we derive 
from our reserves portfolio, which is the only source of revenue for the central bank, came 
tumbling down. It fell from Rs 2.1 billion in FY 2006/07 to Rs 794 million in FY 2012/2013 as 
the average annual yield declined from 4.4% to 0.8% over the same years. Second, is the 
hefty  bill  that  came  with  the  2012  rescue  job  which  the  Bank  had  to  do  to  protect  our 
inherently vulnerable small economy from the global crisis. Allow me to sketch in the reality 
and cost of the action we had to take to prop up the economy and maintain financial stability 
in Mauritius.  
18  The rupee was getting out of line with our economic fundamentals, gradually becoming 
overvalued, and beginning to affect trade. We had no option but to step up our intervention 
on the forex market to combat currency appreciation. We had very limited firepower – a fact 
not obvious at the time to some policy-makers who  were inclined to believe that the Bank 
could just print all the rupees required to buy up the flow of foreign currencies. The constraint 
came  from  the  other  leg  of  the  operation.  To  prevent  the  disruptive  effects  of  the  flood  of 
rupee liquidity on financial and banking sector stability, the Bank had to buy up the rupees by 
issuing its own instruments. The cost of these instruments was a multiple of the yield on the 
currencies purchased. By way of example, let us take US dollars: reserves in this currency 
yielded  0.3%  on  average  in  2012.  The  average  cost  incurred  by  the  Bank  to  sterilise  the 
proceeds of forex purchases stood at 3.4% in the same year – that is ten times higher.  
19.  Central Bank losses were expected and very much at the heart of our initial reluctance 
to intervene. We had support from the IMF who recommended that the cost of the process of 
sterilisation should be borne by the fiscal authorities up front, without waiting to recapitalise 
the central bank after it has incurred the losses. It was on that understanding, that we issued 
more than twice the volume of Bank securities than our normal level. That was indeed more 
than ten times our capital holdings. Our 2012 rescue job on the currency front cost us nearly 
Rs20 billion in Bank paper – that is ten times our capital. But it seems to be working although 
we are not yet out of the woods.  
ORR to the rescue 
20.  Our rapid response, with the Operation Reserves Reconstitution, halted and reversed 
the appreciation of the rupee, kept the export machine going and the economy purring along 
normally. But the Central Bank took quite a hit. And I must emphasise tonight that neither the 
pace nor the level of the ORR-style intervention can be sustained by the Bank on its own 
resources.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The fiscal expectations of the monetary agent 
21.  We were, of course, not alone in being forced to play such an active interventionist role 
–  and  in  paying  for  the  consequences.  Brazil  protested  that  a  “currency  war”  had  been 
declared  surreptitiously.  It  slapped  taxes  on  inward  capital  flows.  The  Swiss  central  bank 
almost lost its shirt in trying, successfully, to contain appreciation of its currency, much to the 
displeasure  of  its  cantonal  shareholders.  Last  month,  the  Australian  government  made  a 
massive  capital  transfer  to  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  to  allow  it  to  sustain  its  Open 
Market Operations. India suffered a severe bout of rupee depreciation, together with capital 
outflows.  Zimbabwe  has  just taken  over  the  debts  of  its  central  bank  – but that  is  another 
story.  
22.  When “tapering” begins in earnest, the world will have to confront the new challenge of 
returning to a “normal” monetary policy. It’s a safe bet that still more currency volatility will 
follow, and even more vigorous action will be necessary to stabilise the affected currencies. 
But central bank balance sheets cannot keep taking hits like this. They cannot continue to 
rescue private sector balance sheets, prop up the economy, but go under themselves, with 
unsustainable losses. Central banks need to have up some extra cards their sleeve.  
23.  Topmost among these, I would place additional capitalisation, or resourcing, of central 
banks, as in Australia, without waiting for them to actually make losses first, as is the norm in 
central bank legislation. Dynamic provisioning, which flies in the face of accounting practice, 
is  equally  important.  This  would  allow  us  to  carry  on  the  battle  against  currency  volatility, 
conduct  Open  Market  Operations,  or  OMO’s,  in  the  low-yield  environment.  Without  these 
extra resources, the only OMO’s that your Central Bank will be able to undertake will be, not 
Open  Market  Operations,  but  Open  Mouth  Operations  –  with  no  money  to  put  where  our 
mouth is!  
24. 
the US Federal Reserve, William McChesney Martin (Jr), comes to mind:  
 As I reflect on the timing of “tapering”, an astute observation of a former Chairman of 
“The job of the FED is to take away the punch bowl just as the party is getting 
going.”  
 
I suspect that the macroprudential measures, that we introduced recently, to minimise 
the risk of overheating in the construction sector, must have evoked similar sentiments in the 
industry. The Bank is now seen as the killjoy, preventing enthusiastic promoters from turning 
the whole country into a gigantic building site. Where they see only benefits, the Bank sees 
Risk, with a capital R.  
Igniting the new engines of growth 
25.  But  let  us  not  end  on  a  dismal  note  for  my  hopes  are  high  for  a  steady  recovery.  I 
believe Mauritius can move into the premier league of small states, and become one of the 
Tigers of tomorrow’s commerce, by igniting new engines of growth.  
26.  Writing, in the 1940’s, William Henry Beveridge, social reformer extraordinaire, defined 
the  road  to  progress  as  the  elimination  of  the  five  giants,  of  want,  disease,  ignorance, 
squalor  and  idleness.  We  have  done  much  in  Mauritius  to  eliminate  want,  disease,  and 
squalor. We still have much work ahead to tackle more vigorously the giants of ignorance 
and idleness. We  absolutely  must  increase  savings;  reform the  public  sector  and  make  it 
more  a  servant  than  a  master  of  the  people;  engage  women  more  in  our  society,  in  our 
businesses and indeed in our banks; extract greater efficiency in education and health; and 
develop greater productivity and innovation in our economy.  
27. 
I  believe  we  shall  see  the  drivers  of  growth  sustained  but  we  must  do  more,  much 
more, to ignite innovation in business and in Mauritian society at large. The Mauritian miracle 
is not just a thing of the past. But it requires a new spirit of adventure to match our talents to 
the opportunities of the cyber age. We must overcome the new threats through a concerted 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
pursuit of macro-economic and macro-prudential policy. Only then can we secure economic 
and financial stability and growth with equity.  
The keys to our future prosperity 
28.  The keys to the future are increased personal and corporate accountability and multi-
sector  collaboration.  We  need  the  private  sector  to  take  a  lead  role.  We  need  more 
stimulation and nurturing of new start-ups. We need to challenge the monopolies of the past. 
We need a slimmer, more effective and efficient public sector, which is seriously in need of 
reform. Some task there! For it has been well said:  
“Reorganising the civil service is like drawing a knife through a bowl of marbles.”  
29.  But in racing ahead on this path, holding forth the torch of new technology, we must 
face up to the many risks of the cyber age. And in this, I am pleased to see, many of our 
brightest bankers are taking a lead. For, above all we need the continuing positive role of our 
highly competitive banking sector in an even closer and more effective working relationship 
with  the  real  economy.  And  we  need  more  inclusive  management  in  the  public  and  the 
private sector. Here I’m reminded of the story of that great British military leader, the Duke of 
Wellington,  who  vanquished  Napoleon  at  the  battle  of Waterloo  in  1815.  Later  he  became 
Prime  Minister  and  found  government  to  be  a  harder  nut  to  crack.  After  his  first  Cabinet 
meeting, he was heard to remark:  
“I  gave  them  my  orders,  and  then,  damn  it,  they  just  sat  down  and  started  to 
discuss them all!”  
Hats off to our local bankers 
30.  So,  let’s  now  take  our  hats  off  to  our  local  bankers!  They  have  never  been  part  of 
casino banking. And they have a long history of serving the nation through their customers. 
As a central bank we are proud of our 46-year history: just imagine how much more so must 
be les grandes dames de la Place d’Armes!. MCB inaugurated here in 1838; HSBC in 1916; 
and  Barclays  in  1919.  That  is  a  span  of  over  175  years,  with  decades  and  decades  of 
experience and skill, serving the people of this country. The State Bank of Mauritius − which 
as many may not be aware, was actually promoted by the Bank of Mauritius just after the 
country’s independence − is an upstart by comparison. And a very successful one, too. The 
brilliant  new  stars  on  the  banking  scene  are  keeping  our  established  bankers  all  on  their 
toes. I say to our bankers here tonight, Hats off to you all.  
The fundamental laws of the unproductive state 
31.  Finally, as is my wont on these occasions, may I leave you with two laws which may 
possibly inspire us in the pursuit of a second Mauritian miracle. In the past you have been 
served:  Maradona’s  law  of  interest  rates,  Einstein’s  law  of  success,  and  Newton’s  law  on 
physical  response,  amongst  others.  For  your  delectation,  I  even  rolled  out  Sutton’s  law, 
named after a bank robber where he explained why he robbed banks.  
32. 
In the same vein, I now turn to Parkinson – no, I am not referring to the Parkinson who 
gave  his  name  to  a  debilitating  disease  which  figures  high  on  the  risk  map  of  humans  in 
advancing years. I am invoking another Parkinson, Cyril Northcote Parkinson, who turned his 
attention  to  an  equally-debilitating  disease  affecting,  not  persons,  but  institutions  and 
corporates.  Parkinson’s  Law  of  Triviality  may  strike  home  for  some  habitués  of  board 
rooms. It states that:  
The  time  spent  by  a  committee  on  any  item  on  the  Agenda  will  be  in  inverse 
proportion to the sum of the money involved.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
33. 
 This is where a trivial item, like the allocation of parking spaces, or the colour of new 
uniforms for staff, dominates discussion at the Board. This leaves no time to review strategic 
items such as a multibillion capital scheme. The big issue is then waved through on the nod. 
Members of the Board have exhausted themselves over the triviality and realise they must 
now break off for lunch!  
34.  Now, as we approach a festive season, when traders vie with one another with sales 
gimmicks, I thought I should do the same with our persiflage. May I therefore offer you two 
laws for the price of one? I am coupling the Law of Triviality with Parkinson’s Law of the 
Organisational Pyramid. It states that:  
The  number  of  subordinates  in  any  organisation  will  increase  linearly  by  5%  a 
year, regardless of the amount of work to be done.  
We might call this the middle age spread of the middle income trap!  
 
35.  Finally,  as  I  leave  you  ruminate  over  Parkinson’s  Laws,  I  shall  conclude,  that  such 
ineffable laws stand as warnings to us all. But if we can escape their pernicious embrace, I 
believe, our long-term future can be just as miraculous as our past. To achieve this, we must 
work together. We must put aside trivialities. And, above all, we must give strategic thinking 
and  visioneering,  priority  on  the  national  Agenda  of  economic  operators  and  political 
decision-makers. It is high time to look beyond Vision 2020.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
