Inia Naiyaga: Detecting money laundering 
Closing  address  by  Mr  Inia  Naiyaga,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
4th National Anti-Money Laundering Conference, Suva, 20 November 2013. 
 The Key Note Speaker and Chief Guest, Director Public Prosecutions, Mr Christopher Pryde 
Members of the National Anti-Money Laundering Council 
Members of the Judiciary 
The Director of FIU, Mr Razim Buksh 
Madam Nazhat Shameem 
Distinguished Conference Speakers and Panellists 
Delegates 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Bula Vinaka and a good afternoon to you all. 
We have come to the end of this 4th National Anti-Money Laundering Conference. This has 
become an important event that all of us look forward to attending for many reasons. 
To me, the Conference is focussed, it is for a day only and therefore is very intensive and the 
conference programme is centred on a theme. 
An  important  aspect  of  the  Conference  is  that  it  has  provided  an  excellent  platform  for 
networking bringing together the relevant stakeholders who are involved in the fight against 
money laundering in Fiji. 
I hope that all of you have greatly benefitted from this Conference. I have noted that most of 
the  speakers  and  panellists  are  anti-money  laundering  practitioners.  Today  they  have 
discussed a number of important issues relating to the conference theme “Detecting Money 
Laundering”. 
Where to from here 
Role of financial institutions and other professions 
So ladies and gentleman, where to from here? It would be good at this stage to reflect on the 
next plan of action after we leave from here. 
We  had  extensive  discussions  on  the  very  important  role  of  financial  institutions  and 
professionals,  such  as,  lawyers  and  accountants,  in  detecting  money  laundering.  Money 
laundering is no longer just an issue for the law enforcement authorities. 
Criminals  and  their  associates  launder  their  criminal  proceeds  using  legitimate  financial 
services  and  products  offered  by  financial  institutions.  Furthermore,  professionals  such  as 
lawyers and accountants can be used by criminals to gain access to the financial system. 
Therefore,  the  providers  of  financial  services  are  best  placed  to  quickly  detect  possible 
money laundering crimes as and when they happen. 
We know that the obligations under our Financial Transaction Reporting Act to prevent and 
detect  money  laundering  are  costly  and  challenging  for  the  financial  institutions  and 
professionals.  However,  financial  institutions  and  professionals  can  no  longer  choose  to 
ignore the abuse of their products and services for criminal gains. A business that values its 
reputation will ensure that its services and products are not targeted for criminal use. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I hope that today’s discussions have provided you with more insight and appreciation on the 
very  critical  role  you  play  in  detecting  money  laundering  in  Fiji.  I  hope  that  you  now  have 
added zeal to more effectively play your respective role. 
Regulators 
The Reserve Bank of Fiji, as the regulator of Fiji’s financial system, also has an important 
role in combating money laundering. 
With the introduction of new financial products and services to the market and with the rapid 
advancement in technology come new risks. As regulators, we need to be on top of these 
new risks. We need to understand these new financial products and services, and how they 
can be abused for criminal use. 
As regulators, we must enforce the FTR Act. That is our role. On the global scene, financial 
regulators  have  come  down  hard  on  banks  that  have  failed  to  comply  with  anti-money 
laundering requirements. 
For  example  in  2012,  the  HSBC  was  fined  US$1.9billion  by  US  authorities  for  failing  to 
comply with anti-money laundering requirements. HSBC Mexico was fined US$27.5m by the 
Mexican  regulator,  the  National  Banking  and  Securities  Commission,  for  “non-compliance 
with anti-money laundering systems and controls” in their branch in Mexico. Expectations of 
the global community will be on all countries including Fiji; to take firm action on similar cases 
should it arise. 
The Financial Intelligence Unit is also the anti-money laundering regulator for those financial 
institutions that are not licensed by the Reserve Bank of Fiji. The FIU also has a direct role 
under the FTR Act to issue anti-money laundering policies and enforce compliance by all the 
financial institutions. 
But as regulators we need to make sure that our regulatory requirements are appropriate to 
our local environment and that it does not stifle access to financial services for our people. 
That is the challenge that we as regulators must address going forward. 
International obligation 
The Financial Transactions Reporting Act, which is our key anti-money laundering law, has 
been in place for 8 years since its implementation in 2006. The private sector and the Fijian 
Government have made much progress in implementing its provisions. 
However,  as  we  have  heard  from  an  earlier  presentation  today,  that  the  international 
standards on anti-money laundering have just been revised. 
What does this mean for us? 
The private sector, financial institutions, the Reserve Bank of Fiji as the regulator, the FIU, 
the National Anti-Money Laundering Council, and other government agencies need to work 
together to develop a national strategy to address these revisions. 
Pressure is being put on all countries to comply with the new international standards on anti-
money laundering issued by the Financial Action Task Force (the FATF). 
This  pressure  will  be  filtered  down  to  individual  financial  institutions,  businesses,  and 
government agencies to implement measures to meet the revised international standards. 
Next year will be critical for Fiji in this area. 
The  Reserve  Bank, the FIU  together  with  the  National  Anti-Money  Laundering  Council  will 
look at how we can adopt the revised requirements of the international standards. We will be 
relying  on  the  private  sector to  assist  us.  The private  sector’s  contribution  in  conducting  a 
national risk assessment will be critical. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
International scrutiny 2015 
Ladies and gentlemen, with international obligations, comes international scrutiny. 
An  assessment  of  Fiji’s  anti-money  laundering  framework  is  scheduled  for  2015.  A  review 
team of various experts will be visiting us, and to assess how effective we are with our efforts 
to comply with the international standards on anti-money laundering. 
This  will  be  quite  a  comprehensive  review.  Each  of  us,  the  private  sector,  regulatory 
authorities,  law  enforcement  authorities,  and many  other  departments and  agencies  of  the 
Fijian Government will need to show that Fiji remains a committed global partner in the fight 
against  money  laundering.  We  need  to  send  a  clear  message  that  Fiji’s  financial  system 
remains safe and we are taking all necessary measures to make life difficult for criminals to 
launder their proceeds of crime. 
Last  year  in  2012,  we  had five  successful  money  laundering  cases.  Capacity  building  and 
training for our law enforcement officials remains a priority. Fiji’s national coordinating body, 
the National Anti-Money Laundering Council, has embarked on a review of our existing AML 
measures  that  is  expected  to  identify  gaps  in  all  the  key  areas,  such  as,  customer  due 
diligence and suspicious transaction reporting requirements, investigation and prosecution of 
money  laundering  offences,  tracing  proceeds  of  crime  and  gaps  in  networking  and 
information exchange. 
A  strong  compliance  by  Fiji  would  mean  that  our  financial  system  is  well  regulated  and  is 
safe and sound. This will lead to more investor confidence and strengthen the reputation of 
Fiji’s financial system. 
It  will  also  mean  that  we  are  ready  to  investigate  sophisticated  financial  crimes,  such  as, 
fraud and corruption. Forfeiture of criminal and unexplained wealth would take us closer to a 
crime-free and corruption-free Fiji. 
Therefore, compliance with the international anti-money laundering standards is not optional. 
It is vital for the economic welfare of Fiji. 
Collaboration 
This  Conference  also  discussed the  need for  collaboration  and  networking and  how  it  has 
contributed towards building an effective anti-money laundering environment in Fiji. 
Collaboration  with  our  international  and  domestic  partners  is  vital  in  combating  money 
laundering. It is through collaboration we can find many opportunities for sharing knowledge 
and expertise. 
Collaboration  between  the  private  sector  and  law  enforcement  authorities  is  vital  for  the 
purpose of investigating money laundering. 
Inter-government  agency  collaboration 
to  prevent  overlapping  and 
contradicting  regulatory  requirements.  Collaboration  with  foreign  counterparts  and  partners 
enables synergy in roles and functions. 
is  also  needed 
Conclusion 
In  concluding,  let  me  say  that  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  is  pleased  to  have  been  able  to 
support  and  sponsor  the  national  anti-money  laundering  conference  in  the  last  4  years. 
Together, we will continue to fight money laundering, fraud, corruption and other crimes in 
Fiji. 
I take this opportunity to express our sincere appreciation to our Chief Guest, the Director of 
Public Prosecutions, and Mr Christopher Pryde. Our gratitude also goes to Madam Nazhat 
Shameem for her support and contribution to this Conference and past conferences. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Also,  to  our  other  distinguished  speakers  and  panellists  for  sharing  their  insights  and 
knowledge on this very important topic of “Detecting Money-Laundering”. 
I thank FIU Director Buksh and his team for putting together this event. 
Finally,  I  thank  each  and  every  one  of  you  for making this  Conference  a  success  through 
your attendance, valuable contribution and active participation. 
I now have the pleasure of declaring the 2013 National Anti-Money Laundering Conference 
officially closed. 
Vinaka Vakalevu 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
