Charles Bean: The UK economic outlook 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at the Society of Business Economists Annual Conference 2013, London, 22 October 2013. 
 Good morning! It is now more than five years since Lehman Brothers collapsed, ushering in 
the worst phase of the financial crisis, followed by a sharp and synchronised contraction in 
global economic activity. While growth was reasonable for the first year after output troughed 
in the middle of 2009, the pace of expansion since then has proved disappointingly weak. 
Just  how  disappointing  is  illustrated  by  Chart  1,  which  shows  our  August  2010  Inflation 
Report  projection  for  GDP  growth,  together  with  the  ONS’s  present  estimates  of  what 
actually  happened.  It  is  not  a  pretty  sight.  Whereas  our  central  expectation  was  for  a 
cumulative  rise  in  output  of  9%  over  the  following  three  years,  the  actual  rise  is  presently 
estimated to have been a miserable 2%. And we weren’t alone. The performance of other 
forecasting outfits was pretty similar. 
At  a  global  level,  a  similar  story  can  be  told.  The  IMF  has  consistently  revised  down  its 
projections  for  global  growth.  Back  in  October  2010,  it  was  forecasting  a  cumulative 
expansion in output of 14% over the following three years, whereas the actual figure was just 
10%.  Indeed,  the  Fund  has  revised  down  its  world  growth  forecast  for  2013  in  every 
subsequent World Economic Outlook: it now expects just 2.9%, against the 4.6% it projected 
three years ago. 
But there are at last signs that a recovery may be gaining traction. In the United Kingdom, 
output rose by a little more than 1% in the first half of the year. And business surveys point to 
something closer to 2% for the second half of this year, somewhat faster than the economy’s 
historical  average  rate  of  expansion.  That  is  good  news.  But  can  we  expect  it  to  be 
sustained? Or is there a danger that it will prove short-lived? That is the first issue I want to 
address this morning. 
A good place to start is by looking backwards, for if we understand the past, then there is 
surely  a  better  chance  of  getting  future  prospects  right.  Why,  then,  was  the  growth 
performance  shown  in  Chart  1  so  disappointing?  Back  in  the  summer  of  2010,  our 
expectation was that demand growth would be supported by a steady improvement in credit 
conditions  and  a  gradual  decline  in  uncertainty.  That  would  foster  both  an  increase  in 
consumer  spending  as  the  saving  rate  fell  back  from  post-crisis  highs  and  a  recovery  in 
business investment. Moreover, we expected net trade to provide a significant stimulus, as 
global activity continued to recover and the 25% depreciation in sterling since the beginning 
of the crisis worked its magic. 
That was not quite how it worked out, of course. Chart 2 shows the cumulative contributions 
of the main expenditure components to growth since the middle of 2010. Most of the growth, 
such  as  it  was,  was  down  to  private  and  public  consumption,  though  the  former  was 
nevertheless  quite  a  bit  weaker  than  we  expected.  Net  trade  was  distinctly  disappointing 
relative  to  our  expectations.  And  fixed  investment  continued  to  drag  on  growth.  Lurking 
behind this picture was: first, a much less pronounced improvement in credit conditions than 
expected,  with  the  spreads  over  Bank  Rate  of  borrowing  and  lending  rates  actually 
increasing for much of the period and only falling sharply after last summer; second, much 
weaker global growth, as the problems of excessive indebtedness in the euro-area periphery 
and  the  associated  uncertainties  concerning  the  resilience  of  European  banks  pulled  the 
region into a second recession; and, third, the kick to net exports from the depreciation of 
sterling was apparently offset by a fall in foreign demand for business and financial services 
triggered by the financial crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As far as inflation goes, at the time of our August 2010 Inflation Report, CPI inflation was a 
little over 3%, reflecting higher oil prices, the restoration of VAT to 17.5% and pass-through 
from the depreciation of sterling (Chart 3). Our central expectation was for inflation to remain 
elevated in the short term, as VAT was raised further to 20%, but then to fall back to well 
below the 2% target when that rise dropped out of the twelve-month comparison. And with 
growth  turning  out  much  weaker  than  expected,  one  might  also  have  expected  to  see 
inflation turning out even weaker than that in the medium term. 
As  Chart  3  shows,  however,  the  outturn  was  in  fact  markedly  higher  than  in  our  central 
projection, with inflation peaking at 5.2% in September 2011. In large part, that was down to 
higher  than  anticipated  energy  and  import  prices,  as  the  strong  recovery  in  the  energy-
intensive  emerging  economies,  together  with  supply  concerns,  put  upward  pressure  on  oil 
and  other  commodity  prices.  Higher  energy  and  import  prices  also  further  depressed 
UK domestic demand growth through their adverse impact on household real incomes. 
The primary reason for believing that the nascent resurgence in growth that we have seen 
this year will be sustained lies in the moderation of these past headwinds. First, UK banks 
have made considerable progress in bolstering their capital positions, in part prompted by the 
Prudential  Regulation  Authority’s  balance  sheet  exercise  earlier  this  year.  Price-to-book 
ratios have risen back to around unity. And bank funding costs have fallen sharply over the 
past  year  (Chart  4),  aided  by  the  Funding  for  Lending  Scheme.  UK  banks  are  now  well 
placed to provide the credit necessary to support a recovery. 
Second, the euro area is no longer in existential crisis, in part as a result of the willingness of 
the  European Central  Bank  (ECB)  to  take  redenomination  risk  off  the  table  through  its 
Outright Monetary Transactions programme. The countries of the euro-area periphery have 
also  made  progress  in  restoring  competitiveness  and  rebalancing  the  composition  of 
demand,  though  there  is  still  quite  a  way  to  go.  Member  states  are  working  towards  the 
creation  of  a  functional  banking  union,  which  has  the  potential  to  break  the  link  between 
sovereigns and  banks. And  in  preparation  for becoming  the  euro-area  banking supervisor, 
the ECB is planning a rigorous review of the quality of banks’ assets, to be followed by a set 
of  stress  tests  and,  if  necessary,  recapitalisation.  Provided  these  carry  credibility  with  the 
market, this could do much to restore confidence in the euro-area banking system. 
But  while  some  headwinds  are  abating,  others  remain.  The  need  to  restore  the  public 
finances  to  sustainability  means  that  fiscal  consolidation  will  continue  for  some  years  yet. 
And, for some households, the past accumulation of debt may weigh on spending. Finally, 
even though the cloud of uncertainty may be lifting, businesses are likely to remain cautious 
about increasing their investment spending until it is clear that the recovery in demand will be 
sustained.  So  the  pace  of  the  recovery  is  likely  to  remain  fairly  modest  by  historical 
standards. That will mean that it is likely to be some time before the economic slack that built 
up during the recession has been brought back into use. I will say a little more about that 
later. 
It  is  against  this  background  that  the  MPC  in  August  decided  to  provide  some  explicit 
guidance  about  the  considerations  that  will  inform  our  policy  decisions  over  the  coming 
months. In particular, we wanted to signal that we would not immediately begin to withdraw 
the considerable monetary stimulus injected after the financial crisis simply because growth 
had picked up. Rather we wanted to make clear our intention to maintain the stance of policy 
until it was clear that the recovery was well entrenched and the margin of economic slack 
had  been  substantially  reduced,  provided  doing  so  did  not  entail  material  risks  to  price 
stability or financial stability. 
As you will all know, we implemented that by committing not to raise Bank Rate until after the 
unemployment  rate  has  fallen  to  7%.  This  is  a  little  higher  than  our  current  estimate  of 
around 6.5% for the medium-run equilibrium rate of unemployment – that is, the sustainable 
unemployment rate once nominal rigidities and other transient factors have worked their way 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
through. In the long run, one would expect the sustainable rate to be even lower, as workers 
who have become disconnected from the labour force are encouraged back into it. 
Specifying our guidance in terms of the unemployment rate, rather than, say, some estimate 
of  the  output  gap,  makes  particular  sense  because  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the 
achievable level of productivity in the economy. Since the start of the crisis, output per hour 
worked has fallen by around 5%, leaving it more than 15% below where it would have been if 
it  had  simply  continued  growing  at  its  pre-crisis  trend  rate.  As  discussed  in  past  Inflation 
Reports,  as  well  as  numerous  speeches  by  MPC  members,  there  are  a  variety  of 
explanations for this weak productivity performance. These include: specific factors, such as 
the  decline  in  North  Sea  oil  production  and  an  exaggeration  of  productivity  growth  in  the 
financial  sector  before  the  crisis;  the  hoarding  of  overhead  and  skilled  labour  through  the 
downturn; unusually low rates of investment on the back of heightened uncertainty about the 
outlook;  the  adoption  of  more  labour-intensive  production  techniques,  encouraged  by  the 
high degree of wage moderation; thick-market externalities, which make it easier to find and 
transact business when demand is strong; and a misallocation of credit as banks repair their 
balance  sheets,  with  heightened  forbearance  shown  on  existing  loans  to  low  productivity 
firms, coupled with caution as regards lending to risky businesses that offer the prospect of 
higher productivity. 
Some of these mechanisms depressing productivity can be expected to unwind naturally as 
demand  recovers.  But  others  might  take  longer  and  require  the  restoration  of  the  banking 
system to full health. And some of the lost productivity growth may prove to be permanent, 
for instance because of the foregone opportunities for learning by doing. Now while we have 
several explanations for this “productivity puzzle”, I think it is fair to say that none of them yet 
seems to provide a completely convincing explanation. And although different MPC members 
place different weights on the possible explanations, we all agree that there is considerable 
uncertainty as to how productivity will evolve as the recovery proceeds. 
Unemployment is certainly not a perfect guide to slack in the labour market. For instance, the 
recent  increase  in  the  number  of  workers  wanting  to  work  more  hours  suggests  it 
understates the absolute level of slack1. But it is not unreasonable to expect this margin of 
“potential hours worked” to move in line with unemployment. And, unlike in the 1980s, we 
have not seen a substantial movement in the labour force participation rate, which suggests 
that the number of discouraged workers has not risen markedly. So overall, changes in the 
unemployment  rate  are,  we  think,  likely  to  provide  a  reasonable  guide  to  the  evolution  of 
labour market slack. 
Now consider what will happen if the weak productivity performance of recent years is simply 
a consequence of the weak state of demand and so reverses as the recovery proceeds. In 
that case, businesses will be able to supply the extra demand without greatly expanding their 
workforces  and  unemployment  will  be  slow  to  fall.  In  these  circumstances,  it  is  indeed 
appropriate  to  keep  monetary  policy  loose  as  potential  output  is  well  above  actual  output. 
Conversely, suppose that the financial crisis and subsequent recession has wrought lasting 
damage to productivity. In that case, unemployment is likely to fall faster as demand grows, 
meaning that unemployment will reach the 7% threshold sooner. Then it will be appropriate 
to tighten policy sooner in this case, as potential output will be lower. The only case where 
the linkage of policy to unemployment is potentially problematic is where there is scope for 
productivity to increase as demand recovers, but for some reason firms take on extra labour 
before the increase in productivity takes place. But this seems rather unlikely to me. 
In any case, it is important to realise that the 7% threshold does not constitute a trigger for 
the MPC to raise Bank Rate. Rather it represents a prompt for the Committee to undertake a 
                                                 
1  See Bell, D N F and Blanchflower, D G (2013) ‘Underemployment in the UK revisited’, National Institute Economic Review, 
No. 224. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
broad assessment of the prospects for demand, supply and inflation. If it appears that there 
is  still  a  substantial  degree  of  slack  in  the  economy  which  can  be  absorbed  without 
threatening the achievement of the 2% inflation target in the medium term, then there will be 
scope  to  maintain  the  existing  stance  of  monetary  policy  longer,  perhaps  re-setting  the 
unemployment threshold to a new lower level at the same time. In any case, as a breach of 
the  threshold  becomes  imminent,  it  seems  likely  that  the  Committee  will  wish  to  provide 
further  guidance  on  the  future  determinants  of  policy  in  order  to  reduce  any  uncertainty 
surrounding our reaction function. 
Can we say anything yet about the effectiveness of the introduction of forward guidance? As 
already noted, the primary objective is to give confidence to business and households that 
policy will not be tightened until there is a material reduction in economic slack (assuming 
that  neither  price  nor  financial  stability  are  threatened)  and  to  prevent  an  excessive  snap-
back in market interest rates taking place simply because a recovery is under way. 
As  far  as  the  broad  message  to  businesses  and  households  goes,  contacts  of  the  Bank’s 
Agents  suggest  that  businesses  have  got  the  message  that  the  MPC  will  only  begin  to 
tighten policy once the recovery is entrenched and slack has been materially reduced. And in 
the period after the MPC’s announcement, the Markit Household Finance Index suggested 
that households expected Bank Rate to rise later than before, although the date has since 
come back in again, perhaps reflecting the continued flow of positive data. 
At first sight, the evidence from market interest rates is more equivocal. Chart 5 shows the 
instantaneous forward yield curve in May, August and today. Yields have risen substantially 
since May. On the face of it, that appears to suggest that the guidance has not been very 
effective  at  influencing  the  expectations  of  market  participants.  Interpreting  movements  in 
market rates is, however, complicated by the fact that other factors influencing yields have 
not been constant. 
First, the recent run of UK data has been unusually strong relative to market expectations. 
That  should  generate  upward  pressure  on  market  interest  rates  as,  other  things  equal,  a 
reduction  in  the  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  would  indeed  become  appropriate  sooner  if 
growth turns out stronger than expected. Bank staff have constructed a time series for the 
news  in  the  incoming  data  by  calculating,  for  14  different  data  series,  the  deviation  of  the 
outcome  from  the  market’s  expectations  (as  recorded  by  the  median  expectation  of 
economists polled by Bloomberg), normalised by its standard deviation. An aggregate time-
series  measure  can  then  be  obtained  by  taking  an  (unweighted)  average  across  the  most 
recent observations for each series. Chart 6 shows such a measure back to 2006, together 
with  analogous  series  for  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area.  The  series  for  the  United 
Kingdom  recently  reached  its  highest  level  over  this  period,  emphasising  just  how  much 
upside news there has been here recently. Moreover, although both the United States and 
euro area have also generally seen upside news of late, it has been nowhere near as strong 
as in this country. Market interest rates should therefore have been expected to rise, and by 
more here than in the other two jurisdictions. 
Second, yields rose globally in the summer on the back of expectations that the US Federal 
Reserve was about to taper its asset purchase program; more recently they fell back when 
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) unexpectedly decided not to begin phasing out 
its  asset  purchases  at  its  September  meeting.  Given  the  relatively  high  degree  of 
substitutability  between  UK  gilts  and  US  treasuries,  and  assuming  that  long-term  inflation 
expectations  are  anchored  in  both  countries,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  a  high  degree  of 
correlation of UK long rates with US long rates. But one might expect the correlation to be 
less pronounced at the short end of the curve, where differences in cyclical positions – and 
therefore differences in monetary stances – should come to the fore. Strong co-movement 
should only be seen if either the shock is common in nature, or the international transmission 
of a shock from one country to the other is strong. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Now, as it happens, measures of co-movement have generally been high since the start of 
the  financial  crisis.  In  the  earlier  phase  of  the  crisis,  when  contagion  through  financial 
markets  was  particularly  strong,  it  was  reasonable  to  believe  that  what  happened  in  the 
United  States  was  critical  to  the  outlook  here.  That  seems  less  plausible  now,  given  the 
substantial progress in repairing the banking systems in the two countries. This thinking lay 
behind the Committee’s decision to issue a statement after its July meeting that the recent 
upward movement at the near end of the yield curve was “unwarranted”. More generally, the 
explicit guidance provided in August should also serve to emphasise that UK monetary policy 
decisions  are  taken  with  reference  to  the  domestic  outlook  and  will  only  be  influenced  by 
developments elsewhere in so far as they affect that outlook. 
There is mixed evidence thus far on whether guidance has helped to de-couple movements 
in UK short-term rates from those overseas. The prime exhibit against this having happened 
is the high degree of correlation between UK and US interest rates at the time of the FOMC’s 
unexpected  decision  at  its  meeting  on  17/18 September  not  to  begin  to  taper  its  asset 
purchases.  As  far  as  market  participants  were  concerned,  this  was  surely  primarily  news 
about the FOMC’s policy reaction function, not about the US economic outlook. So it ought 
also  to  have  had  little  impact  on  UK  interest  rates.  As  Chart  7  shows,  however,  the 
movement  in  UK  one-year  interest  rates  two  years  ahead  was  almost  as  large  as  for  the 
corresponding US series. That, together with the high co-movement prior to the September 
FOMC meeting when US interest rates rose, suggests that market participants may have not 
yet grasped the extent to which decisions over the level of Bank Rate will be driven by the 
domestic outlook. 
There is, however, other evidence  which suggests that some de-coupling may have taken 
place.  Chart  8  shows  the  correlation  between  UK  forward  interest  rates  and  the  UK  and 
US data surprise series that I described earlier, split by time period. That the responsiveness 
of forward interest rates to data news was particularly low during the 2009–April 2013 period 
is not surprising as Bank Rate was constrained on the downside by the zero lower bound, so 
that the distribution of policy rates was truncated. That is still relevant today, but economic 
news  has  been  more  consistently  to  the  upside  recently,  attenuating  the  impact  of  the 
constraint.  Importantly,  there  is  some  evidence  that  the  response  of  UK  rates  to  US  data 
surprises has declined since the introduction of the MPC’s forward guidance, although the 
small  sample  in  the  most  recent  period  means  that  the  coefficients  are  not  that  precisely 
estimated. 
A  final  piece  of  evidence,  which  is  at  least  consistent  with  the  central  aim  of  the  MPC’s 
guidance, is presented in my final chart. As I noted earlier, a prime concern was to convey 
the message that a return to growth did not imply an early withdrawal of stimulus. Rather, if 
slack was substantial, then it should be possible to maintain the highly stimulatory monetary 
stance  for  some  while  before  price  stability  –  as  embodied  in  the  inflation  target  –  is 
threatened.  Historically,  and  particularly  in  the  pre-crisis  period,  there  was  a  reasonably 
strong correlation between indicators of growth and the slope of the yield curve at the short 
end. This is illustrated in Chart 9, which plots the composite Purchasing Managers Index and 
the spread between the two-year swap rate and the overnight rate. 
Now it is not too surprising that there should have been such a relationship during the period 
before  the  crisis,  as  growth  was  generally  steady,  with  inflation  close  to  target  and  output 
close to potential. A period of strong (weak) growth could then be expected to lead to excess 
demand  (supply)  and  a  tendency  for  inflation  to  move  above  (below)  the  target. 
Consequently  it  was  quite  rational  for  market  participants  to  expect  the  MPC  to  increase 
(reduce) Bank Rate. But things are different now, as there is potentially a substantial margin 
of economic slack that needs to be absorbed. In that case, the steepening in the short end of 
the yield curve ought to be far less pronounced. Fortunately, that is exactly what we see in 
the most recent data. The curve has steepened alongside the sharp increase in the PMI, but 
by far less than similar episodes of rising growth in the past would suggest. This too may be 
an indication that the guidance has had some effect in preventing unwarranted movements 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
at the short end of the yield curve2. I am sure, however, that there is scope for much more 
analysis of the impact of our guidance on the behaviour of market interest rates and, indeed, 
on the broader economy. 
That guidance is, of course, qualified by three overrides or “knockouts”. Two of these relate 
to  the  risks  to  price  stability.  One  of  these  stipulates  that  our  own  projection  for  inflation  
18–24 months ahead should be at least as likely to fall below 2.5% as to be above it. The 
other  asks  whether  there  is  any  evidence  that  measures  of  the  inflation  expectations  of 
households, businesses and market participants have become insufficiently well-anchored to 
the target. At this stage, we do not see anything to worry about on this score. 
The third override condition, delegated to the Bank’s Financial Policy Committee, relates to 
whether the monetary policy stance is resulting in the build-up of dangerous financial stability 
risks. If the FPC cannot contain these risks using the range of recommendations and powers 
at its disposal, then it will alert the MPC, who will then decide whether an increase in Bank 
Rate  is  called  for.  Increasingly  noisy  commentary  that  a  new  housing  bubble  is  brewing  
– and concerns that the second stage of the Help to Buy scheme will add fuel to the fire – 
may mean that this condition becomes material. I do not have time left today to do justice to 
this issue. But it is important to remember that mortgage approvals for house purchase are 
still  running  at  a  little  over  half  their  pre-crisis  average  and,  outside  London,  house  price 
inflation is still quite modest. So we appear to be still some way off seeing an unsustainable 
house-price boom on the back of excessive credit growth. That said, neither the MPC nor the 
FPC can afford to be complacent. 
The past five years or so have presented the policy makers here and elsewhere with many 
difficult challenges. We have discovered that we knew even less about the workings of the 
economy  than  we  thought  we  did.  And  we  have  moved  into  policy  territory  that  we  could 
scarcely have imagined during the halcyon days of the Great Moderation. Happily, there are 
signs that a recovery is at last starting to gain traction here in the United Kingdom. But there 
is still a long way to go before we can say the economy is mended. Until that is the case, 
monetary policy will need to remain supportive and the guidance we issued in August was 
intended to make that clear. Thank you! 
 The UK economic outlook
Society of Business Economists Annual Conference
Charlie Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy
22 October 2013
                                                 
2  This point was originally made in a Credit Suisse note entitled “Market to Mark”, 4 September 2013. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Chart 1: GDP projection in August 2010
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
Latest vintage of data
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
Chart 2: Cumulative change in GDP since 2010Q2(a)
Percentage points
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
Net trade
Investment
Consumption
(b)
Change in inventories
Government consumption
GDP
(a) Chained-volume measures.  Components may not sum to total due to chain-linking, the statistical discrepancy and the alignment adjustment.
(b) Excludes the alignment adjustment.
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Chart 3: CPI inflation projection in August 2010
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
Outturn
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
Chart 4: Indicators of bank funding spreads
Secondary market bond spreads(a)
Initial FLS 
announcement
Percentage points
Fixed rate retail bond 
(average of 2 & 3yr 
spreads)(b)
Five-year CDS premia(c)
Covered bond 
spread(d)
Jan
Jul
10
Jan
Jul
11
Jan
Jul
12
Jan
Jul
13
Sources:  Bloomberg,  Markit Group Limited,  Bank of England  and Bank calculations.
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
(a) Constant-maturity  unweighted  average  of secondary  market  spreads  to mid-swaps for the major  UK lenders’  five-year  euro senior  unsecured  bonds.
(b) Sterling.   Spread  over  the relevant  swap rate for fixed-rate  retail  bonds.
(c) Unweighted  average  of the five-year  senior  CDS premia  for the major  UK lenders.
(d) Constant-maturity  unweighted  average  of secondary  market  spreads  to mid-swaps for the major  UK lenders’  five-year  euro-denominated  covered  bonds, where  available.
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  8 
 Chart 5: Instantaneous forward yield curves(a)
May IR
Aug IR
Latest
Percentage points
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
5
4
3
2
1
0
Sources: Bank of England and Bloomberg.
(a) The May and August Inflation Report curves are based on the final day of the respective 15-day averages.  The latest curve is from the 17 
October.
Chart 6: Economic ‘surprise’ indicators(a)
Standard deviations
United States
Euro area
United Kingdom
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1.0
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank of England calculations.
(a) Moving average of unweighted data surprises over a 60-day rolling window.  Data surprises for each variable are scaled by the historical 
standard deviation of surprises for that variable.  Variables are selected according to the number of Bloomberg alert subscriptions, but data on 
consumer prices, producer prices and wages are excluded.
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Chart 7: Interest rate reaction to FOMC meeting 18/9/2013(a)
UK
US
Change since 12pm (bps)
Bernanke's 
conference ends
FOMC
12:00
18 Sep 2013
15:00
18:00
21:00
08:00
19 Sep
11:00
14:00
Source: Bloomberg.
(a) 1-year OIS rates, 2-years forward.
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-35
17:00
Chart 8: Sensitivity of UK interest rates to economic news(a)
Sensitivity of UK 2y1y government yields to UK economic surprises
Sensitivity of UK 2y1y government yields to US economic surprises
Basis points per 
one standard 
deviation surprise
2006 - 08
2009 - Apr 2013
May 2013 - latest
Aug 2013 IR -
14 Oct 2013
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank of England calculations.
(a) Based on bi-variate regressions of daily yield changes on the daily average surprise in the variables within the Economic Surprise Indicators.  
The diamond shows the regression coefficient and the bars indicate plus or minus two standard deviations.
  10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  10 
 Chart 9: Composite PMI and spread between 2-year swap and 
overnight rates
Net balance
65
Percentage points
60
55
50
45
40
35
1998
Spread between 2-year swap and 
(a)
overnight rates (right-hand scale)
(b)
Composite PMI (left-hand scale)
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
Sources: Bloomberg, Markit Economics, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Three-month moving average of the end-month spread between the 2-year swap rate and the SONIA rate.
(b) Based on the Markit/CIPS manufacturing and services PMIs.
 2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
