G Gopalakrishna: Training for commercial bankers 
Speech  by  Mr  G  Gopalakrishna,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
inauguration of the Academic Block of the NITTE Institute of Banking and Finance, Mumbai, 
9 November 2013. 
 I acknowledge the contribution made to the above speech by Shri R Kesavan, General Manager, Central Office, 
DBS. 
Honorable Chancellor Shri Vinay Hegde, Professor Dr Ramandanda Shetty, Dr Shantaram 
Shetty,  Dr  Thingalaya,  Shri  Anantha  krishna,  Chairman,  Karnataka  Bank,  ladies  and 
gentlemen.  It  gives  me  immense  pleasure  to  inaugurate  the  academic  block  of  NITTE 
Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance.  It  is  an  opportune  time  as  also  the  need  of  the  hour  to 
enhance professional skills of bankers since we are poised for a big leap-waiting to enfold 
new banks, new banking structure, perhaps a lot more innovation in banking procedures and 
a  greater  contribution  to  the  whole  process  by  information  technology.  Here  is  where 
institutes  like  NITTE  can  help  in  levelling  knowledge  and  awareness  and  create  a  level 
playing field for bankers in terms of skills and attitude. 
My  thoughts  today  are  focused  on  the  increasing  need  to  integrate  the  present  with  the 
future.  The  past  is  passé  though  it  has  taught  us  many  lessons.  Gone  are  the  days  of 
conventional  banking  where  things  could  be  predicted  with  reasonable  precision.  The 
changing scenario around us and across the world leads to the conclusion that there is an 
imminent need to keep abreast of everything under the sun when it comes to banking... This 
then forms the crux of our interaction today – how can such far reaching changes be brought 
in  the  mind-sets  of  millions  of  bankers  who  look  at  these  recent  developments  with  awe, 
interest, curiosity and also with a determination to surmount the impending challenges. One 
of the main challenges today is to recruit appropriate work force, train them and also retain 
them. At the same time, it is imperative that  we, as bankers, also do not lose sight of the 
training needs of those who are with us today, have been with us for a considerable period of 
time and will continue to extend the same sense of loyalty to the institution that they have 
served. In order that the banks compete in a healthy manner as also enhance the capabilities 
of  their  workforce,  the  utility  of  training  as  an  essential  tool  in  today’s  challenging  times 
cannot be undermined. NITTE and other institutions with similar philosophies have a stellar 
role to play in this context. 
What  constitutes  training?  Is  it  the  enhancement  of  theoretical  knowledge  or  skills  
– the KASH philosophy: Typically, any programme that aims to embellish an employee’s 
talent has to necessarily understand the prospective trainee’s work profile, his specific talents 
and skills and the level of expertise he has gained in the work area assigned to him. There is 
thus a need to embark on a path of upgrading skill-sets, knowledge and attitude, all at the 
same  time.  The  knowledge  component  is  abundant  amongst  banks,  and  employees  have 
always been encouraged to attain professional qualifications in various areas of banking and 
finance. Skill sets may vary amongst different types of banks, each characterised by its own 
staff pattern, work culture, basic business ethos and practices, requirements of the job and 
historic trends in evolution. However, banking today is getting increasingly competitive. With 
large expansion of branch network and new players, there is definitely going to be a clamour 
for  talent  Today,  banks  are  at  the  verge  of  re-inventing  themselves  and  I  must  say  this 
process of renaissance is not just borne out of an apparent challenge from more players in 
the field but one that stems from an overpowering need to innovate. The approach to training 
thus  needs  a  renewed  look,  heightened  passion  and  the  will  to  see  to  it  that  the  pace  of 
training, research and development does not slacken in the wake of seemingly better skill-
sets today. Who knows, today’s skill set may seem grossly outdated and ancient tomorrow. 
Thus, training of employees at all levels can play a significant role in embellishing what has 
come to be known as “KASH”-Knowledge, attitude, skill and habits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Does training need analysis or do training needs require prior investigation? There is a 
subtle and understated difference between both precepts. There are no common methods to 
target all parameters that we seek to develop in an employee-training to enhance knowledge 
may not be suitable where the need is of enhancing skills; similarly, attitudes and long term 
changes in habits can only be brought in by attitudinal training interventions. Training needs 
cannot be purely slotted as those that require only the knowledge component or skill sets of 
trainees. There could always be a requirement of a judicious combination of all or various 
elements in KASH that can deliver the goods. Hence, “training needs analysis” and “training 
needs also require an analysis”. What we are trying to underline here is that 
(i) 
The  methodology  to  be  adopted  for  enhancing  knowledge,  skill,  attitude  of 
employees  has  to  be  designed  after  taking  into  account  the  precise  levels  of 
expertise, development and knowledge levels of the target group. Thus, what kind of 
training  input  is  essential  for  a  given  set  of  objectives  itself  requires  a  thorough 
understanding. 
The  arrival  at  a  precise  training  need  itself  requires  an  analysis.  For  instance,  a 
need  for  training  employees  on  KYC/AML  aspects  cannot  be  met  with  a  mere 
hands-on practice on the software solutions being used by banks for such purposes, 
but by necessarily supplementing such interventions with a firm background of what 
is  required  to  be  looked  into  when  one  seeks  to  ascertain  the  KYC  status  of  a 
customer. 
(ii) 
What are the various areas which need incisive insights as far as training intervention 
in  banks  are  concerned?  In  today’s  compelling  times,  we  need  to  look  at  several  things 
simultaneously – 
• 
• 
exploring leadership skills (attitude based training); 
transformation management (which seeks to combine the best of knowledge, skills 
and attitude to cope with increasing demands of competition, diversity in products 
being launched, innovations being done in the field of banking as also requirements 
of technological proficiency); 
risk  management  encompassing  enterprise  wide  risk  management  strategy  (that 
could  be  best  met  by  an  apt  combination  of  risk  management  precepts,  skills, 
practices and knowledge components); 
banking  innovations  themselves  (there  is  a  need  to  remain  abreast  with  other 
players’ foray into new types of services and products with an aim to at least equal 
those initiatives if not better them); and 
information technology based intervention (that would focus predominantly on skills 
with  a  significant  knowledge  quotient  as  well  to  ensure  application  of  skills  of 
employees  to  operate  standard  solutions  and  packages,  trouble-shoot,  improvise 
and possibly also innovate). 
   Can  training  needs  be  uniform  across  institutions?  Do  occasions and  opportunities 
decide  training  intervention?  Obviously  training  needs  cannot  be  uniform  as  each  bank 
has a unique structural make-up of its own with a different set of aspirations. What applies to 
a  public  sector  bank  may  not  be  applicable  for a  different  skill  set  present,  say,  in foreign 
banks and new generation private sector banks. Further, training need is also accentuated 
by the exact realm that the bank is seeking to explore. PSBs have shortage of skills in credit 
appraisal and risk management, whereas new private banks and foreign banks have better 
have better skills in these areas. Training intervention in banks will thus have to be geared 
towards orienting, facilitating and encouraging more employees to take up positions in such 
areas to manage the competitive rush. 
Innovation in training and innovation in banking – is there a synergy? Any new product 
launched by a bank generates either competition or replication and the competitive interests 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
definitely determine that innovation per se be seen as a significant field of study by banks. 
Banks are attuned more often than not, to meet challenges posed by innovative techniques 
and products launched by fellow players. Thus, initiatives in this field are more reactionary. 
There has to be an active build-up of skill-sets backed by appropriate encouragement from 
top  management  themselves  to  see  as  also  foresee  “innovation  in  banking”  as  a  new 
challenge  and  goal  that  should  constantly  be  re-aligned  with  future  requirements  of 
customers.  In  fact,  there  is  a  distinct  school  of  thought  that  also  postulates  that  perhaps 
banks  and  financial  institutions  need  separate  departments  or  verticals  focusing  on 
“innovation” alone. Such a process of innovation needs rigorous thought process, research 
and  development  as  part  of  framing  strategies.  Innovators’  skills  will  require  constant 
upgrades  in  terms  of  peer  practices,  product  designing,  test  of  acceptability  by  markets, 
feedback and innovating/improvising further. Thus innovating itself needs training of skill-sets 
and knowledge levels. The needs can be met better with increased focus on improvising and 
innovating  training  inputs  and  also  synergising  them  with  elements  of  technology,  design, 
statistics, surveys, mathematical models and inter-personal skills in right proportions. 
Exploring the training frontier: who is my client – my own employee or my customer? 
Banks are invariably driven by objectives of furthering customer-centric interests and in the 
process, furthering their own interests. Modern methods of reaching out to customers range 
from door to door banking on one hand to accessing customers through such initiatives as 
electronic  banking,  on  the  other.  Thus,  the  two  extremes  of  the  spectrum  need  to  be 
comprehended  adequately,  which  would  involve  identification  of  training  needs  of  own 
employees as also such agents as banking correspondents who aid the process. In the wake 
of burgeoning NPAs of banks, a view that has often gained currency is borrower education 
along  with  lender  education.  While  the  former  is  relatively  easier  to  achieve  as  banks 
themselves  have  the  wherewithal  to  engage  their  own  employees  in  adoption  of  prudent 
lending  practices  backed  by  theoretical  and  practical  education  on  norms,  procedures, 
precautions  and  supervisory  techniques;  borrower  education  is  an  innovative  form  of 
ensuring that the borrowing clientele is trained to meet the larger needs of the bank. Who 
can  deny  the  fact  that  banks  would  stand  to  benefit  if  the  borrower  is  equipped  with 
knowledge  on  adopting  prudent  borrowing  practices,  ensuring  adequate  collaterals  and 
securities  and  is  sufficiently  coached  on  legal  issues  that  may  erupt  when  repayment 
obligations are not met. In fact, a case in point is the financial inclusion initiative taken by RBI 
and  banks.  Financial  literacy  campaigns  involve  “training  of  minds”  of  people  (mostly  the 
financially  excluded)  to  the  encouraging  possibilities  in  maintaining  and  operating  bank 
accounts, adoption of saving habits, awareness regarding direct benefit transfers, etc. Such 
endeavours, however, can be successful only if the persons who impart such education are 
also adequately trained. 
Training  of  trainers  is  an  avowed  target  under  the  National  Training  Policy  of  the 
Government of India and has found an echo in various institutions including banks. In RBI, 
we have had dedicated programmes aimed at faculty development for equipping trainers with 
conventional and contemporary training techniques, enhancing communication skills, usage 
of appropriate training tools and devices befitting the target group. The form and technique of 
training  required  for  a  particular  purpose  is  heavily  dependent  on  the  sophistication  of 
clientele  targeted.  Surely,  a  technique  that  may  appeal  to  a  highly  enlightened  class  of 
employees may not find favour with relatively lesser educated section of employees or the 
common man who is being targeted under various financial inclusion projects. Therein lays 
the essence of “training needs analysis” which can be best articulated by the trainer himself. 
An  effective  trainer  who  understands  the  job  and  its  ambit  is  the  one  who  can  drive  and 
derive  results.  If  the  teacher  himself  is  under-taught,  there  can  possibly  be  no  transfer  of 
knowledge and skills further. Institutions like NITTE have a greater responsibility in training 
the trainers in banks, which can be a significant source of mutual learning as well. 
Change  management  and  training  initiatives  –  the  process  of  impact  evaluation: 
Change  management  is  perhaps  the  biggest  challenge  that  institutions  face.  While  skill 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
upgradation  can  be  met  with  appropriate  coaching,  one  to  one  and  one-to-many  training 
initiatives,  the  management  of  change  is  fraught  with  attitudinal  risks  that  are  difficult  to 
measure at once. It would be futile to assume that dedicated training programmes alone will 
help in changing attitudes for the better. There are several demands that banks recognize on 
their own for embellishing their own systems and skills, while there are also others that are 
ordained  by  dictates  of  regulation  and  supervision.  A  case  in  point  is  the  preparedness of 
banks  for  the  risk  based  supervision  (RBS)  process  that  was  launched  in  the  current 
supervisory  cycle  commencing  from  April  2013.There  has  been  a  measured  approach 
behind  bringing  in  roughly  30  banks  under  the  RBS  ambit.  The  reasons  are  manifold  and 
range from technological preparedness, adequacy of risk management techniques and skills 
and extent of human resource development in banks. The very fact that a certain segment of 
the banking sector still remains uncovered is an indication of the fact that those waiting to be 
brought  under  the  fold  have  to  augment  their  initiatives  to  better  the  skill-sets  of  their 
employees  by  way  of  an  active  training  intervention  in  appropriate  areas  including  HRD. 
Training  programmes,  necessarily,  will  have  to  be  followed  up  by  a  rigorous  exercise  of 
“impact  evaluation”  involving  analysis  of  employee  behavior,  perceptible  changes  in 
operational and behavioural efficiency, observing emerging business practices a little more 
closely  etc.  Perhaps, the  biggest  barrier  to  training  initiatives  is  resistance  to  change.  The 
most  prominent  example  in  this  regard  was  the  initial  reluctance  that  banks  in  India 
displayed,  when  computerisation  of  work  processes  was  introduced  in  mid-eighties.  The 
ultimate  objective  of  any  training  that  targets  the  management  of  change  is  the  ease  with 
which  the  change  is  accepted  leading  to  self-actualization  for  the  employee  and  tangible 
benefits for the banks. 
Towards self-actualization and feedback generation: In an effort to nudge employees to 
take the next step towards self-actualization and furthering the business interests of banks, 
some very important steps needed are (i) establishing a “connect” with the target employees; 
(ii)  expectation  setting  and  preparing  the  trainees;  (iii)  setting  context  and  clarifying  goals; 
(iv) ensuring comfort, boosting morale and confidence; (iv) forging bonds between the senior 
and  junior  level  employees  to  drive  the  change  and  last  but  not  the  least  (v)  performance 
review.  Unless  there  is  an  objective  analysis  of results  derived  from  any  training  program, 
there  is  no  effective  feedback  that  can  trigger  betterment  in  training  processes  and/or 
alteration of the training initiative itself. Thus, training has to be invariably accompanied or 
rather summarised by a feedback that is reliable, easy to generate, objective and certainly 
not influenced. 
How  serious  are  training  initiatives  in  banks?  I  have  reasons  to  believe  that  training 
initiatives receive the utmost attention and is not looked upon as a functional adjunct that is 
mandatory in nature. Statistics of training practices and philosophies across a cross section 
of banks in India support my conclusions. I am glad to note that most institutions do follow a 
regimen of “training needs analysis”, to ascertain the specific training need and addressing 
that need precisely, taking care to cover as many employees as possible. On an average, 
60–65% of the employees are invariably covered every year under some or the other training 
programme, though there are also banks that post an achievement rate as high as 85–90%. 
On the other side of the spectrum are a few banks which have been able to train not more 
than 37–40% of their workforce in a given year. 
It  is  particularly  heartening  to  note  that  training  initiatives  are  not  just  confined  to 
officer/executive  staff  alone  but  encompass  all  employees.  There  does  exist  an  active 
process  of  delineating  programmes  and  categorizing  them  as  induction  (on-boarding  of 
employees), behavioural, functional and leadership training, which leads one to believe that 
banks are fully alive to the necessity of a multi-dimensional approach to training. There is a 
profound emphasis on development of “soft skills” amongst development of other skill sets. 
Further, a follow-up to class room teaching or coaching by way of “on the job” training has 
been considered to be the most appropriate form of training by most trainers in banks. The 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
effort to build skills on the job and the ability to apply them to practical situations is seen to be 
a prime training need. 
Agreeably  and  also  predictably,  most  banks  have  identified  training  gaps  in  the  areas  of 
credit  management,  risk  management,  agriculture  programmes,  marketing,  and  foreign 
exchange.  These  areas  require  an  equal  measure  of  knowledge  of  rules,  practices  and 
specialized  skills  for  appraisal  on  one  hand  and  an  awareness  of  markets  on  the  other. 
These are also some areas where banks have felt a dire need for training by external experts 
and institutions. An interesting yet compelling train of thought in banks also has “employee 
superannuation  trends” as  its focus  with  an  objective  to  prepare  more  leaders  in  banks to 
take up challenges in the coming years, especially through such aspects as “mentoring”. e-
learning portals as means to top up training facilities internally has found wider currency in 
the training curriculum of banks. Certain interesting concepts in training have also emerged 
in recent times as revealed by such interesting themes as “selling skills”, “alternate delivery 
channels”,  “product  knowledge”,  “vertical  career  progression”  and  “mentoring”,  thereby 
signifying banks’ intent to adopt the most modern innovations, thinking, employee aspirations 
and philosophies in training. It would also not be out of place to suggest at this juncture that 
training has, over the years, evolved as a specialized and noble profession and has emerged 
as an interesting career prospect as well. 
Training for one and training for all: There is also a school of thought that perceives that 
training is needed only for the line functionaries in the bank. The maxim is entirely untrue. 
Corporate governance requires as much training as say operational or technological areas. 
The  demands  from  higher  level  employees  including  Board  level  executives  of  banks  in 
terms of accountability, responsiveness and competence calls for the need for appropriate 
training  interventions  to  keep  them  up-to-date.  RBI’s  own  guidelines  on  corporate 
governance postulate that there should be an adequate intervention for new inductees on the 
Board. More specifically, in order that independent Directors on Boards perform their roles 
ably and without interference, it would be extremely necessary to train them on such aspects 
as  their  powers,  responsibility  towards  the  stakeholders  and  expectations  from  them  that 
transform with changing times. We, in RBI, have evolved an active process of interfacing with 
Nominee Directors on Boards of various banks and engage them in suitable interventions, 
conferences  and  seminars  to  disseminate  the  latest  in  regulation,  supervision  and  set  out 
their responsibilities and roles in upholding independent stance in decision-making. 
My  emphasis  above  has  been  to  drive  home  the  point  that  training  needs  are  felt  across 
various  echelons  of  banks  and  financial  institutions,  as  also  classes  and  categories  of 
employees.  Training  efforts  only  get  reinforced  with  greater  co-ordination  amongst  like-
minded  institutions;  and  maintaining  an  open  channel  of communication  to  understand the 
precise training needs of banks and financial institutions. It would be even more utilitarian to 
collaborate on training efforts, which we have been adopting with success in RBI. I hope that 
NITTE  will  bring  in  more  specialization,  greater  association  with  national  and  international 
training  houses  of  repute  and  introduce  a  wide  range  of  topics  to  choose  from.  My  best 
wishes are with the institute to build more bridges between the training and trainee fraternity, 
bring  in  more  innovation  and  technology  in  training  methodology  and  target  untapped 
reservoirs of talent in banks and financial institution. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
