B Mahapatra: Implications of new bank licences 
Inaugural address by Mr B Mahapatra, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Post Graduate Students’ Conclave on “Implications of new bank licences”, at the National 
Institute of Bank Management, Pune, 28 September 2013. 
 The assistance provided by Shri S.S. Barik, General Manager, RBI, is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
I  have  great  pleasure  and  privilege  in  associating  myself  with  the  conclave  of  the 
Post  Graduate  Students  of  National  Institute  of  Bank  Management  (NIBM),  Pune.  I  am 
indeed grateful to Director Allen C A Pereira for inviting me to deliver the inaugural address. 
NIBM is a premier educational institution of the country in the field of banking and finance 
and it is but natural for them to select a subject of topical interest for this conclave. 
2. 
I understand that the objective of this conclave is to explore the implications of new 
bank licences on the banking sector, and that, some of the eminent bankers and CEOs of 
NBFIs, who have interest on the subject are also present to express their views, besides the 
students of the Institute. I am sure the conclave will generate a lot of heat and throw much 
light during its deliberations. I congratulate Director Pereira and his team for this. 
Before I proceed with the subject, let me first present as a backdrop, a broad picture 
The broad picture 
3. 
of today’s Indian banking and financial system: 
 
Indian  financial  system  is  bank  dominated  –  banks’  share  at  63  per  cent  of  total 
assets of the financial system, is followed by insurance companies at 19 per cent, 
Non-Banking  Financial  Institutions  at  8  per  cent,  Mutual  Funds  at  6  per  cent  and 
Provident  and  Pension  Funds  at  4  per  cent,  of  the  total  assets  of  the  financial 
system. 
Even among the commercial banks, public sector banks have dominant number of 
branches  at  about  67,000,  followed  by  private  sector  banks  at  about  13,500  and 
foreign  banks  at  about  325  branches,  constituting  83  per  cent,  16.6  per  cent  and 
0.4 per cent respectively of the total number of over 100,000 branches of banks.  
 Licensing of new banks – a historical perspective 
4. 
Historically,  commercial  banks  in  India  were  privately  held.  However,  post- 
independence, from 1951, the Government of India adopted planned economic development 
for the country through Five Year Plans. The economic planning envisaged state ownership 
of the economic means of production to sub-serve the social welfare objectives of planning. 
The  commercial  banks  lagged  in  attaining  the  social  objectives.  It  was  felt  that  banks 
controlled  by  business  houses  failed  in  catering  to  the  credit  needs  of  poorer  sections  of 
society,  such  as  farmers,  craftsmen,  etc.  and  to  the  credit  needs  of  small  and  cottage 
industries.  Therefore,  the  Government  of  India  nationalized  14  major  commercial  banks  in 
1969. All commercial banks with a deposit base over ₹ 500 million were nationalized then. 
These banks had 85 per cent of bank deposits in the country, at that time. The second phase 
of nationalization happened in 1980 when 6 more banks with deposits of ₹ 2 billion or more 
were nationalized and the Government of India controlled around 91 per cent of the banking 
business in India.  
5. 
Subsequently, the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 was enacted to set up Regional 
Rural  Banks  (RRBs)  under  the  joint  ownership  of  Central  Government,  State  Government 
and  a  sponsor  bank,  with  a  view  to  developing  the  rural  economy  by  providing  credit  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
other facilities, particularly to the small and marginal farmers, agricultural labourers, artisans 
and small entrepreneurs, and other productive activities in the rural areas. This led to setting 
up  of  196  RRBs  across  the  country.  However,  no  new  licence  was  issued  for  setting  up 
commercial banks in the private sector till early 1990s. 
6. 
India faced a serious balance of payments crisis in 1991. The Government of India 
adopted  a  policy  of  economic  liberalization.  Therefore,  the  economic  and  banking  policies 
were to be reversed to suit the requirements of a liberalized economy. The banking sector 
reform  became  inevitable  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  reforms  to  usher  in  a  vibrant  and 
competitive economy. An expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri M. Narasimham 
(a former Governor of RBI) was set up for spearheading the financial sector reform in India. 
The  Narasimham  Committee  (Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Reforms  1991)  inter  alia, 
recommended  opening  up  of  the  banking  sector  to  the  private  entrepreneurs  to  bring  in 
competition and efficiency, thereby paving the way for licensing of new commercial banks in 
the private sector. Since then, the Reserve Bank licensed 10 banks in the private sector in 
1993–94,  and  2  more  in  2002–04  under  the  guidelines  framed  in  1993  and  2001 
respectively. There were 157 commercial banks [26 public sector banks, 20 private sector 
banks, 43 foreign banks, 64 RRBs and 4 Local Area Banks (LABs)] as on March 31, 2013. 
Need for new banks in the private sector 
7. 
The Indian financial system has made impressive strides in resource mobilization, 
geographical and functional reach, financial viability, profitability and competitiveness, since 
nationalization  of  banks  in  1969  and  liberalization  of  economic  policies  since  early  1990s. 
With the penetration of banks into the nook and corner of the country, the average population 
per  branch  office  (APPBO)  declined  from  about  64,000  in  1969  (as  per  1961  census)  to 
about a fifth of that number – 12,400 now as per 2001 census.  
8. 
Notwithstanding  the  vast  network  of  branches,  a  sizeable  segment  of  population, 
especially  the  underprivileged  sections  of  the  society,  have  no  access  to  formal  banking 
services. There still exists a gap between the ever increasing demands for financial services 
of a growing economy and the available banking network to cater to the needs of the vast 
areas,  which  are  unbanked  or  under-banked  even  today.  Despite  the  progress  made  over 
the  years  since  nationalization  of  banks  in  1969,  the  problem  of  financial  exclusion  is 
staggering.  According  to  the  findings  of  World  Bank  Global  Findex  Survey  (2012),  only 
35 per cent of Indian adults had access to formal bank account and just 8 per cent borrowed 
formally  in  the  last 12 months.  Only  2  per  cent  of  adult  population  used  bank  accounts  to 
receive  money  (remittances)  from  members  of  family  living  elsewhere  and  4  per  cent 
received payments from the Government.  
9. 
Of the 600,000 rural habitations in the country, only about 40,000 had been covered 
by the presence of brick and mortar branches of banks. With regard to financial access and 
penetration,  India  ranks  low  compared  with  OECD  countries.  As  of  2009,  India  had 
6.33 branches per 100,000 persons whereas OECD countries provided 23–45 branches per 
100,000 persons.  
10. 
Presently, the share of public sector banks constitutes about 72 per cent of the total 
banking assets in India. With the implementation of Basel III capital norms, banks will need to 
raise more capital. As the Government’s share in the capital of public sector banks is close to 
the minimum of 51 per cent, raising of any additional capital by the public sector banks would 
require  the  Government  to  infuse  matching  capital  so  as  to  maintain  its  minimum 
shareholding  at  51  per  cent.  Therefore,  expansion  of  public  sector  banks  into  new  areas 
would depend on the ability and willingness of the Government to infuse capital. 
The  private  sector  banks  have  a  share  of  about  18  per  cent  of  the  total  banking 
11. 
assets in India. The existing 13 old private sector banks, which have been in existence much 
before  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  was  enacted  in  1949,  together  with  the  7  new  private 
sector banks, have been growing at 20 per cent. However, the performance of the old private 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
sector banks was not so impressive in the areas of branch expansion compared to their new 
peers in the private sector. While 13 old private sector banks together had 5,555 branches, 
7 new private sector banks had 7,857 branches as on March 31, 2012.  
12. 
The Government of India has adopted financial inclusion as a state policy. In order 
to achieve this objective, not only more number of branches, but also some more new banks 
are necessary, as stretching of the resources of the existing banks to fill the gap may not 
yield the desired results.  
The genesis of the new bank licensing guidelines 
13. 
The Union Finance Minister, in his Budget Speech for the year 2010–11 had stated, 
“we  need  to  ensure  that  the  banking  system  grows  in  size  and  sophistication  to  meet  the 
needs of a modern economy. Besides, there is a need to extend the geographic coverage of 
banks  and  improve  access  to  banking  services.  In  this  context,  I  am  happy  to  inform  the 
Honourable  Members  that  RBI  is  considering  giving  some  additional  banking  licences  to 
private sector players. Non-Banking Financial Companies could also be considered, if they 
meet  the  RBI’s  eligibility.”  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  a  little  on  the  process 
followed by RBI to formulate the policy for licensing of new banks in the private sector given 
the implications for banking sector and the national economy. 
 The policy formulation process 
14. 
In  pursuance  of  the  announcement  made  by  the  Honorable  Finance  Minister,  the 
Reserve Bank of India prepared a Discussion Paper on Entry of New Banks in the Private 
Sector  marshalling  the  international  practices  in  licensing  of  banks,  Indian  experience  and 
the ownership and governance issues. RBI put out the Discussion Paper on its website on 
August 11, 2010 for comments. 
15. 
 
 
The Discussion Paper flagged various issues, primarily: 
What should be the minimum capital requirement for the new banks? 
What  should  be  the  minimum  and  maximum  shareholding  by  the  promoters  and 
other shareholders?  
What should be the limit on foreign shareholding? 
Whether industrial and business houses should be allowed to promote banks? 
Should  Non-Banking  Financial  Companies  (NBFCs)  be  allowed  to  convert  into 
banks and/or the promoters of NBFCs be allowed to promote new banks? 
What should be the business model of the new banks?  
 
16. 
The Discussion Paper generated extensive debate in the general public, the media, 
by  the  consultants,  existing  banks,  industrial  and  business  houses,  Non-Banking  Financial 
Companies,  Micro  Finance  Institutions,  etc.  The  Reserve  Bank  also  held  discussions  with 
important stakeholders. In order to have transparency, the gist of comments received on the 
Discussion Paper was placed on the RBI’s website on December 23, 2010. Subsequently, 
the draft guidelines on “Licensing of New Banks in the Private Sector” were framed taking 
into  account  the  experience  gained  from  the  functioning  of  the  banks  licensed  under  the 
guidelines of 1993 and 2001 and the feedback and suggestions received in response to the 
Discussion  Paper  and  in  consultation  with  the  Government  of  India.  The  draft  guidelines 
were placed on the RBI’s website on August 29, 2011 for comments. 
17. 
The comments received on the draft guidelines were examined. The Reserve Bank 
had indicated in the draft guidelines that certain amendments to the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949 were under the consideration of the Government of India and final guidelines will be 
issued and the process of inviting application for setting up of new banks in the private sector 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
would be initiated only after the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 is amended. It was essential 
that the extant banking laws were amended to empower Reserve Bank of India to effectively 
deal with new banks in the private sector.  
18. 
After the amendments to the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 in December, 2012, the 
guidelines were finalized and placed in the public domain on February 22, 2013. Following 
the issue of guidelines, clarifications were sought by intending applicants, consultants, etc., 
on various aspects of the guidelines. Instead of replying to such queries on one-to-one basis, 
the Reserve Bank considered it appropriate to invite queries from all concerned and to place 
the  clarifications  to  such  queries  in  the  public  domain  for  the  sake  of  equity  and 
transparency. The replies to the queries were placed in public domain on June 3, 2013.  
Important features of the current policy 
19. 
I  feel  it  would  be  appropriate  on  my  part  to  elaborate  on  some  of  the  important 
features  of  the  guidelines  that  have  generated  a  lot  of  debate,  the  rationale  behind  some 
such  policy  prescriptions  and  to  explain  how  these  guidelines  are  different  from  earlier 
guidelines. I will deal with the issues one by one. 
Eligible entities to promote a bank 
The  first  and  foremost  issue  for  the  Reserve  Bank  was  to  decide  who  could  be 
20. 
eligible to promote new banks considering the broader objective of setting up of these banks, 
its own experience of dealing with the promoters of the private sector banks in the past and 
not the least, the lessons learnt from the recent global financial crisis. The Reserve Bank had 
dealt  extensively  on  this  issue,  including  the  issue  of  permitting  industrial  and  business 
houses setting up banks, in the Discussion Paper, as I mentioned earlier. The pros and cons 
of allowing industrial and business houses had also been indicated in the Discussion Paper. 
In response, RBI received divergent views.  
21. 
In  the  context  of  permitting  industrial  and  business  houses  to  promote  banks,  I 
would  also  like  to  mention  that  concerns  had  been  raised  by  Prof.  Joseph  Stiglitz,  the 
eminent economist, Dr. Y.V. Reddy, former Governor, RBI, and also in the IMF Staff Report. 
These concerns emanate from the likely conflict of interest in case industrial and business 
houses were allowed to own banks. In the last two rounds of licensing of banks in the private 
sector,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  industrial  and  business  houses  had  not  been  allowed  to 
promote new banks, partly out of these concerns.  
22. 
Given the divergent views on the issue of permitting industrial and business houses 
to  promote  banks,  we  in  RBI  discussed  and  debated  a  lot  internally.  The  international 
experience in this regard was of no profound guidance, as it differed from country to country. 
While  countries  like  Australia,  Brazil,  Canada,  Germany,  France,  Japan,  UK,  etc.,  do  not 
specifically restrict industrial houses from setting up banks, there are restrictions in countries 
like USA and Korea. A few instances of banks owned by industrial houses are: Tesco Bank 
(U.K.), Virgin Money (U.K), Banco Ahorro Famsa (Mexico), Banco Azteca (Mexico), Techcom 
Bank  (Vietnam),  Transcredit  Bank  (Russia),  MDM  Bank  (Russia),  Alfa  Bank  (Russia), 
Volkswagen  Bank  (Germany),  Mercedes-Benz  Bank  (Germany),  BMW  Bank  (Germany), 
Siemens Bank (Germany), C & A Bank (Germany) and Alior Bank (Poland).  
23. 
We, at RBI, believed that circumstances have changed a lot since nationalization of 
the  major  private  sector  banks  in  1969  and  in  1980,  and  more  particularly  since  India 
embarked  upon  the  path  of  economic  liberalization  since  1991.  The  banking  and  financial 
system  have  evolved  stronger  and  vibrant  over  the  years.  It  has  been  deepened  and 
diversified.  The  overall  economic  transformation  of  India  has  also  created  a  conducive 
environment for further liberalization of banking policy. 
24. 
In this backdrop, the final guidelines for licensing of new banks in the private sector 
were  formulated  permitting  entities/groups  in  the  private  sector  that  are  “owned  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Having said that, I would like to explain a little why RBI considered corporates for 
controlled by residents” and entities in public sector to promote banks through wholly owned 
Non-Operative Financial Holding Company (NOFHC). The Promoters/Promoter Groups with 
existing non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) were also permitted to apply for a bank 
licence, subject to compliance with other parameters. The guidelines, by implication, permit 
corporates to promote new banks.  
25 
setting up of new banks. The main reasons for allowing corporate houses are: 
 
Industrial  and  business  houses  have  already  been  permitted  to  operate  in  other 
financial services sectors such as insurance, mutual fund, etc., and are competing 
with banks both on the assets and liabilities side. 
Industrial  and  business  houses  have  a  long  history  of  building  and  nurturing  new 
businesses in highly regulated sectors such as telecom, power, airports, highways, 
dams and ports, etc. 
Industrial  and  business  houses  can  be  an  important  source  of  capital  and  can 
provide management expertise and strategic direction to banks as they have done 
to a broad range of non-banking companies and other financial companies. 
Equities of large industrial and business houses are widely held and are listed on 
the stock exchanges and are subject to Companies Act, SEBI rules and regulations 
on transparency, disclosure and corporate governance. 
Permitting industrial and business houses to own a limited number of banks should 
not lead to undue concentration of control of banking activities as the Indian banking 
system is largely dominated by public sector banks. 
Financial inclusion being the overall objective of the present bank licensing policy, it 
was considered that industrial houses with their deep pockets could fill the gap, as 
financial inclusion is a capital and technology intensive project. 
Industrial and business houses with presence across various sectors would not like 
to lose their reputation compared to a pure individual promoter or financial services 
player.  
26. 
I have earlier spoken about the concerns raised in various quarters on the issue of 
permitting industrial and business houses to own banks. Therefore, I would like to mention 
how the new policy on banking licence addresses such concerns. We have built up adequate 
checks and balances in the new guidelines, some of which are as under: 
 
    The  guidelines  have  spelt  out  the  “fit  and  proper”  criteria  for  the  Promoters.  The 
Promoters/Promoter  Group  should  be  financially  sound.  They  should  have  sound 
credentials and integrity and also a successful track record for at least 10 years of 
running business. Due diligence exercise will be carried out on the Promoters and 
Promoter Group entities for ascertaining these aspects, and RBI may seek feedback 
from  other  regulators  and  enforcement  and  investigative  agencies,  as  deemed 
appropriate. 
The Promoters/Promoter Groups’ business model and business culture should not 
be misaligned with the banking model and their business should not potentially put 
the bank and the banking system at risk on account of group activities such as those 
which are speculative in nature or subject to high asset price volatility.  
Now,  I  would  like  to  explain  how  we  addressed  the  issues  relating  to  conflict  of 
 First, the guidelines provide that the Promoters/Promoter Groups, if found suitable 
for  setting  up  a  bank,  would  be  required  to  first  set  up  a  wholly  owned  Non-
Operative Financial Holding Company (NOFHC), which will hold the new bank and 
27. 
interests. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
other  regulated  financial  services  entities  of  the  Group.  The  objective  is  that  the 
Holding Company should ring fence the regulated financial services entities of the 
Group,  including  the  bank  from  other  activities  of  the  Group  i.e.,  commercial, 
industrial and financial activities not regulated by financial sector regulators and also 
that the bank should be ring fenced from other regulated financial activities of the 
Group. The NOFHC will be registered with the Reserve Bank as an NBFC and will 
comply with bank-like corporate governance guidelines and prudential norms. The 
capital structure of the NOFHC has also been laid down. Only non-financial services 
companies/entities  and  non-operative  financial holding  company  in  the  Group  and 
individuals  belonging  to  the  Promoter  Group  will  be  eligible  to  hold  shares  in  the 
NOFHC and at least 51 per cent of the total voting equity of the NOFHC should be 
held by companies in the Promoter Group in which public hold not less than 51 per 
cent of the voting equity. 
Secondly, in the interest of diversified ownership, the banks should be widely held. 
Accordingly,  it  has  been  provided  in  the  guidelines  that  the  shareholdings  of  the 
NOFHC in the bank would be diluted to 15 per cent over a period of 12 years. No 
single  entity  or  group  of  related  entities,  other  than  the  NOFHC  shall  have 
shareholding or control, directly or indirectly, in excess of 10 per cent of the paid-up 
voting  equity  capital  of  the  bank.  Any  acquisition  of  shares,  which  takes  the 
aggregate  holding  of  an  individual/entity/group  to  the  equivalent  of  5  per  cent  or 
more of the paid-up voting equity capital of the bank would require prior approval of 
RBI.  Additionally,  the  bank  is  required  to  list  its  shares  within  3  years  from  the 
commencement  of  business 
to  ensure 
accountability and transparency through adequate disclosures.  
Thirdly, with a view to mitigating conflict of interest and to ensure that there is no 
self-dealing, the new banks will not be permitted to take any credit and investments 
(including  investments  in  the  equity/debt  capital  instruments)  exposure  on  the 
Promoters/Promoter  Group  entities  or  individuals  associated  with  the  Promoter 
Group or their NOFHCs. Further, the banks promoted by Groups having 40 per cent 
or more assets/income from non-financial business will require RBI’s prior approval 
for  raising  paid-up  voting  equity  capital  beyond  ₹ 10  billion  for  every  block  of 
₹ 5 billion.  The  above  prudential  norms  coupled  with  adequate  safeguards  would 
ring fence the banking entity. 
Fourthly, with the recent amendments to the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, RBI has 
been  empowered  to  call  for  information  relating  to  the  business  or  affairs  of  any 
associate  enterprise  of  the  banking  company  and  also  cause  an  inspection  of  its 
books  of  account.  The  amended  Act  also  provides  adequate  powers  to  RBI  to 
supersede the Boards of the banks to secure proper management.  
to  have  diversified  ownership  and 
   Minimum capital required for the new bank 
28. 
The minimum capital requirement for the new banks is another issue on which views 
were  divergent.  The  international  experience  also  differed  across  countries.  The  capital 
requirement should neither be too low to achieve the goals of financial inclusion nor too high 
to become an impediment for those who are committed to the goal. We thought ₹ 5 billion 
would be a reasonable amount and the same was prescribed in the guidelines. 
Foreign shareholding in the new bank 
29. 
Currently, the foreign shareholding in the private sector banks is capped at 74 per 
cent  as  per  the  FDI  policy  of  the  Government  of  India.  With  foreign  shareholding  of  more 
than 50 per cent, a domestic bank becomes a foreign owned bank. Therefore, allowing the 
new  banks  to  be  foreign  owned  from  the  very  beginning  may  not  be  a  good  idea,  as  RBI 
operates a separate window for foreign banks in India and pursuing the subsidiarisation of 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
foreign  banks’  presence  in  India  from  the  perspective  of  strengthening  financial  stability.  It 
was, in that context, considered appropriate to stipulate a lower limit of 49 per cent for the 
first five years, after which the extant FDI limits would kick in. 
Corporate governance and exposure norms 
30. 
Corporate governance and prudential exposure norms are important aspects of new 
bank policy; more so, in the context of allowing corporates to own banks. The guidelines for 
licensing of new banks deal on the subjects extensively. The guidelines mandate the NOFHC 
to have at least 50 per cent independent directors on its Board and they should have special 
knowledge or practical experience in economics, finance, accountancy, banking, insurance, 
law and some such fields. The NOFHC shall not have any credit and investment (including 
equity/debt  capital)  exposure  to  any  entity  belonging  to  the  Promoter  Group  except  those 
held under it and the new bank cannot take any credit and investment (including investments 
in  equity/debt  capital)  exposure  on  Promoters/Promoter  Group  entities  or  individuals 
associated with the Promoter Group or the NOFHC. 
Financial inclusion 
31. 
One of the main planks of licensing policy is to assess how the banks would serve 
public interest. The guidelines require the promoters to address how the bank proposes to 
achieve  financial  inclusion,  comply  with  the  priority  sector  lending  targets  and  minimum 
25 per cent branch presence in rural unbanked centres. The project report and the business 
plan of each applicant will be evaluated to make an assessment about these aspects. 
Fairness and transparency of licensing process 
32. 
The fairness and transparency of the licensing process are no less important given 
the  enthusiasm  shown  by  the  corporate  houses,  NBFCs  and  public  sector  entities  to  get 
banking  licence.  I  may  also  add  that  there  were  suggestions  from  certain  quarters  for 
auctioning of new bank licences. No doubt, banks are for public good. But, banks are special. 
They  are  highly  leveraged  financial  institutions.  They  are  the  conduits  for  monetary  policy 
transmission  and  constitute  the  core  of  payment  and  settlement  system.  They  accept 
uncollateralized  deposits  from  members  of  public  and  their  deposits  are  insured.  The 
purpose of issuing new bank licences is to serve public interest. Auctioning of bank licences 
is unheard of in any jurisdiction. Nevertheless, issues relating to fairness and transparency 
were to be dealt with. It was, therefore, decided to place the names of the applicants for bank 
licences on the RBI’s website after the last date of receipt of applications. Accordingly, RBI 
disclosed the names of 26 applicants. The applications are being subjected to a multi-layered 
scrutiny  internally  by  the  Reserve  Bank  followed  by  scrutiny  by  a  High  Level  Advisory 
Committee that would comprise eminent persons with impeccable integrity and experience in 
banking,  financial  sector  and  other  relevant  areas.  The  High  Level  Committee  will  make 
recommendations to the RBI and the final selection will be that of the RBI. 
Implications of new bank licensing 
33. 
In the above context, I would like to share my personal views on the implications of 
new  bank  licensing.  The  new  bank  licensing  under  the  current  guidelines  will  have 
implications for the Promoters in particular, who get the licence, for the banking industry in 
general, for the economy, for the common man, and also for the Reserve Bank, as regulator 
and supervisor for the banks. I will discuss these implications one by one. 
Implications for the promoter 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Promoters/Promoter  Group  have  to  first  set  up  a  non-
34. 
operative financial holding company (NOFHC) for holding the new bank and other regulated 
financial services entities, in which the Promoters/Promoter Group have significant influence 
or control. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
   First  of  all,  for  setting  up  of  NOFHC,  the  Promoters/Promoter  Groups  have  to 
identify  companies  which  will  hold  the  voting  equities  of  the  NOFHC.  As  the 
guidelines require that at least 51 per cent of the voting equity of the NOFHC should 
be held by a company/companies in the Promoter Group, in which public hold not 
less than 51 per cent of the voting equity, the Promoters have to necessarily dilute 
their shareholdings in such companies to comply with the requirement, if there are 
no such companies for the present. 
Secondly,  the  Promoters/Promoter  Groups  have  to  re-organize  their  business 
structure in respect of the financial services that they undertake through the Group 
entities. They have to move all the regulated financial services entities, in which they 
have  significant  influence  or  control,  into  the  fold  of  NOFHC.  What  this  means  is 
that, they cannot hold the voting equity of the financial services entities directly, but 
only through the NOFHC. This would require some amount of restructuring of their 
financial services business. 
Thirdly, Promoters/Promoter Groups currently undertaking various types of lending 
business through non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) would have to transfer 
the lending business to the new bank. As per the guidelines and the clarifications 
issued, lending activities must be conducted from inside the bank. But, para-banking 
activities, such as credit cards, primary dealer, leasing, hire purchase, factoring etc., 
can be conducted either inside the bank departmentally or outside the bank through 
subsidiary/joint  venture/associate  structure.  Activities  such  as  insurance,  stock 
broking,  asset  management,  asset  reconstruction,  venture  capital  funding  and 
infrastructure  financing  through  Infrastructure  Development  Fund  (IDF)  sponsored 
by  the  bank  can  be  undertaken  only  outside  the  bank.  This  would  require  some 
amount of demerger of business for Groups that have NBFCs for lending business. 
They have the option of converting such NBFC into the new bank, provided all the 
activities that the NBFC currently undertakes could be undertaken by the new bank 
departmentally.  Otherwise,  activities  that  banks  are  not  permitted  to  undertake 
departmentally have to be demerged/divested into other entities or wound down.  
Fourthly, the Promoters/Promoter Groups converting the NBFCs into the new banks 
or transferring the business from NBFCs into the new banks will have to comply with 
the  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR),  statutory  liquidity  ratio  (SLR)  and  priority  sector 
lending (PSL) targets in respect of the liabilities and loan assets taken over from the 
NBFCs, once the new bank commences its business. 
Fifthly,  the  Promoters/Promoter  Groups  have  to  comply  with  the  requirement  of 
opening of 25 per cent of their total number of branches in unbanked rural centres. 
The  rule  will  apply  in  case  of  conversion  of  existing  NBFCs  into  new  banks,  and 
therefore, the Promoters/Promoter Groups have to plan their business accordingly. 
Sixthly, the bank and financial entities held by NOFHC shall not have any credit and 
investments (including investments in the equity/debt capital instruments) exposure 
to  the  Promoters/Promoter  Group  entities  or  individuals  associated  with  the 
Promoter Group or the NOFHC.  
35. 
The  implications  for  the  Promoters/Promoter  Groups  discussed  above  would  vary 
depending upon the number of regulated financial services entities in the Group, the size of 
their business and their present business structure. Considering these implications, RBI has 
extended the validity of “in-principle” approval from 12 months to 18 months from the date of 
issue, for the Promoters/Promoter Group to comply with all such matters during this time, but 
before the banks commence the business. 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Implications for the banking industry 
36. 
A few new banks would enter the banking industry after a decade with the last such 
licence issued in 2004. However, they would be the game changer in many aspects. I would 
like to mention how their presence would have implications for the banking industry. 
 
First  and  foremost,  with  the  setting-up  of  new  banks  under  the  NOFHC,  financial 
holding company (FHC) structure will be introduced in the banking industry for the 
first time. This will be a marked departure from the present bank-subsidiary model 
under which Indian banks operate. The Government of India is also contemplating a 
holding company structure for public sector banks. The existing private sector banks 
are  expected  to  follow  suit,  in  line  with  the  Shyamala  Gopinath  Committee 
recommendations. 
Secondly,  the  new  banks  will  bring  in  new  business  model,  new  products,  new 
processes, new technologies, etc. The level of productivity, efficiency and customer 
service would be expected to be higher. The existing banks may have to re-orient 
some of their businesses, technologies, etc. 
Thirdly, the existing banks would face competition, both on their assets and liabilities 
side of the balance sheet, from the new generation banks and have to devise ways 
to  withstand  the  competition  or  they  may  lose  their  existing  customers,  who  may 
move  away  to  new  banks.  Banks  that  cannot  compete  would  be  vulnerable  to 
acquisitions/take over. Possibility of voluntary amalgamation amongst some banks 
cannot be ruled out. 
Fourthly, the public sector banks, as a group have a dominant market share of about 
72 per cent. They are likely to shed some weight over time and the share of private 
sector banks as a group would increase. 
Fifthly,  Indian  financial  system  is  bank  dominated.  The  financial  system  will  be 
broadened  and  deepened  with  the  entry  of  new  banks  in  the  private  sector.  The 
market  share  of  the  banks,  as  a  segment,  in  the  financial  system’s  assets  would 
increase  over  non-banks,  if  the  business  houses  with  major  NBFCs  come  out 
successful  in  getting  bank  licences.  In  that  case,  they  would  convert  NBFCs  into 
new banks or transfer the lending activities of the Group NBFC into the new bank, 
as per the requirement.  
    Implications for the economy 
37. 
Finance  is  fuel  for  the  economy.  Banks  being  at  the  core  of  the  financial  system, 
provide this fuel. The progress of the real economy depends upon the growth of the banking 
and financial system. An efficient financial system transforms the savings into investments 
and channelizes the investments to productive sectors of the economy to spur growth. India 
is an emerging market economy and has the potential to grow faster. As the Indian economy 
refocuses on the expansion of manufacturing and infrastructure sectors, the credit needs of 
the  real  economy  would  be  much  higher  compared  to  the  services  sector.  Entry  of  new 
banks would, in a way, help in the economic development of the country. 
Implications for the common man 
38. 
Financial inclusion is the basic tenet of new bank licensing policy. As per the data 
furnished in Basic Statistical Returns (BSR) of banks, it is estimated that rural India had only 
7 branches per 100,000 adults in 2011 in sharp contrast to most of the developed countries 
and even BRICS nations having over 40 branches. Further, certain regions, such as, north-
eastern,  eastern  and  central  regions,  are  more  excluded  in  terms  of  banking  penetration. 
Entry of new banks, with the mandated opening of 25 per cent of brick and mortar branches 
in unbanked rural centres, would cover regions that were hitherto financially excluded. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
The  common  man  would  be  benefitted  from  the  innovative  products  and  superior 
39. 
banking  technology  of  the  new  generation  banks.  They  would  be  able  to  reach  out  to  the 
masses  more  easily  by  use  of  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT)  enabled 
devices.  
Implications for the reserve bank 
40. 
In  the  context  of  new  bank  licensing,  serious  concerns  have  been  raised  on  the 
issue of allowing industrial/business houses to own banks. This would be a new experiment 
in  India  after  nationalization  of  commercial  banks  in  1969.  The  RBI’s  regulatory  and 
supervisory effectiveness will be tested in preventing the new banks promoted by industrial 
and  business  houses 
from  self-dealing.  The  new  bank  guidelines  have  adequate 
arrangements for ring-fencing of the financial services activities of the Promoter Groups from 
their  non-financial  (manufacturing/trading/others)  activities  and  addressed 
issues 
concerning conflict of interests by prohibiting lending to and investments in Promoter Group 
entities.  RBI  has  also  been  vested  with  adequate  powers  through  amendments  to  the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 to supervise these banks in a consolidated manner. However, 
it is yet to be tested whether the ring-fence would work effectively or could be circumvented. 
Therefore, we in the RBI need to be extra vigilant to protect the interests of the depositors. 
the 
Banking structure in India – The way forward 
41. 
This  bank  licensing  policy  is  for  now.  How  about  the  future?  The  Reserve  Bank 
reviewed the extant Banking Structure in India keeping in view the recommendations of, inter 
alia,  the  Committees  on  Financial/Banking  Sector  Reforms,  1991  and  1998  (Chairman: 
Shri M.  Narasimham),  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Reforms,  2009  (Chairman: 
Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan) and a few other relevant viewpoints and placed a Discussion Paper 
on the RBI website on August 27, 2013 for comments. 
42. 
The Discussion Paper has taken into consideration the specific requirements of the 
Indian  economy  as  well  as  the  lessons  learnt  from  the  global  financial  crisis  particularly 
relating  to  banking  structure  while  reviewing  the  Indian  banking  structure.  Certain  building 
blocks  for  the  reoriented  banking  structure  have  been  identified  with  a  view  to  addressing 
various issues such as enhancing competition, financing higher growth, providing specialized 
services  and  furthering  financial  inclusion.  At  the  same  time,  the  need  to  address  the 
concerns  arising  out  of  such  changes  with  a  view  to  managing  the  trade-off  for  ensuring 
financial stability is also emphasized.  
43. 
The  Discussion  Paper  also  covers  the  debate  on  having  a  large  number  of  small 
banks for promoting financial inclusion vis-à-vis a few large banks having global presence; 
universal banking and differentiated licensing for infrastructure financing, whole sale banking 
and  retail  banking;  need  for  consolidation  in  the  banking  sector;  conversion  of  urban 
co-operative  banks  (UCBs)  into  commercial  banks/LABs;  policy  for  presence  of  foreign 
banks  in  India  and  Indian  banks’  presence  overseas;  ownership  issues  and  the  need  for 
having  an  effective  resolution  regime  to  deal  with  failure  of  banks.  It  also  envisages  a 
reoriented  banking  system  with  distinct  tiers  of  banking  institutions  with  the  first  tier 
consisting of three or four large Indian banks with domestic and international presence along 
with branches of foreign banks in India, the second tier comprising several mid-sized banking 
institutions including niche banks with economy-wide presence. The third tier and fourth tiers 
will  encompass  old  private  sector  banks,  RRBs,  multi  state  UCBs  and  small  local  and 
cooperative banks, respectively. I hope NIBM will provide a platform to generate a debate on 
this Discussion Paper for an appropriate banking structure for India.  
Conclusion 
44. 
Let  me  now  conclude.  I  started  with  a  broad  picture  of  the  Indian  financial  and 
banking system as a backdrop to today’s discussions. I dealt with a historical perspective of 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
banking developments in India and the need for new banks in the private sector. I touched 
upon the genesis for the new bank licensing guidelines and specifically covered some of the 
debatable  features  of  the  guidelines  such  as  allowing  industrial/business  houses  to  set  up 
banks,  minimum  capital  requirement,  foreign  shareholding  in  these  banks,  corporate 
governance and exposure norms, thrust on financial inclusion, fairness and transparency of 
the  licensing  process,  etc.  I  also  shared  my  personal  thoughts  on  its  implications  for  the 
promoters of banks and banking industry, economy as a whole, and for common man and 
RBI. The way forward for Indian banking structure as put out by RBI in its Discussion Paper 
needs to be debated. As the objective of this conclave is to explore the various implications 
of  the  new  bank  licensing,  I  will  look  forward  to  your  views.  There  could  be  different 
perspectives. 
45. 
the subject and wish meaningful deliberations in this conclave. 
Thank you. 
I once again thank NIBM for providing me an opportunity to share my thoughts on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
