Turalay Kenç: Fostering longstanding relations – opening of the 
Bundesbank Representative Office in Istanbul 
Speech by Mr Turalay Kenç, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, 
at 
Istanbul, 
26 November 2013. 
the  Bundesbank’s  Representative  Office, 
the  Opening  Ceremony  of 
 Excellency Wolke, 
Esteemed Dr. Dombret, 
Distinguished Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
At  the  outset,  allow  me  to  express  the  pleasure  and  appreciation  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Turkey on the occasion of the opening ceremony of the Bundesbank’s Representative Office 
in our beautiful city of İstanbul. 
It is a distinct honour for me to have the opportunity to deliver a couple of remarks before 
distinguished  participants  in  this  historical  opening  event,  as  this  is  the  first  representative 
office in Turkey of a fellow central bank. 
First  of  all,  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  (CBRT)  is  very  pleased  with  the 
signing  of  the  memorandum  of  understanding  (MoU)  this  year  with  your  esteemed  central 
bank.  This  is  so,  not  only  because  the  majority  of  the  Bundesbank  policies  have  been 
regarded  as  gold  standards  in  central  banking,  but  also  because  the  Bundesbank  is  the 
central bank of Germany that is our main trading partner and highest ranking foreign capital 
provider. 
The  MoU  agreement  manifests  the  commitment  of  both  institutions  to foster  long  standing 
relations. In the spirit of the MoU agreement, a primary step in our cooperation is to establish 
high level policy dialogue with the Bundesbank on a regular basis, the first of which will be 
held in 2014. 
This is timely, considering that not only will Turkey assume the G20 presidency in 2015 and 
engage in an even closer interaction with the central banks of the G20 member states, but 
will also help meet the recently increased need for policy dialogues over the implementation 
and implications of new unconventional monetary policies. 
In general, the CBRT places great emphasis on bilateral relations with fellow central banks, 
especially  those  of  the  G20  member  countries.  The  year  2012  is  a  testament  to  our 
commitment,  as  the  CBRT  opened  six  new  representative  offices,  which  brought  the  total 
number  to  ten.  The  first-round  representative  offices  include  those  in  Frankfurt,  NY  City, 
London and Tokyo. The ones opened later on are in Moscow and Sydney – to strengthen 
relations  with  other  G20  presidency  countries;  Beijing  and  Kuala  Lumpur  –  to  strengthen 
relations with the Asian countries; Paris – to strengthen relations with the OECD, and finally 
Washington, DC – to strengthen relations with the IMF. 
In her efforts to enhance regional cooperation, the CBRT laid the foundations of the dialogue 
among  central  banks  that  paved  the  way  for  the  establishment  of  the  Central  Banks 
Governors’ Club of Central Asia, the Black Sea Region and the Balkan Countries.  
The  relations  and  cooperation  of  the  CBRT  in  the  international  scene  go  well  beyond  our 
bilateral  dialogue  with  your  esteemed  Bank  and  cover  also  the  financial  level  (swap 
agreements  signed  with  certain  countries),  as  well  as 
level  (the 
establishment  of  an  international  central  banking  research  facility  and  regional  training 
centre, the İstanbul School of Central Banking). 
the  educational 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Bundesbank  for  opening  a  Representative  Office  in  İstanbul,  for 
signing the MoU agreement and for all the support and assistance you have provided us in 
diverse fields and at various platforms. 
Closing my remarks, I would like to welcome my friend and colleague, Dr. Andreas Dombret, 
a  member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  and  thank  him  for  his 
tremendous efforts in bringing this project to life. 
Now let us celebrate our achievements. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
