Benoît Cœuré: The relevance of household-level data for monetary 
policy and financial stability analysis 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  ECB  Conference  on  Household  Finance  and  Consumption,  Frankfurt 
am Main, 17 October 2013. 
 to 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Welcome 
the  European  Central  Bank  Conference  on  Household  Finance  and 
Consumption.  This  conference  follows  an  important  milestone  in  a  project  that  the 
Eurosystem  took  up  more  than  six  years  ago,  the  Household  Finance  and  Consumption 
Survey (HFCS). The results from the first wave of the survey were published last April, and 
the  microdata  were  made  available  to  researchers  interested  in  their  use.  The  conference 
programme is a testimony to the potential that the HFCS has to enhance our understanding 
of the economic behaviour of individual households. 
Let  me  explain  why  the  ECB  decided  to  embark  on  this  complex  project.  Now  more  than 
ever, after the recent financial crisis, it is clear that aggregate data do not always reveal the 
whole  story.  The  same  aggregate  statistics  can  be  the  result  of  different  underlying 
situations. In particular, micro-economic sub-structures may react differently when facing a 
shock  or  an  economic  policy  intervention.  Progress  in  economic  theory  and  in  empirical 
methods  also  highlights  the  usefulness  of  a  more  granular  approach  to  macroeconomic 
outcomes. 
To be more precise, there are two areas of great importance for the ECB in which the use of 
household-level data can prove very useful: monetary policy and financial stability.  
Monetary policy interventions have distributional effects across the population depending on 
the composition of the assets and liabilities of households. One could argue that monetary 
policy is in essence distributional in the intertemporal dimension and the euro area crisis has 
uncovered distributional effects of monetary policy in the spatial dimension. Such effects are 
however unintended, or in other words, they are a means to an end, that is price stability. 
Central  banks  should  steer  away  from  distributional  politics.  But  there  can  be  a  thin  line 
between intended and unintended consequences, which makes it even more necessary to 
understand the cross-sectional effects of monetary policy interventions. 
Let me give you a few examples. The proportion of total assets invested in interest-bearing 
products  and  the  proportion  of  liabilities  subject  to  adjustable  rates  may  to  a  large  extent 
determine  the  response  of  a  household’s  future  income  and  net  wealth  to  a  change  in 
interest rates. We would like to know how homeowners vs. renters, poor vs. rich, employed 
vs. unemployed, would feel the impact of specific monetary policy interventions, and to what 
extent and how this affects the transmission to the aggregate economy. Moreover, since we 
operate in a monetary union, it is also important to measure and analyse the effects across 
the different Member States, which is only possible if homogeneous information is available 
for all of them. In addition, the survey can be used to estimate how inflation affects portfolios 
of various households, along the lines of Doepke and Schneider (2006).1  
We  are  also  interested  in  the  implications  of  household  financial  positions  for  financial 
stability.  For  this  purpose,  the  matching  of  assets  and  liabilities  has  to  be  done  at  the 
individual  level.  When  monitoring  the  evolution  of  financial  vulnerability  ratios  such  as  the 
                                                 
1   Doepke, Matthias and Martin Schneider (2006), “Inflation and the Redistribution of Nominal Wealth,” Journal 
of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 114(6), pages 1069–1097, December. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
debt service to income ratio, the debt to income ratio or the debt to asset ratio, aggregate 
figures  may  mask  underlying  problematic  situations,  such  as  pockets  of  households  with 
unsustainable financial burdens which could lead to defaults and bank losses in case of an 
adverse macroeconomic scenario. In this vein, the data can be used for conducting micro-
simulations  as  a  policy  tool.  This  is  already  done  in  other  central  banks  such  as  those  of 
Finland2 or Sweden3, which incorporate these simulations as part of their regular monitoring 
of  the  economy.  As  another  example,  the  reasons  for  the  accumulation  of  debt  can  be 
studied as in Mian and Sufi (2009)4, who document that the expansion of mortgage credit in 
the US before the crisis occurred disproportionately in areas with declining relative income 
growth and led to a sharp increase in mortgage defaults later on. 
Going  beyond  these  two  direct  policy  applications,  the  HFCS  offers  researchers  an 
invaluable  tool  to  deepen  our  understanding  of  a  wide  variety  of  topics  in  the  field  of 
household finance.  
The first results of these efforts will already be presented in this conference. I would like to 
draw your attention to some of them. Household indebtedness has grown steadily in most 
developed  countries  in  the  last  two  decades,  both  in  absolute  terms  and  relative  to 
household income5, but the research on the causes and consequences of this indebtedness 
is limited to a few countries, mainly the US and the UK. We are now in a position to study 
which  factors  determine  the  debt  holdings  of  euro  area  households,  how  is  this  debt 
distributed among them, what type of debt do households make use of and what is the effect 
of these holdings on spending. 
It  is  also  important  to  study  the  portfolio  of  assets  that  households  are  holding.  There  is 
ample  evidence  that  most  households  hold  rather  simple  portfolios, composed  basically  of 
real estate and deposits.6 However, the development of financial markets and the creation of 
new financial instruments have facilitated the diversification of households’ portfolios. Stock 
holdings  have  increased,  mainly  through  the  commercialisation  of  mutual  funds  and 
retirement  accounts,  and  this  has  allowed  more  households  to  benefit  from  the  equity 
premium. On the other hand, and in light of the problematic financial situation faced by many 
households during the recent financial crisis, more research will be needed to see whether 
financial  innovation  could  have  negative  effects  on  some  households  and  to  what  extent 
households  are  able  to  understand  the  risks  they  are  exposed  to,  e.g.  once  house  prices 
start to decline substantially. This goes hand in hand with the concept of financial literacy, 
another  area  of  research  which  has  attracted  substantial  attention  lately,  and  which  may 
become even more relevant an issue given the increasing trend towards private households 
managing their own pension wealth in the future.7 As an example, one of the papers that will 
be  presented  in  the  conference  studies  the  effects  of  exposure  to  financial  training  on  the 
debt behaviour of young US consumers.  
                                                 
2   Herrala R. and K. Kauko (2007), “Household loan loss risk in Finland – estimations and simulations with micro 
data”, Bank of Finland research discussion papers 5/2007. 
3   Persson M. (2009), “Household indebtedness in Sweden and implications for financial stability – the use of 
household level data”, BIS Papers No 46. 
4   Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2009), “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. 
Mortgage  Default  Crisis,”  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  MIT  Press,  vol.  124(4),  pages  1449–1496, 
November. 
5   Girouard, N., M. Kennedy and C. André (2006), “Has the Rise in Debt Made Households More Vulnerable?”, 
OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 535, OECD Publishing. 
6   Guiso, L., M. Haliassos and T. Jappelli (2002), Household Portfolios, Cambridge: MIT Press. 
7   Lusardi,  A.  (2010),  “The  importance  of  financial  literacy”,  Presentation  to  the  Conference  on  Household 
Finance and Consumption, Luxembourg City, 25–26 October 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Another advantage of survey data is the possibility of collecting information on households’ 
attitudes,  beliefs  and  expectations.  This  allows  researchers  to  establish  a  connection 
between  behavioural  traits  and  observed  financial  decisions.  For  example,  in  the  HFCS, 
households  are  asked  about  the  amount  of  risk  they  are  willing  to  take  on  when  making 
financial investments or whether over the next year they expect their income to go up more, 
less or about the same as prices. In the next couple of days we will listen to presentations on 
how  gamblers  manage  their  personal  finances  or  how  important  are  the  presence  of  loss 
aversion  and  narrow  framing,  two  of  the  most  prominent  aspects  of  prospect  theory,  for 
portfolio choice decisions. 
The study of household finance has much to say on the causes and consequences for the 
economy  of  the  current  financial  crisis.  The  2007  crisis,  which  originated  in  the  US,  is 
labelled  the  “sub-prime  crisis”,  and  it  is  rooted  in  the  excessive  accumulation  of  debt  by 
households  which  did  not  have  the  appropriate  buffers  to  repay  their  debt  in  case  of  a 
negative shock. As policy-makers we should be deeply interested in knowing where the risks 
are concentrated in the household sector, how much of a threat they pose to other agents in 
the economy, which kind of shocks households are more vulnerable to. And should we, as 
policy-makers, worry about a house price decline, a rise in unemployment or a stock market 
bust? How exposed is consumer demand to declines in prices of different assets? How will 
financial losses of individual households impact on public finances? Tomorrow morning we 
will  hear  about  some  of  these  topics  and  in  particular  about  the  effect  of  macroeconomic 
experiences  on  households’  risk-taking  behaviour  and  portfolio  choice,  the  effect  of  credit 
supply  shocks  on  asset  allocation  and  the  consumers’  demand  for  cash  in  an  after-crisis 
scenario of low interest rates. 
The  closing  session  of  the  conference  will  deal  with  the  topic  of  cross-country  wealth 
comparisons.  Explaining  household  wealth  differences  across  countries  is  not  as  easy  as 
casual  observers  might  think.  There  is  a  plethora  of  factors  involved  in  the  wealth 
accumulation process. Public comments on the first wave of the survey last April confirmed 
the usefulness of a careful analysis and explanation of cross-country wealth differences, as 
was  done  in  the  explanatory  documents.8  The  papers  which  will  be  presented  here  will 
analyse the role of income, home ownership and house price dynamics, household structure 
and intergenerational transfers in this process of wealth accumulation. 
I hope the exchange of ideas that will take place in the next two days will help us to further 
our  understanding  of  how  households  manage  their  finances  in  a  complex  and  uncertain 
world, to draw useful policy lessons and prepare for the next waves of the survey. And I hope 
this conference will spur research in this exciting field, from which we all, researchers and 
policy-makers alike, have so much to learn. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
 
                                                 
8   Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Network (2013), “The Eurosystem Household Finance and 
Consumption Survey. Results from the First Wave”, Statistical Paper Series, No 2, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
