K C Chakrabarty: Ideas and actions for re-igniting India’s growth and 
shaping the recovery 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the PGPX CONNEXION Conclave 2013, organised by the Indian Institute of Management, 
Ahmedabad, 25 October 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Mridul Saggar and Shri N. K. Gayon is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
His Excellency, Dr. Arye Kumar Jagessur, High Commissioner of Mauritius in India; 
Dr.  Ajay  Pandey,  Dean,  IIM  Ahmedabad;  PGPX  Chair  Professor  Anurag  Agarwal,  other 
faculty members and students of IIM Ahmedabad. Let me begin by thanking you for inviting 
me  to  CONNEXION  2013.  I  understand  that  this  is  an  annual  event  organized  by  the 
students of the One-year Post-Graduate Programme in Management for Executives (PGPX) 
which brings together industry and academia for brainstorming on current issues facing the 
nation. It is, indeed, a pleasure to be here this morning as I have an opportunity to share my 
thoughts with both the business leaders of today and tomorrow, and also with those who are 
shaping and grooming the business leaders of tomorrow. I have no doubt that the gathering I 
am  addressing  today  will  be  playing  a  key  role  in  determining  the  future  of  our  economy 
through its ideas and actions. At all times, ideas shape growth in the economy, but perhaps 
the theme of this summit, viz. “India In Cubate: Idea to Action”, is much more relevant today 
than ever before. You all know that our economy is at a critical juncture with growth having 
slowed down for the past two years to a seventeen-quarter low, at close to 4 per cent. At this 
juncture, the onus is upon each one of us to determine the future course of our economy, 
whether  to  shape  a  growth  recovery  or  slide  further  down,  and  imperil  the  long-term 
sustainability  of  India’s  growth  story.  However,  we  need  a  combination  of  both  ideas  that 
shape the recovery and actions that translate those ideas into actual recovery and growth. 
This will be the theme of my talk today. 
2. 
I  will  cover  four  very  simple  things.  First,  how  or  why  ideas  are  important  for 
economic  growth.  Second,  how  ideas  are  a  necessary  condition  for  growth  but  it  is  the 
execution of those ideas, which provides the sufficient condition to actually achieve growth. 
Third,  what  are  the  possible  ideas  and  policies  that  can  put  India’s  growth  back  on  a 
sustainable  path.  Fourth,  what  the  business  community  and  financial  markets  can  do  to 
recoup India’s failing growth levels. Of course, these thoughts are not final words, but a mere 
conduit to stimulate more ideas and thinking. I am sure that IIM Ahmedabad, known globally 
as  an  institution  par  excellence  in  business  education,  would  be  able  to  add  many  more 
ideas to the debate I intend to initiate today. 
3. 
How do ideas matter for growth? We all know that ideas lead to inventions like the 
steam  engine,  which  in  turn  sparked  the  Industrial  Revolution.  However,  ideas  need  not 
necessarily  result  in  inventions  or  discoveries.  Simple  managerial  innovations  can  deliver 
productivity enhancements, which could form the basis for growth. Let me elucidate. 
Ideas matter for growth 
4. 
The fact that ideas have driven the largest economic expansions is ingrained in our 
economic history. Ideas originating from the need for meeting basic human wants such as 
food, clothes and shelter propelled mankind’s first forays into organized economic behaviour 
at  the  time  of  the  great  river-valley  civilisations  that  prospered  around  the  Nile,  the  Tigris- 
Euphrates, the Huang-Ho and the Indus Valley, starting around 3300 B.C. 
5. 
The Industrial Revolution of the 18th century was another example of clustering of 
ideas that set the stage for rapid economic advancement. Inventions and innovations such 
as the steam engine, iron and textile manufacturing that led to the origin of modern – day 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
factories and the corporate system transformed not just the British economy but expanded 
over time to cover the rest of the world as well. These ideas may have resulted in inventions 
that  drove  technological  advancements  but  these  were  much  more  than  mere  inventions. 
These were actually a series of ideas that fed into one another in the form of an interface 
amongst  ideas.  For  instance,  the  steam  engine  would  not  have  been  possible  without 
advancements in smelting and refining techniques of new ores and fuels that led to economic 
use of coal. This in turn led to advances in the chemical industry, which threw up a range of 
consumer  goods  such  as  soap,  glasses,  etc.  Also,  these  technological  changes  spurred 
political, social and cultural changes leading to changes in the way of thinking. The European 
society  that  once  could not  tolerate  Copernicus and  Galileo,  began to  cultivate  a  scientific 
temper  and  promoted  thoughts  like  free  trade  with  significant  implications  for  growth  and 
welfare. 
6. 
Given the strength of ideas in fostering growth, it is a pity that we pay insufficient 
attention to it. Let us not forget Marie Curie’s advice, “be less curious about people and more 
curious  about  ideas”.  In  a  similar  vein,  Eleanor  Roosevelt,  American  First  Lady,  once 
quipped,  ‘great  minds  discuss  ideas;  average  minds  discuss  events;  small  minds  discuss 
people’ 
Converting ideas into action to deliver growth 
7. 
Yet, ideas by themselves are not enough. James Russel Lowell, the 19th century 
American  Romantic  poet  said,  “all  the  beautiful  sentiments  in  the  world  weigh  less  than  a 
single  lovely  action”.  Conversion  of  ideas  into  action  is  important  as  Mahatma  Gandhi 
pointed  out,  that  “action  expresses  our  priorities”.  However,  let  me  add  that  it  is  hard  to 
convert thoughts into reality. The French novelist, Honour de Balzac once said “it is easy to 
sit up and take notice, what is difficult is getting up and taking action”. There is not so often a 
knowledge gap as there is a courage gap, for it needs courage to execute in labour, ideas 
that are born at leisure in our minds. 
8. 
Productive  ideas  are  often  born  out  of  social  necessity,  and  these  have  a  way  of 
spawning their own transition into action. Singer got the idea of inventing the sewing machine 
when he saw his wife toil so hard with her sewing and his mind craved to do something about 
it, leading to the execution of his idea of a vibrating shuttle sewing machine. This brought a 
sea-change to the hitherto transverse shuttle designs, and revolutionised the production of 
textiles into a high-speed, mass-production industry that never looked back. 
Action  can  take  several  forms  and  yield  different  results  from  the  same  idea 
9. 
depending on how action occurs. Henry Fayol provided us with principles of administration 
that laid the foundations of the theory and practice of organizational management. Some of 
these  principles,  which  were  enunciated  in  his  book,  General  and  Industrial  Management 
(published in French in 1916 and later in English in 1949), have helped several generations 
of  business  managers 
functions  by  minimising 
misunderstandings,  better  coordinating  actions,  thereby  resulting  in  increased  efficiency  in 
organizations. 
10. 
Qwerty  keys  was  a  great  idea  devised  way  back  in  the  1870s,  making  it  easy  to 
typewrite using only the keys on the top, thereby preventing the ribbons from clashing with 
one another. This single idea has withstood the test of time and is the basis of the keyboard 
on our laptops and many mobiles even today. This experience tells us that ideas need to be 
translated into action, which can, then, have long-term effects on growth, as acceptability of 
the ideas and their user-familiarity provide lasting gains. Victor Hugo famously said that “an 
invasion of armies can be resisted, but not an idea whose time has come”. 
However, the ideas have to be put into action for growth to take place and it is in this 
11. 
context that the premier academic institutions like IIMs, have a crucial role. Over the years, 
your institution has done a remarkable job in bridging the knowledge gap. Believe me, there 
is absolutely no dearth of good ideas in the system. What is lacking, however, is the courage 
in  effectively  carrying  out 
their 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to  execute  and  bring  these  ideas  to  fruition.  Going  forward,  IIMs  have  to  work  towards 
narrowing this courage gap that exists in the society. 
Ideas and policies to put India’s growth back on sustainable path 
12. 
Now what relevance do these micro-stories on ideas and actions have for shaping a 
sustainable recovery in India? The link may not seem obvious, but there is plenty that can be 
gleaned from the above analogies. I will discuss four simple ideas and actions which need to 
be taken to get India on the path of growth. This, of course, is not, an exhaustive list of ideas, 
but only an illustration of how easily we can and we shall get our growth back. Let me also 
emphasise  here  that  our  problems  are  much  simpler  than  elsewhere  in  the  globe  and  the 
added advantage is that we are well aware of our problems. 
13. 
Are  the  ideas  that  will  restore  India’s  growth  momentum  more  related  to  micro  or 
macroeconomics? My belief is that for putting India back on to the growth track, we need to 
focus  much  more  closely  on  the  micro  level  than  on  the  macro.  However,  the  ideas  for 
bringing about this change have to emanate from thought leaders at all levels. For example, 
we cannot expect the R-SETIs to be the harbinger of ideas for entrepreneurial grooming and 
adaptation  to  changing  technologies.  These  ideas  have  to  primarily  come  from  the 
storehouses  of  wisdom  like  IIMs  and  the  IITs,  which  can  then,  in  turn,  be  executed  at  the 
R-SETIs. The bottom line therefore is that we need more IIM and IIT graduates to develop 
entrepreneurship ideas for the R-SETIs. 
14. 
The  second  idea  is  to  promote  new  thinking  through  R  &  D  and  managerial 
innovations. You  will be surprised to know that, based on the World Bank database; India 
spends  only  0.75  per  cent  of  its  GDP  on  R  &  D.  This  compares  poorly  with  the  OECD 
countries’ 2.5 per cent, China’s 1.7 per cent, Russia’s 1.3 per cent and Brazil’s 1.2 per cent 
of their GDPs. We have just not been paying enough attention to our scientific advancement 
of  late.  After  achieving  technological  and  organizational  breakthroughs  that  delivered  the 
Green Revolution, the White Revolution and then pushing textile, machine tool and software 
exports,  we  seem  to  have  lost  momentum.  Take  the  case  of  agriculture.  Are  we  doing 
enough to push agriculture in our semi-arid areas and harness greater yields? There is much 
more potential for application of biotechnology and genetic engineering to raise more crops 
in  a  wholesome  manner.  These  should  become  our  focus  areas.  We  should  bring 
appropriate  productivity  inputs,  maybe  from  Punjab  and  Andhra  Pradesh,  to  the  backward 
regions of Bihar and Bengal etc. We should, actually, be spending more on R & D than the 
advanced economies. 
15. 
The third idea relates to how to get small and medium enterprises (SMEs) to realise 
their  true  potential  as  also  to  ensure  that  the  sector  receives  its  fair  share  of  institutional 
finance.  SME  entrepreneurs,  though  proficient  in  the  core  production  process,  require 
support  in  other  functions  to  nurture  their  businesses.  There  is  a  need  for  starting  SME 
Service  Centres,  may  be  by  some  of  the  IIM  graduates,  on  a  cluster  basis,  to  conduct 
research and provide ideas on management of productivity, marketing and distribution. Their 
research should also be seized of the need for adequate institutional financing of small firms 
which face more constraints compared with large firms. 
16. 
The fourth idea, of course, stems from my long-cherished goal of seeing meaningful 
financial inclusion in the country. Improving access to finance for individual households, who 
are financially excluded, is an important public policy goal without which sustainable growth 
and  development  is  not  possible.  We  should  ensure  availability  of  finance  to  needy 
entrepreneurs by making credit dispensation extendable to them. Of course, this is without 
losing sight of the fact that aspiring entrepreneurs should also be credit-worthy. On its part, 
the Reserve Bank has taken significant steps to promote financial inclusion. The Kisan Credit 
Card  (KCC)  Scheme  has  immensely  improved  farmers’  access  to  bank credit  while  banks 
have disbursed credit for non-farm entrepreneurial activity under the GCC Scheme. During 
2012–13,  the  public  and  private  sector  banks  issued  3.5 million  additional  KCCs  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
0.8 million  GCCs.  But,  universal  financial  inclusion  still  remains  elusive.  What  can  we  do 
about it? Our banks are still struggling to evolve a cost-effective delivery model to extend the 
banking services to the far corners of the country. It is inexplicable why a country which is the 
backyard for providing the technology solutions to the world cannot develop a cost-effective 
solution  for  our  banks.  We  need  to  harness  technology  more  systematically  to  ensure 
scalability of such services at reduced costs. We need to direct our financial inclusion efforts 
towards  what  the  poor  need  and  are  likely  to  demand,  rather  than  trying  to  impose  the 
supply-led  solutions  upon  them.  In  this  context, I  would  like  the  IIM  students  present  here 
today to serve as the leading lights and ensure that the mission of financial inclusion does 
not  remain  only  a  fashion  but  becomes  a  national  passion.  It  is  expected  that  ensuring 
access to institutional finance to all individuals will itself increase the GDP by 1.5 per cent. 
What is needed is efficient governance. With good governance from authorities such as the 
government,  there  should  also  be  a  revival  of  the  animal  spirits  among  the  educated 
graduates  from  IIMs  and  IITs.  We  have  descended  into  a  languishing  stupor,  ennui,  a 
melancholy feeling that nothing is happening or is likely to happen. We have to break this 
melancholy and revive optimistic spirits and optimistic thinking. 
17. 
We are often reminded of our burgeoning fiscal deficit. Let me emphasize that there 
are a few very simple steps that need to be taken to rein in a sizeable chunk of the deficit. 
We must look to reduce wastage in the system and curtail the subsidies- in urban transport 
system, power distribution, LPG and diesel. If we can improve our governance and minimise 
such wastages in the system, the fiscal deficit will automatically come down. Efficient use of 
subsidies will reduce expenditure, which will, in turn, reduce imports of fuel and help bring 
down the Current Account Deficit. 
18. 
So it behoves on us, the public at large, and the government in particular, to adopt 
fuel conservation as a national priority. We should also stop the matter-of-right cornering of 
subsidies by all, which undermines their efficient and economic use. We must appreciate that 
these are difficult times for our economy and, therefore, we should be willing to make small 
sacrifices.  We  should  be  willing  to  live  with  smaller  wage  hikes.  This  is  applicable  to  all 
sections of the society, especially, the elitist section. 
Infrastructure 
19. 
A very disquieting aspect of infrastructure usage in the country is that we demand 
the  best  infrastructure  but  want  to  access  them  for  free.  In  India,  VIPs  get  access  to 
subsidies  and  infrastructural  services  first,  and  there  is  little  concern  for  whether  or  not  it 
reaches  the  poor  and  needy. We  should  stop  this  culture  from  becoming  a  moral  hazard. 
Again  here,  the  need  for  good  governance  comes  to  the  fore.  While  on  the  subject  of 
infrastructure, I would like to add that one cannot fund the growth of the infrastructure sector 
based on debt alone. As the situation stands, many of the stalled infrastructure projects have 
been financed solely by debt and promoters’ equity contribution is absolutely minimal. Our 
observation is that often debt is raised in the holding companies and is down-streamed as 
equity  in  subsidiary  ventures  or  SPVs.  This  is  a  risky  practice.  Corporate  groups  have 
become hugely leveraged and their debt servicing abilities have been severely constrained. 
The promoters of stalled infrastructure projects have little incentive to bring the projects on 
stream.  As  future  business  managers  of  the  country,  I  would  like  to  impress  upon  you  to 
realise the importance of equity in running successful businesses, as it creates an incentive 
for managements to eschew excessive risks. We need ideas to be able to raise fresh equity. 
Concluding message 
20. 
I would like to conclude by giving you three messages, which I always do, whenever 
I get an opportunity to interact with students. My first message is that you must strive to be 
“third generation literate”. All of you have acquired the first and second generation literacy i.e. 
gained  subject  knowledge  by  reading  books  and  the  knowledge  about  computers  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
information technology. What I mean by third generation literacy is to become “information 
literate”. I read somewhere that every day, we create some 2.5 quintillion bytes of data and 
more than 90 per cent of the data has been created in the last two years. I do not know how 
many zeroes a quintillion has, but, that definitely means a whole lot of information. Every day 
in your professional and personal lives you will come across volumes of information and that 
is why I want you to be information literate. Try to be aware of the things happening around 
you.  You  should  be  hungry  to  learn more  and  constantly  update  yourself  by  keeping  alive 
your  quest  for  knowledge.  Information  literacy  envisages  not  just  seeking  information,  but 
developing the ability to assimilate the same and to apply it in decision making. My second 
message  to  all  of  you  is  to  never  be  complacent  in  life.  Think  positive  and  avoid 
complacency.  It  is  all  the  more  important for  the  people  who  ply  their  trade  in  the  area  of 
finance as moments of complacency can bring disastrous results. My third and final message 
is, be prepared for bad times. In your career you are bound to encounter tough situations. 
During  such  situations,  lie  low  and  pray  to  God.  Do  not  get  desperate,  as  good  times  will 
surely come back. You will always be successful in your life and professional career, if you 
follow  the  above  three  commandments.  The  knowledge  that  you  have  acquired  in  India’s 
most premier academic institution, will open the doors of success for you in whichever field 
you choose. I leave you with a quote from Francis Bacon which aptly sums up the power of 
young  men  and  women  like  you.  “Young  men  are  fitter  to  invent  than  to  judge;  fitter  for 
execution than for counsel; and fitter for new projects than for settled business”. I hope many 
of  you  will  nurture  your  ideas  into  entrepreneurial  ventures  and  truly  contribute  to  the 
economy and the nation. 
I  once  again  thank  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  this  seminar  which  provided  me  an 
opportunity to engage with the brightest minds in the country. I wish you a very fruitful and 
engrossing two days of interaction ahead. I hope you would find time to ponder over the point 
I made about narrowing the courage gap during your deliberations which is so very crucial to 
ensure that not only ideas are generated, but also find their way into execution. If good ideas 
could be incubated and acted upon, India would soon return to the higher growth trajectory 
and gain its rightful place in the world order. 
Thank You! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
