Ignazio Visco: 2013 World Savings Day 
Address by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 89th World Savings Day, 
organised by the Association of Italian Savings Banks (ACRI), Rome, 30 October 2013. 
 After a prolonged decline, in Italy there has been a slight recovery in saving in the last two 
years, from under 17 per cent of national income in 2010 to almost 18 per cent in 2012. The 
increase reflects a reduction in the negative contribution of the public sector. Private sector 
saving has continued to fall, but more slowly. 
With  the  continuation  of  the  recession  Italian  households,  which  initially  had  buffered  its 
impact  on  their  spending  behaviour  by  reducing  their  saving,  revised  their  spending  plans 
downwards, adjusting them to lower permanent income. A factor was the acute uncertainty 
over the valuation of wealth, in turn linked to the prolonged strains in the financial and real-
estate  markets.  In  2012  consumption  fell  sharply,  in  line  with  disposable  income,  and  it 
remains  weak,  notwithstanding  the  first  signs  of  improvement  in  households’  purchasing 
power. 
In the first half of 2013 GDP continued to decline, albeit at a more  moderate pace. In the 
context of a euro-area recovery that is both slow and uneven, the latest indicators for Italy 
are consistent with GDP stabilizing in the third quarter and returning to modest growth in the 
fourth.  Uncertainty  remains  high.  In  the  summer  the  contraction  in  industrial  production 
eased. About half of the firms surveyed by the Bank of Italy reported that the worst of the 
crisis had passed; smaller firms and those exporting less are still in greater difficulty.  
The  trend  in  capital  formation  also  seems  to  be  turning  round.  In  the  second  quarter 
purchases of machinery and equipment recorded their first increase in more than two years. 
The  prolonged  decline  in  construction  is  slowing.  An  acceleration  of  investment  in  the 
remaining part of this year and next year is indispensable for renewed economic growth.   
Savings must flow to businesses through a revival of bank lending but also through greater 
direct access to the capital markets to reduce firms’ dependence on the banks. This means 
overcoming a structural lag of our financial system, manifested in the small number of listed 
companies and the limited level of stock market capitalization in relation to the size of the 
real economy. 
Business loans have decreased by almost 8 per cent (more than €70 billion) since the end of 
2011  when  the  first,  sharp  contraction  occurred.  As  a  proportion  of  GDP  they  have  fallen 
from more than 59 per cent in November 2011 to about 55 per cent in September 2013. The 
unfavourable macroeconomic conditions continue to restrain credit demand and supply; loan 
supply  is  affected  by  the  increase  in  firms’  credit  risk  and  the  related  adverse  selection 
effects. 
Italian firms’ financial leverage is high by international standards: in 2012 the ratio of financial 
debt to the sum of that debt and shareholders’ equity at market prices was 49 per cent in 
Italy against 34 per cent in France and the United States, 39 per cent in Germany and 42 per 
cent  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Analyses  of  firms’  financial 
statements  indicate  that  these  differences  are  due  only  in  part  to  dissimilarities  in sectoral 
and size composition. Italian households invest only a small amount in listed shares (2 per 
cent of their total financial assets, against 4 per cent in Germany and on average in the euro 
area). Only a small proportion of Italian investment funds invest widely in shares.  
The current financial situation should spur banks and firms to overcome this state of affairs. 
Difficult  credit  conditions  necessitate  recourse  to  alternative  channels  of  funding  for  sound 
businesses with good growth prospects. By providing the necessary services to accompany 
these businesses on the capital markets, the banks can sustain their own earnings and at the 
same time reduce their risks, although conflicts of interest must be avoided. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Inflows of foreign capital could help to improve firms’ funding conditions. After the substantial 
outflow  between  the  summer  of  2011  and  the  first  four  months  of  2012,  foreign  portfolio 
investment  is  picking  up;  the  easing  of  financial  tensions,  assisted  by  the  unconventional 
monetary  policy  measures  taken  by  the  Eurosystem,  has  contributed  to  this.  The 
maintenance of balanced public finances and the continuation of reform actions to support 
growth  –  accompanied  by  progress  towards  the  completion  of  the  European  Union  –  can 
improve confidence and reduce the perception of investment risks in our country, allowing us 
to consolidate the recovery of capital flows from abroad. 
The Italian banking system 
Italian  banks  have  weathered  the  global  financial  crisis,  a  double-dip  recession,  and  the 
sovereign  debt  tensions.  The  capital  strengthening  carried  out  in  the  course  of  the  last, 
difficult years has been substantial; in Italy, unlike other countries, it was achieved virtually 
without recourse to public funds. For the system as a whole, between the end of 2007 and 
June 2013 core tier 1 capital increased by €39 billion, to almost €180 billion. The core tier 1 
ratio accordingly rose from 7.1 to 10.9 per cent; for the top five banking groups it reached 
11.2 per cent, in line with the average for the main European banks.   
Banks’ liquidity position benefited from the Eurosystem’s three-year refinancing operations, 
which  enabled  them  to  offset  the  fall  in  international  funding  owing  to  the  sovereign  debt 
crisis and to build up bond redemption reserves. The increase in banks’ exposure to Italian 
government securities – from €220 billion at the end of 2011 to €415 billion in June 2013 – 
reflected  the  economic  advantage  and  necessity  of  temporarily  investing  the  liquidity 
obtained  from  the  Eurosystem  in  a  setting  of  increased  riskiness  of  lending.  In  the  third 
quarter this exposure decreased by almost €10 billion. With the economic recovery and the 
attendant  improvement  in  firms’  prospects,  it  is  likely  that  banks  will  review  their  fund 
allocation policies.  
Aside  from  government  securities,  assets  eligible  as  collateral  in  refinancing  operations 
include  own-use  government-guaranteed  bank  bonds  that  will  mature  over  the  next  few 
years and, in any case, as of 1 March 2015 can no longer be pledged directly by the issuer. 
Sufficient collateral must be maintained to replace the assets that are no longer eligible, in 
order to make up for any falls in value. 
The Bank of Italy is currently developing new ways of facilitating the use of certain types of 
loan that are especially widespread in our country, such as current account credit lines; some 
contractual  changes  will  be  required  to  ensure  consistency  with  the  ECB  standards.  The 
procedures for accepting loan portfolios are also being defined. The adoption of the Bank of 
Italy’s internal assessment model, authorized last July by the ECB, will enable small banks in 
particular to avoid penalizations in terms of valuation haircuts.   
Efforts to regain full access to the international markets must continue. Massive recourse to 
central bank liquidity cannot be a permanent mode of funding for banks.  
The  view  that  Italy’s  banking  system  stands  in  dire  need  of  recapitalization  is  unfounded. 
Only  recently  the  International  Monetary  Fund  published  the  results  of  its  latest  Financial 
Sector Assessment for Italy. I have already had occasion to point out that the IMF’s stress 
tests,  and  similar  exercises  conducted  by  the  Bank  of  Italy,  show  that  the  system  can 
withstand  not  only  the  macroeconomic  weakness  posited  in  the  baseline  scenario  for  
2013–15 but also a less favourable scenario in which GDP growth is cumulatively more than 
4  percentage  points  lower  in  the  same  three  years.  In  this  case,  the  additional  capital 
required  by  some  intermediaries  in  order  to  meet  the  minimum  regulatory  requirements 
would be limited; depending on the definitions used, it would amount to between €6 billion 
and €14 billion. These are – it is worth emphasizing – hypothetical capital needs that would 
arise only in an improbable scenario. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The Financial Sector Assessment Program’s findings dovetail with the analyses that the IMF 
itself has conducted at aggregate level in its recent Global Financial Stability Report, which 
estimates  the  losses  on  loans  to  firms  that  the  Italian  banking  system  could  face  in  an 
adverse economic scenario at €125 billion for the two years 2014–15. Considering the write-
downs already taken, this amount is reduced to €53 billion, less than the gross profits banks 
are  expected  to  make  in  the  same  two  years.  The  losses,  therefore,  should  not  affect  the 
system’s total capital. 
Italian banks have been protected first and foremost by business models that remain rooted 
in traditional retail banking business. In part thanks to the attentive supervision of the Bank of 
Italy,  the  system  avoided  the  kind  of  massive  investments  in  “toxic”  securities  seen 
elsewhere, often with recourse to off-balance-sheet vehicles.   
The depth of the crisis faced by our country nonetheless weighs on the outlook for banks. 
Compared with the third quarter of 2007 gross domestic product has fallen by almost 9 per 
cent and industrial production by roughly one fourth. It should surprise no one that banks are 
encountering  difficulties  and  struggling  to  support  the  economy  fully.  They  suffered  as  a 
result  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  the  ensuing  deterioration  of  funding  conditions  in 
international  markets.  The  protracted  recession  continues  to  have  repercussions  on  the 
quality  of  loans,  above  all  to  firms.  In  some  instances  difficulties  have  arisen  from 
transactions  that  are  incompatible  with  sound  and  prudent  management,  at  times  even 
fraudulent. The supervisory action of the Bank of Italy has been intense; when necessary, 
special administrative measures have been imposed.  
In the second quarter of this year the annualized ratio of new bad debts to total bank loans 
reached 2.9 per cent. Supervision – both off- and on-site – is closely monitoring the evolution 
of  credit  and  its  quality.  The  objective  is  to  make  sure  that  the  coverage  ratios  for  non-
performing  loans  remain  adequate  and  are  raised  when  necessary.  Far  from  harming  the 
banks,  our  action  will  strengthen  them,  reassuring  markets  about  the  soundness  of  their 
balance sheets. Bad debts amount to about €75 billion net of write-downs and are more than 
covered  for  the  system  as  a  whole  by  collateral  and  personal  guarantees.  Other  net  non-
performing loans (substandard, restructured and overdue loans), whose expected loss rates 
are significantly lower than those of bad debts, amounted to about €110 billion. 
Partly  as  a  result  of  the  checks  carried  out  by  us  in  late  2012  and  early  this  year,  the 
coverage ratio for the aggregate of non-performing loans has stabilized. In June of last year it 
was 39 per cent for the whole of the system and 41 per cent for the top five groups. The 
average for the largest European banks is slightly higher (43 per cent), but the criteria for the 
classification of impaired loans are less stringent than those adopted in Italy. 
The  measures  contained  in  the  draft  Stability  Law  to  reduce  the  time  horizon  over  which 
write-downs and loan losses are deductible remove some of the tax disadvantage that has 
long penalized Italian banks compared with foreign competitors and that becomes even more 
significant from the perspective of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. The new legislation, in 
line  with  the  recommendations  issued  on  several  occasions  by  the  International  Monetary 
Fund, will encourage banks to adopt the most conservative practices when writing down bad 
loans, thus improving the transparency of their balance sheets. 
The gross profits of the banks amounted to €32 billion per year on average in 2011–12 and 
to  €17  billion  in  the  first  half  of  this  year.  Loan  losses  continue  to  absorb  most  of  this, 
however. If this situation were to persist for a long time, the low level of net profitability would 
inevitably weigh on their financial situation. 
The  need  to  counter  the  effects  of  the  crisis  makes  it  urgent  to  address  the  structural 
problems of the banking system, including those relating to governance. These are issues on 
which  I  have  already  spoken  in  the  past,  but  must  return  to  because  they  remain  largely 
unresolved.  The  failure  to  solve  them  has  a  negative  impact  on  banks’  efficiency  and 
profitability and ultimately on the correct allocation of savings in the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The ratio of operating costs to gross income, which amounted to 62 per cent in the first six 
months  of  this  year,  is  about  5  percentage  points  higher  than  the  average  for  the  leading 
European banks. Taking into account the growth rate of lending, reduced unit margins and 
weak demand for asset management products, in the current situation it is difficult to foresee 
a  significant  increase  in  banks’  revenues.  In  the  short  term  the  recovery  of  profitability 
requires decisive action on costs, including labour costs, which represent more than half of 
the total. Some progress has been made on this front, but we need all parties to participate, 
and take responsibility, in an action not unlike the one successfully launched in the second 
half of the 1990s to reduce the gap with the leading foreign banking systems. A major part of 
this effort must consist in a rigorous review of executive compensation. 
Cost containment requires a radical rethinking of the distribution channels to make full use of 
the  opportunities  offered  by  technological  innovation.  Standardized  and  low-value-added 
services  can  be  distributed  at  lower  cost  through  remote  channels,  and  the  traditional 
distribution  network  should  be  reviewed  to  concentrate  on  the  supply  of  more  complex 
products.  It  is  not  an  easy  task,  and  it  requires  a  profound  transformation  of  banks’ 
organization and operating structure and considerable investment in staff training. Targeted 
mergers  and  acquisitions,  based  on  robust  economic  premises,  may  facilitate  the 
restructuring and the recovery of efficiency. 
The  process  of  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area  is  encouraging  a  wider  use  of 
technology. The transition to the new payment standards under the Single Euro Payments 
Area, which will be completed by 1 February next year, is an important element. It affects 
firms,  consumers,  banks  and  other  payment  service  providers.  The  availability  of  efficient 
services  will  benefit  the  economy  as  a  whole;  according  to  studies  sponsored  by  the 
European Commission, the efficiency gains resulting from the transition to the new standards 
will  be  in  the  order  of  0.2  per  cent  of  European  GDP.  The  Bank  of  Italy  is  committed  to 
ensuring  that  all  those  involved  in  the  initiative  put  in  place  the  necessary  organizational, 
technical and procedural arrangements within the time limits. 
Corporate reorganization, including within groups, and more streamlined boards are needed 
in order to improve the chain of decision-making, by making directors more accountable and 
eliminating unnecessary costs. Mechanisms must be adopted to prevent a misinterpretation 
of banks’ relationship with their local area from steering lending and investment activity in the 
wrong  direction,  putting  the  soundness  of  banks’  balance  sheets  at  risk  and  hindering  the 
efficient allocation of resources. 
In addition to disbursing credit, Italian banks often participate directly in firms’ capital. Such 
equity links must not be a source of distortions in lending decisions or give rise to attempts to 
prevent  debtors’  difficulties  from  emerging.  These  risks,  like  all  others  deriving  from 
relationships with counterparties closely linked to banks, must be appropriately monitored by 
banks’ governing bodies. The supervisory authority cannot intervene preventively with regard 
to individual transactions, even if they are with related parties. It will, however, continue to 
exercise its control activity, carefully assessing the ways in which transactions are carried out 
and  their  impact  on  banks’  risk  profiles  and  their  sound  and  prudent  management;  it  will 
require any shortcomings to be corrected. 
The business of the large cooperative banks is no longer restricted to a limited local area. 
Their  original  corporate  structures  must  not  be  an  obstacle  to  the  strengthening  of  their 
capital bases. The stability of banks’ ownership structure is of value, but it must be due to 
good results and to high-quality governance arrangements, not to practices or rules aimed at 
hindering the entry of new shareholders. Less fragmented share ownership can strengthen 
the assessment of the performance of directors; the principle of one person, one vote can 
remain a salient feature of small cooperative and mutual banks. For these reasons, as I have 
argued on earlier occasions, it is desirable for large cooperative banks to adopt legal forms 
open to assessment by the market. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Banking foundations should have diversified their portfolios to reduce their dependence on 
the results of their reference bank. Some have not done so, they will have to adapt, taking 
market  conditions  into  account.  All  of  them  must  be  careful  not  to  interfere  in  banks’ 
corporate  structures  and  their  business  decisions,  not  to  hinder  the  necessary  renewal  of 
governing bodies, and not to influence directors’ choices on the basis of criteria other than 
experience and competence. Transfers from the top of foundations to the top of banks must 
be avoided. Prompt and significant progress is needed on these fronts. 
Banking Union 
Banking  Union  is  a  milestone  in  the  completion  of  the  European  Union.  The  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism,  comprising  the  ECB  and  the  national  authorities,  constitutes  the 
first  element.  It  will  be  accompanied  by  a  single  mechanism  for  the  resolution  of  banking 
crises and a harmonized system of deposit insurance, both of which are essential to align 
supervisory responsibility with crisis management and resolution, in order to sever the link 
between sovereign borrowers and banks. Work on these fronts needs to be accelerated. 
The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is  expected  to  be  operational  in  November  2014,  one 
year after the entry into force of the relevant regulation. It is a vast innovation that will require 
a complex organizational effort at least equal to that needed to introduce the single currency. 
The  delicate  start-up  phase  is  taking  huge  investments  in  human  resources  and  technical 
infrastructure.  The  preparatory  work  is  proceeding  with  the  maximum  possible  speed;  the 
workloads of national supervisors will grow with the need to harmonize systems which are 
very  different.  In  November,  the  ECB  will  launch  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the 
situation of the banks that will be supervised centrally (of which 15 are Italian); these banks’ 
assets  represent  85  per  cent  of  the  euro-area  banking  system  total.  The  exercise  is  a 
prerequisite for the coming into operation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism and will last 
twelve months; it will be carried out in collaboration with the national authorities and with the 
support of independent third parties. 
The  evaluation  includes  three  closely  interlinked  elements:  a  preliminary  analysis  of  the 
banks’ risk profiles, an examination of the quality of their assets and a stress test. It will be 
carried out using as a benchmark a ratio of 8 per cent between the banks’ highest quality 
capital  (defined  on  the  basis  of  the  rules  that  will  be  introduced  next  year)  and  their  risk-
weighted  assets.  This  is  a  threshold  that  ensures  the  availability  of  sufficient  resources  to 
cope with possible difficulties. 
The ECB and the EBA will conduct the stress test in close collaboration. The methods and 
scenarios to be used for this exercise will be agreed and announced at a later time. Prior to 
conducting the stress test, in fact, it is necessary that the results of the asset quality review 
are suitably incorporated into the banks’ financial statements. 
The assessment is a critical juncture in the management of the crisis in the euro area and in 
European  integration.  It  represents  a  fundamental  exercise  of  transparency,  designed  to 
strengthen confidence in the banks’ soundness and reliability and, where necessary, define 
the appropriate corrective measures. It will be conducted rigorously, guaranteeing absolutely 
equal  treatment  of  all  banks,  which  are  now  subject  to  highly  heterogeneous  supervisory 
systems and accounting practices. The definition of non-performing exposures used will be 
that recently adopted by the EBA, which is in line with the one used in Italy. Where data are 
lacking, estimates will be employed. 
The analysis will cover all types of risk and be based on current prudential rules. The risks of 
highly opaque instruments will be assessed with special care. Account will be taken of the 
diversity  of  methods  by  which  banks  using  internal  rating  models  calculate  risk-weighted 
assets. 
The methodology of the exercise will be clearly explained, and the market will be informed of 
the  results  and  supplied  with  the  information  needed  to  evaluate  them  properly.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
involvement  of  outside  experts,  avoiding  potential  conflicts  of  interest,  will  enhance  the 
credibility of the exercise. 
Together with the results of the assessment, the corrective measures required will also be 
specified.  Any  capital  shortfalls  will  have  to  be  made  good  primarily  by  drawing  on  banks’ 
own  resources,  not  distributing  dividends,  selling  non-strategic  assets,  and  curbing  costs. 
Where  necessary,  fresh  capital  will  have  to  be  raised  on  the  market.  The  success  of  the 
exercise depends crucially on having adequate national financial backstops, to be utilized in 
conformity with European rules and the legal framework defined by national constitutions for 
the ultimate purpose of ensuring financial stability. 
Once the system is fully phased in, the rules for the operation of a European backstop will be 
defined, to avoid a situation in which measures taken at national level could reaggravate the 
vicious  circle  between  sovereign  risk  and  national  credit  market  conditions.  At  present  the 
European  Stability  Mechanism  cannot  directly  recapitalize  banks;  its  funds  can  be  used 
indirectly  for  loans  to  member  states.  These  loans,  however,  would  increase  their  public 
debt. Direct intervention is envisaged only once the Single Supervisory Mechanism is fully 
operational. The implementing details are now being finalized. 
 The problems of the Italian economy stem from long-neglected structural weaknesses. They 
have been exacerbated by the global financial crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis. 
The  reform  action  undertaken  in  the  last  two  years  must  be  continued  resolutely  and  set 
within a comprehensive framework, giving Italian citizens and domestic and foreign investors 
alike the prospect of a country that can change and return to growth. 
The  efficient  allocation  of  savings  is  a  necessary  condition  for  our  economy  to  regain  the 
path  of  sustained,  balanced  growth.  It  requires  a  vital  financial  system  that  can  support 
entrepreneurial initiative and innovation and fuel a virtuous circle between economic growth 
and saving. 
The banks have a decisive role to play. The Bank of Italy’s supervisory action – which we 
perform in full observance of our powers and duties under the law – is directed to protecting 
the  savings  of  depositors  and  investors,  to  ensuring  that  their  use  is  not  distorted  by 
inappropriate corporate structures or misplaced local allegiance. But rules and controls are 
no  substitute  for  conduct  guided  by  the  principles  of  correctness  and  transparency,  which 
banks must also ensure through a suitable internal organization. 
The exceptional monetary policy measures taken by the ECB Governing Council during the 
crisis, and even before that the supervisory action of the Bank of Italy, have protected the 
banks  and  the  real  economy  against  potentially  catastrophic  consequences.  They  have 
helped to preserve the confidence of savers and investors. Banking Union, in the framework 
of the broader process of completion of the European Union, can further stabilize conditions 
in European markets if it is instituted rigorously and in its entirety. It will help to safeguard 
savings  by  countering  the  sovereign  risk  component  engendered  by  fears  of  euro 
reversibility. 
Italy’s banks are feeling the repercussions of a financial and economic crisis for which they 
bear no responsibility. But they are also suffering the consequences of slowness or failure to 
adapt their business operations, efficiency, service quality and organization to the evolution 
of the markets. They must continue to do their part with a courageous effort of renovation. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
