Erkki Liikanen: The economic crisis and the evolving role of central 
banks 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the Highlevel 
Expert Group on the structure of the EU banking sector, to the Paasikivi Society, Helsinki, 
25 November 2013. 
 Introduction  
One of the consequences of the most recent international economic crisis has been the more 
prominent role of central banks in economic policy. The central banks have played a pivotal 
role  in  crisis  management.  With  the  various  initiatives  currently  underway  to  strengthen 
economic governance, the central banks of the euro area, in particular, will be assigned new 
responsibilities. 
An extreme interpretation of this dynamics was put forward by the American journalist, David 
Wessel. In his excellent book on the outbreak of the financial crisis, “In Fed We Trust”, the 
subtitle  on  the  cover  reads  “How  the  Federal  Reserve  Became  the  Fourth  Branch  of 
Government”, ie alongside Congress, the President and the Supreme Court. Similar thoughts 
have also been voiced elsewhere, including in Europe. The central banks have even been 
referred to as being “the only game in town”. To central bankers, this has been a cause of 
concern rather than delight. 
The financial crisis brought about changes in the operation of central banks and will continue 
to  do  so.  It  has  forced  a  rethinking  of  central  banking  in  terms  of  both  functions  and 
instruments.  The  crisis  has  even  raised  the  question  of  how  central  bank  independence, 
which has become well established in the past couple of decades, can be reconciled with the 
new position of heightened influence. 
Major financial crises have also in the past had an epochal impact on the perception of the 
tasks and capabilities of economic policy and, especially, the role of central banks. The Great 
Depression of the 1930s and the great inflation of the 1970s mark significant turning points in 
this respect. Each resulted in big changes from which there was to be no return. 
The  past  five  years  may  very  well  be  comparable  in  significance  to  the  depression  of  the 
1930s or the stagflation of the 1970s. The former governor of the Bank of Israel, professor 
Stanley Fischer recently made a remark that this crisis will rewrite economics textbooks. It is 
indeed possible that the changes in economic policy practices and institutions initiated in this 
period will be assessed as equal to those following in the wake of previous crises. 
The shaping of the role of central banks 
It  is  too  soon  to  attempt  today  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  consequences  of  the 
most  recent  crisis  on  economic  policy  and,  in  particular,  monetary  policy  doctrines  in  the 
longer term. Certain trends can nevertheless be discerned. 
Let  me  first  briefly  recount  the  various  stages  passed  globally  on  the  way  to  the  current 
division and definition of economic policy responsibilities. 
Following  the  experiences  of  the  1930s  and  the  war-time  command  economy,  monetary 
policy  was,  for  several  decades  to  come,  integrated  within  the  coordinated  approach  to 
general  economic  policy,  and  the  focus  of  monetary  policy  was  shifted  away  from 
maintenance  of  price  stability  (under  the  gold  standard)  towards  aggregate  demand 
management, ie towards a policy aiming at full employment and rapid growth. The theoretical 
foundation of this approach was derived from Keynesian macroeconomics. The result was a 
significant loss of central bank independence, which in the United States happened as early 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
as 1933 as a part of Roosevelt’s New Deal policies, and in the United Kingdom and France 
immediately  after  the  war,  when  the  Bank  of  England  and  Banque  de  France  were 
nationalised. 
New policy instruments emerged as central banks were assigned broad regulatory powers 
over  foreign  capital  movements,  retail  banks’  interest  rates  and  the  investment  of  banks’ 
asset  portfolios  .  Financial  market  regulation  was  tightened,  but  there  was  little  need  for 
active financial stability policy as understood today, given the high level of stability of banking 
systems overall. Occasional balance-of-payment crises still took place, however. 
This regime, which had became established after the Second World War, nevertheless hit a 
wall in the 1970s. Inflation accelerated to two-digit rates in all leading industrial economies 
(except for Germany), while unemployment surged to levels higher than ever recorded since 
the  1930s.  The  situation  grew  unsustainable  to  the  point  of  prompting  a  fundamental 
reassessment of economic policy in all Western economies by the early 1980s. 
The lesson learnt from the 1970s inflation and the measures to curb it in the following decade 
was that monetary policy has its own special role to play in the context of economic policy. Its 
most  important  function  is  to  maintain  confidence  in  the  value  of  money.  Failing  this, 
monetary  policy  cannot  make  an  effective  contribution  to  any  other  economic  policy 
objectives such as sustainable growth and employment. 
The redefinition of the functions of monetary policy was, on the one hand, conditioned by the 
advances  in  economic  theory  and,  on  the  other  hand,  by  German  monetary  policy 
experience. In economics, a greater emphasis was given to the role of expectations in the 
inflation  process.  Germany,  whose  central  bank  enjoyed  an  exceptionally  high  level  of 
independence,  weathered  the  storms  of  the  1970s  better  than  other  countries.  This  was 
attributed to the consistent anti-inflationary economic policy of the Bundesbank. This was of 
great  relevance  to  the  monetary  policy  of  other  countries,  in  general,  and  to  the  future 
structure of European Monetary Union, in particular. 
Hence,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  1970s  inflation,  maintenance  of  confidence  in  the  value  of 
money, in other words stabilisation of inflation expectations at a low level, surfaced as the 
key function of monetary policy. This is commonly referred to as the “anchoring” of inflation 
expectations.  It  was  appreciated  that  this  is  the  very  objective  that  defines  the  role  of  the 
central bank in the division of economic policy responsibilities. In the 1980s and 1990s, more 
and  more  countries  modelled  their  monetary  policy  institutions  and  practices  upon  this 
approach. 
The new central bank doctrine has perhaps best been recapitulated by Stanley Fischer in his 
famous paper “Modern  Central Banking”, delivered in London in 1994  at the Tercentenary 
Symposium of the Bank of England. The then professor at MIT later served as First Deputy 
Managing Director of the IMF and Governor of the Bank of Israel. 
Fischer outlines the following principles of modern central banking. 
Central banks must have a clearly defined mandate, which is to maintain price stability, and 
they must make a public commitment to honouring this objective. 
Central  banks  must  enjoy  operational  independence  in  the  deployment  of  monetary  policy 
instruments,  such  as  interest  rates,  to  achieve  their  objective.  Independence  also  requires 
that central banks must not be obliged to finance the government fiscal deficit. 
As a counter-balance to central bank independence, Fischer underscored the accountability 
of central banks, ie their responsibility to achieve their objective. 
While  these  principles  were  gaining  ground  in  monetary  policy,  the  advanced  economies 
entered a highly favourable period of economic development, now referred to as the Great 
Moderation. This period of low inflation and stable economic growth persisted for more than 
ten years, until the emergence of the financial crisis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  seemingly  favourable  developments,  nevertheless,  masked  mounting  risks,  such  as 
global economic imbalances, as well as the huge expansion of banks’ balance sheets and 
risks, which was partly facilitated by the weaknesses in the regulatory framework for banks. 
The  emergence  of  the  international  financial  crisis  in  2007  and  its  escalation  in  2008 
revealed the fragility of the world economy and the credit system as never before. 
It may come as a surprise that, despite its gravity, the economic crisis of recent years has not 
undermined the foundations of monetary policy. The principles of “modern central banking” 
formulated by Fischer remain unchallenged. Indeed, it is astonishing that central banks have 
been so successful in achieving their primary objective of price stability and solid anchoring 
of  inflation  expectations  amidst  these  highly  extreme  circumstances.  This  is  probably  in 
essence attributable to central bank independence and the confidence that this builds. 
At  the  same  time,  the  central  banks  have  had  to  actively  step  up  to  safeguard  financial 
stability  in  a  way  not  necessary  since  the  early  1930s,  when  catastrophic  banking  crises 
wrecked  the  economies  of  both  the  USA  and  Germany,  then  triggering  a  steep  global 
deflationary spiral. 
Although a traditional function of central banks, ensuring financial stability has not been to 
the forefront in normal times. With the severity of the crisis and the moderation of inflationary 
pressures, financial stability and the related policy choices have now entered the very centre 
stage in the practice of central banking. 
Phase one of the crisis: from subprime crisis to systemic crisis 
It is useful to briefly discuss how central banks have responded to the various phases of the 
crisis and how each phase has affected the role of central banks in economic policy. 
Phase one of the crisis, which can be called the subprime crisis, began in the United States 
in summer 2007 and landed in Europe on 9 August. Money market turnover virtually came to 
a halt and risk premia rose drastically. At the time this seemed dramatic, although, compared 
to later developments, this was merely the overture. 
This phase was characterised by a collapse in the value of investments in mortgage-backed 
securities  and  their  liquidity.  Housing  prices  began  to  decline  in  the  United  States,  which 
affected the value of packaged and structured securities based on residential mortgages. At 
the same time, this created widespread and harmful uncertainty about the real value of the 
structured loans. The turbulence spread in summer 2007 to Europe, because by then it had 
become  evident  that  many  financial  institutions  had  purchased  structured  loans  on  their 
balance sheets or these loans had been purchased by special purpose vehicles owned by 
them. 
The crisis was not entirely unexpected, as the under-pricing of risk on the global markets, 
which  was  one  factor  that  triggered  the  crisis,  had  been  noticed.  For  example  the  then 
President  of  the  ECB,  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  had  already  before  the  onset  of  the  crises 
pointed out in public that some investors did not take full account of the possible risks at a 
time  of  general  asset  price  increases.  Central  banks  discussed  the  dangers  of  a  possible 
uncontrolled correction, but they were unable to predict the timing and scale of the problems 
that they were about to face. 
Already in September 2007, the British bank Northern Rock, which specialised in mortgage 
lending  and  was  dependent  on  short-term  market  funding,  faced  a  liquidity  crisis,  which 
triggered the first bank run in Britain in 150 years. The Bank of England had to grant massive 
liquidity  support  to  Northern  Rock,  which  was  subsequently  nationalised.  The  euro  area 
interbank  money  market  also  froze,  due  to  the  growing  uncertainty,  and  the  ECB  had  to 
increase  the  amount  of  central  bank  money  on  the  market  by  conducting  a  series  of  non-
standard refinancing operations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In the United States, the most famous victim of this phase of the crisis was the investment 
bank Bear Stearns, whose bankruptcy the US Federal Reserve (Fed) prevented with the help 
of large refinancing operations in March 2008. Bear Stearns was subsequently merged with 
another investment bank (JP Morgan). 
The financial crisis entered phase two, the systemic phase in autumn 2008. The milestone 
in this phase was the collapse of the investment bank Lehman Brothers on 15 September. 
The message of the Lehman collapse was that even a large financial institution can collapse. 
This immediately raised financial market uncertainty and the lack of confidence to completely 
new  levels  globally.  The  interbank  money  market,  on  which  banking  liquidity  was  largely 
based on, came to a virtual standstill. 
Many banks that were dependent on short-term market funding ran into difficulties and had to 
resort to central bank financing. Particularly vulnerable was the banking system of Iceland, 
whose  entire  business  model  hit  the  buffers.  The  Icelandic  financial  system  collapsed  in 
October 2008. 
It was clear that the drying up of the credit market would cause great damage. One way that 
central banks responded to the situation was, of course, by using their main instrument, the 
policy rate. In early November, the ECB began to lower its key interest rates drastically. The 
interest  rate  cuts  began  from  a  level  of  4.25%,  but  within  six  months  the  policy  rate  had 
already been lowered to 1.0%. The United States reacted even more rapidly and drastically – 
by the end of 2008, the Fed had cut the federal funds rate to 0.25%. 
The  crisis  awareness  that  arose  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  is  characterised  by  the 
unprecedentedly  swift  and  smooth  international  cooperation  at  the  point  when  the  crisis 
escalated.  Cooperation  between  central  banks,  in  particular,  was  very  efficient.  In  Europe, 
banks were hit by the drying up of dollar-denominated funding, and therefore the ECB and 
the  Federal  Reserve  agreed  on  large  swap  lines,  as  a  result  of  which  the  ECB  obtained 
dollars in exchange for euro, to be lent on to euro area banks. The ECB, the Fed and four 
other major central banks also conducted an unprecedented coordinated interest rate cut in 
October 2008. 
In  terms  of  the  topic  of  this  presentation,  ie  the  changes  in  the  role  of  the  central  banks 
during  the  crisis,  even  more  significant  were  the  measures  that  the  central  banks  took  in 
addition to the interest rate cuts.  
It  was  clear  that  central  banks  had  to  focus  not  only  on  interest  rates  but  also  on 
safeguarding  banks’  liquidity.  In  October  2008,  the  ECB  launched  its  full-allotment  policy, 
under which it has since then provided to banks as much refinancing as they want, at the 
prevailing key interest rate, as long as they have the necessary collateral, approved by the 
ECB. The list of such eligible collateral has also been extended during the crisis. 
Moreover,  the  ECB  began  to  provide  banks  with  credit  with  longer  maturities  than  before. 
Before the crisis, the ECB’s refinancing operations usually had a maturity of one week. To 
alleviate  banks’  uncertainties  about  their  liquidity  positions,  the  ECB  has  during  the  crisis 
increased  the  provision  of  credit  against  collateral  to  banks  on  longer  maturities,  too.  At 
times, credit has been provided with a maturity of as long as 36 months. 
The  longer-term  refinancing  operations  have  played  an  important  role  in  increasing  the 
liquidity of the banking system, and particularly in decreasing the uncertainty involved. But 
now,  as  the  situation  has  calmed  down  somewhat,  a  large  part  of  the  excess  liquidity 
provided has returned to the central bank. 
Central  banks’  actions  to  safeguard  the  operation  of  the  markets  would  hardly  have  been 
possible  without  the  support  of  governments.  In  November  2008,  the  G20  committed  to 
supporting the liquidity of the banking system, but, at the same time, they also committed to 
reinforcing  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial markets.  This  has  triggered  very 
significant processes, regulatory initiatives, that go further than crisis management and that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
aim to reinforce financial market structures in order to prevent a recurrence of the crisis of 
2008. 
At least in terms of financial sector regulation, the world has entered a new phase. 
Experience of the 1930s and the current financial crisis 
The swiftness of central bank responses in the early stages of the crisis and their decisive 
actions as the crisis continued were mainly due to the experiences of the 1930s. A key role in 
formulating monetary policy in 2008 and the years that followed was played by the Chairman 
of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  Ben  Bernanke,  who  before  his  career  as  a  central  banker 
specialised in research on the Great Depression of that decade. 
Bernanke’s  leadership  was  of  major  importance  in  preventing  the  total  collapse  of  the 
financial system. Without his vision of the reasons behind the Great Depression of the 1930s, 
formed  during  his  career  as  a  researcher,  the  Fed’s  response  would  probably  have  been 
much slower and more timid. 
Already  before  Bernanke’s  work,  research  had  begun  to  emphasise  the  role  of  monetary 
policy  errors  in  deepening  the  1930s’  depression.  The  key  publication  was  the  famous  “A 
Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960” by Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, 
published in 1963. The book claimed that the severity of the Great Depression was due to 
the  fact  that,  following  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  monetary  policy,  particularly  in  the  United 
States, was too tight and allowed a steep decline in the stock of money. 
Friedman argued that the Fed’s failure was due particularly to its collateral requirements, ie 
the fact that it held to the “real bills” doctrine. According to this doctrine, the central bank 
issued credit only against notes, drafts and bills of exchange arising from actual commercial 
transactions. Such securities were not available in sufficient amounts following the onset of 
the  recession  in  the  ’30s,  and  so  the  Fed  could  not  increase  its  lending.  According  to 
Friedman,  the  Fed  should  have  used  extensive  purchases  of  government  securities  (open 
market operations) to prevent a decline in the stock of money, but this was prevented by the 
real bills doctrine. This resulted in a fall in the money stock, a collapse in aggregate demand 
and a deflationary spiral. 
Ben Bernanke published his first research papers on the 1930s’ depression already in the 
early  1980s  (“Nonmonetary  Effects  of  the  Financial  Crisis  in  the  Propagation  of  the  Great 
Depression”, American Economic Review, 1983). Bernanke’s research emphasised that the 
depth of the Great Depression cannot be explained only by monetary aspects (interest rate 
level  and  amount  of  money),  but  was  mainly  due  to  the  banking  crisis.  Banks  were  not 
helped,  and  their  mass  failure  led  to  a  collapse  in  the  availability  of  credit.  In  the  United 
States,  approximately  half  of  the  banks  failed  in  1930–1933.  Bernanke  concluded  that  the 
credit  crunch  caused  by  the  banking  crisis  and  the  wave  of  bankruptcies  that  followed 
deepened the early 1930s’ recession in the United States into a full-blown economic crisis. 
He criticised the Fed for its failure at that time to act as lender of last resort in order to ease 
the banks’ distress. 
Research  on  the  1930s  crisis  has  also  focused  on  the  importance  of  the  international 
monetary system. In a speech on the experiences of the 1930s (given in 2004), Bernanke 
notes  that  the  depth  and  extent  of  the  contraction  in  the  global  economy  is  explained  by 
attempts  to  remain  on  the  gold  standard.  Bernanke  refers  to  studies  by  eg  Barry 
Eichengreen  (Golden  Fetters,  1992),  in  which  the  gold  standard  is  regarded  as  the  main 
reason for the global slump, and he takes the view that, in those circumstances, abandoning 
the gold standard was a prerequisite for recovery from the Great Depression. 
The gold standard helped spread the depression around the world, as it prevented countries 
with  a  balance  of  payments  deficit  from  loosening  their  monetary  policy  even  when  their 
internal  economic  situation  had  required  it.  On  the  contrary,  they  had  to  tighten  their 
monetary policy to remain on the gold standard, and, moreover, their central banks, bound 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
by the gold standard, were unable to act as lenders of last resort and support the liquidity of 
their domestic banking systems. As a result, the recession spread from the countries with a 
surplus,  which  in  the  1930s  were  the  United  States  and  France,  to  countries  with  a  weak 
balance of payments (at the time eg Germany and the United Kingdom). 
Bernanke and Eichengreen emphasise that, in the 1930s, the international monetary system 
did not have a clear leader that would have been responsible for the operation of the entire 
monetary system. In particular, the United States, to which the world’s gold reserves were 
flowing,  did  not  bear  its  international  responsibility.  The  idea  that  the  stability  of  the 
international monetary system needs leadership and the conduct of monetary policy from an 
international perspective originates from research by  Charles Kindleberger (The World in 
Depression, 1973). 
It is clear that the traumatic memories of the 1930s and the related understanding that the 
task of monetary policy is to safeguard the operation of the market largely explain the policy 
choices of all central banks, and particularly US monetary policy during the current economic 
crisis. 
The fact that the experiences of the 1930s have again become topical does not necessarily 
contradict with the doctrine that was formulated after the 1970s, ie the conduct of monetary 
policy geared towards price stability and conducted by independent central banks. We can 
expect that the monetary policy thinking and approach towards which the world is apparently 
now shifting will be some synthesis of these two. As trust in the self-adjusting properties of 
unregulated markets has receded, the monetary and financial market policies of the future 
will  consist  of  BOTH  the  pursuit  of  price  stability  (monetary  policy  conventionally  defined) 
AND a more systematic and better-organised pursuit of financial market stability. 
From financial crisis to sovereign debt crisis 
It turned out that even though the financial system remained in operation and no systemic 
meltdown occurred in autumn 2008, this did not prevent the global economy from falling into 
a  deep  recession,  as  everybody  attempted  to  reduce  their  excessive  debt  ratios  and  risky 
investments. This led to the third phase of the crisis – the global economic crisis or “Great 
Recession” – which hit with full force in 2009. 
The  force  with  which  the  financial  crisis  hit  the  real  economy  came  as  a  surprise  to 
everybody, and the forecast error made must have been the greatest of all time. Global trade 
came almost to a halt at the turn of 2008–2009, and in the next year GDP plunged in almost 
all developed economies with magnitudes not experienced after World War II.  
GDP contracted by over 3% in the United States and 4½% in the euro area. Finland’s GDP 
plummeted  by  as  much  as  8½%,  which  was  considerably  more  than  in  1991  –  during  the 
worst year of Finland’s previous economic crisis. The dive in aggregate demand in the global 
economy also affected prices, and in several countries inflation even  slipped into negative 
territory for some time. 
However, the severe economic downturn did not affect people’s everyday lives to the extent 
one  might  assume  on  the  basis  of  the  GDP  figures,  at  least  not  at  the  beginning.  Private 
demand  was  maintained  by  lower  interest  rates  and  the  increasing  government  budget 
deficits, despite the strong decline in exports and industrial output. 
The large general government budget deficits constituted very expansionary fiscal policies, 
which could not, however, continue for long. The limits of fiscal policy were reached first in 
countries  where  government  finances  had  been  in  a  poor  state  already  from  the  very 
beginning, as in Greece, or where the collapse of the banking sector and the related bailout 
measures  had  suddenly  pushed  the  government  debt  burden  to  excessive  levels,  as  in 
Ireland. This led to the next phase of the crisis. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The fourth phase of the crisis – the sovereign debt crisis – came to a head in spring 2010, 
when Greece’s high deficits led to evaporation of market confidence, initially in Greece itself, 
and subsequently also in other euro area countries with the weakest economic positions. In 
this  situation,  euro  area  countries’  economic  developments  and  credit  risks  diverged  from 
each other, and the ECB’s monetary policy, which was already at that time accommodative 
to growth, was not transmitted evenly across the euro area. 
The repricing of sovereign risk hampered the functioning of markets and the transmission of 
monetary  policy.  Euro  area  financial  markets  became  regionally  fragmented  and  banks’ 
problems  increased.  In  this  situation,  the  ECB  launched  a  Securities  Markets  Programme 
(SMP) to alleviate the tensions prevailing on the markets. In the context of the SMP, the ECB 
purchased  government  bonds  in  those  market  segments  that  were  most  dysfunctional. 
During  the  approximately  one  and  a  half  years  the  programme  was  running,  total  SMP 
purchases amounted to around EUR 200 billion. 
In  order  to  alleviate  the  tensions  arising  from  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  banks  were  also 
offered exceptionally long (3 years) longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) in December 
2011 and March 2012. To ensure the availability of liquidity, the range of collateral eligible in 
the  ECB’s  credit  operations  was  also  expanded.  The  Eurosystem  applies  haircuts  in  the 
valuation of collateral, so as to manage the credit risk inherent in collateral policy. 
As the euro area crisis protracted, the fifth stage of the crisis – the European confidence 
crisis – began in summer 2012, as nervousness in the sovereign bond markets culminated 
and fell even upon large euro area countries, namely Spain and Italy. The markets began to 
speculate that one country or a number of countries might even have to exit monetary union. 
Weakening confidence in the integrity of the euro highlighted the importance of a common 
policy stance for the stabilisation of the situation. At the end of June 2012, euro area finance 
ministers issued a statement in which they committed to breaking the vicious circle between 
banks and sovereigns and also – as already proposed by the European Commission – to set 
up a single banking supervisory mechanism for the euro area, which would be headed by the 
ECB. 
This was one of the starting points for the EU process referred to as “Banking Union”, the 
lack of which had proven to be one of the shortcomings in the design of Monetary Union, one 
reason  for  its  fragility.  The  declaration  also  showed  that  more  political  capital  had  been 
invested  in  the  euro  than  had  probably  been  assumed  by  those  who  doubted  its 
irreversibility. 
On 26 July – one month after the Eurogroup statement – the President of the ECB, Mario 
Draghi, gave a speech in London containing a statement that has already become famous: 
“Within  our  mandate,  the  ECB  is  ready  to  do  whatever  it  takes  to  preserve  the  euro.  And 
believe me, it will be enough.” 
The  speech  had  a  very  powerful  and  positive  impact  on  the  markets.  In  retrospect,  it  has 
even been regarded as revolutionary, and with good reason. Pressures on the Spanish and 
Italian government bond markets began to ease, even though no detailed programme had 
yet been presented to concretise President Draghi’s statement. 
The concrete content became public at the beginning of August, when the ECB Governing 
Council  announced  a  new  programme  concerning  the  creation  of  a  programme  of 
government  bond  purchases.  The  details  of  the  programme  were  communicated  during 
autumn. Called “Outright Monetary Transactions” (OMTs), the programme was designed to 
eliminate  such  risk  premia  from  the  markets  as  were  based  on  speculations  about  a 
country’s exit from the euro area. 
No ex ante limits were set on the size of OMTs, but certain conditions were attached to the 
programme to ensure its effectiveness and safeguard the ECB’s monetary policy. The most 
important condition was that the purchases would only concentrate on government bonds of 
countries  that  had  signed  an  economic  adjustment  programme  monitored  by  the  IMF,  EU 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
and the ECB and that, according to the ECB’s independent assessment, also adhered to the 
programme. 
The  OMT  programme  has  so  far  fulfilled  its  purpose  well,  as  it  were:  it  has  considerably 
calmed the markets, even though there has been no need to activate the programme.  
Evaluation of non-standard measures 
The most important forms of expanding the ECB’s monetary policy tools in the recent crisis 
years can be summarised as follows: elastic provision of credit – ie the “full allotment policy” 
–  in  monetary  policy  operations,  expansion  of  the  list  of  eligible  collateral,  the  conduct  of 
long-term credit operations and also, to a certain extent, securities purchases (including also, 
last  but  not  least,  the  so-far  unused  OMTs).  In  addition  to  the  Eurosystem’s  common 
measures, some national central banks have conducted certain operations to address bank-
specific solvency problems in their respective countries. 
The “forward guidance” introduced this year can be regarded as the newest addition to this 
list. Forward guidance refers to regular statements on monetary policy, which for the moment 
have been aimed at increasing the efficiency of accommodative monetary policy. 
Even  though  the  range  of  tools  for  different  central  banks  differs  to  some  extent,  non-
standard central banks measures during the crisis have everywhere resulted in considerable 
growth in central bank balance sheets and hence to growth in central bank liquidity. This has 
stimulated  criticism,  particularly  from  commentators  who  fear  that  growth  in  central  bank 
liquidity will lead to higher inflation. This debate has been under way in the United States and 
the euro area alike. 
However, there have been no signs of an acceleration in inflation, at least not in the euro 
area. Even though the amount of central bank money has increased, this has not led to a 
general increase in the money supply. In fact, the latest indications tell of further diminishing 
underlying price pressures in the euro area over the medium term, starting from currently low 
annual inflation rates of below 1%. 
If  changes  in  the  money  supply  are  examined  using  the  concept  of  broad  money,  which 
means that, in addition to central bank liquidity, bank deposits are also included, we note that 
growth in the money supply has recently remained moderate despite the relaxed monetary 
policy,  and  that  growth  in  bank  lending  to  the  public  has  also  been  weak,  often  even 
negative. 
The fact that the increase in central bank liquidity has not been accompanied by an increase 
in  bank  lending  and  broad  money  has  signalled  uncertainty  on  the  money  markets  and 
banks’ need to cut their balance sheets, which had often expanded to excessive levels prior 
to the financial crisis. Banks strive to increase their liquidity reserves and prefer to keep them 
in the form of central bank deposits rather than invest the reserves on the interbank money 
markets, as was the case prior to the crisis. This has resulted in a simultaneous increase in 
the demand for central bank liquidity and a contraction in bank lending. 
At  present,  a  most  pressing  concern  with  regard  to  money  supply  is  that  corporate  credit 
growth is too sluggish rather than too strong. However, if there were any signs of excessive 
lending  growth  in  future,  the  ECB  has  the  means  to  absorb  bank  liquidity  rapidly,  if 
necessary. 
Charles P. Kindleberger, the famous researcher in the field of financial crisis, has written that 
“too little and too late” is one of the saddest phrases in the lexicon of central banking, but that 
“too soon and too much” would not be much better. Have central banks and the ECB among 
them acted too slowly and parsimoniously, or too generously and hastily? 
It  is  my  view  that,  after  the  problems  that  have  also  hit  the  European  economy  in  recent 
years, the ECB needs to be able to give a positive response to the question of whether it did, 
within its mandate, its share and all it could to solve the problems. Decisions are taken on the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
basis of the information available at the time. The measures that have been taken have been 
necessary  in  light  of  the  available  information.  The  non-standard  measures  have  even 
encompassed notable risks, but the measures have been well considered and, it seems, we 
have been able to contain the risks. 
Banking union 
Alongside crisis management, politicians and public authorities have begun work to reform 
financial market regulation, supervision and structures. This reform work will also impact the 
position of central banks, albeit differently in different central bank constituencies worldwide. 
As regards the euro area, the status and tasks of the ECB will change significantly next year, 
as single banking supervision begins and the ECB assumes responsibility for oversight of all 
euro area banks. A Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) to be set up on these lines will be 
part of a wider framework of reforms, the Banking Union. In addition to single supervision, 
this  also  includes  a  single  crisis  resolution  framework,  which  is  approaching  the  decision-
making stage at EU level, as well as harmonised deposit protection. 
Banking  Union  is  a  correct  and  necessary  step.  It  would  have  been  best  if  it  had  already 
been  built  twenty  years  ago  when  the  financial  markets  were  deregulated  and  the 
foundations of Economic and Monetary Union were laid. 
The  EU’s  single  banking  market  was  established  by  the  Second  Banking  Directive,  which 
entered into force at the beginning of 1993. It was part of the EU’s single market programme, 
and its idea according to the single market logic was that a banking licence obtained from 
any Member State authorised the bank to operate throughout the territory of the EU. 
In connection with the adoption of the Banking Directive and the establishment of Monetary 
Union, there was fairly extensive discussion among experts as to whether the single banking 
market  and  Monetary  Union  also  required  concentration  of  banking  supervision.  But  the 
matter did not move forward. Banking supervision remained the responsibility of the “home 
country” (the country granting the licence). The Maastricht Treaty did, in fact, state that the 
ECB shall “contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by the competent authorities 
relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions”, and that tasks concerning banking 
supervision could be conferred upon the ECB via a Council Regulation. 
It  must  be  remembered  that  at  that  stage  large  European  countries  (perhaps  with  the 
exception of Spain) had for decades not had much experience of serious banking crises. So, 
the  question  was  not  perceived  as  being  a  sufficiently  burning  issue.  Big  differences  in 
national  supervisory  structures  also  played  a  role  in  why  supervisory  convergence  did  not 
make headway. 
The political preconditions for single banking supervision were only born out of necessity as 
a  result  of  the  escalation  of  the  financial crisis.  On  account  of  its  independence, expertise 
and market knowledge, the ECB proved in practice to be the only possible location where 
single supervision could be established. 
The  ECB  will  conduct  banking  supervision  in  cooperation  with  national  supervisors.  In  the 
final instance, the ECB is responsible for the oversight of all banks. Only the largest banks 
will  come  under  its  direct  supervision,  however.  Supervision  of  smaller  banks  will  be 
delegated - with recourse - to national financial supervisors. Supervision of the larger banks, 
too, will require and make use of the efforts of national supervisors. 
Monetary  policy  and  banking  supervision  have  significant  synergies,  particularly  in  the 
domain of information. Even so, decisions concerning these two areas are different in nature 
and based on different objectives. For this reason, the supervisory architecture of the ECB 
will be built in such a way that monetary policy and banking supervision are kept separate in 
order  to  avoid  conflicts  of  objectives.  Key  responsibilities  on  supervisory  decisions  will  be 
conferred  upon  a  new  Supervisory  Board,  of  which  national  banking  supervisors  will  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
members. The Governing Council of the ECB, which is essentially a decision-making body 
for  monetary  policy,  will  ultimately  approve  or  reject  decisions  by  the  Supervisory  Board. 
Banking supervision work will be led by the Supervisory Board. 
Macroprudential stability and structural regulation 
Simultaneously with Banking Union, other new measures to safeguard financial stability are 
also being developed in Europe. I will mention here two of these integrated sets of initiatives. 
On  the  one  hand,  Member  States  are  in  the  process  of  introducing  new  macroprudential 
tools  aimed  at  reducing  the  financial  system’s  vulnerability  to  crises  and  increasing 
authorities’ potential to address, if necessary, threatening developments within the banking 
system as a whole or on the assets markets. 
Typical macroprudential tools include the new capital buffers that banks are required to hold 
and which can be required to be increased in the face of overheated credit markets, or which 
may be graduated according to bank size so that systemically important banks are required 
to maintain higher capital levels than others. Responsibility and competence in the field of 
macroprudential policy will be both at Eurosystem and national level. 
The  other  area  of  initiatives  is  regulation  of  banking  structures,  for  which  the  European 
Commission  is  expected  to  submit a  proposal  in  the  immediate  weeks  ahead.  The  idea is 
that financial operations involving the highest risk are to be separated from ordinary deposit 
banking, to be carried out by special-purpose subsidiaries. This type of structural regulation 
seeks to prevent deposit protection provided to deposit banks from turning into an incentive 
for  unhealthy  risk-taking,  where  speculators  benefit  privately  from  profits,  but  do  not  take 
losses, “privatising profits and socialising losses”, as the saying goes. 
The  Commission’s  proposal  for  structural  regulation  will  take  a  stand  on  the  propositions 
made  by  the  EU’s  High-Level  Expert  Group  of  which  I  chaired.  Legislation  relating  to 
structural  regulation,  similar  to  those  outlined  in  our  report,  is  already  underway  in,  for 
example, France, Germany and the UK. I hope the Commission’s forthcoming proposal will 
lead to as uniform legislation as possible on this issue in Europe. 
The Eurosystem, a special case 
The range of central bank tasks is becoming wider than it was before the onset of the crisis. 
This is a global phenomenon. The Eurosystem – in other words, the ECB and the euro area 
central banks – form in this context a special case of their own, which is explained by the 
structure of Economic and Monetary Union and also by Europe’s internal political dynamics. 
The status assigned to the ECB and its practical policy-making have largely corresponded to 
the  principles  of  “Modern  Central  Banking”  crystallised  by  Fischer  that  I  mentioned  at  the 
beginning: a clearly defined mandate, independence including safeguards against demands 
from governments pressing for central bank credit, and accountability.  
However, the ECB is different from the world’s other leading central banks. As a central bank 
common to many countries, its independence is of particular relevance. This is because the 
countries  in  Monetary  Union  have  given  up  their  monetary  policy  sovereignty.  They  made 
their  decisions  on  joining  Monetary  Union  as  sovereign  decision-makers,  and,  upon 
accession, decided to unite or pool their monetary policy powers. In order to make such a 
far-reaching decision, the countries naturally had to know in advance what kind of monetary 
policy the ECB would conduct. 
It was possible to establish Monetary Union because the countries were ready to pool their 
sovereignty,  on  the  condition  of  certainty  over  the  stable  value  of  money.  For  this  reason, 
too, it was necessary to commit the ECB in a credible manner to objectives set in advance 
and  to  provide  it  with  a  sufficient  degree  of  independence,  with  a  view  to  ensuring  that  it 
could pursue the set objectives, free of any national or other political pressure. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  independence  of  the  ECB  and  the  decision-making  procedure  employed  in  the 
Governing Council prevent individual Member States from dominating monetary policy, and 
the assignment of a clearly defined objective for price stability prevents the independent ECB 
from abusing its independence in an arbitrary manner. The independence is supplemented 
by the ECB’s accountability to the European Parliament and by the national central banks’ 
arrangements for accountability at national level, such as supervision of the Bank of Finland 
by the Finnish Parliament. 
Euro area stability and the ECB 
The independence of the ECB and the definition of its role – or mandate – are interrelated. 
An  independent  institution  bestowed  with  a  public  function  cannot  be  assigned  powers 
defined  too  loosely  or  an  overly  broad  range  of  tasks  in  a  democratic  society.  Such  an 
extension  of  responsibilities  would  before  long  erode  the  political  preconditions  for  central 
bank  independence  and  the  legitimacy  of  the  central  bank  itself.  A  central  bank is  not  the 
fourth branch of government; rather, it acts as if it were a “trustee” who performs the task 
entrusted to it. 
Central bank independence has proven to be the correct solution for the successful conduct 
of monetary policy. Bearing in mind the lessons of the 1970s will be important in the future, 
too. 
As the independence of a central bank thus remains one of the criteria for defining its tasks, 
the  conclusion  is  that  particular  caution  needs  to  be  exercised  in  expanding  the  ECB’s 
responsibilities,  in  order  to  avoid  jeopardising  the  prerequisites  for  its  independence.  An 
example of tasks that could jeopardise central bank independence is those of a resolution 
authority  empowered  to  recapitalise  banks  and/or  wind  them  up.  The  existence  of  such  a 
body is an important element of the upcoming Banking Union, but the ECB considers it as 
self-evident  that  this  body  cannot  operate  in  connection  with  banking  supervision  or 
monetary policy. 
Non-standard monetary policy measures in times of crisis and the forthcoming performance 
of tasks relating to banking supervision are necessary for the ECB and the Eurosystem, and 
useful steps forward for the euro area as a whole. At the  same time,  however, it  must be 
ensured by other means, too, that tensions on financial stability do not become excessive. 
There  are  many  reasons  for  this,  but  one  of  them  is  that  ensuring  monetary  policy 
independence requires that the ECB should not be left alone as a guardian of stability. 
This concerns two issues, in particular: firstly, bringing government indebtedness back onto a 
sustainable path and keeping it on a stable footing, and, secondly, safeguarding adequate 
levels of bank capital. Both are matters over which the ECB has no direct influence; they do, 
however, affect its ability to discharge its widened scope of responsibilities without coming 
into conflict with its own institutional status. 
The role of national central banks 
Within  the  Eurosystem,  the  national  central  banks  have  a  role  of  their  own,  not  only  as 
parties implementing monetary policy, but also as participants in the preparation of the single 
policy. The Governing Council of the ECB takes its decisions considering the situation in the 
euro  area  as  a  whole  and  is  not  a  forum  for  national  interests.  Even  so,  the  role  of  the 
national  central  banks  in  policy  preparation  is  highly  valuable.  It  both  contributes  to  the 
quality of policy and increases its legitimacy. 
The ECB’s monetary policy and its activities in the area of financial stability can make use of 
research and analysis performed by both the ECB and the national central banks. In times of 
crisis, in particular, but also at other times, it is important that each Eurosystem participant 
make its own unique contribution to the preparation of common analysis and policy. Drawing 
on its own research and expertise, the Bank of Finland has provided its input to this work. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Effective implementation of monetary policy, separation between monetary policy operations 
and their risk management as functions of their own, the preparation of structural reforms in 
banking and the promotion of transparency, among other things, are areas to which the Bank 
of  Finland’s  preparatory  work  has  made  a  contribution.  As  a  member  of  the  Governing 
Council,  I  am  independent  but,  of  course,  all  the  Bank  of  Finland’s  competence  is  shared 
within the ECB. 
The Bank of Finland’s experience and preparation have been of particular significance in the 
initiation  of  the  full  allotment  policy  and  in  designing  certain  features  of  the  programme  of 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs),  among  other  areas.  We  have  also  argued  for 
greater  transparency  in  the  decision-making  of  the  Governing  Council.  This  is  the  more 
important, the greater the central bank’s responsibilities and influence become. 
We have also been active in developing forward guidance for monetary policy. This is not 
only  a  variety  of  transparency;  forward  guidance,  when  used  properly,  is  actually  another 
active policy tool that can be used to increase the effectiveness of monetary policy. I believe, 
it was a good thing that the Governing Council adopted more explicit forward guidance last 
July, when the chairman stated that interest rates would remain at the level prevailing at that 
time or lower for an extended period of time. 
This  new  type  of  communication  provided  since  last  summer  has  proven  effective,  as  the 
inflation outlook continued to dampen this autumn. Thanks to the context created by forward 
guidance, we could implement the necessary lowering of interest rates at our meeting of 7 
November as a consistent part of the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy geared towards 
price stability. 
Forward guidance will retain its role in the future, too. The euro area economy will take time 
to recover. Moreover, in the context of globally integrated financial markets, any divergence 
in economic activity between Europe and the United States will increase the challenges for 
the  communication  of  monetary  policy.  Although  the  exit  from  central  banks’  non-standard 
measures  and  the  normalisation  of  interest  rate  levels  are  currently  only  on  the  distant 
horizon,  the  experiences  of  last  summer  show  that  the  approach  of  the  turning  point  and 
related  speculation  could  cause  turbulence  on  the  markets.  Central  banks  will  need  to  be 
able to respond to such developments with precise communication. 
Following the latest interest rate decision, the euro area policy rate has already been brought 
very  close  to  zero.  This  does  not,  however,  mean  that  the  ECB’s  room  for  manoeuvre  in 
monetary  policy  or  the  tools  at  its  disposal  have  been  exhausted.  Experience  has  shown 
that, where the situation so demands, we can count upon the capacity of the Eurosystem to 
find solutions. However, the division of responsibilities between the central bank and other 
actors must be clear, in order to avoid the central bank becoming subject to expectations that 
it can neither fulfil nor should be responsible for fulfilling. 
 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
