Luis M Linde: Reflections on the road and challenges ahead – regulatory 
changes affecting banking activity 
Closing address by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the IX IESE (Instituto 
de  Estudios  Superiores  de  la  Empresa/Business  School  of  the  University  of  Navarra) 
Banking Sector Meeting “Banks – beyond the crisis”, Madrid, 12 December 2013. 
 Firstly, let me thank Professor Juan José Toribio, the president of the Centro Internacional de 
Finanzas, for inviting me to participate in this IESE Banking Sector Meeting. And allow me to 
congratulate  the  IESE  on  this  ninth  edition  of  a  forum  that  has  become  a  classic and  has 
consistently been of the greatest interest and highest calibre. 
I am not going to address certain matters that are very important and topical, such as the 
signs  of  recovery  in  the  Spanish  economy,  the  initial  steps  of  the  launch  of  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism, or the asset quality review or stress tests for those banks that are to 
be supervised by the Single Mechanism. I would hardly have anything novel to say there.  
Rather, I wish to review some aspects of the regulatory changes which, once the crisis has 
been overcome, are going to significantly affect banking activity.  
Three matters concern us: the elements of the new Basel III capital accord that have not yet 
been fully finalised; the Financial Stability Board’s work on the regulatory framework for the 
treatment of systemically important institutions; and the new powers of the Banco de España 
under  the  draft  bill  on  the  supervision  of  credit  institutions,  which  will  foreseeably  be 
approved in the first quarter of next year.  
I shall begin with Basel III. 
The  new  capital  accord  improves  the  comparability  and,  thereby,  the  credibility  of  capital 
ratios. Basel III increases capital requirements with better-quality instruments, and it seeks 
consistency  and  a  uniform  application  across  banks  and  countries.  It  also  adds  two  new 
prudential tools: one in the area of liquidity, and the other in that of leverage.  
First,  the  inclusion  of  the  leverage  ratio,  the  relationship  between  Tier  1  capital  and 
exposure both on and off the balance sheet, i.e. the total banking book, without taking into 
account risk weights. Calculations are made at the consolidated level and, in principle, the 
level  is  set  at  a  minimum  of  3%.  It  is  scheduled  to  come  into  force  in  2018,  although  an 
earlier date will probably be set for the required disclosure of this figure.  
This new tool has been designed as a straightforward measure that complements and acts 
as  a  floor  to  the  minimum  risk-based  capital  ratio.  It  aims  to  provide  additional  protection 
against  what  is  known  as  “model  risk”,  i.e.  underestimating  the  regulatory  capital  needed 
further to a calculation using the sophisticated models allowed by Basel II and III.  
On the more technical side, there appears to be agreement on the definition and calculation 
of the ratio, the treatment of derivatives and repos, and operations with CCPs. But doubts 
remain over its final calibration and how it affects certain business models, specifically those 
most centred on retail activity.  
The  Banco  de  España  has  supported  the  setting  of  this  leverage  ratio  in  Pillar  1  on  the 
understanding that it can be a good prudential tool, once correctly calibrated. In this respect, 
the  monitoring  period  prior  to  its  entry  into  force  will  provide  information  and  experience. 
Although European regulations envisage that countries may apply this ratio as they deem fit 
until its harmonisation in 2018, it is not the intention of the Banco de España, in principle, to 
bring forward its application.  
As regards liquidity, Basel III has added new regulatory requirements: a short-term liquidity 
coverage ratio (LCR), and a long-term requirement, the net stable funding ratio (NSFR). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The short-term liquidity coverage ratio is designed so that banks may have an asset buffer 
with which to meet their maximum foreseeable liquidity or funding needs over a period of at 
least 30 days. As what is involved is a safety margin, this ratio might at times of stress be 
below  100%  of  such  maximum  foreseeable  needs,  which  is  the  level  demanded  once  the 
requirements come fully into force. However, if a bank’s liquidity-generating capacity stands 
at below 100% of the maximum foreseeable needs, it will be obliged to inform the supervisor, 
with which it will have to agree a plan to regain the 100% level.  
The initial design of this ratio is very demanding and, perhaps, not very realistic. The year 
2015 was too early a date for its full implementation, and the definition of “high-quality liquid 
assets” or the assumptions of liquidity needs were overly rigorous. Hence, in January 2012, 
the  Basel  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision  revised  the 
accord to widen the base of assets considered highly liquid and to soften the implementation 
timetable. This regulation is also practically finalised, at least in the Basel Committee, as an 
agreement on its design and calibration has already been reached.  
The short-term ratio will not come into force immediately. It will be phased in from 2015 – 
when a level of 60% will be demanded – to 2019, when it will reach 100%. Nonetheless, this 
timetable may be speeded up at the discretion of the different national authorities.  
The  Banco  de  España  has  backed  the  setting  of  the  short-term  liquidity  ratio,  and  the 
amendments to it, which have softened the original framework proposed. Nor does it intend 
to accelerate the implementation timetable, although we believe that banks should strive to 
meet it as soon as possible. As regards reporting and transparency obligations, we consider 
they should be obligatory for internationally active banks, but that they could be simplified for 
others.  
Basel  III  also  envisages  the  implementation  of  a  long-term  liquidity  ratio  so  that  banks 
maintain  stable  funding  profiles,  tailored  to  their  assets  and  activities.  In  that  way,  banks’ 
dependence on short-term funding markets is structurally reduced, since that proved to be a 
very disruptive weakness in the 2008 financial crisis.   
The design of this ratio is at a relatively early stage, as the preliminary proposal published in 
2010 is being revised. It is expected that, early next year, a consultative document will be 
available, and that the regulations will have been finalised before 2015, with this entailing a 
simplification of the original rule. Further, it will be necessary to agree on certain aspects of 
relevance for Spanish banks, such as, in relation to liquidity requirements, the treatment of 
high-quality mortgages or matters pertaining to asset encumbrance. This ratio is expected to 
come into force in 2018, although in the case of the EU, the Commission will have to submit 
a legislative proposal before 2016.  
I shall now move on to certain elements relating to the review of capital requirements. This 
is part of a broader project: to attempt to ensure that the benefits of risk-adjusted regulations, 
such  as  Basel  III,  are  not  achieved  at  the  cost  of  introducing  excessively  complex 
regulations which, in addition to other problems, yield results that cannot be compared from 
one bank to another. 
The Banco de España is in favour of simplifying the current regulations, striking a balance 
between simplicity, comparability and risk-sensitivity. In this respect, it views favourably the 
transparency exercise conducted by the Basel Committee on the comparability of asset risk 
weights.  
The  results  of  this  exercise  allow  an  argument  to  be  made  for  the  need  to  lessen  the 
differences  between  requirements  obtained  by  applying  the  standard  method  and  those 
calculated using internal models, so that the credibility of the solvency ratios should not be 
compromised.  However,  we  believe  they  should  not  go  so  far  as  to  abandon  the  use  of 
internal  models;  rather,  standardised  models,  based  on  parameters  determined  by  the 
supervisors, should be used as a reference for internal models.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I should also like to mention here the review of the treatment of the trading book, with the 
aim of reducing regulatory capital differences between this book and the banking book, thus 
avoiding regulatory arbitrage.  
At the Banco de España we broadly concur with these lines of work. However, concerning 
the review of sovereign risk and in order to avoid undesirable effects and consequences for 
financial  stability,  we  believe  a  wholesale  approach  should  be  taken,  not  one  that  is 
independent or isolated in respect of each working group.  
As to the review of the current framework for the treatment of securitisations, I should like 
to  underscore  the  importance  of  the  calibration  of  capital  requirements  associated  with 
securitisations not being excessively conservative, and that the reopening of these markets 
should not be hampered in an unwarranted fashion.  
I would like to end my comments on the work of the Basel Committee by touching briefly on 
another regulatory matter currently under review, the treatment of large exposures. 
This falls within the field of prudential measures additional to the solvency ratio, which aim to 
ensure the survival of banks in extreme situations. The review focuses on the treatment of 
exposures to third parties, since that of intra-group exposures has been postponed for the 
time being. The general principle is that exposures to all counterparties should be subject to 
limits based on the capital of the bank.  
That  limit  has  been  set  generally  at  25%  of  tier  1  capital,  although  for  certain  exposures, 
such  as  those  between  systemic  banks,  it  is  stricter.  Notably,  provision  is  made  for  the 
possibility,  after  an  observation  period,  of  limiting  exposures  to  central  counterparties 
(CCPs), although this matter is open and first requires an assessment of the effects of other 
rules governing relationships between banks and CCPs.   
Let me now say a few words on some of the main regulatory projects on which the Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB)  is  currently  working,  particularly  that  to  promote  a  new  regulatory 
framework  for  the  treatment  of  systemically  important  institutions,  i.e.  those  whose 
complexity,  size  and  interconnectedness  are  such  that  their  failure  could  cause  serious 
problems to the global financial system. 
This  new  framework  rests  on  four  pillars:  additional  loss  absorbency,  effective  resolution 
mechanisms, 
financial  market 
infrastructure.  
Unquestionable progress has been made in implementing this framework. In particular, the 
G-20  has  approved,  as  a  new  international  standard,  the  so-called  Key  Attributes  of 
Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions, which have to be complied with 
in each jurisdiction.  
In  Spain,  Law  9/2012  adopts  and  applies  many  of  the  principles  set  forth  in  the  “Key 
Attributes”.  Meanwhile,  the  European  Union  expects  to  adopt  the  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution Directive by the end of the year, which will be an important step forward in fully 
implementing the “Key Attributes” in all Member States. 
On  this  last  point,  as  you  know  Ecofin  is  currently  discussing  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism  and  the  Resolution  Fund.  It  seems  that  agreements,  or  draft  agreements,  are 
being  reached  and  that  progress  is  being  made  in  the  area  of  resolution,  such  as  the 
determination of the competent authority. Also, in the more difficult and complicated issue of 
financing, headway is being made on the characteristics of the proposed Single Resolution 
Fund.  Negotiations  are  following  their  course  and  an  extraordinary  Ecofin  meeting  is 
scheduled for next week to address these matters.  
Let  me  now  look  at  the  new  powers  assigned to  the  Banco  de  España  in  the  draft  bill  on 
credit institution supervision and solvency to be debated shortly. 
increased  supervisory 
intensity  and  more 
resilient 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Obviously  all  the  functions  and  powers  conferred  on  the  Banco  de  España,  which  I  will 
describe shortly, will have to be interpreted and implemented taking into account the powers 
of  the  European  Central  Bank  in  the  framework  of  the  implementation  of  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism. 
From  the  formal  standpoint,  the  draft  bill  will  consolidate  in  a  kind  of  “Bank  Code”  all  the 
regulatory provisions on the creation, activity and control of credit institutions, thus putting an 
end  to  the  dispersion  of  legislation  which  has  characterised  the  credit  sector  for  various 
decades. 
Furthermore, the aforementioned consolidation aims to write into Spanish law the changes 
introduced  in  June  2013  by  the  so-called  CRD-IV  package,  i.e.  the  Directive  and  the 
Regulation  which  incorporate  the  Basel  III  Accord  into  European  legislation.  As you  know, 
that  transposition  has  been  partly  handled  by  the  promulgation  of  Royal  Decree-Law 
14/2013,  which  includes  those  matters  considered  essential  for  incorporation  before 
1 January 2014. 
Under the draft bill, and without prejudice to the framework resulting from the entry into force 
of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the Banco de España will retain its current power to 
authorise the exercise of banking activities. Moreover, it will receive additional powers, such 
as that to revoke banking licences. 
Regarding the regime governing the purchase of qualifying holdings in credit institutions, the 
Banco de España will continue to be the authority responsible for assessing the  proposals of 
potential  purchasers,  although  now  there  are  plans  to  give  it  powers  of  supervisory 
intervention, senior officer replacement, suspension of voting rights or, in extreme situations, 
licence revocation. 
As  bank  supervisor,  the  Banco  de  España  will  continue  overseeing  compliance  with 
organisational  and  disciplinary  regulations.  To  this  end,  the  draft  bill  maintains  its  existing 
inspection and verification powers, although with some changes, such as that requiring the 
Banco de España to carry out yearly stress tests on supervised institutions to evaluate their 
solvency.  
Additionally, in the context of the Banco de España’s prudential supervisory tasks, the draft 
bill  equips  it  with  certain  tools  envisaged  in  EU  legislation,  including  the  so-called  Pillar  2 
measures  such  as  additional  own  funds  requirements,  limitations  on  dividend  distribution, 
restriction of certain activities and limitation of variable compensation. 
The  Banco  de  España  will  also  be  empowered  to  set  the  “additional  capital  margins” 
envisaged in the draft bill.  
The  Banco  de  España  will  continue  drawing  up  supervisory  guidelines.  As  a  new 
development, it is envisaged that, if institutions’ conduct does not comply with the guidelines, 
they will, if required by the supervisor, have to explain the reasons for such non-compliance.  
In the area of sanctions, the Banco de España retains its current powers, independently from 
the  powers  which  may  at  any  time  be  exercised  by  the  European  Central  Bank  within  the 
framework  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  Against  this  background,  significant 
changes were made which generally strengthen the regime currently in force.  
Finally,  the  draft  bill  endows  the  Banco  de  España  with  supervisory,  inspection  and 
sanctioning powers in respect of compliance with obligations to offset, notify and reduce risks 
associated with the use of OTC derivatives. 
To conclude: 2014 will, as we all know, be an extremely intense year as far as international 
financial regulation and supervision are concerned. There will be no lack of work. My best 
wishes to all of you and good luck. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
