Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Empowering entrepreneurs through responsive 
microfinance programs 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  2013  Citi  Microentrepreneurship  Awards  (CMA) 
Awarding Ceremonies, Manila, 3 December 2013. 
 Magandang hapon sa inyong lahat! We are gathered once again to celebrate a happy event: 
the awarding of our top achievers in the Philippine microfinance sector. 
I  can  tell  you  that  it  took  a  lot  of  work:  we  had  to  go  through  evaluation,  discussions  and 
validation.  But  in  the  end,  we  are  very  pleased  that  we  continue  to  see  many  inspiring 
success stories of Filipino microentrepreneurs. 
Let us therefore acknowledge all those involved in this Citi Microentrepreneurship Award: Citi 
Philippines  represented  by  Country  Officer  Batara  Sianturi;  Microfinance  Council  of  the 
Philippines  (MCPI)  represented  by  Chairman  Mila  Banker;  the  officers  and  staff  of  the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas; and finally, our amazing and committed members of the board 
of  judges  under  the  National  Selection  Committee  which  include:  Mr.  Batara  Sianturi, 
Mr. Antonino Alindogan, Jr. and Ms. Marixi Rufino-Prieto. Atty Felipe Gozon is represented 
by Ms. Teresita Pacis of GMA. 
We  also  acknowledge  the  presence  of  Mr.  Michael  Zink,  Head  of  ASEAN  and  Singapore 
Country  Officer  of  Citi,  as  well  as  MBM  Felipe  Medalla,  Adviser  to  the  BSP  Microfinance 
Committee. 
And  most  of  all,  we  congratulate  all  the  finalists  and  all  the  winners  of  the  2013  Citi 
Microentrepreneurship  Awards  for  continuing  to  surprise  us  with  your  creativity,  your 
discipline, and your humility even as you achieve your goals in the face of many challenges 
that come your way. 
Congratulations  po  sa  inyong  lahat.  Through  you,  we  are  reassured  again  and  again  that 
microfinance  is  a  viable  option  for  entrepreneurial  Pinoys.  Eleven  years  na  po  tayo  and 
counting. Our family of awardees keep growing and you continue to make us proud. Ipinag-
ma-malaki namin kayo. 
Dahil po dito, we continue to find ways to enhance our annual awards program. This year for 
instance, we are giving a Special Award for Microenterprise Leadership. This will be awarded 
to  a  previous  winner  whose  success  continues  to  bring  it  to  another  level  of  growth  and 
expansion. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  Seeing  our  microentrepreneurs  graduate  into  the  next  level  as  a 
small  enterprise  is  a milestone  we  look forward to. In this  connection,  we  have  developed 
support programs to make this happen. 
Among  others,  the  regulation  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  on  “microfinance  plus” 
increases the ceiling of microfinance loans from one hundred fifty thousand (P150,000.00) to 
three hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00) to support further growth that will employ more 
people, create wealth, and contribute to broad-based, inclusive growth. 
As it is, we are already seeing positive results from providing microentrepreneurs access to 
finance.  As  of  end-June  2013,  186  banks  with  microfinance  operations  were  serving  over 
one  million  clients  with  combined  outstanding  loans  of  8  billion  pesos.  And  these 
microentrepreneurs have become net savers… with consolidated bank deposits of 8.9 billion 
pesos, an amount that easily surpasses their total loan. It is clear, these microentrepreneurs 
are on the road to attaining a certain level of financial independence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We  also  continue  to  implement  programs  to  provide  more  Filipinos  access  to  financial 
services  that  would  empower  people  to  improve  their  lives.  For  instance,  there  are  now 
391 micro-banking offices that provide a broad range of financial services in new areas. 
In addition, a retail electronic payments system through e-money and mobile banking is in 
place with 30 e-money issuers working alongside a network of more than 12,000 cash-in and 
cash-out  agents.  Indeed,  we  continue  to  post  gains  in  our  program  to  develop  a  more 
inclusive financial system that will promote inclusive growth. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  This  year’s  CMA  is  taking  place  on  the  heels  of  super  typhoon 
Yolanda that devastated parts of Leyte, Samar and other islands in the Visayas. Some of our 
previous  CMA  winners  were  not  spared.  Our  regional  winners  from  Bantayan  and 
Malaspacua  Islands  in  Cebu  reported  that  the  typhoon  wiped  out  everything  they  owned. 
Also affected are our previous winners living in Iloilo, Negros and Leyte. 
Destructive  natural  calamities  underscore  the  importance  of  having  adequate  insurance 
protection  especially  for  the  most  vulnerable.  In  particular,  microinsurance  can  protect  the 
hard-earned gains of our microentrepreneurs. For this reason, starting in 2011, the prizes of 
CMA winners include microinsurance. 
Indeed,  challenging  times  call  for  stronger  partnerships.  And  to  show  our  support  and 
solidarity to our microentrepreneurs, we conducted here at the Bangko Sentral last week a 
three-day event which we called Microfinance Partnerships during Challenging Times. 
Fellow  advocates  of  microfinance,  let  us  continue  to  enhance  and  strengthen  our 
partnerships  in  support  of  our  microentrepreneurs  who  have  improved  the  lives  of  their 
families and generated employment for millions of Filipinos. 
It  is  also  noteworthy  that  our  microentrepreneurs  are  also  known  for  their  generosity  in 
helping  other  would-be  entrepreneurs.  They  would  readily  share  their  stories  and  mentor 
others.  Last  month  for  instance,  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  financial  education  lectures  for 
1,700 teachers  and  principals  of  the  Department  of  Education  in  Kabankalan,  Negros 
Occidental  was  made  more  memorable  and 
local 
microentrepreneurs from Negros. 
Indeed, our microentrepreneurs have developed a culture of sharing. In words and in deeds, 
they inspire others who aspire to better their lives through microfinance. Across our country, 
our  microentrepreneurs  prove  that  humble  beginnings  can  lead  to  success  beyond  their 
dreams and sometimes even beyond our borders. 
Once  again,  congratulations  to  our  CMA  winners  this  year.  Mabuhay  ang  microfinance! 
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! 
the  sharing  of 
inspiring  by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
