Andreas Dombret: How to overcome fragmentation in the European 
financial market 
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the 23rd European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 22 November 2013. 
 1 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to share some thoughts with you on the subsequent discussion of how 
to overcome fragmentation in the European financial markets. 
When introducing a panel discussion, a sensible piece of advice is always to be briefer than 
anybody  dared  hope.  I  intend  to  follow  this  recommendation  and  will  therefore  limit  my 
introductory remarks to no more than 15 minutes. 
Allow  me  to  talk  about  four  aspects  that  we  at  the  Bundesbank  consider  of  particular 
importance when thinking about fragmentation within European Monetary Union. First of all, 
let me note that diagnosing financial fragmentation requires normative judgement. Moreover, 
fragmentation is, to some extent, natural. It reflects structural differences between national 
markets, which are not bad per se. 
Second, let me share my thoughts on fragmentation and its implications in a monetary union. 
And third, we also need to look at supervision when talking about fragmentation and its roots. 
I will argue why the European banking union, in the Bundesbank’s view, is an important step 
towards a more integrated European financial market. Finally, let me briefly touch upon the 
issue of fragmentation in the real economy. 
Financial market fragmentation: A bad thing or to some degree natural? 
2 
Let me come to my first point: The reasons for fragmentation. The most obvious source of 
financial market fragmentation is the existence of different currencies. As we all know, in the 
euro  area this  source  of fragmentation  was  eliminated  by  the  introduction  of the  euro.  But 
even  before  1999  there  were  various  political  initiatives  with  the  objective  of  overcoming 
market  fragmentation  in  Europe.  Most  notably,  let  me  mention  the  EU’s  internal  market, 
which guarantees free movement of goods, capital, services, and employees. 
Nevertheless,  financial  market  fragmentation  within  the  euro  area  has  been  discussed  in 
quite  some  depth  over  the  past  few  years.  Probably  most  observers  would  agree  that 
financial markets in today’s European Monetary Union are still segmented or fragmented – 
especially when compared with the situation before the crisis. 
But  diagnosing  financial  fragmentation  is  by  no  means  a  purely  technical  exercise  with  a 
clear  result.  In  the  end,  it  requires  a  normative  judgement,  offering  answers  to  questions 
such as: Which differences are well-founded and therefore justified? Which differences are 
not  well-founded  and,  hence,  potentially  a  sign  of  a  dysfunctional  market?  Obviously, 
reasonable people can disagree substantially on the answers to these questions. 
Strongly diverging prices of, for instance, government bonds may well be a sign of market 
fragmentation. However, determining the adequate risk premium as part of an interest rate is 
a  highly  difficult  exercise.  And  central  banks  usually  do  not  know  better  than  market 
participants  what  the  adequate  risk  premium  or  price  should  be.  Coming  from  the  private 
sector myself, let me add that central bankers should not even attempt to know better. And 
even if central bankers were to observe differences in prices or risk premia, this may be due 
to structural causes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Allow  me  to  make  this  point  as  clear  as  possible.  Segmented  markets  are  primarily  the 
symptoms of underlying structural causes, which usually explain most of the differences. This 
applies, for example, to government bond markets, to the corporate credit market as well as 
to  the  interbank  money  market.  Even  if  prices  on  these  markets  differ  markedly  among 
market  participants  or  countries,  it  would  be  premature  to  interpret  such  differences  as  a 
definite sign of market exuberance or market malfunction, as a sign of irrationality or as a 
sign of inefficiencies. 
Nevertheless, financial fragmentation can pose a challenge for the single monetary policy in 
the  European  Monetary  Union  (EMU),  not  least  with  respect  to  the  monetary  policy 
transmission channel. 
How can the Eurosystem contribute to reducing fragmentation? 
3 
The  single  monetary  policy  cannot  make  a  distinction  between  differing  economic  and 
financial  conditions  among  EMU  member  countries.  Instead,  what  matters  for  the  single 
monetary  policy  is  the  aggregate  situation  of  our  monetary  union.  In  this  context,  a 
well-known  mechanism  applies:  The  more  similar  economic  conditions  and  economic 
policies  of  member  states  are,  the  more  suitable  the  single  monetary  policy  becomes  for 
each member country. 
Does this, in turn, mean that economic conditions as well as economic outcomes need to be 
the same in every single member state of a monetary union? No – in fact, on the contrary: If 
national economic policies and national public preferences are different from one country to 
another,  national  economic  outcomes  will  differ  as  well.  These  differences  will  then  be 
mirrored in different financial market conditions. 
Therefore, even in a monetary union, different economic conditions are basically the rule and 
not necessarily an exception or a sign of a market dysfunction. Differing outcomes – not only 
in  the  financial  sphere  –  are,  in  fact,  compatible  with  a  monetary  union  –  as  long  as 
economies do not diverge too strongly and as long as important stability requirements are 
met. 
So what is the role of the Eurosystem in the context of financial fragmentation? My central 
point  is  that  the  Eurosystem  cannot  overcome  the  structural  causes  of  the  market 
segmentation, because these causes are beyond its control. As the Eurosystem cannot solve 
the sovereign debt crisis, it cannot solve the ensuing market fragmentation, either. 
I  firmly  belief  that  it  is  primarily  the  task  of  European  governments  to  provide  sound  and 
lasting solutions to the various challenges posed by the sovereign debt crisis. Three things 
are particularly important in this context. First, in order to restore confidence, member states 
have to set both their public finances and their banking systems in order. Second, distressed 
member states have to implement the necessary structural reforms in order to become more 
competitive. And third, the present framework of our monetary union has to be strengthened 
and needs to be made more consistent. 
The central banks in the euro area can, at best, cure the resulting fragmentation symptoms, 
but only to a certain degree. However, administering “central bank medicine” in order to treat 
fragmentation symptoms does not come without unintended consequences. It is more than 
important  that  such  medicine  does  not  prevent  policymakers  from  tackling  the  underlying 
causes of the fragmentation. 
Two  very  important  structural  reasons  for  fragmentation  that  became  apparent  during  the 
crisis are the sovereign debt crisis and the nexus between the solvency of sovereigns and 
banks. This nexus is something we need to overcome. And here I see a prime role for the 
banking union to which I wish to turn now. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Banking union and the treatment of sovereign exposures 
4 
The  European  banking  union  will  be  a  very  important  step  –  actually  the  most  important 
European  integration  effort  in  the  financial  market  since  the  introduction  of  our  single 
currency.  So  far,  financial  markets  in  Europe  are  not  the  only  entities  which  are  to  some 
extent fragmented along national borders – financial supervision is as well. This absence of a 
true  level  playing  field  has  certainly  contributed  to  financial  market  fragmentation.  The 
application  of  uniform  standards  by  a  single  European  banking  supervisor  will  foster 
integration.  But  single  supervision  has  to  be  complemented  with  a  single  resolution 
mechanism.  Only  if  a  bank  can  be  resolved  in  an  orderly  manner,  without  endangering 
financial stability, will authorities have the ability, and the courage, to declare such a bank 
non-viable. We still have too many banks in Europe lacking a viable business model but not 
exiting the market. A credible resolution framework can reduce supervisory forbearance as 
well as market turbulence and thus reduces the likelihood of a government bail-out. This will 
be essential in breaking the link between the balance sheets of banks and public finances. 
But  even  a  sound  banking  union  will  not  be  sufficient  to  reach  our  goal  of  making  the 
financial system more stable. Apart from supervision and resolution, we have to look at bank 
regulation.  The  current  regulatory  framework,  too,  promotes  this  nexus  between  bank  and 
sovereigns  because  it  encourages  banks  to  invest  in  sovereign  debt.  This  reinforces  the 
“doom loop” between the sovereign sector and the banking system. Should doubts about the 
sustainability  of  government  debt  arise,  the  national  banking  sector  will  also  be  negatively 
affected.  This  is  particularly  relevant  in  the  European  Monetary  Union  as  European  banks 
often only invest in the sovereign bonds of their home countries. 
The  current  regulatory  framework  is  biased  towards  sovereign  debt  in  several  ways. 
Generally,  bank  exposures  to  a  single  counterparty  are  limited  to  a  quarter  of  a  bank’s 
eligible capital. But this does not apply to exposures to sovereigns, which are exempt from 
such  rules.  Furthermore,  sovereign  exposures  are  also  privileged  by  low  or  zero  capital 
requirements,  as  they  are  seen  as  more  or  less  risk-free.  Reassessing  the  regulatory 
treatment  of  financial  institutions’  sovereign  exposures  is  crucial.  More  effective  financial 
market regulation is necessary to ensure that a “doom loop” between sovereigns and banks 
cannot emerge. 
But  let  me  come  back  to  fragmentation.  We  do  not  only  observe  natural  differences  and 
fragmentation in financial markets, but also in the real economy. And I would claim that we 
should not interpret this generally as a malfunction there either. 
Fragmentation also exists in the Real Economy 
5 
Germany  has  been  criticized  for  its  relatively  high  current  account  surpluses.  The  current 
account  balance  in  Germany  is,  however,  not  the  result  of  distinct  government  policies  or 
even  central  economic  planning.  It  is,  first  and  foremost,  the  result  of  market-driven 
processes reflecting the investment and saving decisions of millions of market participants. 
And  they  simply  reflect  structural  causes.  For  countries  like  Germany,  a  current  account 
surplus  helps  to  absorb  future  burdens  induced  by  its  demographic  development.  In  this 
sense, current account surpluses are not an economic harm but an economic asset. 
Neither fellow European Monetary Union countries nor the European Monetary Union as a 
whole would be better off if Germany were to be weakened artificially. Especially, since the 
relatively strong balance sheets of German households, businesses, and of the public sector 
provide a certain degree of stability not only for Germany, but for the euro area as a whole. 
We have to accept the structural differences between economies. 
This brings me back to the main points of my speech. First, that diagnosing fragmentation 
requires  normative  judgement.  Second,  fragmentation  often  reflects  structural  differences 
and is not bad per se. Third, that the banking union will be an important step towards more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
integrated financial markets. And last but not least, differences or fragmentation in the real 
economy may be justified as well. 
Since  a  speaker  should  exhaust  the  topic,  not  the  audience,  I  will  close  my  introductory 
remarks here. 
Thank you for your attention today, and I wish you a productive and rewarding discussion.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
