Ardian Fullani: Improving the performance of Albania’s banking sector 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the year-end event with the 
Albanian Association of Banks, Tirana, 17 December 2013. 
 Dear bank executives, 
Your Excellency Ambassador Sequi, 
Dear Mr. Ilahi, 
Dear Mr. Pencabligil, 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  this  year-end  meeting,  as  we  reflect  about  the 
challenges  we  faced  and  the  objectives  we  accomplished  in  this  year,  and  endeavour  to 
identify issues that may arise over the next year. Given the celebrations time and the spirit of 
this meeting, I would rather not dwell upon all the issues I would have liked to. However, I will 
share with you my opinion on two issues I consider as important for a good performance of 
the banking sector over 2014. 
Before moving on, we should acknowledge that the year we are leaving behind was a difficult 
one  for  the  banking  sector.  In  its  development  cycle  for  over  more  than  one  decade,  this 
year, the banking sector’s growth slowed down sharply and annual lending levels contracted. 
Deteriorated asset quality, dictated by credit, has led to lower financial profit due to higher 
provisions needed. These developments have reflected the overall economic slowdown and 
domestic demand drop resulting from lower private consumption and investments. However, 
other  developments  highlighted  the  banking  sector’s  capacity  to  properly  respond  to  and 
cope with these challenges. The banking sector has maintained ample liquidity and capital 
levels  thanks  to  the  further  rise  in  public  deposits  and  added  capital  by  parent  banks.  In 
terms of non-performing loans, obvious efforts have been made to restructure credit and sell 
off non-performing loans to non-bank financial institutions. 
The Albanian Association of Banks has played an active role in discussing the problems with 
relevant  authorities  and  identifying  solutions  through  the  regulatory  treatment  of  non-
performing  loans,  notably,  the  legal  amendments  to  collateral  execution  process,  which 
entered into force in September 2013. 
Through its activity, the banking industry may transform 2014 into a better year for both the 
banking industry and the Albanian economy. I think that this may be achieved through harder 
work in the following aspects: 
The  first  aspect  pertains  to  restoring  lending  to  adequate  levels  in  Albania.  This  objective 
may be achieved by interlinking these three elements: 
a)  
Cleaning up balance sheets from non-performing loans. It is indispensible that you 
should mark evident progress during 2014 to write off loss loans from their balance 
sheets  and  engage  in  cautious  credit  restructuring,  where  necessary.  The 
improvement in the fiscal handling of loan write-offs, in the near future, is expected 
to  better  support  this  process;  however,  this  does  not  justify  the  sluggish  and 
protracted  action.  I,  therefore,  call  for  your  utmost  commitment  to  successfully 
implement projects initiated with the World Bank in this regard. 
Additionally,  quantitative  objectives  for  reducing  the  level  of  non-performing  loans 
should be included in your institution’s annual work plans for 2014; 
Evaluating  and  selecting  new  loan  applications  in  a  professional  fashion.  Indeed, 
credit demand remains weak; however, this exists and must be viewed in terms of 
its  potential  for  growth  in  the  future.  In  this  regard,  the  banking  industry  should 
 b)  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
strengthen  its  analysis  to  steer  lending  toward  those  sectors  of the  economy  with 
high  development  potentials.  Priority  should  also  be  given  to  launching  banking 
products  that  boost  credit  demand  from  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises, 
mitigating credit risk through portfolio diversification and improving the stable return 
on bank lending; 
Reducing  lending  costs.  I  refer  to  the  interest  rate  applied  to  lek  loans.  To  our 
opinion,  it  has  inadequately  reflected  both  the  key  interest  rate  trend  and  our 
expectations.  From  the  decrease  in  the  interest  rates  applied  to  government 
borrowing, we understand that the inert moves in the cost of lending reflect the risk 
premia the banking industry imposes when lending to the private sector. For 2014, 
we  think  that  the  banking  industry  should  better  support  the  private  sector, 
considering that: 
IMF’s agreement with Albania will mitigate government’s need for borrowing; 
Public arrears to the private sector are expected to begin to be paid off shortly; 
Worsening  financial  ratios  in  the  banking  industry  imposes  the  gradual  return  to 
lending to the private sector, in order to improve the generation of income. 
c)  
 Second,  I  would  like  to  underline  the  need  for  the  significant  improvement  of  technical 
capacity  and  structures  for  risk  management.  In  this  regard,  your  decision  making  should 
include  analytical  assessments  of  the  performance  of  your  institutions  against  various 
scenarios. This is a requirement stipulated in the existing regulatory framework, which we will 
monitor  with  additional  caution  over  the  next  year.  In  our  view,  this  element  constitutes  a 
bank management quality indicator. 
Sparing  the  details,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  continue  to 
provide the necessary support for all these processes. We appreciate the professional and 
direct cooperation with you, as an important element to comply with the requirements of the 
supervisory and regulatory framework. 
Moreover, the IMF’s agreement and additional financial support from the World Bank and the 
European  Union  will  contribute  to  restoring  the  country’s  long-term  economic  stability, 
translating the macroeconomic stability into higher economic growth rates. I am confident the 
banking  industry  will  use  this  moment  to  identify  the  best  opportunities  to  restructure  and 
improve its performance and expand its activity, thus reassuming its role as the engine for 
the country’s economic development. 
Thanking you for the invitation, I would like to wish you all good health and a prosperous and 
successful New Year! 
Happy New Year! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
