K C Chakrabarty: Vigilance administration – encouraging probity in 
public life 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a 
seminar  organised  by  the  Centre  For  Integrity,  Governance  and  Training  on  “Vigilance 
Administration”, Mumbai, 11 November 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Smt. N. Mohana and Shri R. K. Sharma is gratefully acknowledged. 
1.  Shri  A.  K.  Handa,  Chairman,  Centre  For  Integrity,  Governance  &  Training  on  Vigilance 
Administration  (CIGVA);  Shri  S  .K.  Goel,  former  CMD,  UCO  Bank;  Shri  R.V.  Verma, 
Chairman,  NHB;  other  officials  of  CIGVA;  delegates  to  this  seminar  on  Vigilance 
Administration,  ladies  and  gentlemen!  At  the  outset,  let  me  congratulate  CIGVA  and  Shri 
Handa  for  creating  an  institutional  forum  which  seeks  to  strengthen  the  governance 
processes with an underlying objective of bringing about qualitative improvements in public 
service  delivery  for  overall  societal  benefits.  It  is,  indeed,  commendable  that  CIGVA  has 
been  organising  these  training  programmes  for  generating  fresh  capacities  and  for  raising 
the competency levels of personnel involved in vigilance administration so that the standards 
of  ethical  conduct  are  effectively  met  in  all  public  institutions.  The  exchange  of  ideas  and 
anecdotes that happen in such seminars increase our knowledge exponentially and make us 
aware of issues afflicting the system as a whole. 
Introduction 
2. The importance of vigilance in our daily life is aptly established in the quote of John Philpot 
Curran,  an  Irish  orator,  politician,  lawyer  and  judge  who  stated  that  “The  condition  upon 
which God hath given liberty to man is eternal vigilance”. Pearl S. Buck, an American writer 
and novelist had further reinforced the importance of vigilance in our daily life by stating that 
“When good people in any country cease their vigilance and struggle, then evil men prevail”. 
These observations made years back hold true even today, where one has to be ever vigilant 
to ensure that no harm befalls him, his family or the society at large. Hence, the need for 
awareness about vigilance and the various dimensions to it has become all the more critical 
in the modern public space. 
3. The dictionary defines Vigilance as being watchful and wary to detect danger; being ever 
awake  and  alert.  While  being  vigilant  is  important  in  all  walks  of  life,  the  observance  of 
vigilance  becomes  more  critical  in  the  financial  sector  and  particularly  for  institutions  like 
banks,  which  deal  with  public  money.  While  in  my  address  today,  I  would  draw  specific 
references  to  the  banking  sector,  the  fundamental  issues  that  I  intend  to  raise  are  pretty 
much sector neutral as far as the Government and public sector undertakings are concerned. 
However, though, the vigilance issue is relevant in the private sector as well, the issue does 
not assume such a big proportion ostensibly on account of expeditious and summary nature 
of punishments meted out to the guilty. 
4. Banks, which act as an intermediary between depositors and lenders, are duty bound to 
observe the highest standards of safeguards to ensure that money accepted from depositors 
are  not  mis-utilised  and  are  put  to  gainful  use  or  are  available  with  them  to  be  paid  on 
demand.  In  order  to  ensure  this,  banks  are  not  only  required  to  do  due  diligence  on  the 
borrowers but are also expected to put in place appropriate safeguards to ensure that the 
transactions being undertaken by the staff are as per laid down guidelines. The watchfulness 
enforced by the vigilance function is required to ensure that public money, which banks hold 
in fiduciary capacity is not allowed to be misused by the delinquent elements in any manner. 
Precisely,  the  same  logic  holds  good  for  the  need  for  a  vigilance  function  in  other  public 
sector  enterprises  or  in  the  Government  as  these  institutions  too  are  custodians  of  public 
funds. In a sense, an effective vigilance is a sine qua non for good Governance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Vigilance function in banks 
5.  The  need  to  have  a  dedicated  body  to  look  into  vigilance  and  anti-corruption  issues  in 
public sector undertakings was felt way back in the early 1960s when Government of India 
set  up  the  Committee  on  Prevention  of  Corruption  [popularly  known  as  Santhanam 
Committee] on whose recommendation the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) was set up 
in February 1964 as an Apex Body with its vigilance units headed by Chief Vigilance Officers. 
The  Commission  was  since  accorded  statutory  status  on  August  25,  1998  through  the 
Central Vigilance Commission Ordinance, 1998 which was substituted by Central Vigilance 
Commission Act, 2003. 
6. Public Sector banks fall under the jurisdiction of Central Vigilance Commission on account 
of  their  incorporation  and  operation  as  public  sector  entities.  Further,  RBI  also  issued 
guidelines  in  May  2011  advising  all  the  private  sector  banks  to  evolve  suitable  structure 
within their organization which would scrutinize all cases where any foul play is suspected 
from vigilance angle. This mechanism is intended to ensure that reckless decisions resulting 
in loss – of money and reputation – to the bank – are identified and suitable action is initiated 
against the delinquent employees promptly and effectively. The existence of a credible and 
responsive vigilance system acts as an effective deterrent to disorderly conduct. 
7.  The  guidelines  on  vigilance  administration  are  issued  by  the  Central  Vigilance 
Commission.  The  Chief  Vigilance  Officers  in  the  respective  organisations  have  been 
authorised to decide upon the existence of a vigilance angle in individual cases, at the time 
of registration of the complaint. Once a complaint has been registered as a vigilance case, it 
will have to be treated as such till its closure, irrespective of the outcome of the investigation. 
Although formulation of a precise definition is almost impossible, generally a vigilance angle 
could be perceptible in cases characterised by: 
• 
commission of criminal offences like demand and acceptance of illegal gratification, 
possession  of  disproportionate  assets,  forgery,  cheating,  abuse  of  official  position 
with  a  view  to  obtaining  pecuniary  benefits  advantage  for  self  or  for  any  other 
person; 
irregularities reflecting adversely on the integrity of the public servant; 
lapses  involving  gross  or  wilful  negligence,  recklessness,  failure  to  report  to 
competent  authorities,  exercise  of  discretion  without  or 
in  excess  of 
powers/jurisdiction, cause of undue loss or a concomitant gain to an individual or a 
set of individuals/a party or parties and flagrant violation of systems and procedures. 
I  would  like  to  add  here  that  not  only  the  financial  propriety  of  transactions  but  at  times, 
certain non-financial aspects also need to be examined from a vigilance angle. I will return to 
this issue in a little while. 
8. As in all organisations, vigilance activity in financial institutions is an integral part of the 
managerial function. The vigilance function should not be seen as an impeding factor in the 
decision  making  process  in  any  institution.  It  should  be  viewed  as  internal  litmus  test  to 
identify  the  bonafide  decisions  taken  in  the  institution,  irrespective  of  the  fact  whether  the 
decision taken has resulted in loss to the institution or not. It is not that all decisions which 
result in loss to the banks are to be viewed as decisions taken with ulterior motives but, at 
the same time, the banks need to go into the merits of each decision so that actions taken 
with  ulterior  motives  and  without  clear  adherence  to  the  laid  down  procedures  can  be 
recognised,  segregated  and  dealt  with  incisively.  The  role  of  the  vigilance  structure 
envisaged  in  the  banks  has  to  be  to  strike  a  fine  balance  between  the  role  of  risk  taking 
which is the raison d’être of banks and the responsibility as trustees of public deposits. 
9.  The  incidence  of  frauds  and  levels  of  NPAs  in  the  banking  system  have  been  on  an 
upswing for quite some time now. I would return to these specific issues a little later in my 
address,  but,  at  this  stage  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  adverse  developments  like 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
rising incidents of frauds and ballooning of NPAs in the banking sector and similar adverse 
outcomes  like  mispricing  of  national  resources  in  other  public  sector  entities  and  the 
Government  departments  has  led  to  a  situation,  where  vigilance  function  has  become 
extremely critical to ensure good governance standards and probity in the implementation of 
projects  involving  public  money.  The  primary  reason  for  such  adverse  outcomes  is  that  a 
large majority of such projects are mainly supported by debt (whatever equity is brought in is 
mainly money raised as debt or quasi debt) and hence key stakeholders in the project i.e. 
borrowers,  lenders  and  administrators  have  virtually  no  downside  risk  from  the  failure  of 
projects, but substantial upside return. Only stakeholders who have some downside risk are 
the  politicians  primarily  due  to  compulsions  of  electoral  politics  and  media  gaze,  which  is, 
understandably,  of  very  short  term  nature.  There  is  virtually  no  accountability  for  the  top 
decision makers and on most occasions it is only the public interest that is sacrificed. In such 
an  environment,  vigilance  administration  in  the  public  sector  undertakings  becomes  very 
critical and needs to be carried out with extreme care and clarity. 
Three aspects of vigilance administration 
10. There are three aspects to the vigilance function – Preventive, Punitive and Participative 
–  (surveillance  and  detection).  In  normal  course,  banks  should  strengthen  preventive 
vigilance functions by inculcating a sense of honesty and integrity among its employees and 
establishing internal systems and controls, which would act as a defence against malafide 
activity.  Preventive  vigilance  function  is,  perhaps  the  most  crucial  and  yet,  the  most 
challenging of the three aspects of vigilance that I mentioned earlier. It is crucial because it 
has the potential to prevent lapses from occurring by stemming the rot at the initial stages 
itself.  However,  it  is  challenging  because  it  needs  to  be  a  continuous  exercise  across  all 
levels  of  the  organization  and  demands  the  focussed  attention  of  the  management.  This 
involves keeping close watch on the activity profile and the life style of the employees. The 
employees, who maintain a flashy life style without accounted for means to support such life 
style, who rarely take leave, who do not share the finer points of work with fellow colleagues, 
who take extra interest in the work assigned to others, who are ever ready to help vendors 
dealing  with  the  institution,  who  are  under  debt  etc.,  need  to  be  closely  watched  from  a 
vigilance angle. 
11.  This  should  be  followed  by  strengthening  participative  vigilance  function  which 
encompasses reviewing the existing systems and control, identifying lacunae and putting in 
place sufficient red flags so that the scope for misconduct is minimised and transgressions 
are  detected  swiftly.  The  systems  of  the  institution  which  allow  the  employees  to  take 
independent  decisions  without  subjecting  them  to  “four  eye  principle”,  allowing  use  of 
excessive  powers  without  scrutiny,  giving  unrestrained  financial  powers  to  individual 
employees, allowing employees to change the terms and conditions of any contract without 
involving the original sanctioning authorities etc. need to be reviewed and proper checks and 
balances need to be put in place to avoid misuse of powers by individual employee for their 
personal benefit. When the precautions become part of the culture of the organisation, the 
same  also  act  to  improve  the  surveillance  and  detection  vigilance  function  in  any 
organisation. 
12.  To  strengthen  the  preventive  vigilance  function  in  any  institution,  involvement  of  all 
stakeholders irrespective of their standing in the institution can play an important part. For 
example,  if  any  branch  manager  accommodates  any  constituent  after  the  office  hours  for 
some pecuniary benefit for himself or his close friends, the best source to collate information 
about the activities of such branch manager may be subordinate staff who may be present in 
the office during this period. Similarly any information about the nefarious activities of officials 
dealing with outside vendors can be collected through market intelligence. 
13. Holding periodical workshops and training programmes for the dealing staff on vigilance 
aspects  to  sensitise  them  about  the  need  to  be  cautious  while  dealing  with  outsiders  and 
making  them  aware  about  the  penal  provisions  which  an  employee  will  be  subjected  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
following detection of his involvement in such nefarious activities is one of the most effective 
tool of participative vigilance as it instils a sense of responsibility in the minds of employees 
and  serves  as  a  warning  against  engaging  in  self  enriching  activities  at  the  cost  of  the 
interests of the organization. 
14. The concept of whistleblower is another effective tool for preventive vigilance which acts 
as  deterrent  for  the  employees  to  keep  themselves  away  from  such  activities.  The 
whistleblower is generally an insider who has near full knowledge of the nefarious activities 
of fellow worker or higher official and can provide clinching evidence against the delinquent 
employee when required. The management should support the culture of whistleblowers in 
their organisations so that this channel of information gathering from the inside sources can 
be nourished and built into an effective arm of the vigilance function. 
15. With regard to concept of whistleblower, perhaps it will be appropriate to quote Churchill 
who had said “Courage is what it takes to stand up and speak, Courage is also what it takes 
to sit down and listen”. I would urge all of you who are present here and are entrusted with 
vigilance  functions  in  the  respective  organisations  to  remember  Churchill’s  words  to 
encourage  employees  to  speak  up  when  they  come  across  activities  which  are  not  in  the 
interest  of  the  organisation.  The  decision  makers  in  the  organisation  should  also  show 
courage by listening to somebody who may be speaking necessary but unpalatable truths. 
16. Punitive vigilance is the most important and most dreaded part of the vigilance function in 
any  organisation. The management  can  use  this function to  instil  a  sense  of  responsibility 
and accountability amongst its work force. To make this tool really effective, the management 
should  strive  to  complete  the  investigation  process  promptly  without  any  bias  and  impose 
penalty  which  is  commensurate  with  the  gravity  of  the  offence  committed  and  the  loss 
suffered by the organisation. For this purpose, there need to be close coordination between 
the organisation and investigating agencies like police/ CBI/ CVC. Care should be taken to 
place  bonafide  business  decisions  on  different  footing  from  decisions  guided  by  ulterior 
motive of deriving undue personal benefit from the transactions. This is important to ensure 
that the decision making ability is not impacted adversely. 
Progress in vigilance administration in banking sector: RBI’s experience 
17. Our experience with implementation of these three aspects of vigilance function by the 
banking  industry  does  not  inspire  enough  confidence.  Our  observation  is  that  preventive 
vigilance does not get the desired focus while surveillance and detective vigilance function is 
almost  non-existent.  The  punitive  vigilance  aspect  is  also  not  implemented  with  required 
objectivity and alacrity. 
18. In banks, credit related decision making has a very high potential for indulging in unfair 
and corrupt practices, but at the same time, it is extremely difficult to establish that officials 
have resorted to such practices. One of the manifestations of the vigilance failure is a sharp 
increase in the number of high value advance related frauds especially in the public sector 
banks  (Annex  1).  In  this  context,  I  must  admit  that  there  are  definitional  incongruities 
surrounding fraud and there is a need to draw a clear distinction between a crystallization of 
business risk taken in normal course and a fraud. My own view is that unless the borrower 
disputes his liabilities or the advance is not utilized for creating any asset or its deployment is 
in complete disregard to the purpose for which the sanction and disbursal is made or unless 
fund is siphoned off by the borrower, the advance should not be treated as a fraud. However, 
notwithstanding  the  definitional  part,  we  observe  a  tendency  on  part  of  the  sanctioning 
authorities to brandish their credit appraisal failure as a fraud perpetrated by the borrower. I 
am not sure how a borrower who has maintained good banking relationship with the banks 
for a few years suddenly becomes a fraudster. My assessment of the situation is that, in such 
cases  more  often  than  not,  it  is  the  failure  of  the  credit  appraisal  and  post  disbursement 
supervision  processes  which  results  in  accounts  becoming  non-performing  or  being 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
classified  as  fraud.  This  state  of  affairs  in  public  sector  banks  is  a  reflection  of  a  general 
lowering of guard by the vigilance administrators in banks. 
19.  Our  analysis  of  large  value  frauds  (greater  than  Rs.  50  crore  in  value)  has  thrown  up 
some  interesting  conclusions  like  an  inordinate  delay  in  declaring  the  accounts  as  fraud 
(Annex  2),  covering  too  many  officials  in  the  probe,  holding  junior  officers  responsible  for 
frauds  etc.  We  have  also  observed  that  in  frauds  in  consortium/Multiple  Banking 
arrangements, while some banks do not find any staff accountability, several others do the 
opposite(Annex  3).  Our  analysis  also  suggests  that  out  of  719  officers  who  were  found 
accountable in 230 large value fraud accounts in the banks over a period of time, 426 officers 
were  up  to  the  rank  of  Senior  Manager,  196  officers  were  Chief  Managers  and  AGMs, 
94 officers were of the rank of DGM, GM and CGM and only 3 Officials were from the Top 
Management and the Board of Directors. This statistic highlights the skewed nature of our 
punitive vigilance process and its tendency to focus on the lower level functionaries. Another 
factor which greatly erodes the efficacy of the vigilance function is the disconnect between 
the punishment meted out and the offence. We observe that in public sector banks, most of 
the  officials  found  liable  were  let  off  with  minor  penalties  –  caution,  warning,  censure, 
stoppage  of  increments  for  limited  period  etc.  which  sends  out  a  wrong  message  –  a 
message  about  passive  tolerance  rather  than  active  intolerance  towards  misconduct! 
Incidentally, private and foreign banks operating in India adopt a no nonsense approach as 
reflected by the quantum of penalties imposed for similar misdemeanours including dismissal 
from service. 
20.  Based  on  our  analysis  of  large  value  advance  related  fraud  cases,  I  would  like  to 
highlight following issues for closer scrutiny by the vigilance administration in banks: 
(i) 
Dragging in too many people in the ambit of probe not only delays the process but 
also scuttles the identification of actual perpetrators 
Holding lower rung officials accountable for frauds even though the sanctioning of 
advances is usually at the level of senior executives/Board 
The  officials  at  junior  level  should  be  brought  under  the  ambit  of  probe  for 
accountability only if there is deficiency at the monitoring/implementation level 
Establishing  accountability 
the  case  of 
consortium/Multiple Banking arrangements where there is common tendency on part 
of  the  member  banks  to  absolve  themselves  of  all  responsibilities  and  squarely 
blame the lead bank for deficient credit appraisal/ post-disbursement monitoring 
in  all  member  banks  even 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
in 
21.  Therefore,  what  is  of  essence  is  the  speed  with  which  the  fraud  is  acknowledged, 
investigations are concluded, staff accountability is fixed and deterrent action is taken. While 
on the subject of fraud in banks, let me also raise another wider issue. As vigilance officials 
your focus is on the internal staff but what about the fraudulent borrowers. Who ensures that 
they  are  appropriately  punished?  I  feel  there  is  an  urgent  need  to  ensure  that  the  system 
joins hands in punishing the perpetrators of frauds including an outright refusal of banking 
facilities to them. Similarly, stringent and exemplary action including debarment from further 
hiring  also  needs  to  be  taken  against  professionals  like  chartered  accountants,  lawyers, 
valuers who aid and abet the fraudulent practices. 
Vigilance administration: the non-financial aspects 
22.  Let  me  now  come  back  to  the  issue  of  examining  non-financial  aspects  as  part  of 
vigilance administration. We see many instances of close relatives of the officials working for 
the commercial entities which these officials also supervise. As some of you may be aware 
there  is  a  raging  furore  and  an  investigation  of  JPMorgan  by  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission  in  the  USA  for  hiring  Chinese  “princelings”  (the  privileged  children  of  ruling 
Communist Party leaders) in order to land business in the country. Do we make an analysis 
of  how  many  of  these  recruitments  are  based  on  merit  and  how  many  of  these  are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
in 
lending 
inherent 
the  risks 
transaction  or 
accommodations? Sooner or later, such issues are also likely to come up for debate in our 
society. It is important, therefore, that we take cognizance of the problem before it snowballs 
into  a  major  controversy.  Further,  there  is  also  this  issue  of  bureaucrats,  regulators, 
supervisors  taking  up  appointments  with  the  entities  they  regulated/supervised,  soon  after 
their  retirement.  This  is  an  inherently  dangerous  practice  which  needs  to  be  curbed  with 
appropriate polices. 
23.  Similarly,  I  have  an  issue  with  the  concessional  pricing  extended  to  the  few  so  called 
“special” borrowers on considerations like overall business relationship. Pricing is essentially 
meant  to  cover  inherent  risks  and  administrative  cost.  I  do  not  know  how  business 
relationship  brings  down 
the  cost  of 
administration.  In  order  to  eliminate  the  element  of  discretion  in  such  transactions,  it  is 
essential  that  the  respective  Boards/  Ministries/  Departments  lay  down  well  documented 
policies/rules  for  pricing  of  products  and  services  or  national  resources.  I  would  urge  the 
vigilance machinery in the institutions to closely focus on this aspect. 
24.  To  my  mind,  one  of  the  major  sources  of  corruption  is  spending  beyond  sanctioned 
authority  by  the  public  institutions.  There  is  virtually  no  accountability  for  unnecessary  or 
unethical  spending  across  institutions.  The  spending  is  very  often  hidden  in  the  garb  of 
legal/audit or regulatory expenses. The problem is more endemic at higher levels where such 
spending is never questioned. Do you as vigilance officers probe into these spending? In the 
developed economies, there is a system of disclosing the donations made to political parties, 
expenses  incurred  on  bureaucracy/regulators/  policy  makers  etc.  I  wish  to  raise  a  debate 
here on why we should not have similar disclosure norms and transparent practices by our 
corporates. In the meantime, there is a need for a strong internal control framework for such 
expenses,  which  should  necessarily  be  monitored  by 
the  organization’s  vigilance 
mechanism. 
25.  I  would  also  urge  the  community  of  vigilance  officers  not  to  go  overboard  and  remain 
circumspect  while  dealing  with  corruption  cases.  One  has  to  be  able  to  draw  a  distinction 
between a “tip” and a “graft”. It would, perhaps, be in order for the organisations to prepare a 
code  of  ethics  which  should  clearly  outline  the  expectations  from  the  employees  while 
dealing with the various stakeholders. 
Improving effectiveness of vigilance function 
26. This brings us to the basic question of how to make the vigilance function more effective 
without creating any fear in the mind of employees. In my view, institutions should lay more 
emphasis on the preventive vigilance aspect so that the problem may be addressed in the 
initial  stages  itself.  Organizations  can  benefit  by  inculcating  a  sense  of  honesty  and 
responsibility  among  its  employees.  Ownership  of  the  vigilance  function  should  not  rest 
merely with the few officials manning the vigilance department, it should traverse across the 
length and breadth of the organization. 
27. In this context, it will be appropriate to quote renowned poet Alexander Pope who said 
“An honest man is the noblest work of God. So my friends, there is no substitute to honesty. 
Honesty is not a concept or a word. It is a way of life. Honesty pays in life. Dishonest people 
may  prosper  at  times  but  in  the  end,  it  is  the  honest  man  who  wins.  Honesty  needs  no 
excuses. Honesty leads to mental peace. It answers your conscience. An honest man needs 
no vigilance. It is meant for people who are black sheep in any organization. So, let us all 
pledge to be honest in life, not only in our public dealings as public servants but as human 
beings to fellow human beings on the earth. One must have a value system and must stick to 
that on all costs”. 
28.  The  second  aspect  in  my  opinion  would  be  a  clear  and  transparently  professed 
intolerance  for  misconduct,  by  both  insiders  and  outsiders.  While  well  laid  down  vigilance 
policy  can  address  the  internal  requirements,  actions  such  as  caution  listing  of  persons 
involved  in  fraudulent  activity,  information  sharing  within  the  industry,  creation  of  fraud 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
registries,  availability  and  access  to  credit  bureaus  can  to  a  large  extent  help  identify  and 
mitigate threats to vigilance on account of external influences. 
29. Thirdly, there is a need to keep yourself updated about what is happening in the industry. 
Many times people who are posted in vigilance departments feel that there is nothing much 
to  learn  apart from the vigilance  manual.  Some  also feel  dejected that  they  are  out  of the 
mainstream of the organisation. In my opinion these are very myopic views. People entrusted 
with vigilance should be as updated as people in marketing. In fact, I may add that people 
involved in the vigilance function need to be abreast of developments across business lines 
and  verticals  as  compared  to  their  colleagues  in  other  departments  who  only  need  to  be 
updated  on  developments  in  their  respective  operational  areas.  Only  if  you  know  what  is 
happening around you or what is the trend or what are the features of the new product that is 
being rolled out can you be vigilant and quickly put in safeguards. 
30. Finally, management and investigative agencies must be sensitive enough to differentiate 
between the negative consequences arising out of bonafide decisions and those arising out 
of  malafide  intentions.  There  should  be  a  robust  vigilance  system  in  place  for  prompt 
investigation and the guilty should be brought to books by imposing exemplary punishment to 
act as a deterrent for others. No doubt, this is a tough call, particularly when adherence to 
disclosure  requirements  and  good  corporate  governance  standards  may  result  in  adverse 
publicity  and  avoidable  public  enquiry.  However,  an  impartial  and  adept  vigilance  function 
can  also  serve  to  enshrine  the  culture  of  integrity  within  the  organization  and  enhance  its 
reputation and standing in the eyes of the world. 
Conclusion 
31. An improvement in efficiency of public delivery service and an efficient utilisation of public 
funds  is  incumbent  upon  efficient  governance  process  which,  in  turn,  depends  upon  a 
responsive  accountability  regime.  The  Governance  process  can  only  improve  if  the 
organisations  have  a  culture,  which  encourages  officials  at  all  levels,  right  from  the  Board 
downwards, to be accountable for their actions. It is in this context that the vigilance officers 
have  their  task  cut  out.  Rather  than  focussing  solely  on  the  punitive  aspect,  the  vigilance 
machinery has to work on the preventive and participative aspects and have to help promote 
a culture which breeds probity and integrity. 
32. As a concluding thought, my advice to people in vigilance administration is: 
• 
Know the essence of the vigilance function – What is expected of you? 
Evaluate decisions against two tests – Was it for the good of the organisation? Was 
• 
it done at the cost of the public /common good? 
Have an open and inquisitive mind – Be aware of things that may affect the interests 
and good governance in your respective organizations 
When  the  rest  of  the  organisation  is  looking  to  push  business  interests,  focus  on 
ensuring that ethics and values are not lost sight of 
  33. If you bear the above thoughts in mind while attending to your call of duty, I am sure the 
objective of vigilance function would have been well served. I once again thank CIGVA and 
Mr. Handa for  inviting me to this seminar and giving me  an opportunity  to  interact  with the 
participants representing a wide cross-section of the public sector. I observe that CIGVA has 
assembled an impressive set of speakers with vast practical experience and I, therefore, hope 
that you would have two very interesting days of deliberations. I hope some of the issues that 
I  have  raised  this  morning  would  be  debated  during  the  course  of  the  seminar  and  some 
actionable  ideas  on  improving  the  Governance  process  in  public  sector  enterprises  would 
emerge from these deliberations. I wish you the very best in all your future endevaours. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Annex 1 
Annex 2 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Annex 3 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
