Njuguna Ndung’u: Exchange rate and monetary policy nexus 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the official 
opening of the 1st Annual Research Seminar on “Exchange rate and monetary policy nexus”, 
organized by the Kenya School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 1 October 2013. 
 Invited Guests;  
Members of the Monetary Policy Committee;  
Researchers;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
Good morning. I am pleased to join you this morning at the official opening of the Research 
Seminar on “Exchange Rate and Monetary Policy Nexus” organized by the Research Centre 
at KSMS.  
I  am  delighted  that  KSMS  took  the  initiative  to  organize  this  event  which  provides  an 
important avenue to share ideas and knowledge, and for researchers to receive input from 
the financial sector players on research needs of the sector.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, why the focus on the exchange rate? As so often in recent years, I 
will  take,  as  my  starting  point, the global  crisis of  2009–2010,  and  the  risk reassessments 
that  banks,  investors,  researchers  and  decision-makers  all  over  the  world  were  forced  to 
make  as  a  result  of  the  crisis.  Legacies  of  this  crisis  amid  continued  globalization  is 
significantly reshaping the global and regional economic and financial landscape. This new 
landscape seems to be characterised by:  
1.  
Volatile capital flows, prompted by cyclical shifts in flows of funds in response to new 
risks and opportunities;  
Greater  interconnectedness,  between  financial  institutions  as  well  as  between  the 
real and financial sectors;  
Lower global economic growth, with the centre of economic gravity shifting towards 
emerging and frontier markets especially in Asia, Africa, and Latin America;  
Currency wars with potential for emerging markets currencies entering the accepted 
reserve currency range.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
These  impending  structural  changes  pose  a  number  of  challenges  to  emerging  markets, 
including  Kenya.  From  the  viewpoint  of  monetary  authorities,  there  are  two  especially 
pressing policy issues that potentially arise from these changes.  
First, more volatile capital flows combined with greater financial interconnectedness translate 
into a growing risk to financial stability;  
Second, there are implications for management of the exchange rate policy and the macro-
economy given the increasingly large and volatile financial flows. Under a flexible exchange 
rate regime, large swings in capital flows can generate excessive exchange rate fluctuations 
which may in turn undermine macroeconomic stability. These challenges are real for Kenya.  
In  addition  to  the  above  two  challenges,  the  lower  global  growth  puts  pressure  on  the 
sustainability of the export-led growth model, hence the need to look for new markets just as 
emerging markets have done to move away from traditional market enclaves.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  policy  issue  is  then  the  determination  of the  appropriate  role  of  exchange rate  policy, 
with a view to facilitating an appropriate structural adjustment process that promotes long-run 
and sustainable growth.  
The  theme  of  today’s  Seminar  is  timely  as  Kenya’s  economy  readies  for  take-off. 
Policymakers need to find a flight path through the lingering risks.  
Ladies  and gentlemen, several  papers  that  link monetary  policy  actions  and  the  exchange 
rate policy have been lined up for presentation today. These include research that looks into 
factors  that  explain  exchange  rate  movements,  the  extent  of  real  exchange  rate 
misalignment and the relationship between the real exchange rate and exports. We will also 
get presentations on papers that develop indices that can serve as an early warning system 
for currency and macro-economic crises. 4  
As Kenya aspires to be the regional financial hub; and is indeed currently regarded as so, 
one  of  the  pillars  for  maintaining  this  regional  leadership  is  also  being  on  the  frontier  of 
research information for the financial sector. A well known fact is that a financial boom can 
trigger an overvaluation of a currency if adjustments do not take place over time. The Kenya 
School of Monetary Studies is well placed to provide this leadership and it is challenged to do 
so. Therefore, these types of Seminars should be the norm on an annual basis. But filtering 
policy conclusions that can be used for policy direction remain the most important objective.  
As I conclude, I thank the participants present, including those that have travelled from far for 
this seminar. I hope the handful of issues addressed in the contributions today will provide 
the basis for a rewarding discussion.  
Once gain – you are all very welcome!  
It is my pleasure to declare this workshop officially opened.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
