Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Taking charge of your financial wellbeing 
Opening address by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore, at the MoneySENSE 10th Anniversary Roadshow, Singapore, 19 October 2013. 
 Good afternoon Members of the Financial Education Steering Committee, and everyone who 
has come to Toa Payoh hub for one reason or another. 
Please enjoy the shows and exhibitions which we have planned, that are all aimed at helping 
Singaporeans to manage their money better. 
2. 
We  all  know  that  managing  money  is  important,  regardless  of  your  income  level. 
You may be low, middle or high income, but managing your money is very important for your 
quality of life. Research supports this, but we all know from our own family members, friends, 
and colleagues at work – that it is not just how much money we make but how we manage, 
spend or share our money that determines how satisfied we are. 
Financial Literacy Survey 
3. 
MoneySENSE  commissioned  a  Financial  Literacy  Survey  earlier  this  year,  which 
shows  that  Singaporeans  are  generally  quite  careful  with  their  finances.1  80%  of 
Singaporeans save some money each month and 86% of people do not like taking on debt. 
Many people take on loans because of housing, but they don’t like to borrow more than they 
can comfortably service with their income. 
4. 
But there are some people who over-spend and over-borrow, which we find in every 
society, and Singapore as well. Data from Credit Counselling Singapore (CCS) also shows 
that  the  people  who  over-spend  and  over-borrow  are  not  just  low-income  people.  In  fact, 
most  of  them  are  not  low-income.  The  average  income  of  those  who  come  to  CCS  with 
serious debt problems is around $2,800 per month, not far below the median income level; 
and  quite  a  few  are  higher  income.  Hence  everyone  can  over-borrow  because  of  over-
spending. According to the CCS, the most common problem is actually over-spending. 
5. 
MAS  has  also  found  from  the  survey  that  more  than  half  of  those  surveyed  had 
insufficient insurance to protect their dependents if something were to happen to them. One 
in three of those surveyed did not know that they  were covered by  Medishield. Hence the 
level of awareness is not very high. 
6. 
Quite  a  few  people  are  passive  towards  managing  their  money.  That  means  not 
planning ahead or finding out information that would help them to manage their money well. 
This  is  again  something  we  find  all  over  the  world.  In  most  countries,  they  find  that  many 
people do not plan ahead, and they take life one step at a time, taking things as they come. 
But  eventually,  they  may  end  up  with  problems  if  they  have  not  saved  enough  or  not 
anticipated  some  future  expenses  for  their  children  or  themselves.  So  we  can  do  more  to 
help Singaporeans to plan ahead, by expanding financial education for all age and income 
groups, all over Singapore. This is not something we will do for one or two  years. We will 
have to continue this work as our children become young adults and eventually retire, giving 
rise  to  a  whole  new  cycle.  Hence  the  work  on  financial  education  has  to  be  done 
continuously, as it is a very important area to help Singaporeans. 
                                                
1   Financial Literacy Survey of over 1,800 Singaporeans and PRs conducted by The Nielsen Company on behalf 
of  MAS  between  August  and  October  2013.  Respondents  answered  questions  and  participated  in  focus 
groups on their knowledge of, attitudes and behaviour towards financial products and management. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Towards better financial wellbeing 
Financial protection 
7. 
What  will  MAS  do?  We  have  a  two-pronged  approach  to  help  Singaporeans  to 
enhance  their  financial  well-being.  The  first  is  to  regulate  the  conduct  of  our  banks  and 
financial  institutions.  For  banking,  the  key  issue  is  to  discourage  the  imprudent  use  of 
unsecured  credit  facilities.  Consumer  research  has  shown  the  immediate  pleasure  of 
purchasing a designer accessory or purchasing the latest gadget using a credit card. If you 
have a credit card, the immediate pleasure of using it to purchase the latest good that you’re 
interested  in  can  lead  people  to  spending  more  than  they  otherwise  would.  There  was  an 
experiment with a group of students in the US who were asked to bid for a pair of tickets to a 
basketball match. The experiment showed that those who bid for the tickets using their credit 
cards were willing to pay up to 100% more than those who were using cash.2 And this was a 
group of students that was not a typical population, but a group of MBA students from MIT! 
Even they, with their credit cards, bid much more when using credit cards than when using 
cash. This is normal human behaviour. 
8. 
Hence  MAS’  credit  card  rules  are  important. We  have  to  discourage  people  from 
excessive spending using credit cards. Many countries do not impose rules, or some have 
imposed  rules  only  recently.  We  moved  very  early  to  discourage  excessive  credit  card 
spending. I think it is a very sensible move, having a minimum income requirement and also 
making sure that once you have a credit card, you can’t spend too much compared to your 
monthly  income.  This  is  something  we  have  strengthened  recently.  As  some  of  you  may 
know,  we  have  a  total  limit  on  what  individuals  can  borrow  on  all  their  credit  cards  and 
unsecured facilities combined, with all the banks. The total limit will be capped at 12 months’ 
of income, which is still a very high borrowing on an unsecured basis. But MAS started with 
this  limit  because  we  are  aware  that  some  Singaporeans’  borrowings  currently  exceed 
12 months of income, and we have to give them time to bring their borrowings down. MAS 
will monitor the situation, and tighten the credit limits further, if necessary. 
9. 
For insurance, our main challenge is to ensure that all Singaporeans have access to 
the right products, at an affordable rate. That is our main priority for insurance. We must help 
consumers to meet their insurance needs for themselves and their families without paying for 
something they do not need. 
10. 
That’s why  we have the Financial Advisory Industry Review or FAIR over the last 
year. Two of the initiatives of FAIR will help consumers by making insurance products more 
affordable and their pricing more transparent. First, consumers will be able to buy basic life 
insurance products directly from the insurer, without paying commission. Second, consumers 
will be able to use the internet to use a web aggregator to compare prices and coverage of 
similar  insurance  products  offered  by  different  insurance  companies.  So  they  can  choose 
what is suitable to their needs, and at the most affordable rate. The competition that comes 
about because of this transparency will also help keep costs low for consumers. 
Financial education 
11. 
The second approach is reaching out to Singaporeans through MoneySENSE. This 
is the work of our partners, not just the MAS – including the community, the media, financial 
industry  associations,  advocacy  groups  like  CASE  and  SIAS,  our  educational  institutions 
which  will  play  a  larger  role  in  the  future,  and  a  whole  set  of  government  agencies,  all 
working  with  MAS  to  propagate financial  education  to  as  many  Singaporeans  as  possible. 
Over  the  last  10  years,  MoneySENSE  has  reached  out  to  Singaporeans  through  many 
                                                
2   Prelec  and  Simester,  “Always  Leave  Home  Without  It:  A  Further  Investigation  of  the  Credit  Card  Effect  on 
Willingness to Pay”, Marketing Letters 12, no. 1, February 2001. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
channels  –  schools,  community  events,  workplace  talks,  newspapers,  TV,  radio,  and  now 
increasingly the internet – to reach out in every way  we can to as many Singaporeans as 
possible. 
12. 
We set  up  a  new  institute  last  year  called  the  Institute for  Financial  Literacy  (IFL) 
which was set up jointly by MoneySENSE and the Singapore Polytechnic. This institute has 
helped to bring financial education to working adults, who don’t have much time, but they can 
attend  lunchtime  talks  and  workshops  free  of  charge  at  their  workplace.  To  date,  IFL  had 
reached out to 12,000 people. 
Translating knowledge into action 
13. 
What  will  be  our  focus  for  the  next  10  years?  First,  we  have  to  recognise  that 
financial  education  is  not just  about knowledge, but  also  about  inculcating the  right  values 
from  young,  and  encouraging  everyone  to  be  pro-active  rather  than  passive  about  their 
finances. At every income level and for every family, it really pays to prepare for the future. 
14. 
Many think that they don’t have enough time, or just say they are not interested, or 
that there’s too much to plan for because it’s too uncertain. But it’s precisely because life has 
uncertainties that we need to make plans for the future. We need contingency plans. 
So we will focus, for the next ten years, on three areas. First, we must start earlier, 
15. 
with teenagers. Forming the right attitudes towards spending and saving early in life goes a 
long way. 
Starting  from  next  year,  the  Ministry  of  Education  will  introduce  Food  and 
16. 
Consumer Education (FCE) for all secondary one and two students.  This  is  a  way  of 
teaching  them  life  skills  that  they’ll  find  very  helpful.  A  key  objective  is  to  inculcate  basic 
financial literacy in our students, at a time when they are starting to think of ways of using 
money. MoneySENSE is working closely with the MOE and NIE to equip teachers with the 
relevant skills and knowledge, so they can help the children with money management skills. 
This is the first objective, start early when they are teenagers. 
Second, we must deliver targeted financial education messages at key points in a 
17. 
person’s life, for instance, when couples intend to get married, to plan for wedding expenses, 
which can be very large if we are not careful; and later, when they are buying a flat, how to 
make sure they can buy an affordable flat for the future; advising parents on how they can 
plan and save for their child at public hospitals and clinics; and advising older Singaporeans 
when  they  withdraw  monies  from  their  CPF.  So  at  each  key  point  in  life,  we  will  provide 
targeted advice for people at the immediate stage of life they are coming upon. Deliver the 
right message at the right time. 
Third,  we  will  provide  more  avenues  for  people  who  are  in  difficulty  or  financial 
18. 
distress, to seek help. We must do everything we can to prevent people from getting into a 
worse situation, or getting into a debt spiral. CCS, with the help of ABS, runs a very useful 
debt management programme for those who cannot re-pay their borrowings from banks. We 
can do more, using our social workers and counsellors. 
19. 
MoneySENSE, through the new institute that I talked about, the Institute of Financial 
Literacy,  is  now  conducting  a  pilot  training  programme  to  help  social  workers  and 
counsellors, to equip them with financial literacy knowledge so they can provide advice to low 
income households, or those who come and see them for help. It may have to do with cutting 
down  on  utility  bills,  or  it  may  be  about  spending  wisely  in  weekly  marketing,  without 
compromising on health and wellbeing. 
20. 
of 
Singaporeans. 
MoneySENSE will continue working with the social service sector with the objective 
they  can  expand  our  outreach  to 
training  social  workers  and  counsellors,  so 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Conclusion 
21. 
This is what we plan to do for the future. I think we have done good work for the first 
ten  years,  but  there  is  a  lot  more  work  ahead  to  help  Singaporeans.  Helping  students, 
couples, retirees, to go about their financial decisions carefully and not just taking life as it 
comes, can really help improve your quality of life, not just for ourselves, but for our families 
and loved ones. 
22. 
I  encourage  everyone  who  is  here,  to  spend  a  little  bit  of  time  going  through  the 
exhibitions,  which  has  been  very  well  put  together.  So  once  again, thank  you  to  everyone 
who  has  been  a  partner  of  MoneySENSE  in  helping  Singaporeans,  and  let’s  do  more  in 
future  to  help  everyone  have  the  basic  lifeskills  of  financial  management.  Thank  you  very 
much. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
