Anita Angelovska-Bezoska: Financial regulation, implementation and 
transition effects on emerging market economies 
Speech  by  Ms  Anita  Angelovska-Bezoska,  Vice-Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the 
Republic  of  Macedonia,  at 
in  Europe,  Ankara, 
5–6 September 2013. 
the  Fourth  OMFIF  Main  Meeting 
 Special  thanks  for  the  preparation  of  the  background  note  to  Ana  Mitreska,  Monetary  Policy  and  Research 
Department and Natasa Andreeva, Financial Stability and Banking Regulation Department. Mihajlo Vaskov and 
Ljupka Georgievska also contributed to the drafting of the Note. 
Background note prepared for the participation of the Vice Governor Anita Angelovska 
Bezoska at the Fourth OMFIF Main Meeting in Europe, Ankara, Turkey, 5–6 September 
2013. 
Since the onset of the global financial crisis the financial regulatory overhaul has been 
put high on the policy agenda with the aim of increasing the resilience of the banking 
system  and  thus  promoting  global  financial  stability.  Stronger  banking  system  will  be 
better  placed  to  absorb  financial  or  economic  shocks  and  prevent  transmission  of  these 
shocks to real economy. The regulatory reform basically addresses the lessons learned from 
the crisis that insufficient capital and liquidity buffers, non-adequate on and off-balance sheet 
risk  coverage  and  excessive  leverage  can  undermine  the  stability  of  the  financial  system 
leading  to  contraction  of  the  economic  activity  that  can  further  aggravate  the  financial 
instability and require public sector intervention to avoid full-blown banking crisis. In this vein 
the reform will undoubtedly contribute to creating more sound and resilient banking system 
that  is  a  key  for  sustainable  growth.  For  the  emerging  world,  even  more  so  amidst  less 
developed capital markets, as an alternative source of growth funding. 
However,  during  the  process  of  transition,  given  the  still  rather  weak  economic 
recovery, the reform may have some negative implications for the financial markets, 
credit activity and growth dynamics. The fact that these reforms were primarily tailored to 
the  specifics  of  the  more  advanced  economies  (AE),  where  the  financial  crisis,  originally 
rooted  from  points  to  a  possibility  of  asymmetric  effects  for  advanced  and  emerging 
economies  (EE)  during  the  transitional  process.  As  EE’s  and  AE’s  economies  intrinsically 
differ in terms of the level of financial and economic development, it is to be expected for the 
financial regulatory reform to have asymmetric impact on both groups of countries. Possible, 
unintended  adverse  impact  on  emerging  market  might  occur,  both  through  the  direct 
channel  of  transmission  (via  the  direct  implementation  of  the  new  regulation),  but  also 
through  the  indirect  channel,  as  the  foreign  banks  in  the  emerging  market  change  their 
behavior in response to the new regulatory standards. The deleveraging process is one of 
the  well  known  indirect  impacts,  with  large  consequences,  particularly  in  the  emerging 
Europe. 
As the international regulatory reform process is very complex, some of the measures 
have long sequencing of implementation, and for some of the reform areas there are 
more  observations  and  analyses  to  be  done  to  define  the final  contours  of the  new 
financial  system,  more  precise  assessment  of  the  impact  seems  challenging. 
Nevertheless  the  qualitative  assessments  and  quantitative  impact  studies  converge 
toward  the  understanding  that  the  global  regulatory  changes  will  impact  the 
availability and cost of funding in the EM in transition period. The financial structure in 
the EE is rather simple, and dominated by the banking system, the retrenchment of credit 
financing  might  impair  growth  prospects  and  the  potential  for  job  creation  in  the  emerging 
markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Although the reforms process is quite comprehensive and there are probably many channels 
through which it can translate to the EE, still there are some key channels that I would like to 
highlight. 
The  first  point  of  transmission  refers  to  Basel  III  capital  requirements.  To  provide 
adequate coverage of banks’ risks exposure with capital, focus is placed on enhanced risk 
coverage (especially trading book), higher quality and quantity of the regulatory capital, and 
constraints  on  leverage.  Overall,  it  appears  that  banks  in  emerging  markets  are  well 
capitalized with relatively low reliance on hybrid capital instruments, with traditional business 
and no significant exposure to risks related to trading book, so significant direct impact of the 
new capital requirements is not expected. But the indirect effects are perceived as important, 
with possible adverse impact on the access to financing and the growth potential. Some of 
the important indirect implications are very well being pinpointed by the IMF (April, 2013) in 
its scrutiny on impact of the global regulatory changes on the CESEE countries. 
–  The  new  capital  requirements  require  balance  sheet  rebalancing  of  internationally 
active banks, i.e., increase of the capital or reduction in risk weighted assets. Given the 
still slow recovery process that would be an obstacle for faster increase of capital (through 
reinvested earnings or new capital injections) this may have implications for the availability of 
finance.  One  related  issue  is  the  exclusion  of  minority  stakes  from  consolidated  group 
capital and its implications for the process of deleverage as well as for the development and 
liquidity of local equity markets (change in the nature of acquisitions). 
–  “Retrenchment  in  specialty  finance  due  to  higher  risk  weights  for  certain  finance 
instruments would be particularly harmful to the growth outlook of the region. Some of the 
sectors  most  exposed  to  the  retrenchment  process  are  specialty  finance  lines,  particularly 
infrastructure  finance  and  trade  finance.  Infrastructure  finance  is  characterized  by  long 
maturities, heavy use of syndication, and dependence on long-term dollar funding that makes 
it particularly exposed to deleveraging” 
–  Cost  of  finance  –  “The  cost  of  finance  in  the  region  could  increase  due  to  inherent 
inconsistencies in the treatment of sovereign exposures at the solo and consolidated levels. 
Host  supervisors  typically  apply  low  risk-weighting  for  exposures  to  the  host  sovereign. 
However  under  the  forthcoming  set  of  EU  regulations,  higher  risk  weights  on  these 
exposures could result in a higher cost of finance in the host jurisdiction”. 
The second channel of transmission is related to the Basel III liquidity framework. As 
learned from the crisis that adequate capital is necessary, but not sufficient, the Basel 
III introduces internationally harmonized liquidity standards promoting internationally 
leveled  playing  field.  The  introduction  of  the  Principles  for  Sound  Liquidity  Risk 
Management and Supervision (Sound Principles adopted in 2008), Liquidity Coverage Ratio 
(LCR) and the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), undoubtedly address the prior inadequate 
liquidity regulation, which contributed to the crisis. The impact of the new regulation for sure 
will be felt in AE and EE, but most probably the nature of it will be different. Most of the EE’s 
have  already  established  sound  regulatory  regimes  for  liquidity,  as  a  response  to  the 
previous financial crisis within this group. But, despite the fact that the level of liquidity per se 
should  not  be  a  problem  there  are  additional  dimensions  through  which  the  new  liquidity 
regulation impacts the EE’s. 
– The Basel III liquidity framework asks for very specific features of the high quality liquidity 
assets, which does not always properly reflect the structure, the depth and the liquidity of the 
financial markets in the emerging markets (tighter criteria compared to the existing ones in 
national regulations). This mainly refers to government bonds, being treated as highly liquid 
assets.  Most  of  the  emerging  markets  do  not  have  deep  and  developed  government 
securities  markets,  which  imply  very  limited  availability  of  these  assets,  as  a  basis  for 
fulfillment of the liquidity requirements-”highly marketable” which is more restrictive than 
the eligibility criteria for central bank refinancing operations (and central bank liquidity is 
the  most  reliable  form  of  liquidity).  The  options  for  investing  in  foreign  securities  might  be 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
viable, but at the same time it also increases the exposure to foreign exchange risk. Some of 
the  countries  might  opt  for  the  central  bank  placements  as  an  alternative,  but  this  is  also 
seen as a solution, which increases the cost of liquidity and hence, increases the costs of 
finance. The problem of limited availability of proper assets also holds for corporate bonds, 
which should have a proper credit rating and certain liquidity features to qualify for the LCR. 
This is difficult to be fulfilled in countries with thin financial markets, and with sovereign and 
hence  corporate  credit  rating  usually  bellow  the  Basel  III  requirement.  So  measures  that 
restrict  banks  ability  to  finance  bond  holdings  may  hamper  the  further  development  of  the 
local  capital  markets.  One  remaining  issue  is  the  interaction  between  the  LCR  and  the 
provision of central bank facilities (The Basel Committee committed to work on this during 
2013). 
– The second “dimension of problems” arises from the calculation of the NSFR that 
requires  shift  from  short-term  to  more  stable  funding  of  assets  and  business 
activities. Banks would have to extend the maturity of funding sources (long-term securities 
or extend the maturity of loans) or convert long-term loans to short-term loans with negative 
implications for the effects for the growth. Extension of the maturity of the funding structure 
would also imply higher cost of financing. Within the emerging markets, the main concerns 
arise from the mismatch between the funding that is actually being stable in some of the EE’s 
and the funding that is defined as a stable one within the Basel III regulation. Some of the 
examples that we can run through are countries like Saudi Arabia and South Africa, where 
the deposits of the public sector entities and the wholesale funding are the most stable one, 
but are not treated as such within the new regulatory framework. 
The  above  can  be  considered  as  direct  impact  of  transmission  of  the  new  liquidity 
framework  to  the  EE’s,  but  the  indirect  impact  should  not  be  neglected  at  all.  The  new 
liquidity rules will probably change the assets structure in the balance sheets in some of the 
large banks in the AE’s. In a world of rapid financial integration, many of these banks have 
subsidiaries in the emerging world and if the liquidity is managed on consolidated level, this 
can  imply  possible  liquidity  shortages  in  the  host  country.  The  treatment  of  intra-bank 
exposures may pose challenges especially in the emerging markets where banking systems 
rely  markedly  on  the  parent  funding  (intra-bank  funding  will  be  treated  as  funding  from 
external third parties and their maturity will have to be extended – netting out at consolidated 
level  is  not  allowed).  Other  question  is  the  treatment  of  liquidity  transfer  restrictions. 
Excess liquidity in one entity would not be recognized when calculating the consolidated LCR 
if  there  is  a  reasonable  doubt  about  the  availability  of  such  liquidity  (due  to  ring-fencing 
measures, non-convertibility of domestic currency, foreign exchange controls etc.).This may 
lead to fragmentation of the liquidity management, replication of the treasury operations at 
decentralized level with cost implications. 
The growth impact of the regulatory changes is of large importance for the emerging 
markets,  as  they  aim  towards  financial  inclusion,  development  of  financial  markets, 
long-term sustainable growth and real convergence to the more AE’s. Two of the most 
important  points  which  have  been  extensively  discussed  in  the  growth  context  are  the 
regulatory impact on trade and long-term infrastructure finance. Trade finance has been 
considered as the most important facilitator of the trade flows in part of the emerging markets 
and  hence  as  an  important  growth  factor  within  this  group  of  countries.  Some  of  the 
estimates point to a figure of 80–90% of the world trade being reliant on some form of trade 
finance, like trade credits or insurance/guarantees. Some of the products like the Letters of 
credit have been widely used in the emerging markets and some of the estimates indicate 
around  55%  of  all  letters  of  credit  to  be  related  to  export  activities,  indicating  the  relative 
importance of trade financing in export facilitation and growth performances. Trade finance is 
particularly considered to be important for SME, as an easy and chip access to financing, as 
it is structured and self liquidating. Despite the large importance and the low riskiness, the 
new Basel rules treat the trade finance in more conservative  way, which might reduce the 
availability  of  trade  finance,  increase  its  costs  and  thus  impair  the  export  and  growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
prospects of the emerging markets. Albeit some amendments to the Basel rules in this area 
were done in October 2011, still there are views that they are relaxed asymmetrically, only 
for the importers, and as such they do not bring benefit for the emerging market exporters, 
where the problems might stem from. Longer-term infrastructure finance is also treated as 
important enhancer of the infrastructure project in the emerging economies, and crucial for 
enhancement  of  their  structural  competitiveness. The reforms  of  the  regulatory framework, 
pose challenges in this respect as they might ask for a balance sheet rebalancing towards 
more liquid assets, which can reduce the availability of infrastructure finance. In addition, the 
implementation of NSFR increases the costs of infrastructure financing as it asks these types 
of assets to be covered with longer term and more expensive funding. 
Albeit there are many other angles within the new regulatory reform which have been 
discussed in light of their consequences to the EE’s (for instance policy measures for 
dealing  with  systemically  important  banks,  the  impact  of  some  other  national  and 
regional  reforms1,  the  two  above  elaborated  dimensions  of  the  Basel  III,  seem  to 
depict, or to be a good represent of what the main impact boils down to. Rising cost of 
finance, restrained credit availability and more conservative treatment of some of the forms 
of  financing,  crucial  for  the  growth  of  EE’s  are  the  most  important  consequences  being 
discussed, which should be seriously addressed. 
As  for  the  quantitative  impact  studies, they do  indicate  a  growth impact  of the  new 
regulatory  changes,  though  with  varying 
intensity.  While  BIS  Macroeconomic 
Assessment Group finds rather modes effect, assessment of the International Institute 
of Finance and some assessments of the banking industry point to a non-negligible 
growth effects. A BBVA2 research, conducted in early 2011 estimates the impact of higher 
liquidity and capital requirement on the quantity and price of credit, and hence its impact on 
the GDP per capita. The estimation results point to a larger effect of the regulatory changes 
on the GDP per capita of the emerging markets, compared to the one in the more advanced 
countries. The results show that an increase in the capital to assets ratio by 20% reduces the 
GDP per capita by 1.6% for the whole sample, and by 2.5% for the emerging markets, while 
the  increase  of  the  liquid  reserves  to  assets ratio  by  20%  adversely  impacts  the GDP  per 
capita  by  0.4%  and  0.5%,  respectively.  Another  research,  conducted  by  the  International 
Institute  of  Finance  (IIF),  a  private  sector  institution,  in  2011,  finds  pronounced  net 
cumulative impact on economic activity of the proposed financial sector reforms (both, CAR 
and LCR) estimating that the level of GDP will be 3.2% lower than it would otherwise be after 
five years with an output loss of 0.7% per annum. On the other hand, the analysis conveyed 
by the Macroeconomic Assessment Group (MAG), which was set up by the BCBS and FSB 
in  2010  with  a  purpose  of  assessing  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  the  new  Basel  III 
proposals  suggests  a  modest  impact  on  aggregate  output  of  the  transition  towards  higher 
capital and liquidity standards. According to MAG’s assessment results, a 1 percentage point 
increase  in  the  target  ratio  of  tangible  common  equity  (TCE)  to  risk-weighted  assets  is 
estimated to lead to a decline in the level of GDP by a maximum of about 0.19% from the 
baseline path after four and a half years (equivalent to a reduction in the annual growth rate 
of  0.04  percentage  points  over  this  period).  Regarding  the  tighter  liquidity  requirements 
(modeled as a 25% increase in the holding of liquid assets, combined with an extension of 
the maturity of banks’ wholesale liabilities) MAG’s estimations point to a median increase in 
lending spreads of 14 basis points and a fall in lending volumes of 3.2% after four and a half 
years. This is estimated to be associated with a median decline in GDP in the order of 0.08% 
relative  to  the  baseline  trend.  An  IMF  study  dating  as  of  February  2012,  reports  similar 
results to MAG’s research, finding that in the absence of any monetary policy response, a 
for  all  banks  by 
permanent  synchronized  global 
in  capital  requirements 
increase 
                                                
1   For instance the EBA requirements and the Volcker Rule, within the Dodd-Frank Law in US. 
2   Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 percentage point would cause a peak reduction in GDP of around 0.5 percentage points, of 
which around 0.1 percentage point would result from international spillovers. Their findings 
show somewhat higher losses in EMEs as compared to AEs (0.74 percentage point loss in 
GDP  in  EMEs  as  compared  to  0.46  percentage  points  in  AEs)  due  to  higher  estimated 
spillover effects. 
The third point of transmission relates to development of financial markets EE’s. The 
development of deep domestic financial markets can improve the economy’s ability to absorb 
shocks  and  manage  financial  risks.  These  benefits  to  financial  stability  complement  the 
critical  role  that  capital  markets  play  in  efficient  resource  allocation  and  in  reducing  over-
reliance  on  the  banking  sector  for  the  mobilization  of  savings  and  financial  intermediation. 
Additionally, diversified financial markets provide investors with alternative asset classes in 
times  of  financial  stress.  However,  developing  such  markets  is  a  long-term  process  that 
requires proper planning, appropriate prioritization and decisive action in several successive 
stages. 
Divert efforts from further development of financial markets 
Financial markets in EE’s have become more interlinked within the local and global financial 
systems,  but  they  are  still  shallow  and  prone  to  sudden  price  movements  and  greater 
disruption  that  may  undermine  confidence  in  their  integrity. It  is  therefore  important that 
the  ongoing  fundamental  reforms  in  emerging  financial  markets  continue  and  that 
these  longer  term  priorities  are  not  forgotten  as  a  consequence  of  predominant 
focusing on the policy response to the financial crisis and on the accomplishment of 
the international regulatory reform agenda. In this sense, a decisive action is needed to 
develop  a  domestic  investor  base,  address  market  illiquidity,  and  improve  key  aspects  of 
market  infrastructure  in  order  to  mitigate  risks  to  emerging  economies’  financial  stability. 
Ultimately,  development  of  bond  markets,  money  markets  and  government  securities 
markets is the optimal route for further progress on this front. The assistance of international 
partners  in  this  area  is  of  a  key  importance  and  should  not  be  neglected  in  conditions  of 
growing challenges of different size and shape on both sides. 
Loss of diversification benefits 
Another important drawback in this regard is the initiated process of deleverage of western 
banks, their more pronounced concentration on home markets and the general fragmentation 
of international banking model that could deplete the financial markets of EE’s, slow down 
the  process  of  their  regional  integration  and  globalization  and  will  eliminate  the  potential 
diversification benefits for their investors. 
Incentive for further development of shadow banking 
Extremely high capital and other requirements may drive banking activity into institutions or 
financial  arrangements  that  are  not  regulated  as  strongly,  often  referred  to  as  “shadow 
banks.” This is especially pronounced in EE’s where required credit growth rates to support 
continued  rapid  economic  growth  and  social  development  are  much  higher  compared  to 
advanced economies (AE)3. There is near universal agreement after the financial crisis that 
the shadow banking sector is potentially capable of creating massive problems and triggering 
a future crisis. Therefore, there is much discussion on how to control those institutions and 
                                                
3   According to Financial Stability Board’s monitoring report on global shadow banking (“Global Shadow Banking 
Monitoring  Report  2012”,  page  4,  paragraph  5):  “After  the  crisis  (2008–2011),  the  shadow  banking  system 
continued  to  grow  although  at  a  slower  pace  in  seventeen  jurisdictions  (half  of  them  being  emerging 
markets  and  developing  economies  undergoing  financial  deepening)  and  contracted  in  the  remaining 
eight jurisdictions”.. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
types  of  transactions.  Determining  appropriate  capital  adequacy  standards  for  the  shadow 
banking  system  will  indeed  be  a  key  challenge  in  an  effective  redesign  of  the  regulatory 
system. A related challenge is to ensure that tighter capital standards for banks and other 
highly regulated entities do not result in their simply shifting activity to less regulated areas, 
including  off-balance-sheet  activities  such  as  structured  investment  vehicles.  This  would 
simply encourage more risk taking and raise systemic risk as well, since many off-balance-
sheet activities could end up being effectively on-balance sheet at times of crises. However, 
the truth is that we are far from completely figuring out how to control these institutions and 
types of transactions and it is unlikely that there will be an approach clever enough to provide 
the same level of systemic protection in regard to shadow banks as there will be for highly 
regulated entities. 
Conclusion 
When scrutinizing the impact of the regulatory changes on the EE’s, there are no doubts 
that  the  reform  process  is  an  important  qualitative  step  forward  for  the  overall 
financial  industry  and  its  implementation  will  mean  more  stable  financial  sector,  lower 
probability  of  financial  crisis  and  less  “headaches”  for  the  authorities  responsible  for 
macroeconomic and financial policies. Yet, apparently, there are many angles within the 
new regulation which should be further well screened and assessed in terms of their 
potential adverse impact, especially in emerging markets due to different challenges. And 
as the EE’s are currently the main engine of growth in the world economy, and the economic 
prospects of the advanced world are highly conditioned on the economic health of emerging 
countries,  it  appears  that  this  is  a  question  of  a  mutual  interest.  Improving  the  home-host 
cooperation to avoid conflicts of interest between home and host supervisors may also help 
in mitigating the possible adverse effects. 
What I have talked above, for sure does not exhaust all the issues, but I think it gives a map 
of  the  main  points  which  are  being  heavily  discussed,  as  they  can  possibly  impair  the 
financial  and  economic  prospects  of  the  EE’s.  By  now,  many  shortcomings  of  the  reforms 
have been identified, and efforts for addressing some of them have already been made. But, 
the  timeline  of  the  financial  regulatory  changes  is  rather  long.  Hence,  a  continuous 
discussion on the characteristics of the proposed financial reforms is of a great importance. 
Discussions and forums in this area can help for a timely identification and removal of the 
possible weaknesses that can easily evolve into causes of a next (global) financial crisis. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
