Koji Ishida: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Koji Ishida, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at 
a meeting with business leaders, Aomori, 11 September 2013. 
 Monetary Policy 
Introduction of the “Price Stability Target” and the joint statement by the 
government and the Bank of Japan 
I. 
A.  
First, I would like to describe the status of the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy conduct at 
the beginning of this year. At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on January 21 and 
22, 2013, the Bank decided to introduce the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the 
year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI). At the same time, it released 
a  joint  statement  with  the  government,  which  clearly  stated  that  the  government  and  the 
Bank  would  strengthen  their  policy  coordination  and  work  together  to  overcome  deflation 
early  and  achieve  sustainable  economic  growth  with  price  stability.  In  the  statement,  the 
Bank announced that, under the price stability target, it would pursue monetary easing and 
aim  to  achieve  this  target  at  the  earliest  possible  time.  Concurrently,  the  government 
announced that it would not only flexibly manage macroeconomic policy but also formulate 
measures for strengthening the competitiveness and growth potential of Japan’s economy, 
and promote them strongly. The government also announced that it would steadily promote 
measures  aimed  at  establishing  a  sustainable  fiscal  structure  with  a  view  to  ensuring  the 
credibility of fiscal management. 
Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) 
B.  
Now I  would  like to talk about the Bank’s current monetary policy measures, which aim at 
overcoming deflation. 
At  the  MPM  held  on  April  3  and  4,  2013,  the  Bank  introduced  QQE  to  achieve  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  at  the 
earliest  possible  time,  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years.  The  features  of  this  new 
monetary policy measure are as follows. First, with a view to pursuing quantitative monetary 
easing, the Bank changed the main operating target for money market operations from the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate to the monetary base, which is the total amount of money 
the Bank directly supplies to the economy. On this basis, the Bank increases the monetary 
base  –  defined  as  the  sum  of  banknotes  in  circulation,  coins  in  circulation,  and  current 
account  deposits  held  by  financial  institutions  at  the  Bank  –  at  an  annual  pace  of  about  
60–70 trillion yen. Second, the Bank purchases Japanese government bonds (JGBs) as the 
primary  means  of  increasing  the  monetary  base,  so  that  their  amount  outstanding  will 
increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. Moreover, the average remaining maturity 
of the Bank’s JGB purchases has been extended from slightly less than three years to about 
seven years – equivalent to the average maturity of the amount outstanding of JGBs issued. 
Third, in addition to JGBs, with a view to lowering risk premiums of asset prices, the Bank 
purchases exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) 
so that their amounts outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 1 trillion yen and 
30 billion yen, respectively. And fourth, the Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve 
the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary to maintain that target in a 
stable  manner.  It  will  examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and 
prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. 
So far, I have explained the basic framework of QQE. More than five months have passed 
since QQE was introduced at the beginning of April. The amount outstanding of the monetary 
base has increased from 146 trillion yen at the end of March to 177 trillion yen at the end of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
August, and has been accumulating smoothly toward 200 trillion yen, the amount projected 
at end-2013. The amount outstanding of JGBs has also been accumulating smoothly toward 
140 trillion yen, the amount projected at end-2013, increasing from 91 trillion yen at the end 
of March to 123 trillion yen recently. 
Loan support program 
C.  
In addition to implementing QQE, the Bank has been employing the Loan Support Program 
in order to make the effect of aggressive monetary easing further permeate the economy. 
The  Loan  Support  Program  consists  of  two  measures:  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to 
support strengthening the foundations for economic growth (hereafter the Growth-Supporting 
Funding Facility) and the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending (hereafter the 
Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility). With  the  Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility,  the  Bank 
supplies long-term funds at a low interest rate to private financial institutions in accordance 
with  their  efforts  in  terms  of  lending  and  investment  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for 
economic growth. With the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility, on the other hand, the Bank 
provides  long-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  to  financial  institutions  that  have  increased 
their lending, at their request, up to an amount equivalent to the net increase in their lending, 
with a view to encouraging them to take more aggressive action and helping stimulate the 
proactive credit demand of firms and households. In addition, there is no upper limit to the 
total amount of funds provided by the Bank under this facility. The outstanding balance of the 
total  loans  provided  through  both  facilities  of  the  Loan  Support  Program  has  exceeded 
7 trillion yen, supporting financial institutions’ efforts to tap firms’ proactive demand for funds. 
Developments in financial markets 
D.  
Reflecting  such  aggressive  monetary  easing  measures,  financial  conditions  in  Japan  have 
been substantially accommodative. As for firms’ funding costs, financial institutions’ lending 
rates have been significantly low. CP issuance rates have declined to around 0.1 percent – 
equivalent  to the  interest  rate  applied to  excess  reserve  balances  at the  Bank  –  and  yield 
spreads  between  corporate  bonds  and  JGBs  have  remained  narrow  on  the  whole.  With 
regard to credit supply, firms have continued to see financial institutions’ lending attitudes as 
being on an improving trend. 
From end-2012 until the beginning of April 2013, long-term interest rates in Japan declined 
significantly, reflecting heightened expectations for large-scale monetary easing by the Bank 
and some anticipation of abolishment of the payment of interest on excess reserve balances. 
However, since the introduction of QQE at the beginning of April, the entire yield curve has 
risen, reflecting (1) the correction of the level of interest rates on instruments with medium-
term maturities due to a drop in anticipation of abolishment of interest payments as well as 
(2) the phenomenon of “buying on rumors and selling on facts.” Moreover, since the middle 
of  May,  a  rise  in  U.S.  long-term  interest  rates  stemming  from  speculation  about  possible 
changes  in  quantitative  easing  in  the  United  States  has  been  exerting  strong  upward 
pressure on Japan’s long-term interest rates. At present, yields on 10-year JGBs have been 
in the range of 0.7–0.8 percent, which in absolute terms are higher than those before QQE 
was introduced at the beginning of April. It should be noted, however, that while the rise in 
U.S. long-term interest rates has actually caused interest rates in Germany and the United 
Kingdom to follow suit, interest rates in Japan have recently been more or less flat at a low 
level.  This  is  evidence  that  the  Bank’s  aggressive  monetary  easing  has  been  working 
strongly to contain the upward pressure on Japan’s long-term interest rates. 
Reflecting such  extremely  accommodative financial  conditions  in  Japan,  the  yen  has  been 
depreciating, albeit with some fluctuations, and stock prices have been trending upward. The 
year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending has been rising in 
recent months, as major banks’ lending stance has become active. According to the money 
stock statistics for August 2013, released on September 10, 2013, the year-on-year growth 
rate of broadly-defined liquidity was 3.5 percent, the highest since March 2007, and among 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
its  components,  the  growth  rates  of  pecuniary  trusts  and  investment  trusts  have  been 
accelerating in particular since the turn of fiscal 2013. Although economic entities have just 
started  to  rebalance  their  portfolios,  the  monetary  easing  seems  to  have  gradually  taken 
effect. I would therefore like to continue close monitoring of future developments. 
II. 
Economic activity and prices 
The current situation of Japan’s economy 
Economic activity 
A.  
1.  
Next I will talk about economic activity and prices. 
The Bank currently assesses Japan’s economy as recovering moderately. According to the 
second preliminary estimates of real GDP statistics released on September 9, 2013, Japan’s 
economy  grew  at  an  annualized  rate  of  3.8  percent  in  the  April-June  quarter,  showing 
positive growth for the third consecutive quarter. The rate was largely revised upward from 
the  first  preliminary  estimate  of  2.6  percent  as  a  result  of  increases  in  business  fixed 
investment and inventory investment. As for domestic demand, private consumption showed 
relatively  high  growth  while  public  investment  continued  to  increase,  and  business  fixed 
investment  turned  positive  for  the  first  time  since  the  October-December  quarter  of  2011. 
External demand also made a positive contribution, with exports rising due to factors such as 
the depreciation of the yen. 
Other economic indicators have also been improving on the whole. Among various statistics 
on  private  consumption,  the  Synthetic  Consumption  Index,  which  combines  demand-side 
and supply-side statistics, has been firm recently. Real exports, despite monthly fluctuations, 
have been gaining upward momentum from developments in foreign exchange rates and a 
moderate recovery  in  the  U.S.  economy.  In  particular,  those  of motor  vehicles  and  related 
goods  as  well  as  of  capital  goods  and  parts  have  recently  been  moving toward  a  pick-up. 
Industrial production is also increasing moderately, reflecting these developments in demand 
both at home and abroad. 
Looking at corporate profits, listed firms expect to see large increases in their profits for fiscal 
2013, which they forecast to recover close to the levels of the post-fiscal 2000 peak marked 
in fiscal 2007. Earnings of listed firms for the April-June quarter of 2013, announced in late 
July  to  early  August,  showed  that  corporate  results  of  firms  in  domestic  demand-oriented 
sectors  were  favorable  on  the  whole,  and  that  many  firms  reported  increased  sales  and 
profits due to the effects of developments in foreign exchange rates and greater demand for 
motor vehicles, smartphones, and related goods. In this environment, firms are planning to 
increase business fixed investment for fiscal 2013, and supply and demand conditions in the 
labor market continue to improve moderately, as seen, for example, in a rise in the active job 
openings-to-applicants ratio. 
2.  
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) had turned positive in 
June 2013 for the first time in 14 months, and in July it rose to 0.7 percent. The CPI for the 
Tokyo  metropolitan  area  rose  to  0.4  percent  in  August  year  on  year,  showing  a  marginal 
increase from 0.3 percent in July. 
Looking  at  the  components  of  Japan’s  CPI  reveals  that  rises  in  prices  of  energy-related 
goods, such as gasoline prices and electricity charges, are pushing up the CPI. In addition, 
some firms in the food products industry are passing their higher costs arising from the rise in 
import  prices  on  to  sales  prices.  The  recent  rise  in  the  CPI  is  attributed  to  not  only  the 
increase in prices of energy-related goods but also rises in prices of a wide range of items as 
a result of resilient private consumption. This is evident from the fact that the decline in the 
CPI excluding food and energy is gradually coming to a halt. 
Prices 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Outlook for economic activity and prices, and challenges for Japan’s economy 
Outlook 
3.  
(a)  
I will now turn to the outlook for economic activity and prices in Japan. Japan’s economy is 
expected to continue a moderate recovery against the background of firm domestic demand 
and  the  pick-up  in  overseas  economies.  Specifically,  exports  are  expected  to  increase 
moderately due to a gradual pick-up in overseas economies, mainly in the United States, and 
the  definite,  cumulative  effects  of  developments  in  foreign  exchange  rates  since  last  year. 
Looking  at  domestic  demand,  public  investment  is  expected  to  continue  trending  upward 
supported  by  the  supplementary  budget  for  fiscal  2012  under  the  emergency  economic 
measures,  the  budget  for  fiscal  2013  with  higher  weight  on  public  investment,  and  the 
increased budget for reconstruction-related spending. Housing investment showed negative 
growth  in  the  April-June  quarter  in  the  GDP  statistics.  However,  the  number  of  housing 
starts, a leading indicator of housing investment, increased clearly by 9.3 percent in the April-
June quarter from the previous quarter. It is expected that actual implementation of housing 
investment  will  start  rising  firmly  as  (1)  reconstruction  of  houses  struck  by  the  earthquake 
disaster  in  2011  continues  and  (2)  lower  interest  rates  on  loans  and  a  surge  in  consumer 
spending  prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hikes  are  likely  to  encourage  housing  investment. 
Business  fixed  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  moderate  increasing  trend  as  corporate 
profits continue to improve. Private consumption is expected to remain resilient, supported by 
improvement in the employment and income situation. Under these circumstances, industrial 
production is expected to continue increasing moderately. 
As  for  prices, the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is  likely  to  continue  rising. In  a 
situation  where  the  effects  of  the  improvement  in  the  supply  and  demand  balance  are 
expected to become clear with an economic recovery, a rise in petroleum product prices – 
reflecting the recent  developments  in foreign  exchange rates  and  crude  oil  prices  –  and  a 
further  rise  in  electricity  charges  by  electric  power  companies  are  likely  to  exert  upward 
pressure on overall prices. Therefore, for the time being, the CPI is expected to continue to 
rise clearly on a year-on-year basis. I mentioned earlier that some firms in the food products 
industry are passing their higher costs on to sales prices, and wholesale and retail prices of 
imported goods, such as personal computers and handbags, are also being raised in some 
cases. In forecasting price developments, close watch should be kept on changes in firms’ 
price-setting behavior. Price increases could spread gradually if private consumption remains 
resilient and firms are encouraged to raise prices. 
(b)  
In order for the economy to move in line with the outlook I have described, it is necessary for 
production  levels  to  rise  firmly.  The  sluggish  pace  of  increase  in  exports  appears  to  have 
caused industrial production for the first half of 2013 to remain lower than a year earlier. As a 
result, business fixed investment remains lackluster, restraining growth in production. 
In  the  past,  exports  were  usually  the  driving  force  of  economic  recovery  in  Japan.  The 
present recovery, however, is being led by domestic demand, such as private consumption, 
housing investment, and public investment. It is time for exports to take the lead. The cause 
of the current slow recovery in exports can be partly attributed to structural factors, such as 
declining  competitiveness  of  firms  in  some  industries  and  a  greater  shift  to  overseas 
production  and  local  procurement  of  goods  since  the  earthquake  disaster.  In  order  for 
Japan’s  economy  to  return  to  a  stable  growth  path,  exports  must  rise,  and  thus 
developments in overseas economies hold the key. 
Challenges for Japan’s economy 
Overseas economies 
Europe 
B.  
1.  
Economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  deteriorated  due  to  the  European  debt  problem  that 
engulfed  Greece,  Portugal,  and  Spain.  More  recently,  however,  the  economy  has  finally 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The United States 
Emerging and commodity-exporting economies 
bottomed out and is now showing signs of heading toward a pick-up with an improvement in 
consumer and business sentiment. Although some countries are still subject to factors that 
might lead to instability, investors have become less risk-averse and the financial conditions 
of financial institutions have been improving. While economic activity in the euro area cannot 
be expected to improve significantly for the time being, the situation there will no longer exert 
a large negative impact on the global economy. 
2.  
The U.S. economy has been on a moderate recovery trend against the backdrop of steady 
private  demand,  despite  downward  pressure  from  the  fiscal  side.  Private  consumption 
remains on a moderate increasing trend as the employment situation follows an improving 
trend and prices of houses and other assets rise. The U.S. economy is expected to remain 
on a recovery trend. In view of this, the Federal Reserve is planning to gradually reduce the 
size  of  its  asset  purchases,  and  long-term  interest  rates  have  started  to  rise.  Given  the 
possibility of a further increase in interest rates, it is necessary to monitor how this will affect 
housing investment, which has been the engine of U.S. economic growth, just as automobile 
sales have been. 
3.  
Economic growth in China, which has been the driving force of global economic growth, has 
decelerated  due  to  sluggish  economic  activity  in  Europe,  an  important  trade  partner,  and 
slower  growth  in  China’s  manufacturing  sector  activity  owing  to  excess  capital  stock.  The 
Chinese  economy  is  currently  aiming  for  a  soft  landing  followed  by  stable  growth  led  by 
domestic  demand.  Other  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  have  been 
benefiting thus far from China’s robust economy and monetary accommodation in advanced 
economies; however, deceleration in the Chinese economy and speculation about possible 
changes in quantitative easing in the United States are currently exerting strong downward 
pressure on their financial markets, trade, and commodity prices. 
4.  
Action by the Federal Reserve to gradually reduce the size of its asset purchases is sensible 
for the U.S. economy since it is showing signs of recovery, and it would be a natural policy 
decision  for  the  United  States.  An  ensuing  rise  in  U.S.  long-term  interest  rates,  however, 
could trigger a rise in long-term rates in other countries, which would restrain their economic 
growth. 
In emerging economies, growth has been propelled in part by a large inflow of funds caused 
by  the  quantitative  easing  policy  in  the  United States.  However,  an  outflow  of  these funds 
from  emerging  economies  could  lead  to  depreciation  of  their  currencies,  declines  in  stock 
and  bond  prices,  and  to  higher  inflation,  thereby  exerting  negative  effects  on  economic 
growth. It is necessary to continue close monitoring of whether these negative effects will be 
offset  by  the  positive  effects  to  be  generated  by  growth  in  the  U.S.  economy.  Close 
monitoring  is  also  required  of  developments  in  capital  flows,  since  they  would  influence 
whether emerging economies can eliminate their twin deficits, draw up effective measures to 
stem inflation, and implement structural reforms. 
Challenges for overseas economies 
III. 
Overcoming deflation 
Outlook for Japan’s economic activity and prices 
A.  
From  fiscal  2014  toward  fiscal  2015,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  follow  the  baseline 
scenario presented in the April 2013 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, released by 
the Bank. That is, the economy is expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential, 
as  a  trend.  As  for  prices  –  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  scheduled  consumption  tax 
hikes  –  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is  expected  to  follow  a  rising  trend, 
reflecting factors such as the improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
well  as  the  rise  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  It  is  likely  to  reach  around 
2 percent – the price stability target – toward the latter half of the projection period, spanning 
from fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2015. 
Overcoming deflation 
B. 
As  I  have  explained,  the  Bank  is  implementing  the  aggressive  monetary  easing  policy  to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI, and thereby achieve sustainable economic growth with price stability as stated in 
the joint statement with the government released in January 2013. 
Many people believe that economic activity will pick up and the quality of people’s lives will 
improve  when  the  economy  overcomes  deflation.  Economic  growth,  however,  will  be 
temporary and unsustainable if price increases following the efforts to overcome deflation are 
not  accompanied  by  increases  in  income;  a  decline  in  households’  real  purchasing  power 
would dent private consumption and lead to economic deterioration. If this turns out to be the 
case, it is meaningless to aim at overcoming deflation. 
Japan’s  economy  has  finally  started  to  recover  moderately,  and  it  is  at  an  extremely 
important stage where a virtuous cycle has just begun to operate. Given that the year-on-
year rate of increase in the CPI is likely to rise from fiscal 2014, it is essential for nominal 
income to increase steadily so that the present recovery enters a stable growth path. 
For  this  to  happen,  it  is  necessary  that  the  current  positive  momentum  of  the  economy  is 
maintained and that the overall level of corporate profits rises sufficiently. Furthermore, it is 
necessary  to  dispel  concerns  about  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy  and  secure  growth 
expectations.  To  this  end,  as  specified  in  the  joint  statement,  it  is  vital  for  the  Bank  to 
vigorously  implement  aggressive  monetary  easing  measures  to  achieve  the  price  stability 
target  –  and  for  the  government,  for  its  part,  to  be  flexible  in  its  public  spending,  steadily 
implement growth strategies, and ensure the credibility of its fiscal management. 
In order to realize effectively a steady expansion of consumption expenditures, increases in 
nominal income made in the form of increases in scheduled cash earnings – which comprise 
about three-fourths of nominal  wages and are considered to be stable and less  variable – 
would be superior to increases in special cash earnings, which are considered to be more 
variable.  In  this  context,  it  is  crucial  that  from  fiscal  2014  onward  base  levels  of  salaries, 
which have hardly increased since the beginning of the 21st century, are once again raised 
on an annual basis in a wide range of industries. 
In Japan, the deflationary mind-set has taken hold as a result of years of sluggish income 
and prices. However, an actual steady increase in  income as a result of economic growth 
accompanied by a rise in prices will change this mind-set, thereby helping Japan’s economy 
to overcome deflation. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
