Dimitar Bogov: Recent financial and economic developments in 
Macedonia 
Interview  with  Mr  Dimitar  Bogov,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, in The American Times, October 2013. 
 Please offer our readers a brief on the functions of the National Bank of the Republic 
of Macedonia (NBRM)  
Our primary goal is price stability with a secondary goal of financial sector stability. Without 
jeopardizing the primary goal NBRM should support economic policies. The way in which we 
execute the primary objective is by pegging the exchange rate with the Euro. Pegging our 
currency  has  been  our  long  term  strategy  since  1995,  originally  with  the  Deutsche  mark. 
When  one  compares  our  inflation  with  that  of  the  European  Monetary  Union  the  result  is 
relative  alignment;  to  put  it  in  real  terms,  EMU  inflation  is  at  about  1.9%  with  Macedonia 
hovering at 2.2%. 
We have witnessed in the past 4–5 years several very important foreign direct investments. 
Some of them are so large that they already equate to roughly 17% of our exports. 
How has the global recession and currently, the strength of the Euro, especially when 
compared to the US dollar effected your ability to maintain price stability, if at all? 
It affected our economy because our largest export markets are EU countries, equating to 
60%, whose demand for our products dramatically reduced. When one additionally considers 
our many exports to neighboring, non-EU countries, but who maintain a Euro-centric policy 
we can see an indirect detrimental effect; which in turn means roughly 90% of our exports 
were hit by the crisis. For example, we experienced a decline in GDP of 1% in 2009 with a 
recovery  of  3%  in  the  next  two  years  before  declining  again  by  –0.4%  in  2012;  which  is 
reasonably low when compared to other countries in the region. Although this does not mean 
the effects from the Euro Zone crisis were not harsh, they clearly were; however, there were 
compensating  policies  such  as  a  fiscal  stimulus  from  the  government  which  substantially 
mitigated the negative impact which is most likely why Macedonia had the slowest decline in 
the region. 
What were some of those hedging fiscal policies? 
Traditionally, Macedonia has had low fiscal deficits, ranging from –1% to +1%, but during the 
crisis in 2009 this grew initially to 2.5% then to 2.8% with our highest in 2012 at 3.8%. This 
year,  due  to  the  financial  stimulus  we  are  forecasted  at  3.5%.  We  were  able  to  mitigate 
successfully because our public debt was low at around 20% of GDP which afforded us room 
for expansion which we used during this crisis period. 
Apart from the macro-economy concerns, the crisis with the Euro as a currency helped boost 
confidence in our domestic currency [MKD denar]. This is because people naturally began to 
wonder what would happen with Europe; therefore, its primary currency. As a result, some 
people  began  to  orient  more  towards  the  MKD.  Traditionally  our  country,  like  most  former 
Yugoslavian  countries  are  highly  Euro-rized,  which  means  people  save  and  use  credits  in 
Euros, with a 65% Euro to 35% MKD ratio. During the crisis and continuing today, the ratio of 
households and their propensity to save in MKD has elevated to 50%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
You have been in your post for 2 years with 5 more remaining. How do you view the 
future development of the economy based on the government’s FDI promotional 
campaigns that are taking place currently across the globe? 
We have witnessed in the past 4–5 years several very important foreign direct investments. 
Some of them are so large that they already equate to roughly 17% of our exports, with the 
majority of the companies focused on component manufacturing for the automotive industry. 
There are also several large firms that are in the pipeline which have shortlisted Macedonia 
for  their  capacities.  Importantly,  these  incoming  large-scale  investments  are  also  bringing 
diversification to our exports, which are traditionally based in textiles, agriculture and metals. 
It is worth noting that several of these firms not only made the decision to enter Macedonia 
but  are  currently  in  expansion  mode  based  off  their  operational  successes  here,  to  the 
degree  that  I  predict  in  3  years  the  current  and  pending  FDIs  can  equate  to  30%  of  our 
exports. 
Of  course  strong  and  growing  exports  are  a  main  target  for  most  countries  due  to  their 
balancing  of  payments.  In  our  case,  these  FDIs  in  automotive  and  electronics  have 
contributed  primarily 
to  manufacturing.  Other 
manufacturing  sectors  are  struggling  due  to  their  continued  dependence  on  the  European 
Union’s  growth;  as  such,  their  success  is  dependent  upon  overall  growth  and  stabilization 
within the EU, which is showing signs of alleviation. 
Clearly  a  growing  focus  is  a  diversification  of  export  markets.  This  can  be  remedied  by 
establishing  further  value-added  capacities  in  manufacturing  which  can  allow  for  non-EU 
exports. 
to  our  economic  growth 
in  regards 
Is it safe to assume that the growth factors mentioned previously are a result of the 
Economic Zones established within Macedonia? 
Yes, most of these FDIs in production of tradable goods and their resulting benefits to the 
overall Macedonian economy are located within the Economic Zones. 
We have been speaking about the EU and its effect on Macedonia’s economy. 
Compared to the US, if only marginally, the EU is experiencing a more stagnant rate of 
growth. You mentioned you see the EU beginning to recover slightly. What is your 
outlook on the future of the Euro Zone? 
This is true; the US is ahead in terms of growth. The EU economy in Q2 of this year went out 
of recession but remains in a fragile state and questions certainly remain regarding its long 
term  stability.  They  are  not  out-of-the-woods  yet  but  are  heading  in  that  direction.  So, 
although growth will not be very strong I do not see them entering a recession again. 
Even the hardest hit Southern European and Mediterranean countries have the potential to 
see growth as early as next year. Which is a positive indicator for our more traditional export 
firms; as several of these countries act as their largest trading partners. Our confidence is 
building. If this year we will see a 2.2% increase in overall growth we predict next year can 
yield 3.5% and it can certainly grow from there to over 4% in ensuing years. 
First-movers  entering  this  market  will  be  the  ones  benefiting  from  the  immediate  and 
privileged market access 
Do you see Macedonia’s current inability to enter the EU due to the naming dispute 
with Greece as a component that is putting a relative cap on the growth figures you 
just mentioned?  
If we look from an economic point of view, judging from rating agency criteria that takes into 
consideration political uncertainties such as the ongoing naming issue, it is safe to assume 
that our rating is lower than what it could be. The resolution of this dispute and the resulting 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
increase in rating will certainly lead to greater investor confidence as well as better terms on 
financing  in  the  international  markets.  There  would  also  be  access  to  more  EU  funds  that 
could be used for critical infrastructure developments. 
Speaking domestically, as the mega-regulator of the financial sector, how do you view 
the strength of the banking segment in terms of contributing to domestic growth? 
Following  the  crisis  the  Macedonian  banking  sector  proved  to  be  quite resilient.  No  banks 
failed  and  all  were  well  capitalized.  Our  prudential  regulation  has  always  kept  banks  from 
entering into risky investments as we have a conservative banking system. As a result, we 
were not exposed to some exotic instruments from abroad before 2008 which is why they did 
not suffer directly. 
Indirectly,  yes,  through  reduced  economic  activity  which  created  some  problems  with 
companies in the real sector where they could not repay their loans which in turn raised the 
Non-Performing  Loan  (NPL)  ratio  to  around  12%.  But  again,  comparing  regionally  from 
Slovenia  to  Greece  it  is  probably  the  lowest  and  more  importantly,  fully  covered  with 
provisions. Liquidity is very high at 30%. So after stabilization the goal is to promote lending 
activities once more. 
A  second  channel  of  exposure  was  through  the  fact  that  90%  of  Macedonian  banks  are 
foreign owned and parent banks were primarily oriented to handling problems in their home 
country. Sometimes they make decisions at a group level without paying specific attention to 
their Macedonian operations, which affects our banks negatively, depicted by years with no 
growth. I do have to point out, however, that Macedonian banks do not rely on funds from 
their  parent  banks;  our  Loan-to-Deposit  (LTD)  ratio  is  90%.  So,  from  this  point  of  view  it 
means  they  can  operate  as  a  stand-alone  but  due  to  parent  bank  strategies  they  are 
inhibited. 
Do you think there is opportunity for more entrants in the banking sector? 
Currently at 16 banks, we have too many. 
In that case, do you see more mergers and acquisitions occurring? 
Yes,  absolutely,  in  fact  it  is  a  process  that  I  have  been  encouraging  in  the  last  2  years, 
sending  signals  and  urging  banks  towards  this  end.  7–10  banks  would  be  ideal.  There  is 
another strong  possibility  that  parent  company  banks  may  decide  to  sell  their  Macedonian 
subsidiaries,  which  are  very  solid  banks,  possibly  resulting  in  some  strong  international 
brands entering the market. 
Based on your position and knowledge of the Macedonian marketplace. Please offer a 
personal message to our American Investor readers. 
Macedonia’s  market  is  not  yet  saturated  and  there  is  room  for  investors  at  the  earliest 
stages. We are actively pursuing and obtaining EU standards and EU accession is certainly 
something to benefit from when it does occur. First-movers entering this market will be the 
ones benefiting from the immediate and privileged market access. The beauty is that there 
are strong returns available now, not just after accession! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
