Patrick Honohan: The future shape of banking 
Address  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  IIEA 
Conference on “The future of banking in Europe”, Dublin, 2 December 2013. 
 Long before the single currency, the potential for a single market in European banking was 
created by the Second Banking Directive in 1989. A bank licensed anywhere in the European 
Union could thereby provide services throughout the entire Union. The most basic legislative 
ingredient  for  what  is  now  thought  of  as  a  banking  union  was  created.  Curiously,  this 
powerful  piece  of  legislation  did  not  have  the  impact  that  one  might  have  expected.  Pan-
European  banking  supermarkets  did  not  rapidly  emerge.  Instead,  the  stronger  forces  of 
financial integration were global ones. An Australian bank bought one of the six full service 
Irish banks; expanding Irish banks bought into (then non-EU) Poland and the US more than 
into continental Europe. 
It is not always easy to predict where the future of banking lies, whether for Europe or for 
Ireland. More dependent for financial services on banks than on markets in debt and equity, 
Europe has had to work harder to repair its financial system following the banking collapse of 
2008 and this task is complicated by the subsequent widespread debt overhang. 
Much  of  this  conference  has  been  devoted  to  the  question  of  banking  supervision  and 
resolution, matters of official policy in the proposed Banking Union. I would like to look further 
ahead to ask what type of banking system we may see – or wish to see – in Ireland within 
the Banking Union. 
Let us recall that banks have to perform a multidimensional set of functions in the economy: 
• 
ensuring  that  payments  are  reliably  made  for  the  transactions  that  underpin  all 
economic activity; 
providing safety for the liquid assets of the general public: households and firms; 
evaluating  creditworthiness  of  borrowers,  monitoring  their  financial  condition  and 
ensuring that loans are repaid; 
acting as broker for a range of other financial services. 
• 
All this we expect banks to do. And that is part of why it is so difficult to resolve a crisis which 
– to a greater or lesser extent all over Europe – has weakened both banks’ financial strength 
and their operational capacity to deliver satisfactorily on all of these functions. 
 What might change in Europe? 
As  the  banking  systems  of  Europe  are  repaired,  how  will  their  organisation  differ?  What 
position will they hold in European finance? 
Two types of indicator of what might be in store could be sought by (i) comparing the current 
situation  with  that  in  other  advanced  economies  in  order  to  assess  whether  the  gaps 
between  the  systems  might  tend  to  be  closed  and  (ii)  extrapolating  recent  trends  and 
technological innovations. 
As  far  as  structural  differences  today  between  the  EU  and  US  financial  systems  are 
concerned, two striking differences are in integration and in the relative importance of bank 
and market finance. 
The  US  banking  market  is  along  several  dimensions  more  integrated  than  that  of  Europe, 
and the trend has been continuing. Just to give one related indicator, concentration, I noticed 
from  a  recent  study  that  the  share  of  the  top  50  banks  in  the  US  grew  by  10  percentage 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in 
traditionally  undertaken 
the  universal  banking  model  which  has 
points during the first decade of the new millennium (continuing a long trend), whereas the 
share  of  “large  banks”  in  the  EU  shrank  by  5  percentage  points  between  2007  and  2013. 
Geographic segmentation along country lines has also increased in recent years in Europe, 
whereas  the  traditional  segmentation  along  state  lines  for  retail  banking  in  the  US  has 
progressively  weakened.  Perhaps  the  increasing  segmentation  in  Europe  is  an  immediate 
post-crisis  tendency  –  driven  for  example  by  EU  competition  requirements  in  relation  to 
State-aid granted to failing banks, as well as by the pressures in the euro area – and will be 
reversed. I hope so. 
The  US  has  long  had  a  larger  nonbank  financial  sector,  including  organised  securities 
markets,  which  provide  a  useful  “spare  tyre” for  SME  finance.  In  Europe,  nonbank market 
finance has a much smaller share. Even if this gap partly reflects the wider range of financing 
activities 
long 
characterised  continental  banking  systems,  it  is surely  possible  that  with  the  weakening of 
European banks, the time may be ripe for this gap to be closed. 
The growth of nonbank finance in Europe to close the gap may be flavoured and facilitated 
by  some  recent financial  technological trends,  already  observed  in  the  US  and  elsewhere. 
For  example,  what  is  the  long-term  potential  of  innovations  such  as  internet-based  equity 
crowd-funding  and  peer-to-peer  lending?  How  much  evolutionary  growth  will  there  be  in 
lending by collective investment schemes, trusts and unincorporated financial vehicles and 
how  will  they  impact  the  role  of  banks?  And  I  suppose  one  cannot  mention  technological 
change without at least alluding to Bitcoin. Some nascent developments will surely fizzle out, 
but others may not. All raise controversial and complex regulatory issues which need further 
study.  But  these  and  other  trends  could  serve  to  shrink  the  share  of  banks  in  European 
finance. 
Nevertheless, universal banking can be a very profitable business, not least because, when 
banks  fail,  their  creditors  are  often  bailed  out  by  Government.  Anticipating  this,  investors 
require a smaller premium to fund the bank. The value of this implicit government guarantee 
can be significant, especially during market turbulence. 
Ireland 
In Ireland for the past five years banking has not been profitable. This is largely because of 
the  difficulty  banks  have  had  in  coping  with  the  legacy  assets  on  their  books.  A  large 
proportion of these assets yield little by way of interest because of the low euro area money 
market rates to which their yield is contractually set. A large and – at least until very recently 
– growing, share of the assets is also not fully performing. The Irish banks have set aside, 
and  will  still  need  to  set  aside,  sizable  provisions  to  enable  them  to  absorb  the  inevitable 
credit  losses  on some  of  this  portfolio,  as  it  becomes more  evident  what  part  of  the  loans 
cannot be paid in full, and since the property-related collaterals that backed the loans at the 
outset no longer suffice as a backstop. 
Faced with these problems, some foreign-owned banks, whose parents also are weakened 
by the crisis, have decided to withdraw from the Irish market, either altogether or from large 
segments  of  it.  Two  significant  Irish-controlled  banks  –  Anglo  and  INBS  –  have  been 
liquidated. Two others, AIB and EBS, have been merged. Aside from the group of export-
oriented banking firms operating in the export-oriented IFSC context, the banking landscape 
is now much sparser than it was. 
The ability of Irish banks to make their full contribution to financial services needed for the 
recovery and into the longer term depends on their being fully repaired after the far-reaching 
damage wreaked in the boom and its aftermath. Much has been done here already in terms 
of  recapitalisation,  deleveraging  and  reduction  in  the  cost  base.  But  the  case-by-case 
resolution of impaired loans, both for the SME sector and the household sector, still has a 
long way to go. At last there are clear indications that the operational processes put in place 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to accomplish this goal are gaining traction and that the problem can finally be brought under 
control. 
What will Irish banking look like at the end of the decade; what would we like it to look like? 
For  the  sake  of  argument  I  will  assume  that  the  legacy  issues  will  by  then  have  been  put 
behind  us.  Official  policies  and  the  mandates  and  operational  imperatives  of  the  surviving 
banks are focused on ensuring this. 
Banking in 2020 will have to be composed of entities that are financially solid and profitable, 
delivering the services needed for strong performance of the non-financial economy. 
The  prospective  organisational  shape  of  the  banking  system  can  be  considered  along  a 
number  of  dimensions.  Few  or  many?  Big  or  small?  Specialised  or  full  service? 
Internationally diversified or locally focused? Regional or national? Commercial or mutualist? 
Under MNC or local control? With public or private ownership? Let me discuss these aspects 
one-by one, recognising of course that they are not fully independent but raise overlapping 
issues. 
Few or many? 
The  question  here  is  about  ensuring  a  sufficient  degree  of  competition.  And  there  is  an 
increasing focus on this. Making sure that banks compete is not just a question of numbers, 
however,  or  the  preventing  of formalised  collusion.  It may  not  be  necessary  to  have  more 
than a handful of banks to ensure that they will have the incentive to compete for business 
and offer keen pricing (without sacrificing prudence). 
Many writers have cautioned against excessive competition for market share in banking, and 
there  have  even  in  recent  years  been  distinguished  advocates  of,  for  example,  deposit 
interest ceilings to inhibit reckless competition for funds. In the run-up to the crash in Ireland, 
banks had unlimited access to funds in the global money market, so they had less need to 
drive up deposit rates. They sourced funds, not from reckless foreign speculators (there were 
such, but they did not buy low-yielding Irish bank bonds!), but in a highly liquid international 
market  for  what  were  considered  safe  bank  bonds  and  deposits.  Instead,  the  destructive 
competition was for market share in loans to property developers, and to those who would 
buy what the property developers and construction firms would build. 
Unless  they  sold  out  before  the  crash,  shareholders  of  the  banks  lost  out  because  of  this 
seemingly  reckless  competition,  as  did  the  holders  of  subordinated  bank  debt.  Of  course 
senior bank management did a lot better on average, given their very sizable earnings during 
the  boom.  But  it  was  the  Government  that  picked  up  the tab for the  remaining  creditors  – 
mostly depositors and a smaller sum in respect of bondholders. Excessive competition can 
mean  excessive  risk-taking,  and  the  losses are often  socialised  (though  less  so  under  the 
proposed resolution directive). 
At present, some interest rates and other charges are much higher than would happen in a 
healthy  and  fully  competitive  banking  market,  but  some  are  below  –  especially  the  legacy 
tracker  mortgages  whose  interest tracks  the  ECB  policy  rate  which  is  4  percentage  points 
lower now than before the crash. Still, it is too easy to attribute all of the much higher spreads 
on SVR mortgages to the banks’ need to cross-subsidise trackers and to cover loan-losses 
on the back-book. The rising spreads on UK standard rate mortgages also since the crisis 
suggests that some of the rise should be attributed to belated recognition of the true risks 
and costs of mortgage lending. 
A fully competitive market would need not so much a plethora of many banks, but a sufficient 
number  of  sound  banks  free  of  crippling  legacy  issues.  If  weakness  of  their  parents,  and 
concern about the prospects of banking profitability, have discouraged some foreign owners, 
new  foreign  entrants  and  re-engagement  by  those  now  hibernating  or  marking  time  will 
eventually shave spreads down to new equilibria. The domestic banks will certainly need to 
be fully repaired by then. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Big or small? 
Globally, the question of optimal banking size has been a matter of considerable dispute. Are 
there economies of scale and scope in banking? Or do bigger banks have the possibility to 
make  greater  profits  because  their  creditors  are  reassured  by  the  implicit  government 
guarantee provided by their having grown “too big to fail”? Some policy makers have argued 
for  breaking  up  global  mega-banks  until  this  implicit  guarantee  no  longer  has  much  force. 
Others have tended to the alternative approach of simplifying the business of big banks and 
modularising  them  so  that  if  part  of the  whole  gets  into trouble,  it can  be  isolated  and the 
remainder resolved without the need to call on Government support to keep essential parts 
going. 
None of the Irish banks ever got to the €3 trillion scale of the largest European megabanks, 
but even at €200 billion in total assets for each of the top two – well in excess of national 
GDP – and €100 billion for the third, each of the largest nationally-controlled Irish banks was 
on a scale that could and did create problems that threatened the solvency of the State itself. 
Since then, these figures have shrunk by more than a quarter, though the total assets of the 
two largest remain comparable to GDP in size. 
Can  we  risk  having  banks  of  this  size  for  the  long-run?  Against  this  concern  there  are  of 
course economies of scale to be considered. A full-service bank needs to have IT systems of 
a sophistication that undoubtedly needs a degree of scale to achieve acceptable unit costs. 
Personally, my reading of the evidence is that a €100 billion bank is not much larger than is 
needed to deliver the full range of banking services at the lowest unit cost. 
Foreign or domestically controlled? 
One  way  of  achieving  low  unit  costs  is,  of  course,  to  rely  on  multi-national  corporations  in 
banking  as  we  do  to  a  large  extent  in  the  manufacturing  and  internationally  traded  non-
financial services sector already in Ireland. 
Having  foreign  ownership  can  help  absorb  problems.  Even  if  some  of  the  entrants  of  the 
early 2000s (Danske, Halifax-Bank of Scotland, Rabo) and earlier (Royal Bank of Scotland, 
Kredietbank) – all coming from within the European Union – stoked up the over-heated credit 
competition in the boom, they certainly also absorbed a sizable chunk of the losses in the 
bust.  And foreign  shareholders  owned  well  over  half  of  AIB  and  Bank  of  Ireland  when  the 
crisis  broke. (At  present, foreign  shareholders  hold  more  than  70  per  cent  of the  equity  in 
Bank of Ireland). 
But  what  about  in  normal  times?  To  what  degree  is  it  safe  to  rely  on  foreign  controlled 
entities for delivering the full range of banking services? The international literature notes the 
tendency for foreign-owned banks to serve mainly large companies and wealthy individuals 
when  they  enter  a  banking  market;  but  it  also  emphasises  that  their  entry  can  drive  the 
incumbent  banks  to  refocusing  on  SMEs  and  middle-income  households,  with  a  beneficial 
effect on availability and pricing of services to this clientele. 
Perhaps  then  the  best  mix  is  to  rely  on  foreign-owned  concerns  for  those  services  that 
require large scale, while not neglecting the importance of the local relationship banking that 
is necessary for supporting the SME sector. 
Internationally oriented or domestic oriented? 
Does  that  mean  that  those  banks  that  are,  in  the  future,  locally  controlled  should  not  be 
looking to  export  business? This  is  a question  to  which  one  would  tend  to give  a  different 
answer after the crisis than before, though maybe the centralisation of banking supervision 
and resolution in the euro area will change it again. 
Looking  at  the  experience  of  the  Icelandic  banks,  whose  export-orientation  had  got  to  the 
point where over 70 per cent of their net income was said to be generated from international 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
business, but which then spectacularly blew up destroying a sizable segment of the Icelandic 
economy  even  though  their  foreign  creditors  were  not  bailed  out  by  the  Icelandic 
government,  it  would  appear  that  the  potential  for  future  international  expansion  of  banks 
headquartered in small countries may be doomed. 
Irish  banks  too  became  quite  internationalised  in  the  boom,  not  just  through  their  foreign 
subsidiaries  (or  through  their  traditional  branch-bank  operations  in  Northern  Ireland  and 
Britain)  but  also  through  the  financing  of  Irish  developers’  international  property  portfolios. 
Outside of the UK substantially all of that has been divested. Should or could it be recreated? 
In principle, one could say that the creation of the SSM and a common resolution mechanism 
offers  the  potential  for  some  future  Irish-controlled  bank  to  become  pan-European  without 
implying a threat to the Irish sovereign, at least if its funding and lending is effectively ring-
fenced  from  the  national  economy.  After  all,  that  is  consistent  with  the  logic  of  the  single 
market. But I feel that such a prospect lacks the ring of authenticity. This is probably not a 
path to seek out in the immediate future. While recognising the UK links, the main focus of 
Irish banks should now be on Ireland. 
Regional or sectoral? 
Should  one  go further  and  imagine  a  banking  system  that  is  regionally  specialised?  For  a 
country  of  Ireland’s  size  and  economic  homogeneity  –  even  if  a  distinction  can  be  made 
between  the  greater  Dublin  area  and  the  rest  –  there  seems  little  reason  to  press  for  a 
downsizing and specialising of national banks to a regional focus. 
Even  less  case  I  would  think,  to  promote  the  idea  of  sectorally  specialised  banks  (for 
agriculture, housing, commerce, etc.). After all, specialisation in property-related lending was 
the downfall of all the banks. The demise of both of the former state-owned sectoral banks 
ACC and ICC when they were turned by their acquirers into predominantly property lenders 
only  adds  an  ironic  twist  to  this  conclusion.  A  degree  of  sectoral  diversification  not  only 
insulates a bank from such risks, but helps build a more comprehensive information base on 
which to rebuild relationship lending. Besides, the sectoral mix of banking business is already 
changing,  with  service  sectors  looming  much  larger  than  before;  their  evolving  financial 
product  needs  are  quite  different  from  those  of  manufacturing,  construction  or  the  primary 
industries. A bank that merely focuses on one sector misses the cross-sectoral interactions 
and business opportunities that require financial services. 
Community banking 
To  say  that  national  banks  need  not  be  pressed  to  downsize  or  split  into  regionally  or 
sectorally  specialised  sub-units  is  not  to  dispute  the  value  of  the  community  bank.  A 
community bank may be able to offer the range of retail services that low or middle-income 
households and small and micro enterprises require even if operating on a scale well below 
€1 billion – and do it professionally and efficiently, and with sensitivity to local conditions. 
Though we don’t use the term, already in Ireland we have a large involvement in community 
banking with an astonishingly deep credit union sector (it has greater penetration measured 
by the ratio of accounts to population than in any other country apart from tiny islands in the 
West  Indies).  Its  governance  is  mutualist  rather  than  capitalist:  this  strengthens  the  bonds 
between  the  members,  while  limiting  the  potential  for  expansion.  Though  quite  large  in 
aggregate (reporting almost €14 billion in assets), the sector is very fragmented with almost 
400 separate credit unions around the country. 
It is not to be wondered that the credit union sector was weakened by the crisis, though not 
to  the  same  extent  as  the  mainstream  banking  sector.  The  damage  was  limited  by  the 
conservative 
the  sector, 
imposed  on 
supplemented by regulatory restrictions on new lending by weaker credit unions. 
liquidity  requirements 
long  been 
that  have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  Government  has  established  and  provided  cash  for  two  funds,  a  resolution  fund  for 
dealing  with  credit  unions  which  are  failing  but  for  which  an  assisted  transfer  to  another 
institution is warranted (such transfers may, for example, work out cheaper to the resolution 
fund  than  liquidation  to  the  deposit  guarantee  fund),  and  a  restructuring  fund  designed  to 
strengthen credit unions not in danger of failing. This framework offers the opportunity now to 
ensure that community banking can be put back on a solid basis. 
My  own  view,  which  is  shared  by  some  –  though  not  all  –  experts  and  insiders,  is  that  a 
degree of consolidation in the credit union sector is essential if it is to perform effectively for 
its members in the future. This would mean some dilution of the very local control enjoyed by 
the  members  of  some  very  small  town-based  credit  unions,  but  it  would  be  more  than 
compensated by greater operational efficiency, range of services, and solidity. Operating a 
modern credit union requires a greater degree of organisational skill than in the past, and the 
inevitable  intensification  of  regulatory  burden  has  also  contributed  to  the  need  to  reduce 
overall  operational  costs  by  consolidation,  while  still  retaining  a  sufficient  local  presence. 
That is the way community banking has trended all over the world, especially where it is still 
thriving. 
Public ownership 
If I have conveyed a picture in which a handful of large multinational players actively caters 
to the larger firms and to those requiring more sophisticated financial services, alongside a 
handful  of  nationally  controlled  banks  focusing  mainly  on  delivering  to  the  needs  of  the 
middle-market,  while  several  dozen  mutually-owned  community  banks  are  operating  at 
county or large enterprise level, then this was my intention. 
It  is  subtly  different  from  the  present  situation  where  the  two  big  players  are  nationally 
controlled,  with  a  handful  of  other  banks  –  one  nationally  controlled,  the  others  MNC 
subsidiaries  but  nationally  supervised  banks  –  present  but  somewhat  reticent.  And  a  very 
fragmented credit union movement. 
Two  of  the  banks  are  wholly  state-owned  –  though  the  Government  is  operating  under 
relationship agreements (agreed with the Troika) which limit the extent to which Government 
intervenes in day-to-day operations of these entities. 
What role will state ownership have in the future? Most likely, Government will have no long-
term interest in holding a controlling stake in any of the existing banks. Indeed, it is likely to 
want to reduce its debt by disposing of its bank shares as quickly as is realistic. (Ideally, the 
capital needed to keep these banks going would come from a wider European fund, but that 
is a political debate at European level, to which I can make little useful contribution at this 
point.) 
What  about  the  vision  of  a  Government-sponsored  business  or  development  bank,  which 
recently has come back into vogue? There is a long and chequered history of such entities, 
and a sizable literature evaluating their successes and failures. Before the crisis the failures 
seemed  to  outweigh  the  successes  by  so  much  that  few  observers  saw  much  value  in 
reintroducing national development banks. (As mentioned, our own two, ACC and ICC, were 
sold off to foreign concerns at the turn of the millennium.) But the crisis and the sweeping 
failure of privately-owned banks has reignited the debate. One of the success stories is the 
German  Government’s  KfW.  Perhaps  through  the  current  interaction  between  the  Irish 
Government  and  KfW  we  will  learn,  in  a  hands-on  way,  more  of  what  it  takes  to  make  a 
Government-owned development bank a success. 
Back to the future? 
Was  there  a  golden  age  of  Irish  banking  that  we  should  hanker  after?  Probably  not.  Yes 
there was a century and a quarter after the Munster Bank episode of 1885 with scarcely a 
failure.  But,  though  the  banks  were  safe,  they  were  even  less  adventurous  than  those  in 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Britain and lent mainly to commerce and the church (and later to agriculture), depositing the 
balance in the London money market for much of that interval. I have pointed out elsewhere 
that the convergence of Ireland to the frontier of European living standards in the last decade 
of the old millennium owed little to financing from the Irish banks. 
Perhaps this reflection means that our ambitions should be modest. If the banks can manage 
to accelerate their processing of the large backlog of troubled legacy debt into sustainable 
solutions,  much  of  what  is  needed  to  restore  their  health  will  have  been  achieved.  If  in 
addition the funding of their low-yielding tracker portfolio could be enhanced (something for 
which technical solutions have been devised, but require wider official European agreement 
that does not seem likely to be forthcoming in the short-run), then, when combined with the 
credit  union  restructuring  framework  being  implemented  by  the  Credit  Union  Restructuring 
Board  (REBO),  the  foundations  would  be  well  laid  for  the  long-term  rehabilitation  and 
repositioning of the banking sector. 
Technological changes will of course influence the operations and image of banking in the 
future. I have spoken only briefly about such aspects. Such factors may not be as strong in a 
period of reconstruction than they were in the run-up to the crisis, where over-reliance was 
placed on risk management models and automated credit approval processes. But anyway 
that  was  not  the  flaw  that  caused  the  Irish  banking  collapse.  Its  converse,  traditional 
relationship  banking  based  on  the  lender  understanding  both  the  needs  and  the 
creditworthiness  of  customers,  is  in  effect  what  was  mishandled  in  Ireland  during  the 
exuberant years but is inevitably what we have to re-learn to ensure the recovery of the Irish 
economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
