Panicos Demetriades: The pros and cons of having a separate and 
independently managed asset management and development bank 
Welcome remarks by Mr Panicos Demetriades, Governor of the Central Bank of Cyprus, at 
the Institute of Directors (IoD) Open Panel Discussion, Nicosia, 27 August 2013. 
 Good evening ladies and gentlemen. I think tonight’s panel discussion is very important. The 
Bank of Cyprus is our largest bank and it will shortly hold its Annual General Meeting. At the 
AGM shareholders will choose the Board that will run the bank. The strategy that the new 
Board approves will need to be aggressively pursued. 
The  Bank  of  Cyprus  in  the  future  will  have  a  greater  focus  on  its  core  Cypriot  business, 
serving personal, SME and corporate customers. It will also have to deal with the legacy of 
historic expansion and growth in non-performing loans. 
The Central Bank of Cyprus does not have a fixed view as to whether the Bank of Cyprus 
should  be  split  into  two  or  not.  This  is  a  decision  for  shareholders  and  the  Board.  The 
question is whether separating certain assets is the right answer today. Opinion is divided – 
some say that this would be damaging to borrowers, others that it is the only way to manage 
the assets and restore the bank to health. I believe that we need to confront this issue and 
the  bank  should  investigate  all  options.  Any  decision  should  be  based  on  the  facts  and 
merits. 
In  all  options,  the  Bank  of  Cyprus  will  need  to  create  an  organisation  to  manage  non-
performing  loans.  The  bank  is  already  moving  in  this  direction,  and  should  it  remain  as  a 
single entity it is likely that there will still be a dedicated focus on managing the workout of 
troubled loans. 
Splitting the Bank of Cyprus into a commercial bank and an asset management/development 
bank would create a legal and management separation. This – as any other option – has a 
number  of  merits  and  challenges.  Two  institutions  would  provide  specialisation.  The  asset 
management/Development Bank could focus on maximising value through the restructuring 
of  the  loan  book  with  no  immediate  time  pressures.  It  could  also  act  as  a  specialist  bank 
focussed on real estate and development related activities. The remaining commercial bank 
could  focus  on  serving  the  domestic  economy.  However,  a  split  could  be  operationally 
disruptive in the immediate term, even if it was beneficial over time.  
Substantial progress in the restructuring of the banking system has been made. This has not 
been easy, and market conditions remain fragile. In determining the way forward any solution 
should look to meet four objectives; 
Restoration  of  Confidence  –  It  is  essential  that  any  solution  furthers  the  restoration  of 
confidence. Customers must have confidence in the future of the Bank of Cyprus whether it 
is one bank or two. As confidence is re-established we can further ease and ultimately lift 
capital controls. 
Funded  Balance  Sheet  –  The  Bank  of  Cyprus’s  reliance  on  emergency  support  is  well 
known. Any structure needs to be funded. The use of emergency support should be reduced 
over time. 
Maximise Value – The Bank of Cyprus has received substantial capital. It needs to manage 
its loan book, restructure loans and maximise value. This will not be best achieved through a 
fire sale. 
Support the Economy – As the largest and most important bank in the country the recovery 
of the Bank of Cyprus is vital to the recovery of Cyprus. The bank must continue to prudently 
lend to business and consumers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  Cypriot  economy  and  the  Bank  of  Cyprus have  undergone  a  severe  shock.  However, 
both Cyprus and the bank are resilient and can emerge strongly. It is important to recognise 
that substantial progress has been made. The Bank of Cyprus is now adequately capitalised 
and has exited resolution. New management is in place and they are working on preparing 
the strategy and restructuring plan. The ECB’s Governing Council has recognised the steps 
taken  to  restore  confidence.  Continuing  the  efforts  to  create  a  stronger  and  safer  Bank  of 
Cyprus is in all of our interests. I look forward to hearing the panellists’ views on how this can 
best be achieved. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
