Norman T L Chan: Can central banks save the world? 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  19th  Annual  Hong  Kong  Business  Summit  Luncheon,  Hong  Kong, 
25 November 2013. 
 C K (Chow), Stephen (Yiu), distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
1. 
It  has  been five  years  since  the  onset  of  the Global  Financial  Crisis  in  2008. The 
Crisis – followed three years later by the European Sovereign Debt Crisis – exposed 
the weaknesses of the global financial system and the vulnerabilities of the global 
economy. Today, peripheral countries in Europe are suffering a sharp contraction in 
their  economies,  and  major  advanced  economies  are  experiencing  very  weak 
growth, if any at all. The economic output of several European countries, including 
the UK and France, is still below the levels prior to the Global Financial Crisis. The 
US, which seems to be the only bright spot among the advanced economies, still 
hasn’t recovered in full the 8.7 million jobs it lost following the Crisis. 
Confronted by this extremely difficult environment, it was not surprising that central 
banks  in  the  advanced  economies  began  taking  unprecedented  steps  to  lower 
interest rates  as far  as  possible.  And,  once  the  rates  hit  rock  bottom,  they  began 
introducing  different  forms  of  very  aggressive  quantitative  or  credit  easing.  For 
example, in the US, the Fed introduced QE1, QE2 and unlimited QE3, which inflated 
the Fed’s balance from US$900 billion in 2008 to US$3.7 trillion now. Separately, in 
the past five years, the balance sheets of the ECB and the Bank of England have 
expanded, almost two-fold for the ECB and over four times for the Bank of England. 
And,  the  Bank  of  Japan,  the  forerunner  of  QE,  has  embarked  on  what  is  called 
Qualitative and Quantitative Easing (QQE). 
Today, the big question is: will the unconventional monetary policies undertaken by 
these  central  banks  actually  work?  Put  another  way:  can  central  banks  save  the 
world? 
Is the World Worth Saving? 
4. 
But before I try to address the question of whether central banks can save the world, 
I would like to digress a little by raising a deliberately provocative question: Is the 
World Worth Saving? You may think it a little odd that I should ask this question, as 
the answer must surely be an emphatic “Yes”. Indeed, the commonly shared desire 
is that we must do whatever it takes to bring the world back to the path of economic 
recovery,  to  enable more  jobs to  be  created  and  to  improve  people’s  welfare  and 
livelihood. So, why do I ask this seemingly superfluous question? Let me explain. 
On a number of occasions in recent years I have expressed the view that although 
there  were  many  factors  leading  to  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  and  the  European 
Debt  Crisis,  the  root  cause  of  our  present  predicament  is  the  excessive  leverage 
and  indebtedness  built  up  over  the  past  two  to  three  decades  in  the  household, 
corporate and government sectors in the advanced economies. During this period, 
the  indebtedness  of  many  industrial  economies,  such  as  the  US,  the  UK,  France 
and Germany increased steadily from 160% or 1.6 times of GDP to over 320% of 
GDP. Japan, of course, ranked the highest in this “league table” with over 450% of 
GDP. This is alarming not just because the stock of debt was rising, but the speed of 
the increase outpaced the economic or income growth of these economies by 100% 
over  this  period.  What  is  even  more  depressing  is  that  the  aggregate  public  and 
2. 
3. 
5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
private sector indebtedness ratios actually increased even further after the financial 
crisis in most advanced economies except for Germany. 
The increases were mostly due to a sharp pick up in public debt in most advanced 
economies after the Global Financial Crisis, as substantial amounts of public funds 
were deployed by the crisis-hit countries to salvage their financial systems, while the 
real  economies  were  suffering  from  falling  fiscal  revenues  with  slow  growth  and 
rising public spending. In the US, for example, public debt increased by US$6 trillion 
from the end of 2008, with the ratio of public debt to GDP rising from about 74% to 
the  current  100%.  Another  striking  example  was  Japan  where  the  public-debt-to-
GDP  ratio  surged  from  an  already  precarious  level  of  around  190%  in  2008  to 
almost 240% in 2012, and is expected to rise even further to over 250% by 2020 
along  with  still  more  fiscal  stimulus  under  “Abenomics”.  In  terms  of  private-sector 
debt,  while  the  US  and  the  UK  underwent  more  significant  private-sector 
deleveraging,  most  European  countries  showed  little  progress  on  the  reduction  in 
private-sector  indebtedness.  The  weak  peripheral  countries  aside,  even  in  core 
countries  like  France,  the  private  non-financial  sector  debt ratio  increased  sharply 
from about 200% of GDP at the end of 2008 to 230% of late. 
There are many narratives on why this trend of rising indebtedness has occurred. 
Perhaps  the  financial  “deepening”  had  made  credit  much  easier  and  cheaper  for 
many  households  and  corporates  to obtain. Or, financial  innovation  in  the form of 
securitisation and financial derivatives, such as CDS and CDOs, enabled leverage 
to be amplified and distributed throughout the financial system and beyond. But, the 
cause of this alarming trend is not the issue. The point I wish to make is that most 
people  had  become  insensitive  to  the  excessive  levels  of  indebtedness  and 
leveraging, and the resulting imbalances and vulnerabilities that had built up prior to 
the Global Financial Crisis and the European Sovereign Debt Crisis. Clearly, many 
people  would  now  question  the  validity  of  this  mindset.  But  have  we  learnt  our 
lessons? Unfortunately, I’m not so sure we have. While most people  would agree 
with the view that excessive debt and leveraging was a major factor leading to the 
crises in the US and Europe, many would still think it is possible to overcome the 
problems without having to deleverage or somehow avoid the pain arising from the 
deleveraging process. 
On the subject of pain, most of us understand what happens when we live beyond 
our  means  through  borrowings  at  the  individual,  household  or  corporate  level. 
Without any increase in productivity or income, excessive levels of debt can lead to 
insolvency or bankruptcy, which entails very serious and unpleasant consequences. 
However,  the  situation  is  a  lot  less  clear  when  it  comes  to  a  country  incurring 
excessive  debt  because  the  usual  bankruptcy  rules  do  not  apply.  Indeed,  when 
compared to households or corporates, there are two significant problems relating to 
governments  spending  beyond  their  means.  First,  there  is  the  temptation  for 
governments to continue to incur deficits as the market seems to be quite willing, at 
least for a while, to finance such deficits. In this context, Greece is a good recent 
example. Secondly, there is the usual political pressure for governments to spend 
and  borrow  now,  and  worry  about repayment  later.  Unlike  an  individual  borrowing 
money,  government  borrowing  can  be  rolled  over  and  increased  over  such  an 
extended period that repayment becomes a problem for the next generation not the 
present one. Sadly, this kind of behaviour is rather common and widespread. It is 
hard  to  imagine  a  reasonable  person  wanting  to  maintain  a  good  lifestyle  now  by 
borrowing huge amounts of money which can only be repaid by his or her children 
or grandchildren. In other words, allowing or asking governments to spend beyond 
their means for an extended period of time is tantamount to society mortgaging the 
income  and  livelihood  of  our  future  generations.  Such  action  is  irrational  and 
irresponsible,  but  it’s  happening  all  over  the  world.  No  wonder  some  people  have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
6. 
7. 
8. 
2 
 10. 
11. 
12. 
Can central banks save the world? “Yes and no” 
9. 
posed  the  question  –  if  this  is  the  kind  of  world  we’re  living  in,  is  it  really  worth 
saving? 
Rather  than  trying  to  answer  this  metaphysical  and  provocative  question,  let  me 
quickly return to the subject of my remarks today: can central banks save the world? 
The short answer is “yes and no”. 
When a financial crisis occurs and the financial system is facing imminent meltdown, 
as happened in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, shockwaves 
in the form of a severe credit crunch normally follow as banks and other financial 
firms lose confidence in each other and hold on to whatever liquidity they can. The 
breakdown in the collateral and credit supply chain can lead to the failure of not only 
illiquid  or  poorly  managed  firms,  but  also  otherwise  sound  and  healthy  firms. 
However, central banks, playing the role of lender of last resort, can and should step 
in  to  inject  the  necessary  liquidity  to  allow  the  financial  system  to  continue  to 
function. If not, illiquidity can quickly turn into insolvency on a systemic scale. Given 
the ability of central banks to create money by expanding their balance sheets, the 
Fed and the world’s central banks did exactly that during the latest Global Financial 
Crisis. This action helped prevent a global financial system meltdown. Therefore, we 
can say central banks can and do save the world during a financial crisis. 
Nevertheless,  the  ability  of  central  banks  to  reflate  the  economy  or  boost 
employment during the post crisis recovery is not as clear cut. After the 2008 Global 
Financial Crisis, the US, followed by Europe and Japan, reduced interest rates to a 
very  low  level.  And,  when  they  hit  the  near  zero  lower  bound,  the  major  central 
banks  embarked  on  unconventional  monetary  policies  of  quantitative  or  credit 
easing.  So  far,  the  US  has  created  and  injected  US$2.8  trillion  into  the  banking 
system  and  is  currently  pursuing  a  monthly  US$85  billion  asset  purchase 
programme. Mainstream thinking supports the use of this unconventional monetary 
easing on the grounds that weak growth post-crisis is mainly the result of a lack of 
aggregate demand and thus the solution is to boost demand generally by reducing 
the cost of borrowing and inducing investors to shift from low-yielding government 
bonds to riskier assets in search of yields. 
While  there  was  general  agreement  on  the  need  and  efficacy  of  action  taken  by 
central banks during the crisis period to stabilise the markets, the same cannot be 
said  for  using  the  extremely  accommodative  monetary  easing  by  the  advanced 
economies  to  support  economic  growth  and  job  creation.  Looking  beyond 
mainstream  thinking,  there  are  some  sound  analyses  by  renowned  economists, 
such as Bill White of the OECD and Dr Rajan, the former IMF Chief Economist and 
newly  appointed  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  that  suggest  these 
unconventional  monetary  policies  are  now  in  “uncharted  waters”  and  may  create 
unintended consequences and risks to the global financial system. At this point, I will 
mention three key costs or risks of these unconventional monetary policies. 
(a)  First,  these  policies  punish  the  savers  and  pensioners:  The  suppression  of 
interest rates at close to zero is helpful to debtors, but I should hasten to add that 
only those debtors who can refinance themselves at the lower rates can benefit. So, 
most of the US home owners in negative equity or with low credit scores have not 
been able to benefit from the all-time-low mortgage rates (which once dropped to as 
low as 3.55%). At the same time, the low interest rates cause a great deal of harm 
to savers, whose deposits have been earning virtually no interest at all. There are 
millions  of  savers,  including  households,  pensioners,  corporates  and  investment 
funds  that  have  remained  prudent  and  have  avoided  falling  into  the  excessive 
leverage  trap.  These  prudent  savers  have  been  punished  badly  in  the  past  four 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
years under the “low-for-very-long” policies. With a sharp drop in recurrent interest 
income,  the  behaviour  of  this  group  may  have  changed  by  scaling  down  their 
consumption or investment. This offset, at least partially, the potency of low interest 
rates and QEs. 
(b) Secondly, these policies create moral hazard: The suppression of interest rates 
and  the  injection  of  huge  amounts  of  liquidity  through  QEs  create  considerable 
moral  hazard  in  several  ways.  It  delays  the  necessary  adjustments  in  the  debt 
overhang through deleveraging by households, corporates and governments. If one 
agrees that excessive leverage is the root cause of the latest crises, deleveraging 
across the board is the only way to escape the trap. It is hard to imagine why the 
problem of excessive leverage can be overcome by adding more debt to the system. 
As QEs can reduce the short term pain and pressure brought by adjustments, there 
is a real risk the implementation of the much needed reforms in the private sector 
and the fiscal reform in the public sector could be delayed, or dropped altogether. 
This means the fundamental cause of the imbalances in the global financial system 
is not being addressed at all. The problem is particularly acute in the fiscal positions 
of  many  advanced  economies  that  have  built  up  high  levels  of  public  debt. 
According  to  the  “Ricardian  Equivalence”  theory,  when  people  believe  the  fiscal 
positions of their governments are unsustainable and that at some future stage the 
governments  have  no  choice  but  to  raise  taxes  to  pay  back  the  debt,  this  will 
materially curtail the citizens’ desire to spend and invest now because they need to 
save more to prepare for the “rainy” days ahead. 
(c) Finally, the third important cost or risk factor is the misallocation of resources and 
investments:  Given  the  near  zero  interest  rates  and  abundant  liquidity  in  the 
financial system, it is to be expected that the asset markets, especially the stock and 
housing markets, will benefit. With US stock markets continually reaching historical 
highs and with a strong rebound in the housing market, the positive wealth effects 
should help boost consumption and investment. So, this must be good news – apart 
from the inconvenient questions one asks from time to time about “How long will it 
last?” or “Is it sustainable?” For Emerging Market Economies, we have all witnessed 
the inflow of capital at the initial stages of the QEs, which drove up asset prices and 
inflationary pressure. This is not surprising as investors have no choice but to take 
aggressive  steps  to  search  for  yields  globally.  This  results  in  a  misallocation  of 
resources,  as  the  abnormally  low  interest  rates  distort  investment  decisions  by 
allocating  capital  away  from  productive  real  investment  into  risky  assets  that  yield 
higher  returns.  The  lack  of  real  investment  in  turn  reduces  medium-term  potential 
growth. Indeed, business investment growth in the US has been lacklustre since the 
economy recovered from the global financial crisis. The misallocation of resources 
aside,  the  search  for  yield  behaviour  also  leads  to  a  mispricing  of  risks  across  a 
wide spectrum of asset classes. In the US, junk bond issuance has risen sharply in 
the past few years, accounting for about 24% of all bond issuances so far in 2013, 
while the average high-yield spread has fallen below 5%. While the buoyancy in the 
asset markets helps support the economy in the short term, imbalances could build 
up  in  the  economy  and  the  financial  system  that  may  pose  a  threat  to  systemic 
stability when the unconventional monetary policies begin to unwind. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  before  moving  on  to  what  lies  ahead,  let  me  briefly 
summarise my  key  message  –  excessive  leverage  is the root cause  of the global 
financial crisis, but surprisingly, not much has changed. Many have still not learnt 
the  lesson,  and  think  the  problems  can  be  solved  by  further  leveraging.  And 
policymakers  advocating  extremely  accommodative  monetary  easing  still  believe 
liquidity-driven  growth  is  the  answer.  Indeed,  it’s  ironic  that  low  interest  rates, 
mispricing  of  risk  and  excessive  debt  levels,  which  contributed  to  the  crisis  in  the 
first place, are now considered the “solution”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
13. 
4 
 What lies ahead? 
14. 
So, we have now entered “uncharted waters” or the “world of the unknown”. It has 
often  been  argued  that  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  was  unprecedented  and  one 
which demanded unprecedented policy action. As most of the advanced economies 
have very little, if any, fiscal headroom to support growth and job creation, the use of 
zero  interest  rates  and  QE,  and  leveraging  on  central  banks’  seemingly  limitless 
ability  to  expand  their  balance  sheets,  appears  to  be  “The  Only  Game  in  Town”. 
Presumably, this means the situation has become so bad, we may as well try these 
unconventional  policies  to  see  if  they  work.  However,  as  I  outlined  earlier,  the 
efficacy or potency of these policies has not been as strong as first thought. In the 
US, the pace of economic recovery has been rather moderate, if not disappointing, 
despite  the  unprecedented  fiscal  and  monetary  support  packages  launched  since 
2009. In Europe, the situation is even more disheartening, given the fact the output 
of  many  peripheral  countries  and  the  UK  and  France  is  not  yet  back  to  pre-crisis 
levels.  Again,  when  faced  with  criticisms  that  the  central  banks  had  gone  beyond 
their  remit  and  capabilities  by  taking  up  the  role  of  supporting  economic  growth, 
mainstream  thinking  argued  that,  even  though  QE  was  not  as  potent  as  it  was 
hoped,  the  economic  conditions  post-crisis  would  have  been  a  lot  worse  without 
these  unconventional  monetary  policies.  At  this  juncture,  based  on  the  empirical 
evidence  available  so  far,  it  is  hard  to  judge  one  way  or  the  other  whether  the 
unconventional monetary policies have worked, or will work. 
However, it should not take long to find out the answer. This is the fifth year of QE in 
the  US;  and  the  main  issue  now  is  not  to  what  extent  QE  has  helped  economic 
recovery  since  2009,  but  what  happens  when  the  Fed  actually  exits  from  these 
accommodative  policies.  Of  course  we  don’t  know  exactly  when  the  Fed  will  exit, 
which entails three stages: tapering in the asset purchase programme, ending the 
purchase  programme  and  eventually  raising  policy  rates.  Chairman  Bernanke  and 
some FOMC members have made it clear the timing of these stages is still uncertain 
as it will depend on the actual pace of economic recovery and improvement in the 
job market. The three stages have long been known to the markets and are nothing 
new.  However,  when  Chairman  Bernanke  talked  about  a  possible  timeline  for 
tapering in  May and June, the US and global asset markets reacted strongly  with 
both  bond  and  stock  prices  taking  a  beating.  It  is  particularly  noteworthy  that 
Chairman  Bernanke’s  remarks  triggered  selling  off  in  many  emerging  market 
economies, especially those with weak current account positions. As a result, it took 
the  Chairman  and  his  FOMC  members  considerable  time  and  effort  to  clarify  that 
tapering was not “tightening” and there was still a long way to go before US interest 
rates would rise. Lately, there has also been some rather strange market behaviour, 
with the markets going down when the economic or employment data showed some 
improvement,  which  in  theory  should  have  been  good  news;  and  markets  rising 
when  jobs  or  employment  data  showed  signs  of  softening.  This  pattern  is  quite 
different  to  what  conventional  wisdom  would  suggest.  It  also  highlights  the 
uncertainty and risk that when asset markets have been supported by low interest 
rates and high liquidity for a prolonged period, the normalisation of the interest rate 
and  liquidity  conditions  could  create  the  kind  of  market  dynamics  that  may 
destabilise the financial system and dislocate the recovery path of the real economy. 
Nevertheless, we don’t know how long these perverse market dynamics will persist 
and how they may impact on the Fed’s exit. We certainly hope the world will benefit 
from an orderly exit from the QE and zero interest rate policies. As we don’t have a 
crystal ball, we can only wait and see what will happen in the re-pricing of assets 
across the globe as and when interest rates begin to normalise. In the meantime, it 
is crucial we are well-prepared for possible turbulence and shockwaves. 
15. 
16. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
But, I believe Hong Kong is on the right track. While we have been at the receiving 
end  of  massive  international  capital  flows  for  several  years,  prompting  a  rise  in 
inflationary pressure and overheating in the property market, we have acted swiftly 
to  contain  the  adverse  impact  of  such  unprecedented  monetary  easing  policies. 
Since  2009,  the  HKMA  has  undertaken  six  rounds  of  countercyclical  prudential 
measures  on  mortgage  lending,  coupled  with  other  supervisory  action  on  bank 
capital and liquidity, to enhance the resilience of the banking system so it is better 
equipped to cope with future shocks. We have also launched a series of measures 
to contain credit growth, and recently we have further required banks with relatively 
fast credit growth to ensure they have stable funding sources to support that growth. 
The prospect of a tapering in quantitative easing in the US has already caused jitters 
on  global  financial  markets,  including  fund  flows  and  exchange  rates  in  some 
regional economies. Such volatility may continue, if not magnify, in the next couple 
of  years.  Therefore,  we  must  remain  vigilant  against  the  possible  spillover  effects 
from other economies, as well as any other emerging risks. We will continue to take 
proactive steps to ensure our banking system is resilient to a possible reversal of the 
credit  cycle,  and  to  enhance  banks’  liquidity  planning  and  management  in 
anticipation of any sudden outflow of funds. 
In conclusion, ladies and gentlemen, we will keep reminding and warning the public 
not  to  allow  ourselves  to  incur  excessive  debt  simply  because  interest  rates  are 
currently  at  very  low  levels.  We  don’t  know  whether  and  when  these  shocks  will 
materialise, but we must stand ready to face them and be able to emerge from the 
next crisis relatively unscathed, as we have done in the past. 
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
