Stephen S Poloz: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 23 October 
2013. 
 Good  morning.  Tiff  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  October 
Monetary Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
• 
The  global  economy  is  expected  to  expand  modestly  in  2013.  However,  its  near-
term  dynamic  has  changed  and  the  composition  of  growth  is  now  slightly  less 
favourable for Canada. 
The U.S. economy is softer than expected. But as fiscal headwinds dissipate and 
household deleveraging ends, growth should accelerate through 2014 and 2015. 
Overall,  the  global  economy  is  projected  to  grow  by  2.8  per  cent  in  2013  and 
accelerate to 3.4 per cent in 2014 and 3.6 per cent in 2015. 
In  Canada,  uncertain  global  and  domestic  economic  conditions  are  delaying  the 
pick-up  in  exports  and  business  investment.  This  leaves  the  level  of  economic 
activity lower than the Bank had been expecting. 
While  household  spending  remains  solid,  slower  growth  of  household  credit  and 
higher  mortgage  interest  rates  point  to  a  gradual  unwinding  of  household 
imbalances. 
The Bank expects that a better balance between domestic and foreign demand will 
be achieved over time and that growth will become more self-sustaining. But this will 
take longer than previously projected. 
Real GDP growth is projected to increase from 1.6 per cent this year to 2.3 per cent 
next year and 2.6 per cent in 2015. The Bank expects that the economy will return 
gradually to full production capacity, around the end of 2015. 
Inflation  in  Canada  has  remained  low  in  recent  months,  reflecting  the  significant 
slack in the economy, heightened competition in the retail sector, and other sector-
specific factors. 
With larger and more persistent excess supply in the economy, both total CPI and 
core inflation are expected to return more gradually to 2 per cent, around the end of 
2015. 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several risks emanating from both the external 
important that we are not just aware of these risks, but that we also take them on 
board as we consider the appropriate course for monetary policy. 
We have identified two important external risks. An upside risk to inflation in Canada 
that  emanates  from  the  external  environment  is  the  risk  of  more-robust  economic 
growth than projected in the advanced economies. Greater global demand would in 
turn  translate  into  higher  exports  for  Canada  and  rising  commodity  prices,  which 
would support higher incomes and spending. 
A  second  important  external  risk  is  a  more  protracted  and  difficult  euro-area 
recovery. Since Canada’s direct trade links to the euro area are limited, the effects 
would be felt mainly through confidence and financial channels, as well as through 
indirect trade links. 
We have also identified three important domestic risks. 
            BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
     is  a  risk 
than  assumed.  This 
that  could  materialize 
First, there is a possibility that, for a given projection for global growth, exports could 
be  even  weaker 
if 
competitiveness  challenges  were  greater  than  anticipated  and  would  result  in  an 
even larger loss of market share. 
Second,  there  is  a  risk  on  the  upside  that,  as  confidence  returns,  domestic 
momentum  builds  faster  than  expected.  Once  the  recovery  in  foreign  demand 
becomes more solidly entrenched, and with domestic demand continuing to grow at 
a moderate pace, business sentiment could improve rapidly. 
The  third  important  domestic  risk  remains  a  disorderly  unwinding  of  household 
sector  imbalances,  which  are  still  elevated.  The  continued  slowing  in  household 
credit  and  the  rise  in  mortgage  interest  rates  point  to  a  gradual  unwinding  of 
household imbalances, but recent data suggest some risk of renewed momentum in 
the housing market. 
Although  the  Bank  considers  the  risks  around  its  projected  inflation  path  to  be 
balanced,  the  fact  that  inflation  has  been  persistently  below  target  means  that 
downside risks to inflation assume increasing importance. However, the Bank must 
also  take  into  consideration  the  risk  of  exacerbating  already-elevated  household 
imbalances. 
Weighing these considerations, the Bank judges that the substantial monetary policy 
stimulus currently in place remains appropriate and today decided to maintain the 
target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
