Barry Whiteside: Promoting and supporting greater financial inclusion in Fiji 
Address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch of the 
inaugural Microfinance Awards, Suva, 2 September 2013. 
 National Financial Inclusion Taskforce Members 
Microfinance Working Group Members 
Our Co-Sponsors of the Microfinance Awards: Life Insurance Corporation of India and 
the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme 
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Introductory comments 
Good morning and bula vinaka to you all. 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you to the launch of the first national Microfinance 
Awards.  
The decision to host a Microfinance Awards this year is something that we at the Reserve 
Bank have been contemplating for some time. We believe that greater recognition needs to 
be  given  to  those  special  individuals  and  micro  enterprises  that  play  a  critical  role  in 
alleviating  poverty,  providing  employment  and  income  to  many  needy  families,  particularly 
those living below the poverty line. They are also an important component and complement 
the national efforts to promote and support greater financial inclusion. 
The Microfinance Awards are an initiative of the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce. The 
National  Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  is  a  national  committee  that 
was set up in 2010 and represents stakeholders from the public and private sector, the donor 
agencies, Micro Finance Institutions and NGOs, with the goal of extending financial services 
to  150,000  unbanked  people  by  the  year  2014.  I  am  pleased to  report that  as  of  30  June 
2013 we have now achieved 87 percent of this target. The NFIT has three working groups 
that  help  achieve  its  objective,  namely  the;  Financial  Literacy  Working  Group,  Statistics 
Working Group and the Microfinance Working Group.   
The purpose of us having these awards is to: 
Promote the micro enterprise sector; 
• 
Encourage local value adding of our resources;  
• 
• 
To encourage self-employment; and, most importantly 
To recognize successful, innovative and creative micro entrepreneurs at a national 
• 
level.  
Microfinance awards 
The inaugural Microfinance awards include 3 main categories: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
These awards include enterprises with a total turnover of less than $30,000 per annum.  
Best Microfinance Entrepreneur – Individual; 
Best Microfinance Entrepreneur – Partnership; and 
Best Microfinance Service Provider. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Development front in the micro sector 
Through these awards we hope that more people, young and old, rural and urban dwellers, 
will  be  encouraged  to  find  opportunities  for  themselves  and  their  families  by  starting  a 
business. 
We believe that with an enabling regulatory policy environment and with access to affordable 
financial services, individuals and micro-enterprises will have the opportunity to flourish and 
bloom.  Like  a  small  seedling,  a  budding  micro-enterprise  can  in  the  right  environment  put 
down strong roots and grow over time.  
In the same way, micro-enterprises when managed well and in the right environment will not 
remain micro. They can always grow into small businesses and later on graduate to medium 
and large enterprises. Many of our own local millionaires and renowned large companies in 
Fiji like Punjas, Vinod Patel, Tappoos, Marco Polo, and Joes Farm, just to mention a few, all 
started  from  very  humble  beginnings.  Thinking  about  these  companies  and  how  they  all 
started brings hope to those wanting to start a business. You can always start small; the key 
is hard work, perseverance and prudence. 
Allow  me  to  mention  some  of  the  policy  initiatives  that  RBF  has  recently  implemented  to 
create a more inclusive financial sector.  
In early 2010, under Banking Supervision Policy Statement 14, all commercial banks were 
directed to set up microfinance units at every branch to cater for the low income earners and 
especially those in the informal sector. I am pleased to report that the total value of micro 
deposits held by the commercial banks at 30 June 2013 was $40.3million. 
This was followed by the launch of mobile money services in June and July 2010. The mobile 
money  ecosystem  continues  to  expand  across  Fiji  and  is  becoming  an  accepted  mode  of 
payment and offers many services similar to a bank. A wide range of services is available 
through mobile phones, such as bill payments, international remittances, domestic transfers, 
online  shopping  payments,  savings,  insurance  repayments,  payment  for  judicial  fines, 
payment for municipal council services and payment of wages and salaries of civil servants. 
These  new  financial  services,  we  believe,  have  created  more  opportunities  for  financial 
services providers and their clients to transact and conduct business with each other through 
the  mobile  phone.  For  example,  one  of  the  four  microfinance  institutions  operating  in  Fiji 
today offers loan disbursements to their clients, or clients can make their loan repayments 
using  their  mobile  phones.  Other  exciting  developments  that  are  expected  to  be 
transformational for business in Fiji include the opportunity for farmers with the use of their 
mobile phones to post their crops they have ready for sale online and negotiate with potential 
buyers directly from their farm gate.  
Earlier  this  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  issued  Agent  Banking  Guidelines  to  guide  the 
commercial  banks  in  the  establishment  of  agent  networks  that  will  assist  them  in  their 
delivery  of  financial  services  to  unbanked  communities.  The  objective  is  to  encourage 
commercial  banks  to  reach  out  and  provide  basic  banking  services  to  the  underserved 
communities and individuals and entrepreneurs in the rural and maritime areas, with little or 
no access to regular banking services, through localised agents such as retail merchants or 
postal agencies. This will allow those who are living far from the main urban centres where 
bank  branches  are  generally  located,  to  be  able  to  deposit  or  withdraw  money  from  their 
bank accounts and also receive money from their families or friends based both locally and 
abroad, or make payments at these retail agents. 
Our  national  achievements  and  progress  towards  inclusive  development  for  the  financial 
sector have been made possible through the collaboration and support of our development 
partners. I  wish  to  highlight  and  mention  here the  tremendous  contribution  that the  Pacific 
Financial Inclusion Programme and Life Insurance Corporation of India have provided over 
the past few years. With theirs and other stakeholders support and initiative, Fiji has gained 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
through  the  integration  of  financial  education  into  the  school  curriculum  and  new  micro 
insurance products to name a few.  
The Reserve Bank has organized over 16 expositions around the country with the last rural 
expo in Kadavu in July. This platform is playing an important role in coordinating actions of 
NGOs,  donors,  financial  institutions  and  government  ministries  in  promoting  microfinance 
and  also  providing  entrepreneurial  and  financial  literacy  training.  In  brief,  the  expos  make 
financial inclusion a reality by taking the services to the underserved communities.  
Official launch  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen  in  concluding,  let  me thank the  Life Insurance  Corporation  of  India 
and  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion  Programme  for  their  valuable  contributions  and  for 
partnering  with  the  Reserve  Bank  in  co-sponsoring  our  microfinance  awards.  The  Awards 
presentation will be held in conjunction with the Microfinance Pacific Week later in October 
this year at the Sheraton Resort.  
I take this opportunity to wish this year’s candidates all the very best and I now have much 
pleasure in officially launching the first ever Microfinance Awards.  
Thank you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
