Millison Narh: Ghana’s financial services industry and its impact on 
private sector growth 
Keynote address by Mr Millison Narh, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the 
Ghana Association of Bankers – 13th Annual Working Luncheon, Accra, 8 August 2013. 
 Mr.  Chairman,  the  Executive  Secretary,  Members  of  the  General  Council,  Managing 
Directors of Banks, Fellows and Associates of the Association of Bankers, Members of the 
Banking Fraternity, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Good  afternoon  and  welcome  to  the  13th  Annual  working  luncheon  of  the  Ghana 
1. 
Association of Bankers. I am privileged to be given the opportunity to address stakeholders 
of the banking sector today. The Association gave me the liberty to decide on any topic and 
since this gathering consists of members of the banking fraternity, I have chosen to focus on 
the  financial  services  industry  and  its  impact  on  private  sector  growth,  with  emphasis  on 
financing small and medium term enterprises. But first, let me start with the current global 
and  domestic  economic  conditions  through  which  we  can  leverage  our  way,  as  financial 
intermediaries to promote growth and development. 
2. 
Mr.  Chairman,  we  are  holding  this  annual  luncheon  against  the  backdrop  of 
continued global uncertainties characterised by financial and sovereign debt crisis in the euro 
area  and  weakened  global  growth  prospects  across  major  advanced  economies.  The 
prevailing  weak  global  economic  conditions  have  dampened  external  trade  and  weakened 
commodity prices on international markets. In the first half year of 2013, we have seen some 
signs  of  growth  though  unevenly  spread  across  regions.  In  the  euro  area,  the  recession 
continued  and  in  the  US,  the  recovery  remained  timid  while  Japan  offered  some  positive 
signs of growth. In emerging markets especially China, the tempo of economic activity has 
reduced somewhat, posing further threats to overall global growth prospects. 
3. 
In the quarters ahead, however, global growth is projected to pick up gradually while 
an upturn in world trade and financing conditions may also boost growth in the euro area. 
These  notwithstanding,  the  impact  of  the  current  weak  global  conditions  have  resulted  in 
sharp drop in commodity prices, especially gold, with adverse implications for the country’s 
external  sector.  Mr.  Chairman,  let  me  now  shift  focus  to  developments  in  the  Ghanaian 
economy over the first half year. 
4. 
The Ghanaian  economy  experienced  phenomenal  growth  over  the  last  two  years, 
spurred on by the oil sector and its multiplier effects on economic activity. Economic growth 
peaked at 15 pct in 2011 and 8 pct in 2012 with inflation firmly anchored in single digits for 
the two consecutive years. However, assessment of current economic conditions in the first 
half of 2013 indicates some growth moderation amid rising inflation. 
5. 
Economic conditions broadly remained challenging during the first half of 2013. The 
developments reflected a slower pace of real sector economic activity during Q1 evidenced 
by  a  contraction  in  the  real  CIEA  and  weak  business  and  consumer  sentiments  in  the 
quarter.  However,  economic  activity  and  consumer  confidence  rebounded  in  Q2  while 
business confidence continued to be weak. 
Headline  inflation  has  consistently  trended  upwards  in  the  year  on  account  of 
6. 
significant increases in domestic petroleum products and seasonal food cycle which affects 
prices.  Inflation  has  risen  to  11.8  pct  in  July  2013  (new  CPI  basket),  from  8.8 pct  in 
December  2012.  In  addition,  inflation  expectations  by  both  businesses  and  consumers 
remained heightened. 
7. 
On the external front, prices of Ghana’s key commodities softened which resulted in 
lower  export  earnings.  This,  coupled  with  moderated  import  growth,  resulted  in  some 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
improvement in the trade deficit to US$1.2 billion in the first half, compared with a deficit of 
US$1.3 billion same period last year. 
8. 
While  modest  gains  have  been  made  in  broadly  stabilizing  the  foreign  exchange 
market, major vulnerabilities emanating from continuing imbalance in the supply and demand 
conditions on the market are currently exerting some pressure on the local currency. On a 
year to date basis, the Ghana cedi has cumulatively depreciated by 3.4 pct against the US 
dollar, compared to 17.2 pct depreciation a year earlier. Going forward, the Bank of Ghana 
stands  ready  to  implement  both  short  term  and  medium  to  long  term  measures  to  ensure 
stability in the foreign exchange market. 
9. 
Mr.  Chairman,  as  we  all  know,  developments  in  the  banking  sector  showed  that 
banks remained profitable, liquid and well-capitalised, thanks largely to the high interest rate 
environment  that  has  persisted for  some time  now.  In  contrast to  low  investment  yields  of 
2 pct in global financial markets, banks in Ghana on average had ROE of over 20 percent 
and ROAs of over 5 percent. The Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) was about 18 pct, above 
the prudential limit of 10 pct. Asset penetration, measured as the ratio of total assets to GDP, 
was 40.5 pct indicating continued deepening of the financial sector in the economy. 
10. 
These notwithstanding, there are some concerns to us at the Bank of Ghana like the 
persistently high level of NPL ratios compared to other peer countries. As at June 2013, the 
NPL ratio was 12.8, down from 13.2 in June 2012. Although the rates are on the downward 
trend,  they  are  still  high  and  we  are  taking  steps  to  encourage  banks  to  write-off  long 
outstanding “loss” accounts with 100% provisioning that tend to overstate the true NPL level. 
For instance, when we account for the loss category, the NPL ratio as at June 2013, declined 
to 4.7 which compares favourably with prevailing NPL levels in other peer countries. 
11. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  also  the  need  to  apply  strict  provisioning  rules  on 
overdraft facilities which are more prone to “ever-greening” than ordinary term loans. Other 
issues  are:  the  build-up  of  unclaimed  deposit  balances  or  dormant  accounts  on  banks’ 
books;  concentration  risk  on  both  sides  of  the  balance  sheet  –  large  loan  exposures  and 
reliance on large deposits; the need for transparent regulatory issuances on such issues as 
Mergers  &  Acquisitions,  internal  controls,  and  external  auditors;  and  finally  the  need  to 
update manual of accounts and reposting requirements. 
12. 
The Bank of Ghana took another major step to enhance transparency in the setting 
of  lending  rates  in  the  industry.  The  new  base  rate  model  which  seeks  to  ensure 
transparency and uniformity in loan pricing within the banking industry, became operational 
in  July  2013.  As  per  the  directive,  banks  have  fully  complied  with  the  new  framework  and 
there are positive indications that on the average, base rates have declined by about 3 pct in 
the  banking  industry.  This  new  initiative,  together  with  the  credit  bureau  system  and  the 
collateral  registry  should  help  improve  the  environment  for  lending  and  further  help  lower 
NPLs in the banking industry. 
13. 
Mr. Chairman, permit me to touch on a matter that is sensitive to both the industry 
players  and  the  Bank  of  Ghana  that  is  capital  requirements.  Developments  in  the  macro-
economic front have necessitated the need for the Bank of Ghana to review the minimum 
capital requirements for new industry entrants. In this regard, the minimum paid-capital for 
major banks have been revised from GH¢60 million to GH¢120.0 million while that of NBFIs 
increases from GH¢7.0 million to GH¢15.0 million. That of the rural banks have been upped 
to GH¢300,000. 
14. 
These increases are necessary in order to provide our institutions with the muscle to 
undertake big-ticket deals to support the growth of the private sector and to further serve as 
a  capital  cushion  for  absorbing  unexpected  losses  that  may  arise  in  the  normal  course  of 
business. In this regard, I would like to take this opportunity to advise the industry players, 
particularly  the  banks,  to  properly  align  their  risk  appetite  to  their  capital  levels.  This  is 
important because any misalignment between risk and capital could threaten the solvency of 
the institution and unduly put shareholders investments at risk. Mr. Chairman, subsequent to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
these  capital  enhancements,  we  have  initiated  action  towards  gazetting  the  increases  as 
required by law. 
15. 
Mr. Chairman, to equip our tool box with the necessary tools needed to identify and 
manage problem banks, the Bank of Ghana has developed a Supervisory Intervention Guide 
which  seeks  to  provide  a  consistent  and  transparent  framework  for  intervening  in  the 
operations  of  regulated  deposit-taking  Financial  Institutions  with  the  view  to  protecting  the 
interest of depositors and shareholders. 
16. 
In order to further strengthen the regulatory and supervisory regime, we have also 
developed guidelines and regulations which are being fine-tuned for the consideration of the 
sector minister and Parliamentary approval where necessary. These include; 
Corporate Governance Regulations 
• 
Licensing Regulations 
• 
Outsourcing Guidelines 
• 
Risk Management Guidelines 
• 
External Auditors Regulations 
• 
Mergers and Acquisition Guidelines 
• 
17. 
Of  these,  the  Outsourcing  Guidelines  and  the  Corporate  Governance  Regulations 
have  already  been  exposed  to  industry  and  we  have  received  contributions  and  some 
interesting  comments  from  the  banks.  It  is  evident  that  without  a  strong  Corporate 
Governance  regime,  shareholder’s  investments  will  be  put  at  risks  and  the  industry  as  a 
whole would be less attractive to investors. 
18. 
Mr. Chairman, to further strengthen our supervisory function, the Bank of Ghana has 
also initiated action toward the revision and consolidation of the existing laws that govern the 
Banking  and  Non-Bank  Financial  Institutions.  It  is  envisaged  that  these  initiatives  would 
remove  any  potential  vulnerabilities  in  the  banking  landscape  to  ensure  a  safe  and  sound 
banking practices across the industry. 
Another  recent  industry  development  is  BOG’s  quest  to  introduce  a  Deposit 
19. 
Insurance Scheme in Ghana. Pursuant to this objective, a feasibility study has been done by 
Global Business Solutions of Germany, financed by KFW of Germany. The study has since 
been approved by the Bank of Ghana, KFW and the Government of Ghana (GOG) through 
the  Ministry  of  Finance.  Currently  the  Bank  of  Ghana  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance  have 
reviewed and approved the Terms of Reference for the Legal consultants to draft a Deposit 
Insurance  law  for  industry.  It  is  our  expectation  that  the  Deposit  Insurance  Agency  would 
become  operational  by  end  December  2014  and  that  could  afford  some  protection  to  all 
depositors. 
20. 
The  key  challenge  going  forward  to  the  banking  industry  is  how  to  maintain  the 
continued  high  levels  of  profitability  over  the medium  to  longer-term  and  more  particularly, 
when the interest rate environment begins to shift its course. It appears to us at the Bank of 
Ghana  that,  among many  other  avenues  for  maintaining  the  bottom  line  like  massive  cost 
cutting  and  growing  non-fee-based  income,  the  answer  could  lie  in  taking  up  the  SME 
challenge  –  which  in  the  words  of  a  recent  banking  survey  means  harnessing  the  SME 
potential. 
21. 
Although the banking sector has not witnessed new entrants this year, the number 
of microfinance institutions licensed by the Bank of Ghana has more than doubled to 228 by 
June  2013,  from  90  in  December  2012.  The  increasing  trend  in  acquisition  of  licenses  by 
microfinance  institutions  signals  the  increasing  demand  by  economic  agents  at  the  lower 
echelon of financial service provision. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
22. 
Traditionally, banks are known to focus largely on corporate as well as personal and 
consumer  banking.  Thus,  the  increasing  number  of  microfinance  institutions  suggests  a 
broadening of the scope of financial service provision at the micro level. This leaves a wide 
financial  services  gap, which  has  been referred  to  as the  “missing middle”  and  constitutes 
mainly Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). 
23. 
Mr.  Chairman,  the  critical  role  that  this  segment  of  society  plays  in  any  economy 
cannot be overemphasised. Various studies show that promoting the development of SMEs 
can be used as a catalyst for economic growth, employment and poverty reduction. And yet, 
by their nature, SMEs are constrained from accessing financial services, especially through 
the  major  banks  due  to  lack  of  proper  governance,  weak  management  systems,  technical 
knowledge, and poor labour skills. Although most banks are aware of the potentials of SMEs, 
venturing  into  the  sector  requires  painstaking  efforts  to  help  them  overcome  these 
constraints.  Nevertheless,  SME  financing  can  be  a  good  business  for  banks  and  a  better 
understanding  of  the  sector  should  provide  enough  incentives  for  banks  to  start  and  build 
business  relationships  with  them.  This  is  an  investment  that  can  be  done  now  within  the 
environment of high bank profitability. 
24. 
To start with, it is important for banks to understand the mode of operation of SMEs 
and  develop  innovative  financial  services  that  suit  those  peculiar  needs.  Typically,  SMEs 
have  weak  competencies  in  financial  management  and  they  operate  with  low  levels  of 
productive capital which heightens their risk levels. With such background knowledge, banks 
should  seek  to  set  up  specialised  desks  to  provide  strong  guidance  for  SMEs  to  address 
weaknesses  in  their  financial  management,  handle  SMEs  appraisals,  loan  documentation 
and monitoring. These processes could set very high standards for SMEs financing and help 
lower risks associated with the financing sector. 
25. 
While it is essential for banks to embrace SME financing, it is even more critical not 
to  downplay  the  risks  associated  with  the  sector.  This  brings  up  the  issue  of  risk 
management systems and structures to assist in the identification and effective management 
of risks in the banking environment, including that of SME banking businesses. 
26. 
The need to invest in risk management structures, policies and procedures including 
IT  systems  that  go  beyond  the  traditional  lending  activities  of  the  bank  to  include  SMEs 
should  therefore  be  factored  in  as  banks  engage  in  their  own  internal  capital  adequacy 
assessment program. Some profits could be retained to support such SME-friendly capacity-
building  initiatives  in  addition  to  funding  internal  growth  to  meet  the  demands  for  large 
financing  by  our  fast-growing  oil  economy.  In  addition,  the  practice  of  placing  some  funds 
with banks abroad beyond usual need to fund correspondent banking relationship should be 
rationalized by banks heavily engaged in this practice. 
27. 
We are also closely monitoring the fast growing share of deposit – taking non-bank 
financial  institutions  (NBFIs)  sector  such  as  savings  and  loans  companies  and  finance 
houses  in  the  total  assets  of  the  financial  system.  The  strong  growth  of  these  other 
institutions has reduced the banks share in total assets from 89 pct in 2010 down to 85 pct. 
These smaller institutions which are able to offer more competitive rates on deposit products 
to their customers are inching up their market share. Clearly, this development should be a 
wakeup  call  to  all  banks  since  there  are  more  funds  that  can  be  intermediated  in  the 
economy if the price is right. 
28. 
In conclusion, let me reiterate that financial intermediation, especially for SMEs, is 
critical  for  overall  private  sector  development  and  growth  acceleration.  However,  it  is 
important to create the necessary macroeconomic environment for an effective and efficient 
financial sector to jumpstart the process. Looking ahead, the central bank is optimistic that 
inflation will edge closer within the target band by end year as inflationary pressures decline 
in  the  quarters  ahead. The  Bank  also  stands  ready  to  implement  sound  monetary  policies 
and take appropriate measures aimed at consolidating macroeconomic stability. 
29. 
Thank you for the attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
