Stephen S Poloz: $5 and $10 bank note issue 
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  presented  to  the 
Canadian Space Agency, Saint Hubert, Québec, 7 November 2013. 
 It is a great honour for me to be here to complete the launch of the Frontiers series of bank 
notes.  As  of  today,  we  are  releasing  the  new  $5  and  $10  polymer  notes,  which  are  now 
ready to join the twenties, fifties and even maybe a hundred or two that have already made 
their way into our wallets. 
One of the most important functions of the Bank of Canada is to design and issue bank notes 
that are hard to counterfeit so that Canadians can use them with confidence. With this new, 
innovative series, the Bank has produced some of the most secure bank notes in the world. 
As  Governor  of  the  Bank,  I  join  all  my  colleagues  in  expressing  our  pride  in  the  Frontiers 
series.  It  is  aptly  named  since  each  bank  note  pushes  the  frontiers  of  security  and 
technological innovation to maintain low counterfeiting levels and ensure that confidence in 
cash remains strong. 
The  images  on the  bank  notes  also  speak  to the  theme  of frontiers.  Each  tells  a  uniquely 
Canadian story. With the $100 note, the story is medical innovation, including the discovery 
of insulin and the invention of the pacemaker. On the $50, we evoke our far north and Arctic 
research. On the $20, the image of the Canadian National Vimy Memorial reminds us of the 
valour and sacrifice of Canadian soldiers in military conflicts throughout our history. 
The bank notes we are issuing today continue this tradition. The new $5 and $10 bank notes 
tell a story about the frontiers of our country and even our universe. 
The  $5  note  highlights  Canada’s  technological  achievements  that  look  skyward  –  our 
contributions in robotics to the International Space Station Program. 
The $10 note depicts a great feat of engineering from Canada’s past – the joining of east and 
west by rail. 
This  is  where  the  bank  note  story  gets  personal  for  me.  I  grew  up  hearing  about  George 
Stephen,  whom  I  am  named  after.  He  was  president  of  what  was  then  the  new  railway 
company, and was the principal financier of the building of CP rail. 
By all accounts he was a man who shunned the limelight and who said about himself that he 
had  neither  the  training  nor  the  talents  to  accomplish  anything  without  hard  work.  Well, 
without his hard work, we may not have had the Canadian Pacific Railway. The building of 
the CPR was years in the making and involved the hard work and sacrifices of thousands. It 
was a monumental undertaking – a feat of engineering and nation building. 
Our speakers today have reminded us that our bank notes reflect the people and the society 
where they are used. 
Canada is a world leader in using innovation for secure bank notes. 
Work on this series started eight years ago, in 2005. It’s not that we work slowly at the Bank 
of  Canada  –  that’s  how  long  it  takes  to  reach  new  frontiers  in  bank  notes  using  a  new 
polymer  material  and  state-of-the-art  security  features.  Well  over  700  million  are  now  in 
circulation. 
With this series, the Bank sets a global benchmark for currency. It’s a big change and we are 
working  closely  with  the  cash  handling  industry,  including  financial  institutions  and  retail 
associations  to finalize  the  transition from  paper  to  polymer  and  make  sure  it  is  a  smooth 
one. 
And though we are very proud of these bank notes, we are not standing still. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
That’s because neither technology nor counterfeiting stands still. You can be sure that at the 
Bank  of  Canada  we  will  continue  to  innovate  and  apply  new  technologies  so  that  we  stay 
ahead of the counterfeiters. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
