Yves Mersch: The overhaul of the architecture of the euro area and the 
return of investor confidence 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the CFA Institute European Investment Conference “Beyond austerity – opportunities for 
European investors in the global market”, London, 15 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
It is a great pleasure to join you at the Sixth Annual European Investment Conference and to 
have this opportunity to talk to investment professionals. I would like to discuss the return of 
confidence in the euro that we have observed over the past year. In particular, I would like to 
show that recent financial market developments confirm the credibility of the reform actions 
taken at European and national level. We can clearly see that investor confidence is slowly 
returning, that the persistent euro area financial market fragmentation is decreasing and that 
contagion is receding. This does not mean that the euro area and its member countries can 
rest on their laurels, as some efforts are still needed to bring an end to the crisis and to put 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) on a stronger footing. 
Building a stronger EMU 
Before looking at these encouraging market developments, let me briefly recall the causes of 
the euro area crisis and the policy actions taken at European and national level to address 
the economic imbalances and financial vulnerabilities. 
As the crisis has shown us: the original design of the euro has been incomplete. It became 
clear  that  the  euro  area  lacked  certain  institutional  elements  which  are  essential  to 
federations with a single currency. Three of these shortcomings were particularly acute and 
contributed to the euro area sovereign debt crisis: 
First, the Maastricht Treaty was a child of its time. It reflected the ambient overreliance on the 
disciplinary  effects  of  markets.  Fiscal  policies  remained  at  national  level.  The  Stability  and 
Growth Pact provided rules to mitigate this situation but their implementation by the Council 
of Ministers often lacked traction and facilitated fiscal indiscipline. 
Second,  macroeconomic  imbalances  often  precede  fiscal  disequilibria.  But  the  Treaty  only 
provided for a vague coordination of economic policies which on top were not determinedly 
pushed by the Commission. 
Third, Europe lacked a coherent approach to financial sector policies. Regulatory frameworks 
and  financial  policies  remained  insufficiently  harmonised  and  centralised,  neglecting  the 
increasing level of financial integration in the euro area. In this respect, there was no level 
playing field for European banks and, in particular, there was no institutional framework to 
deal with (domestic and cross-border) systemic risks in the banking sector. To be true, in the 
late 80s/ early 90s the concept of systemic risk hardly existed. 
The  flaws  of  the  original  Treaty  are  therefore  less  of  a  conceptual  nature  –  unless  one 
applies the intellectual framework of today with the benefit of hindsight to judge the design of 
the  early  90s.  The  main  flaw  in  my  view  was  that  the  political  authorities  and  economic 
agents  did  not  internalise  enough  what  participation  in  a  monetary  union  means.  They 
received  the  benefits  of  reduced  interest  rates  but  missed  out  on  the  obligations  for  the 
country itself (i.e. the need for adjustment through the domestic economy) and towards other 
countries  (arising  from  negative  spillovers  linked  to  unbalanced  domestic  policies).  A 
coherent and viable architecture of EMU ought to be based on more integrated frameworks 
for budgetary matters, economic policy, financial sector and democratic accountability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In light of the crisis and the urgent responses it required in the short term, one may lose sight 
of the major institutional progress achieved since the crisis erupted. Besides putting in place 
crisis  management  tools  and  financial  firewalls  that  not  only  proved  effective  but  also 
underlined  a  degree  of  solidarity  unseen  before  to  accompany  ambitious  reform  programs 
which began – where implemented – to yield results, European leaders have adopted major 
decisions aimed at significantly reinforcing the architecture of EMU. 
First, the fiscal framework has been strengthened since the start of the crisis to improve 
fiscal  discipline  and  restore  fiscal  sustainability  in  euro  area  Member  States.  In  particular, 
fiscal  surveillance  has  been  enlarged  and  fiscal  governance  has  been  enhanced  by 
procedural  steps  to  nearly  automatic  sanctions.  We  expect  that  no  further  holes  will  be 
punctured in this strengthened SGP. 
There  are  encouraging  signs.  National  governments  are  addressing  their  fiscal 
imbalances. The euro area’s progress in fiscal consolidation is much more advanced than 
that of other regions of the world. Its average fiscal deficit in 2013 is projected to be 3.1% of 
GDP,  compared  with  a  5.8%  deficit  in  the  US  or  a  9.5%  deficit  in  Japan.  Gross  general 
government debt is expected to peak at 96% of GDP in the euro area this year vs. 106% in 
the US and 244% in Japan. 
Second, economic governance at European level has been improved by implementing 
the  Macroeconomic  Imbalance  Procedure  (MIP).  The  MIP  has  been  set  up  to  enhance 
surveillance,  identify  potential  risks  and  correct  existing  imbalances.  This  has  been 
complemented by structural reforms which have been introduced at national level to address 
the  serious  gaps  in  competitiveness.  This  new  procedure  should  be  pursued  with 
determination by the Commission to lend it much needed credibility. 
And again, things are moving in the right direction. The competitiveness gaps in the 
euro area have been partly corrected largely on account of declines in unit labour costs in 
many  stressed  euro  area  countries.  Current  accounts  in  these  countries  have  improved 
substantially  and  a  significant  part  of  this  adjustment  is  considered  to  be  of  a  non-cyclical 
nature  and  therefore  likely  to  be  sustained  in  the  medium  term.  Some  larger  countries, 
however, are slow on structural reform. They should be aware of their responsibility for the 
euro area as a whole. 
Finally,  the  establishment  of  a  banking  union  has  been  agreed  and  is  now  being 
delivered in stages, starting with the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). The creation of 
the SSM will ensure effective supervision and a level playing field for euro area banks across 
countries,  which  needs  to  be  commensurate  with  the  high  level  of  banking  integration  in 
Europe. 
On 23 October, we announced the details of the comprehensive assessment that we 
will undertake in the run-up to the SSM. This assessment will include three components. The 
first one is a supervisory risk assessment that will address key risks in the banks’ balance 
sheets, including liquidity, leverage and funding. The second component is the asset quality 
review that will look at credit exposures, on- and off-balance sheet positions and domestic 
and non-domestic exposures. The third component is the stress test that will build on and 
complement  the  asset  quality  review  by  providing  a  forward-looking  view  of  banks’  shock-
absorption capacity under stress. 
As  a  second,  indispensable  pillar  of  the  Banking  Union,  the  SSM  will  need  to  be 
complemented  by  a  single  resolution  mechanism  (SRM).  Once  the  single  supervisory 
mechanism is operational and supervision is passed to the European level, the same needs 
to happen for resolution. Therefore we strongly support the envisaged timeline for the SRM 
to become effective in January 2015. 
In sum, the euro area is actively moving in the direction of a more robust and safer financial 
sector within the context of a strengthened monetary union. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The return of confidence 
The credibility of these policies and actions at national and supranational level and the return 
of confidence in the euro is demonstrated by three recent positive developments in the euro 
area financial markets. First, the substantial capital inflows to the euro area in recent months. 
Second,  the  receding  financial  fragmentation  across  various  euro  area  market  segments. 
And,  finally,  the  limited  contagion  from  adverse  news  compared  with  earlier  stages  of  the 
euro area crisis. 
Financial market fragmentation 
Similar  to  the  positive  developments  in  international  capital  flows,  financial  market 
fragmentation has declined over the past year. 
First  and  foremost,  intra-euro  area  bond  spreads  have  narrowed  sharply  and,  as  a  result, 
borrowing  costs  for  euro  area  governments  have  returned  to  more  sustainable  levels. 
Ireland’s  10-year  government  bond  is  cheaper  than  before  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  As  a 
consequence  the  Irish  government  has  decided  to  exit  the  program  even  without  a 
precautionary safety net. 
Receding financial market fragmentation has not been confined to government bond 
markets.  Increased  investor  sentiment  was  also  transmitted  to  other  market  segments.  In 
particular,  the  dispersion  in  the  cost  of  debt  issuance  across  euro  area  banks  has  been 
reduced, coupled with improved funding and market access for banks in stressed euro area 
countries.  Moreover,  non-financial  corporate  bond  spreads  in  the  euro  area  have  also 
followed  a  continuous  downward  trend.  Finally,  fragmentation  in  euro  money  markets  has 
also receded. The on-going advance repayments of funds borrowed from the ECB under the 
three-year LTROs is also a sign of receding tensions in funding markets. 
Now that financial fragmentation has been receding on the funding side of the banks, a key 
challenge remains in alleviating fragmentation on the lending side of the banks, especially 
towards stressed countries and towards SMEs. 
Financial market contagion 
Finally, the return of confidence in the euro is reflected in the increased resilience of the euro 
area  financial  environment  to  adverse  political  news  and  to  heightened  global  market 
volatility. 
Let  me  give  two  examples.  The  first  refers  to  euro  area  country-specific  instabilities.  The 
second refers to heightened levels of global risk aversion. 
At  earlier  stages  of  the  euro  area  crisis,  euro  area  country-specific  policy  uncertainty  was 
immediately  transmitted  to  other  countries  under  stress.  Even  more  so,  intra-euro  area 
sovereign  spreads  increased  disproportionately  as  investors  rebalanced  into  euro  area 
economies perceived as safe havens. 
However, an over-reaction of sovereign bond markets in stressed euro area countries 
has  not  been  observed  in  recent  months.  Following  adverse  euro  area  country-specific 
news, such as the instability in Cyprus in early 2013 or the recent political tensions in Italy 
and Portugal, contagion to other euro area countries has been limited. 
The second example refers to the recent bout of global financial market volatility. The period 
served as a useful initial stress test for vulnerabilities in certain global market segments. 
Again,  bond  and  equity  markets  in  stressed  euro  area  countries  have  been  remarkably 
resilient  to  the  heightened  global  risk  aversion.  Capital  outflows  were  modest  and  the 
increase  in  yields  marginal.  By  contrast,  several  emerging  market  economies  experienced 
significant  disruptions  and  were  subject  to  pronounced  portfolio  retrenchment  by  global 
investors.  Investors  seem  to  increasingly  differentiate  between  securities  of  stressed  euro 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
area countries on the one hand and other riskier market segments on the other hand, which 
have been subject to capital outflows amid elevated levels of risk aversion. 
Taken together, the return of foreign investors, receding financial market fragmentation and a 
halting of contagion clearly demonstrate a return to confidence in the euro, and the credibility 
of the measures taken at supra-national and national level. 
Let me now conclude. The euro area crisis has painfully shown that the original design of 
the  monetary  union  was  incomplete.  An  overhaul  of  the  EMU  architecture  was  necessary 
and a lot of progress has been made over recent years to strengthen EMU, both at national 
and at supranational level. 
And  we  are  now  seeing  encouraging  signs.  Recent  financial  market  developments  clearly 
demonstrate  the  credibility  of  the  reform  measures  taken  at  European  and  national  level  
– although progress is unevenly distributed. Investor confidence is returning, the persistent 
euro area financial market fragmentation is decreasing and contagion is receding. 
However, the policy agenda needs to be completed. Investment has taken a disproportionate 
share in the adjustment process and must be freed. 
Financing the real economy via the banking channel should resume with the certainty and 
confidence accompanying the Banking Union’s comprehensive assessment. 
Capital markets reform needs to be backed properly by regulation. 
Indeed, as Churchill famously said: Continuous effort is the key to unlocking our potential. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
