Mario Draghi: Europe’s pursuit of “a more perfect Union” 
Lecture by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at Harvard Kennedy 
School, Cambridge (USA), 9 October 2013. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  have  been  invited  to  give  this  year’s  Malcolm  Wiener  lecture  on 
international political economy. It is always a pleasure to be back in this country, particularly 
here in Cambridge where I studied for my PhD back in the 1970s. 
The United States has often been described as a young nation, but the institution that I have 
the honour of leading is considerably younger. The European Central Bank (ECB) and the 
single  currency  began  operations  nearly  15  years  ago  at  the  beginning  of  1999.  Today  I 
would  like  to  give  you  a  flavour  of  both  the  circumstances  of  our  beginnings  and  the 
challenging environment of our teenage years. 
As you will all be aware, Europe is currently engaged in a far-reaching process of reform. 
Many  of  those  reforms  are  taking  place  within  the  Member  States  of  the  European  Union 
(EU)  –  to  make  their  public  finances  more  sustainable;  to  make  their  economies  more 
competitive; and to strengthen the balance sheets of their domestic banks. 
But  there  is  also  an  important  stream  of  reforms  taking  place  at  the  European  level  –  the 
counterpart of what you call the federal level here in the US. New rules and institutions are 
being created that will change the relationship between the Union and the Member States. 
It is this process and its implications on which I want to focus in my remarks today. 
The preamble of the European Treaty makes “ever closer union” a goal of the EU. For some 
people, this creates anxiety. It seems to promise an inexorable movement towards a future 
super-state. Many Europeans, with different national histories and cultures, feel that they are 
not ready for that. 
So  it  is  important  to  understand  that  the  agenda  facing  Europe  today  is  not  adequately 
captured by the phrase “ever closer union”. In my view, it is better encapsulated by wording 
borrowed  from  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States:  the  establishment  of  a  “more  perfect 
union”.  
By  this,  I  mean  that  we  are  “perfecting”  something  that  has  already  begun  –  namely,  the 
economic  and  monetary  union  that  was  launched  in  1999.  Policy-makers  are  following 
through the consequences of the decision to create a genuine single market supported by a 
single currency.  
In what follows, I would like to describe several of those consequences. In doing so, I will 
explore two broad themes. 
First, I will argue that a single market necessarily has political implications, in which a partial 
sharing  of  individual  and  national  sovereignty  can  be  the  best  means  to  preserve  that 
sovereignty. 
Second, I will explain how the concepts of banking union and a strengthened fiscal setup are 
supportive of the single market and the single currency.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The political implications of a single market 
To understand the EU and the euro area, it is important to appreciate the difference between 
a free trade area and a true single market. 
A free trade area is a partial and reversible arrangement. A single market, by contrast, is a 
universal and permanent union. This is a distinction with fundamental implications. 
Because a single market is universal and permanent, governments and parliaments forfeit, 
both in principle and by Treaty, the ability to reinstate border controls. This means that, unlike 
in a free trade area, they cannot act alone to protect their constituents from unfair or unlawful 
competition from abroad. 
Yet such underpinning at the political level is vital for a market to function. There cannot be a 
free  market  without  such  fundamental  elements  of  law  as  the  protection  of  property  rights 
and the enforcement of contracts.1 
So while a free trade area can be managed through intergovernmental cooperation, a single 
market requires a supranational organisation. There has to be a judiciary with the power to 
enforce competition law at the level of the market. In Europe, this authority is devolved to the 
European Commission and the European Court of Justice. 
If there is a judiciary, there naturally has to be a legislature, to write the law enforced by the 
judiciary. In Europe, the EU Council and the European Parliament jointly perform this role. 
And if there is a legislature and a judiciary, then there also has to be an executive able to 
implement  their  decisions.  Here  again,  in  Europe,  the  European  Commission  is  entrusted 
with executive responsibility. 
This  is  what  I  mean  when  I  say  the  single  market  necessarily  has  political  implications. 
Indeed,  it  is  well  known  that  the  short  commerce  clause  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States, which grants Congress “power to regulate commerce (…) among the several states”, 
forms the basis of a considerable body of federal legislation governing economic matters. 
Sharing sovereignty in a single market 
The more difficult question in Europe is what degree of powers must be transferred to the 
supranational level to support the single market – or put differently, how much sovereignty 
needs to be shared. In my view, one way to approach this question is by considering more 
carefully what we mean by sovereignty.  
One  way  to  look  at  sovereignty  is  normative,  and  was  historically  favoured  by  absolutists 
such as Jean Bodin in the sixteenth century. Sovereignty here is defined in relation to rights: 
the right to declare war and treat the conditions of the peace, to raise taxes, to mint money 
and to judge in last resort. 
Another way to look at it is positive. Sovereignty relates to the ability to deliver in practice the 
essential services that people expect from government. A  sovereign that is not capable of 
effectively discharging its mandate would be sovereign only in name. 
This second approach is more consistent with the writings of the political philosophers who 
most influenced our modern democracies. John Locke, in his second treatise of government, 
affirms that the sovereign exists only as a fiduciary power to act for certain ends. It is the 
ability to achieve those ends that defines, and legitimises, sovereignty. 
                                                 
1   There  is  a  large  literature  on  market  development  and  the  protection  of  property  rights  and  the  rule  of  law.  For 
example, in an environment where property rights are well-defined and protected, entrepreneurial activity is focused 
on innovation rather than on predation. An early reference is W. J. Baumol (1990): “Entrepreneurship: Productive, 
unproductive, and destructive”, Journal of Political Economy, 98, 5, pp. 893–921. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The same argument is made by James Madison in federalist paper 45, in which he states 
that “no form of government whatever has any other value than as it may be fitted for the 
attainment of [the public good]”.  
I see this positive view as essentially the right way to think about sovereignty. And I think it 
needs  to  be  the  guiding  principle  when  deciding  which  powers  should  be  at  national  or 
European  levels.  We  need  to  look  at  effectiveness,  not  at  abstract  principles  that  may  be 
empty in today’s world. 
Such an approach moves us away from a zero-sum view of sovereignty as power, where one 
body loses sovereignty and another gains it. Instead, by placing the needs of citizens at the 
centre, it allows us to view sovereignty in terms of outcomes – and this can be positive-sum.  
This  way  of  thinking  is  in  fact  already  embedded  in  the  EU  Treaty  under  the  principle  of 
subsidiarity. This states that powers cannot be transferred to the level of the Union unless 
action is more effective at that level than at a lower level of government. In other words, it 
places the emphasis squarely on the efficacy of policy.  
In my view, it is this pragmatic focus on policy efficacy that should be the motor of further 
integration. 
From a single market to a single currency 
Policy efficacy was indeed one of the main motivations for monetary union – in particular, to 
maximise the potential gains from Member States forming a single market.  
A first argument in favour of the single currency related to the desirability of a single means 
of  payment  and  unit  of  account  in  a  single  market.  A  single  currency  is  not  necessary  for 
trade, but it is helpful, to the extent that it eliminates currency conversion costs and increases 
price transparency. 
A  second  argument  related  to  the  conditions  for  fair  competition  in  a  single  market.  In  a 
system  of  floating  exchange  rates,  individual  governments  may  be  tempted  to  manipulate 
their  currency  to  pursue  “beggar  thy  neighbour”  policies,  which  constitutes  a  distortion  of 
competition. An economy that increases productivity and competitiveness can be deprived of 
the  benefits  it  should  enjoy  in  terms  of  increased  market  share  because  of  currency 
depreciation in competing countries. 
Indeed,  the  instability  of  exchange  rates  post-Bretton  Woods  has  arguably  vindicated  the 
views of economists such as Ragnar Nurske, who, in an influential study commissioned by 
the League of Nations and published in 1944, warned of the economic losses resulting from 
currency volatility.2  
It  is  also  worth  remembering  that  Nobel  laureate  Robert  Mundell  developed  his  theory  on 
optimum  currency  areas  as  a  critique  of  flexible  exchange  rates  in  a  single  market,  not  in 
support of such an arrangement. He said that he “could not see why countries that were in 
the  process  of  forming  a  common  market  should  saddle  themselves  with  a  new  barrier  to 
trade in the form of uncertainty about exchange rates”.3 
In any case, the desire to limit exchange rate volatility in the EU was formulated very soon 
after the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s. It has been reflected in 
successive fixed exchange rate arrangements, such as the European Monetary System and 
its successor the Exchange Rate Mechanism.  
                                                 
2   R. Nurkse (1944). “International Currency Experience”. Geneva: League of Nations. 
3   R.  Mundell,  “Optimum  Currency  Areas”,  Columbia  University  (extended  version  of  a  luncheon  speech 
presented at the Tel Aviv University, December 5, 1997). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
And  it  has  been  reflected  in  the  Treaty  requirement  that  each  Member  State  treat  its 
exchange rate policy as a matter of common interest. 
Free  trade  and  capital  movements  could  clearly  not  be  sacrificed  in  a  true  single  market. 
Also, Europeans saw fixed exchange rates as an important component of fair competition. It 
was thus the national sovereignty over monetary policies that would have to be let go. In this 
sense, the single currency became a way of maximising the benefits of the single market. 
And  the  empirical  evidence  suggests  that  sharing  a  currency  has  indeed  boosted  trade, 
although the effect may be smaller than was earlier suggested.4 
Let me also add that, for several Member States, joining the single currency implied not only 
greater policy efficacy, but paradoxically, greater national influence.  
Whether  Austria  before  1999  or  Latvia  today,  many  Member  States  pursued  a  fixed 
exchange rate policy or currency board vis-à-vis a bigger neighbour – Germany in the past, 
the euro area today. This meant that they were effectively importing a monetary policy over 
which they had no say. Now, as members of the euro area, they have a say. When Latvia will 
adopt  the  euro  on  1  January  next  year,  my  colleague  the  governor  of  the  central  bank  of 
Latvia will partake fully in the formulation of the ECB’s monetary policy. The same cannot be 
said  of  the  countries  that  peg  their  currencies  to  the  US  dollar,  some  of  which  are 
considerably larger. 
From a single currency to a banking union 
The  implications  of  the  decision  to  set  up  a  genuine  single  market  are  not  limited  to  the 
creation  of  the  single currency.  The  single currency  itself has  consequences,  of which  the 
most pressing is banking union.  
The establishment of a banking union has been agreed by Heads of State and Government 
in  Europe  and  is  now  being  delivered  in  stages,  starting  with  the  single  supervisory 
mechanism.  This  has  been  entrusted  to  the  ECB  and  has  recently  been  approved  by  the 
European Parliament. We trust that a single resolution mechanism will enter into force by the 
beginning of 2015. 
To understand why banking union is a consequence of monetary union, it is worth recalling 
that  only  a  small  fraction  of  money  is  “outside”  money,  meaning  the  liability  of  the  central 
bank. The bulk of money used in the economy is “inside” money, meaning the liability of a 
commercial bank.  
For  money  to  be  truly  single  within  a  currency  area,  there  has  to  be  full  substitutability 
between its different forms. This means that one euro in a bank in any euro area country has 
to be fully substitutable with a euro in another. The only way to achieve this is to remove the 
differences in the banking system that can create fragmentation along national lines – and 
the  most  important  difference  is  the  way  banks  are  supervised  and,  when  necessary, 
resolved by national authorities. 
We are thus moving these functions to the European level to ensure that the single currency 
is matched by a single banking system. And this is consistent with the positive definition of 
sovereignty  I  gave  earlier:  a  genuine  banking  union  can  give  citizens  more  trust  in  their 
money than can different national approaches.  
Moreover, there is an important positive feedback effect here. While there is a chain of logic 
from  the  single  market  to  the  single  currency  to  banking  union,  banking  union  in  turn 
                                                 
4   See, among others, P. Lane (2006): “The real effects of EMU”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 5536. The paper 
states that “EMU has indeed contributed to greater economic integration – however, economic linkages with 
the rest of the world have also been growing strongly, such that the relative importance of intra-EMU trade has 
not dramatically increased”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
supports the single market. When fragmentation of the banking system takes place, it does 
not  only  undermine  the  singleness  of  money,  but  it  also  undermines  the  conditions  of 
competition. This is because it results in a dispersion of bank lending rates among national 
lines, as we have seen in recent years. 
Let me be clear here: there is no reason per se why a Spanish firm should be able to borrow 
at  exactly  the  same  price  as  a  Dutch  firm.  If  the  operating  environment  of  both  firms  is 
different, then this can reasonably affect their credit risk and therefore the rate at which they 
borrow. 
But in a single market, a Spanish firm should be able to borrow from a Spanish bank at the 
same  price  at  which  it  would  borrow  from  a  Dutch  bank.  If  that  is  not  the  case,  if  the  risk 
premium paid by a bank client in one country is not idiosyncratic but systemic, then there no 
longer truly is a single market for capital. Location would matter. And this is what banking 
union aims to reverse. 
In  Europe,  such  banking  union  is  even  more  important  than  in  the  US  because  over  two 
thirds  of  firms’  external  financing  takes  place  in  the  form  of  bank  loans.  For  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises this share is even higher. In the US, by contrast, the role of banks 
in  firms’  external  finance  is  only  about  one-third  or  even  less.  Hence,  a  banking  union  is 
crucial also for the euro area real economy.  
But, it can reasonably be asked, if a banking union is so important, why did this only become 
apparent in the last few years? 
The  main  reason  is  that  the  potential  for  financial  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area  was  not 
recognised.  Policy-makers  and  observers  did  not  fully  appreciate  the  extent  to  which 
diverging  fundamentals  between  different  economies  could  feed  through  to  the  banking 
system.  This  applies  notably  to  sovereign  debt,  and  the  two-way  interaction  between 
sovereign distress and bank distress. 
Certainly,  a  banking  union  can  play  a  major  role  in  breaking  the  vicious  circle  we  see  in 
Europe between banks and their sovereigns. But there is also a strong onus on governments 
to ensure that sovereign debt performs its expected function in the financial system – that is, 
as a risk-free, safe asset. Let me therefore briefly turn to fiscal policies. 
The implications for fiscal policies 
It  is  welcome  that  governments  in  the  euro  area  have  made  significant  progress  in 
consolidating  their  budgets,  and  hence  removing  some  sovereign  risk  from  the  financial 
system. The primary fiscal deficit for the euro area has fallen from 3.5% of GDP in 2009 to 
around  0.5%  in  2012.  In  the  United  States,  by  comparison,  it  was  around  6%  of  GDP  in 
2012. 
That  said,  we  need  to  ensure  time  consistency.  We  all  know  the  experience  of  the  first 
decade  of  the  euro.  Fiscal  rules  enshrined  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  were  not  sufficiently 
binding; market discipline likewise did not work in an effective way.5 
For this reason, the ECB has long argued in favour of moving towards more effective rules in 
the  fiscal  domain.  We  are  convinced  that  they  are  crucial  for  the  stability  of  the  common 
currency in the longer term. I am therefore encouraged that policy-makers in Europe have 
been taking significant steps to strengthen the common fiscal rules.  
                                                 
5   To quote the Delors Report: “To some extent market forces can exert a disciplinary influence […] However, 
the constraints imposed by market forces might either be too slow and weak or too sudden and disruptive.” 
Bayoumi  et  al.  (1995)  however  provide  some  evidence  in  favour  of  market  discipline  on  US  data;  see 
T. Bayoumi,  M.  Goldstein  and  G.  Woglom  (1995):  “Do  credit  markets  discipline  sovereign  borrowers? 
Evidence from U.S. States”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 27, 4, pp. 1046–1059. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
These  steps  include  new  ways  of  dealing  with  countries  that  do  not  comply  with 
recommendations from the European Commission. They include giving the Commission the 
right to inspect national budgets before they go before national parliaments – a power the US 
federal  government  does  not  have  over  the  states.  And  they  include  inserting  balanced 
budget  rules  into  their  national  constitutions  or  equivalent.  We  look  forward  to  a  full  and 
transparent implementation of this new regime.  
These changes do to some extent represent a transfer of powers to the European level. But 
as  with  banking  union,  I  do  not  view  it  as  a  loss  of  sovereignty.  Rather,  I  see  the 
strengthening of the fiscal pillar in a manner that lends credibility to fiscal policies as a way to 
restore  the  efficacy  of  policy:  for  the  Union  as  a  whole,  as  countries  are  less  affected  by 
spillovers from fiscal difficulties in an integrated financial market; and also for the Member 
States themselves.  
This  budget  stabilisation  capacity  through  the  automatic  stabilisers  is  diminished  if 
governments are unable to run a deficit at the low point of the cycle – or put differently, if the 
credit of the government deteriorates to the point where its debt is no longer regarded as a 
safe  asset.  Indeed,  if  the  credit  of  the  government  is  impaired,  and  behaves  like  private 
credit, then government’s relative cost of borrowing increases at precisely the time when it 
needs to borrow.  
One can see this as the real loss of sovereignty. It prevents national governments from using 
normal fiscal policy for macroeconomic stabilisation. In this sense, steps that restore faith in 
public credit, such as more credible fiscal rules, restore the ability of governments to exercise 
the functions that citizens expect from them.  
This  is  particularly  important  in  a  monetary  union  where  the  burden  of  macroeconomic 
stabilisation cannot be entirely shifted onto the shoulders of the central bank. Our monetary 
policy mandate is to deliver medium-term price stability in the euro area as a whole. Fiscal 
policy has to absorb idiosyncratic or asymmetric shocks at a national level.  
And unlike in the United States, as fiscal policies are decentralised, such stabilisation takes 
place  entirely  at  the  sub-federal  (or  national)  level  in  the  euro  area.  However,  if  the  fiscal 
rules and institutions are credible, there is ample scope for national policies to perform this 
role. 
Looking forward 
Overall,  the  changes  taking  place  in  the  euro  area  are  making  our  monetary  union  more 
robust. At the national level, consolidation and structural reforms are helping most countries 
reach a more sustainable external position.  
At  the  European  level,  we  are  approaching  a  balance  of  competencies  which,  taken  in 
combination, should provide more effective stabilisation.  
That said, it would seem misplaced to exclude that over time the euro area may move to a 
new equilibrium. Integration is a dynamic process and we need a certain degree of humility 
about where it will lead. If we look at the US, we see that it strengthened its union in different 
stages, with each stage eventually begetting the next. The creation of the Federal Reserve 
System in 1913, for example, was followed twenty years later by the creation of the FDIC, a 
key pillar of America’s banking union. The federal budget also developed significantly at this 
time. 
In Europe today, we are in some ways undergoing an analogous process. It is not analogous 
in the sense that the destination is the same. We do not know this. What is analogous is the 
guiding principle. Like the US, our orientation is pragmatic and driven by a desire for policy 
efficacy and to provide the functions citizens expect of government. We are then drawing the 
policy conclusions that follow, at the time when they are relevant. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In the dark days of the crisis, many commentators on this side of the Atlantic looked at the 
euro area and were convinced it would fail. There were wrong in their medium term macro 
view. The euro area has created 600 000 more jobs than the US since 1999. And while the 
unemployment rate has increased more in the euro area than in the US during the crisis, the 
employment rate in the US has fallen further than in the euro area, which makes the figures 
difficult to compare. 
But  they  were  wrong  in  a  more  fundamental  way.  They  had  underestimated  the  depth  of 
Europeans’ commitment to the euro. They mistook the euro for a fixed exchange rate regime, 
when in fact it is an irreversible single currency. And it is irreversible because it is born out of 
the  commitment  of  European  nations  to  closer  integration  –  a  commitment  which,  as  the 
Nobel  committee  recognised  last  year,  has  roots  in  our  desire  for  peace,  security  and 
transcending national differences. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
