Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Philippine banking – responsive and 
responsible 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Third  Annual  Asian  Banker  Philippine  International 
Banking Convention 2013, Manila, 25 October 2013. 
 Good  morning  everyone.  I  am  pleased  to  join  you  at  this  3rd  Asian  Banker  Philippine 
International  Banking  Convention.  This  provides  us  the  platform  to  share  the  continuing 
transformation  of  our  banking  industry  in  the  midst  of  global  challenges,  the  start  of  our 
compliance with Basel 3 in 2014, and issues related to expansion and competition. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  In  our  view,  there  are  four  Rs  that  define  our  banking  community 
today: robust, resilient, responsive and responsible. 
For  instance,  the  three  major  international  credit  rating  agencies  that  gave  the  Philippines 
investment grade status this year, acknowledged our sound and stable banking industry as a 
contributing factor. They view the Philippine banking system as well capitalized, profitable, 
and liquid, with deposit-funded balance sheets and sound loss-absorption capacities. 
In  fact,  the  Philippines  is  the  only  country  whose  banking  sector  is  on  positive  outlook  at 
Moody’s; it raised the outlook to positive in December 2012. In January 2013, Moody’s said it 
sees “positive credit trends in the Philippine banking system, one that has been and will stay 
relatively immune to global economic shocks, and is benefiting from steady credit growth and 
growing diversification opportunities.” 
On the other hand, Standard & Poor is in its February 2013 report said it believes that “the 
Philippine banking system is reasonably resilient to an external slowdown.” 
As  the regulator  of  the banking  system,  we  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  value  such 
positive third party assessments which are of course, corroborated by relevant indicators. But 
more than being robust and resilient, our banking sector has become more responsive to the 
varied needs of differentiated stakeholders. Most of all, responsible behavior by our banking 
sector in handling the savings of our people continues to underpin the continued growth of 
our banks to record levels. 
A responsive banking industry 
Indicators clearly show a growing industry. But that cannot be the only measure of success. 
For the Bangko Sentral, it is the banks that must respond to the needs of their constituents, 
not  the  other  way  around.  But  let  me  make  one  thing  clear:  this  is  not  meant  to  be  a 
relaxation of standards; rather, it is a necessary calibration to ensure that the financial needs 
of the public are truly met by the industry. 
The critical issue to determine then is how inclusive our banking system has become. Our 
ultimate goal is for banks to cover even the underbanked, the unbanked, and those that have 
been mis-labeled as “unbankable.” This is quite a challenge in a country of 7,107 islands with 
a total population of 100 million and where only 20% of households have bank accounts. 
Nevertheless, we continue to make progress in this area. While consolidation continues to 
reduce  the  number  of  our  banks,  the  industry’s  network  and  reach  continue  to  grow  and 
deepen through branch banking, ATMs, ebanking, and innovations in marketing and service 
delivery. 
Our initiatives to develop an inclusive financial system through financial education, consumer 
protection  and  providing  access  to  financial  services  also  continue  to  generate  positive 
results. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
For  the  5th  straight  year,  the  Economist  Intelligence  Unit  ranked  the  Philippine  regulatory 
environment  for  microfinance  as  the  best  in  the  world.  We  now  have  186  banks  with 
microfinance operations, microfinance loans have more than tripled from 2002 to June 2013 
at eight billion pesos, while the number of microfinance borrowers have also tripled to over 
one  million.  Even  better,  the  combined  savings  of  the  banks’  microfinance  clients  have 
reached  8.9  billion  pesos,  an  amount  surpassing  their  total  loans.  This  tells  us  that  these 
microentrepreneurs attained a level of financial independence because they gained access 
to microcredit. Indeed, the socio-economic impact of developing an inclusive banking system 
cannot be overemphasized. 
Moving forward, there is one point about our population structure that should be highlighted. 
Based on 2015 population estimates, the median age of Filipinos nationwide would be at the 
upper end of the 20–24 years old bracket. By the years 2020 and 2025, the average age of 
Filipinos is estimated to move up to 25 years and 26 years old, respectively. 
This information should matter to the banking industry. It reflects a steady but young core of 
the  population  whose  main  financing  needs  lie  10  to  15  years  ahead.  On  the  other  hand, 
there is also the more mature half of the population who are today already savers, investors, 
borrowers and entrepreneurs. 
Indeed, the needs of your market vary considerably across constituents, across geographical 
communities  and  across  the  dimension  of  time.  This  presents  challenges  as  well  as 
opportunities if banks are to be responsive to the needs of the public. Nevertheless, while 
having an array of products and services is necessary, this is also not sufficient. The diversity 
across  constituents  calls  for  consumer  protection  and  customer  care  to  be  on  top  of  our 
agenda. This is the responsible path to take. 
At the Bangko Sentral, the drive to promote financial inclusion is balanced with programs to 
institutionalize redress mechanisms and financial education. Today, this balanced approach 
is part of global standards. 
Nevertheless, the Bangko Sentral is taking consumer protection a notch higher. Soon, our 
supervised institutions will also be examined on how they provide consumer protection. Up 
for  consideration  by  our  Monetary  Board  is  a  consumer  protection framework  that  outlines 
the  modes  of  behavior  and  practices  that  should  be  adhered  to  by  BSP-supervised 
institutions. 
Responsible market conduct: a credit perspective 
A central tenet of the financial consumer protection framework is the aspect of responsible 
market  conduct.  This,  extends  beyond  consumer  protection  and  is  a  critical  pillar  of  our 
market. 
I am pleased to share therefore that even with the high level of liquidity in the banking system 
and our own push towards a more inclusive banking industry, our banks, in general, adhere 
to high standards of credit discipline. 
For instance, we note that while total loan portfolio increased by over a trillion pesos between 
December 2009 and March 2013, the amount of non-performing loans over the same period 
actually  declined  by  over  11  billion  pesos.  And  even  with  this  improvement,  banks  further 
increased their allowance for credit losses on loans by more than 11.6 billion. The result is a 
declining NPL ratio and an NPL coverage ratio above 100 percent. 
Likewise,  the  country’s  credit-to-GDP  ratio  does  not  show  any  sign  of  unwarranted 
expansion.  In  fact,  within  ASEAN-5  we  remain  at  the  low  end  of  the  spectrum  on  this 
measure, suggesting that there is room to grow within the tenets of sound credit standards. 
In addition, stress tests, which we conduct every semester, tell us that the balance sheet of 
banks can absorb extreme credit shocks. Even at a 50 percent write off, capital positions are 
sufficient  to  take  on  the  magnitudes  of  such  losses.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  all  of  these 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
indicators  suggest  that  Philippine  banks  manage  their  credit  exposures  quite  well.  They 
observe  a  degree  of  conservatism  needed  to  stay  within  the  so-called  “discipline  of  target 
markets.” This is evident by the declining levels of NPLs, high coverage ratio and moderate 
credit  exposures  vis-à-vis  GDP. What  makes  these  numbers  even  more  impressive  is  the 
fact that banks have available liquidity that they can deploy, if they so choose. 
The pursuit of financial stability 
Perhaps, the crux of the matter lies in those last four words: “if they so choose”. In a market 
that seizes opportunities, making the appropriate choices is critical, particularly since funds 
being deployed belong to the public. 
The  BSP  sees these  choices  not  only  in  the  numerical  indicators…  but also  in  the ICAAP 
(Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Program) document which universal and commercial 
banks submit annually. Indeed, risk management cannot be the domain of a few specialists 
in the bank. Strategic risk decisions must emanate from bank management and from there it 
should become everyone’s business within the bank. 
On our part, the Bangko Sentral does not hesitate to act accordingly in the event remedial 
and corrective actions are needed at the bank level. 
Ladies and gentlemen. To us, the prudential objective for the industry is not only about banks 
being  individually  safe  and  sound;  a  clear  lesson  from  the financial  crisis  of  2007–2009  is 
that the condition of the whole cannot be the simple sum of the respective parts. 
Moreover, the bigger picture is defined not just by the complexities of finance. Rather, it is 
about the web of inter-connectedness between transacting parties, across products as well 
as the channels of risk that underpin the activities in the market. 
This is the new prudential world of financial stability. It is not just about banks being safe and 
sound. For this reason, the norms for financial stability go beyond those of financial system 
stability.  There  are  technical  and  policy  nuances  to  consider  under  financial  stability  but 
these can be discussed at another opportunity. 
For  now,  let  us  be  mindful  that  all  of  us  must  bear  collective  responsibility  for  the  actions 
each of us take in the market, day in and day out given that inter-connectedness is a central 
tenet of financial stability. 
Final thoughts: managing change and moving forward 
Moving  forward,  it  is  wise  to  remember  that  market  conditions  continue  to  evolve, 
opportunities  are  never  permanent,  incentives  change  and  macro-financial  situations  can 
reverse. 
We need therefore to continuously invest in ourselves as a market, if we are to sustain the 
banking sector’s position of strength and adhere to the new prudential mandate of financial 
stability. This means that change is inevitable, at the national, regional and global scale. 
A case in point is Basel 3, the new global standard for managing banking-related risks. In this 
connection,  the  Bangko  Sentral  has  made  clear  repeatedly  that  we  subscribe  to  the 
underlying  principles  espoused  by  the  Basel  3  Accord.  However,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
calibrate its implementation here to align with local conditions. 
At the Bangko Sentral, we do not instigate change for the sake of change. Rather, our policy 
initiation is calibrated to make the industry stronger against potential waves of shocks. 
The same principle applies to other reform strands. The new framework for OTC derivatives, 
financial  market  infrastructure,  changes  in  corporate  governance  standards,  consumer 
protection, accounting and even the recent issue on the integrity of financial benchmarks are 
all  in  the  context  of  addressing  identified  weaknesses  under  a  financial  stability  mandate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
They represent global reforms that are meant to revise the international financial architecture 
and the market’s intrinsic landscape. 
At the regional level, the reforms emanate from the policy decision to pursue integration. For 
the banking community, this will be the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework or ABIF. The 
framework takes  us  to  2020  at  which  time  we  expect  that the  ASEAN  banking  community 
would be semi-integrated. 
While this is six years away, the work under ABIF is well underway. Banks can choose to 
retain a domestic focus or choose to become a regional player. However you position your 
bank, be aware that either of the two choices has critical competition policy consequences. If 
one is to survive and thrive, international competitiveness is the way to go. This is because 
so-called  Qualified  ASEAN  Banks  (QABs)  will  operate  within  ASEAN.  In  the  end,  the  size 
and  strength  of  each  bank’s  balance  sheet  as  well  as  the  quality  of  its  management  will 
become crucial factors under regional integration. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen, we  have  covered  quite  a  bit  of  ground  in  describing  the  Philippine 
banking industry in terms of both its current standing and its prospects. I can say that while 
we are in a clear position of strength today, calibrated reforms will continue to be a necessity. 
At the end of the day, the real measure of strength and success is the ability to withstand 
difficulties that will arise in the future. We know that change will always be at a cost; consider 
this  as  investment  for  the  future.  For  today,  your  prospective  strength  will  be  difficult  to 
quantify. 
Nevertheless, you can count on the Bangko Sentral in defining our shared vision of the future 
under the principle of collective responsibility. I believe we all want a banking system that is 
robust,  resilient,  responsive  and  responsible.  How  to  achieve  these  in  the  midst  of  a 
constantly shifting and changing landscape is the challenge before us. 
I  look  forward  therefore  to  this  International  Banking  Convention  of  The  Asian  Banker  to 
provide some answers for us. 
Thank you all and Mabuhay! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
