Ardian Fullani: Bank of Albania exhibition – “The currency and financial 
literacy through it” 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the opening ceremony of 
the exhibition of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 4 October 2013. 
 Dear Mr Speaker of Parliament,  
Dear participants,  
In  pursuit  of  alternatives  to  present  the  100-year  journey  of  central  banking,  the  Bank  of 
Albania  opens  today  an  exhibition  on  “The  currency  and  financial  literacy  through  it”.  The 
consolidation history of the state and the currency shows they have walked hand in 
hand over the centuries. We are all aware of the importance of currency in everyday events 
of our civilisation. Cash, lek, franc, ecu, euro, dollar... instruments. Call it as you wish. Money 
is important! It is important not only for its functions to pay, save, or deposit, but also as an 
historical and artistic legacy of a nation’s journey through the centuries. To the religious, love 
for money was the root of all evil. To generals, it was the strongest weapon in the battlefield. 
To revolutionaries, it represented shackles on the workers wrists. What is money, after all? A 
mountain of silver, a ceramic tablet, or a piece of paper? How did it evolve into its present-
day  form,  when  we  seldom  see  physical  money?  More  often  than  not,  a  set  of  digits  on 
computer screens? Where does money come from and how did it evolve? As you will shortly 
see  in  the  displays,  this  exhibition  seeks  to  give  an  answer  to  these  questions  in  a 
comprehensive  language  for  all  of  us.  Above  all,  however,  it  commemorates  an  important 
date in history.  
The  opening  date  for  the  exhibition  “...  The  bank  for  Albania  is  a  second  victory,  after 
freedom...”  is  4  October  2013.  Today  100  years  ago,  on  behalf  of  the  Provisional 
Government of Albania, Ismail Qemal Bey Vlora signed the first concession agreement on 
establishing  an  Albanian  national  bank.  At  the  opening  of  this  exhibition,  I  feel  happy  and 
excited  at  the  same  time,  not  only  as  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank,  but  also  as  an 
Albanian citizen. The exhibition brings to the fore for the Albanian public one of the meritable 
contributions  of  the  father  of  the  country’s  Independence,  placing  him  on  the  pedestal  he 
rightfully earned through the activity and vision of a real statesman. 
The  history  tells  us  that  central  banking  was  not  built  in  a  day.  It  did  not  come  into  being 
following  a  specific  event;  neither  was  it  a  by-product  of  an  accident.  Central  banking 
developed as a need of the countries to have an institution that would create and guarantee 
the supply of the economy with money. 
It followed the need to fill the treasuries of the kingdoms, which were emptied to fund military 
campaigns  to  expand  their  territories  and  colonies,  to  absorb  the  economic  and  financial 
crises shocks, and restore the economy to equilibrium. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  Albanian  central  banking  has  a  different  story  to  tell.  The  wise 
man Ismail Qemali conceived the idea of a central bank based on the principle of freedom, 
which the Albanians had been longing for in centuries. At the inauguration of the bank, he 
would say: “I say, for Albania, the bank is a second victory, after freedom, both in economic 
and political terms.”  
Whenever  I  read  these  words,  I  understand  how  simply  Ismail  Qemali  managed  to 
synthesise the necessity to consolidate the infant independence with a solid financial basis 
for  a  prosperous  society.  Ismail  Qemali  envisioned  the  bank  as  a  financial  institution  that 
would give life to economic development and stabilization of the newly-independent state of 
Albania.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
It  is  not  a  coincidence  that  in  his  speech,  a  few  days  after  the  signing  of  the  concession 
agreement  establishing  the  National  Bank  of  Albania,  Ismail  Qemali  said:  “From  the  day 
Albania  was  fortunate  to  become  a  state  among  other  Balkan  and  European  peers,  it  is 
entitled  to  have  one  and  even  more  banks  to  ensure  both  overall  credit  as  a  nation,  and 
individual credit for each Albanian citizen.” 
His  visionary  words  are  still  relevant  today.  I  am  proud  today,  a  hundred  years  later,  that 
thanks to endless efforts we have a modern central bank that has the trust of the public and 
is capable to fulfil its mandate: price stability and financial stability. During the past twenty 
years, many women and men, mothers and fathers, young ladies and young gentlemen, or 
grandchildren of the first professionals, have contributed and continue to contribute whole-
heartedly  to  the  life  of  the  modern  and  successful  institution  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  The 
characteristics  of  their  work  and  contribution  may  be  summarised  in  three  simple  words: 
dedication, professionalism, and integrity.  
I  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  staff  members  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  for  their  work 
insofar, and express my confidence that their dedication will continue to be unlimited in the 
future as well.  
The last economic and financial crisis showed that the role of central banks is essential to 
ensuring  a  country’s  stability  and  prosperity.  I  am  certain  the  Bank  of  Albania  has 
accomplished  its  mission  with  professionalism  providing  a  stable  environment,  especially 
with  regard  to  banking  system  stability.  This,  however,  is  not  accidental.  Not  wanting  to 
repeat  myself,  I  have  to  restate  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  vigilant,  monitoring 
scrupulously the financial soundness of the system, both before and after the onset of the 
crisis. 
With  professionalism,  dedication  and  farsightedness,  we  have  succeeded  in  consolidating 
the independence of the institution, thanks to constant communication with all market actors, 
upholding the “independence-accountability” principle. Transparency is the basis of decision-
making  in  the  field  of  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  Our  effort  to  inject  rational 
optimism with regard to the behaviour of economic agents has been in the synthesis of our 
stance throughout the difficult period that the global crisis has imposed on us.  
Looking ahead, I believe it is indispensable for this spirit to be embraced and transmitted to 
the economy by all policymakers, economic agents, financial market, including the members 
of  the  public. The gist  of  this  philosophy  consists  in  comprehensive  structural reforms  that 
would accelerate our progress towards sustainable long-term development of the country.  
Dear participants,  
The  Albanian  central  banking  needs  a  date  of  birth.  This  date  provides  the  opportunity  to 
honour the efforts of the fathers of the nation to establish a central bank and consolidate the 
Albanian  state;  commemorate  the  efforts  of  all  contributors  to  the  development  and 
promotion of this institution; and look at future challenges and find ways to face them. The 
Bank of Albania will continue to be a responsible and reliable actor, to accomplish its legal 
mission and support the country's sustainable development.  
This first centennial of central banking in Albania is a good omen for all of us.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
