Barry Whiteside: Overview of the Fijian economy 
Address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  opening  of 
Credit Corporation (Fiji) Limited’s new building, Nadi, 4 October 2013. 
 The Chairman of the Credit Corporation Board, Mr Garth McIlwain 
Board of Directors 
Managing Director, Mr Peter Dixon 
Management and Staff 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory comments 
Good morning and Bula Vinaka. 
I thank Peter for the kind invitation to open this new Credit Corporation (Fiji) Limited building, 
which I am told will now house the institution’s Nadi Branch. 
These occasions are exciting for us as they are evidence of the increased confidence and 
optimism shown by our business community in the Fijian economy. We are progressing as a 
nation,  and  in  this  regard  are  grateful  to  institutions  like  Credit  Corporation  for  their 
commitment and for building their presence in Fiji. 
Please allow me to provide a brief update on how our economy is progressing. 
The Fiji economy 
We  are  fortunate  that  the  Fijian  economy  has  not  been  seriously  impacted  by  the  current 
global  slowdown.  Our  economy  this  year  is  forecast  to  grow  by  3.2  percent,  up  from  the 
2.2 percent growth last year. 
Consumption  activity  has  been  upbeat  and  is  a  reflection  of  a  combination  of  factors 
including lower personal income taxes and higher inward remittances. Inflation is expected to 
be  around  3.0  percent  by  the  year-end  and  our  foreign  reserves  were  recorded  at 
$1.83 billion as at 03 September 2013, sufficient to pay for 5.2 months of retained imports of 
goods and services. Investment is forecast to be around 28 percent of GDP this year, above 
the Government target of 25 percent. 
We  however  still  need  to  work  on  some  real  challenges  and  in  this  regard,  the  current 
accommodative monetary policy stance will be maintained. We are mindful that consumption 
and  investment  led  growth  cannot  be  sustained  for  too  long  as  they  have  heavy  import 
content. For this reason, policies aimed at export diversification and promotion, and import 
substitution remain paramount. 
New  lending  as  an  indicator  of  economic  activity,  has  increased  significantly  in  the  last 
8 months. Lending institutions like Credit Corporation are experiencing great competition as 
they work on retaining customers in a period of high liquidity and falling interest rates, but at 
the same time ensuring they meet their growth targets. Financial institutions therefore remain 
the  backbone  of  our  financial  system  and  their  expansion  is  an  indicator  of  increased 
confidence  in  our  economy.  This  new  development  by  Credit  Corporation  is  definitely  an 
example of such a vote of confidence in doing business in Fiji.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I feel it would be pertinent at this stage to say a few words about Credit Corporation (Fiji) 
Limited or CCFL as we refer to it in the Reserve Bank. 
Credit Corporation (Fiji) Limited 
CCFL is a subsidiary of Credit Corporation (PNG) Ltd and has been licensed here in Fiji as a 
credit institution under supervision of the Reserve Bank, having started its operations in Fiji in 
1992, at Gorrie Street in Suva. It has been serving the Fiji market for over 21 years now, with 
a network of 4 branches, all located in the popular business centres around the country. The 
company now employs 44 staff with a customer base of more than 4000. 
CCFL  has  not  only  grown  in  presence,  but  also  in  size,  from  its  initial  investment  of 
$1.0 million, to an asset base of just over $101 million as at December 2012. While its asset 
size is smaller relative to other licensed credit institutions in the market, its performance has 
been remarkable, reporting one of the most favourable returns on assets and efficiency in the 
industry, during the 2012 financial year. 
The  institution  has  had  its  share  of  operational  challenges  in  the  past,  but  somehow 
continues  to  show  resilience  in  ensuring  its  Fiji operations  remain  prudent  and  sound. We 
noted that in 2012, CCFL made a strategic decision to have additional provisions, resulting in 
a higher than normal provisioning charge against its profit. 
There is no better indicator of soundness for financial system supervisors like the Reserve 
Bank than seeing our licensed financial institutions taking their own initiative to be adequately 
provisioned and having a satisfactory buffer against any deterioration in the quality of their 
loan portfolio. Such prudent measures are effective in meeting unexpected losses in times of 
crisis, such as in the aftermath of natural disasters, which remain a significant risk for all our 
lending institutions.  
Fiji had experienced colossal losses of around $146 million attributed to natural disasters in 
2012; with $71 million caused by the two major floods and an even greater loss of $75 million 
caused by Cyclone Evan. CCFL’s own Namaka Branch, along with other financial institutions 
in the area, were severely affected by these events. 
While all of them have undertaken refurbishment incurring significant costs in the process, 
the operational risk of being affected by floods in future remains. I have been told that it was 
this that initially prompted CCFL to purchase this piece of land in 2011. The construction of 
this  completed  commercial  property,  which  will  now  house  the  Nadi  Branch,  is  indeed  a 
mission accomplished. 
I understand that this is a non-flood prone area, but even so CCFL has taken the necessary 
steps  to  meet  challenges  faced  during  times  of  natural  disasters  equipping  the  site  with 
backup water supply and power generators and improving safety for staff and tenants. The 
building  has  been  designed  with  a  modern,  functional  and  efficient  concept;  and  the 
significantly larger floor space also intends to provide comfort to both customers and staff. 
With these state of the art features, we can definitely expect to see a lift in CCFL’s profile and 
visibility in the West. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the opening of this new building is testament to the commitment of 
the  institution  to  its  customers  and to  the  country,  as  it  seeks  to  increase  its facilitation  of 
financial intermediation, and grow its investment in Fiji.  My  warmest congratulations to the 
Credit Corporation Team on the opening of this new building, and I wish you all the very best 
in your future endeavours.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Official opening 
I thank the Board and Management again for the invitation to be here today, and now have 
much pleasure in declaring Credit Corporation (Fiji) Limited’s new Namaka Building, open. 
Vinaka vakalevu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
