Agus D W Martowardojo: Managing stability, promoting transformation 
for sustained economic growth 
Address by Mr Agus D W Martowardojo, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Annual Bankers’ 
Dinner, Jakarta, 14 November 2013. 
 Honorable , 
Leaders  and  Members  of  House  of  Representatives,  Supreme  Court,  People’s 
Consultative Assembly, Regional Representative Council, and Supreme Audit Board, 
Ministers of United Indonesia Cabinet II, 
Chairman of Indonesia Financial Services Authority, 
Leaders  of  Non-Government  Institutions,  International  Institutions,  and  Prominent 
Bankers, 
Former Governors of Bank Indonesia, 
Enterpreneurs, Economists and Scholars, 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalamu‘alaikum Wr. Wb., 
Good Evening and May God Bless Us All, 
1. I would like to commence our respectable event by praising and thanking God Almighty 
who  has  blessed  us  with  the  opportunity  to  gather  here  in  the  occasion  of  Governor’s 
Address and Annual Bankers’ Dinner 2013. 
2. I am delighted to have the opportunity to meet all of you on my initial appearance in our 
strategic forum this evening. On this momentous occasion, I would like to emphasize that this 
event  is  an  important  platform  to  harmonize  our  views  on  current  economic  condition, 
emerging challenges, and efforts to strengthening the measures. 
3.  Your  presence  provides  additional  support  for  Bank  Indonesia  in  undertaking  its 
mandates,  and  is  essential  for  us  to  further  enhance  economic  resilience  in  dealing  with 
greater challenges ahead. In this regard, allow me to express my humble gratitude for your 
participation. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
[Economic Development 2013] 
4.  Since  I  took  my  position  in  Bank  Indonesia,  I  have  personally  experienced  formidable 
economic challenges [TABLE 1]. I initially joined Bank Indonesia on May 24th, 2013, just only 
two  days  after  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  indicated  its  plan  to  start  tapering  its 
monetary  stimulus.  A  very  brief  signal  from  the  Chairman,  yet  it  has  world-wide  negative 
impacts. From that moment until end of August 2013, massive foreign capital flew out from 
our economy which eventually led to sharp depreciation of the rupiah. 
5. However, we observe that global issues overshadowing our economy are much broader 
than the issue of the Fed’s tapering itself. We view that there are, at least, three main global 
issues which have created uncertainties and put more pressures on our economy in 2013. 
6. First, uncertainty of the speed of global recovery. The global economic recovery process 
is  not  as  expected,  and  even  slower  than  previously  estimated.  The  global  environment 
becomes  more  uncertain  because  of  the  shifting  of  global  economic  landscape.  I  still 
remember, two years ago, we have had a discussion about the two-speed world recovery, 
i.e.  slow  recovery  in  advanced  economies,  and  much  faster  recovery  in  emerging 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
economies.  Now,  the  situation  has  turned  around.  The  United  States’  economy  has 
strengthened,  the  European  economy  has  shown  signs  of  escaping  the  crisis,  while 
emerging economies have slowed down. In other words, the phenomenon of a three-speed 
world recovery has emerged [GRAPH 1]. 
Table 1 
Revision of global growth forecast 2013 
Graph 1 
A three speed world recovery 
  the  wide-spread  uncertainties  as  consequences  of 
7.  Second, 
the  US  policy’s 
indecisiveness, not only related to the withdrawal of ultra-accommodative monetary stimulus 
but  also  the  debt  ceiling  crisis  and  the  US  government  shutdown.  These  prolonged 
unfavorable circumstances have triggered global investors to re-evaluate risks and caused 
excessive  reactions,  which  have  led  to  turmoil  in  the  global  financial  markets,  including  in 
Indonesia [GRAPH 2]. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 2. 
Capital flows & the IDR/USD exchange rate 
8.  Third,  the  uncertainty  of  global  commodity  prices.  In  line  with  the  sluggish  global 
economic growth and heightened volatility in the global financial markets, commodity prices 
have  continued  its  downward  trend,  confirming  the  end  of  commodities  super-cycle  era 
[GRAPH 3]. 
 Graph 3 
Global commodity prices 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
9.  The  three  main  global  issues  I  mentioned  previously  have  inevitably  affected  the 
performance  of  Indonesia’s  economy.  Amidst  the  robust  domestic  demand,  intense  global 
pressures have put more burden on the current account.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
10. The current account deficits have occurred since the fourth quarter of 2011 [GRAPH 4]. 
Furthermore, sliding commodity prices which have started since the beginning of 2012 have 
affected exports that finally led to growing current account deficits. 
Graph 4 
The current account 
11. These substantial current account deficits are not only caused by trade balance deficits 
but also overburdened by prolonged services and income balance deficits [GRAPH 5]. On 
the other hand, foreign portfolio investment flows have fluctuated associated with changes in 
sentiment, known as risk-on and risk-off behavior in global financial markets. Together with 
the  issues  of  current  account  deficits,  turbulence  in  domestic  financial  market  creates 
deterioration of the Indonesia balance of payment posture. 
 Graph 5 
The net services and income account 
12. Economic adjustments are eventually unavoidable. Yet, we argue that these economic 
adjustments are needed as part of rebalancing process toward a more balanced economy 
which is aligned with its economic fundamentals. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13.  In  line  with  the  deterioration  in  the  balance  of  payment,  rupiah  has  demonstrated  a 
weakening trend. Moreover, the hike of inflation caused by the reduction in fuel subsidy is 
also  part  of  the  delayed  adjustment  process.  These  conditions  have  finally  led  to  a  lower 
economic growth. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
[Policy Responses and Current Economic Condition] 
14. The Government and Bank Indonesia have taken various policy responses to safeguard 
economic adjustments. These policies are intended to maintain economic stability to ensure 
the process of short term adjustments remain in place. In particular, the policy responses are 
aiming  to  ensure  a  stable  inflation,  maintain  exchange  rate  of  rupiah  in  line  with  its 
fundamentals, and reduce current account deficits toward a more robust level. 
15. Within these policy directions, Bank Indonesia attempts to further strengthen the policy 
mix ranging from: (i) Increasing Bank Indonesia Rate by 175 bps to the level of 7,50%, from 
June to November 2013; (ii) Reinforcing monetary operation; (iii) Stabilizing rupiah exchange 
rate;  (iv) Strengthening  macro-prudential  policies;  (v) Promoting  monetary  and  financial 
system  stability  policy  cooperation  with  other  central  banks;  and  (vi) Enhancing  policy 
coordination with the Government. 
16.  On  behalf  of  Bank  Indonesia,  I  would  like  to  extend  our  sincere  appreciation  to  the 
Government for its policy responses. The decision to raise the subsidized fuel prices in the 
end  of  June  2013  has  reduced  pressures  on  fiscal  sustainability,  although  this  effort  is 
inadequate to further improve current account posture. In addition, we are of the view that 
the Government has already taken initial positive steps by introducing the policy packages in 
August and October 2013. 
Respected Audience, 
Table 2 
INDONESIA balance of payments – quarterly 
17.  Without  intending  to  be  complacent,  it  is  worthy  to  mention  that  the  policy  responses 
have  demonstrated  positive  contributions.  Various 
that  economic 
indicators  reflect 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 adjustment  process  remain  under  control. The  trade  deficits  have  started  to  decline  in  the 
third quarter of 2013. The foreign capital inflows has also intensified [TABLE 2]. 
18. Positive developments on the balance of payment have supported the stability of rupiah 
since the end of September 2013. At the same time, the micro structure of foreign exchange 
market  shows  improvement  as  indicated  by  the  increase  in  the  volume  of  interbank 
transactions  and  a  more  healthy  price  discovery  in  the  forex  market.  A  lower  off-shore 
non-deliverable forward rate (NDF) compared to the spot rate indicates a more liquid market 
[GRAPH 6]. 
Graph 6 
Foreign exchange market 
19. The high level of inflation following the hike of subsidized fuel prices has returned to its 
historical pattern [GRAPH 7]. This development suggests that the second round impacts of 
the  hike  of  subsidized  fuel  prices  were  restrained.  Although  the  administered  and  volatile 
food prices have significantly increased, core inflation remains below 5,0%. The inflation has 
surpassed its target of 4,5±1%, yet we forecast inflation in 2013 will slightly fall below 9,0%. 
 Graph 7 
Inflation 
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
20. We expect our economy will expand by 5,7% in 2013. Although lower than its growth in 
2012 that was recorded at 6,2%, the figure is still above the estimated average growth rate of 
its peer countries of 3,6% [GRAPH 8]. 
Graph 8 
INDONESIA economic growth vis a vis peers 
21. The adjustment process of the Indonesia’s economy is also supported by the stability of 
financial  and  payment  system,  as  well  as  sound  foreign  debt  level.  Through  a  consistent 
policy,  excessive  pressures  stemming  from  economic  adjustments  could  be  avoided 
[GRAPH 9]. 
 Graph 9 
Banking indicators 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
[Economic Challenges and Opportunities Ahead] 
22. Ahead, the current challenges are not about to recede very soon. At the present juncture 
when the economy is in the adjustment process to a soft landing, I see a number challenges, 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
both  global  and  domestic,  remain  at  the  fore.  The  challenges  are  not  only  those  that  are 
cyclical  in  nature  but  also  those  that  are  structural,  and  therefore  demand  our  collective 
attention.  
23. Along this line, we need to remain vigilant of the global economic growth dynamic. While 
the  global  economy  in  2014  is  projected  to  expand  at  around  3.5%,  the  shift  in  the  world 
economic landscape is anticipated to continue [TABLE 3]. The average growth of the US and 
Europe,  which  only  arrived  at  2.2%  and  1.4%  respectively  within  the  last  two  decades,  is 
expected to rise to 3.1% and 1.6% in the next five years. On the contrary, China’s economy 
in the subsequent five years will have to accept a new normal growth of around 7%, after 
expanding  at  an  average  10.25%  in  the  last  two  decades.  Similar  pattern  is  expected  to 
occur in other emerging markets’ economic path. 
Table 3 
The shift in global economic landscape 
 24.  What  becomes  a  concern  for  us  is  the  risk  that  the  shift  in  the  global  landscape  will 
reverse  the  direction  of  portfolio  flows  to  advanced  countries,  particularly  the  US 
[GRAPH 10].  Undeniably,  the  delay  in  the  reduction  of  US  monetary  policy  stimulus  has 
provided “temporary breathing space” for us at this moment. Nonetheless, the tapering off of 
the  US  monetary  stimulus  is  indeed  an  unquestionable  event  that  will  occur  in  the  near 
future. As a matter of fact, several recent indicators have started to reflect a strengthening of 
the US economy.  
25.  Against  the  background  of  the  above  global  challenges,  equally  daunting  challenges 
arise in the domestic front [FIGURE 1]. The first challenge relates to our financial market that 
needs to be restructured. One of the issues pertains to the fragmentation of rupiah excess 
liquidity in the banking sector. This calls for attention as it would increase the complexities of 
monetary operation and disturb the stability of the financial system.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 10 
Global capital flows 
Structural challenges to monetary policy implementation 
Figure 1 
  26. Another challenge concerning the financial market is its lack of depth and liquidity. In the 
rupiah market, this is reflected in the low turnover and the anomaly of price formation in the 
repo  market  [GRAPH  11].  The  collateralized  market  does  not  appeal  to  many  market 
participants  and  is  more  expensive  compared  to  the  uncollateralized  interbank  money 
market. In the meantime, the foreign exchange market is characterized by low volume and 
inactive hedging transactions. With such micro structure, the exchange rate is easily under 
pressure even when the demand for foreign exchange experiences a small upsurge.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Graph 11 
Domestic money market condition 
27.  The  second  challenge  deals  with  structural  weaknesses  that  will  inhibit  our  attempt  to 
boost the economy to a higher level. Today, Indonesia has firmed up its position as a middle 
income country and is in transformation from lower middle income to upper middle income 
[GRAPH 12]. This implies that the middle class expansion in the last decade will continue 
and  correspondingly  our  domestic  market  will  enlarge.  The  structure  of  demand  for  goods 
and  services  will  also  be  getting  more  diverse  with  increasingly  complex  characteristics 
[GRAPH 13]. 
 Graph 12 
Income per capita 
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 13 
Expanding middle class 
28.  Notwithstanding,  amid  the  changing  structure  of  aggregate  demand,  I  view  that  the 
economy  has  expanded  too  rapidly  and  is  susceptible  to  correction  [FIGURE  2].  The 
Economic  expansion  is  also  followed  by  a  weakening  posture  of  the  current  account. 
Consequently, the pace of economic growth to a higher path is hindered. 
 Figure 2 
Structural challenges 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
29. I view the above impediment to economic growth as a reflection of the existing imbalance 
between  the  structure  of  aggregate  demand  and  the  capability  of  the  supply  side.  In  the 
supply  side,  the  production  structure  that  took  shape  within  the  last  decade  has  been 
gradually felt to be obsolete. 
30. This is actually a sensible development [GRAPH 14]. The existing production structure 
reflects  the  comparative  advantage  that  we  used  to  utilize  to  take  Indonesia  transforming 
from low to middle income country. The abundant natural resources heritage outside Java 
and the human resources surplus in Java have become the primary assets that lifted a large 
part of our society out of the poverty trap. These primary resources have enabled us to build 
an  industrial  order  dominated  by  export  industries  that  are  intensive  in  human  and  natural 
resources such as coal mining and crude palm oil industry. 
Net exports of natural resources and low tech industry 
Graph 14 
 31.  Nevertheless,  when  Indonesia  finally  stepped  up  to  become  a  middle  income  country 
with  a  growing  middle  class,  such  industrial  order  is  no  longer  sufficient.  The  typical 
characteristic of a middle class society is having the desire and simultaneously the capability 
to  purchase  goods  with  higher  quality  and  value  added.  In  line  with  the  increased 
complexities of the demanded goods, greater basis for comparative advantage and industrial 
capability are undoubtedly needed. 
32. This gap between demand and supply is increasingly fulfilled by imports, primarily goods 
produced by middle and high technology industry [GRAPH 15]. The net imports of goods in 
this  category  have  grown  larger  since  Indonesia  stepped  into  a  middle  income  country 
category  in  2014.  This  technology  deficit  in  the  supply  side  is  felt  across  the  nation. 
Nonetheless, the stronger industrial capacity in Java has not sufficed in accommodating the 
substantial changes in the structure of national demand. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 15 
Spatial profile of trade balance in Nusantara 
 33. I believe this condition does not stay apart from the impact of several aspects that are 
inadequate and need to be improved. First, the availability of infrastructure for connectivity 
both  digitally  and  physically.  Second,  the  management  of  domestic  energy.  The  energy 
management aspect has acquired growing attention as the augmenting demand for energy 
has  to  be  fulfilled  by  imports,  which  eventually  aggravates  the  ongoing problem  of  current 
account deficit. Third, several aspects related to business climate that are under the close 
watch of businesses, including ease of starting up a business, legal certainty, registration of 
personal proprietary right, insolvency settlement, and enforcing contract.  
34. Overall, the above domestic structural challenges demand our increased attention as our 
integration  with  the  ASEAN  Economic  Community  (AEC)  is  looming  near  in  2015.  The 
question for us is “Are we able to gain the benefit of AEC and develop to be part of the global 
value chain, or merely become a target market?” 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
[General Policy Direction] 
Figure 3 
Policy direction 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13 
foundation 
therefore  becoming  a  strong 
35. In the spirit of determination and thrust to respond to the challenges and strengthen the 
stepping  stone  toward  sustainable  growth,  allow  me  to  convey  Bank  Indonesia’s  policy 
direction ahead and a number thoughts concerning the structural reformation that we need to 
pursue together with the Government [FIGURE 3]. 
36.  Let  me  underline  that  in  our  policy  direction  ahead,  including  in  the  period  of  political 
transition in 2014, Bank Indonesia will consistently preserve the stability of the economy and 
the financial system. Stability needs to be prioritized in order to create a more balanced and 
sound  economic  structure, 
for  economic 
transformation in the future. 
37. The economic balance that I am referring here is economic growth that is supported by a 
sustainable posture of the current account. On the one hand, sustainable can be interpreted 
as a condition where exports have high value added and industries are capable of producing 
intermediate  goods  and  services  that  so  far  still  rely  on  imports.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
financing of current account should derive from more permanent sources, i.e. Foreign Direct 
Investments  that  will  propel  the  growth  and  development  of  advanced  and  globally 
competitive industry sector. 
38. With the complexities of the confronted challenges, BI’s policy direction is measured in 
terms  both  goal  and  time  dimensions.  As  regard  the  goal  dimension,  BI  is  not  simply 
committed  to  manage  inflation  to  be  between  its  target  range,  but  more  broadly,  is  also 
directed to manage current account toward a sustainable path, while preserving the stability 
of the financial system. 
39. The effort to attain low inflation is not negotiable as it becomes a pre-condition for the 
sustainability of the economy. Notwithstanding, the Asian and global crisis demonstrate that 
low inflation is not sufficient to warrant sustainable economic growth. 
40.  The  journey  of  our  economy  post  97/98  Asian  shows  that  we  need  to  remain  vigilant 
even when inflation rate remains low, because it may well be a delayed inflation which will be 
accompanied  by  increasing  current  account  deficit.  The  inflation  phenomenon  was  indeed 
delayed since the risk of rising inflation was temporarily absorbed by government subsidies 
such  as  fuel  and  energy  subsidies.  Inflation  rate  was  also  subdued  owing  to  decreased 
pressure from imports as the prices of global commodities declined. 
41. From the time dimension, Bank Indonesia’s policy stance will consistently be adopted in 
a  time-consistent  manner  until  the  economic  condition  becomes  more  balanced.  This 
dimension  is  in  line  with  the  structural  challenges  which  will  take  quite  a  long  time  to  be 
resolved. 
42.  In  sum,  Bank  Indonesia’s  policy  direction  is  implemented  through  a  policy  mix  in  the 
monetary, macropudential and payment system area. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
[Monetary Policy Direction] 
43.  In  the  area  of  monetary  policy,  the  BI  Rate  will  be  consistently  directed  towards 
controlling inflation to be within its target. Furthermore, the monetary policy stance is taken to 
support efforts in reducing the current account deficit to achieve a sustainable level and to 
maintain a robust financial system stability. 
44.  The  exchange  rate  policy  is  aimed  at  guiding  the  exchange  rate  to  move  within  its 
fundamental  value  acting  as  shock  absorber  instrument  of  the economy  and  not  as  shock 
amplifier. In this context, a deep and liquid foreign exchange market is needed to support a 
more efficient creation of the exchange rate. 
45. The monetary policy is strengthened with a number of monetary operation strategies. In 
the area of rupiah liquidity management, the monetary operation strategy will be to continue 
to  absorb  structural  excess  liquidity  in  a  guided  and  measured  manner.  This  is  conducted 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
among others by extending the open market operation tenor through the introduction of the 
1 year or longer SBI tenor and the Medium Term Notes. 
46. Furthermore, Bank Indonesia will continue to strengthen the development of the rupiah 
and the forex money market and the deepening of the financial market. As an initial step, the 
facilitation of the “mini” Master Repo Agreement initiative for a number of pilotbanks is seen 
as  a  meaningful  step  and  will  contribute  to  the  implementation  of  a  larger  scale  initiative 
which is the General Master Repo Agreement. In addition, Bank Indonesia will also issue a 
number of money market regulation and several funding instruments for financial institution 
liquidity management such as the revision of the commercial paper regulation and the inter 
bank repo transaction based on syariah principle. We will also undergo policy harmonization 
and increase dissemination and education to the market player. 
47.  One  policy  which  we  will  continue  to  take  to  improve  external  endurance  is  the 
strengthening of the second line of defence through financial cooperation with other central 
banks and financial authorities in the region. We view these types of cooperation should be 
continuously  strengthened  to  anticipate  against  uncertainty  of  risk  of  the  global  economic 
condition that can instantly weakened the external sector performance. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
[Macroprudential Policy Direction] 
48. In an effort to strengthen external sector endurance, we will also adopt macroprudential 
policy  through  supervisory  action.  The  macroprudential  policy  is  aimed  at  strengthening 
credit composition extended to productive sectors with export orientation and which provide 
import substitute goods and support efforts to increase economic capacity. 
49. Bank Indonesia will also buttress the implementation of its new function and authority as 
the macroprudential authority. In this context, macroprudential policy will be directed towards 
systemic  risk  management,  including  credit  risk,  liquidity  risk,  market  risk,  as  well  as 
strengthening the capital structure [FIGURE 4]. 
Figure 4 
Macroprudential policy mix 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15 
50. In managing liquidity risk, we will improve the syariah minimum reserve requirement and 
introduce a staged Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) instrument starting from January 1, 2015. 
As the time for its implementation is nearing, I urge banks to include the LCR target in their 
respective  2014  Bank  Business  Plan.  In  the  area  of  capital  buffer,  the  calculation  of  bank 
capital  will  be  enhanced  by  the  incorporation  of  more  complex  and  comprehensive  risk 
elements, such as the economic cycle and assessment of banks with systemic impact. 
51. In the area of strengthening financial system stability, I view the enhancing of a macro-
micro  coordination  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  OJK  to  be  important.  I  have  initiated  the 
macro-micro  coordination  effort  by  the  signing  of  the  Joint  Decree  (SKB)  on  October  18, 
2013. In principle, the Joint Decree includes commitment to ensure the smooth transition of 
the bank microprudential supervision and the effective implementation of the task, function, 
and authority of each institution. 
52.  Enhancement  of  macro  and  microprudential  coordination  is  important  to  prevent  any 
increase in regulatory cost, discourage regulatory arbitrage, and improve the quality of the 
Crisis Management Protocol (CMP). In the area of financial sector policy, I am confident that 
OJK  will  preserve  consistency  of  the  banking  regulation  and  supervision  and  continue  the 
policies/commitments agreed thus far with the banking industry. 
53.  Nevertheless,  I  view  coordination  between  the  two  authorities  can  be  further 
strengthened with coordination and cooperation between institutions in the context of crisis 
prevention and resolution. Such coordination is necessary to provide legal certainty basis in 
terms of crisis prevention and resolution. On that note, I am hopeful that the financial system 
safety  net  law  can  be  introduced  soon  to  serve  as  an  umbrella  for  a  better  cooperation 
between relevant authorities. 
54. Strengthening the financial system, specifically the banking sector, becomes more critical 
in  response  to  the  implementation  of  the  AEC  in  the  financial  services  sector  in  the  year 
2020. It is in my view that improving perseverance and competitiveness as key factors to a 
healthy competition. Banks must escalate their business scale in order to achieve a higher 
level of economic of scale and concurrently an improved governance. 
55. It is in this context that I wish to remind banks undergoing corporate actions or holding an 
unfavorable governance rating and bank soundness level by the end of 2013, to adjust their 
ownership composition to be in line with the threshold established. Such adjustment should 
also  follow  the  existing  regulation  in  place  and  the  transfer  of  ownership  share  to  other 
parties  must  gain  clearance  from  the  authority.  I  wish  to  avoid  the  buying  and  selling  of 
business permit since in principle business permit granted are merely facilities provided by 
the state and cannot be transferred without prior approval from the rightful authority. 
56.  The  same  principle  also  applies  to  the  transfer  of  bank  ownership  share  to  foreign 
investors.  In  principle,  these  investors  can  play  a  role  in  the  national  banking  industry. 
However,  it  must  be  carried  out  in  a  proportional  and  reciprocal  manner  and  delivering 
benefits  to  the  economy.  In  this  context,  authorities  agreement  and  commitment  between 
countries  is  necessary  to  ensure  equality  in  terms  of  market  access  as  well  as  national 
treatment and an adequate cross-border supervision. 
57. The development of syariah financing is also a priority in strengthening financial system 
stability. The relatively rapid development of legal and institutional infrastructure, as well as 
syariah  financial  market  and  its  supporting  instruments  since  2008  will  continue  to  be 
broaden  to  boost  syariah  principle  based  economic  contribution  to  the  national  economic 
growth.  Within  this  framework,  existing  syariah  education  program  will  be  enhanced  to 
become  an  economic  movement,  the  so  called  Syariah  Economic  Movement  which  is 
expected to commence in the near future. 
Distinguished Guest, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
[Payment System Policy Direction] 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
58. In the area of payment system policy, Bank Indonesia will remain to be the rightful authority 
to regulate, develop, monitor and grant payment system operation license. In this capacity, we 
will develop a more efficient domestic payment system industry through the improvement of 
payment system architecture and broadening access to payment services. Such policy is taken 
to  anticipate  rising  public  needs  for  non  cash  instrument  payment.  We  will  also  reinforce 
regulatory  and  payment  system  monitoring  aspect  through  the  improvement  of  capacity, 
including improvement of the Bank Indonesia human resource competency in the area of fund 
transfer operation and foreign exchange merchant [FIGURE 5]. 
Figure 5 
Payment system policy 
59. In its implementation, the payment system policy will be based on three main strategies 
as follows: (1) strengthening the domestic industrial structure, (2) technical and mechanism 
standardization to improve efficiency, and (3) expansion of access to payment services. The 
first  strategy  is  implemented  through  the  development  of  the  National  Payment  Gateway 
[FIGURE  6].  This  initiative  can  increase  domestic  industry  efficiency  in  terms  of  cost 
reduction – cost of transaction, mitigate systemic risk on settlement activities and broaden 
payment access. 
 Figure 6 
National payment gateway timeframe 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17 
60.  The  second  strategy  will  be  carried  out  by  developing  standardization  aspect  in  the 
national payment system industry. Such strategy will create a safe and smooth functioning of 
the  system,  preserve  a  healthy  competition  and  will  not  create  any  economic  rent. 
Furthermore,  we  will  also  promote  the  standardization  of  Government  routine  expenditure 
through non cash mechanism. 
61. The third strategy will be conducted as an integral part of the financial inclusion policy 
supported  by  education program  and  consumer protection. This  is  done by  making  use of 
innovation  and  information  technology,  specifically  through  the  simplification  of  know  your 
customer,  while  maintaining  its  reliability  in  the  implementation  of  the know  your  customer 
principles. To further promote non cash payment system we will explore cooperation with the 
Government for the possibility of providing fiscal incentive for non cash transactions. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
[Financial Inclusion and SMEs Policy Direction] 
62.  In  addition  to  the  monetary,  macroprudential,  and  payment  system  policy,  Bank 
Indonesia  will  also  strengthen  its  policy  in  relation  to  financial  inclusion  and  SMEs 
[FIGURE 7]. The two policies have roles in promoting banking intermediation and efficiency 
hence contributing to the strengthening of the financial system stability and supporting policy 
in the payment system area. 
Figure 7 
The scope of financial inclusion & SMEs policy 
 63. The financial inclusion policy is focused on five main strategies. First, enhancing financial 
education as an effort to alter financial management behaviour, especially to the low income 
part  of  society.  Second,  improving  financial  access  supported  by  the  firming  up  of  the 
payment  system  infrastructure,  utilizing  information  technology  and  innovation,  as  well  as 
local economic unit network. Third, consumer protection to ensure the public’s rights when 
using financial access and the payment system. Fourth, reduction of asymmetric information 
by providing financial profile data of the public currently untouched by the banking sector and 
commodity  information  data.  Fifth,  introduction  of  regulation  under  the  financial  system 
stability  framework  as  well  as  providing  policy  recommendation  to  relevant  authorities 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
[FIGURE  8].  Meanwhile,  the  policy  on  SMEs  in  principle  adopts  a  similar  strategy  to  the 
financial inclusion and further complemented with the improvement of SMEs capacity. 
The principles of financial inclusion & SMEs policy 
Figure 8 
 Distinguished guests, 
<Coordination with Government> 
64.  Efforts  in  responding  to  economic  challenges  necessitate  coordination  with  the 
Government,  especially  on  issues  related  to  structural  challenges.  Within  the  scope  of 
cyclical challenges, Bank Indonesia once again appreciates the steps taken by Government 
in  controlling  the  2014  Budget  deficit  at  1,7%  of  GDP.  That  target  reflects  our  similar 
perspective in prioritizing efforts for economic stabilization. Nevertheless, persistent strength 
in demand for subsidized fuel remains as our common challenge. 
Figure 9 
A global race to prosperity 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19 
65. In addressing the dimension of structural challenges, it is noteworthy for us to improve 
the quality and speed in implementing public policy in order not to lag behind competitors in 
the  global  strategic  environment  [FIGURE  9].  In  this  regard,  a  need  for  acceleration  in 
various  policies  to  improve  the  quantity  and  quality  of  infrastructure,  strengthening  the 
management  of  domestic  energy,  including  speeding  up  the  development  of  a  clean  and 
renewable  alternative  energy,  and  ameliorating  every  aspect  related  to  ease  of  doing 
business in Indonesia such as law and regulation. I believe that the strengthening of every 
elementary aspect in our competitiveness will lessen our technology deficit and improve our 
industry capabilities. 
66.  Within  the  same  context,  Indonesia  needs  to  strengthen  its  investment  strategy  in 
promoting  the  development  of  upstream  industry  for  intermediate  goods  with  high  value-
added. Therefore, the presence of manufacturing FDI by global manufacturers of quality and 
who are market leaders within their respective industries must become the complementary 
part  of  our  national  investment  policy  in  the future. In the  same sense,  Indonesia  will  also 
benefit by the downstreaming of natural resources extractive activity. 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
67. I am aware completely that everything that I have conveyed regarding improvement of 
production  structure  on  the  supply  side  could  not  be  materialized  in  the  near  term. 
Nonetheless,  I  hold  the  view  that  not  much  time  is  available  to  keep  postponing  steps  in 
materializing them. 
68. Indonesia’s position as a middle income country which is progressing to become a high 
income country requires us to rethink the relevance of economic growth model that we have 
always been implementing. Indonesia as a middle income country could no longer rely only 
on  cheap  labor  wages  and  extractive  activities.  It  is  about  time for  us to  switch  towards  a 
growth model that emphasizes increased industrial capabilities. 
69. Also within that context, the whole efforts in overcoming the structural deficit in the supply 
side  need  to  be  mounted  as  a  joint  effort  in  building  an  innovation  ecosystem  across 
Indonesia, as a “New Growth Model”. In that ecosystem, diffusion of technology, R&D and 
innovation activities, intellectual property rights, risk capital and education activities, interact 
with each other without barrier and supported by the availability of reliable connectivity both 
physical and digital. 
70.  Encompassing  all  of  those,  we  can  expect  that  the  national  economy  will  transform to 
become more reliable, efficient, and globally competitive, with sustainable economic growth 
in a stable economic environment. 
Respected audience, 
[Economic Prospect 2014] 
71. Considering those economic challenges and the policy direction which will be taken by 
Bank Indonesia and Government, it can be expected that our economy in 2014 will be in a 
consolidation phase [FIGURE 10]. 
20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 10 
Cyclical economic forecast 
 72. This consolidation is tied to the still unfinished economic correction process in rectifying 
our  current  account  deficit,  which  is  expected  to  decrease  in  2014.  Imports  which  are 
increasingly manageable, along with the recovery process within the domestic economy are 
expected to support the improvement of the current account balance. 
73.  Economic  growth  in  2014  is  expected  to  improve  within  the  range  of  5,8–6,2%.  This 
prospect is supported by improvement in export along the improvement of global economy 
and  domestic  demands.  However,  projection  of  current  account  balance  and  potential 
downside  risk  in  economic  growth  will  require  attention  considering  that  the  process  of 
slowing global economy is still ongoing. The prospect could change direction if the process of 
global economic recovery is stopped, as happened in 2013. 
74. From the perspective of price, we project that inflation in 2014 will be back under control, 
within  the  target  range  of  4,5±1%.  This  is  influenced  by  the  positive  impacts  from  various 
policies  taken  by  the  Government  and  Bank  Indonesia.  Inflation  of  foods  and  inflation  of 
administered prices are expected to be stabilized, supported by expectation of improvement 
in  the  supply  and  distribution  of  food,  assuming  there  will  be  no  more  policy  of  price 
increases that is of strategic nature. Core inflation is expected to remain controlled due to the 
preservation  of  supply  availability,  stable  Rupiah  exchange  rate,  and  manageable  inflation 
expectation. 
75.  For  the  prospect  of  banking  in  2014,  potentially  fragile  economy  and  interest  rates 
increases need to be anticipated. In this sense, we forecast that credit growth from banking 
in 2014 will be within the range of 15–17%, supported by growth in Deposits along the same 
pace. In our assessment, that pace of credit growth is consistent with our efforts in balancing 
the economy. Therefore, I expect the active involvement of the banking sector to adjust the 
target of credit growth in each respective Bank Business Plan for 2014 to be more consistent 
with our effort in managing the economy towards a healthier direction. 
Respected ladies and gentlemen, 
<Medium-term prospects> 
76. In the medium-term perspectives of 2015–2018, global economy is expected to grow at 
an average rate of 3,9%, driven by expected improvement of economic activities within the 
United States. Prices of non-oil and gas commodities are expected to increase, albeit limited. 
Nevertheless,  prospect  of  global  oil  price  needs  to  be  carefully  monitored  because  it  can 
potentially increase due to ongoing global economic recovery. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
77.  Indonesian  economic  growth  is  expected  to  reach  6,5%  in  2018,  if  all  transformation 
policies in the economy proceed according to expectation [FIGURE 11]. I take the view that 
those  policies  can  improve  the  structural  balance  between  demand  and  supply,  while  also 
easing  the  problem  of  current  account  balance  structure.  Along  the  same  line,  economic 
growth  could  be  stuck  at  6%  if  the  transformation  process  does  not  proceed  according  to 
expectation. 
Figure 11 
Medium-term economic prospect 
 Distinguished ladies and gentlemen 
<Vision, Mission and Strategic Values of BI > 
78.  In  order  to  achieve  those  important  targets,  Bank  Indonesia  is  transforming  itself.  We 
have  launched  our  vision  until  2024,  which  is  to  become  a  central  bank  that  is  to  be  a 
credible institution and the best central bank in the region. 
79.  We  strive  to  be  the  best  in  the  implementation  of  policy  mix,  macroprudential 
development,  management  of  capital  flow,  initiative  policies  for  the  creation  of  Regional 
Financial Safety Net, financial inclusion and SMEs, and the development of digital financial 
services. All those will proceed along the stage of restructuring, enhancing, and shaping the 
end state, for the achievement of low inflation and stable exchange rate. 
80. To support the achievement of our vision, we want to ensure that all potential resources 
within our control are functioning more effectively. Therefore, our new strategic values, which 
comprise (1) upholding trust and integrity, (2) promoting professionalism, (3) seeking perfect 
performance, 
(5) strengthening  coordination  and 
teamwork, will be continually strengthened to support the achievement of that vision. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
<Closing/Epilogue> 
81.  Looking  at the  issues  and  challenges  that  we  currently  face,  it  is  not  difficult for  us  to 
imagine  the  bigger  problem  that  is  waiting  for  us  in  the  future  if  we  fail  to  act  quickly  and 
appropriately. We have not achieved an optimal economic growth, while being faced with the 
challenge  of  restoring  our  current  account  balance,  and  simultaneously  we  must  also 
continuously improve to advance the economic transformation towards the direction that we 
aspire to. 
82. In that regard, we have to commonly develop a work ethic and we will not rest until those 
goals  are  achieved.  Before  concluding  tonight  remarks,  please  kindly  allow  me  to  quote a 
known philosopher from the 4th century BC, Cicero: “within the character of the citizen, lies 
(4) prioritizing  public 
interest,  and 
22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the welfare of the nation.” That the development of a nation cannot be separated from the 
work ethic and character of the nation itself. 
83. Allow me to conclude my remarks tonight. May God Almighty bless and lighten our steps 
forward. That will be all and thank you. 
Wassalamu’alaikum Wr. Wb.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
