Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Harmonizing fiscal and monetary policies to deliver 
stability and growth 
Text of the 18th Annual Oration by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Sri  Lanka*,  organized  by  the  Faculty  of  Taxation,  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of 
Sri Lanka, Colombo, 27 August 2013. 
 *Also: Past President, Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka; Past President, 
South  Asian  Federation  of  Accountants;  Former  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Plan 
Implementation. 
Chairman, Mr. Sujeewa Rajapaksha, President, CA Sri Lanka;  
Honourable Ministers; 
His Lordship Mohan Pieris, Chief Justice; 
Dr. P B Jayasundera, Secretary, Ministry of Finance & Planning;  
Secretaries to Ministries;  
Your Excellencies; 
Mr. H.A.S. Samaraweera, Auditor General; 
Deputy Governors and my colleagues at the Central Bank; 
Vice President and Council Members of CA Sri Lanka; 
Mr. N. R. Gajendran, Chairman, and Members of the Tax Faculty of CA Sri Lanka; 
Mr. Esmond Satarasinghe; 
Fellow Chartered Accountants; 
Members of the Business Community; 
My dear friends, 
At the outset, let me thank CA Sri Lanka for inviting me to deliver the 18th Annual Oration on 
Taxation  organized  by  the  Faculty  of  Taxation  of  CA  Sri  Lanka.  I  consider  myself  deeply 
privileged  to  have  this  unique  opportunity.  I  am  further  pleased  because  the  topic  of  the 
Oration, “Harmonizing Fiscal and Monetary Policies to deliver sustainable growth and 
Stability”  is  one  that  is  relevant  and  timely,  since  there  are  a  large  number  of  global  and 
national developments which regularly underscore the vital importance of harmonization of 
the Monetary and Fiscal policies in countries as well as in regions.  
Monetary policy and fiscal policy 
In order to set the backdrop for today’s Oration, let me initially provide you with a brief insight 
as to what Monetary policy and Fiscal policy entails. 
Monetary  policy  is  the  means  by  which  a  central  bank  seeks  to  achieve  macro-
economic  stability.  In  Sri  Lanka,  the  authority  responsible  for  the  formulation  and 
implementation of monetary policy is the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. The Monetary Law Act 
No.58 of 1949 is the legislation under which the Central Bank (CB) was established, and it 
provides a wide range of instruments that could be used by the Central Bank for monetary 
management. Developments in the economy and the financial system have led to a gradual 
evolution of the objectives, and the framework for the conduct of monetary policy. In 2002, in 
an amendment to the Monetary Law Act No. 58 of 1949, the objectives of the Central Bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
were re-defined as “economic and price stability” and “financial system stability”, with a view 
to encouraging and promoting the development of the productive resources of Sri Lanka. 
Fiscal  policy  is  the  framework  that  is  implemented  by  the  government  in  order  to 
influence  economic  activities  via  the  allocation  of  resources  towards  achieving  the 
overall goals of stability and growth. This policy framework is mainly implemented through 
the Ministry of Finance (MoF) in Sri Lanka, with the traditional policy tools used for this 
purpose being taxation, government expenditure & borrowing, and debt management. 
In  the  meantime,  it  would  also  be  noted  that  the  financing  of  the  budget  and  debt 
management  has  monetary  implications,  while  the  composition  of  debt  instruments,  the 
timing  of  debt  issues  and  their  maturities,  has  a  close  relationship  with  both  fiscal  and 
monetary  implications.  We  need  to  understand  that  Fiscal  policy  is  broader  than  taxation. 
Therefore, perhaps the next post-budget seminar of the Institute should attempt to convey 
this position so that the popular misconception amongst many Chartered Accountants that 
“fiscal policy is only about taxation” is removed, thereby encouraging Accountants to focus 
on fundamental fiscal philosophies and implementation methods at their important pre and 
post-budget  seminars.  Needless  to  say,  a  greater  appreciation  of  the  entirety  of  the  fiscal 
policies  would  enable  Chartered  Accountants  to  pay  more  attention  to  the  wide  range  of 
subjects  encompassing fiscal  policy,  so  that  the  Accountants’ knowledge  and  ideas  in  this 
field could be regularly harnessed for the benefit of the country at large. 
Mr. Chairman, while it may be reasonably easy to define what Monetary Policy and Fiscal 
Policy  means,  it  would  not  be  so  easy  to  define  as  to  under  whose  purview  such  policies 
would fall into, when it  comes to implementation. Of course, it is clear that the bulk of the 
Monetary Policy would be the direct responsibility of the Central Bank, and the bulk of the 
Fiscal  Policy  would  be  the  responsibility  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  However,  there  are 
several grey areas and overlaps, which blur the boundaries of these policy frameworks, and 
therefore,  there  are  many  instances  of  policy  actions  of  one  institution  impacting  and 
influencing upon the policy framework of the other, and vice versa. 
Relationship between the central bank and the ministry of finance 
With that in mind, let us now examine as to how the relationship between the Central Bank 
and the Ministry of Finance have been structured according to our Laws. 
Mr. Chairman, as I already stated, the basic law governing the operations of the Monetary 
Board and the Central Bank, is the Monetary Law Act No.58 of 1949. The Monetary Law Act, 
(popularly called the MLA), covers the powers and purposes of the Central Bank, Monetary 
Board,  Governor  and  Deputy  Governors,  Departments  of  the  Central  Bank,  Reports  and 
Publications, Profits and Losses and the Accounts of the Bank etc. In addition, chapters are 
devoted  to  the  powers  and  purposes  of  the  Central  Bank,  National  Monetary  Policy, 
instruments of the Central Bank, and the Central Bank’s relationship with the Government. 
What perhaps is most relevant for today’s discussion is how the MLA has defined the Central 
Bank’s  relationship  with  the  Government.  Towards  that  end,  a  careful  examination  of  the 
MLA  as  well  as  John  Exter’s  “Report  on  the  establishment  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Ceylon” in November 1949, (popularly called the Exter Report), will provide some useful 
insights  as  to  the  objectives  and  background  of  one  of  the  most  important  pieces  of 
legislation in our country. 
At  this  stage,  a  quick  introduction  of John Exter  may  also  be  relevant.  John  Exter  was  a 
senior official of the Federal Reserve System who was seconded for service in late 1948, to 
the  Government  of  Ceylon  by  the  US  Government,  to  advise  the  Government  of  Ceylon 
about  the  organization  and  the  functions  of  a  Reserve  Bank  for  Ceylon,  and  to  frame 
proposals for a draft constitution for the Reserve Bank of Ceylon. Exter who was a brilliant 
banker and scholar, fulfilled his mission and was thereafter appointed as the first Governor of 
the Central Bank of Ceylon in 1950. John Exter’s Report, now serves as the most important 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  authoritative  reference  for  Central  Bankers  in  Sri  Lanka,  and  is  referred  to  often  by 
academics and practitioners of Central Banking, whenever a clarification is required on any 
issue relating to central banking in Sri Lanka. 
Getting back to our topic, what does this analysis of the MLA reveal? In my view, some very 
interesting positions: 
First:  The  MLA  has  been  designed  to  ensure  that  the  Central  Bank  functions  as  an 
independent  body,  with  a  high  degree  of  autonomy  to  fashion  and  implement  its 
policies, which have far reaching implications for the people. 
Mr. Chairman, let me now cite from the first paragraph of the Exter Report where he deals 
with the significance of the Central Bank System. I quote: “The decision of the Government 
of  Ceylon  to  establish  a  central  bank was  a  decision  with  far  reaching implications  for the 
people of Ceylon. One implication already stands out very clearly: in taking steps to establish 
an independent monetary system to be administered by a central bank, the Government has 
demonstrated  unmistakably  its  intention  to  achieve  genuine  economic  freedom  as  a 
corollary of the political freedom achieved a year and a half ago.” 
Having set the stage, Exter goes on to elaborate the responsibilities to be undertaken by the 
Central Bank: “A central bank thus undertakes a great responsibility, and the broad powers 
given  to  the  Central  Bank  of  Ceylon  under  the  draft  bill  in  Part  II  of  this  report  are 
commensurate  with  the  magnitude  of  this  responsibility.  The  Bank  should  not  be 
hampered by rigid limitations which might prevent it from fulfilling its purpose.” 
Second: Exter reports on the need for the Central Bank to function in the context of 
the other agencies of government. 
He reports, and I quote: “Under the draft law, the Central Bank will be the principal monetary 
authority, but it is obvious that it cannot exercise its authority in the monetary field as in a 
water-tight  compartment,  from  which  the  various  ministries  and  other  agencies  of  the 
Government, are excluded. There is no fine line separating monetary policy from other 
policies,  such  as  fiscal  and  trade  policies.  The  Minister  of  Finance  through  his  fiscal 
policy, or the Minister of Commerce and Trade through his authority to control imports and 
exports,  can  exert  a  powerful  influence  upon  monetary  conditions  in  Ceylon.  But  it  is  the 
clear  intent  of  the  Bill  to  concentrate,  in  so  far  as  it  is  considered  practicable  and 
constitutional  to  do,  as  much  monetary  authority  and  responsibility  as  possible  in  a 
single regulatory and operating agency – the Central Bank”. 
Third:  The  Monetary  Law  Act  (Chapter  6)  envisages  the  Central  Bank  acting  as  the 
Fiscal 
Agent, Banker and Financial Advisor to the Government. 
Sections  106,  113,  and  114  set  out  clearly  the  Central  Bank’s  role  in  relation  to  the 
management of the public debt and the borrowings by the Government and any agencies of 
Government. Those Sections read as follows: 
“Section 106. (1) The Central Bank shall act as the fiscal agent and banker of 
the  Government  and  of  agencies  or  institutions  acting  on  behalf  of  the 
Government, whether established by any written law or otherwise.” 
“Section 113. The Central Bank shall, as agent of the Government, be responsible 
for the management of the public debt.” 
“Section 114. No new loan shall be raised and no new issue of stock or debentures 
shall  be  made  by  the  Government  or  by  any  agency  or  institution  referred  to  in 
subsection  (1)  of  section  106,  whether  in  pursuance  of  authority  conferred  by  any 
written law or otherwise, unless the advice of the Monetary Board has first been 
obtained upon the monetary implication of the proposed loan or issue.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  Exter  Report  elaborates  the  thinking  behind  these  sections:  “In  a  small  country  like 
Ceylon, it is clearly advantageous to place the responsibility for co-ordinating the activities of 
all  Government  credit  institutions  in  the  Monetary  Board  of  the  Central  Bank.  The  Board 
determines  monetary  and  credit  policy  in  general,  and  should  have  some  means  of 
ensuring that the policies of other credit institutions conform.” 
He further clarifies: “The Board should be able to co-ordinate both the borrowing and 
the lending and investment operations of such institutions. With respect to borrowing, 
co-ordination  is  necessary  in  order  to  prevent  separate  Government  agencies  from 
competing  with  each  other  and  ‘spoiling’  the  market,  especially  in  the  early  stages  of  its 
development,  and  to  make  possible  the  formulation  of  a  properly  diversified  pattern  of 
interest rates and maturities for the entire Government borrowing program.” 
Those Sections of the MLA that I referred to, and the relevant annotations in Exter’s Report, 
strongly suggest that the Central Bank should play a dynamic role in the formulation of 
fiscal  policy,  particularly  in  relation  to  a  significant  part  of  fiscal  policy’s  sphere  of 
influence, namely that of borrowing and lending. In that context, it may be safely argued 
that,  whilst  the  overwhelming  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  has  to  be  assumed  by  the 
Central Bank, a sizeable part of the responsibility in relation to fiscal policy is also cast upon 
the Central Bank. 
Fourth:  Exter  explains  the  unique  position  of  the  Governor,  and  the  need  for  the 
Governor to be independent. 
This  position  is  assured  by  the  fact  that  the  Governor  is  appointed  for  a  6  year  term  and 
cannot  be  removed  from  office,  unless  he  has  done  any  act,  which  in  the  opinion  of  the 
Governor General, (now, the President), is of a fraudulent or illegal character, or is against 
the interest of the Central Bank. 
Fifth: Exter discusses the limitations of the Central Bank: 
Once again, let me quote: “A central bank influences the economic life of a nation principally 
by  monetary  action.  While  such  action  can  be  tremendously  effective  under  certain 
conditions, its limitations should be frankly recognized. Thus, through its control of money 
the Central Bank can assist, but by no means ensure, the achievement of the above 
objects. A monetary system that is stable and at the same time responsive to the needs of a 
growing  country  is  a  necessary,  but  not  a  sufficient  condition  of  orderly  economic 
development.” 
Sixth: Exter reports on the vital importance of harmonizing between the Government 
policies and the Central Bank policies. 
Here, Exter’s comments are unambiguous and far reaching. I quote: “There are, however, 
many important problems of monetary policy, especially those relating to fiscal policy, 
on which a central bank must necessarily work in close harmony with the government. 
On  such  problems,  experience  in  many  countries  has  shown  that  a  central  bank,  with  a 
degree of independence of the government proper, can make economic analyses and hold 
views which are more detached and objective than those of a government department. Many 
governments have learned to value and to use the sort of independent and objective advice 
on monetary and other aspects of economic policy which central banks have been able to 
give. On matters of vital interest to the state, however, it must be recognized that… it would 
be impossible for the Central Bank to adopt a policy or pursue a course of action contrary to 
the  policy  of  the  Government  of  the  day.  No  agency  which  is  a  creature  of  the 
Government can be entirely independent of the Government. While the Government may 
be prepared to give an independent regulatory agency rather wide discretion in a field such 
as that of money, there is no gain-saying that, in the last analysis, the Government must 
assume responsibility for monetary policy as for other policies. The Governor and the 
appointed  member  of the  Monetary  Board  cannot  help  being  acutely  conscious  of  the  fact 
that,  since  no  Parliament  can  bind  its  successors,  their  independence  and  tenure  in  office 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
under the proposed legislation is limited by the ultimate power of the Government to change 
the law.” 
Exter also makes a further useful observation: “The exact degree and independence of the 
Central Bank is likely to vary from time to time. For example, central banks can ordinarily act 
more independently in stable, peace-time economic conditions, than in time of war or other 
national  emergency.  They  also  tend  to  take  stronger  stands  on  issues  which  are 
primarily  monetary  in  character,  than  on  related  issues  which  may  simply  have 
monetary repercussions”. 
Seventh: Exter describes the ideal situation as contemplated by the MLA. 
I quote once again: “The ideal which it is hoped that the proposed law will achieve is 
one  in  which  there  will  be  continuous  and  constructive  co-operation  between  the 
Monetary  Board  and  the  Government.  The  principal  instrument  for  achieving  this 
co-operation  should  be  the  Permanent  Secretary  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  whose 
membership  on  the  Board  will  ensure  at  all  times,  that  his  Minister’s  views  will  be 
made known to the other members of the Board. The effectiveness of this cooperation 
and co-ordination between the Board and the Government will depend more upon the 
men occupying the key positions at particular times than upon any legal formula, no 
matter how carefully or elaborately it might be worked out. A relationship as complex, 
and  sometimes  as  delicate,  as  this  one  is  certain  to  be,  cannot  be  established 
full-blown by a piece of legislation. It must be the result, as in other countries, of years 
of experience and the slow growth of political conventions.” 
A  reading  and  understanding  of  these  Exter  annotations  clearly  indicate  the  delicate  and 
complex  nature  of  the  envisaged  relationship  between  these  two  vital  institutions,  and  the 
men  (or  women!)  occupying  the  key  positions.  It  would  also  be  observed  that  Exter  is 
suggesting, and the MLA is legislating, a somewhat paradoxical situation. On the one 
hand, (now, I am speaking like a traditional Economist!), the Central Bank must exercise a 
high  degree  of  independence,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Central  Bank  must  act  in 
harmonization with the policies of the Government! It is of course obvious that this paradox is 
not  unintentional,  and  has,  in  fact,  been  carefully  thought  through  and  deliberately 
introduced,  and  has  obviously  been  done  in  order  to  establish  an  extremely  vital  and  far 
reaching  principle.  That  is,  the  need  for  the  Central  Bank  to  retain  intellectual  and 
operational  independence,  but  to  temper  it  with  the  pragmatism  of  the  national 
deliverables  of  the  economic  agenda  that  has  been  decided  by  a  democratically 
elected  government.  Going  further,  Exter’s  comment  that  “the  effectiveness  of  this 
cooperation  and  coordination  between  the  Board  and  the  Government  will  depend  more 
upon the men occupying the key positions at particular times, than upon any legal formula”, 
emphasizes the complexity and the delicateness of the relationship, which he has described 
in lucid and clever language.  
Mr. Chairman, All these positions that I described to you now highlight another very important 
fundamental  principle  that  was  set  out  in  Exter’s  Central  Bank  Report  of  1949.  That  is, 
Exter’s wise words that “good central banking is less good law than good practice”. After 
7 years as the Governor, I can tell you that that is one of the wisest comments in the Exter 
Report,  and  an  appreciation  of  that  principle  must  be  understood  by  all  stakeholders, 
especially  at  the  current  turbulent  times,  when  Sri  Lanka  is  on  a  fast  track  to  economic 
development. 
In fact, over the past several decades, monetary policy objectives, instruments and operating 
mechanisms have changed significantly. Today, in the aftermath of global financial crisis, the 
key  focus  of  central  banks  is  both  the  successful  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential policy, in order to reinforce each other to stabilize economies. In Sri Lanka 
too,  monetary  policy  formulation,  operational  framework  and  strategies  adopted,  have  all 
evolved  in  line  with  the  changing  structure  of  the  economy,  developments  in  the  financial 
markets, and the availability of data and communication strategies. I do not intend to discuss 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
these  changes  in  detail  here,  but  would  like  to  highlight  that  a  greater  coordination  of 
monetary  and  fiscal  policies  would  become  even  more  crucial  in  the  implementation  of 
monetary policy and achieving macroeconomic stability, in the future than in the past. 
Another position that should be clear to us is that the need for harmonization between the 
Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance, is not a virtue that has been suggested recently, 
but a vital ingredient that had been provided for, since the establishment of the Central Bank, 
in order to ensure the sound economic management of the country. 
The recent evolution of our economy 
Armed with that background, I would now like to proceed to share with you, some instances 
of harmonization that has taken place in the recent past in our country. However, before I do 
that, I think it is necessary to first touch upon the recent evolution of our economy in order to 
set the stage for what would follow. 
To do so, let us initially examine a snap shot of our economy in 2005. Growth in 2005 
was  6.2%,  with  the  average  growth  for  the  7  years,  1999  to  2005,  being  4.3%;  Foreign 
reserves were around US$ 2.7 billion, or about the equivalent of 2 ½ months imports; The 
country was at the mercy of a ruthless terrorist group and on the brink of war; Unemployment 
was  at  7.2%;  Poverty  was  at  a  level  over  15%;  Inflation  was  on  a  sharp  rising  trend; The 
banking  system  was  vulnerable  and  displaying  several  worrisome  cracks;  Public  debt  to 
GDP level  exceeded  90%;  Per  capita  income  was  under  US$1,250;  GDP  was  around 
US$24 billion;  The  Western  Province  share  of  GDP  was  an  overwhelming  51%; 
Infrastructure development was almost non-existent; The fiscal deficit was over 7% although 
very  little  infrastructure  development  work  had  been  carried  out.  All  in  all,  a  rather  bleak 
picture, and worse still, a bleak outlook. 
Let us now see what it is like today: Growth is over 7%, and average growth from 2006 to 
2012 has been 6.7%; Growth appears to be on course to reach around the 8% level from 
next year; Foreign reserves exceed US$ 6.3 billion and around 4.4 months of imports; The 
country  enjoys  peaceful  and  stable  conditions;  Foreign  investment  inflows  are  strong  and 
foreign  Investment  via  international  sovereign  bonds  and  Government  paper  amounts  to 
about US$7.0 billion; Unemployment is around 3.6%; Poverty is down to about the 6% mark; 
Inflation  has  been  at  single  digit  levels  over  the  past  4  ½  years;  GDP  is  at  about 
US$60 billion;  Per  capita  income  is  around  US$  3,000;  The  economy  is  being  diversified 
under  a  5Hub  +  Tourism  strategy  to  avoid  the  middle  income  trap;  The  Fiscal  deficit  has 
been limited to 6.4% in 2012, and on a reducing trend; The Debt to GDP level is below 80% 
and  falling;  The  level  of  infrastructure  has  improved  tremendously;  The  Doing  Business 
global  rank  is  at  the  81st,  and  is  poised  to  jump  about  10  places  this  year;  Regional 
development  has  made  tangible  progress  and  the  Western  Province  share  of  GDP  has 
dropped  to  around  43%;  Regular  foreign  investment  is  flowing  into  banks  and  the  stock 
market;  Private  remittances  have  reached  nearly  10%  of  GDP,  or  about  US$  6  billion  in 
actual inflows; The banking system has been stable and even in the midst of very difficult 
global  circumstances, 
influential 
international quarters. 
Mr. Chairman, a dispassionate comparison of the conditions prevailing in 2006 and 2013 tells 
us that our economy has made an unprecedented transformation over the past 7 years, with 
strong economic growth, and stable macro-economic conditions. 
the  country  enjoys 
favourable  reviews 
from  many 
Harmonization of monetary and fiscal policies – case studies 
The  discussion  point  that  then  arises  is,  as  to  what  factors,  processes  and  conditions 
contributed to this current level of growth and stability. Of course, we are all aware that many 
factors  contributed  to  the  current  state  of  affairs  of  the  country,  and  those  could  be  the 
subject of, maybe 50 other Orations! But, for today’s discussion, let us confine ourselves 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to  examining  the  background  of  some  significant  initiatives  that  would  have 
influenced the current state of the economy, and to understand how the present day 
outcomes  were  supported  and/or  impacted  by  the  harmonization  of  the  Fiscal  and 
Monetary policies. 
One  striking  feature  in  the  implementation  of  Monetary  and  Fiscal  policy  over  the  past 
7 years, has been that both institutions, MoF and CB have been taking a keen and enduring 
interest in both monetary and fiscal policies. We realized that a “blame game” would be of 
no value to the country or to the stakeholders, and that it was absolutely vital that we 
should deliver on both fronts simultaneously. 
Mr.  Chairman,  having  said  that,  we  will  now  discuss  some  case  studies  that  would  throw 
some  light  about  the  degree  of  harmonization  that  took  place  between  the  policies  of  the 
Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance, in order to deliver some of the vital results to our 
country and economy, over the past 7 years. 
Case Study 1: Opening out Sri Lanka Treasury Bills and Bonds to foreign investors 
Mr.  Chairman, the first case  study  that I  would  like  to  cite  is the  November  2006  move  to 
open out Sri Lanka Treasury bills and bonds to foreign investors. By late 2006, in Sri Lanka, 
a  massive  infrastructure  development  programme  had  been  launched,  and  the  critical 
humanitarian operation had begun. These twin programmes had demanded a regular, steady 
and massive flow of funds, and it was becoming increasingly clear that we would not be able 
to  secure  the  new  fund  requirements  only  via  local  taxes  and  local  borrowing.  If  such  a 
quantum of funds were to be sourced from within, an enormous pressure would have been 
exerted upon the entire economy. In fact, such an attempt would have pushed interest rates 
to unacceptable levels, and may have even dragged the economy towards negative territory, 
and placed the entire monetary system at considerable risk. Such fears may have perhaps 
been one of the reasons that prompted successive governments of the past, to avoid large 
scale infrastructure development programmes or attempt to launch a full scale counter action 
programme  against  terrorism.  However,  the  government  of  President  Mahinda  Rajapaksa 
took  the  bold  decision  to  undertake  both  these  missions,  and  the  fiscal  and  monetary 
authorities had then to find innovative  ways to support those missions, without placing the 
economy under undue risk or peril. 
As a response therefore, in late 2006, the Treasury and the Central Bank decided to open 
out a small portion of the Government Treasury bills and bonds to foreign investors. This was 
the  first  move  to  attract  foreign  investment  into  Government  rupee  paper,  and  it  was 
naturally a fresh and exciting experience for both the Sri Lankan authorities as well as foreign 
investors. You may note that I said, “foreign investment”, and not “foreign direct investment” 
or FDI. That is because, in our view, what was vital was that “foreign investment” should be 
allowed  to  flow  through  convenient  instruments  to  supplement  the  shortfall  in  savings  and 
investments in our country’s economic structure, and such inflows need not necessarily have 
been  only  via  FDI.  The  move  resulted  in  new  and  quick  inflows,  and  as  a  result,  debt 
management became more dynamic and robust. It also provided a new tool to address the 
wide fluctuation of interest rates that was taking place in the country, prior to the move. 
This initiative of course necessitated close cooperation and follow up between the MoF and 
CB,  particularly  because  it  resulted  in  a  significant  infusion  of  forex  into  the  country  that 
needed to be properly managed from the point of view of the Central Bank. In retrospect, I 
can  also  state  that  this  important  move  enabled  the  economy  to  face  the  emerging 
challenging times confidently, with the new inflows assisting the Government to maintain the 
growth momentum, while also allowing the Central Bank to maintain stability. 
One  of  the  important  lessons  that  we  would  take  away  from  this  case  study  is  that  the 
initiative was implemented as a result of the close harmonization between the MoF and the 
Central Bank. Had any one of the two agencies not fully supported this bold and imaginative 
move, the initiative would have failed, or worse still, been still-born. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Case Study 2: Debut International Sovereign Bond 
The second case study that I would describe this evening is the debut international sovereign 
bond of Sri Lanka, in 2007. 
Mr.  Chairman,  as  you  may  recollect,  by  the  second  half  of  2007,  the  country  was  fully 
engaged in the major humanitarian operation, while the global environment was becoming 
more and more unstable. The local environment was also tense, notwithstanding all efforts. 
Inflation  was  high;  interest  rates  were  high;  the  exchange  rate  was  under  threat;  and  the 
fiscal deficit was expanding rapidly, because of the ever increasing need for finances to fund 
the  massive  infrastructure  development  programme  and  to  meet  the  costs  of  the 
humanitarian operation. To deal with this challenging situation, the MoF and the CB decided 
that it was vital that a further sizeable injection of long term foreign funds was given to the 
economy. It was only such an infusion that would allow us to maintain stability, as well as be 
able  to  have  the  much  needed  funds  to  keep  the  infrastructure  development  effort  going. 
Some financially savvy  members of the Opposition too, realized the significance of such a 
fund infusion into the economy, and tried their utmost to scuttle that effort. But, fortunately, 
we were able to defeat those endeavours, and raise the all important bond, and tide over the 
risky period. 
The infusion of the new funds immediately brought stability to the economy and also acted as 
an important stimulus for growth, with the new additional resources quickly filtering down into 
the economy. Hence, as a result of the move, the Fiscal framework was supported with the 
moderation of interest rates; the monetary framework was facilitated with the stabilization of 
prices; and exchange rate was supported by the buttressing of international reserves. 
Mr. Chairman, I believe that, some day when Sri Lanka’s economic history is being written, 
this  2007  infusion  of  US$  500  million  through  the  international  sovereign  bond,  would  be 
marked as a major “turning point” in our economic landscape. I also believe that the benefits 
of this land mark move has been of an enduring and permanent nature, as evidenced by the 
fact  that,  over  the  next  5  ½  years,  the  Government  has  been  able  to  raise  a  further 
US$3 ½ billion from international bonds, with the coupon rates tightening considerably each 
year. Another benefit that this initiative entailed, was that it paved the way for several banks 
and corporates to also issue international bonds, thereby accessing savings from outside the 
country. By doing that, we had also been able to bridge the chronic savings/investment gap 
that has been regularly referred to by a never ending stream of experts since independence, 
as a major deficiency that was hampering growth in our economy. 
Case Study 3: Intervention to stabilize a systemically important bank 
The third case study that I would like to illustrate is the instance where the Central Bank and 
the Ministry of Finance teamed up to stabilize a systemically important bank that was facing 
a liquidity crisis in late 2008/early 2009. 
Mr. Chairman, If we take our minds back to that period, in late 2008, we would recollect that 
the  external  environment,  internationally  and  locally,  had  become  even  more  hostile  and 
highly  uncertain.  Internationally,  the  global  financial  crisis  had  taken  a  major  toll,  with 
hundreds  of  banks  collapsing  across  the  world.  Each  day,  we  were  hearing  about  the 
collapse or the imminent failure of many big names in the global financial landscape. In many 
countries, the Ministers of Finance and the Governors of the Central Banks were huddled in 
endless  discussions  as  to  what  should  be  done  to  arrest  the  crises,  or  how  to  stop  the 
bleeding. Businesses were going bankrupt by the thousands. Business confidence level was 
at  rock  bottom.  People  in  all  parts  of  the  world  were  in  panic.  Locally,  our  humanitarian 
operation  had  entered  a  final  and  most  critical  stage,  and  enormous  pressure  was  being 
exerted on the economy. 
In that background, when a systemically important bank showed signs of a liquidity crisis, we 
knew that such an event, if allowed to escalate, could have dragged our economy to chaos, 
and our humanitarian operation to a standstill. We had to act decisively, and fast. We could 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
not  have  delayed  responding  to  this grave  threat,  or got  it  wrong.  Fortunately,  the  Central 
Bank  was  ready.  We  had  already  developed  a  bank  intervention  operation,  code  named 
“Sigiriya”, to deal with a situation of a liquidity crisis in a bank. The time had come to activate 
such  a  mission.  But  to  do  so,  the  first  step  was  vital.  That  was  to  apprise  the  Minister  of 
Finance and obtain his approval to make the intervention. If the Minister of Finance were to 
approve such an intervention, if would be the first time ever, in Sri Lanka, that such a rescue 
operation was attempted. At the same time, the experiences of other countries during that 
period, were not too encouraging. In many countries, including the UK, (as in the case of the 
Northern  Rock  Bank),  the  Finance  Ministers  and  the  Governors  of  the  Central  Banks  had 
been  in  protracted  discussions  for  many  weeks  about  this  type  of  intervention,  without 
reaching agreement. 
Fortunately for Sri Lanka however, such procrastination did not take place. The Minister of 
Finance  was  decisive,  and  after  a  single  “one-on-one”  discussion  with  me,  he  gave  the 
approval for the Central Bank to proceed with implementation of the intervention plan. The 
rest  is  history.  The  newly  appointed  directors  and  the  managing  agents,  with  the  Central 
Bank  in  the  background,  were  able  to  stabilize  the  bank  within  a  short  period  of  about 
2 weeks.  Thereafter,  within  a  few  months,  the  bank  was  able  to  infuse  new  capital  and 
thereby qualify to exit from the close monitoring system of the Central Bank, in less than a 
year. 
This episode will be an important lesson for those who wish to study the way Governments 
and  Central  Banks  should  cooperate  to  bring  stability,  in  the  face  of  any  instability  in  the 
banking sector. It also confirmed the validity of an important annotation in Exter’s Report. Let 
me  quote  once  again  from  the  first  Chapter  of  his  Report:  “Many  of  its  (Central  Bank’s) 
powers may go unused for long periods, because they are designed for particular situations, 
some of which may never arise. Others are intended for use only in crises or to forestall a 
crisis, but prudence dictates that they be included now, so that they will be at hand in case of 
need. …”. 
Case Study 4: The creation of our present day “virtuous cycle” 
Mr.  Chairman,  I  would  like  to  now  place  before  you,  yet  another  significant  example  of 
harmonization between the Monetary and Fiscal policies, which led to the creation of a new 
“virtuous  cycle”  in  relation  to  inflation,  interest  rates,  investor  confidence  and  sustained 
growth, in our country. 
As  we  are  all  aware,  Sri  Lanka  had  been  long  trapped  in  a  “vicious  cycle”  of  high  fiscal 
deficits leading to high inflation; high inflation leading to high interest rates; high interest rates 
leading to low investor confidence; low investor confidence leading to sluggish  investment; 
sluggish investment leading to low growth; low  growth leading to high debt; and high debt 
once  again  leading  to  high  fiscal  deficits.  This  was  the  vicious  cycle  that  we  had  been 
trapped, for more than 5 decades since independence. It is true that we have had one-off 
spurts of high growth or short periods of low inflation at various times in our history. However, 
we  have  to  acknowledge  that,  other  than  in  2010  and  2011,  we  have  never  had  over 
8% growth  in  consecutive  years,  or,  for  that  matter,  been  even  able  to  record  an  average 
growth  of  over  5%  over  a  5  year  period,  prior  to  2006!  At  the  same  time,  other  than  the 
period February 2009, till now, Sri Lanka had never enjoyed a period of even two continuous 
years of single digit inflation, and, believe it or  not, our level of average inflation was over 
12% prior to that! What was worse was that there was almost a sense of acceptance of such 
performance among many officials of both the MoF and CB, who harboured the internal view 
that it may be our country’s “karma” to have low growth, large fiscal deficits and high inflation! 
In fact, many Central Bank officials were often heard to lament that the continuous high fiscal 
deficits  of the Government  was  pushing  inflation  up  and grumble  that the  Government  will 
never stop doing that. In turn, MoF officials used to complain that the tight and in-sensitive 
monetary  policies  of  the  CB  was  the  root  cause  for  the  fiscal  deficit  always  being  out  of 
control! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
It was therefore clear that a change in attitude and a change in action was vital. It was also 
necessary  to  make  some  effective  interventions  to  change  the  equilibrium  of  this  vicious 
cycle, so that a fresh equilibrium could be created. Le Chatelier, the famous French Scientist 
who  introduced  the  “Equilibrium  Law”  to  the  world  in  1898,  had taught us  that,  in  order to 
disturb an equilibrium, you only need to disturb one component of the equilibrium. Then, the 
entire  system  will  move  into  a  new  equilibrium.  So,  a key  decision  had  to  be  made,  as  to 
which of the offending components of our vicious equilibrium should be disturbed and dealt 
with first. Towards that end, I remember, having several “one-on-one” discussions with the 
Secretary to the Treasury, Dr. P.B. Jayasundera in late 2006 and early 2007, to jointly decide 
on this all important priority. Based on such discussions, we decided that we would take the 
necessary  initiatives  to  improve  investor  confidence  so  as  to  ensure  the  continuous 
investment  via  the  Government  and  the  local  private  sector,  whilst  specifically 
targeting new foreign investment. 
Accordingly,  many  initiatives  were  implemented,  and  over  a  comparatively  short  period  of 
time, such efforts started showing results, and the country started to record a steady inflow of 
foreign  investment  through  major  government  projects,  investments  in  Treasury  Bills  and 
Bonds,  and  investments  in  international  sovereign  bonds. This  regular flow  of  investments 
enabled the economy to record sustained high growth, even whilst the conflict was raging. As 
a  consequence,  Sri  Lanka  recorded  an  average  growth  of  6.7%  through  2006  to  2012, 
which was one of the most difficult periods in our history. In fact, the growth levels of 2006: 
7.7%, 2007: 6.8%, 2008: 6%, 2009: 3.5%, 2010: 8%, 2011: 8.2%, and 2012: 6.4%, were the 
highest ever in any seven year period in our history! That meant that our joint strategy had 
paid  off,  with  sustained  growth  being  recorded.  With  such  sustained  growth  and  with  the 
pipeline of continuous investments, the economy was gradually transformed to a more stable 
level, and with that, all other key factors in the vicious cycle also began to change for the 
better. 
Initially, certain critics did not believe that we would be able to escape from the vicious cycle 
that  had  trapped  the  country  for  decades.  They  wrote  to  the  newspapers  and  gave  TV 
interviews  stating  that  the  initial  successes  were  flukes  and  were  not  sustainable.  They 
warned  that  the  economy  would  return  to  the  vicious  cycle  once  again. They  continued to 
support  their  arguments  with  many  high  sounding  theories  and  hair-splitting  formulas,  and 
Dr. Jayasundera and I were ridiculed, and often described as the villains responsible for the 
impending  disaster.  We  were  regularly  featured  in  some  unflattering,  but  nevertheless 
enjoyable cartoons as well! 
But,  today,  Mr.  Chairman,  those  critics  are  finding  it  increasingly  difficult  to  sustain  their 
criticism, in the face of the gradually emerging new equilibrium of the “virtuous cycle” that our 
new  harmonized  policy  framework  had  been  able  to  generate.  Presently,  even  though  a 
minority stubbornly refuse to see what is unfolding before their very own eyes, this new cycle 
has  taken  shape:  Low  inflation  leading  to  real  interest  rates;  real  interest  rates  leading  to 
enhanced  savings;  enhanced  savings  leading  to  a  regular  pipeline  of  investment;  regular 
investment leading to lower debt levels; lower debt levels leading to sustained growth; and 
sustained growth once again leading to low inflation. What that tells us is that we have been 
able  to  break free from the  previous  vicious  cycle,  and  have  now  placed  the  country  on  a 
more  virtuous  cycle!  The  challenge  therefore  would  be  to  carefully  nurture  and  guard  this 
new  equilibrium,  knowing  fully  well  that  the  disturbance  in  even  one  of  those  components 
could change that situation with adverse results. 
Case Study 5: The establishment of the Deposit Insurance Scheme 
Let  me  now  illustrate  yet  another  example  of  harmonization.  This  is  in  relation  to  the 
establishment of the Deposit Insurance Fund and Scheme. 
My  colleagues  at  the  Central  Bank  have  told  me  that  discussions  in  connection  with  the 
setting up of a Deposit Insurance Scheme had been taking place at various times, over the 
past  two  decades!  However,  there  was  no  consensus  reached  on  a  suitable  mechanism, 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
particularly because the large initial capital that was required for the establishment of such a 
scheme,  could  not  be  allocated  by  the  Government  for  many  years  due  to  the  intense 
pressure  upon  the  need  to  allocate  funds  for  other  more  pressing  needs  of  the  state. 
Nevertheless, it was considered vital that such a fund and a scheme should be established, 
and hence an innovative method had to be structured, without placing an additional burden 
upon the Government coffers. 
In 2010 too, internal discussions were once again taking place with regard to the possible 
setting up of a Deposit Insurance Fund. At that time, we noted that the abandoned properties 
of the banks, which constituted the dormant account balances of over 10 years, had risen to 
a sizeable amount, and according to the law, those funds had to be placed by the banks with 
the Government for safe keeping. Accordingly, it was then decided by the MoF and the CB to 
use  the  funds  so  placed,  as  the  nucleus  of  the  Deposit  Insurance  Fund.  Thereafter,  the 
regular  premia  paid  by  the  banks  and  finance  companies,  based  on  a  pre-determined 
formula, could be credited to this new Fund, and thereby, build up the Fund. 
In order to implement such plan, an arrangement had to be made with the Government, in 
that,  instead  of  crediting  the  abandoned  property  funds  to  the  fiscal  coffers  of  the 
Government, such funds could be retained by the CB for the purpose of initiating the Deposit 
Insurance  Fund.  In  that  manner,  the  new  deposit  insurance  fund  was  created,  and  as  a 
result, a long felt need was fulfilled! In fact, that scheme was innovatively designed not only 
to provide for a “pay out” in the event of a financial institution collapsing or being rendered 
dysfunctional, but also to provide funds for the purpose of reviving and/or restructuring viable 
financial institutions that face liquidity crisis from time to time. 
In that context, I am pleased to state that the Monetary Board has recently decided to invest 
a part of the fund to deal with some of the structural imbalances that have arisen in certain 
finance companies,  so  that  such  an  infusion  would  encourage  new  investors to take  over, 
revive and restructure such troubled institutions, with greater confidence and certainty. 
Case Study 6: Stabilization measures of 2012 
Mr. Chairman, the next illustration I want to present to you is one of the clearest examples of 
policy co-ordination between fiscal and monetary policy. That was the stabilization package 
of  2012,  which  was  introduced  by  the  MoF  and  the  CB  from  February  to  April  2012,  in 
response to the pressure on the balance of payments, high imports, high credit growth and 
pressure on the exchange rate. 
As  we  all  know,  to  deal  with  that  growing  tension,  the  Central  Bank  increased  the  policy 
interest rates, allowed the exchange rate to be more flexible and placed a 18% credit ceiling 
upon  banks’  lending.  In  tandem,  the  Government  imposed  higher  duties  on  the  import  of 
vehicles and a few other commodities, and increased the administratively determined prices 
of  petroleum  products.  These  measures  were  implemented  in  a  carefully  planned  out  and 
logical sequence. As a consequence, the desired stability within the economy was achieved 
quickly, with the Balance of Payments returning to positive territory, and the exchange rate 
stabilizing.  In  fact,  this  new  situation  enabled  the  Monetary  Board  to  relax  the  monetary 
policy tightening cycle that commenced in February 2012, as early as in December 2012. 
This  joint  exercise  therefore  shows  how  quickly  and  effectively,  a  coordinated  fiscal  and 
monetary policy could deliver results, instead of the implementation of stand-alone monetary 
or fiscal policies, which usually take a long time to impact the economy, thus resulting in to 
the entire economy having to suffer from tight policies for longer periods of time. 
Case study 7: Judicious use of fiscal policies, based on inflation behavior and other 
macro-economic factors 
Mr.  Chairman,  I  have  so  far  discussed  6  case  studies  that  confirm  the  co-operation  and 
harmonization between the MoF and CB. The co-ordination however, went even further and 
was  applied  in  several  other  situations  as  well.  Now,  I  am  going  to  describe  one  general 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
example out of several similar instances which took place from time to time, over the past 
few years. 
Let us take our minds back to October/November 2011. At that time, the global oil prices had 
soared to dizzy heights, and the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation was incurring rather heavy 
losses. As a natural response therefore, an increase in the administrated prices in petroleum 
products seemed like a sensible action. However, at that time, inflation in the country was 
around the 7% level. Inflation projections for the next 2 months too, were around the 7% to 
8% levels. In that background, our view was that, if the petroleum prices were to be adjusted 
upwards  significantly,  the  inflation  figures  would  have  risen  above  10%,  and  had  that 
happened,  the  favourable  sentiments  that  had  been  built  up  carefully  over  the  previous 
33 months would have been badly damaged. Then, we would have had to start our inflation 
control efforts all over again, and inflation expectations too would have suffered considerably. 
So, a balance was struck and the decision to increase the petroleum prices was postponed 
until February 2012, because we knew that, by that time, the inflation figures would be very 
low, at less than 3%, and that benign situation would then give us a comfortable cushion to 
make the price adjustment, without harming the inflation numbers or the inflation outlook. 
This was then, just one, but a representative case study of holding on to a difficult position in 
the short term, to realize a long term position, so as to benefit by an even more significant 
outcome.  It  was,  as  Exter  may  have  been  happy  to  acknowledge  had  he  been  present, a 
pragmatic decision of the Government working closely with the Central Bank, cooperating on 
a complex and delicate issue, to deliver stability and growth in the long term. 
A “shared vision” and “goal congruence” 
Mr.  Chairman,  I  am  often  asked  by  people  as  to  the  exact  definition  of  the  economic 
philosophy  behind  our  country’s  economic  policies.  As  is  usual  in  any  field  of  learning, 
academics  and  scholars  like  to  categorize  a  series  of  policies,  according  to  a  general 
character,  or  to  place  them  in  a  framework  of  a  pre-determined  school  of  thought. Where 
then  would  our  current  economic  policy  framework,  fit  in?  Is  there  a  particular  model  that 
Sri Lanka follows? 
To respond to such questions, let us try to understand what exactly our economic planners 
are doing, and what they are attempting to achieve. In my view and understanding, it is clear 
as  to  what  our  goals  are,  and  I  must  say,  there  are  quite  a  few:  Maintain  a  low  level  of 
inflation;  Consolidate  the  fiscal  deficit  on  a  planned  basis;  Promote  SMEs;  Ensure  food 
security;  Encourage  import  substitution;  Enhance  exports;  Diversify  our  external  sector  by 
adding new areas to the external sector; Record a current account surplus by 2016; Deliver 
balanced  regional  development;  Ensure  that  infrastructure  development  takes  place  in  all 
parts  of  the  country;  Improve  the  way  we  do  business;  Consolidate  our  debt  position; 
Encourage  more  savings;  Eradicate  poverty;  Reduce  unemployment  to  very  low  levels; 
Continuously maintain sufficient levels of foreign reserves; Improve the living standards of all 
the people. 
What  then  would  a  collection  of  policies  that  are  designed  and  are  being  implemented  to 
deliver  the  above  outcomes,  be  called?  In  all  humility,  I  must  admit,  I  don’t  know.  That 
perhaps could be for the academics and scholars to propose, debate and decide. But for the 
time  being,  let  me  say  that,  whatever  those  policies  may  be  collectively  called,  we  are 
determined to implement them through a harmonized approach that is designed to take us 
forward,  towards  all  those  vital  targets  simultaneously.  I  would  also  argue  that,  for  such 
approach to be successful in the long term, we must always retain one of the most important 
features of our current economic management, which is that the MoF and CB must have a 
“shared” vision and “shared objectives”. That shared vision has been the platform that has 
helped the two institutions to achieve “goal congruence” in the recent past, and there is also 
no  doubt  that  the  resulting  harmonization  has  been  the  powerful  driving  force  behind  our 
steady progress. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In the meantime, we must also appreciate that a large segment of our economic activities are 
carried out by the private sector, to which many of you belong. Your contribution then, has 
also been a vital factor in maintaining the momentum and thrust of our economy. Therefore, 
let me acknowledge today that, no amount of harmonization of Monetary and Fiscal policies 
could  ever  be  a  substitute  for  the  commitment  and  dedication  of  a  vast  number  of 
entrepreneurs  who  take  risks,  as  well  as  burn  the  mid-night  oil,  to  deliver  value  in  our 
economy. 
A future role for the accountancy profession 
Where  do  we  go  from  here?  In  my  view,  Sri  Lanka  has  only  just  begun  an  exciting  and 
adventurous journey, and we are steadily moving towards a US$ 100 billion economy that 
would  be  more  diversified  and  more  stable.  Needless  to  say,  the  success  of  our  journey 
would  depend  to  a  great  extent  on  harmonized  policies,  clarity  of  communication,  quick 
implementation, and the maintenance of a vibrant momentum on a continuous basis. 
In that context, I see the accounting profession playing an increasingly significant role. I see 
the  Accountants  being  vital  partners  in  the  operationalizing  of  the  5  major  hubs,  and  in 
particular, the commercial and knowledge hubs that we are keen to establish in our country. 
The  CAs  have  expertise  in  accounting,  auditing,  taxation,  information  technology,  financial 
management,  banking, planning, financial  analysis  and  project management,  among  many 
other skills. The contribution they could make in the new Sri Lanka that is unfolding before 
us, therefore, is immense. The skills that they possess in finance, planning and business are 
also varied, and hence they could play a very important role in many spheres of public and 
private enterprise of our country. I am confident they would respond to that call, and all of 
you would enhance your role in our country’s economic activities in the future. 
A finance man as governor? 
Let me now strike a slightly personal note before I proceed to conclude this address. 
In order to do so, let me quote from what Exter had to say about the person to be selected as 
the  Governor:  “Although  the  ultimate  authority  rests  in  the  Monetary  Board,  the  draft  law 
nevertheless  recognizes  need  for  a  strong  chief  executive  for  the  Central  Bank. 
Accordingly, the Governor is made the Chairman of the Monetary Board, and is given control 
of the agenda for its meetings. He is to be responsible for the execution and administration of 
policies  and  measures  adopted  by  the  Monetary  Board,  for  the  direction,  supervision  and 
control  of  the  operations  of  the  Central  Bank,  and  for  its  internal  management  and 
administration.  He  is  to  be  chief  representative  of  the  Bank  in  its  relations  with  outside 
persons,  …..  Accordingly,  the  Governor  should  be  a  man  of  recognized  and 
outstanding  competence  in,  and  understanding  of,  the  economic  and  financial 
problems of Ceylon, and of unquestioned integrity and responsibility...” 
Exter then states, and I quote further: “It is important that the Governor should have had 
actual financial experience. In many countries this point has actually been incorporated in 
legislation, as the following quotation from De Kock’s book on Central Banking shows: ‘… in 
the  case  of  some  central  banks  it  has  been  laid  down  by  statute  that  the  Governor  and 
Deputy-Governor shall be ‘men of proven financial experience’, as in Canada, or ‘persons 
possessed of actual banking experience’, as  in New Zealand, or ‘persons of recognized 
banking and financial experience’, as in Argentina, or that the Governor shall be a ‘person 
of tested banking experience’, as in the Union of South Africa and Mexico.’” 
Mr.  Chairman,  you  may  remember  when  I  was first  appointed Governor,  there  were  some 
who  claimed  that  a  person  with  “financial  experience”,  was  not  a  suitable  choice,  to 
undertake the duties of the Governor. While I firmly believe it is up to history to judge as to 
whether I have been successful or not in discharging my responsibilities as Governor, I also 
believe that even at this late stage, it may be useful for those critics to reflect on the profile 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
that John Exter had in mind for the position of Governor when drafting the MLA, and then 
perhaps consider, whether or not, I fitted the envisaged profile! 
In  that  background,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  education,  training,  and  professional 
skills imparted by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka, had a major role in my 
being  appointed  to  this pivotal  position  as  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka. 
Therefore,  please  permit  me  to  officially  and  publicly  thank  the  Institute  of  Chartered 
Accountants  of  Sri  Lanka  for  the  tremendous  impact  that  the  Institute  has  had  on  my 
academic and professional career, in addition to the singular honour you bestowed on me 
this evening, by inviting me to deliver this prestigious Oration. 
Conclusion – running between the wickets! 
Mr. Chairman, let me now conclude, with a little story. 
About 6 months ago, a journalist friend asked me to explain the official relationship between 
the Governor and the Secretary, Treasury. 
In response, I gave him a long lecture for about half an hour, like what I have done today! 
While listening to me, I could see that he was quite restless, and somewhat bored. So, I was 
not surprised when he remarked that he was not sure as to how he can explain all what I had 
said to him, to ordinary people, as my explanation seemed too technical and high-flown. 
He then told me, “Governor, Can you please explain what you just said to me, in layman’s 
language?” 
This was my reply to that challenging question: 
“To score runs in a cricket match, when one batsman strikes the ball, both batsmen have to 
run, each to their opposite ends. When the second batsman strikes the ball, once again, both 
batsmen  have  to  run,  each  to  their  opposite  ends.  That  is  how  the  team  will  be  able  to 
accumulate its runs. For an effective partnership to be built, both batsmen have to diligently 
run for each other’s strikes. In the same way, for an economic partnership of the country to 
succeed,  it  is  vital  that  there  is  a  clear  understanding  between  the  Governor  and  the 
Secretary,  Treasury.  And,  each  time  the  Governor  strikes,  both  the  Governor  and  the 
Secretary have to run, and when the Secretary strikes, both the Governor and the Secretary 
have  to  run  once  again.  That  is  the  type  of  relationship  that  has  to  exist  between  the 
Governor and the Secretary to the Treasury.” 
My journalist friend’s eyes brightened and his boredom vanished. The expression on his face 
indicated to me that he had finally understood what this complex relationship is all about. 
Then, he said “Ah, so it’s like running between the wickets!” 
14 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Mr.  Chairman,  I  sincerely  hope  my  address  to  you  today,  helped  you  and  everyone  here 
present, to also understand this complex and delicate relationship, in the same manner my 
friend did! 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
