Glenn  Stevens:  The Australian  dollar  – thirty years of floating 
Speech by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Business Economists’ Annual Dinner, Sydney, 21 November 2013. 
 I thank Alexandra Rush for assistance in preparing these remarks. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
In  just  a  few weeks’ time we will pass the anniversary of one of most profound economic 
policy decisions in Australia’s modern history. I refer of course to the decision taken by the 
Hawke  Government  in  December  1983  to  float  the  Australian  dollar  and  to  abolish  most 
restrictions on the international movement of capital. 
The decision had been a long time coming. The possibility of a float had been contemplated 
for years. But the right combination of intellectual climate and circumstances did not arrive 
until 1983. When it was taken, the decision was a key part of a sequence of very important 
decisions  that  opened  up  the  Australian  economy  and  its  financial system to international 
forces, and which changed it profoundly. 
Much has been written about that broader reform process. I will speak just about the floating 
of the dollar itself. I shall pose, and offer answers, to several questions. Why did we float? 
How has the market developed? How has the exchange rate behaved? What difference did 
the  float  make  for  monetary  policy  in  particular  and  the  economy  in  general?  Has  the 
currency been “misaligned” in ways that have been damaging? And what can be said about 
intervention? 
Why did we float? 
1.  
In a nutshell, I think it is true to say that Australia finally floated the exchange rate because 
the  feasible  alternatives  had  been  shown  to  be ineffective. We had tried just about all the 
currency  arrangements  that  were  known  to  human  kind,  with  the exception of a currency 
board: a peg to gold/sterling, a peg to the US dollar, a peg to a basket and a moving peg. All 
proved ultimately unsatisfactory. 
From  first  principles  it  could  be  questioned  whether  Australia,  a  country  on  occasion 
experiences quite large shocks in the terms of trade, should have had a fixed exchange rate. 
The background was the complete breakdown of the international trade and financial system 
in  the  1930s  followed  by  war,  which  left  private  capital  flows  small,  central  banks  and 
governments  dominating  capital  markets  and  a distrust of the price mechanism generally. 
The  experience  of  the  early  1950s,  however,  showed  how  hard  it  could  be  to  maintain 
stability in the face of terms of trade shocks with a fixed exchange rate.1 
By the early 1980s the intellectual climate had clearly changed. Things had moved on from 
the post-Depression set of assumptions. More people were conscious of the shortcomings of 
the regulated era, and were prepared to argue for allowing market mechanisms to set prices 
and allocate resources. 
So  there  was  a  case  for  exchange rate flexibility on “real” or resource allocation grounds. 
There was also one based on monetary grounds. On the one hand, a fixed exchange rate 
with a suitable major currency can serve as a “nominal anchor” if we are prepared to accept 
                                                 
1  
In  the  early  1950s  the  Korean  War  induced  a  wool  price  boom,  increasing  Australia’s  terms  of  trade 
dramatically.  Under  the  fixed  exchange  rate  and  without  the  stabilising  effect  of  an  appreciation,  the 
associated increases in national income and aggregate demand led CPI inflation to peak at almost 24 per 
cent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  monetary  policy  of  the  other  country through all phases of the cycle. The countries to 
whose  currencies  we  had  pegged,  however,  had  their  own  circumstances  and  policy 
imperatives  that  evolved  differently  from  our  own. Private capital flows had become much 
larger and our commitment to make a price in the foreign exchange market meant we could 
not  control  liquidity  in  the  domestic  money  market.  Inflows  of  funds  in  anticipation  of  a 
revaluation led conditions to become too easy, and outflows in anticipation of a devaluation 
tightened up the system. By the early 1980s, with inflation quite high, the lack of  monetary 
control was a serious problem. This was the situation in the lead-up to the decision to float.2 
How has the market developed? 
2.  
Thirty  years  ago,  the  Australian  foreign  exchange  market  was  relatively  small  and 
underdeveloped.  At  the  time  of  the  float,  the  participants  in  the  market  were primarily the 
domestic  commercial  banks,  though  this quickly changed after a number of foreign banks 
were given licences, increasing competition significantly. After the float, the market matured 
and grew. Today the Australian dollar is one of the most actively traded currencies. Global 
daily turnover runs at about $460 billion.3 The AUD/USD is the fourth most traded currency 
pair, accounting for just under 7 per cent of global foreign exchange turnover. Compared with 
the  US  dollar,  the  euro or yen, these are small numbers but compared with currencies of 
several other countries whose economies are noticeably larger than Australia’s, the size of 
the AUD market is remarkably large. It offers the full range of foreign exchange products. 
These days more of the trading activity in our currency occurs outside our jurisdiction than 
inside it, a pattern that is common to most currencies. This reflects the role of international 
financial  centres  such  as London, which retains  a dominant role as a financial hub. Other 
centres  such  as  Singapore  and  Hong  Kong  have  made  it  part  of  their national “business 
model” to provide an environment conducive to major financial firms setting up to offer a full 
menu  of  financial  services  to  the  global  investor  community.  Most  countries  that  are  not 
themselves  international  financial  hubs  find  that an increasing proportion of trading in their 
currency takes place “offshore”.4 
How has the exchange rate behaved? 
3.  
At  the  time  of  the  float,  the  Australian  dollar  against  the  US  dollar  was  actually  not  very 
different from its current value (Graph 1). It was worth about 90 US cents in December 1983. 
That was down from its highest point in the 1970s under the fixed exchange rate system, of 
US$1.4875. The trade-weighted index was 81 (today about 72), down from a high of around 
120. People forget how high the exchange rate was for much of our history. 
Initially after the float, the exchange rate rose for some months before settling back. There 
was a further very distinct leg down beginning in early 1985. There was quite a lot of drama 
at  the  time  –  this  was  the  era  of credit rating downgrades and  “banana republics”. I think 
                                                 
2   Remarkably,  the  decision  was  taken  as  the  exchange  rate was under upward pressure, only a matter of 
months after a discrete devaluation had been forced on a newly elected government by large capital outflows. 
3   Figures from the BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey of foreign exchange and derivatives market activity in April 
2013. 
4   Should this worry us? At one level it might be concerning that people elsewhere in the world take decisions 
that have a major bearing on the value of “our” currency. But decisions elsewhere in the world have a major 
bearing on the price of lots of things we care about: traded products of all kinds, the stock market valuations of 
our companies, the interest rate on government debt and so on. It is part and parcel of participating in the 
global economy and being open to foreign trade and capital flows that foreigners have a say in pricing the 
currency.  They  can  and  will  do  so  whether  the  traders  sit  in  Sydney  or  Singapore  or  London.  That  is  a 
separate  question  from  whether  we  would  benefit  from  our  firms  offering  more  value  added in financial 
services to the investors of the world. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
there was a genuine fear at various times that the currency might simply collapse to some 
ludicrously low value. 
With the benefit of that most powerful of tools, hindsight, one can observe that the currency 
had by the mid 1980s adjusted to a lower mean value, around which it fluctuated for nearly 
20 years. One can further note that those trends had some association with developments in 
Australia’s terms of trade (Graph 2). From this vantage point, the market might be argued, on 
the  whole,  to  have  moved  the  exchange  rate  to  about  the  right  place.  And  despite  the 
occasional worries about large downward movements, there was probably less high drama 
associated with them than would have accompanied decisions to devalue a fixed exchange 
rate. 
Some  trends  did  seem  less  explicable,  such  as  when  the  exchange  rate  fell  below 
49 US cents in March 2001 and lingered at very low levels for a while. This was in the wake 
of a slowdown in the Australian economy, but was also the era of excitement over America’s 
so-called “new economy”, and the sense that Australia was an “old economy”.5 
The “old economy” elements like mining would come into their own only a few years later. In 
2001, the terms of trade were already rising, and a powerful upswing ensued over the next 
decade. Even those who were prescient enough to understand the importance of the rise of 
China have, I suspect, been surprised by the extent of increase in Australia’s terms of trade 
and its longevity. And of course this trend has carried Australia’s currency to historically high 
levels – back, in fact, to about where the floating journey began thirty years ago. 
Has  the  mean  value  around  which the currency fluctuated from the mid 1980s to the mid 
2000s  now  given  way  to  something  higher,  or  will  it  reassert  itself?  That  is  a fascinating 
question. 
What difference did the float make? 
4.  
For the Reserve Bank in its monetary policy responsibilities, the float made all the difference 
in  the  world. We no longer had an obligation to stand in the foreign  exchange market at a 
particular  price.  An  earlier  decision of the Fraser government to issue government debt at 
tender  meant  that the Reserve Bank did not have to stand in the government debt market 
either. As a result of these two decisions – and they were both important – for the first time 
the Bank had the ability to control the amount of cash in the money market and hence to set 
the short-term price of money, based on domestic considerations. This is the hallmark of a 
modern monetary policy. The extent  of short-term variability in interest rates declined while, 
naturally, that of the exchange rate rose somewhat (Graph 3). 
A flexible exchange rate is also a critical component of inflation targeting, which is Australia’s 
monetary  policy 
for  some  years  exchange  rate 
considerations  were  still  sometimes  seen  as  something  of  a  constraint  in  the conduct of 
monetary policy. This has been progressively less the case, though, as the credibility of the 
inflation target has increased. 
Even if all the flexible exchange rate did was to allow monetary policy to operate effectively, 
that was a major benefit. But the float did more than just that. Real exchange rates move in 
response to various forces affecting an open economy, even if the nominal exchange rate is 
fixed. Given the slow-moving nature of the bulk of prices, allowing the nominal exchange rate 
to change makes the process more efficient unless there is excessive short-run variability in 
framework  of  choice.  Admittedly, 
                                                 
5   We  found  ourselves  “out  of  favour”  despite  the  fact  that  it  was  almost  certainly  the  use  of  information 
technology rather than its production that made for the biggest gains to a society and on that score Australia 
ranked highly. The price put on our currency by the market seemed at odds with other things and that episode 
saw the first use of results from a model in a speech by a Reserve Bank Governor to demonstrate that point 
(see Macfarlane 2000). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the nominal rate. As hedging markets develop the cost of short-run noise is usually lessened. 
In my view the flexible exchange rate has helped adjustment in the real economy in its own 
right. 
The  combination  of  allowing  monetary  policy  to  operate  effectively  and  fostering  real 
economic  adjustment  is  very  important.  One  very  telling  comparison  is  between  the 
macroeconomic  performance  in the most recent commodity price upswing and that in the 
episodes  in  the  early 1950s and mid 1970s (Graph 4). It is obvious that there has been a 
first-order  reduction  in  macroeconomic  variability  on  this  occasion.  The  flexibility  of  the 
exchange rate has been a major contributor to that outcome. 
Has the exchange rate been “misaligned”? 
5.  
The currency has certainly moved through a very wide range over the thirty years since the 
float. If our metric were some constant target level of “competitiveness” measured, say, by 
relative unit costs, then we would be drawn to the conclusion that it has been “misaligned” 
much of the time. 
But such a simple calculation alone isn’t the right metric. For a start, over the course of a 
business cycle the exchange rate should move in ways that help to maintain overall balance 
between  demand  and  supply.  In  a  period  of  strong  demand  it  will  rise,  spilling  demand 
abroad by lowering prices for traded goods and services. This lessens “competitiveness” in 
the  short  term,  but  helps  preserve  it  in  the  longer  term  by  maintaining  discipline  over 
domestic costs. 
Moreover, the level of relative unit costs in, say, manufacturing, that is “needed” is a function 
of  several  factors,  including  the  terms  of  trade.  A  country  with  an  endowment  of  natural 
resources  will  find  that  when  those  resources  command  high  prices,  it  will  have  a  high 
exchange rate and low manufacturing  “competitiveness”, compared with the situation when 
the terms of trade are low. The high resources prices draw factors of production towards the 
resources sector, pushing up labour costs for other sectors and drawing capital from abroad, 
so pushing up the exchange rate. The terms of trade rise is an income gain, and may well 
prompt  an  expansion  in  investment  in  the  resources  sector.  Hence  aggregate demand is 
likely  to  increase,  which  among  other  things  will also require a higher exchange rate than 
otherwise  to  maintain  overall  balance.  These  forces  diminish  “competitiveness”  for  other 
traded sectors. At a later stage, when those adjustments the capital stock have occurred, the 
exchange rate may be lower than at its peak, though still higher than what would have been 
observed had the terms of trade not risen. 
So it is not surprising that the exchange rate responds to changes in the terms of trade. It is 
nonetheless striking how close the empirical relationship has turned out to be. Of course it is 
not  to  be  assumed  that  the  parameters  of  that  particular  empirical  relationship  are 
necessarily optimal. But nor is the contrary to be assumed. Over the thirty-year period since 
the float, that relationship seems not to have led to long periods of the economy either having 
excess demand or supply. Australia has had one serious recession in that time, in 1990–91, 
and the principal cause of the depth of that downturn was asset price and credit dynamics, 
not  the  exchange  rate. Overall, variability of the real economy has been lower in the post-
float  period.  While  there  are  several  factors  at  work  in  producing  that  result,  the  flexible 
exchange rate is clearly one. 
My  conclusion,  then,  would  be  that  evidence  of  large  and  persistent  exchange  rate 
misalignments is actually rather scant over the floating era as a whole. Arguably some of the 
bigger misalignments occurred under previous exchange rate regimes. 
But  what  of  recent  levels  of  the  exchange  rate?  They  have  been  blamed  for  many 
disappointing  corporate  results  and  triggered  numerous  restructurings,  instances  of 
“offshorings”  and  job  shedding.  The  only  other  factor  so  frequently  offered  to  explain 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
disappointment is “consumer caution”. One can imagine that many people would see this as 
prima facie evidence of the exchange rate being significantly misaligned. 
There  are  a  few  difficulties  in  evaluating that claim. First, very high terms of trade can be 
expected to lead to some loss of “competitiveness”, as noted above. Just how much of this 
would be expected depends, among other things, on how permanent the terms of trade rise 
is, but this episode has been very persistent so far. The euphemism “structural adjustment” 
hardly conveys the difficulties faced by firms and their workforces affected by these forces. 
But a big and persistent shift in relative prices, which is what the terms of trade shift amounts 
to, was always going to produce some such effects. 
A  further  difficulty  in assessing the exchange rate’s level lies in that very persistence. The 
relationship  between  the  exchange  rate  and  the  terms  of  trade  has,  broadly  speaking, 
continued  to  hold  (Graph  5).  Nothing  looks  very  unusual  right  at  the  moment.  But  this 
relationship is estimated over a period in which the changes were generally cyclical. It is at 
least conceivable that a large and persistent rise in the exchange rate may have effects on 
the  economy  beyond  those  discernible  from  the  experience  of  the  past  thirty  years,  if 
previous rises in the exchange rate were not long-lived enough to cause significant structural 
change. This is a possibility the Reserve Bank has noted in the past couple of years.6 
There is at least one more complication in assessing the exchange rate’s recent behaviour 
and  that  is  the  extraordinary  monetary  policy  measures  that  are  being  undertaken  in  the 
major economies of the United States, Japan and the euro zone. These too are outside any 
historical  experience.  Such  measures  are  in  place  because  they  are  required  by  the 
circumstances  of  those  economies,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  have  fostered  the so 
called “search for yield”. That, after all, was the whole point. 
Added to this is the lessening, even if only at the margin, of perceived creditworthiness of a 
number of sovereigns, while our own sovereign rating has remained at the highest level. This 
has contributed to an increase in “official” holdings of Australian assets as reserve holders 
sought diversification. 
These  “yield-seeking”  and  “diversification”  flows  have,  no  doubt,  pushed  up the Australian 
dollar. Quantifying that effect is not straightforward. Models suggest that interest differentials 
have had an effect on the exchange rate, but that effect is dwarfed by the estimated terms of 
trade effects. But again, the conditions we have seen are unlike anything seen in the period 
over which the models are estimated. 
The flows  have surely been important at times, though not necessarily lately. The available 
data suggest that foreign holdings of Australian government debt stopped rising in the middle 
of  last  year.  Earlier  flows  into  Australian bank obligations have also generally continued to 
reverse  over  that  time.  As  my colleague Guy Debelle has noted, the most obvious capital 
inflows in the past couple of years have been in the form of direct investment into the mining 
sector. Those flows were of course responding to expected returns, but not ones that were 
affected very much by the interest rate policies in the major economies. 
In  the  end  it  is  not  possible to come to a definitive assessment on the extent of currency 
misalignment  at  the  moment,  on  the  basis  of  standard  metrics  (and having regard to the 
statistical imprecision of such metrics). Having said that, my judgement is that the Australian 
dollar is currently above levels we would expect to see in the medium term. 
                                                 
6   See Lowe P (2012), “The Changing Structure of the Australian Economy and Monetary Policy”, Address to the 
Australian Industry Group 12th Annual Economic Forum, Sydney, 7 March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Intervention 
6.  
In  the  early  period  after  the  float  the  Reserve  Bank undertook market transactions for the 
purposes  of  so-called  “smoothing  and  testing”.  As  the  market  developed  and  the  Bank 
gained  more  experience,  intervention  became  less  frequent  but  more  forceful.  A  key 
motivation  for  intervention  was  often  trying  to  avoid  the  currency  moving  downwards  too 
quickly. For most of the floating era, until recently at least, a currency that seemed prone to 
weakness seemed more frequently a problem than the reverse. 
As has been well documented, the Bank’s intervention strategy has tended to be profitable 
over the long run.7 The success of this strategy was helped considerably by the fact that, for 
much of the floating era, the exchange rate’s behaviour could be characterised as fluctuating 
around  a  stable  mean.  If  a situation came along that shifted the mean, the strategy might 
need to be altered. 
It  might  be  argued  that  this  is  what  has  happened  over  the  past five years or more. The 
terms of trade event we have lived through is without precedent in its size and duration, at 
least  in  the  past  century.  The  exchange  rate  has  responded.  Notwithstanding  that,  in  my 
view,  the  Australian  dollar  is  probably  above  its  longer-run  equilibrium  at  present,  it  is far 
from clear that we can assume that the mean level we saw in the 1980s to the early 2000s 
will  be  the relevant one in the future. In evaluating the merits of intervention, the Bank has 
been cognisant that the current episode is unlike the experience of the first twenty or twenty-
five years of the float. Some very powerful forces have been at work. 
A  further  factor  relevant  to  intervention  decisions  has  been  cost.  Intervening  against  the 
Australian dollar would have been involved selling Australian assets yielding, say, 3 per cent, 
and  buying  foreign  assets  yielding much less – in fact earning almost nothing over recent 
years at the areas of the yield curve where the Bank operates. This “negative carry” would be 
a cost to the Bank’s earnings and therefore Commonwealth revenue. 
Now  it  might  be  argued  that  a  negative  carry  for  the  Reserve  Bank,  and  therefore  the 
Commonwealth, and an acceptance of the associated very large valuation risks, would be a 
price worth paying, if it corrected a seriously misaligned exchange rate. If such a policy were 
effective,  it  could  turn  out  to be profitable, if a fall in the exchange rate offset the negative 
carry. The point is simply that costs have to be considered alongside the likely effectiveness. 
Often  those  who  argue  for  intervention  don’t  work through those costs, or they assume it 
would be entirely costless. That can’t be assumed and the idea should be considered in a 
cost-benefit setting. 
Overall, in this episode so far, the Bank has not been convinced that large-scale intervention 
clearly passed the test of effectiveness versus cost. But that doesn’t mean we will always 
eschew  intervention.  In  fact  we  remain  open-minded  on  the  issue.  Our  position  has  long 
been,  and  remains,  that  foreign  exchange  intervention  can,  judiciously  used  in  the  right 
circumstances, be effective and useful. It can’t make up for weaknesses in other policy areas 
and to be effective it has to reinforce fundamentals, not work against them. Subject to those 
conditions, it remains part of the toolkit. 
Conclusion 
When  the  foreign  exchange  market  opened  on  12  December  1983,  without  the  Reserve 
Bank making a price for the first time in decades, people would have been uncertain what 
would  happen.  Yet  policymakers  had  tried  all  the  alternatives  and  the  float  was  an  idea 
whose time had come. It was a profound decision – part of a recognition that Australia was 
                                                 
7   See Andrew and Broadbent (1994) and Becker and Sinclair (2004). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
part of a wider world, and that we had to reform our own policy and economic frameworks in 
order to have the sort of prosperity that we wanted as a society. 
On 12 December this year we can expect the exchange rate to move a little, one way or the 
other, and for this to be reported in a very matter-of-fact way on the news broadcasts. We will 
be  able  to  get  updates  on  our  smart phones and to read seemingly limitless quantities of 
analysis about why it moved the way it did, and predictions about what it might do next, most 
of  which  we  shall  (sensibly)  ignore.  We  would  be  able,  if  we  wished,  to  trade  foreign 
currencies from those devices in a way unimagined thirty years ago. (For the record, I am not 
recommending  the  practice.)  For  the  dollar  to  move  around  in  the  market  as  the various 
players  balance  supply  and  demand is now considered normal, and most of the time it is 
considered no more newsworthy than the price of milk or petrol, and less newsworthy than 
the price of houses. 
Over  the  past  thirty  years,  the  exchange  rate  has  on  occasion  been  the  subject  of 
excitement, concern, even shock. It has acted as a shock-absorber, as intended, but it has 
also served as a disciplining constraint at times. Generally speaking, that was good for us. 
At various times we have worried that the market was behaving irrationally, believing that the 
exchange rate should have been somewhere other than where it was. And sometimes we 
were right about that. Yet, looking back, on balance the evidence suggests, I think, that the 
market  has  mostly  moved the exchange rate to about the right place, sooner or later. We 
sometimes  didn’t  like  the  pathway.  But  if  I  ask  the  question  of  whether  I  would  have 
consistently done a better job setting that price, even had that been feasible (which it wasn’t), 
I don’t think I could confidently answer in the affirmative. 
No doubt at some Australian Business Economists’ occasion on a future anniversary of the 
float, these matters will be re-examined. We cannot know what the conclusions will be. But 
for now, and probably for quite some time to come, we remain best served by the floating 
Australian dollar. 
References 
Andrew  R  and  J  Broadbent  (1994),  “Reserve  Bank  Operations  in  the  Foreign  Exchange 
Market: Effectiveness and Profitability”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 9406. 
Beechey M, N Bharucha, A Cagliarini, D Gruen and C Thompson (2000), “A Small Model of 
the Australian Macroeconomy”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2000–05. 
Becker C and M Sinclair (2004), “Profitability of Reserve Bank Foreign Exchange Operations: 
Twenty Years After the Float”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2004–06. 
Debelle  G  (2013),  “Funding  the  Resources  Investment  Boom”,  Address  to  Melbourne 
Institute Public Economic Forum, Canberra, 16 April. 
Foster  R  (1996),  “Australian  Economic  Statistics  1949–50  to  1994–95”,  RBA  Occasional 
Paper No 8. 
Macfarlane  I  (2000),  “Recent Influences on the Exchange Rate”, Address to CEDA Annual 
General Meeting  Dinner, Melbourne, 9 November. 
Stone  A,  T  Wheatley  and  L  Wilkinson  (2005),  “A  Small  Model  of  the  Australian 
Macroeconomy: An Update”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2005–11. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Graph 1 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph 2 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 3 
 
 
Graph 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Graph 58 
                                                   
8   Graph 5 shows the results from a standard model maintained by the Reserve Bank’s staff (Beechey et al. 
2000; Stone, Wheatley and Wilkinson 2005). The estimated “equilibrium” level is based on the real exchange 
rate’s medium-term relationship with the goods terms of trade and the real interest rate differential with major 
advanced economies. In this sense, the estimated equilibrium is the value of the exchange rate justified by 
these  medium-term  fundamentals,  based  on  historical  relationships.  In  practice,  the  terms  of trade has 
historically  been  the  most  important  determinant  of  this  estimated  equilibrium.  At  any  point  in  time, 
divergences  between  the  actual  real  exchange  rate  and  the  estimated  equilibrium  will  reflect  some 
combination of the model’s short-run dynamics, which include a number of variables that account for financial 
influences on the exchange rate and an unexplained component. The short-run variables include a financial 
market-based commodity price measure and variables that capture changes in risk sentiment in financial 
markets. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
