Brian Wynter: Implications of the medium-term macroeconomic 
programme for expanding Jamaica’s exports 
Remarks  by  Mr  Brian  Wynter,  Governor  of 
Exporters’ Association Awards Banquet, Kingston, 11 June 2013. 
the  Bank  of  Jamaica,  at  Jamaica’s 
 is 
that 
loans  amounting 
they  will  provide 
Good Evening, Ladies and Gentlemen.  
Thank you for inviting me to share this special event with you as you recognise and celebrate 
the achievements of your members.  
With Jamaica’s entry into a four-year Extended Fund Facility (“EFF”) with the IMF, we are 
meeting  at  the  start  of  a  new  chapter  in  Jamaica’s  economic  life.  The  JEA’s  celebratory 
theme,  “Exporting  is  Everybody’s  Business”,  supports  the  objective  of  the  Government’s 
medium-term  macroeconomic  programme  which 
the  achievement  of  sustainable 
improvement  in  economic  growth  and  per  capita  incomes  in  Jamaica.  Against  this 
background, I would like to outline the economic reforms in the EFF programme which are 
aimed at enhancing the business environment and competitiveness. I will also say something 
about what I believe this new programme will mean for businesses.  
Last  month,  the  IMF  approved  a  four-year  Extended  Fund  Facility  for  Jamaica  of 
approximately  US$932  million.  In  addition,  the  World  Bank  and  the  Inter-American 
Development  Bank  publicly  announced 
to 
US$510 million each to support Jamaica’s economic programme.  
The new borrowing arrangement was preceded by the development of a plan to redress the 
unsustainable  economic  imbalances  that  have  constrained  economic  growth  over  the  past 
three  decades.  The  construction  of  this  programme  was  very  detailed  and  intensive, 
involving several rounds of comprehensive assessment and reassessment with the IMF over 
a 12-month period to ensure that the commitments and targets are do-able and would yield 
the  desired  outcome.  The  programme  seeks  to  implement  far-reaching  reforms  and,  as  a 
consequence, it extends over a period of four years. More importantly, a key feature of the 
programme is that the major reforms are front-loaded, that is, they have to be implemented 
mostly in the first year of the programme. 
Another element aimed at reducing implementation risk is the establishment of the Economic 
Programme  Oversight  Committee  (“EPOC”).  The  work  of  this  body  introduces  greater 
transparency to the process and enhances public information and confidence. EPOC, as you 
know,  is  comprised  mainly  of  representatives  from  the  private  sector,  financial  institutions, 
trade unions, farmers and small businesses who will closely monitor performance under the 
programme.  
The programme is built on three pillars.  
The  first  is  fiscal  sustainability  which  means  implementing  the  necessary  revenue  and 
expenditure  measures  as  well  as  a  public  debt  management  strategy  that  will  enable  the 
Government to achieve a primary surplus equivalent to 7.5 per cent of GDP in each of the 
next four years. By bringing the fiscal accounts rapidly into balance, the government’s need 
to borrow is being sharply curtailed thus permitting a steady reduction in debt levels to below 
100  per  cent  of  GDP  by  2020  (from  nearly  150  per  cent  currently).  This,  balanced  fiscal 
accounts, will be a highly unusual circumstance in Jamaica’s modern economic experience 
and  it  bears  careful  contemplation  as  to  its  likely  consequences,  which  are  beneficial,  I 
should add. The policy actions necessary to achieve this have already been taken and are 
now in place.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Further,  the  Government  has  committed  to  adopt  a  legally  binding  fiscal  rule  in  this  fiscal 
year  in  order  to  provide  assurance  to  us  all  that  a  sustainable  budgetary  balance  will  be 
incorporated into future annual budgets long after the EFF has been successfully completed.  
The second pillar of the programme is built on the Government’s commitment to structural 
reforms  which  will  lead  to  more  efficient  public  financial  management.  These  include  tax 
reform  and  improved  tax  administration  as  well  as  reform  of  the  public  sector  and  social 
spending. A major step in the tax reform is the harmonisation of the tax treatment of charities 
across tax types and the removal of the Minister of Finance’s discretion to grant waivers to 
charitable  organisations.  The  Government  has  also  undertaken  to  table  an  Omnibus  Tax 
Incentive  Bill  in  Parliament  to  eliminate  ministerial  discretion  to  grant  tax  relief  and  put  in 
place a transparent regime for limited tax incentives. These reforms are aimed at reducing 
lost revenue and creating a more performance-driven system of tax incentives for businesses 
in Jamaica.  
Given the drive for sustainable expansion in real output, the third pillar is a growth strategy 
that  is  based  on  catalytic,  strategic  public  and  private  investments  and  improved 
competitiveness.  In  this  regard,  the  Government  is  committed  to  taking  legislative  and 
administrative  measures  to  create  an  enabling  business  environment  conducive  to 
investment and growth. Within this fiscal year, the Government plans to table an Insolvency 
Bill and a Secured Obligations Bill in Parliament, streamline the business registration process 
through  the  use  of  a  multi-purpose  registration  instrument  and  commence  the  process  to 
establish a Port Community System which will electronically integrate and streamline export 
and import procedures.  
The  Government  also  plans  to  move  as  quickly  as  possible  to  facilitate  flexible  work 
arrangements and improve access to training in skills required for enhancing productivity in 
the  economy.  Further,  there  is  a  commitment  to  implement  energy  sector  initiatives  to 
achieve  diversification  in  the  sources  of  fuel  and  facilitate  energy  conservation  in  order  to 
reduce  the  cost  of  energy  to  the  economy  and  more  so  to  the  productive  sector.  As  you 
would  have  heard  from  recent  presentations  in  Parliament,  these  initiatives  are  well 
underway.  
These  reforms  and  commitments  are  all  aimed  at  improving  the  competitiveness  of 
Jamaica’s goods and services. Accordingly, the macroeconomic programme aims to reduce 
the hindrances to economic growth such as the macroeconomic instability caused by high 
and  unsustainable  fiscal  balances  and  debt.  These  factors  have  limited  the  Government’s 
ability to tackle social issues, including the improvement of education and training and the 
reduction of crime. 
For  the  Central  Bank,  our  primary  role  is  to  maintain  price  stability  and  financial  system 
stability. Bank of Jamaica is committed to maintaining single-digit inflation over the medium 
term  with  the  long-term  objective  of  reducing  inflation  to  the  level  of  our  major  trading 
partners. Bank of Jamaica is also committed to a flexible exchange rate regime consistent 
with  enhancing  the  competitiveness  of  the  Jamaican  economy.  The  combination  of  low 
inflation and exchange rate flexibility is a valuable tool in maintaining the competitiveness of 
our  export  sector.  In  addition,  the  current  historically  low  interest  rates  are  conducive  to 
stronger investment and growth than we have had in the past.  
What then does the implementation of this programme mean for businesses, small, medium 
or large?  
First,  a  flexible  and  competitive  exchange  rate  will  enhance  the  ability  of  Jamaican 
businesses  to  compete  in  both  the  export  markets  and  the  domestic  market.  A  flexible 
exchange rate is an exchange rate that responds to market forces. A competitive exchange 
rate  is  an  exchange  rate  that  adjusts  so  as  to  at  least  account  for  the  difference  between 
Jamaica’s inflation and that of our trading partners. The Bank is aware of the concerns about 
recent movements in the exchange rate. However, let me reassure you that the depreciation 
thus far has been in keeping with our expectations and the policy objective of ensuring that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
goods and services produced locally can be sold at competitive prices in the global market. 
This is absolutely essential for export-led growth.  
The  recent  movement  in  the  exchange  rate  also  comes  against  a  background  where  the 
Bank  has  been  steadily  and  deliberately  rebuilding  the  net  international  reserves.  Bank  of 
Jamaica  had  already  halted  the  decline  in  reserves  which,  with  reason,  was  a  source  of 
considerable concern in all corners of our society during the last two years. We have now 
made good headway in the rebuilding of the reserves which bring comfort and confidence not 
only to our domestic stakeholders but also to international investors who continue to have 
strong interest in Jamaica and its many investment opportunities. 
Already we are receiving reports of companies that have been benefiting from the adjustment 
in the exchange rate and others who are repositioning to capitalise on the opportunities that 
are  being  created  by  a  more  competitive  Jamaican  dollar.  These  include  a  company 
successfully  competing  for  orders  in  a  market  it  was  unable  previously  to  get  into  and  a 
medical  practice  making  capital improvements  in  order  to  provide  first-rate  services  locally 
more  conveniently  and  at  more  competitive  rates  than  is  available  overseas.  I  want  to 
encourage  everyone  to  look  carefully  at  the  opportunities  that  the  new  environment  is 
providing.  
Nonetheless, we remain watchful over the potential short-term negative impact of exchange 
rate movements on the standard of living. The monetary and fiscal policy mix will therefore 
seek to restrain the pass-through to inflation. However, the only way to sustainably mitigate 
the  impact  of  depreciation  on  our  standard  of  living  is  through  meaningful  gains  in 
productivity and stronger economic growth.  
The  successful  implementation  of  the  programme  will  also  have  a  positive  impact  on 
businesses as the sustained reduction in public debt and the fiscal deficit will lead, and quite 
soon,  I  should  add,  to  a  “crowding  in”  of  resources  for  the  productive  sector,  that  is,  an 
expansion  in  available  financing  to  businesses  and  on  better  terms.  An  environment 
favourable to exports should contribute to an increase in investment, economic growth and 
job creation, particularly within the export sector. Moreover, the on-going fiscal consolidation 
has  contributed  to  a  compression  in  domestic  demand,  which  therefore  means  that 
businesses will have to redirect their focus more towards external markets.  
The  Government’s  commitment  to  improve  the  ease  of  doing  business,  including  tax  and 
incentive  reforms  and  energy  diversification,  are  designed  to  improve  the  ability  of  local 
businesses  to  compete  successfully  with  foreign  producers.  Overall,  the  programme 
strategically  and  deliberately  creates  a  macroeconomic  environment  that  is  conducive  to 
strong and sustainable export growth. 
In closing, I encourage the JEA members to continue the process of retooling and looking at 
new  areas  for  diversification  of  exports.  I  also  urge  you  to  seize  to  the  fullest  the 
opportunities that this programme affords.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
