Gill Marcus: Globalisation can be a force for good 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Dinner in 
Honour of Ambassadors and High Commissioners to the Republic of South Africa, Pretoria, 
1 October 2013. 
 Your  Exellencies,  Ambassadors,  High  Commissioners,  Counsels  and  Diplomats,  good 
evening. 
Thank you for accepting our invitation to join the South African Reserve Bank this evening. If 
there was ever any doubt that we live in a highly integrated world, financial markets have a 
tendency  to  remind  us  on  a  daily  basis  of  the  inter-linkages  between  our  countries.  Fed 
chairman Ben Bernanke issues a statement on monetary policy developments in the US and 
financial  markets  around  the  world  react.  European  car  sales  fall  and  platinum  miners  in 
South Africa feel the effects. Coffee drinking in China increases and farmers in Ethiopia earn 
more. Our world is probably more integrated today than at any point in human history. 
With the level of interdependence that the nations of the world have today, it is worth asking 
whether we have the appropriate relationships, institutions and rules for everyone to benefit 
from global integration, and whether we have the institutional mechanisms to protect the poor 
and vulnerable in such an integrated world. Globalisation has increased opportunities for all 
countries to become richer. Markets for goods and services have grown. Countries are not 
just able to exploit their present comparative advantages but are also able to use technology 
and innovation to change their comparative advantages, to move up the value chain, thereby 
raising  incomes  and  living  standards  of  the  poor.  The  global  financial  system  has  also 
adapted to a world unimaginable a few decades ago. Capital is able to flow from savers to 
borrowers,  seeking  opportunities  in  every  corner  of  the  planet.  The  net  effect  of  greater 
global  integration  is  that  about  a  billion  people  have  been  lifted  out  of  poverty  in  the  past 
twenty years, with over half of these in China. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  globalisation  has  also  increased  risks  and  vulnerabilities  for  all 
countries,  in  particular  for  poor  countries  and  the  poor  and  low-skilled  workers  within 
countries.  A  housing  loan  crisis  in  the  US  eventually  translates  into  rocketing  youth 
unemployment  in  Spain.  A  banking  crisis  in  Cyprus  sends  shares  on  the  world’s  stock 
exchanges  lower.  Curbs  on  the  importation  of  gold  in  India  impact  on  the  earnings  of 
Ghanaian and South African gold miners. And so, while globalisation and its tools – supply 
chains,  technology  and  finance  –  has  made  a  major  positive  contribution  to  development, 
these same tools have also made the world more complex, risky and dangerous, especially 
for the poor. 
Globalisation  has  also  coincided  with  a  marked  increase  in  inequality  in  most  major 
economies in the world. As capital has become more mobile, investors are able to achieve 
higher returns by investing in new frontier markets. On the other hand, the entry of a billion 
more workers into the global labour force has depressed wages for low-skilled workers. The 
combination of these effects is that the rich have done far better out of globalisation than the 
poor. While it is undoubtedly true that poverty rates have fallen, the phenomenal increase in 
incomes going to the top one per cent of the world’s population raises the threat of social 
instability, conflict and strife.  
How do we build a world where everyone can benefit from globalisation? How do we build a 
world  where  there  is  a  fairer  distribution  of  the  upside  benefits  and  the  world’s  poor  have 
greater  protection  from  threats  and  vulnerabilities  that  are  inherent  in  a  more  connected 
world? It is in the interest of all of us to look critically at the rules and institutions that we have 
that govern the global economy to ensure that they are fairer and more just. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
into  our  economy 
introduced  volatility 
In  1994,  South  Africa  re-entered  the  community  of  nations. There  were  those  who  argued 
that we should re-enter the global system slowly and cautiously. But because South Africa is 
a low-savings economy and, therefore, dependent on foreign savings to finance investment, 
our  re-entry  into  the  world  economy  was  both  bold  and  rapid.  In  a  relatively  short  period, 
trade  barriers  were  significantly  reduced,  capital  controls  on  non-residents  were  abolished 
and financial markets were opened up. 
South  Africa  has  benefited  from  this  strategy.  In  many  ways,  our  faith  in  the  international 
community has paid dividends. South Africa is able to access foreign savings, South African 
firms  have  access  to  global  markets,  businesses  have  access  to  foreign  technology  and 
government can raise capital abroad for its investments. 
This road, however, has not been a smooth one and we have been exposed to a number of 
external  shocks.  Shortly  after  the  transition  to  democracy,  we  were  affected  by  the  Asian 
crisis and the Russian debt default, which impacted our currency. At the end of 2001, in the 
aftermath of the dot com bubble and the events of September 11, we faced another sharp fall 
in  the  exchange  rate. When  the  sub-prime  crisis  exploded  and  Lehman  Brothers  crashed, 
our  economy  suffered  too,  with  close  to  one  million  workers  losing  jobs.  Economic 
rebalancing in China has sent commodity prices lower, with its attendant consequences on 
our terms of trade. Both the onset of quantitative easing and, more recently, expectations of 
tapering,  have 
that  makes  macroeconomic 
management more difficult. 
The  South  African  economy,  in  tandem  with  many  other  economies  around  the  world,  is 
growing below its potential rate of growth. While part of the reason for slow growth relates to 
the  global  economy,  there  are  also  South  African-specific  issues  that  inhibit  our  ability  to 
grow  faster  and  create  jobs.  Over  the  past  year,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  has 
highlighted  some  of  these  issues,  even  though  we  ourselves  do  not  have  the  policy 
instruments to deal with these issues directly. We remain of the view that higher economic 
growth  requires  both  sound  macroeconomic  management,  over  which  we  have  some 
influence,  as  well  as  on-going  reforms  to  improve  the  education  system,  improve  the 
functioning  of  the  labour  market,  reduce  the  costs  of  doing  business  and  increase 
competitiveness in the economy. 
While  we  remain  concerned  about  the  effects  of  strike  action  on  the  economy,  we  are 
encouraged that, whereas 2012 was marred by a series of unprocedural and violent strikes, 
so far the strikes in 2013 have largely been peaceful and legal. In addition to stabilising the 
labour relations environment, South Africa recognises the need to take steps to reduce our 
vulnerability in a world economy that remains volatile and uncertain. Sound macroeconomic 
management  to  rebuild  policy  space  and  buffers  and  the  implementation  of  the  new  twin-
peaks model of financial regulation are our highest priorities. These efforts will complement 
other much-needed reforms to boost growth and employment. 
In the implementation of monetary policy, the South African Reserve Bank faces a difficult 
set  of  challenges,  given  slowing  growth  and  rising  inflationary  pressures.  The  Bank  will 
continue  to  take  the  necessary  steps  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  and  achieve  price 
stability within our mandate of flexible inflation targeting. 
There  are  also  a  series  of  measures  that  the  international  community  needs  to  take 
collectively  to  make  the  world  a  safer,  fairer  and  more  prosperous  place  for  all.  I  wish  to 
highlight  three  aspects.  The  first  is  accelerated  reform  of  the  global  financial  system.  The 
second is continued reform and strengthening of global and regional institutions such as the 
United  Nations,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  African  Union  (AU),  and  the 
Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC).  The  third  is  to  promote  regional 
economic integration, especially on the African continent. 
Five years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the world remains a risky place, with the 
financial  sector  still  constituting  a  major  source  of  fragility.  Reform  processes  led  by  the 
Financial Stability Board, the G20 and the Bank for International Settlements are pointing us 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in the right direction, but progress in implementing these reforms is slow and uneven across 
major regions of the world. The world has a broad framework to regulate globally-systemic 
financial  institutions  but  there  remain  gaps,  especially  regarding  resolution  mechanisms 
when banks fail. 
A major source of the crisis was the build-up of significant external imbalances. The world 
has made slow progress in tackling high current account imbalances across the globe, which 
has  spill-over  effects  on  smaller  countries.  The  recent  sell-off  in  emerging  markets  in 
response  to  talk  of  tapering  in  the  US  is  an  example  of  how  policies  in  one  country, 
especially one as powerful as the United States, have unintended consequences for other 
countries.  Many  countries  continue  to  pursue  exchange  rate  policies  that  distort  trade  and 
investment  flows.  Naturally,  each  country  pursues  policies  that  suit  its  own  national 
circumstances. At times, these policies exacerbate global fragilities rather than contributing 
to their resolution. 
The world would benefit from a higher level of coordination and cooperation to limit the spill 
over effects of domestic interest and exchange rate policies on smaller open economies. The 
world  also  needs  more  robust  institutions  to  reduce  the  cost  of  insurance  for  individual 
countries  as  well  as  to  objectively  enforce  rules  and  standards,  with  the  aim  of  reducing 
future  crises.  At  present,  there  is  a  perception  that  bodies  such  as  the  IMF  apply  rules 
inconsistently,  with  one  set  of  rules  for  developing  countries  and  another  for  advanced 
economies. South Africa, like most other countries, is a member of the IMF and it is in our 
collective interest for this body to be credible, strong and responsive. 
The paralysis in world trade negotiations has given rise to regional trading blocs and bilateral 
trade  agreements.  Given  the  asymmetry  in  power  across  the  world,  such  an  approach  to 
negotiations is always going to result in a skewed system, biased towards richer countries at 
the  expense  of  poorer  ones.  Fair  and  open  trade  and  increased market  access for  poorer 
countries to richer ones is essential to reduce the build-up of imbalances. 
On the African continent, more needs to be done to strengthen the African Union. Quite a 
number  of  countries  do  not  pay  their  dues,  resulting  in  the  organisation  being  overly 
dependent  on  donors.  While  donations  are  always  welcome,  it  cannot  be  right  for  an 
important continental body to be so reliant on foreign funding. A stronger African Union can 
play  a  driving  role  in  supporting  the  development  of  infrastructure  that  is  essential  for 
enhanced economic growth and development across the continent. 
The  process  of  establishing  regional  economic  communities  is  proceeding  slowly  and 
unevenly.  East  Africa  and  West  Africa  have  probably  made  more  progress  than  we  have 
made in Southern Africa. There remain significant obstacles to greater regional integration, 
especially  in  Southern  Africa.  These  obstacles  include  hard  issues  such  as  infrastructure 
constraints, energy shortages and different rail systems as well as softer issues such as high 
tariffs, significant non-tariff barriers and numerous challenges at border crossings. 
Many of Southern Africa’s problems are less intractable when taking a regional perspective. 
Water, food and energy security, as well as adapting to climate change, are all problems that 
require regional solutions. Southern Africa has significant hydroelectric potential that can only 
be  tapped  in  an  economically  viable  manner  if  we  have  regional  supply  networks.  While 
South Africa and several of its neighbours are water scarce and hence cannot and perhaps 
should not be growing certain crops, many other countries have the water resources to grow 
a broader range of foods and fruits and become the breadbasket for the region and beyond. 
It  is  also  natural  that,  as  countries  develop,  certain  industries  become  less  sustainable for 
higher cost producers. Given the different levels of development and per capita incomes in 
sub-Saharan  Africa,  a  win-win  solution  could  be  to  develop  parts  of  the  supply  chain  in 
neighbouring countries to take advantage of lower costs. 
The  challenge  with  many  of  these  ideas  and  options  is  high  transportation  costs  and 
inefficient and unreliable freight logistics systems. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The South African Reserve Bank is making a contribution towards regional integration in the 
payments area by leading a pilot project for a real time electronic settlement system, which 
was launched in the Common Monetary Area (CMA) in July this year. Preparations are now 
under way to expand it beyond the CMA into other SADC countries. Payments systems are a 
key piece of the infrastructure required to facilitate trade and investment. 
Globalisation can be a force for good. Greater economic integration has the potential to lift 
millions more out of poverty. To achieve these outcomes we all need to do more to make the 
world economy safer, less crisis prone and fairer and take the necessary steps to enhance 
the framework that govern our myriad linkages and interactions. We also need to focus more 
on building credible global institutions that help to deliver global public goods. 
In  the  realm  of  financial  markets,  solid  progress  is  being  made  in  developing  new  rules, 
standards  and  mechanisms,  yet  more  needs 
to  ensure  consistent 
implementation. From the South African Reserve Bank perspective, we will continue to argue 
for reform of the global financial system to make it fairer and invest in building our internal 
institutions. 
South  Africa’s  progress  since  1994  has  been  supported  by  the  efforts  of  the  international 
community. We look forward to our continued working together to build a fairer and more just 
world, one in which the poor, too, can benefit from financial inclusion, economic growth and 
globalisation. 
Thank you. 
to  be  done 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
