William C Dudley: Title II resolution, a useful tool but not a panacea 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  2013  Resolution  Conference  “Planning  for  the  orderly 
resolution of a global systemically important bank”, Washington DC, 18 October 2013. 
 The topic of how systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) will be resolved is a very 
important  subject.  As  we  saw  during  the  financial  crisis,  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers 
generated  huge  shocks  across  the  global  financial  system  that  led  to  a  deep  global 
downturn.  That  is  not  an  acceptable  regime  and  I  am  very  glad  we  are  working  hard  to 
change it.  
I thank the organizers for giving me the opportunity to make some short remarks. Today, I’m 
going to take a somewhat broader view than some of the other speakers, focusing on two 
issues:  
• 
Some outstanding questions about how the “single point of entry” strategy under the 
Title II resolution regime would work in practice.  
How the resolution regime fits within the broader supervisory agenda of ending “too 
big to fail” and making the financial system more resilient and robust.  
 As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the 
Federal Reserve System.  
The first point I’d make is that I very much endorse the single point of entry framework for 
resolution as proposed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). I think it is the 
best plan for implementing Title II given the complexity and scope of large, global financial 
institutions and I also think it is well-suited to the U.S. bank holding company framework. By 
assigning  losses  to  shareholders  and  unsecured  creditors  of  the  holding  company  and 
transferring  sound  operating  subsidiaries  to  a  new  solvent  entity,  such  a  “top-down” 
resolution  strategy  will  facilitate  continuity  for  the  critical  services  performed  by  the  firm’s 
subsidiaries. This will reduce the costs associated with the failure of the parent company and 
reduce the degree of disruption to financial markets and financial stability. 
While  the  Title  II  single  point  of  entry  strategy  holds  tremendous  promise,  I  think  it  is 
important not to declare victory prematurely. First, there are still significant issues about how 
the  resolution  of  a  large  systemically  complex  firm  would  work  in  practice.  Second,  even 
assuming  that  our  efforts  to  overcome  these  challenges  are  ultimately  fully  successful, 
resolution  is  still  likely  to  represent  a  “second  best”  outcome  compared  to  preventing  a 
systemically important financial institution from failing in the first place. After first describing 
some of the current implementation challenges associated with Title II resolution, I will return 
to this second issue.  
Implementing  the  resolution  regime  on  a  cross-border  basis  remains  one  of  the  most 
significant challenges. U.S. authorities are working with authorities abroad on the issues that 
require  international  collaboration,  but  the  financial  industry  also  has  a  role  to  play  in 
overcoming these challenges. I encourage the industry to promptly address the matters that 
require action on their part.  
In particular, I am worried about two current shortcomings: 
• 
The reach of Title II’s one-day stay on the close-out of qualified financial contracts is 
incomplete  and  does  not  extend  to  contracts governed  by  non-U.S.  law  with  non-
U.S. counterparties.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 The  placement  of  the  parent  company  into  receivership  may  be  treated  by  these 
counterparties as an event of default due to the presence of a parent guarantee or 
other cross-default provisions triggered by the parent-level insolvency.  
Unless  market  participants  make  the  appropriate  contractual  changes  that  will  ensure  that 
the entry of the parent company into Title II will not trigger the close-out provisions of those 
over-the-counter derivatives and other qualified financial contracts that are outside the reach 
of Title II’s U.S. application, foreign counterparties to the systemically important firm will tend 
to exercise this right whenever it is in their individual economic interest to do so. This would 
create significant difficulties because such actions could greatly complicate the operations of 
the  firm  during  a  time  when  it  is  already  under  considerable  stress  and  would  propagate 
stress more broadly in financial markets.  
There are two main options for addressing this issue, and they are not mutually exclusive. 
Existing derivative contracts need to be amended and future contracts need to provide that 
the parent’s entry into the Title II proceeding does not trigger the close-out option, or legal 
changes need to be implemented abroad so that the “one-day stay” that applies to qualified 
financial contracts governed by U.S. law is enforceable against those contracts governed by 
foreign law. Only by making these changes can we avoid the potential for disruptive close-
outs. I strongly encourage the ongoing efforts to address this critical issue.  
A  second  issue  with  respect  to Title  II  resolution  is  that  we  cannot  be  certain  how  foreign 
authorities  will  react  when  the  parent  is  put  into  the  Title  II  proceeding.  While  the 
U.S. authorities  have  been  in  discussion  with  our  colleagues  abroad  to  enable  the 
coordination  needed  for  a  smooth  cross-border  resolution  process,  we  cannot  always  be 
certain of the circumstances under which host authorities may choose to take or be required 
to take actions such as unilateral “ring-fencing” that might disrupt the implementation of the 
single point of entry approach. Thus, we need to continue to work with foreign regulators to 
iron  out  any  issues  ahead  of  time  so  that  the  resolution  regime  will  work  well  for  global, 
systemically important firms. 
The smooth operation of a resolution proceeding also depends on the existence of adequate 
liquidity  in  the  early  days  of  the  process.  One  of  the  key  pillars  of  Title  II  is  that,  unlike  a 
bankruptcy proceeding, the FDIC will have access to liquidity from the U.S. Treasury to help 
ensure an effective resolution. While this access provides significant support for an effective 
resolution,  it  will  still  be  important  for  the  resolution  authorities  to  provide  clarity  about  the 
timing and the amount of liquidity resources that will be made available after a firm enters 
into resolution. This clarity will likely be necessary in order to calm creditors and markets at 
the  time  of  resolution.  Under  the  single  point  of  entry  framework,  the  intent  is  to  create  a 
highly capitalized bridge entity so that counterparties will be willing to stay engaged based 
upon the improved creditworthiness of the bridge parent and its recapitalized subsidiaries. If 
successful, this will reduce the need for the up-front provision of external liquidity resources. 
Nevertheless, to make the viability of the bridge entity fully credible, market participants must 
believe that the bridge company has access in a timely way to whatever additional liquidity 
resources might prove necessary.  
In addition, under the Dodd-Frank Act, Title II is not the baseline or preferred approach for 
dealing  with  the  failure  of  a  large  complex  firm.  For  a  firm  to  go  through  Title  II,  a 
determination  must  first  be  made  that  the  failure  of  the  firm  and  its  resolution  would  have 
serious  adverse  effects  on  U.S.  financial  stability  under  the  insolvency  law  that  would 
otherwise  apply.  Because  market  participants  will  not  know  for  certain  which  path  U.S. 
authorities  will  ultimately  take  –  allowing  resolution  under  ordinary  insolvency  law,  as 
contemplated under Title I, or instead initiating a Title II resolution – this uncertainty in and of 
itself  could  cause  investors  in  short-term  obligations  that  are  likely  to  be  protected  under 
Title II to run. 
Several other issues are also worthy of note. First, for the Title II single point of entry strategy 
to  work  properly,  there  needs  to  be  a  sufficient  amount  of  debt  outstanding  at  the  parent 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
company that can be converted by the FDIC into equity to ensure that the bridge company 
will be demonstrably well-capitalized. We don’t yet have a long term debt requirement – this 
is an area where we are still working out the details. My own view is that a holding company 
needs  a  substantial  amount  of  long  term-debt  to  ensure  that  the  newly  created  bridge 
company is viewed as fully viable by its counterparties.  
We  also  need  to  ensure  that  the  holding  company  is  structured  so  that  the  bridge  bank 
formed  upon  resolution  can  easily  downstream  capital  to  its  operating  subsidiaries.  The 
ability  to  do  this  will  help  reduce  the  risks  of  preemptive  ring-fencing  by  foreign  regulators 
and runs by counterparties of the foreign operations of U.S. firms. 
Turning to the second main theme I would like to discuss, resolution is being offered up by 
some  as  not  only  a  necessary  element  of  the  solution  to  the  too  big  to  fail  problem  (a 
proposition I agree with), but also as an entirely sufficient solution that eliminates the need 
for heightened prudential standards to reduce the probability of failure in the first place. The 
argument is based on the view that, in resolution, shareholders’ equity will be wiped out and 
that  some  portion  of  the  long-term  debt  will  be  converted  to  equity.  The  prospect  of  this 
outcome will, it is argued, lead to a disciplining effect by the parent company’s long-term debt 
holders, who will demand higher yields now that the prospect of failure is credible. This, in 
turn,  will  help  to  eliminate  the  implicit  subsidy  of  too  big  to  fail.  Under  this  theory,  Title  II 
would also limit the incentives for firms to become larger and more complex in order to gain 
this funding subsidy.  
By  itself,  however,  Title  II  does  not  entirely  eliminate  the  advantages  of  being  large  and 
complex.  That  is  because  large,  complex  firms  are  more  likely  to  go  through  Title  II  than 
smaller, less complex bank holding companies, who will generally go through a Chapter 11 
bankruptcy  proceeding.  Also,  only  large  firms  will  benefit  from  Title  II’s  one-day  stay  on 
qualified financial contracts. Finally, under the Title II resolution regime, the businesses and 
the franchise value of the subsidiary-level customer relationships will be maintained relative 
to a traditional bankruptcy proceeding, which in the past has often led to the liquidation of the 
bankrupt entity. As we saw in the case of Lehman Brothers, for financial firms, bankruptcy 
can destroy considerable value.  
This  isn’t  an  argument  against  Title  II  resolution.  Dodd-Frank’s  addition  of  Title  II  to  the 
resolution  toolkit  was  an  important  advance  to  regulators’  ability  to  mitigate  financial 
instability.  But  we  must  recognize  that  Title  II  by  itself  it  is  not  sufficient  to  eliminate  the 
advantages  of  being  perceived  as  too  big  to  undergo  ordinary  bankruptcy  at  the  holding 
company level.  
Moreover, even with a viable Title II resolution regime in place, we must recognize that there 
still will be disruption to the financial system when a large firm fails. This suggests to me that 
while a Title II single point of entry resolution is a very useful tool that we should continue to 
develop, we should view it as more preferable to prevent the failure of the SIFI in the first 
place.  
In  this  regard,  I  think  we  have  made  considerable  progress  by  raising  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements  for  large,  complex  firms.  In  addition  to  the  role  of  these  requirements  in 
reducing the probability of failure, higher capital and liquidity requirements for large, complex 
firms  also  have  the  ancillary  benefit  of  offsetting  any  residual  competitive  advantage  that 
might remain for SIFIs because of how they are likely to be treated under Title II resolution. 
The Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) stress tests are important in this 
regard  because  they  make  the  capital  requirements  for  large,  complex  institutions  forward 
looking. What matters is not just the current capital ratio, but also what the capital ratio could 
be if a stress environment were to materialize. The CCAR process is also useful because it 
focuses on the quality of the bank’s capital planning processes. It is not sufficient just to have 
enough capital; the bank’s management and directors need to be able to evaluate the bank’s 
ongoing capital needs in a thoughtful and thorough manner. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  responsibility  of  the  management  of  a  large,  complex  firm  does  not  end  with  capital 
planning. Firms’ managers need to ensure that they can respond to financial or operational 
weakness  of  any  type  by  having  robust  recovery  plans  that  get  triggered  long  before 
resolution becomes necessary. Firms should develop and track metrics that not only identify 
when they are on the verge of insolvency or default, but also trigger appropriate remediation 
actions whenever the firm begins to become stressed. These plans should identify actionable 
options  that  the  firm  can  take  in  response  to  financial  weakness  that  will  restore  the 
confidence of the firm’s counterparties in the firm without the need for extraordinary official 
sector support. Firms must also have disciplined processes that analyze the root causes of 
their  problems  and  identify  longer-term  strategies  that  will  need  to  be  employed  as  other 
recovery options to restore capital and liquidity are being executed. And firms must support 
the viability of their contingency and recovery plans by implementing the internal governance 
necessary to develop, test, update and implement them credibly.  
There is also more work that we, as supervisors, can do to reduce the probability of failure 
and to incent firm managers to act well before resolution becomes necessary. We need to do 
more  to  create  incentives  to  force  banks  to  act  sooner  to  steer  away  from  impending 
icebergs  –  cut  capital  distributions  earlier,  raise  new  capital  faster,  restructure  businesses 
sooner, and restructure senior management and boards of directors more radically when the 
firm is not performing well. For example, one approach might be to implement a long-term 
debt requirement in a way that enhances market discipline.  
Another reform would be to reduce the incentives of large, complex firms to rely on short-
term  wholesale  funding  to  finance  longer-term,  illiquid  assets.  Among  other  benefits, 
reducing a firm’s susceptibility to sudden runs associated with short-term wholesale funding 
will  lengthen  the  “runway”  for  management  to  implement  the  strategic  actions  that  would 
restore the firm to health. 
Let me conclude by emphasizing that these two paths – reducing the financial stability costs 
associated with the failure of a systemically important financial firm versus applying tougher 
capital  and  liquidity  standards  for  such  firms  that  reduce  the  probability  of  failure  –  are 
complements  not  substitutes.  We  need  to  keep  pushing  forward  with  both  approaches  in 
order to make the financial system more resilient and robust.  
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
