Grant Spencer: Trends in the New Zealand housing market 
Speech  by  Mr  Grant  Spencer,  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of  Financial  Stability  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Property  Council  of  New  Zealand,  Auckland, 
15 October 2013. 
 It is a pleasure to be here today at the Property Council of New Zealand to participate in your 
residential  summit.  Your  speakers  will  have  various  perspectives  on  the  New  Zealand 
housing  market.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  perspective  is  a  macro  one.  We  see  the  housing 
market  as  an  important driving force  in the  overall  New  Zealand  economy.  It  is  not  just of 
relevance  for  the  building  industry  and for  people  buying  and  selling  houses. The  housing 
market is also relevant for upstream manufacturers of building products, for the net worth of 
all  existing  home  owners,  for  banks  seeking  to  fund  home  purchases,  and  for  exporters 
facing pressures on the exchange rate. As a central bank mandated with price stability and 
financial  stability  objectives,  the  housing  market  is  a  key  factor  influencing  our  policy 
decisions. Most recently, we introduced restrictions on mortgage lending with a high loan-to-
value ratio (LVR), starting from the first of October. 
The  main  purpose  of  the  LVR  restrictions  is  to  reduce  risk  in  the  financial  system  by 
moderating  the  current  excess  demand  pressures  on  house  prices,  which  are  particularly 
evident in Auckland. We agree with most commentators that the key underlying issue here is 
a chronic housing supply shortage, and I will come back to this topic. But the period of rapid 
price increases over the past two years has coincided with very low interest rates and easier 
bank  credit.  Banks  have  competed  aggressively  for  mortgage  business  and  this  has 
contributed to a ramp up in housing demand, which has far exceeded the available supply. 
If the growth in demand continues to exceed the growth in housing supply, house prices will 
become increasingly vulnerable to a sharp correction, which could be prompted, say, by a 
global  financial  shock.  As  seen  in  many  developed  countries  in  the  global  financial  crisis 
(GFC),  such  a  correction  can  come  with  significant  financial  and  economic  costs.  Further, 
growing  momentum  in  house  price  inflation  would  risk  a  return  to  the  “borrow  and 
spend”mentality of the last housing boom. The consequent growth in consumption would add 
to  general  inflation  pressures  and  ultimately  prompt  stronger  interest  rate  increases  than 
would otherwise be necessary. In this way, a housing expansion can easily start to crowd out 
other economic activity including, in particular, export production through upward pressure on 
the New Zealand dollar exchange rate. 
In my talk today I want to look specifically at the current supply and demand pressures in the 
New Zealand housing market, at how the imbalance might be alleviated in coming years, and 
the impact that the LVR restrictions are expected to have. 
Housing market pressures are growing 
Between 2000 and 2007 house prices in New Zealand more than doubled, and household 
indebtedness increased from 100 to 150 percent of household disposable income. When the 
cycle  turned  in  2007,  house  prices fell  10  percent  –  a  relatively  benign  fall  compared  with 
some  countries,  such  as  the  United  States,  Spain  and  Ireland,  where  house  prices  fell  by 
30 to  40  percent.  This  is  a  key  reason  why  the  New  Zealand  economy  has  performed 
relatively well amongst OECD countries through the post-GFC period. 
But while New Zealand households’ balance sheets fared relatively well in the downturn, the 
vulnerabilities built up during the 2000s housing boom have not unwound: house prices and 
household  debt  both  remain  elevated  relative  to  international  and  historical  norms.  These 
imbalances  leave  New  Zealand  vulnerable  to  a  fall  in  house  prices  at  some  point  in  the 
future.  Such  a  fall,  potentially  triggered  by  an  external  financial  shock,  could  cause  real 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
damage  to  New  Zealand’s  financial  system  and  broader  economy.  Figure  1  shows  that 
house prices are high relative to household disposable incomes and rents, even though they 
have  eased  from  their  2007  peak.  On  these  sorts  of  measures,  the  OECD  estimates  that 
New Zealand house prices are 25 percent above their long-term averages. 
Figure 1: House prices relative to income and rents 
Source:  Quotable  Value  Ltd.,  RBNZ,  Statistics  New  Zealand,  Ministry  of  Business,  Innovation  and 
Employment. 
 From this high starting level, New Zealand house prices are now rising rapidly once more. 
Over  the  year  to  the  September  quarter,  New  Zealand  house  prices  increased  9  percent. 
According  to  REINZ,  house  prices  have  increased  particularly  strongly  in  Auckland  and 
Christchurch,  with  annual  rates  of  17  and  8  percent  respectively  (figure  2).  House  price 
inflation  in  the  rest  of  New  Zealand  is  running  at  around  3  percent.  Some  of  the  stronger 
regions include Nelson, New Plymouth and Queenstown. As a consequence of these rises, 
national  house  prices  are  now  11  percent  higher  than  at  the  peak  of  the  boom.  Auckland 
prices are 26 percent above their previous peak. 
Figure 2: House price inflation by region, three-month moving average 
Source: REINZ. 
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
While we are currently satisfied with the soundness of the financial system and the stability of 
general  prices,  the  increasing  stretch  in  house  prices  presents  a  risk  to  future  financial 
stability and future general price stability. The stretch is being driven by supply constraints, 
combined with an expansion in credit-based demand. 
The housing supply shortage 
In Christchurch, the supply of habitable homes was significantly reduced as a result of the 
Canterbury earthquakes in 2010/11. Both house prices and rents increased substantially as 
permanent residents sought to re-establish themselves and temporary residents moved in to 
work on the rebuild. 
In Auckland, the picture is different. The housing shortage has emerged over a longer period, 
and is more evident in homes for sale than in rental properties, with house prices moving up 
well in excess of rents. This pattern is consistent with an increasing trend of existing renters 
seeking to become first home buyers. In the last June quarter, available listings of houses for 
sale in Auckland reached the lowest level ever recorded. 
Looking  back,  the  building  of  new  homes  in  Auckland  has  been  weak  for  many  years.  A 
significant  number  of  new  homes  were  built  in  Auckland  between  2002  and  2005  when 
overseas  immigration  into  New  Zealand  was  strong.  However,  the  rate  of  new  building 
slowed dramatically in 2005, as immigration flows moderated, and has remained low since. 
In the rest of the country, construction of new dwellings remained elevated from 2002 right 
through  until  the  2008/09  recession,  with  many  houses  built  outside  of  the  main  urban 
centres in regions such as Waikato and the Bay of Plenty (figure 3). 
Figure 3: New dwelling consents in selected regions (annual average) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
 While  many  dwellings  were  built  in  Auckland  between  1991  and  2005,  research  suggests 
that,  relative 
lowest  supply 
responsiveness in the country.1 If we exclude apartments from the picture, the construction 
of new dwellings has been weak or declining since 2004 (figure 4). 
to  population  growth,  districts 
in  Auckland  have 
the 
                                                
1   See Grimes & Aitken (2006). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Figure 4: New building consents in Auckland (quarterly) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
 Low rates of building have led to a gradually increasing shortage of homes in Auckland. This 
is reflected in a consistent upward trend in population-per-dwelling in Auckland since 2005.2 
Auckland Council estimates that there is a shortage of 20,000 to 30,000 homes in the region 
currently,  and  that  13,000  new  dwellings  will  be  needed  each  year  to  meet  projected 
population growth over the next 30 years. 
A  significant  limitation  on  new  home  building  in  Auckland  appears  to  be  a  scarcity  of 
available land. This has been an increasing problem as the Metropolitan Urban Limit (MUL) 
has  become  more  binding.  As  the  availability  of  land  within  the  MUL  has  decreased,  land 
prices  have  been  bid  up,  which,  in  turn,  has  probably  curbed  housing  supply.  The 
Productivity Commission (2013) estimates that, in 2010, land just inside the MUL was worth 
nine times the value of land just outside the boundary – up from six times in 1998. This is a 
key reason why land costs now comprise 60 percent of the cost of building a new dwelling in 
Auckland,  compared  with  40  percent  in  the  rest  of  the  country.  In  its  report  on  housing 
affordability, the Productivity Commission (2012) identified restrictive urban planning, and the 
time  and  costs  associated  with  land  development  and  construction,  as  additional  factors 
constraining the building of new houses. 
To  help  alleviate  supply  constraints,  the  Government,  in  agreement  with  the  Auckland 
Council,  has  passed  legislation  to  implement  the  Auckland  Housing  Accord.  The  accord 
seeks to free up enough land for 39,000 new homes in the next three years. To do this, the 
resource consent process will be sped up for housing developments within specified areas, 
consistent with the rules outlined in Auckland’s Unitary Plan.3  
Auckland Accord targets aim to make enough land available for 9000 new dwellings over the 
year to March 2014 – well above the current rate of 5600 new dwellings consented over the 
year  to  August.  So  far,  the  council  has  announced  the  release  of  enough  land  for 
6000 homes under the accord. The accord targets are ambitious and it will take time for land 
                                                
2   Many thanks to Westpac for providing regional population-per-dwelling data. 
3   The Unitary Plan is regulatory document developed under the Resource Management Act, in accordance with 
the Council’s vision for housing development in Auckland over the next 30 years. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to be developed and houses built. Nonetheless, the accord is an important step forward in 
helping to alleviate the Auckland housing shortage. 
Pressures on construction 
As more new homes are built in Auckland, this will create construction jobs and contribute to 
economic growth. However, this new building will occur at the same time as the Canterbury 
rebuild  is  taking  place,  creating  significant  resource  pressures  in  the  national  construction 
industry. 
Figure 5 shows the amount of new dwellings that might be built over the coming three years 
if  accord  targets  were  fully  met  and  12,000  new  homes  were  built  in  Canterbury  over  the 
same period. To achieve this, new dwelling construction would need to be 9 percent higher 
than at the height of the recent housing boom, even assuming no growth in home building 
through  the  rest  of  the  country.  At  the  same  time,  a  significant  amount  of  repair  work, 
infrastructure and commercial construction will be taking place in Canterbury. In reality, we 
expect  the  targeted  house  building  in  Auckland  and  Christchurch  to  occur  over  a  longer 
period  than  three  years.  How  much  longer  will  depend  on  the  extent  of  improvements  in 
approval  processes  and  on  the  ability  of  the  construction  industry  to  expand  its  current 
capacity. 
Figure 5: New dwellings consented in an unconstrained building scenario 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ calculations. 
Note:  This  scenario  assumes  that  Auckland  Accord  targets  are  met,  12,000  homes  are  built  in 
Canterbury over the next three years, and that building through the rest of New Zealand continues at its 
current rate. 
 While phasing of this major home building programme will help to limit resource pressures, 
some wage and price pressures will inevitably result. The upward pressure on construction 
costs that we are currently seeing in Canterbury may well extend more broadly across the 
industry.  On  a  moderate  scale,  this  would  help  to  attract  resources  into  the  construction 
industry and hence facilitate the building expansion. On an excessive scale, this would risk 
spilling  over  into  general  inflation  and  put  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates  and  the 
exchange rate. 
To avoid the potential problems associated with excessive house price and construction cost 
inflation, we will need a more responsive supply side that includes: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
A responsive and innovative building sector; 
An adequate supply of labour, some of which will need to be imported; and 
A responsive planning and consenting process. 
• 
• 
• 
We  will  also  need  the  demand  side  to  be  kept  in  check  while  the  supply  response  takes 
place. 
The demand side and credit 
Clearly, the supply of houses is an important determinant of house prices– but it is only one 
side  of  the  story.  We  have  seen  the  shortage  of  homes  in  Auckland  emerge  due  to  low 
construction rates over many years. But house price inflation has accelerated only over the 
past two  years,  over  the  same  period that  credit  conditions  became  easier  and  population 
growth picked up with stronger net inward migration. It is relevant that house price inflation in 
Auckland  has  not  been  matched  by  rental  inflation,  which  is  less  affected  by  credit 
conditions. 
Looking more closely at credit conditions, interest rates are currently very low by historical 
standards.  Indeed,  the  sub-5  percent  mortgage  rates  on  offer  earlier  in  the  year  were  the 
lowest  since  the  1960s.  Low  interest  rates  increase  the  incentive  for  households  to  own 
rather than rent. Over the past 18 months, as housing demand picked up, housing credit has 
also  been  easier  to  obtain  than  previously,  with  banks  competing  aggressively  to  write 
mortgages. As a consequence, credit growth has risen, with outstanding housing credit rising 
6 percent through the year to August. Lending to borrowers with high LVRs has grown twice 
as fast, causing the share of high LVR lending to rise (figure 6). 
Figure 6: High-LVR loans as a share of new lending 
Source: RBNZ. 
 Households  who  borrow  at  high  LVRs  tend  to  be  the  most  vulnerable  to  a  fall  in  house 
prices. In the event that house prices fall, these borrowers are more likely to see the value of 
their house fall below the amount of debt they have outstanding – particularly if they have 
entered  the  market  recently.  This  can  lead  to  financial  hardship,  mortgage  defaults  and, 
potentially, stress across the broader financial system. 
Apart from easy credit conditions, housing demand over the past year has been boosted by a 
growing  net  inflow  of  immigrants  (figure  7).  Net  immigration  to  New  Zealand  has  risen 
substantially over 2013 due to fewer departures of New Zealand citizens to Australia at the 
same time as inflows of returning citizens and non-New Zealand citizens from Europe, the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
United Kingdom and Asia have continued to increase. Over the year to August 2013, a net 
13,000 people moved to New Zealand with the intent of staying a year or longer – the highest 
annual inflow since early 2010. As more people enter the country, this increases the demand 
for  housing,  tending  to  put  upward  pressure  on  rents  and  house  prices  –  particularly  in 
Auckland, where immigration flows have been strongest. 
Figure 7: Permanent and long-term immigration to New Zealand (quarterly) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
 The role of high-LVR lending restrictions 
The  LVR  lending  restrictions  in  operation  from  1  October  2013  are  primarily  intended  to 
reduce  systemic  risk  by  slowing  house  price  inflation.  They  seek  to  reduce  the  risk  that  a 
subsequent price correction in an increasingly overvalued housing market could pose for the 
financial sector and broader economy. Given the relatively slow response of housing supply, 
it does not make sense to let credit-based housing demand get too far out in front. Further, to 
the extent that the LVR restrictions dampen overall demand in the economy, they could also 
reduce the extent of interest rate increases, and hence exchange rate pressure, that may be 
needed over the coming cycle. At this point, we estimate that the LVR restrictions are worth 
approximately 30bp of OCR adjustment. The LVR restrictions are also expected to reduce 
risk in the banks’ balance sheets. 
Estimating the impact of the LVR restrictions is complicated by the fact that this is a new tool 
and  New  Zealand  appears  to  be  unique  in  using  a  speed  limit  approach.  Quantitative 
estimates of impact are necessarily approximate, with key uncertainties including the extent 
to  which  low-deposit  borrowers  find  other  sources  of funds,  and  the  extent  to  which  lower 
credit growth feeds through to house sales and prices. 
We estimate4 that: 
• 
• 
• 
Mortgage credit growth will be 1–3 percentage points lower over the first year. 
Home sales will be 3–8 percent lower over the first year 
House price inflation will be 1–4 percentage points lower over the first year. 
                                                
4   See Bloor & McDonald (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Beyond the first year, these effects will be reduced. Also, the impact of LVR restrictions will 
not  be  uniform  across  the  country.  Market  segments  with  a  higher  proportion  of  high-LVR 
borrowers  are  likely  to  see  larger  effects,  as  will  areas  where  house  prices  and  borrower 
incomes exceed the criteria for Welcome Home Loans, which are exempt. 
An important point to make here is that while house price inflation should be reduced by the 
LVR  restrictions,  New  Zealand  house  price  levels  will  remain  high  on  most  metrics,  for 
example, relative to incomes and rents. In this sense it is hard to see how these restrictions 
will  materially  reduce  the  existing  incentives  to  develop  new  residential  property.  Provided 
the  “red  tape”  costs  and  delays  are  reduced,  there  will  remain  a  strong  price  incentive  to 
expand the housing stock, particularly in Auckland and Christchurch. 
In due course, we expect housing supply to catch up with demand, and for demand to be 
further  moderated  as  interest  rates  return  to  more  normal  levels  over  the  next  couple  of 
years. As the imbalance between demand and supply is reduced, we will look to lift the LVR 
restrictions.  The  indicators  we  will  assess  in  this  regard  include  house  price  inflation, 
mortgage approvals, credit growth and house sales. We will be looking for clear signs that 
excess demand pressures have substantially reduced and that a removal of the restrictions 
will not result in a return of such pressures. 
Conclusion 
The  underlying  issue  in  the  New  Zealand  housing  market  is  a  shortage  of  supply.  In 
Christchurch  there  is  a  specific  housing  shortage  as  a  result  of  the  earthquake-damaged 
housing stock. In Auckland, the shortage has been growing over a much longer period, with 
weak or declining rates of house building since 2005. While the trend in people-per-dwelling 
in Auckland has been moving steadily upwards since 2005, demand for home-ownership has 
accelerated in more recent times due to the ready availability of cheap credit and a growing 
trend amongst renters to become first home buyers. The recent growth in net immigration is 
also adding to the excess demand situation. 
Plans to increase the housing supply are well underway. Residential building consents are 
trending upwards in Christchurch and Auckland, and indeed in the rest of the country. The 
residential  consent  process  has  improved  in  Christchurch  and  efforts  are  being  made  to 
streamline  planning  and  consents  in  Auckland  via  the  Government/council  accord  and  the 
Unitary  Plan.  However,  meeting  the  combined  three  year  targets  of  Christchurch  and 
Auckland  would  require  a  major  mobilisation  of  national  construction  resources.  In  all 
likelihood, the build will be stretched over a longer period. 
Expanding  housing  demand  through  easy  credit  will  do  nothing  to  speed  up  the  housing 
supply  response.  It  simply  adds  to  housing  demand,  pushes  up  house  prices  and  makes 
housing  less  affordable.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  introduced  LVR  restrictions  on  bank 
mortgage  lending  aimed  at  moderating  house  price  inflation  by  reducing  the  effective 
demand for housing. This is intended to reduce the build-up of systematic risk in the New 
Zealand financial system. It will also potentially reduce the extent of interest rate increases, 
and hence exchange rate pressure, that may be needed in the coming cycle. 
References 
Bloor, C and C McDonald (2013) “Estimating the impacts of restrictions on high LVR lending” 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, 2013/05 
Grimes,  A  and  A  Aitken  (2006)  “Regional  Housing  Markets  in  New  Zealand:  House  Price, 
Sales  and  Supply  Responses”,  Centre  for  Housing  Research  Aotearoa  New  Zealand, 
Department of Building and Housing, and Housing New Zealand Corporation, Wellington. 
New  Zealand  Productivity  Commission  (2012),  “New  Zealand  Productivity  Commission 
Inquiry into Housing Affordability”, Final Report, April 2012. 
New Zealand Productivity Commission (2013) “The effect of Auckland’s Metropolitan Urban 
Limit on land prices”, Research Note, March 2013. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
