  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Le Figaro 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in Le Figaro, conducted by Ms Alexandrine Bouilhet on 4 April 2014. 
 Le Figaro: Isn’t the strong growth seen in the financial markets out of touch with 
economic reality? 
Benoit  Cœuré:  Markets  are  anticipating  economic  recovery.  That  is  a  good  sign,  and  we 
think  they  are  right!  It  is  not  a  bad  thing  in  itself  to  anticipate  a  recovery! We  at  the  ECB 
believe that the recovery is already underway, albeit a gradual and fragile one, and so we 
want to accompany it with low, or even lower, interest rates for a prolonged period. 
Is this strong growth not already creating bubbles? 
In our opinion, no – not in the euro area. But, in a period of very low interest rates, there is a 
need  for  vigilance.  If  this  risk  were  to  materialise,  supervisory  authorities  in  the  Member 
States have new “macro-prudential” instruments at their disposal, not to mention the other 
macroeconomic measures. 
Is the ECB really ready to start quantitative easing (QE)? 
Yes,  the  Governing  Council  is  unanimous  in  its  commitment  to  using  unconventional 
instruments,  including  QE,  if  the  current  period  of  low  inflation  extends  for  longer  than 
expected. We do not consider that necessary at present, because the low level of inflation is 
partly  due  to  temporary  factors  and  we  believe  in  the  recovery:  inflation  should  therefore 
increase. But we will continue to monitor developments very closely and act if required. 
How can QE help to increase lending? 
That  is  the  question!  Even  if  QE  means  there  is  more  liquidity  on  banks’  balance  sheets, 
there is no guarantee of that increasing lending. The ECB cannot be a substitute for putting 
the banking sector back on a sound footing. The review of banks’ balance sheets that we are 
carrying out in 2014 will help. QE in the European context would inevitably be different to the 
approach taken in the United States. 
On that issue, Mario Draghi has weakened the euro. Why? 
Market participants have now fully understood that the exchange rate is not an objective of 
our  monetary  policy,  but  it  is  nevertheless  an  important  variable  in  our  decision-making 
because  of  its  influence  on  price  developments.  In  a  period  of  low  inflation,  the  effects  of 
exchange rate developments are closely monitored. 
What should be done to weaken the euro further? 
Another reason why the euro is at this level vis-à-vis the US dollar is that the euro area has 
recorded  large  and  growing  current  account  surpluses  –  [Editor’s  note:  forecast  at 
€286 billion for 2014]. This is new. Before, the current account of the euro area was generally 
balanced. It is not the case that Germany, for example, exports too much, as is sometimes 
argued,  but  that  euro  area  domestic  demand  is  weak.  From  this  perspective,  the  best 
solution  is  therefore  to  support  domestic  demand  by  investing,  and  that  is  also  a  way  of 
preparing  Europe  for  the  future!  But,  these  exchange  rate  issues  go  beyond  just  the 
European framework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  At USD 1.37, isn’t the euro overvalued from a French perspective? 
France’s situation within the euro area is exceptional in that it is the only country, at present, 
with such a large current account deficit – [Editor’s note: €36 billion in 2013]. The solution is 
to increase competitiveness, as foreseen by the government. 
France has asked for more time to reduce its deficit: does it risk being punished by 
the markets? 
Europe has high expectations of France, because France is the euro area’s second largest 
economy. The euro area needs a strong France. France also has its own responsibility: to 
make credible the economic government of the euro area, which it itself called for and which 
is  gradually  being  put  in  place.  This  governance  sets  out  targets  for  both  nominal  and 
structural  deficits.  As  the  European  Commission  reiterated,  France  has  already  had  two 
extensions. It must live up to its commitments. It is all about credibility and trust. 
Can France manage without the euro? 
Without the European Union and without the euro, France would be an average, vulnerable 
power,  over-indebted  and  with  declining  productivity.  The  euro  and  Europe  give  France 
protection  that  enables  it  to  remain  in  charge  of  its  own  destiny,  while  managing  its  own 
reform process. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
