  Luis M Linde: Snapshot of the Spanish economy within the international 
environment 
Testimony  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the  Parliamentary 
Committee on Economic Affairs and Competitiveness, Madrid, 17 June 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I appear before this Committee in connection with the presentation of the Banco de España 
Annual Report for 2013. 
I will briefly review the international economic environment before setting out developments 
in the Spanish economy, which has been characterised by a gradual recovery in activity and 
progress  in  the  internal  adjustment  process.  I  will  then  address  aspects  relating  to  the 
situation of and outlook for the banking system, concluding my testimony with some thoughts 
on the challenges our economy faces in seeking to set sustainable growth firmly in place. 
The international environment 
In 2013 the global economy grew by around 3%, slightly down on the previous year, although 
it did move on a gradually recovering path which is expected to hold in 2014. The euro area 
initiated  a  phase  of  recovery  in  2013  Q2,  starting  then  to  emerge  from  the  recessionary 
phase affecting it since late 2011. 
This  recovery  has  been  marked  by  the  strengthening  of  the  developed  economies  – 
particularly in the United States, where expectations have held that monetary conditions are 
progressively normalising – and by lesser momentum in the emerging economies, central to 
which is the moderation of growth in China. 
Contributing  to  this  lesser  momentum,  on  one  hand,  has  been  the  change  to  a  more 
moderate growth model in China; owing to lower Chinese demand for commodities and the 
interrelated effect on global production chains, this has been instrumental in the lower growth 
in the other emerging economies. 
Further,  the  expectations  that  global  financial  conditions  will  normalise  have  led  to  fewer 
capital  flows  towards  certain  emerging  economies,  exposing  their  vulnerabilities  linked  to 
their  dependence  on  external  funding.  In  any  event,  exchange  rate  flexibility  or  sizeable 
volumes  of  reserves  have  enabled  them  to  withstand,  in  better  conditions  than  in  past 
periods, this episode of reversed capital flows. 
In sum, this new outlook reveals greater certainty about the recovery of the global economy 
and  a  shift  in  the  central  points  of  uncertainty  from  the  developed  economies  –  and  in 
particular from the euro area countries – to the emerging economies. 
As regards price developments, the current phase of recovery is marked by the absence of 
inflationary  pressures  in  the  main  advanced  economies,  with  the  exception  of  Japan,  with 
inflation  rates  significantly  below  the  targets  set  by  central  banks  being  recorded. 
Contributing  factors  here  were  the  persisting  slack  in  labour  markets,  the  low  levels  of 
capacity utilisation and the moderation of commodities prices, in particular of oil. 
The absence of inflationary pressures has been conducive to an accommodative monetary 
policy  stance  being  maintained  globally,  with  official  interest  rates  anchored  at  levels  very 
close to zero and extraordinary liquidity provision measures still in force.  
This  monetary  policy  stance  has  meant  that  long-term  interest  rates  in  the  advanced 
economies  have  held  at  very  low  levels,  while  very  generous  pricing  in  certain  financial 
markets has been the case. Indeed, some prices are at all-time highs, in a setting in which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  investor  yield  search  appears  to  be  playing  a  predominant  role  compared  with  other 
considerations based more on the fundamentals of these assets. 
This  scenario  on  international  money  and  financial  markets  poses  risks,  as  it  is  likely  to 
undergo  abrupt  changes  in  the  face  of  expectations  emerging  over  the  withdrawal  of 
monetary  stimuli  or,  what  comes  down  to  the  same,  of  expectations  over  sustainable 
improvements in growth rates that advise less expansionary monetary policies. 
Developments in and outlook for the Spanish economy 
In the course of 2013 the Spanish economy showed a degree of dynamism and, from the 
third quarter  onwards,  positive  GDP  growth  rates. This trajectory  has  continued  into  2014, 
meaning  that  the  year  might  finalise  on  a  path  in  line  with  the  forecast  forwarded  in  the 
Spanish Economic Projections Report published by the Banco de España in March, that is to 
say, with annual average growth of 1.2%. 
This  recovery  has  also  been  discernible  in  the  labour  market. The  pace  of job  destruction 
slackened in 2013, until showing slight job creation in the closing months of the year. 
The  improvement  has  progressively  strengthened  to  date  in  2014.  On  the  latest  available 
data for May, the official number of registered unemployed fell by almost 112,000, placing 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  at  –6.5%,  0.8  pp  better  than  in  April.  Social  Security 
registrations  increased  this  same  month  by  198,000,  or  at  a  year-on-year  rate  of  1.6%, 
0.4 pp above the growth recorded in the previous month, marking four consecutive months of 
growth. 
This  change  in  the  Spanish  economy  has  arisen  from  a  combination  of  external  and 
domestic factors. Let me take the former first. 
The external boost to recovery in the Spanish economy 
First, the rise in activity and global trade in the second half of 2013 and the resumption of 
economic growth in the euro area shaped a favourable environment for our exports. 
Second, a favourable impact has also been exerted by the measures adopted by euro area 
Member  State  governments  in  terms  of  fiscal  consolidation  and  the  approval  of  structural 
reforms, particularly visible in those economies that were subject to financial tensions. 
The support programmes for Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Cyprus also unfolded favourably. 
Indeed,  Ireland  and  Portugal  have  already  exited  their  respective  financial  assistance 
programmes  without  resorting  to  any  additional  precautionary  mechanism.  Greece,  for  its 
part,  posted  a  primary  fiscal  surplus  in  2013,  indicating  that  its  public  finances  have  been 
redressed. 
But the challenges ahead remain significant, as highlighted by the European Commission in 
the annual revision of the exercise on macroeconomic imbalances within the area.  
Measures by the ECB are contributing to shaping a setting favourable to recovery. Since the 
onset of the crisis, monetary policy has been strongly accommodating, more so both in 2013 
and in 2014 to date. 
On  the  conventional  front,  official  interest  rates  have  been  cut  on  three  occasions  since 
January last year. As a result, the main refinancing operations rate has reached, for practical 
purposes, its lower bound (0.15%). And the remuneration banks receive for their deposits in 
the  Eurosystem  stands,  following  the  recent  decisions  adopted  on  5  June,  in  negative 
territory (–0.10%), which should promote a greater and lasting injection of liquidity into the 
markets. 
As regards liquidity, moreover, it was resolved at the Governing Council meeting on 5 June 
to  extend  the  current  policy  of  fixed  rate  full  allotment  tender  procedures  at  least  until 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  December  2016.  It  was  also  decided  to  suspend  the  fine-tuning  operation  sterilising  the 
purchases under the Securities Market Programme. The ECB thereby ensures the continuity 
and  scope  of  the  policy  of  generous  provision  of  liquid  funds  adopted  since  what  was 
practically the very onset of the crisis. 
Finally, regarding unconventional measures, and following the adoption last year of forward 
guidance,  significant  additional  steps  have  been  taken  in  June.  Firstly,  targeted  long-term 
refinancing operations explicitly geared to promoting bank lending to households and firms 
were  announced.  Further,  it  was  decided  to  step  up  the  work  under  way  to  enable  a 
framework  to  be  designed  for  outright  ABS  purchases  by  the  ECB.  The  aim  of  these 
purchases  is  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism, 
which is still adversely affected by the financial market segmentation induced by the crisis. 
Progress in the internal process of adjustment 
The  turnaround  in  the  Spanish  economy  would  not  have  been  possible  had  the  internal 
process of adjustment not been sustained and deepened. Thus, in 2013, there was progress 
in correcting the imbalances in terms of competitiveness, fiscal consolidation, private-sector 
debt and financial system reform. I shall briefly discuss each of these developments. 
Competitiveness and correction of the external imbalance 
The continuity of the ongoing moderation in labour costs and prices allowed further gains in 
competitiveness to be built up during 2013. On the indicators available, based on unit labour 
costs, the gap opened up since Spain joined the euro area is expected to have closed. 
The  internal  devaluation  process  is  exerting  a  favourable  effect  on  our  foreign  trade.  The 
year  ended  with  our  first  current-account  surplus  since  1997.  That  said,  our  continuing 
excessive  dependence  on  imported  energy  and  the  persistent  deficit  on  the  incomes 
balance, owing to our high external debt, stood in the way of an even bigger improvement.  
Fiscal consolidation 
Turning to public finances, once the extraordinary effects of the aid to financial institutions is 
excluded, the year 2013 closed with a deficit of 6.6% of GDP, 0.1 pp above the objective set, 
in  a  macroeconomic  environment  marked  by  cyclical  weakness  and  by  higher  interest 
payments. The fiscal adjustment drive has been most significant, as shown by the structural 
primary balance (the cyclically adjusted balance, excluding interest payments), which posted 
a correction of 1.2 pp of GDP. 
2013 was the first full year of application of the mechanisms of the Budgetary Stability and 
Financial Sustainability Law approved in 2012. Moreover, measures were taken to improve 
the sustainability of public pensions (the sustainability factor and revaluation index). 
Private-sector deleveraging and bank lending 
To conclude this section, I will refer to the correction of private-sector overindebtedness. The 
Spanish  economy’s  cyclical  position  suggests,  along  with  past  experience,  that  several 
quarters  of  economic  growth  will  still  be  necessary  before  lending  at  the  aggregate  level 
resumes positive growth rates. 
However, there were actually signs of an improvement in this connection in 2013. 
Since  mid-year,  lending  to  companies  has  been  shrinking  at  increasingly  lower  rates,  a 
change which has begun to be discernible also in the case of households since early 2014. 
The more disaggregated analyses conducted by the Banco de España support the idea that 
the contraction in debt at the aggregate level is proving compatible with a shift in the mix of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  debt  towards  those  companies  in  a  sound  position  which  are,  therefore,  better  placed  to 
channel funds to new investments that translate into more growth and more employment. 
Spanish banking sector 
I will now refer to the position of and outlook for our banking sector. 
For the Spanish banking industry, the year 2013 marked the culmination of a major reform in 
the framework of the financial assistance programme agreed with the European authorities. 
This programme began in 2012 and, as you know, concluded last January. The reform has 
seen the clean-up, recapitalisation and restructuring of the sector. 
In  a  complex  macroeconomic  and  financial  environment,  which  required  the  adjustment  of 
the imbalances that have built up in the previous expansionary phase, the Spanish banking 
sector has demonstrated notable adaptability. 
I  will  briefly  review  some  of  the  basic  parameters  marking  developments  at  our  banks,  in 
particular  the  changes  in  the  structure  of  their  balance  sheets,  non-performing  loans  and 
results.  I  will  then  underscore  the  importance  of  the  capital  conservation  measures  in  the 
current setting. 
Changes in the structure of bank balance sheets 
Last year, the banking sector significantly reduced the size of its balance sheet, as well as 
changing its structure. 
On  the  asset  side,  the  reduction  in  lending  to  the  private  sector  persisted.  This  reduction 
was,  however,  compatible  with  an  increase  in  the  weight  of  assets  relative  to  the  total 
balance  sheet,  whereas  other  asset  items  –  such  as  deposits  at  central  banks  and  credit 
institutions,  and  derivatives  operations  –  contracted  at  very  high  rates.  In  turn,  on  the 
liabilities  side,  there  was  a  shift  towards  private-sector  deposits,  thereby  furthering  the 
reduction in funds borrowed from the Eurosystem. In addition, the sector also increased its 
own funds, the relative weight of which on the balance sheet has gained in significance. 
Non-performing assets 
Private-sector  non-performing  assets  continued  to  rise  in  2013.  This  increase  and  the 
aforementioned decrease in credit explain the growth in the non-performing assets ratio. Also 
playing a role in this increase was the reclassification of refinanced loan portfolios required 
by the Banco de España in 2012. 
In any event, banks’ non-performing loans have a clearly cyclical component. In this respect, 
in line with the onset of the recovery of the economy, the latest data, which relate to early 
2014, show a slight fall in non-performing assets in month-on-month terms. This trend can be 
expected to firm as the recovery of economic activity gathers steam. 
Results 
The  banking  sector  in  2013  reported  consolidated  profit  of  €11  billion  in  2013,  following 
heavy  losses  in  2012,  basically  due  to  the  sizeable  provisions  made  by  banks.  Although 
provisions continued to eat up a considerable portion of profit, their relative significance in 
2013 was appreciably less than in 2012. 
Margins and efficiency 
The more moderate provisions noted above helped to offset the lower margins in the 2013 
income statement compared with 2012. Thus, against the background of a smaller volume of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  activity  and  of  lower  interest  rates,  net  interest  income  (the  difference  between  accrued 
interest revenue and costs) dropped by nearly 10% year-on-year in 2013. 
In  2013  Spanish  banks  persisted  in  their  efforts  to  increase  efficiency,  readjusting  their 
operating  capacity  by  pruning  staff  and  branch numbers  in their  business  in  Spain,  which, 
compared with the highs in mid-2008, were down by around 20% and 25%, respectively. 
In an environment characterised by persisting downward pressure on earnings from factors 
such as weaker lending, low interest rates and still-high provisioning needs, banks have to 
persevere in reducing their operating costs and improving their efficiency. 
Conservation of banks’ capital 
In  2013  the  banking  sector  strengthened  its  solvency.  The  aggregate  core  capital  of  all 
deposit institutions stood at 11.5% at the end of that year, up somewhat more than 2 pp on 
end-2012. 
From  a  medium-  and  long-term  standpoint,  the  banking  sector  has  to  maintain  its  capital 
conservation policies.  
The  economic  recovery  is  still  incipient  and  some  fragmentation  persists  in  the  euro  area 
financial markets. Moreover, the new solvency legislation which came into force in Europe 
last  January  implementing the requirements  of the  Basel  III  Accord,  but  whose  application 
has yet to be completed, calls for, inter alia, higher levels and quality of capital. The Banco 
de  España,  recognising  that  it  is  desirable  to  conserve  capital  and  strengthen  solvency 
levels, last February renewed its recommendation that banks should limit their dividend pay-
out policies. 
Challenges facing the Spanish economy and the role of economic policy 
I shall conclude with some thoughts on the challenges facing the Spanish economy and the 
role of economic policy. 
Our  economy  is  currently  setting  its  growth  on  a  firm  footing.  However,  the  effects  of  the 
crisis  in  terms  of  unemployment  and  indebtedness  of  the  resident  sectors  have  been 
sizeable and their absorption will require time. 
The  improvements  in  competitiveness  and  the  reduction  of  private-sector  debt  must 
continue.  And  this  in  an  environment  of  low  inflation  in  the  euro  area  and  of  high  euro 
exchange rates, which poses an additional difficulty. 
In the area of national policies, the leeway for applying demand-side policies is scant. In this 
respect, let me discuss in more detail the challenges ahead for fiscal policy. 
Fiscal policy challenges 
As  I  have  already  indicated,  progress  in  the  correction  of  European  fiscal  imbalances  has 
been significant. The data for 2013 show, however, that six years after the economic crisis 
began, ten countries in the European Union countries had budget deficits of over 3% of GDP 
and  public  debt  levels  stand  at  record  highs  in  many  member  countries.  Having  now 
emerged from the phase of financial and banking instability, the need for fiscal consolidation 
will  continue  to  condition  economic  policy  in  Europe  over  the  coming  years,  although  the 
adjustments planned are on a lesser scale than those already implemented. 
In the case of Spain, the consolidation drive still ahead remains substantial. According to the 
latest Stability Programme Update, the planned reduction in the budget deficit between 2014 
and 2017 is 5.5 pp of GDP, and rises to 6.4 pp of GDP in terms of decreasing the primary 
deficit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Completing  the  fiscal  consolidation  process  must  remain  an  overriding  priority  of  Spain’s 
economic policy. This effort is necessary to maintain the confidence of economic agents, to 
continue to advance in the normalisation of financing and to restore the room for manoeuvre 
in budget policy. 
Meeting  targets  is  crucial  first  for  containing  and,  subsequently,  reducing  the  public 
debt/GDP  ratio.  It  will  be  difficult  to  curb  the  rising  trend  of  public  debt  now  the  latter  has 
reached high levels and the outlook for economic growth and inflation is moderate. 
If the interest on the debt is higher than the nominal growth rate of the economy, the public 
debt/GDP ratio grows inertially, even when public revenue and spending are balanced. This 
effect  stems  from  the  pressure  generated  by  the  interest  burden,  arising  from  high  debt 
which cannot be countered by growth in real GDP and changes in inflation. In this situation, 
then,  in  order  to  avoid  an  increase  in  debt,  it  is  not  enough  to  attain  an  overall  balanced 
budget  (that  is,  net  of  the  interest  burden);  rather,  sizeable  primary  surpluses  must  be 
achieved  and  maintained,  which  is  particularly  difficult  in  a  setting  of  low  growth  and  low 
inflation.  Furthermore,  the  short-term  negative  effects  on  economic  growth  of  the  fiscal 
adjustment should be considered, which contributes to the above-mentioned inertial increase 
in debt. 
Against the backdrop of a brighter economic outlook, it is to be expected that, unlike in recent 
years,  the  reduction  of  the  budget  deficit  will  foreseeably  be  boosted  by  a  more  positive 
performance  of  tax  revenue  and  a  decrease  in  those  expenses  more  closely  linked  to  the 
economic cycle, particularly unemployment benefits. The efforts to contain spending should 
desirably  be  accompanied  by  public  spending  and  revenue  arrangements  which  help  to 
ensure that the public sector makes a better contribution to economic activity and to achieve 
a lasting adjustment. 
As for public spending, various actions have already been undertaken in the area of public 
employment in the health and education sectors, as well as in reforming local government 
administration  and  streamlining  the  public  sector,  among  others,  which  should  continue  to 
generate savings over the coming years. In line with the recommendations of the European 
Council, this process would gain in depth and consistency if it were accompanied by a public 
spending  assessment  and  review.  Given  the  degree  of  decentralisation  in  Spain,  such  an 
exercise requires the active collaboration of the regional governments. 
Of the various public expenditure items, spending on pensions is particularly important given 
its high share and the challenges faced in relation to its sustainability in the medium term. 
Progress  in  this  area  has  been  significant  as  a  result  of  the  various  reforms  approved.  In 
particular, in 2011 the retirement age and the period for calculating the regulatory base were 
increased, and in 2013 the so-called “sustainability” factor was defined and the revaluation 
index  of  pensions  was  introduced.  These  measures  will  help  to  ease  the  pressure  in  the 
medium  term  arising  from  population  ageing.  The  next  step  should  be  to  develop  the 
mechanisms  to  increase  saving  for  retirement  so  that  in  the  future  this  may  complement 
defined-benefit public pensions. 
Turning  to  public  revenue,  according  to  the  findings  of  the  Committee  of  Experts  –  which 
delivered its report in March 2014 – and the recommendations of international agencies, a 
reform is needed to redress the problems which have become visible during the crisis. These 
problems include most notably the low revenue-raising capacity of the tax system, the high 
legal rates of taxation alongside low effective rates of taxation due to the proliferation of tax 
benefits, and a bias towards a more distortional system of taxation for economic growth and 
employment, namely, that levied on labour and capital. 
Given this diagnosis, the proposals of the Committee of Experts and international agencies 
coincide as to the need to increase the weight of indirect taxation to permit a reduction in the 
taxation  of  labour,  particularly  social  security  contributions,  and  also  a  lowering  of  the 
taxation of capital income. Additionally, the Committee suggests that tax rebates, reductions 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and allowances be eliminated and that progress be made towards greater neutrality across 
savings  instruments.  These  recommendations  underline  that  is  important  that  any  future 
changes  to  taxation,  in  addition  to  improving  efficiency,  should  not  jeopardise  the  fiscal 
consolidation required. 
Medium-term economic growth 
The fiscal consolidation process has been accompanied by a series of reforms whose effects 
are becoming discernible or will be perceived shortly. The increased sensitivity of prices to 
the  economic  cycle  has  prompted  a  correction  of  the  competitiveness  gap  of  the  Spanish 
economy, while the more flexible labour framework has undoubtedly been conducive to wage 
moderation.  A  change  is  also  perceptible  in  the  role  of  past  inflation  in  the  process  of 
determining costs and income. This change will be bolstered by the implementation of the 
legislation on the deindexation of the economy. 
The  effects  in  terms  of  job  creation  are  more  tentative,  yet  promising.  Foreseeably,  as  a 
result  of  the  more  flexible  labour  framework,  employment  will  grow  at  rates  which,  while 
moderate, are relatively high in relation to the growth in GDP. 
Undertaking reforms to increase competition is also unavoidable. Progress in this area has 
also been significant: we may recall the laws on entrepreneurs, single market guarantee and 
insolvency.  However, 
their  actual 
implementation is encountering difficulties or has been delayed. 
Thank you.  
it  must  be  acknowledged 
in  some  cases 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
