  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Le Monde 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in Le Monde, conducted by Ms Marie Charrel on 17 April 2014. 
 Is the level of government debt in the euro area sustainable? 
The  euro  area  countries  have  already  greatly  reduced  their  deficits.  Now  that  growth  is 
returning, continued efforts in this regard will allow debt-to-GDP ratios to be reduced. 
The measures required of countries subject to a financial assistance programme 
under the Troika have had a recessionary impact stronger than that forecast by the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), particularly in Greece. Have we gone too far with 
austerity? 
The financial assistance provided by the European Union and the IMF gave these countries 
time to change the course of economic and financial trends that were no longer sustainable. 
Remember that had no financial assistance been provided, the adjustment would have been 
much more abrupt. The need for restraint is now lessening in the euro area, but not because 
debt  is  back  in  fashion!  It  is  down  to  the  fact  that  most  countries  have  already  taken  the 
toughest measures and are now starting to reap the benefits. 
Is the current level of the euro too high? 
There is a particular fascination with the exchange rate in France that is not shared by other 
euro area countries. No doubt this has something to do with the fact that France is one of the 
only countries in the euro area whose external accounts are in the red. However, the euro 
area as a whole is running a current account surplus: the solution for France, therefore, is to 
improve its competitiveness, which is indeed what the government plans to do. This is not to 
say that the ECB is not concerned about the exchange rate; it is rather that the ECB does not 
have an exchange rate objective. The exchange rate is one of the factors that we take into 
account  in  deciding  on  our  monetary  policy  stance.  The  important  thing  for  us  is  to  know 
whether the level of the euro exchange rate and its outlook are likely to hinder the return of 
inflation rates to below, but close to, 2%, which is our definition of price stability and which 
lies at the heart of our mandate. 
There is no doubt that the appreciation of the euro since the summer of 2012 has contributed 
to the current low level  of inflation. All other things being equal, the stronger the euro, the 
more an accommodative monetary policy is justified. 
The low inflation observed in the euro area is affecting all advanced economies. What 
is behind this? 
There is no simple answer to this question. Several factors are at play. Let’s start with the 
difficult  situation  observed  on  the  labour  markets  in  most  industrialised  countries.  The 
unemployment rate remains very high in the euro area. If this figure is lower for the United 
States, it is because many Americans have withdrawn from the labour market. 
To this must be added the deleveraging by households and businesses, which is weighing 
on consumption and investment, and other factors, such as the slowing of China’s economy, 
which  is  having  a  dampening  effect  on  energy  commodity  and  food  prices,  as  well  as  the 
decline in energy prices, which is linked in part to the exploitation of shale gas in the United 
States. We need to know whether these developments are sustainable. All the major central 
banks, and not just the ECB, are asking themselves this question. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  What could the ECB do to influence the level of the euro? 
We  have  several  instruments  at  our  disposal  in  the  event  that  it  becomes  necessary  to 
loosen our monetary policy stance. We still have some margin to reduce key interest rates, 
including by pushing the deposit rate into negative territory (which remunerates the banks for 
funds held in the ECB’s overnight deposit facility). Finally, at its last meeting, the Governing 
Council declared itself unanimously ready to look into non-standard measures, including the 
possibility of quantitative easing (QE) if circumstances dictated. 
Would such quantitative easing affect purchases of government or private debt? 
If implemented, this instrument is expected to have an impact on a range of assets that is 
broad enough to inject sufficient liquidity into the economy. The ECB’s choice as to whether it 
should then repurchase public or private assets would depend on three factors. First, it is a 
question of effectiveness, in order to ensure the smooth transmission of the measures taken 
to  the  real  economy,  and  in  particular  loans  to  businesses.  Second,  it  is  an  issue  of 
feasibility. The financial markets in Europe are very different to those in the United States: a 
QE for the euro area would thus be very unlike the US version of QE. Lastly, purchases of 
assets  should  be  carried  out  in  line  with  the  Treaty,  which  prohibits  the  ECB  from  directly 
financing governments. Discussions are underway on all of these aspects. 
I should add that any monetary measure will only be effective if banks in the euro area are 
able  to  start  loaning  to  businesses  again,  and  notably  to  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises. The assessment of banks’ balance sheets that the ECB is undertaking this year 
is key in this regard: if it is perceived as being sufficiently strict and objective, it will foster 
renewed confidence in the banking sector. 
Would it be advantageous for the euro area to develop market financing of the 
economy, like in the United States? 
Yes,  even  if  the  idea  is  not  to  copy  the  United  States.  European  growth  is  based  almost 
exclusively on financing of households and firms by banks. For a long time that worked well, 
European  banks  did  their  job.  But  the  2007  global  crisis  and  then  the  euro  area  crisis 
revealed  that  depending  so  exclusively  on  one  sole  method  of  financing  constitutes  a 
weakness. 
Developing market financing via ABS, i.e. asset-backed securities (secured corporate debt) 
or,  for  example,  bond  issuance  by  medium-sized  enterprises  would  make  the  financial 
system more balanced and more resistant to shocks. This is essential as, by definition, we 
do not know where the next crisis will hit. 
With this in mind, the ECB and the Bank of England are suggesting to revise the 
European rules on ABS. How? 
The  European  regulators  are  discussing  this  because  the  euro  area  needs  these 
instruments. It’s a medium-term project whose purpose must not in any circumstances be to 
recreate the securities market as it existed before the crisis. The “new ABS” must be different 
from the previous ones. If they are more transparent and simpler then they will be less risky – 
the  rules  could  take  this  lower  degree  of  risk  into  account,  in  particular  for  the  capital 
requirements applying to banks and insurance companies. It’s not a question of going back 
over the need to raise the moral standards of finance, which has been advocated since 2008, 
but to promote instruments that finance the economy. 
Might the normalisation of US monetary policy push European interest rates up? 
It  should  be  remembered,  first,  that  if  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System  has  decided  to 
gradually  taper  its  asset  purchases  in  the  markets,  it  is  because  it  considers  that  the  US 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  economy  is  improving  and  that  the  recovery  is  sound.  That’s  good  news  for  the  global 
economy. 
Recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  behind  compared  with  the  United  States.  We  are  therefore 
working to ensure that this differentiated recovery does not harm monetary conditions in the 
euro  area.  The  ECB’s  adoption  of  “forward  guidance”  on  its  monetary  policy  has  enabled 
European short-term interest rates to be disconnected efficiently from US short-term interest 
rates. We will ensure that this continues. 
Spanish, Greek and Italian sovereign rates have declined strongly in recent weeks 
although these Member States still have high public debt. Are the markets too 
optimistic? 
No,  on  condition  that  the  reforms  continue.  International  investors  have  confidence  in  the 
reform dynamic in euro area Member States, including in Greece. The level of the rates is 
only justified if the reforms are carried out as planned. This is true in small Member States 
just as in the big ones. 
France has just announced 50 billion euro worth of savings and is slow to implement 
reforms. Is France lagging behind? 
France has not been under the same pressures or financial stress as the peripheral countries 
of the euro area. France has enjoyed investor goodwill and has been fortunate to be able to 
decide for itself on the rhythm of its reforms. But that does not mean that the reforms are any 
less necessary. 
The ECB has begun assessing banks’ balance sheets before the start of Banking 
Union. Could the discovery of weaknesses in large institutions trigger another crisis? 
At this stage it is too early to say what we will find. But one thing is certain: for confidence in 
the  banking  system  to  be  restored,  each time  a  bank  has  insufficient  capital  reserves, the 
gap  will  need  to  be  filled  quickly.  And  this  following  a  well-defined  procedure:  first,  having 
recourse to the bank’s internal resources, then markets and finally – and only in the event 
that this is not enough – to public authorities at national or European level in compliance with 
State aid rules. Governments in the euro area have for that matter undertaken to follow this 
procedure if the situation requires it. 
With the banking union, the ECB will be responsible for banking supervision in 
addition to monetary policy. Is that not too many powers in the hands of one sole 
institution? 
It is true that the ECB will have more powers. But, as in any democratic system, it will have 
strong  counterparts.  In  banking  supervision  just  as  in  monetary  policy,  the  ECB  will  be 
accountable  for  its  decisions  in  accordance  with  the  procedures  which  have  been  agreed 
with the European Parliament. 
How will the ECB stand up to any political pressure in this regard? 
The ECB has already demonstrated its ability to withstand pressure. Indeed, it is not only a 
question of being independent of governments but also of financial lobbies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
