Sayuri Shirai: Communication and forward guidance in a world of 
unconventional monetary policy – the case of the Bank of Japan 
Remarks by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at the 2014 
Monetary Policy Forum, New York City, 28 February 2014. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Thank you very much for inviting me to the 2014 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum. I feel greatly 
honored  to  have  the  opportunity  to  talk  about  communication  on  monetary  policy  in  the 
context of the Bank of Japan. 
As you may know, the Bank adopted quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) in 
April 2013. Prior to this, the Bank had adopted the 2 percent price stability target in terms of 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  in  January  2013.  The 
Bank  committed  to  pursuing  monetary  easing  to  achieve  the  2  percent  target  as  early  as 
possible. Despite this increased transparency on its inflation target, some in both the markets 
and  the  public  soon  questioned  the  achievability  of  the  2  percent  target  under  the  then 
existing monetary easing framework called comprehensive monetary easing (CME) adopted 
in October 2010. This appears to have reflected (1) a perception of lack of boldness under 
CME,1  (2)  doubt  about  the  Bank’s  determination  to  overcome  deflation  due  to  ineffective 
communication  between  the  Bank  and  the  markets  as  well as  the  public,  and  (3)  disbelief 
arising from the Bank’s past monetary policy because of a poor track record in achieving its 
stated objectives.2 Under these conditions, QQE was introduced in April 2013. 
Given this background, my presentation will begin by touching on the main features of QQE. 
I will then explain the Bank’s forward guidance, or its communication strategy, on its future 
monetary policy stance. Finally, I will discuss issues related to the Bank’s communication on 
monetary policy. 
Main features of QQE and the Bank’s forward guidance 
II. 
Let me first highlight some distinctive differences between the current QQE and the previous 
CME (Chart 1). 
Shifting from interest rate targeting to monetary base targeting 
First,  the  main  feature  of  QQE  was  a  shift  in  the  main  operating  target  for  money  market 
operations  from  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  to  the  monetary  base.  There  were 
several  reasons  for  this  shift.  It  was  thought  it  would  be  intuitively  easier  for  the  public  to 
grasp  the  essence  of  monetary  easing:  an  increase  in  the  “quantity”  could  easily  be 
connected to a large-scale supply of cash, creating an image of inflation. Moreover, market 
participants  use  the  monetary  base  as  a  reference  for  measuring  the  scale  of  monetary 
easing  across  central  banks  when  engaging  in  financial  transactions.  Certain  academic 
research studies were also taken into account in regard to the Bank’s adoption of monetary 
base targeting.3 Moreover, there was general agreement among the Policy Board members 
                                                 
1  The size of the Asset Purchase Program was increased nine times, each time in the range of 5–10 trillion yen. 
The purchase of JGBs was mainly up to a remaining maturity of three years.  
2  This often refers to the exit timings of the zero interest rate policy in August 2000 and quantitative monetary 
easing in March 2006.  
3  These research studies, including those related to the Bank’s monetary policy, include Paul R. Krugman, “It’s 
Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1998, 
2, pp. 137–205; Allan H. Meltzer, “The Transmission Process,” paper presented to the Deutsche Bundesbank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
that changing the main operating target would effectively signal a much-needed change in 
the monetary policy framework and enable the Bank to wipe away its image as a reluctant 
monetary accommodator. Hence, the shift was decided as part of the Bank’s communication 
policy tool. The purchase of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) was viewed as the main 
tool  to  fulfill  the  monetary  base  target.  The  Bank  now  purchases  JGBs  with  a  remaining 
maturity from a minimum of less than one year up to the maximum 40 years. 
Importance of raising long-term inflation expectations 
Here, I should also mention that QQE relies more heavily on long-term inflation expectations 
to achieve negative long-term real interest rates than the monetary policies adopted by other 
central  banks.  A  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates  in  real  terms  may  increase  investment 
and  consumption.  The  anticipation  of  higher  inflation  may  hasten  such  increases.  These 
expectations may also affect current sales prices and wages. Thus, the Bank decided to use 
all  available  tools  to  convince  the  markets  and  the  public  of  its  strong  determination  to 
overcome  mild deflation and to help transform the deflation-oriented mindset. In  this spirit, 
the  “quantity”-based  targeting  approach  was  considered  reasonable.  This  feature  draws  a 
clear line between QQE and the previous CME, which placed little emphasis on influencing 
such expectations and perceptions relating to the Bank’s monetary policy stance. 
The Bank’s communication strategy and two descriptions in its forward guidance 
QQE  entails  forward  guidance  as  one  of  its  most  important  elements  (Chart  2).  The  Bank 
released  a  public  statement  in  April  2013  that  introduced  QQE,  and  contained  two 
descriptions  of  the  time  span  of  monetary  accommodation.  The  first  description  was  a 
statement of the Bank’s intention to achieve the 2 percent price stability target at the earliest 
possible  time,  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years.  The  second  description  was  a 
statement of its intention to continue with QQE as long as it was necessary for maintaining 
the  2  percent  target  in a  stable  manner.  This  description also  added  a  condition  that  both 
upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices  would  be  examined,  and  that 
adjustments would be made as appropriate. 
The purpose of the first description was to signal to both the markets and the public the 
Bank’s  intention  to  achieve  its  2  percent  target  within  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years, 
normally pursued by other central banks under an inflation targeting framework. The reason 
the Bank set a time span was to show its determination to achieve the target and increase 
the  confidence  of  the  markets  and  the  public.  To  fulfill  this  objective,  the  main  operating 
target for money market operations was switched from the uncollateralized overnight call rate 
to the monetary base; it was then decided that the size of the monetary base would rise at an 
annual  pace  of  about  60–70  trillion  yen,  to  be  doubled  in  two  calendar  years  (2013–14). 
Under  this  monetary  base  target,  the  Bank  currently  purchases  JGBs  of  approximately 
50 trillion yen (on an outstanding basis) each year to double the amount outstanding in two 
years (Chart 3). 
Some  market  participants  considered  that  the  first  description  is  a  strong  calendar-based 
commitment.  This  may  have  partly  reflected  an  impression  gained  from  the  Bank’s 
communication about QQE in April 2013. Namely, the Bank stressed the number “two” on 
many  occasions  –  the  2  percent  price  stability  target,  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years, 
doubling the monetary base and the amount outstanding of JGBs, and more than doubling 
                                                                                                                                                      
Conference  on  the  Monetary  Transmission  Process:  Recent  Developments  and  Lessons  for  Europe,  1999; 
Ben S. Bernanke, “Japanese Monetary Policy: A Case of Self-Induced Paralysis?” in Adam Posen and Ryoichi 
Mikitani,  eds.  Japan’s  Financial  Crisis  and  Its  Parallels  to  U.S.  Experience,  Special  Report  13,  Institute  for 
International  Economics,  Washington,  D.C.,  2000,  pp.  149–166;  and  Bennett  T.  McCallum,  “Alternative 
Monetary Policy Rules: A Comparison with Historical Settings for the United States, the United Kingdom, and 
Japan,” Economic Quarterly, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 2000, pp. 49–79. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  average  remaining  maturity  of  JGB  purchases.  This  presentation  was  successful  in 
sending a clear message about the new framework. However, the message may also have 
been interpreted by some market participants as a strong calendar-based commitment with a 
time limit, with a lesser focus on the second description (which I will describe in a moment). 
Personally,  I  believe  that  the  first  description  could  be  interpreted  as  both  calendar-based 
(about two years) as well as state-contingent (2 percent) guidances. However, in this case, 
the time horizon of “about two years” should be interpreted with some flexibility rather than as 
a rigid “two years.” 
The second description is related to a conditional commitment, because the continuation of 
QQE  is  subject  to  the  examination  of  upside  and  downside  risk  factors.  It  is  also  state-
contingent  guidance  (to  maintain  the  2  percent  target  in  a  stable  manner),  linked  to  the 
continuation of QQE, and it plays a greater role than the first description in stabilizing long-
term inflation expectations at around 2 percent. This helps to reduce long-term interest rate 
volatility and prevent its overshooting. 
The first description can be considered as a “necessary condition” for achieving the second 
description, if the first description is regarded as referring to the achievability of the 2 percent 
target  and  the  second  as  referring  to  the  maintenance  of  the  2  percent  target  in  a  stable 
manner.  While  the  time  horizon  of  these  two  descriptions  could  overlap,  the  second 
description implies that the time horizon is somewhat longer and that the asset purchases 
may  not  come  to  an  end  after  two  years.  In  this  sense,  the  QQE  time  framework  may  be 
described as “open-ended,” although the April 2013 public statement stipulated the annual 
pace of increase in the monetary base for the coming two calendar years. Thus, these two 
descriptions are mutually non-exclusive. 
Based on the framework I have described, the Bank holds the baseline scenario that core 
CPI inflation (CPI for all items less fresh food; excluding the direct effects of the consumption 
tax hikes) is expected to reach around 2 percent toward the latter half of the projection period 
of fiscal 2013–15.4 
Personally, I am aware of the possibility that it may take some time to achieve the 2 percent 
target, since the duration depends crucially on “the pace of improvement in the employment 
and  income  situation  in  Japan.”  Moreover,  it  is  possible  that  it  may  take  even  longer  to 
achieve a situation where the 2 percent target is maintained in a stable manner, considering 
the duration required to judge whether the condition described as “in a stable manner” is met. 
During this period, support from monetary policy is likely to be necessary. Bear in mind here 
that the Bank adopted the 2 percent target in January 2013, assuming that such an inflation 
rate should be sustainable.5 Hence, the Bank’s decisions on the necessity and measures of 
future monetary easing should be judged in line with the objective to pursue a society with 
2 percent price increase in a stable manner. 
Why is the Bank’s forward guidance so different from that of the Federal Reserve? 
The form of forward guidance adopted by the Bank differs from that of the Federal Reserve 
on several fronts (Chart 4). First, the Federal Reserve applies forward guidance to its primary 
short-term policy interest rate (the overnight federal funds rate) and provides guidance to the 
                                                 
4  The consumption tax rate in  Japan is scheduled to increase from 5 percent to 8 percent in April 2014 and 
further  to  10  percent  in  October  2015.  The  hikes  are  expected  to  raise  CPI-based  inflation  by  about 
2 percentage points for fiscal 2014 and by 0.7 percentage point for fiscal 2015, respectively. When assessing 
the inflation rate, the Bank disregards the effects of these increases as they are temporary. 
5  The  Joint  Statement  of  the  Government  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  on  Overcoming  Deflation  and  Achieving 
Sustainable Economic Growth, released in January 2013, stated, “The Bank recognizes that the inflation rate 
consistent  with  price  stability  on  a  sustainable  basis  will  rise  as  efforts  by  a  wide  range  of  entities  toward 
strengthening  competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  make  progress.”  Based  on  this 
recognition, the Bank set the 2 percent target. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
markets and the public about how long it expects to keep the current exceptionally low level. 
In  other  words,  the  Federal  Reserve  attempts  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  longer-term 
interest  rates  by  influencing  expectations  of  the  markets  and  the  public  regarding  the 
continuation of the current low level of short-term interest rates over an extended period of 
time.  Asset  purchases  are  regarded  as  a  separate  monetary  easing  policy  tool  and  are 
supplementing the interest rate policy and forward guidance. In contrast, the Bank applies 
forward  guidance  to  QQE  as  a  package.  Once  the  pace  of  the  annual  increase  in  the 
monetary  base  is  set,  the  approximate  pace  of  increase  in  JGB  purchases  is  determined 
accordingly.  In  this  sense,  the  pace  of  increase  in  the  monetary  base  and  that  in  asset 
purchases are treated as “non-separable,” as shown in Chart 3. Then the Bank uses forward 
guidance to inform the public of its intention to maintain an increase in the monetary base 
and  thus  in  asset  purchases  in  the  future.  In  other  words,  the  Bank  attempts  to  exert 
downward pressure on the entire yield curve by influencing the expectations of the markets 
and the public about the low level of the yield curve in the future. 
Second, the Bank purchases treasury discount bills (T-Bills) and other assets, in addition to 
JGBs, to meet the monetary base target.6 Moreover, it regularly conducts fixed-rate funds-
supplying operations (with a duration of mainly three months, but available up to one year). 
Therefore,  these  short-term  operations  exert  downward  pressure  directly  on  short-term 
interest  rates.  In  contrast,  the  Federal  Reserve  purchases  longer-term  Treasury  securities 
(with  a  remaining  maturity  from  four  to  30  years)  and  agency  mortgage-backed  securities 
(MBSs). The downward pressure on short-term interest rates is exerted through the forward 
guidance. 
Third,  the  Bank  and  the  Federal  Reserve  have  different  views  on  long-term  inflation 
expectations.  Forward  guidance  issued  by  the  Federal  Reserve  assumes  that  longer-term 
inflation  expectations  have  been  anchored  at  around  2  percent.  However,  there  may  be 
some limited concerns on the dis-anchoring of inflation expectations. Therefore, one of the 
main tasks for the Federal Reserve is to continue with monetary easing measures to seek 
economic  improvement,  while  ensuring  that  the  anchored  inflation  expectations  are 
maintained.  In  contrast,  the  Bank  has  not  yet  successfully  anchored  long-term  inflation 
expectations at around 2 percent. Thus, the Bank must help transform the deflation-oriented 
mindset of all economic entities and then increase inflation expectations to a higher level of 
2 percent.  Therefore,  the  threshold  used  for  forward  guidance  concentrates  solely  on 
“2 percent” or “maintaining 2 percent in a stable manner.” 
Fourth, Federal Reserve forward guidance includes employment-related thresholds. It has a 
dual mandate of promoting price stability and maximum employment, so the reason for this is 
clear.  In  contrast,  the  Bank’s  primary  mandate  is  to  achieve  price  stability  and  there  is 
relatively  small  concern  about  the  unemployment  rate.  In  fact,  the  unemployment  rate  for 
December 2013 reached 3.7 percent, close to the lowest point in recent years of 3.6 percent, 
which was attained in July 2007. Some labor issues exist, such as the differential treatment 
of  regular  and  non-regular  workers  and  firms’  demand  for  increased  flexibility  over  labor 
market  regulations.  However,  these  are  structural  issues  that  are  beyond  the  scope  of 
monetary policy. 
Communication and challenges faced by the Bank 
III. 
As  you  may  know,  Japan’s  economy  is  performing  relatively  well  and  the  core  CPI  turned 
positive  in  June  2013  and  reached  1.3  percent  in  December  2013.  Together  with 
expansionary  fiscal  measures  and  a  front-loaded  increase  in  consumption,  QQE  has 
                                                 
6  Other assets include exchange-traded funds (ETFs), Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs), CP, and 
corporate bonds. The Bank has also charged 0.1 percent on excess reserves since October 2008. Thus, this 
interest rate functions largely as a floor for the interbank market interest rates. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
contributed to the favorable performance. That said, I will present my own views on some 
possible communication-related challenges that the Bank may face in the future. 
Maintaining low levels of real interest rates and communicating with the markets 
One clear achievement of QQE (and of the anticipated greater monetary easing from the end 
of 2012) is that long-term real interest rates turned negative and have remained in negative 
territory (Chart 5). This reflects two factors. One factor is the continuous downward pressure 
being exerted on long-term nominal interest rates. Chart 6 shows that upward pressure on 
long-term interest rates remains limited to date, since the massive purchases of JGBs have 
helped  to  generate  strong  downward  pressure  on  interest  rates.  The  chart  shows  the 
decomposition of key factors contributing to long-term JGB yields. It indicates that in recent 
months downward forces caused by “other factors” (which seems to largely reflect domestic 
factors) have been greater than upward pressure caused by “common factors” (which largely 
reflects global factors). 
Another  factor  is  an  increase  in  long-term  inflation  expectations  since  late  2012.  Chart  7 
shows  survey-based  indicators  (such  expectations  of  households,  economists,  and  market 
participants),  while  Chart  8  shows  market  data-based  indicators.  These  indicators  show  a 
general increase in inflation expectations. However, they require caution in interpretation, as 
an increase in the inflation expectations may reflect the potential impacts of the consumption 
tax hikes. After excluding the tax effects, they are still well below the 2 percent target and the 
recent movement of some indicators appears to have leveled off to some extent. 
A  current  and  future  challenge  relates  to  the  growing  linkages  across  financial  markets.  A 
rise in long-term nominal government bond yields in a major overseas economy may exert 
upward  pressure  on  the  government  bond  yields  in  Japan.  The  upward  force  may  work 
against the downward pressure maintained by QQE, potentially weakening the effectiveness 
of  monetary  policy  and  leading  to  greater  volatility  in  long-term  nominal  and  real  interest 
rates. Yet, even in the phase of intensified upward pressure, the continuation of the Bank’s 
large-scale asset purchases is likely to maintain the downward pressure – in addition to the 
forward guidance applied to QQE. As long as the rising pace of long-term interest rates is 
more moderate than that of inflation expectations, real interest rates are likely to remain at 
low  levels.  Maintaining  relatively  low  levels  of  nominal  and  real  interest  rates  as  well  as 
contained volatilities are important in terms of supporting the economic recovery path. While 
the Bank expects that both short- and long-term interest rates will move largely on a stable 
path,  it  is  important  to  continue  dialogues  with  the  market  participants  regarding  the 
framework of QQE. Indeed, during April-July 2013, when the JGB market became unstable, 
the Bank held several dialogues with market participants and adopted a flexible operational 
framework, which helped to stabilize the market. 
Inflation outlook gap between the bank and economists, and promotion of 
communication with the latter 
As  mentioned  earlier,  according  to  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario,  the  core  CPI  inflation 
(excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hikes)  is  projected  to  reach  around 
2 percent  toward  the  latter  half  of  the  projection  period  of  fiscal  2013–15.  As  shown  in 
Chart 9, the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts is 0.7 percent for fiscal 2013, 
1.3 percent for fiscal 2014 (3.3 percent including the effects of the tax hike), and 1.9 percent 
for fiscal 2015 (2.6 percent including the effects of the tax hike).7 
Now  let  me  show  you  the  projections  on  core  CPI-based  inflation  envisaged  by  about 
40 economists.  Chart  10  shows  the  evolution  of  the  economists’  forecasts  for  inflation 
                                                 
7  There is a large gap between the maximum and minimum Policy Board member inflation forecasts, suggesting 
the presence of divergent views. This divergence widens somewhat for fiscal 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
(including the tax effects) over the period of fiscal 2013–15 by plotting the distribution of their 
forecasts  for  each  fiscal  year.  It  reveals  that  the  economists’  forecasts  for  inflation  were 
adjusted toward the higher levels with greater probability for fiscal 2013 as the observation 
point approached the end of the observation year concerned. A similar but more moderate 
pattern was present for fiscal 2014. The chart indicates that a divergence of views was also 
present among economists for fiscal 2014 and 2015. Next, a comparison was made between 
the  average  of  the  economists’  forecasts  and  the  median  of  the  Bank’s  Policy  Board 
members’ forecasts. Chart 11 indicates that a clear convergence was present for fiscal 2013, 
as  a  result  of  adjustments  made  mainly  by  the  economists.  A  moderate  degree  of 
convergence  was  also  observed  for  fiscal  2014,  while  a  relatively  large  difference  still 
remained between the projections for fiscal 2015. 
The observations I have described suggest that a degree of uncertainty exists regarding the 
path  toward  2  percent  and  the  time  it  will  take  to  achieve  the  2  percent  target.  These 
differences appear to reflect differing views between the Bank and economists, with respect 
to  (1)  the  pace  of  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  in  Japan,  (2)  the 
pace of the rise in long-term inflation expectations, and (3) the ability of firms to raise their 
sales prices owing to the healthier prospects for profitability. 
The views of economists and market participants are particularly important for the Bank. This 
is  because  financial  markets  influence  the  behavior  of  households  and  firms  through 
changes  in  interest  rates,  foreign  exchange  rates,  and  financial  asset  prices,  but  these 
financial  market  indicators  reflect  the  valuations  of  economists  and  market  participants  for 
various  financial  assets  as  well  as  their  expectations  of  future  inflation  and  economic 
developments.  These  financial  indicators  respond  directly  to  changes  in  market  conditions 
caused by (present and anticipated) monetary policy measures, in addition to the release of 
the  latest  macroeconomic  data,  news,  and  exogeneous  shocks.  Thus,  to  help  narrow  the 
perception gap between the Bank and these groups, it is important for the Bank to enhance 
its  dialogue  with  them  by  (1)  exchanging  views  on  forecasting  methods  as  well  as 
(2) providing  clearer  explanations  about  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  easing 
(including background analysis) and the direction of QQE for achieving the target. 
Communication to enhance public understanding on the importance of the 2 percent 
target 
The  Bank  needs  to  increase  its  dialogue  with  the  public  to  promote  understanding  of  the 
importance  of  the  2  percent  target.  In  January  2013,  the  Bank  judged  that  setting  the 
2 percent  price  stability  target  was  important  for  the  economy.  This  judgment  took  into 
account,  for  example,  (1)  the  scope  needed  to  avoid  another  deflationary  period,  (2)  the 
scope needed for the conduct of flexible monetary policy in normal periods to avoid the zero 
lower  bound  in  the  recessionary  phase  of  the  economy,  (3)  the  upward  bias  in  the  CPI 
statistics,  and  (4)  the  need  to  align  with  the  global  standard  of  a  price  stability  target. 
Moreover, achieving sufficiently high nominal GDP growth rates is essential for the economy 
to boost firms’ and households’ economic growth expectations. 
In Japan, the majority of households continue to view price rises as unfavorable. This implies 
that  the  importance  of  achieving  the  2  percent  target  may  not  be  widely  understood  and 
shared by households. Thus, it is vitally important for the Bank to clearly explain to the public 
and respond to questions as to why the Bank aims to achieve the 2 percent price stability 
target and how this will improve daily lives in the medium to long term. This is particularly 
important given that a consumption tax hike is scheduled in April this year, and the inflation 
rate may temporarily exceed 2 percent, together with the effects of monetary easing. 
Communication about the 2 percent pinpoint target 
Some  argue  that  the  Bank  should  adopt  an  inflation  target  range,  rather  than  an  inflation 
target point. I believe that the Bank should maintain the current inflation target point (that is, 
2 percent). The idea of applying a range to the inflation target should not be ruled out and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
might  be  examined  after  the  actual  inflation  rate  exceeds  at  least  1  percent  in  a  stable 
manner and after it is judged that inflation expectations are likely to rise toward 2 percent. 
However, the premature introduction of a range may result in the actual inflation rate getting 
stuck at the lower bound of the range, making it harder to achieve the 2 percent target. A 
more  important  concern  in  this  case  is  that  the  markets  and  the  public  may  mistakenly 
assume  that  the  Bank’s  intention  to  achieve  the  target  has  weakened,  undermining  the 
credibility of monetary policy. 
Communication on achieving the 2 percent target in a stable manner 
Lastly, the expression “in a stable manner” contained in the second description of the Bank’s 
forward  guidance  may  give  the  impression  of  ambiguity  in  terms  of  its  description  of  the 
conditions.  This  expression,  however,  appears  to  be  appropriate  at  present,  because  the 
formation of long-term inflation expectations entails uncertainty. In addition, judgment on how 
and when long-term inflation expectations will be stabilized at around 2 percent is likely to 
require  a  clear  understanding  of  the  features  and  movements  of  a  range  of  indicators 
measuring  inflation  expectations.  Nevertheless,  as  economic  activity  and  prices  firmly 
improve  and  as  the  process  of  increasing  inflation  expectations  becomes  clearer  with  an 
enhanced understanding of their developments, I think that the second description of forward 
guidance could be refined with more specific information about what constitutes “in a stable 
manner” from a longer-term perspective. 
I would like to end my presentation here. Thank you for your kind attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
