Christine M Cumming: Reform in a time of rapid change 
Remarks by Ms Christine M Cumming, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, at the Standard and Poor’s Ratings Services Global Bank Conference, New York 
City, 27 March 2014. 
 It is a pleasure to speak at this program on global banks. Since your agenda covers many 
dimensions  of  transformation  and  adaptation  of  global  financial  institutions,  I  thought  I’d 
frame my remarks around the theme of reform in a time of rapid change. Change involves 
both long-wave and short-wave components. Reform can be driven by both the public and 
the private sectors. My thesis is that the most effective reform involves both the public and 
private sectors and takes account of both the proximate needs for reform and the long-term 
trends  that  drive  long-term  transformation.  The  views  I  will  express  are  my  own  and  not 
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. 
Let me highlight two kinds of change. So much of the immediate regulatory agenda has been 
framed around addressing the failings in the run-up to the global financial crisis – the failings 
as we understand them today. The resulting lessons learned often focus on developments 
between 2003 and 2007: poor underwriting in the U.S. residential mortgage market, the rapid 
expansion  of  leverage  in  the  household  and  the  financial  sectors,  and  the  packaging  and 
repackaging of risks from mortgages into increasingly complicated securities. 
Alongside those immediate forces driving reform, I want to highlight a second kind of change 
– the no less major impetus for transformation in the financial services business that stems 
from larger macroeconomic and technological change. As we think about public sector and 
private sector reform, I submit that we need to address and adapt to both types of change. 
What are some of those longer run forces that have been transforming the financial system? 
Let’s  start  with  two  macroeconomic  trends  that  reflect  the  result  of  successes  in  global 
economic  policy.  One  is  the  rapid  rise  in  wealth  in  much  of  the  world  and  with  it,  new  or 
greatly  expanded  institutions  to  concentrate  and  manage  that  wealth.  The  function  of  the 
banking system in the 19th and early 20th century was to intermediate scarce capital on one 
side and a large supply of ambitious projects on the other, projects such as the building of 
the  transcontinental  railroad.  By  contrast,  today  we  live  in  a  capital-rich  world  where  the 
financial system’s problem to solve is effective deployment of abundant capital, not gathering 
sufficient savings to meet capital needs. 
Another  long-run  macroeconomic  force  has  gathered  substantial  momentum  in  the  last 
decade:  the  shift  of  income,  wealth  and  economic  energy  from  the  so-called  advanced 
economies  of  the  United  States,  Japan  and  Europe  to  the  so-called  emerging  economies. 
Ten years ago, the emerging market countries accounted for about 20 percent of world GDP 
–  the  advanced  economies  80  percent.  Today  the  proportion  is  40/60,  and  the  emerging 
market countries continue to grow substantially faster than the large advanced economies. 
Yes,  China  is  an  important  component  of  that  growth,  but  the  trend  reflects  strong 
performance in recent years in many regions of the world outside the advanced economies. 
A further long-run force, seen as the most disruptive, is technology. At one time, the financial 
system,  perhaps  until  the  1970s  or  1980s,  played  an  important  role  in  searching  for 
savers/investors  to  contribute  to  financing  those  major  investments.  Much  of  the  work  of 
identifying and linking the sources and the uses of funds has been facilitated or even taken 
over  by  technology  –  just  think  of  the  ubiquity  of  trading  platforms,  screens,  and  financial 
news and, beyond that, the increasing automation and artificial intelligence applied to credit 
evaluation, financial analysis, and trading activities. 
I  mention  these  three  long-run  forces  because  the  financial  industry  has  been  and  still  is 
adapting to these trends. Indeed, the major transformation in the U.S. financial industry that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
occurred  in  the  course  of  the  1980s  and  1990s  –  the  development  of  over-the-counter 
derivatives markets, the shift toward a larger role for securities markets relative to banking 
markets – was just such an adaptation to the long-run forces of change. The shift reflected 
the  growth  of  institutional  wealth  and  the  power  of  technology,  ubiquitous  information  and 
expanded financial know-how. 
In  1986,  the  derivatives  markets  were  still  nascent  and  securitization  had  just  begun  to 
spread  outside  the  mortgage  markets  in  the  United  States.  At  that  time,  a  task  force  of 
central bankers, the precursor to today’s Committee of the Global Financial System, which 
reports  to the Global  Economy  Meeting  of  31 central  bank governors, published  a  volume 
titled Recent Innovations in International Banking.1 The report was notable for being among 
the  first  to  describe  what  was  then  a  set  of  new  financial  instruments,  such  as  over-the-
counter  derivatives  and  the  expanded  use  of  financial  options.  The  study  noted  the 
tremendous  momentum  behind  the  1980s  wave  of  financial  innovation,  the  likelihood  of 
those  forces  continuing,  and  the  changes  already  occurring  in  the  financial  system, 
especially  the  shift  of  financial  activities  from  traditional  banking  markets  to  securities  and 
derivatives markets. 
The  really  noteworthy  aspect  of  the  report  is  the  study  group’s  effort  to  identify  –  really, 
anticipate – the risks and concerns that could emerge in the transforming financial system. In 
a section that anticipates current policy language with the cutting-edge title “Macro-prudential 
policy”, the report enumerates these concerns: 
• 
The  risk  that  credit  vigilance  would  decline  in  the  financial  system,  and  with  it, 
overall credit quality. 
The  potential  that  the  transformed  financial  system  could  encourage  and  enable 
leverage. 
The  risk  of  sudden  loss  of  liquidity  as  markets  come  under  pressure,  especially 
because  the  banking  system  would  no  longer  be  capable  of  backstopping  the 
nonbank financial sector and the broader private sector. 
Concern  that  instrument  complexity  and  transaction  volume  could  overwhelm 
settlement systems. 
   Post 2008, these issues sound all too familiar, of course. 
Of particular note, the report stated that: 
A  major  source  of  concern  derives  from  the  difficulties  in  pricing  new  instruments  and  the 
possibility that many new  instruments appear to be, at least to some degree, underpriced, 
that  is,  that  gross  income  from  the  transactions is  insufficient,  on  average,  to  compensate 
fully  for  their  inherent  risks.  Since  it  may  be  necessary  to  accumulate  experience  over  a 
variety  of  circumstances  and  cyclical  conditions  in  order  for  market  participants  fully  to 
understand and assess all elements of risk, this problem may appear especially before the 
market for a new product has reached maturity. 
The  recent  financial  crisis  in  many  ways  represented  the  realization  of  many  of  these 
concerns. Some observations: 
• 
The  crisis  demonstrated  how  the  combination  of  poor  underwriting,  financial 
engineering, and leverage could transform what had been viewed as relatively safe 
markets  for  US  residential  mortgages,  magnify  risks  in  those  instruments  through 
securitization and leverage, and transmit the risks around large parts of the globe. 
                                                
1  Recent innovations in international banking (Cross Report). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    The  speed  at  which  liquidity  deterioration,  market  dysfunction  and  financial 
institution  distress  set  in  was  breathtaking  –  far  faster  than  experienced  in  earlier 
crises. 
Capital  and  liquidity  buffers  in  place  through  regulatory  minimums  and  firms’  own 
economic capital calculations, once viewed as robust, proved in many cases to be 
inadequate to absorb mounting losses during the crisis. In addition, the supervisory 
apparatus proved slow to recognize and address the full dimension of the problem, 
and  when  some  large,  systemically  important  firms  approached  failure,  the  public 
sector lacked the tools to resolve them. 
Difficulties arose in winding down large derivatives portfolios because of their size 
and  complexity,  the  back  office  logistics  and  settlement  risks  associated  with 
derivatives  portfolios,  and  the  lack  of  a  sufficiently  harmonized  international  legal 
framework to handle counterparty default or failure. 
At 
to  be 
unsustainable.  At  many  large  institutions,  the  heavy  reliance  on  generating 
mortgage-related revenues, whether through flawed underwriting or creating highly 
complex securities, proved a vulnerability; some institutions lacked stable revenue 
streams robust to macroeconomic conditions; some relied heavily on funding from 
short-term markets such as the tri-party repo market. 
least  some  business  models 
the  crisis  proved 
in  place  before 
Regulatory reform 
The  wave  of  regulatory  reform,  of  course,  corresponds  to  a  considerable  degree  with  the 
problems  observable  during  the  crisis.  Take,  for  example,  solving  the  Too  Big  to  Fail 
problem.  The  regulatory  and  financial  stability  agenda  being  advanced  by  the  Financial 
Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is intended both to reduce 
the probability that large, systemically important firms could fail and to mitigate the costs of 
their failure, should that occur. Measures to raise both the quantity and quality of capital at 
the large, systemically important firms, known as G-SIFIs, such as Basel III and enhanced 
prudential standards, are aimed at reducing the probability of failure. The work on recovery 
and resolution planning, as set out in the Key Attributes for Effective Resolution Regimes, a 
new global standard published in 2011, aims at mitigating the cost of failure by developing 
the  institutional  arrangements  and  concrete  plans  to  place  a  failing  G-SIFI  into  resolution. 
These  initiatives  at  the  global  level  have  been  mirrored  at  the  national  level  in  many 
countries. 
I’d draw special attention to stress testing in its role in reducing the probability of failure and 
to resolution planning in reducing failure’s social cost, because both represent an important 
shift  of  focus  for  the  supervisory  community.  Both  processes  focus  attention  on  the  far 
adverse  tail  of  the  probability  distribution  of  outcomes  for  a  firm.  Technology,  financial 
modeling, and risk management theory and practice have greatly expanded and enhanced 
the supervisors’ ability to analyze and address those severe adverse outcomes. 
Another part of the regulatory reform agenda addresses weaknesses in short-term funding 
markets. Efforts here include seeking to reduce the reliance on intraday credit in the tri-party 
repo  market,  to  strengthen  risk  management  in  the  repo  and  other  short-term  funding 
markets,  and  to  make  progress  toward  developing  a  collateral  liquidation  mechanism  to 
prevent fire sales of collateral in distressed markets. Reforms also are being considered for 
money market mutual funds, where the inherent run risk in the event that a money market 
mutual fund “breaks the buck” continues to be a significant vulnerability. 
Yet  a  third  set  of  initiatives  in  the  reform  agenda  seeks  to  strengthen  the  clearance  and 
settlement infrastructure for over the counter derivatives. In addition to creating incentives to 
move derivative transactions into trade repositories and central counterparties, which provide 
the  benefits  of  risk  management  mechanisms  and  encouragement  of  standardization  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
contract terms, the reform efforts extend to improving the international legal framework for 
derivatives transactions in the event of default and failure or resolution. 
Regulatory  reform  can  create  guardrails  for  the  financial  system,  but  in  my  view,  those 
reforms are far more effective if accompanied by similar reform efforts in the private sector. 
Private  sector  reform  can  take  the  form  of  enhancing  internal  governance,  re-evaluating 
strategy  and  business  models,  and  strengthening  risk  management  and  internal  controls 
within individual firms. It can also take the form of industry collective action to improve market 
structure and practice, to invest in financial infrastructure and to recommend best practices. 
In  the  U.S.,  the  combination  of  public  sector  –  and  private  sector  –  driven  reform  has 
historically played an important role in our financial system and should play a role today. 
I experienced the interplay of public and private sector efforts in the early 1990s, in the wake 
of  the  commercial  real  estate  and  leveraged  buyout  downturn  in  the  US  Northeast.  In  the 
public  sector,  the  supervisors  pursued  an  aggressive  program  of  remediation  for  troubled 
banks  with  three  major  elements.  Because  the  problems  at  that  time  were  simpler,  the 
remediation program imposed by supervisors was easy to understand and it was effective. 
The  three  principal  actions  were:  a  troubled  bank  had  to  raise  additional  capital  and 
strengthen  its  liquidity;  it  needed  to fully  identify  its  problem  assets  and  exposures,  isolate 
them and place them in workout; and it needed to develop a new business plan. 
At the same time, Congress passed the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement 
Act,  otherwise  known  as  FDICIA  in  1992;  for  its  time,  it  contained  a  large  number  of 
provisions to guide supervisory and market practice. Its lasting contributions were the prompt 
corrective action framework escalating the intensity of supervision as capital levels fall in a 
bank  culminating  in  the  ability  to  close  banks  before  capital  is  fully  depleted  and  a 
management attestation about the quality of internal controls that foreshadowed Sarbanes-
Oxley. Today, however, much of FDICIA has been forgotten. 
The  reason?  At  many  financial  firms,  bankers  struck  the  theme  of  “never  again”.  That 
conviction  spurred  them  to  identify  lessons  learned  and  institute  stronger  controls  on 
commercial  real  estate  lending  and  buyout  lending  and  maintain  them.  One  sign  that  the 
effort mattered appeared as the commercial real estate market heated up later in the 1990s 
and  lending  terms  started  to  loosen.  Deal  flow  came  to  a  near-standstill  as  the  controls 
established  in  the  early  1990s  kicked  in.  The  market  only  resumed  when  underwriting 
standards retraced their way back to higher ground. 
So,  as  we  benchmark  progress  in  the  recovery  of  financial  institutions  from  the  recent 
financial  crisis,  one  area  stands  out.  The  early  1990s  supervisory  program  comprised 
strengthening  capital  and  liquidity,  identifying  problem  exposures  and  placing  them  in 
workout, and developing a new business plan – there is one area where more progress will 
need  to  be  made.  The  international  community  of  supervisors  has  done  a  great  deal  to 
address  the  need  for  more  and  better  quality  capital  through  new  capital  standards.  The 
identification  and  workout  of  troubled  assets  has  made  significant  progress,  which  we  can 
observe in the recovery of markets for some troubled assets. But global financial firms are 
still  working on the new business plan. From the financial press, it’s clear that many large 
financial companies have been rethinking their strategies, often along the lines of increasing 
the focus on nonfinancial businesses and households and reducing the focus on expanding 
capital markets businesses. But I believe we are more at the beginning than toward the end 
of that process of reconsideration. 
In  my  personal  view,  the  reconsideration  of  business  plans  needs  to  incorporate  the  long-
term  macroeconomic  and  technology  trends  even  as  they  incorporate  the  lessons  learned 
from  the  financial  crisis.  Those  business  plans  need  to  look  ahead  five  years  or  more  to 
position the financial firms and, with them, the financial system for the opportunities and risks 
that  lie  ahead.  We  will  need  to  meet  the  long-term  challenges  of  changes  in  the  global 
macroeconomy, the distribution of growth opportunities and the distribution of wealth, and the 
speed and power of technological change. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Since so much opportunity has developed elsewhere in the world, how will the public sector 
reform agenda impact the global banking activities of financial institutions? We do not know 
yet how the reform agenda will affect the international activities of G-SIFIs, although we can 
see  some  early  indications.  Higher  capital  requirements  and  more  stringent  prudential 
standards  are  causing  some  firms  to  re-examine  their  correspondent  and  business 
relationships and make new cost-benefit assessments. The greater focus on stress testing 
and resolution planning may lead to more discussion of firm structure, including the number 
of subsidiaries, the alignment of the corporate structure with the firm’s business activities, the 
management of intragroup exposures, the use of parent guarantees, and the correlation of 
the firm’s capital and liquidity structure with the firm’s business and legal entity structure. 
In  my  personal  view,  discussion  will  no  doubt  lead  to  action,  in  the  best  scenario,  by  the 
large, systemically important financial firms themselves. The issues reflect areas where the 
true costs of managing a large, complex, internationally active firm have not yet been fully 
internalized  by  the  firms.  Said  differently,  the  cost  of  international  financial  activity  has 
probably  been  too  low,  and  as  it  rises,  some  readjustment  of  those  activities  will  be 
necessary. 
The forces of change continue strong, as strong as they were in the peak years of innovation 
more than 25 years ago. Now, as then, financial institutions will need to adapt and transform 
themselves. This time, however, we have the sobering experiences of the financial crisis to 
guide us. We all have an interest in moving forward, given the pace of change in the world 
and in technology. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
