  Agustín Carstens: Emerging market economies – challenges and how to 
move forward 
Speech by Mr Agustín Carstens, Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the Economic Club of 
New York, New York City, 28 March 2014. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  and  privilege  to  have  the  opportunity  to  address  such  a  distinguished 
audience, in this venerable fora that is over 100 years old. I thank Roger Ferguson for having 
invited me and Bill Dudley for his kind words of introduction. 
The topic I would like to develop relates to the challenges that Emerging Market Economies 
(EMEs)  are  facing  today  and  in  the  near  future,  and  at  the  same  time  I  will  attempt  to 
delineate a path on how should they respond and move forward. At the outset I would like to 
recognize  that  there  is  substantial  heterogeneity  among  EMEs,  and  by  doing  this  type  of 
grouping  I  run  the  risk  of  making  sweeping  generalizations  that  may  be  unfair  to  some 
countries.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  undeniable  that  EMEs,  Mexico  included,  face  common 
challenges derived from our participation and interaction in the global economy. This in fact 
is  recognized  by  financial  markets,  which  oftentimes  consider  EMEs’  assets  as  an  asset 
class by itself, opening the possibility of contagion among countries. 
Allow me first to go back a few years to provide appropriate background. It is fair to say that 
in  2007–2008,  when  the  global  financial  crisis  erupted,  EMEs  were  by  and  large  well 
prepared.  After  many  countries  in  this  grouping  suffered  sequential  crisis  in  the  seventies, 
eighties  and  nineties,  with  huge  economic,  social  and  political  costs,  we  learnt  important 
lessons. These led to the adoption of key policy actions, of which I would like to highlight the 
following: 
– 
– 
The establishment of flexible exchange rate regimes; 
The  enhancement  of  the  degree  of  autonomy  of  central  banks,  with  primary 
mandate  of  price  stability.  These  led  to  a  wide  adoption  of  inflation  targeting  and 
probably more important for a number of countries, to the end of fiscal dominance; 
Consciousness about the relevance of fiscal discipline and the preservation of public 
debt sustainability; 
Deeper trade liberalization; 
Keeping  up  to  speed  in  financial  sector  supervision  and  regulation,  which  has 
produced well-capitalized banking systems. 
  The result of this behavior was that most EMEs did not have any major economic imbalances 
in  2008.  Previous  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  EMEs  were  not  in  the  radar  screen  of 
vulnerable economies. In support of this claim, let me say that in October 2006, when I left 
the IMF to become Mexico´s Finance Minister, the main concern at the institution was that 
the  number  of  countries  under  IMF  programs  had  shrunk  to  an  all-time  low,  generating 
concerns about the budgetary sustainability of the Fund! 
Then  September,  2008  arrived  with  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers,  among  other 
systemic financial institutions. The jolt to the world economy  was immediately felt, through 
exacerbated financial volatility and a sudden collapse in world trade and economic growth. 
But EMEs recovered very quickly, as trade and growth bounced back in early 2009, with an 
almost  generalized  recognition  of  financial  resiliency.  Access  to  international  financial 
markets was reinstated and no lasting consequences in local markets were apparent. Given 
the  prevailing  situation  then  in  advanced  economies,  talk  started  about  EMEs  decoupling 
from advanced economies. In this context, many EMEs jumped into the bandwagon of trying 
to  defeat  the  world’s  business  cycle  by  implementing  countercyclical  fiscal  and  monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  policies – Mexico did not –, as advocated by fora like the G-20 and the IMFC. The consensus 
was  that  it  was  the  turn  of  EMEs  to  become,  at  least  in  the  foreseeable  future,  the  main 
engine of growth in the world economy. My sense is that this was a premature conclusion. 
Better growth and stability prospects in EMEs, combined with the understandable adoption of 
unconventional  monetary  policies  in  the  main  advanced  economies,  triggered  massive 
capital  inflows  into  EMEs.  This  phenomena  was  interpreted  by  many  authorities  as  a 
ratification  of  the  perceived  economic  strength  of  EMEs.  For  a  while,  those  flows  also 
reinforced  the  acceleration  of  growth  in  EMEs.  In  addition,  China´s  double  digit  growth, 
among  other  factors,  provoked  a  significant  spike  in  commodity  prices,  benefiting  mostly 
EMEs. Taking all these elements into account, the perception for a while was that nothing 
could go wrong with EMEs. 
But under the surface, problems were brewing. Massive capital inflows into EMEs persisted, 
fed  primarily  by  carry  trades  explained  supposedly  by  ex-ante  uncovered  interest  rate 
arbitrage opportunities. Needless to say, this has generated asset mispricing in many EMEs, 
including excessive real exchange rates appreciations, and logically has opened the door for 
sudden capital flow reversals. In addition, the quick recovery in EMEs post 2008, the ample 
liquidity and opportunities for leverage, and the positive terms of trade shocks that were not 
taken  advantage  off  to  strengthen  macrofundamentals,  induced  some  countries  to  believe 
that they had some degrees of freedom in macropolicy management that they really did not 
have. 
Almost a year ago, the global financial cycle was more clearly transmitted to EMEs, probably 
due to the fact that the process of policy normalization in key advanced economies, markedly 
in the United States, started. The beginning of the end of the era of low interest rates and 
ample  liquidity,  together  with  the  correction  in  commodity  prices  that  has  followed  the 
economic  slowdown  in  China,  has  invited  a  re-evaluation  in  EMEs  prospects.  As  a  result, 
vulnerabilities in economic fundamentals in several EMEs have been exposed, in particular 
in those with high levels of public and private leverage, which in turn have produced relatively 
high fiscal and current account deficits. Tighter financial conditions, together with the terms of 
trade  corrections  and  the  lasting  real  effects  of  prolonged  and  excessive  currency 
appreciation, have been reflected in a widespread slowdown in EMEs economic growth. 
To  be  sure,  to  have  advanced  economies,  which  represent  approximately  50  percent  of 
world’s  GDP,  growing  below  potential,  has  not  helped  EMEs  growth  either.  So,  with  the 
benefit of hindsight, my estimation is that the hypothesis of “EMEs decoupling” was more a 
mirage than reality. 
From a financial stability point of view, given these underlying conditions, the main risk for 
EMEs  is  to  be  confronted  with  sudden  massive  capital  reversals,  which  so  far  have  not 
happened; incipient reversals yes, but not massive. To address this issue, it is useful to try to 
identify  which  could  be  the  triggers  of  perverse  market  reactions.  There  could  be  both 
domestic and external triggers. On the domestic side: 
– 
Poor macroeconomic policy management, in particular if the objective is to artificially 
stimulate economic growth; and 
Concerns related to growing internal and external imbalances; for the latter not only 
the current account matters, but also the magnitude and composition of gross asset 
flows. 
 In turn, as external triggers we could have at least four: 
– 
– 
– 
Abrupt changes in monetary policy in advanced economies; 
An interruption in the ongoing strengthening in the European Union; 
Contagion,  given  the  interconnection  in  financial  markets  and  the  possibility  of 
sudden rebalancing of investors’ portfolios, and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Geopolitical risks. 
– 
Therefore, from a political economy point of view, taking a perspective that goes beyond the 
domain of central banks, I would say that the main challenge for EMEs boils down to how to 
stimulate growth without compromising financial stability, facing at the same time an external 
environment plagued with uncertainties. The question then is, how to move forward? 
One  option  would  be  to  try  to  engineer  some  form  of  international  coordinated  policy 
response,  bringing  on  board  both  EMEs  and  advanced  economies.  But  at  this  stage,  this 
option does not seem to be feasible. As the late Anna Schwartz used to say: “international 
policy  coordination  is  a  fair  weather  phenomena”.  Right  now  we  don’t  have  “fair  weather”, 
and I am not referring to New York City. Since 2008 we have had some policy coordination, 
mostly among central banks and financial sector authorities, but primarily to tackle specific 
vulnerabilities in global financial markets. The bottom-line is that EMEs should take policies 
in advanced economies as given. The governments of these economies have to deal  with 
their own problems, which are not negligible. If they succeed, the world will be better off. 
So  EMEs  have  to  find  their  own  way  out.  In  my  mind,  a  three-  pillar  approach  should  be 
followed. 
First  Pillar.  Strong  macrofundamentals  and  policy  settings  are  of  the  essence. 
Basically there is no room for poor fundamentals. 
In particular, it is very important for EMEs to limit financial needs to what is feasible under 
stress  scenarios.  This  calls  for  moderate  fiscal  policies  and  to  use  aggregate  demand 
management to avoid large current account deficits. Monetary policy should concentrate in 
keeping inflation under control, since this is a prerequisite for the flexible exchange rate to be 
able to perform as a shock absorber. The domestic financial markets should be monitored 
with  a  hawkeye;  early  adoption  of  the  enhanced  regulatory  regime  produced  under  the 
auspices  of  the  FSB  and  the  Basel  Committee  should  be  pursed.  On  macroprudential 
policies, they might work under specific circumstances, but they are not substitutes for core 
policy actions. 
Second  Pillar.  External  sector  resilience  under  stress  scenarios  should  be  a  policy 
objective. This is very important to avoid capital reallocations resulting in bad equilibria in 
financial  markets.  So  to  start  with  a  strong  balance  of  payments  is  needed.  Flexibility  in 
interest  and  exchange  rates,  anchored  by  strong  fundamentals,  should  be  part  of  the 
adjustment process. But, given the sheer size of capital inflows to EMEs so far, this might not 
be sufficient. So to count with large international reserves and other forms of backstops, like 
the IMF’s flexible credit line, is highly advisable. Also, the public and private sectors should 
pursue proactive debt management strategies, avoiding bunching of maturities, lengthening 
durations, and keeping an eye on foreign exchange rate mismatches. 
Third  Pillar.  Promote  economic  growth  by  making  the  economy  more  competitive, 
increasing total factor productivity and thus potential GDP growth. This takes us down 
the road of structural reforms, which have huge potential in EMEs. This is the hard way to 
achieve sustainable GDP growth, but is the only reliable one that is left. 
So,  in  summary,  the first  and  second  pillars  are  meant  to guarantee financial  stability,  not 
necessarily inhibiting economic growth. The real lever for promoting growth lies in the third 
pillar. As the saying goes: plan for the worst, hope for the best. 
Let me conclude by saying that I am an optimist, even though my remarks might not project 
that. As you know, we central bankers, by design, are overly cautious, and we are “worriers”. 
All  things  considered,  EMEs  have  sailed  through  the  global  financial  crisis  relatively  well, 
notwithstanding  the  bumpiness  in  the  ride.  Required  policy  responses  have  been 
implemented  on  a  timely  basis  in  most  cases,  and  the  underlying  fundamentals  are  still 
strong. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  With  regard  to  my  own  country,  Mexico,  I  can  say  that  we  have  in  place  a  plan  that  fully 
complies  with  the  three  pillar  approach  I  just  presented  to  you.  Macrofundamentals  are  in 
good  shape,  we  have  a  strong  external  position,  even  under  stress  scenarios,  and 
unprecedented structural reforms are under way. 
All  this,  hopefully  with  stronger  economic  growth  in  the  United  States  –  our  main  trading 
partner  –  should  allow  us  to  preserve  financial  stability  even  under  turbulent  times,  and 
increase  gradually  potential  GDP  growth  to  reach  a  level  close  to  5  percent  at  the  end of 
President Peña Nieto´s Administration. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
