  Lesetja Kganyago: Policy choices in a low growth, high inflation 
environment 
Address by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at 
the University of Limpopo, Faculty of Commerce, Sovenga, Limpopo, 6 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Last week in the Financial Times, columnist Wolfgang Münchau reported a conversation he 
had  with  a  central  banker  in  the  1990s,  at  a  time  when  inflation  targeting  was  first  being 
adopted. What would you do, Münchau asked then, if you faced stagflation – low growth and 
high inflation? Would you raise rates and risk a recession? The banker replied that such a 
situation would never occur. Münchau now accepts he was right – it never happened. 
He shouldn’t give up so easily. 
South Africa finds itself at precisely this unpleasant juncture. Growth was negative in the first 
quarter  of  the  year,  the  worst  performance  since  the  2009  recession.  Meanwhile,  inflation 
has crept above the target, reaching 6.1% in April, and the Reserve Bank has since January 
forecast  an  extended  breach  of  the  target  lasting  until  the  second  quarter  of  2015.  This 
morning, I would like to speak to you about how we got into this difficult situation, and what 
policy  can  do  about  it.  I  will  mostly  talk  about  monetary  policy,  because  that  is  my 
responsibility, but let me say upfront that monetary policy cannot fix these problems alone. 
Monetary policy can help staunch the bleeding, but it cannot heal the patient. 
Inflation 
2. 
Starting with inflation, a central banker, like Münchau’s nameless interlocutor, might consider 
high  inflation  and  low  growth  to  be  an  impossible  combination  because  weak  demand 
alleviates price pressures. If firms lack for customers, they are unlikely to raise prices and 
scare off buyers. There is substantial evidence that demand has moderated in South Africa. 
Credit growth has been subdued. Mortgages, the largest category of credit extension, have 
grown  slower  than  inflation  for  several  years.  Unsecured  lending,  which  expanded  very 
briskly in recent years, is now dropping fast. Installments, which mostly fund the purchase of 
motor vehicles, are also slowing markedly; new vehicles sales appear to have peaked last 
year. Retail sales have also been sluggish, falling in March 2014 on a month-on-month basis, 
and  retailers  are  expecting  a  poor  second  quarter.  These  indicators  do  not  point  to  an 
overheating economy and demand-driven inflation. 
Why, then, do we have above-target inflation? I would like to draw your attention to two main 
causes, cost-push pressures and exchange rate depreciation. 
Cost-push inflation 
2.1 
Cost-push pressures impart a structural upward bias to prices. The logic is that many firms 
and  employees  enjoy  limited  competition,  so  they  make  high  wage  and  price  demands 
without risking losing jobs or customers. However, the two influence each other. When firms 
raise prices, costs go up for workers, who then demand higher wages. Higher wages raise 
costs  for  firms,  who  then  raise  prices,  and  so  forth.  The  result  is  consistent  inflationary 
pressure. There is abundant evidence for this dynamic in South Africa, but let me illustrate 
my  point  using  one  particular  example:  inflation  expectations.  On  behalf  of  the  Reserve 
Bank,  the  Bureau  for  Economic  Research  at  Stellenbosch  University  measures  inflation 
expectations  by  surveying  three  groups:  businesses,  unions  and  financial  analysts. 
Generally,  the  focus  is  on  the  aggregate  of  their  expectations.  However,  businesses  and 
unions  have  systematically  higher  expectations 
is  especially 
than  analysts,  which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  problematic given these actors actually determine prices and wages. In a recent paper, Alain 
Kabundi,  Eric  Schaling  and  Modeste  Some  estimated  that  businesses  and  unions  have 
implicit  inflation  targets  of  6.8%  and  6.2%  respectively,  above  the  Reserve  Bank’s  3–6% 
target.  With  expectations  like  these,  price  setters  will  keep  inflation  high  despite  weak 
economic conditions. 
Inflation and the exchange rate 
2.2 
The  exchange  rate  affects  inflation  both  in  how  it  moves  and  in  how  that  movement  gets 
passed-through  to  consumer  prices.  South  Africa  faces  inflation  from  both  these  sources, 
and I’ll discuss them in that order. 
The  rand  has  been  on  a  depreciating  trend  since  the  start  of  2011,  which  accelerated 
markedly after May 2013 and again in January 2014. In both cases, faster depreciation was 
driven by international developments. In May it was “taper talk”, which surprised markets with 
news  that  the  Federal  Reserve  might  start  tapering  its  asset-purchase  programme  sooner 
than expected. In January, it was the actual implementation of tapering. Since then, the rand 
has  appreciated  somewhat,  for  reasons  that  remain  mostly  international.  In  the  United 
States,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  settled  into  a  predictable  pattern  of  tapering  by 
US$10 billion  per  meeting.  Market  sentiment  now  holds  that  rate  increases  remain  quite 
distant and will be gentle when they do come, thanks to low inflation and moderate growth. 
Meanwhile, the European Central Bank is still moving towards looser monetary policy, rather 
than away from it, as is the Bank of Japan. The result has been renewed global appetite for 
risk, leading to currency appreciation for most of the emerging markets which had previously 
experienced weakening exchange rates. 
Domestic  factors  seem  to  have  played  only  a  supporting  role  in  driving  emerging  market 
currency movements over this period. In South Africa, markets appear to have welcomed the 
responsiveness  of  monetary  policy  to  rising  inflation;  the  current  account  deficit  also 
narrowed somewhat in the last quarter of 2013. But South Africa’s economic fundamentals 
have on the whole not changed substantially, nor have markets assessed them differently: 
the current account deficit remains over 5% of GDP and growth has deteriorated. It would be 
very rash indeed to assume that the rand’s long depreciation trend is now concluded, and 
that  henceforth  a  strengthening  rand  will  mitigate  inflation.  Instead,  South  Africa  remains 
vulnerable to further changes in global sentiment, which could be sudden. 
The other aspect of exchange-rate linked inflation is pass-through. With certain prices, pass-
through  is  quick  and  complete.  The  obvious  example  is  petrol  prices,  which  have  exerted 
substantial inflationary pressure despite relatively flat international prices thanks to exchange 
rate depreciation. But many prices behave differently. In a weak economy, firms may choose 
to  absorb  higher  import  costs  rather  than  pass  them  on  to  consumers,  leading  to  a 
divergence between headline consumer prices and the exchange rate. This seems to have 
been the pattern from the start of 2011 until early 2014. However, at some point firms will 
judge that their profit margins have been eroded to an unacceptable degree, and they will 
start passing on these costs to consumers. 
We see evidence that firms are being squeezed in producer price inflation, which reached 
8.8% in April, its highest level in two years. And we see evidence for higher pass-through in 
rising  core  inflation,  which  has  picked  up  again  after  a  period  of  stability  in  2013.  Our 
conclusion  is  that  pass-through  has  risen,  pushing  inflation  above  the  target.  This  effect 
cannot be expected to abate just because the rand has recovered some lost ground. If the 
currency  begins  to  trade  in  a  stable  band  well  above  its  old  levels,  stability  will  not 
necessarily moderate pass-through; rather, it could convince firms to price in the new normal 
level. We should not assume that inflation will simply track the most recent movement of the 
exchange rate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The role of monetary policy 
3. 
South Africa has a flexible inflation targeting framework for monetary policy. Flexibility means 
that inflation does not have to be within the target at all times; instead, policymakers will look 
through  passing  shocks  –  for  example,  during  the  temporary  departure  from  the  target  in 
August  2013,  which  was  driven  by  petrol  prices.  Flexibility  also  means  avoiding  abrupt 
interest rate movements which might destabilise the economy. But flexibility does not mean 
ignoring sustained breaches of the target. With inflation expected to be above 6% for about a 
year, and given that that the exceptional period of ultra-low world rates is ineluctably drawing 
to  a close, the  Reserve  Bank  has  commenced a  monetary  policy  tightening  cycle,  starting 
with a 50-basis point increase in January. 
In describing the revised monetary policy stance, we have been at pains to emphasise that 
this tightening cycle will not necessarily move rates as far or as fast as in previous cycles. 
There are good reasons for this. Subdued economic growth reduces demand-driven inflation. 
Fiscal policy has moved in the direction of consolidating deficits, which should ease pressure 
on capital markets. World rates are very low, and may not return to pre-crisis norms. Global 
inflation is subdued. 
We  have  also  emphasised  that  monetary  policy  remains  accommodative,  despite  the 
January hike. It is easy but wrong to confuse the change in monetary policy with its level. In 
real terms, the repo rate is still negative. Furthermore, since 2009, the MPC has accepted 
inflation closer to the upper end of the target than it might in different circumstances, so as to 
support the recovery. In other words, monetary policy has done a great deal to assist growth. 
But  this  is  not the  only  message  to  bear  in  mind  when  thinking  about the  monetary  policy 
stance.  The  other  message  is  that  monetary  policy  is  not  the  long-run  solution  to  South 
Africa’s growth problems. Over the long-run, monetary policy is effective at achieving price 
stability, but it can generate additional growth only at the cost of rising inflation. This is why 
the Bank’s core mandate is for price stability. To address high inflation and low growth, what 
South Africa really needs are structural reforms. And it needs them even more urgently given 
the paucity of alternatives: 
• 
The two growth engines which powered the economy in the late 2000s are running 
down. Commodity prices remain high, in comparative perspective, but South Africa’s 
terms of trade peaked in 2011, and will probably continue to decline as China slows 
and rebalances. Credit extension has also been growing quite feebly in South Africa, 
and although household balance sheets have improved, they are not robust enough 
to sustain another round of credit-driven growth. 
Furthermore,  the  policy  stimuli  which  have  bolstered  growth  since  the  crisis  now 
need  to  be  slowly  withdrawn.  Responsible  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  in  the 
pre-crisis period left South Africa with considerable policy space to run fiscal deficits 
and enjoy record-low interest rates. But now debt levels are once again approaching 
uncomfortable levels, and as I have already said, the inflation outlook requires an 
interest rate hiking cycle. 
 The need for reform 
4. 
The  above  notwithstanding,  South  Africa  does  have  attractive  prospects  for  policy  reform. 
The National Development Plan (NDP) outlines ten critical actions which we should focus on 
to take the country to the next level, that of a higher, labour absorbing growth path. These 
critical actions include: 
1. 
A  social  compact  to  reduce  poverty  and  inequality,  and  raise  employment  and 
investment, founded on partnerships with all sectors of society. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
 A  multipronged  strategy  to  address  poverty  and  its  impacts  through  broadening 
access  to  employment,  strengthening  the  social  wage,  providing  public  transport 
and raising rural incomes. 
Steps  by  the  state  to  professionalise  the  public  service,  strengthen  accountability, 
improve coordination and prosecute corruption. 
Boost  private  investment  in  labour-intensive  areas,  competitiveness  and  exports, 
with adjustments to lower the risk of hiring younger workers. 
An  education  account-ability  chain,  with  lines  of  responsibility  from  state  to 
classroom.  
Phase in national health insurance, with a focus on upgrading public health facilities, 
producing more health professionals and reducing the relative cost of private health 
care. 
Public infrastructure investment at 10 percent of gross domestic product, financed 
through  tariffs,  public-private  partnerships,  taxes  and  loans  and  focused  on 
transport, energy, water and freight. 
Interventions to ensure environmental sustainability and resilience to future shocks. 
New spatial norms and standards – densifying cities, improving transport, locating 
jobs  where  people  live,  upgrading  informal  settlements  and  fixing  housing  market 
gaps. 
Reduce  crime  by  strengthening  criminal 
environments. 
improving  community 
justice  and 
Conclusion 
5. 
Looking  around  the  world,  this  is  something  of  a  springtime  for  reform.  In  Mexico,  for 
example, the government has adopted a bold structural reform package, known as the Pact 
for Mexico, which includes major changes in telecommunications and education policy. More 
recently,  in  India,  a  development  platform  with  the  promise  to  reverse  several  years  of 
sub-par growth and high inflation is being pursued. 
The  lesson  to  take  from  this  is  that  we  are  not  helpless  in  the  face  of  economic 
disappointment,  of  high  inflation  and  low  growth.  For  monetary  policymakers,  with  limited 
tools,  this  situation  provides  no  attractive  choices.  But  there  are  many  appealing  options 
available  for  other  aspects  of  policy.  For  South  Africa,  our  present  predicament  should  be 
read  as  an  invitation  to  embrace  reform.  The  National  Development  Plan  provides  a 
compelling basis upon which to build our reform agenda. 
Let  us  begin  to  do  the  work.  The  contribution  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  to  the 
National Development Plan is captured in the constitution of the Republic of SA and I would 
like to end by quoting “Section 224.The primary object of the South African Reserve Bank is 
to  protect  the  value  of  the  currency  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable  economic 
growth in the Republic.” 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
