  Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview with Deutschlandfunk 
Interview  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, with Deutschlandfunk, conducted on 4 September and aired on 7 September 
2014. 
 Ms  Lautenschläger,  you  are  a  member  of  the  six-person  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank. In a few weeks, the ECB will be entering what is practically a 
new era. You are taking over supervision of the most important European banks. That 
is a balance sheet of more than €21 trillion. The question is, therefore, are you up to 
the task? Are you ready for take-off? 
We are ready to start, or we will be ready to start in November. We have taken on quite an 
astonishing number of highly qualified staff. So far, there are 28 nations represented here. 
So, how many people will be working there in the new supervision function? 
We will have 800 supervisors plus an additional 250 staff who will provide the support. These 
are  colleagues  carrying  out  legal  work  and  colleagues  involved  in  IT  or  recruitment. 
Altogether, that makes 1,050. 
And how easy was it to fill the positions? Did you have a lot of applications? 
Almost 20,000, I heard last week. That’s something I’m very proud of. We appear to be very 
attractive – which I can understand. It’s a great job. And we had applications not only from 
bank  supervisors  from  lots  of  countries,  but  also  from  employees  in  accountancy  firms, 
management consultants and a very large number of bankers. 
How does it work in practice? How are the banks monitored? Are banks scrutinised by 
teams of people from various countries, or how do you do it? 
It  depends  to  some  extent  on  what  kind  of  bank  it  is.  It  is  divided  into  two  parts.  We  will 
directly  supervise  120  credit  institutions  in  the  euro  area,  for  which  there  are  these  mixed 
teams  of  supervisors.  Altogether,  that  represents  80%  of  the  aggregated  balance  sheet  of 
the  banks  in  the  euro  area.  That’s  already  quite  a  lot.  And  then  there  is  the  indirect 
supervision. That is around 3,500 credit institutions, representing the remaining 20% of the 
aggregated  balance  sheet  of  the  banks  in  the  euro  area.  And  we  will  set  the  supervisory 
standards for this, so that there is uniform supervision. However, the supervision itself – the 
decisions etc. – will be carried out by the national supervisory authorities. 
The financial centre of Frankfurt is actually a bit of a male bastion. If you look out of 
the window here, in the towers – Deutsche Bank, Commerzbank – the men have the 
final  say.  But  in  banking  supervision  there  are  an  astonishingly  large  number  of 
women.  For  example,  Danièle  Nouy,  the  new  chief  bank  supervisor,  Elke  König,  the 
President of the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin), and, of course, you 
yourself. Are women better at keeping an eye on banks? 
Yes, well, I would say it’s a tough job, and that’s something to which we are suited. 
So, would the financial crisis not have happened with women charge ? 
Lautenschläger: That’s a tough question. I don’t like thinking in such boxes. There are men 
who are risk-takers and there are women who are risk-takers, and there are also much less 
risky business activities that both men and women pursue. So, please, don’t think in terms of 
pigeon holes. 
However,  you  once  said  you  could  imagine  that,  with  the  start  of  the  new  banking 
supervision, there could also be a new European supervisory culture? 
Yes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  What are we to understand by that? 
That  that  is  what  I  would  like  to  hope.  That  is  what  I  expect.  And  we  have  been  working 
towards it for months. 
So, what’s new about this culture? 
Well,  this  supervisory  culture  will  at  last  bring  together  the  experience,  the  knowledge,  of 
19 different  supervisory  authorities  –  in  fact  it’s  actually  28  when  you  consider  that  we 
currently have 28 countries represented among our staff. It will at last incorporate the lessons 
of the crisis. It will ensure that, through a fusion of these different traditions, we create better 
supervision  using  the  best  practices  that  we  will  devise  from  these  different  supervisory 
cultures. And this supervisory culture will most certainly be able to assert itself. It will be in 
direct contact with the credit institutions, very close to the bank, challenging the bank in its 
valuations and detecting risks at an early stage, and then also taking action. It will not simply 
collect and evaluate information, but will also go on to do something. 
So,  how  well  prepared  are  the  large  European  banks  for  this  supervision?  We  hear 
that Deutsche Bank has already obtained a lot of capital and so on. What would you 
say? Are they well prepared? 
Well, the capital has more to do with whether one is prepared for the health check. In that 
regard,  I  would  say  that  some  have  done  their  homework.  Since  July  2013,  more  than 
€140 billion has been added in additional capital or by reducing business etc. That is quite a 
sum.  But  supervision  is  not  just  this  health  check.  Instead,  it  concerns  the  fact  that,  as  a 
bank,  I  would  have  to  adjust  to  a  new  supervisor.  What  supervisory  culture  does  it  have? 
How tough is it? How seriously does it take certain things? How quickly will it actually want to 
see  deficiencies  corrected  etc?  And  that  is  what  the  banks  are  preparing  themselves  for. 
And, finally, it also concerns the fact that banks are now going to have to do everything in 
English and not in German. 
While we’re discussing the health check – this time it’s a bit different than in the past. 
You are first conducting an inspection of the banks’ balance sheets. Why? 
Well, the stress tests which we have seen so far were applied to the valuations made by the 
banks  themselves  for  their  operations,  that  is  to  say  for  the  individual  contracts,  for  the 
individual  transactions.  I  would  put  a  question  mark  over  whether  those  valuations  were 
occasionally a bit too positive, whether, ultimately, the starting position to which the stress 
was applied – assuming more or less that an economic crisis was developing and looking at 
how the value of these transactions developed – was too positive. Therefore, this time, we 
have  looked  at  the  most  significant,  most  risky  transactions  of  the  banks  and  gained  an 
impression of the valuation standards. We have also valued individual transactions ourselves 
in order to see where we might have to reduce the valuation of individual transactions and 
then apply stress to this reduced value. 
Will banks fail? 
I cannot tell you that yet. We are right in the middle of the quality assurance. And, I’m afraid, 
much as I really like Deutschlandfunk, I have no insider knowledge for you. 
But  there  is  a  study  which  says  that,  of  the  130  banks,  there  are  nine  or  ten  that 
probably won’t manage it? 
Well, of course, the studies don’t have our insights. And I am not going to pass them on. 
But, speaking generally, without mentioning individual banks or figures, how good are 
the German banks? 
I’m  not  going  to  tell  you  that  either.  You  can  ask  me  as  many  times  as  you  like.  We  will 
announce the results in the second half of October this year, and then we’ll see what’s going 
on in the German banks and in the other banks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Let us assume that the results have been published and there are a couple of banks 
that have failed. What would you do then? Provide capital in next to no time? 
Well, if banks actually see a need for capital in the asset quality review or in the stress test, 
meaning  that,  in  the  end,  they  fail  to  meet  our  benchmark  of  5.5% in  the  stress  test  –  or, 
more specifically, in the adverse stress test – and of 8% in … 
You will have to explain “adverse stress test”, if we’re going to use the term. 
Oh,  sorry.  “Adverse”  means  using  a  special,  very  tough  scenario  of  an  economic  slump. 
Now, if they no longer meet this 5.5% capital ratio – or, more specifically, core capital ratio – 
or the 8% core capital ratio in the less tough stress scenario or the asset quality review, then 
the credit institutions will have two weeks to present a capital plan to us. This capital plan 
must provide us with a fully credible explanation of how, over the next six months or nine 
months respectively, they intend to close these gaps in their capital. That means that each 
bank has a further six or nine months to meet the capital requirement. 
So,  can  we,  as  taxpayers  or  as  investors,  be  sure  that,  when  you  take  over  the 
supervision,  there  will  be  no  more  bank  crashes,  no  more  episodes  like  the  one  at 
Espìrito Santo – the Portuguese bank which got into difficulties this summer? Can we 
be sure that there will be no more bank crashes? 
I will, of course, not comment on individual banks. I am also of the opinion that it must be 
obvious that a bank can be wound up. To put it plainly, imagine what it would be like if we 
have 4,000 banks in the euro area and not one is allowed somehow to go down the drain 
economically. 
But, Ms Lautenschläger, isn’t there a fault in the system there? We don’t have bank 
resolution regime yet. It is on the way, but it does not exist yet. If a bank had to be 
wound up in the next few months, the framework does not exist yet, does it? 
In Germany, there is a framework under the German Bank Restructuring Act. 
But in Germany, all the banks will pass the test, won’t they? 
I have not said anything about which banks from which countries might possibly not pass the 
test! And you won’t get me to do so either! 
Okay. 
No,  in  Germany  we  have  a  Bank  Restructuring  Act.  Many  other  countries  also  have  bank 
restructuring laws. Some countries don’t, and then the national insolvency law applies. So, a 
bank can indeed be wound up. However, it is our aim that a bank should be wound up in an 
orderly  fashion,  without  affecting  financial  stability.  That  is,  of  course,  the  point  of  the 
European bank restructuring law that you, I believe, were alluding to. That will not in fact be 
in place until 2016. Nonetheless, for me it is very important to make it clear that individual 
banks  must  be  able  to  leave  the  market.  Otherwise,  we  would  not  have  a  proper  market, 
because we would never ultimately remove banks from the market that do not have a sound 
business model. However, you asked me whether we were more secure overall. I would, of 
course, like to answer that. I believe that we will provide better supervision. That means that 
we will, of course, make our contribution to ensuring financial stability. However, that does 
not mean that one bank or another will not leave the market. 
Generally speaking, have the banks become more humble? At the moment, they (the 
banks) have a lot on their plates with stress tests, penalties, regulation. You have been 
involved  with  banks  for  the  whole  of  your  professional  career  –  has  anything 
changed? 
I would not equate it with humility, but I would perhaps mention the word “cautiousness” or a 
greater  awareness  of  the  lack  of  understanding  in  the  society.  There  is  quite  clearly  also 
greater awareness that the rules have become very much tighter, that countries, regulators 
and supervisors have finally become much more critical, and that the framework overall has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  been found to be too loose, too soft, and that we are now tightening all the reins – and rightly 
so. 
The ECB is now the supervisor and, at the same time, the central bank. Is there not a 
danger that this will somehow become mixed up? 
On one hand, there are synergies to be gained. It is good as a supervisor to also have the 
knowledge that a central bank has, for example, about an economic environment, about the 
markets, about infrastructures such as payment services. In this area, therefore, there are 
synergies to be gained, simply by exchanging information. On the other hand, it is of course 
the case that, when you conduct monetary policy, you always have an eye on the banks as a 
transmission  channel,  and  then  conflicts  of  interest  can,  of  course,  be  expected.  Let  us 
assume, for example, that you provide emergency liquidity assistance to banks and, at the 
same time, as banking supervisor, you ask yourself: “Is this bank still solvent?” That would, 
for example, be such a case. For this case, we have very clear rules. They were laid down 
for us by the European legislator, but we also impose them on ourselves. They concern the 
fact that, ultimately, the decision-making channels, right up to the Governing Council of the 
ECB, are kept fully separate. That means that the central bank side, with the exception of the 
Governing  Council,  does  not  know  what  is  being  decided  or  prepared  on  the  banking 
supervision side, and the banking supervision side does not know what is being prepared on 
the central bank side. 
That  is  why  they  sit  in  two  towers  so  far  apart  from  each  other.  One,  the  ECB,  is 
located in the new tower in Frankfurt, and the supervision is located in the old tower. 
Precisely.  Yes,  they  are  located  in  two  different  buildings.  But  there  are  also  very  clear 
decision-making channels which are separate from each other. On the central bank side, the 
Executive  Board  prepares  the  decisions.  On  the  supervision  side,  these  decisions  are 
prepared by the Supervisory Board, which is composed of the representatives of the national 
supervisory authorities and representatives of the ECB who, with one exception, are not on 
the central bank side. But, to ensure that one side knows what the other side knows, there is 
one person who acts as a bridge between the two, and you are talking to her right now. 
And  we  are  very  pleased  about  that,  since  we  have  you  here  with  us  for  the 
“Interview of the week” at Deutschlandfunk – Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the 
Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  One  of  the  sides  was  very  active 
this week, and – to the surprise of many – initiated a cut in interest rates. The key rate 
is now only 0.05%. That surprised a lot of people. What is the reason for such a low 
interest rate? 
Well, first of all, the low interest rates are justified. I know that very many of your listeners 
may not always be able to fully appreciate that. It is, however, the case that the economic 
growth we are seeing in the euro area as a whole is simply too modest not to want to give 
growth a boost through low interest rates. In addition, as you also know, we have very low 
rates of inflation. And that is another reason why these low interest rates are justified. The 
interest  rate  move  to  which  you  have  just  referred  ensures,  ultimately,  that  we  have  now 
arrived at the very bottom. That is, in view of the interest rate move, now the lower bound. 
And that was also the intention. 
But others might say: “So, now they are at the bottom. Now there is nothing more they 
can do.” Is that not an admission that there is now nothing more that can be done? Is 
that not an admission of the powerlessness of the ECB? 
That  would  be  so  if,  in  addition  to  interest  rate  adjustments,  there  were  not  also  other 
measures  which,  ultimately,  can  be  used  to  influence  the  rate  of  inflation  and  economic 
growth. 
We will come to the other measures in a moment. Staying briefly on the subject of the 
low  interest  rates,  because  that  is  of  real  interest  to  many  of  our  listeners  who  are 
looking at their savings and life insurance and saying: “What is the ECB doing? Is it 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
actually conducting monetary policy against me as a saver?” What would you say to 
them? 
I would say that the ECB is not conducting monetary policy against your listeners as savers. I 
have a lot of understanding for the fact that savers are concerned. I am, by the way, also a 
saver. But I believe we must not think so short-term, but more middle and long-term. And you 
have to simply recognise that you can’t save if you don’t have a job. And if, at the end of the 
day, the economic environment is so weak that economic growth cannot be generated, then 
we at the ECB must consider how we can ensure that economic growth is generated and 
that  inflation  rises  from  the,  as  mentioned,  very  low  inflation  rate  of  0.3%?  How  can  we 
ensure  that  jobs  are  safe  and  remain  or  that  new  jobs  are  created?  And  not  only  for 
Germany,  but  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  We  are  not  conducting  monetary  policy  for 
Germany alone – that is a very important point! And with this interest rate cut, which is one 
measure among a package of measures – also a very important point –, another small input 
is  ultimately  being  provided  and  the  lower  limit  has  been  reached.  Again,  the  low  interest 
rates  are,  unfortunately,  justified  at  this  time.  It  is  my  conviction  that  they,  of  course,  also 
entail  risks,  and  therefore  it  is  also  my  conviction  that,  if  the  conditions  improve,  then  we 
should, of course, also allow interest rates to rise again. 
So you can give people a little hope when they look at their savings books and their 
pensions that things will not remain as they are, that you will also become active again 
and raise interest rates? 
Well, things will remain as they are as long as the economic conditions remain unchanged. In 
our projections, inflation is too low over too long a period of time. And that is what we must 
respond to, because our mandate is price stability, and price stability means upwards as well 
as downwards. That means, if we have inflation that is too low, with all the dangers that I 
have already described to you, then we must also respond to that. 
Is  there,  as  a  result  of  the  cheap  money,  a  threat  of  bubbles,  for  example  in  the 
property markets? 
That is often mentioned as one of the risks. And, yes, there are such side effects. If we are 
talking about possible bubbles in the German property sector, I can tell you that so far we 
cannot detect any. Nor does the Deutsche Bundesbank see any. We can detect overheating 
here  and  there  in  certain  areas  in  certain  cities  in  Germany.  However,  a  bubble  is  not 
generated through rising prices alone, but also through a simultaneous rise in credit growth, 
which,  in  the  end,  is  what  finances  such  bubbles  and  such  overheating.  And  we  cannot 
detect  that.  I  would  say  that,  until  the  middle  of  the  year  at  least  (I  don’t  have  the  latest 
figures  yet),  credit  growth  in  the  property  sector  in  Germany  was  not  extraordinary,  but, 
rather, at the lower end of the scale. 
Turning away from Germany again and looking at Europe more widely, for many small 
and  medium-sized  enterprises,  particularly  in  southern  Europe,  credit  growth  is 
unsatisfactory. For this reason, the ECB has now decided to purchase asset-backed 
securities  (ABSs).  This  allows  banks  to  clear  their  portfolios,  i.e.  what  they  have 
issued, from their balance sheets and to grant new loans again. That, I believe, is the 
basic idea of this measure. Has this any prospect of success? Many people say that 
there is no real market for these ABSs that are now going to be purchased, that the 
market is not large enough. 
Now, first of all, there is a market. There is a market for the senior tranches, but there is also 
a  market  for  the  mezzanine  tranches.  However,  the  point  is  not  only  to  show  that  we  will 
purchase  something  that  already  exists,  but  to  send  a  signal  to  the  market  that  we  will 
purchase  certain  securities  over  a  certain  period,  so  it  makes  sense  to  generate  them,  to 
produce them. Therefore, you have to look not only at the market that is already there, but 
also at what signal is being given out for future business activities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
In the United States, these ABSs were the fuel for the property crisis, so they carry a 
bit of a stigma. How do we get out of that? 
I  believe  that  we  must  be  careful  not  to  lump  all  securitisations  together.  There  are 
securitisations which, ultimately, are simply a large pool of very transparent loans which can 
be easily evaluated, which are very simply structured, and which have been standardised, 
pooled  and  then  securitised.  I  don’t  consider  those  particularly  dangerous.  In  fact,  I  don’t 
consider them dangerous at all, if they are simple and transparent in their structure and if 
individual valuations – for each individual loan – are available. What emerged in the United 
States  and  ultimately  led  to  this  contamination  were  extremely  complex  structures.  In  that 
case,  there  were  securitisations  of  securitisations  or  “CDO-squared”.  These  securitisations 
were no longer transparent. The credit institutions and the investors no longer had any idea 
what they had bought in terms of individual loan values. Instead, at the end of the day, they 
simply assumed that diversification would keep the risk within limits. Moreover, and this is the 
significant factor with regard to US mortgage law, nobody really paid any attention to the fact 
that what we, for example, have in Germany in terms of collateral standards before such a 
mortgage loan can be granted, did not exist at all in the United States. Mortgage transactions 
were also not supervised. 
Will  the  ECB  go  a  step  further?  These  are  ABSs.  Will  the  ECB  at  some  time  also 
purchase government bonds on a large scale? Will it begin a massive bond purchase 
programme? 
We have decided on a package of measures, in particular that we will purchase ABSs, that 
we will purchase covered bonds, and that we have again reduced interest rates. At this time, 
I would prefer not to discuss future possibilities with you. 
This week, the President of the ECB, Mr Draghi, also spoke of geopolitical risks that 
people  will  have  to  keep  an  eye  on.  Does  this  refer  to  the  risks  arising  from  the 
Ukraine crisis? 
Precisely what he meant is something you will have to ask Mr Draghi, but I would assume so. 
Can you see geopolitical risks? 
Yes, of course. There is certainly a risk arising from the Ukraine crisis – a confidence risk 
relating  to  certain  growth  prospects.  So  far,  it  has  not  manifested  itself  in  the  economic 
indicators, but that it is, after all, a risk that could manifest itself at some time is undeniable. 
The final question. You are extraordinarily active, and now there is also going to be a 
new ten euro note this month. Is everything going well with that? Last time, there were 
some  problems  with  vending  machines  etc.  It  is  now  due  on  23  September.  Will  it 
arrive? 
I think it will arrive. I also hope that everyone is well prepared. We at the ECB have done our 
best. We informed people very early. We provided all the information to enable the vending 
machine producers or operators to modify their software. However, at the end of the day, we 
are dependent on the vending machine operators to actually send a mechanic to modify the 
software or do whatever he has to do to ensure that the ten euro note is recognised. After we 
have prepared everything, after we have provided all the information and knowledge, it is in 
the  hands  of,  and  is  therefore  the  responsibility  of,  the  vending  machine  operators.  And  I 
would just like to appeal to them right now. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
