  Daniel Mminele: Shaping cross-border banking integration in Africa 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Association  for  African  Central  Bankers  (AACB)  Roundtable  on  “Cross-Border  Banking  In 
Africa – A Force for the Good?”, Washington DC, 11 April 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. Thank you to the conference organisers for inviting 
me  to  deliver  a few  remarks  this  afternoon  on  shaping  cross-border  banking  integration  in 
Africa. This is an area which has seen tremendous growth in recent years, particularly with 
the rise of Africa-based regional lenders. 
I will divide my remarks into four parts: I will first reflect on the drivers of cross-border banking 
within the region; then highlight the benefits of cross-border banking; consider the challenges 
of integration and finally, consider the role of regulators. 
Drivers of cross border banking in Africa 
2. 
Against the backdrop of robust growth on the African continent over the past decade, Africa 
has become an increasingly sought after and active destination for investment and banking 
activity.  The  year-on-year  growth  in  Africa’s  gross  domestic  product  has  consistently 
surpassed  that  of  the  global  economy,  and  that  of  advanced  economies,  benefitting  from 
high commodity prices of recent years, as well as rising domestic demand in alignment with 
trends of increased urbanisation and disposable income within the region1. According to the 
International Monetary Fund April 2014 World Economic Outlook, Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) 
is forecast to grow by over 5 per cent in 2014, up from 4.9 per cent in 2013. 
SSA saw substantial capital inflows in 2013 totalling US$30 billion2, with countries such as 
Ghana,  Nigeria  and  Zambia  in  particular  benefitting  from  an  increase  in  portfolio  inflows, 
reflecting  growing  positive  global  business  sentiment  towards  Africa.  There  has  also  been 
robust  loan  demand  within  the  region,  according  to  the  Institute  of  International  Finance’s 
survey on emerging market bank lending conditions. It would seem then that despite slowing 
demand for commodities from China, growth could remain supported by improved investor 
sentiment  towards  African  financing  and  an  increasingly  conducive  business  and  debtor 
environment in the region driving financial deepening and cross-border banking. 
Another reason for the rise in cross border banking, particularly in Africa, is the wide-ranging 
international financial regulatory reform agenda adopted after the global financial crisis. The 
new  and  stringent  regulatory  requirements  imposed  by  jurisdictions  such  as  the  US  and 
European  Union  on  their  banks  have  meant  that  these  international  banks  are  doing  less 
business within Africa, opening up an opportunity for larger African based banks to enter new 
African markets. The integration process is however slow and not without its challenges, as I 
will elaborate on shortly. 
Benefits of cross-border banking 
3. 
Growth in African cross-border banking has not been confined to South Africa’s four largest 
private banks. Banks from Nigeria, Morocco and Kenya, including banks such as Ecobank 
and  the  United  Bank  of  Africa,  have  also  taken  advantage  of  emerging  opportunities.  The 
                                                
1  United Nations World Economic Situation and Prospects 2014. 
2 
IMF Balance of Payments Statistics, February 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  resulting increase in the availability of banking services to segments of the African population 
previously excluded from formal banking, has contributed to enhancing the culture of savings 
and entrepreneurship with obvious benefits for economic growth and development within the 
region.  With  this,  Africa  has  taken  significant  steps  towards  having  a  relatively  mature 
banking system and has increased the resilience of the region to systemic risk3. 
The arrival of regional African banks has improved the efficiency of the banking sector in host 
countries.  They  stimulate  competition,  and  increase  the  diversity  of  available  financial 
services,  generally  at  transactional  lower  costs,  improved  quality  and  potentially  lower 
interest  rates4.  This  in  turn  positively  affects  household  savings  and  consumption  and  the 
availability of credit to businesses, leading to gains in employment and standards of living.  
Furthermore,  cross-border  integration  has  the  significant  benefit  of  forcing  the  domestic 
banking  regulatory  and  supervisory  systems  to  modernize  as  larger  capital  flows  within  a 
country  necessitate  improved  regulatory  frameworks,  technological  innovation  and  efficient 
payment  systems5.  These  modernizations  also  create  opportunities  for  greater  financial 
inclusion, both with regard to individuals and SMEs. 
Challenges for integration 
4. 
While cross border banking creates significant benefits, it also is associated with challenges 
which need to be considered. Unlike the Euro area, where most banks have made relatively 
similar  progress  in  implementing  the  Basel  III  framework,  African  jurisdictions  are  still  at 
varying stages of implementing the various Basel capital standards. 
First,  operating  in  multiple  countries  creates  supervisory  and  compliance  challenges.  The 
banks  are  expected  to  report  to  both  home  and  host  country  supervisors  who  may  use 
different regulatory standards or may interpret similar standards in different ways. In many 
cases, the same information is reported to different supervisors in different formats as per the 
relevant  supervisor’s  requirements,  which  often  causes  duplicate  reporting  or  banking 
entities  operating  in  different  jurisdictions  may  have  to  provide  reporting  on  potentially  all 
three Basel standards. These differences become even more pronounced when considering 
the  operational  and  business  impact.  Although  African  regulators  have  been  notably 
increasing  their  level  of  training  and  understanding  of  all  Basel  frameworks,  it  remains 
necessary  for  banking groups  to  appoint  staff  members  with  different  skills  to  address  the 
various elements between the Basel frameworks, and to implement systems that have the 
capacity to cater for all the different regulatory and reporting requirements. This can be both 
time consuming and resource intensive for a bank. 
Second,  the  differences  in  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  home-  and  host-country 
supervisors  can  create  challenges.  More  specifically,  a  home-country  supervisor  is 
responsible for the solvency of the banking group, while the host-country supervisor’s role is 
to ensure that there is sufficient liquidity to meet all obligations and to protect depositors in its 
jurisdiction. Such differences can lead to both overlaps and gaps in the regulatory framework 
applicable  to  a  bank,  thereby  creating  problems  of  regulatory  coordination.  One  way  to 
address these challenges is through the establishment of cross-border supervisory and crisis 
management groups for systemically important banks in Africa. I will elaborate further on this 
topic later in my remarks. 
                                                
3  Oxford Policy management. 2013. “Cross border banking supervision in SADC region”. 
4  BIS Papers No 76. 
5  Levine,  R  (1996):  “Foreign  banks,  financial  development  and  economic  growth”,  in  C  Barfield  (ed), 
International financial Markets: harmonization versus competition, Washington DC, AEI Press. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Third, these banks can become means for transmitting risks from one jurisdiction to another 
and thus can reduce the authorities control over their economies. This can cause authorities 
to introduce protective regulations that complicate cross border banking. 
These challenges raise the obvious question of what can be done to minimize the negative 
aspects of cross border banking and maximize their benefits. Clearly, the governing bodies 
of  relevant  regional  economies  need  to  agree  to  co-operate  in  creating  the  regulatory  and 
policy  frameworks  for  managing  cross  border  banking  and  ensuring  effective  financial 
integration. These arrangements should then address issues of common concern to various 
banking groups and also provide a platform from which to discuss issues that the supervisory 
authority believes are hindering financial integration in the region. Examples of such issues 
of  common  concern,  in  addition  to  what  has  already  been  raised,  include  issues  such  as 
localisation (where banking groups are of the opinion that they require at least 75% of the 
voting rights and therefore shareholding, in order to effect a special resolution decision) and 
capital protection (where banking groups may also be concerned about future restrictions on 
the movement of capital within the group, including the impact of currency fluctuations). 
In  light  of  the  challenges  I  just  mentioned,  the  cross-border  integration  in  Africa  of 
internationally  accepted  banking  supervision  standards,  improvement  of  financial  sector 
disclosure and governance practices is therefore crucial not only to ensure the appropriate 
and effective supervision of banking groups that are significant in an African context, but also 
to  limit  the  regulatory  burden  and  associated  cost  burden  on  banks  and  consumers  of 
financial products. 
However,  it  is  important  to  recognise  that  these  challenges  also  create  opportunities  to 
promote regional financial integration. South Africa is therefore fully supportive and active on 
committees such as the Association of African Central Banks, SADC Committee for Central 
Bank  Governors  (CCBG),  the  FSB’s  Regional  Consultative  Group  for  sub-Saharan  Africa 
and  the  Community  of  African  Banking  Supervisors  (CABS).  The  work  of  these  important 
committees  all  contribute  towards  the  development  and  implementation  of  an  effective 
financial sector regulatory framework in Africa. 
Promoting  cross-border  banking  in  Africa  and  implementing  regulatory  co-ordination 
measures to address these concerns could have substantial benefits in promoting growth in 
the continent. 
Role of regulators and international and regional forums 
5. 
Regulators  have  a  particular  role  to  play  in  the  integration  process  as  the  success  of 
financially integrated markets starts with the regulatory authorities ensuring that the entities 
allowed  into  their  financial  sector  meet  all  the  relevant  requirements  for  access  to  the 
relevant  jurisdiction.  For  this  reason,  it  is  important  to  conduct  rigorous  assessments  to 
accurately determine the costs and benefits which arise from allowing a foreign bank into a 
jurisdiction. 
In  order  to  ensure  the  African  banking  sector  remains  adequately  integrated,  with  minimal 
negative spillover effects felt from cross-border banking in both the home and host country, 
regulators need to be appropriately equipped to deal with cross border banks. This requires: 
Staying abreast of the latest international regulatory developments: Those of us who 
• 
participate  in  regional  and  international  financial  standard-setting  bodies  have  an 
obligation to play a pro-active role, to use our strengthened voice, be ready to take 
constructive  positions  on  the  various  reforms  and  consider  the  views  of  those 
countries  that  are  not  at  the  table.  This  highlights  the  importance  of  the Financial 
Stability Board (FSB) regional outreach groups and the CABS. 
Encourage  progress  in  the  implementation  of  the  Basel  Capital  Accords,  so  as  to 
create a level playing field, which makes it easier and more cost efficient to start-up 
a business in a new jurisdiction. However, implementation of international standards 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
      must be done taking into account country specific circumstances and should not be 
at all costs, or to the detriment of the stability of the financial system. 
Maintain  the  emphasis  on  information  exchange:  There  is  already  a  pronounced 
effort to make existing mechanisms of information exchange more meaningful, such 
as  Memoranda  of  Understandings  (MoU)  between  home  and  host  countries.  This 
was  a  principal  aim  of  the  SADC  Subcommittee  of  Banking  Supervisors  (SSBS) 
initiated  in  20066.  Unfortunately,  due  to  differences  in  accounting  standards, 
reporting  requirements,  off-site  monitoring  systems,  regulatory  frameworks  and 
supervisory practices, drafting and implementing effective MOU’s is difficult and they 
are not always used for their intended purpose. 
Efforts  should  be  made  to  create  databases  that  are  useful  and  available  to  all 
African  regulators  and  regional  workshops  should  be  encouraged  (such  as  the 
Enhanced  Data  Dissemination  for  Africa  regional  workshop  held  in  2011).  Such 
initiatives  contribute  to  skills  development  and  information  sharing,  and  create 
opportunities  to  develop  new  connections  between  regulators  and  new  means  for 
coordinating  and  standardizing 
for  compiling,  processing  and 
disseminating data. 
Supervisory colleges have proven to be highly useful in ensuring information sharing 
and  relationship  building  between  supervisors  and  are  therefore  valuable  tools  to 
promote.  Effective  consolidated  supervision  of  an  international  banking  group 
requires the home supervisor to have sufficient knowledge of the operations of the 
group, both domestic and foreign, so as to monitor, assess and deal with risks faced 
by the group. As noted by past Roundtable discussions on regional banks in Africa, 
Regional  Economic  Communities  (REC),  in  which  most  Pan-African  financial 
banking groups operate, can be very useful in this regard due to their specific focus 
on building supervisory capacity and strengthening cross-border regulations7. 
Ensure that existing crisis management and resolution plans are enhanced and put 
in  place  to  withstand  financial  crises:  Prompt  and  effective  responses  to  potential 
financial distress are important to avoid severe  systemic disruptions and minimise 
the risk of banking failures. If not properly managed, supervisory co-operation might 
collapse when a financial crisis hits as protection of national assets will become very 
important. Establishing upfront crisis management and resolution plans will facilitate 
robust  supervisory  co-operation  which  should  withstand  the  pressure  of  a  cross-
border financial crisis. 
the  methods 
Conclusion 
6. 
In conclusion, financial integration in Africa has already had a positive effect on the growth 
potential  of  the  continent.  It  is,  however,  vitally  important  that  the  integration  process 
continues  to  be  monitored  by  the  regulatory  authorities  to  ensure  its  success  and 
sustainability.  Without  an  integrated  regulatory  authority  environment,  achieving  a  robust 
integrated financial system would be difficult. 
It is therefore important that we as regulators use all the tools at our disposal, implement new 
and innovative ways to communicate, share information and ensure that we develop apace 
with the market and its needs, because without doing so we cannot create and sustain an 
effective cross-border financial integration. 
                                                
6  South African Reserve Bank. Bank Supervision Department Annual Report 2012. 
7  Association  of  African  Central  Banks.  2012.  Roundtable  on  Regional  Banks  in  Africa:  “Safeguarding  and 
Leveraging a New Force for Financial Sector Development in Africa”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  I look forward to further informative discussions on the topic, such that we all may learn from 
past mistakes, successes and achievements whilst also continuously striving to address the 
challenges in unison with one another. 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
