  Seppo Honkapohja: Financial innovation and financial stability – 
comments 
Speech  by  Mr  Seppo  Honkapohja,  Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the 
Shanghai Forum, Shanghai, 26 May 2014. 
Slides can be found on the Bank of Finland website. 
 Introduction: the global financial crisis and the crisis in Europe 
The start of the global financial crisis can be dated in different ways. One plausible date is 
almost seven years ago in August 9 in 2007. Significant turmoil in financial markets appeared 
after  activity  closures  in  some  hedge  funds  specializing  in  US  mortgage  debt  were 
announced. 
The  scale  and  the  economic  ramifications  of  the  crisis  have  been  vast.  The  resulting 
economic  downturn  in  2008  for  a  while  resembled  the  pace  of  developments  in  the  Great 
Depression.1 Liquidity support operations by central banks at different stages, explicit state 
guarantees to banks and expansionary fiscal policies succeeded in stopping the recession 
and changed the course of developments in comparison to the 1930’s. 
In  Europe,  a further  stage  of  the  crisis  appeared  in  2010  when  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  hit 
some  euro  area  countries.  The  Euro  crisis  has  its  roots  in  the  specific  features  of 
construction of the European Monetary Union, but it was also triggered by the second-wave 
shocks following the global financial crisis. 
[Figure 1: Substantial crisis impact on the real economy, particularly in Europe] 
The financial crisis weakened the Euro area economies and it also weakened bank balance 
sheets. In several countries governments were forced to support their troubled banks, which 
in turn adversely affected government finances. In some countries public finances became 
weak,  which  fed  back  to  the  credibility  of  their  banking  sectors,  thus  creating  a  notorious 
bank-sovereign feedback loop. 
Troubled  countries’  membership  in  the  monetary  union  added  to  the  challenge  to  restore 
their  competitiveness  as  traditional  tools  such  as  devaluation  were  no  longer  available.  It 
became  evident  that  the  fiscal  rules  agreed  in  the  monetary  union  had  not  always  been 
honored.  These  developments  raised  concerns  about  credibility  of  the  weak  euro  area 
countries  in  international  capital  markets.  The  so-called  existential  risk  of  the  Euro  zone 
emerged. 
The culmination of the Eurocrisis in mid-2012 was tamed by the creation of the ECB’s OMT 
(outright monetary transactions) program. I quote President Draghi’s promise that “Within [its] 
mandate,  the  ECB  is  ready  to  do  whatever  it  takes  to  preserve  the  euro”.2  OMT  is  a 
conditional  promise  to  buy  in  the  secondary  market  without  limit  government  bonds  of 
selected Euro area countries. OMT has worked and remarkably, there has so far not been 
any need to activate the program. 
                                                
1  Rajan,  R.  (2013),  A  step  in  the  dark:  unconventional  monetary  policy  after  the  crisis.  Andrew  Crockett 
Memorial Lecture, BIS, 23 June 2013.  
2  Speech  by  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  at  the  Global  Investment  Conference  in 
London 26 July 2012 (www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120726.en.html).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Finance and growth 
Thinking with hindsight about the causes and possible early indicators of the financial crises, 
one thing seems clear. The financial sector, including banks, grew to a very large scale in 
many countries. Recent research suggests that when the financial sector grows rapidly into 
large proportions, the risk of a serious crisis is heightened.3  
[Figure 2: Rapid growth in the EU banking sector pre-crisis] 
Before  the  crisis,  the  consensus  view  from  the  finance  and  growth  literature  was  that 
financial development not only follows economic growth but contributes to it. However, after 
the  financial  crisis,  the  darker  side  of  the  financial  sector  growth  has  received  increasing 
attention. 
The traditional benign view of finance and growth is that a growing financial sector improves 
overall economic growth opportunities by mobilizing resources to finance investment projects 
and by facilitating risk management. The key assumption is that a well-developed financial 
system  helps  allocate  productive  resources  more  efficiently,  both  by  channeling  funds  to 
growth sectors and by pulling resources from declining ones. 
Correspondingly, research has argued that low financial development could be a factor which 
reduces  long-run  growth  and  also  increases  growth  volatility.4  However,  some  recent 
research by Cecchetti and Kharroubi at the BIS suggests that while finance does contribute 
to economic growth, it does so only up to a point.5  
[Figure 3: Finance and growth] 
At the level of individual financial institutions, the growth of bank balance sheets was seen as 
reflecting  increasing returns  to  scale  and  scope from  combining  a  wide  variety  of financial 
services and providing them also cross-border to internationally active clients.  
Technological  development  and  financial  innovation  enabled  the  creation  of  totally  new 
products. These were initially seen as filling gaps in the palette of risk management products 
and creating totally new segments of the financial markets.6 
Today  we  know  that  many  of  the  new  exciting  risk  management  products  increase  rather 
than  reduce  risk,  when  applied  inappropriately.  Moreover,  the  changing  shape  of  financial 
intermediation  and  risk  management  made  the  whole  financial  system  more  vulnerable  to 
common shocks. 
In the crisis the ultimate risk stemmed largely from the US housing market, but it had been 
transferred  also  onto  European  banks’  balance  sheets.7  This  took  place  with  the  help  of 
securitizations and the related new financial intermediaries, generally dubbed as the shadow 
banking  sector.  As  a  result,  the  number  of  counterparty  relationships  and  the  ensuing 
counterparty risks increased. The global financial network became highly interconnected and 
complex. 
                                                
3  See  e.g.  Claessens,  Kose,  Laeven,  and  Valencia  (2013),  “Understanding  Financial  Crises:  Causes, 
Consequences, and Policy Responses”, CAMA Working Paper 05/2013.  
4  See  e.g.  Aghion,  P.,  E.  Farhi,  E.  Kharroubi  (2012),  “Monetary  policy,  liquidity,  and  growth”,  and  the literate 
cited therein.  
5  Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012), Reassessing the impact of finance on growth, BIS Working Paper 381. 
6  Rajan (2006) Has Finance Made the World Riskier? European Financial Management, Vol. 12, No. 4, 2006, 
499–533. See also Bolton, P. (2013), The Good Banker.  
7  Shin (2012): “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium”, IMF Economic Review, 60.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Many  of  these  developments  prior  to  the  crisis  did  not  benefit  the  real  economy  in  a 
sustainable manner. As suggestive evidence of this, economic recovery from the crisis has 
been slow.8 
One important lesson from the crisis is the need to understand better the point where and 
why  the  expansion  of  the  financial  sector,  or  any  of  its  particular  business  areas,  turns 
excessive. Moreover, we need to ensure that financial innovations such as securitization are 
applied appropriately so that the benefits are realized. 
Reasons for excessive financial growth 
Why did the financial sector this time grow so much? And why was it especially hazardous? 
Certainly, there were global macroeconomic reasons behind the recent crisis developments, 
and problems with regulation and supervision in failing to see potentially dangerous market 
failures. 
Global  imbalances  provided  a  fertile  ground  for  the  development  of  financial  excesses,  as 
capital  inflows  to  the  United  States  pushed  long-term  interest  rates  down.9  Moreover,  the 
monetary policy stance was accommodative in much of the early 2000’s. 
There  may  also  have  been  a  false  sense  of  security  resulting  from  the  successful  track 
record of monetary and macroeconomic policies, known as the period of Great Moderation. 
As a result, the markets placed their trust in central banks’ ability to take care of liquidity if 
markets were to be hit by serious shocks. 
These expectations may also have contributed to imprudent risk-taking which, once the crisis 
started unfolding, led to real losses. Banks’ capital requirements and liquidity buffers had not 
kept  pace  with  the  growing  risks  as  serious  short-comings  in  risk  measurement  within  the 
Basel framework became apparent once the crisis hit. 
Theoretical models of the possibility of excessive financial growth range from banks’ failure 
to internalize systemic risks from growth of bank leverage and ballooning balance sheets to 
rent-extraction in opaque OTC markets.10 Research has also shown how financial innovation 
waves can raise the risk of endogenous crisis.11 Moreover, as financial innovation caters to 
investors’ desire for safe assets, systemic risk may follow if these new “safe” assets turn out 
to be highly risky, as happened in the last crisis.12 
Cross-country  evidence  indicates  that  financial  innovation  does  contribute  to  economic 
growth, especially in industries dependent on external finance. In the light of the recent crisis, 
such  innovation  also  contributes  to  growth  volatility,  idiosyncratic  bank  risk  and  bank 
losses.13 
                                                
8  See  e.g.  Claessens,  Kose  and  Terrones  (2013),  “The  Recent  Global  Financial  Crisis:  How  Similar?  How 
Different? How Costly?”, in S. Claessens et al., eds., Financial Crises, Consequences, and Policy Responses, 
forthcoming, IMF. 
9  See  e.g.  Bernanke,  B.  S.  (2005),  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit”,  speech 
delivered at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Va., March 10.  
10  Stein,  J.  (2012),  Monetary  Policy  as  Financial-Stability  Regulation,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  and 
Bolton,  P.,  T.  Santos,  and  J.  Scheinkman  (2012),  “Cream  skimming  in  financial  markets”,  NBER  Working 
Paper 16804, respectively.  
11  Biais, B., J-C. Rochet, P. Woolley, “Innovations, rents and risk”. 
12  Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, R.W. Vishny, 2012, “Neglected Risks, Financial Innovation and Financial Fragility” 
Journal of Financial Economics.  
13  Beck, T. et al. (2012), “Financial innovation: The bright and the dark sides”.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Compensation  schemes  focusing  on  short-term  performance  became  popular  in  the  last 
decade  and  they  were  said  to  encourage  risk-taking  in  new  financial  products  which 
generated fee income.14 
Market expectations of public support in the event of a large-scale crisis were an important 
reason for excessive financial growth concerns. For instance, the leading European banks 
are very large in an international comparison, especially in relation to the size of their home 
countries. 
[Figure 4: Size of selected European banks] 
Many large and complex financial institutions appear to have benefited from cheap funding, 
thanks to such too-big-to-fail expectations.15 Cheap funding which is insensitive to balance 
sheet  risks may  easily  spur  risk-taking,  especially  when  banking  competition  gets tougher. 
Sheer ignorance by bank managements of the true risks may also have played a role.16 
The too-big-to-fail phenomenon weakened market discipline and the opacity of large complex 
financial  institutions  contributed  to  this.  The  structure  of  banking  sector  has  not  been 
reformed in a way that accords with well-established market discipline.17 The challenge is to 
implement regulatory reforms and policies that steer the financial sector and banks towards a 
size  and  structure  that  best  support  economic  growth.  At  the  same  time  financial  stability 
should be maintained. 
No one really knows the right size of the financial sector or banks. For instance, it has been 
pointed  out  that  the  scale  and  scope  of  the  largest  banks  may  simply  be  an  efficient 
response  by  banks  to  the  bundles  of  services  demanded  by  the  big,  internationally  active 
customers.18 At least, attempt should be made to remove any perverse incentives which can 
lead to excessive growth of the sector and its risks. Eliminating the too-big-to-fail problem lies 
at the core of the solution. 
Financial reforms after the crises 
A profound international regulatory reform agenda was endorsed by the G-20 in response to 
the global financial crisis. Many key parts of agenda, especially the Basel III framework, have 
been or are in the process of being implemented. 
[Figure 5: The main building blocks of the European regulatory reform] 
The EU has launched its own additional financial reform program, called the banking union, 
in response to the Euro crisis. The banking union entails a common banking supervision and 
a framework for bank resolution. The Single Supervisory Mechanism will be operated by the 
European Central Bank. The establishment of the Single Resolution Mechanism in the EU 
will facilitate the resolution of cross-border banks. 
Importantly, the resolution framework gives the power to authorities to promptly implement a 
“bail-in” of bank debt holders when a bank goes into resolution. Banks will have to have a 
minimum of 8% of their liabilities eligible to bail-in. Bail-in means that debt holders will bear 
                                                
14  See  e.g.  Rajan,  R.G.  (2005),  Has  Financial  Development  Made  the  World  Riskier?,  Proceedings  of  the 
Jackson Hole Conference organized by the Kansas City Fed, 2005.  
15  See e.g. Davies & Tracey (2014), “Too big to be efficient? The impact of implicit funding subsidies on scale 
economies in banking”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (forthcoming).  
16  Rajan,  R.  (2013),  A  step  in  the  dark:  unconventional  monetary  policy  after  the  crisis.  Andrew  Crockett 
Memorial Lecture, BIS, 23 June 2013.  
17  Laeven  and  Levine  (2007),  “Is  there  a  diversification  discount  in  financial  conglomerates?”,  Journal  of 
Financial Economics 85(2).  
18  See Bolton, P. (2013), The Good Banker.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  losses  without  actual  bankruptcy  proceedings.  Hence  the  potential  to  bail-in  is  a  major 
improvement in banks’ de facto solvency. 
The key motivation for the banking union is to break the notorious bank-sovereign feedback 
loop,  match  the  institutional  structure  (supervisor  and  resolution  authority)  with  the 
geographic  scope  of  the  cross-border  banks  and  pave  way  for further banking  integration. 
True  banking  integration  in  Europe  could  also  enhance  financial  stability  in  the  EU  by 
reversing  the  fragmentation  of  financial  conditions  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  which  is 
apparently hampering Europe’s current economic recovery. 
The banking union project also includes a third element; the prospect of creating a common 
deposit insurance system. However, the national systems currently vary a great deal, so that 
the first priority ought to be harmonization of the national systems of deposit insurance. The 
European Commission has made proposals in this direction. 
There are also a number of other regulatory initiatives in addition to the banking union. Some 
initiatives focus on increased transparency in the financial markets. For example, accounting 
standards  and  disclosure  practices  are  reviewed,  and  banks  are  urged  to  improve  risk 
management and corporate governance practices. Other initiatives include supervision and 
regulation  of  derivatives  markets  and  the  shadow  banking  system  are  revised,  including 
moves  to  central  counterparties  which  will  help  address  the  contagion  risks  embedded  in 
long counterparty chains in the OTC markets. 
[Figure 6: Additional regulatory initiatives] 
An obvious question is, whether the increased regulation of banking will lead to the growth of 
the less regulated shadow banking sector? Would systemic risks also migrate from banking 
to shadow banking as a result of the new banking regulation? There are responses to this 
concern  that  aim  to  increase  transparency  and  oversight  of  shadow  banking.  Some 
researchers  have  also  suggested  that  regulatory  margin  requirements,  an  equivalent  of 
banks’  capital  requirements,  could  be  considered  for  shadow  banking  institutions.19  This 
would  reduce  the  risk  of  fire  sales  and  the  resulting  loss  spirals  which  were  experienced 
during the global financial crisis both in banks and shadow banks. It is also crucial to make 
sure  that  banks’  exposures  to  shadow  banks  are  met  with  sufficient  capital  requirements. 
Furthermore,  the  European  Commission  has  proposed  structural  regulation  of  universal 
banks,  which  would  impose  direct  restrictions  on  banks’  exposure  to  hedge  funds.  The 
Volcker rule implies similar restrictions in the US. 
Macro-prudential  analysis  and  tools  are  another  area  of  regulation.  They  are  being 
developed mainly on the national basis, but also in accordance with Basel III and the capital 
requirement  directive  (its  application  in  Europe)  for  the  purpose  of  setting  counter-cyclical 
capital  buffers.  Moreover,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  has  published  guidelines  on 
the implementation of macro-prudential tools across the EU member states. This is a highly 
important but challenging area of work where we are most likely to see a lot more research 
and  new  developments  in  the  future.  The  challenge  is  to  find  indicators  which  are  able  to 
warn  of  looming  vulnerabilities  sufficiently  early.  Potential  candidates  are  at  least  market 
prices, credit-to-GDP ratios, and changes in banking sector liabilities.20  
Finally, in accordance with the structural regulation of banks already agreed in the US and 
the UK, the European Commission has proposed a ban on proprietary trading for the largest 
banks and an option for subsidiarisation of other trading activities, to be placed in a separate 
legal  entity  within  a  banking  group.  The  motivation  for  the  structural  regulation  is  to 
                                                
19  Hanson, S.G., A.K. Kashyap, J.C. Stein (2010), A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation, Journal 
of Economic Perspectives 25:1, pp. 3–28.  
20  Shin,  H.S.  (2014),  Procyclicality  and  the  Search  for  Early  Warning  Indicators,  in  Claessens  et  al.  (eds.) 
Financial Crises, Consequences, and Policy Responses, IMF.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  significantly reduce, together with the resolution framework, the largest banks’ too-big-to-fail 
status.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
