Benoît Cœuré: Monetary policy transmission and bank deleveraging 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at “The Future of Banking Summit”, organised by “The Economist”, Paris, 13 March 2014. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Federic  Holm-Hadulla  for  his  contributions.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the  opinions 
contained herein. 
Summary 
Deleveraging  is  not  a  process  that  policy-makers  should  seek  to  avoid;  rather,  it  needs  to 
take place and be properly managed, explains ECB Executive Board member Benoît Cœuré. 
Describing  the  good,  the  bad  and  the  ugly  deleveraging  at  the  Future  of  Banking  Summit 
organised by “The Economist” in Paris, he emphasises how the wrong type of deleveraging 
could impede recovery and make it more difficult for central banks to engineer an appropriate 
degree of monetary accommodation. 
To ensure the right type of deleveraging is achieved, Mr. Cœuré highlights, “both monetary 
policy and prudential supervision – notably the ECB’s ongoing comprehensive assessment – 
have a key role to play.” According to him, the comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance 
sheets and the steps taken towards the banking union are crucial to establish the conditions 
necessary for a transparent, competitive and stable banking sector. He adds, “and they will 
help monetary policy to regain traction across the euro area.” 
He concludes by explaining why it is important for the banking union to be complete, “Not 
moving promptly towards a single resolution mechanism (SRM) and a single resolution fund 
(SRF) would prolong financial fragmentation, leave the financial system exposed to systemic 
fragility, and, ultimately, be harmful for growth and jobs. This would in particular be the case 
if the SRF is only slowly mutualised, and if it cannot resort to a common European backstop 
from the outset.” 
* * * 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to speak to you at the Economist’s “Future of Banking” Summit. 
But before turning to the future of banking, let me briefly look back at its recent past. As you 
know  well,  the  euro  area  banking  sector  is  currently  undergoing  a  secular  deleveraging 
process. The need for deleveraging had its roots in a period of strong bank balance sheet 
expansion in the last few years. 
From the  start  of  that  expansion  in  2005  to  its  peak  in  2012, the total assets  of  monetary 
financial  institutions  rose  by  more  than  60  percentage  points  of  GDP  to  €33.7  trillion,  i.e. 
3.55 times euro area GDP. But as the crisis highlighted, this expansion was not necessarily 
backed  by  rising  productive  capacity  in  the  euro  area  economy.  Instead,  it  was,  at  least 
partly, channelled to low-productivity activity, as manifest for instance in the overinvestment 
in the construction sector in some Member States. 
The current adjustment reflects, therefore, the aftermath of a major financial crisis and the 
debt  overhang  that  inevitably  comes  with  it.  It  also  reflects  the  end  of  the  unsustainable 
business models and liability structures that many euro area banks had developed before the 
crisis. Hence, deleveraging is not a process that policy-makers should seek to avoid; rather, 
it needs to take place and be properly managed. 
The  main  point  I  want  to  make  today  is  that  how  this  process  is  managed  has  important 
implications for monetary policy. Deleveraging badly hinders the pass-through of our interest 
rates to borrowers. But by the same token, deleveraging well, to the extent that it restores the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
transmission  of  monetary  policy,  could  potentially  unleash  a  pent-up  monetary  easing. 
Achieving the right type of deleveraging depends crucially on the incentives embedded in the 
institutional  framework  in  which  banks  operate.  Both  monetary  policy  and  prudential 
supervision – notably the ECB’s ongoing comprehensive assessment – have a key role to 
play in this respect. 
Three types of deleveraging and their effects 
Broadly speaking, there are three different types of bank deleveraging. These are the good, 
the bad and the ugly, as The Economist itself stated in a blog a couple of years ago.1 
“Good  deleveraging”  involves  banks  raising  capital  and  getting  rid  of  impaired  assets  in  a 
targeted  and  rapid  manner.  This  approach  recognises  and  corrects  the  flaws  in  legacy 
business  models  and  allows  for  a relatively  swift  reallocation  of  credit  to  more  competitive 
sectors. This eventually translates into a more dynamic recovery. 
“Bad  deleveraging”  entails  an  indiscriminate  reduction  in  balance  sheet size,  regardless  of 
the quality of assets. The main motivation for such adjustments is to reduce indebtedness. 
And  in  order to  “balance  the  books”,  this  process  is  accompanied  by  asset  shedding. The 
upshot is a potentially prolonged, across-the-board reduction of credit to the real economy. 
Finally,  “ugly  deleveraging”  comprises  banks  specifically  discarding  good  assets  while 
keeping  distressed  assets  in  the  banking  book  and  recording  them  at  close  to  nominal 
values. This method can rapidly turn a bank into a “bad bank” that does little to support credit 
creation. 
These last two types of deleveraging can have significant real economy effects. Financially 
weak banks tend to roll over unprofitable loans that do not support growth – which is  why 
they  have  sometimes  been  dubbed  “zombie  banks”.2  There  is  in  fact  some  evidence  that 
such evergreening practices have appeared in the euro area as well in the last few years.3 
The  wrong  type  of  deleveraging  also  has  a  further  effect,  which  I  want  to  concentrate  on 
today: it harms the transmission of monetary policy. 
Given  the  bank-based  nature  of  our financial  system,  the  main  channel through  which  the 
ECB’s monetary policy impulse reaches the real economy is through bank lending rates. And 
this  is  particularly  important  for  smaller  borrowers,  as  they  cannot  easily  substitute  bank 
financing for capital market financing such as corporate bond issuance, as larger borrowers 
have been able to. 
But  banks  that  are  deleveraging  through  a  prolonged  process  of  retaining  earnings  and 
rolling-over bad loans tend to block this channel. Regardless of the level of nominal interest 
rates, they are likely to demand higher compensation for new exposures that increase risk-
weighted assets, including notably loans to non-financial firms. And if they are competing for 
new  deposits  to  improve  their  loan-to-deposit  ratios,  they  will  face  higher  funding  costs, 
which then have to be incorporated into the interest rate spread for new loans. All this means 
that monetary policy starts to lose traction. 
                                                
1  http://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2012/05/deleveraging 
2  See, for example, Albertazzi, U. and M. Bottero (2014), “The Procyclicality of Foreign Bank Lending: Evidence 
from the Global Financial Crisis”. Journal of International Economics, forthcoming. 
3  Although the identification of “evergreening” practices is challenging, a large number of analyses have been 
conducted  on  this  issue  looking  at  Japan’s  “lost  decade”.  See,  among  others,  Caballero,  R.,  T.  Hoshi  and 
A. K. Kashyap (2008), “Zombie Lending and Depressed Restructuring in Japan”. American Economic Review, 
Vol.  98,  No.  5.  One  more  recent  study  looks  at  the  global  financial  crisis  and  identifies  lending  patterns 
consistent with evergreening practices, although limited to smaller banks; see Albertazzi, U. and D. Marchetti 
(2010) Credit supply, flight to quality and evergreening: an analysis of bank-firm relationships after Lehman, 
Bank of Italy Working Paper No. 756. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Indeed, different deleveraging needs are one explanation for the fragmentation in the pass-
through  of  interest  rates  in  euro  area  countries.  Those  countries  that  saw  the  highest 
pre-crisis increases in private debt – principally Ireland, Cyprus, Portugal and Spain – and 
that  therefore  have  the  greatest  bank  deleveraging  needs,  are  by  and  large  the  same 
countries  where  monetary  policy  transmission  has  been  most  impaired.  Of  course,  other 
factors such as sovereign risk have also played a role. 
Significant progress has already been made with bank deleveraging. Banks have engaged in 
a sweeping shrinkage of balance sheets – declining by around 20 percentage points of GDP 
in 2013. Loan-to-deposit ratios have also come down, from more than 140% in 2008 to less 
than 120% at the end of last year, mainly through higher deposits. And we have observed a 
marked increase in banks’ risk-weighted capital ratios since the beginning of 2009. Since the 
onset of the global financial crisis, euro area banks have issued around €235 billion of equity, 
in addition to other forms of capital (e.g. retained earnings, CoCos, etc.). As a result, large 
parts of the sector now comply with the minimum capital requirements under Basel III – well 
before it becomes binding. 
There are already signs, such as the stabilisation of credit conditions,4 that these efforts are 
improving  the  transmission  of  our  easy  monetary  policy  stance.  The  challenge  for  policy-
makers  now  is  to  finish  the  job:  to  ensure  that deleveraging  takes  place  fast,  that  it  takes 
place well, and that it happens everywhere where it is needed. 
Monetary policy intervention 
Monetary  policy  itself  has  a  role  to  play  in  this  process.  Our  measures  have  helped  ease 
pressures on the liability side of bank balance sheets that might have led to “bad” or “ugly” 
deleveraging. For example, in the first phase of the crisis after the Lehman Brothers failure, 
banks faced a funding crunch which could have led them to fire sales of assets. We helped 
avert  this  by  effectively  standing  in  for  the  interbank  market.  Our  two  very  long  term 
refinancing  operations  (VLTROs)  in  2011  and  2012  had  an  analogous  effect  in  the  term 
funding market. 
It is important to stress, however, that we aimed to prevent a disorderly deleveraging, not the 
deleveraging process itself. Bank deleveraging leads to a reduction in inside money, that is 
money  created  by  banks,  and  with  fragmented  financial  markets,  liquidity  flows  within  the 
euro  area  were  disrupted.  By  providing  an  elastic  supply  of  central  bank  money,  we 
substituted  inside  for  outside  money  to  support  the  stabilisation  of  the  banking  system. 
Indeed, base money – i.e. the total amount of currency in circulation and banks’ holdings of 
liquid deposits with the Eurosystem – increased by almost 30% following the two VLTROs. 
The ECB’s forward guidance should also be supportive: the Governing Council of the ECB 
expects interest rates to stay at present or lower levels for an extended period of time, while 
inflation  should  rise towards  2%  over  our  projection  horizon.  This  implies  that real  interest 
rates for borrowers will progressively fall as inflation rises. 
And we stand ready to act if this scenario does not materialise. 
But, nonetheless, broad money and credit expansion by the euro area banking system has 
remained  anaemic.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  slowed  steadily  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
VLTROs  and  stood  at  a  very  low  level  of  1.2%  in  January  2014.  The  monetary  policy 
impulse, as reflected by the increase of base money, has hardly been transmitted to the real 
economy. 
Additionally,  it  is  clear  that  the  ingredients  of  “good  deleveraging”  cannot  be  provided  by 
monetary policy alone. Good deleveraging involves, on the liability side, equity being built up 
                                                
4  Euro area bank lending survey, ECB January, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
through  outright  issuance  or  as  last  resort  through  public  interventions.  And  on  the  asset 
side, it involves  writing down and carving out non-performing assets. Indeed, without such 
measures there is a risk that low interest rates and ample liquidity provided by the ECB might 
delay the restructuring and reallocation that are necessary to escape a debt overhang. For 
this reason, prudential measures must also play a key part in the deleveraging process. 
Prudential policy in the new banking union framework 
For  the  euro  area,  the  principal  tool  to  steer  deleveraging  towards  its  good  form  is  the 
ongoing  comprehensive  assessment  of  banks’  balance  sheets.  The  ECB  has  recently 
released  more  technical  details  about  an  important  component  of  this  exercise,  the  asset 
quality review, so I will not repeat its features today. The assessment will shed light on bank 
assets  and  ensure  that  non-performing  exposures  are  fully  recognised,  and  prompt  timely 
corrective action in the form of bank restructuring and capital replenishment. 
In turn, I expect this to help monetary policy regain traction across the euro area. Actually, 
this for me will be a measure of the success of the exercise. 
Why do I expect this? 
For  banks  that  are  found  to  be  healthy  by  the  assessment,  the  price  mechanism  will  no 
longer  be  obscured  by  uncertainty  about  asset  valuation  and  bank  funding  models.  This 
should be reflected in higher share prices and cheaper funding costs, supporting the pass-
through of our interest rates. 
For  banks  that  are  restructured  and  recapitalised,  lending  rates  should  also  become  more 
responsive to our monetary policy impulses. There will no longer be a need for such banks to 
rebuild capital, and hence their incentive to reduce loans that carry higher risk weights, like 
those to non-financial corporations, will disappear. When loans are repaid, banks can opt to 
lend again rather than to shrink their balance sheets. 
At  the  same  time,  spreads  on  loans  should  come  down.  Funding  pressures  are  likely  to 
attenuate as banks reach their target loan-to-deposit ratios and as interest rates on deposits 
converge.  And  as  more  banks  free  up  balance  sheet  space  for  new  lending,  competition 
among banks for borrowers should start to increase, putting further downward pressure on 
new lending rates. We have already seen some of these dynamics playing out in Spain since 
mid-2012. 
By  identifying  weaker  and  stronger  banks,  and  putting  a  price  on  bank  assets,  the 
comprehensive  assessment  may  also  have  a  further  effect:  the  results  could  present  an 
opportunity for a revival of M&A activity, which has been very weak since the crisis, with the 
overall  value  of  deals  decreasing fourfold from 2008  to  2012.  A  rationalisation  of  the  euro 
area  banking  sector  will  increase  efficiency,  and  hence  be  conducive  to  a  smoother 
transmission of monetary policy. 
In short, a strict and credible comprehensive assessment will significantly support monetary 
policy.  Insofar  as  it  leads  to  bank  lending  rates  converging  between  the  core  and  the 
periphery, it will allow a significant additional easing of monetary policy in some jurisdictions. 
And insofar as it leads to better access to finance, higher growth and rising inflation, it will 
support our expectation that real interest rates will gradually ease over the projection horizon. 
One  final  point:  looking  further  ahead,  I  expect  the  downsizing  of  the  banking  sector  to 
accelerate  the  development  of  alternative,  capital  market-based  sources  of  finance, 
especially for smaller firms. We are already seeing this playing out in some jurisdictions – for 
example, the “mini bonds” scheme in Italy – and through initiatives, which the ECB supports, 
to revive European ABS markets. 
This  matters  for  monetary  policy  for  two  reasons.  First,  it  provides  a  spare  tyre,  i.e.  an 
additional  channel  through  which  monetary  policy  can  be  transmitted  if  the  bank  lending 
channel  becomes  impaired  again  in  the  future.  Second,  it  reduces  banks’  market  power, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
which  may  tend  to  make  bank  lending  rates  more  responsive  to  monetary  policy.  Indeed, 
recent research has shown that where banks in Europe face limited competition, and firms 
depend on them, financing constraints for SMEs have been found to be higher.5 
Such a rebalancing of the financing mix of the euro area economy probably requires further 
regulatory  action  to  acknowledge  the  emergence  of  new,  high-quality  capital  market 
instruments, such as simpler and more transparent ABSs. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Depending on how it materialises, bank deleveraging has a potential to impede the recovery 
and make it more difficult for central banks to engineer an appropriate degree of monetary 
accommodation  or,  to  the  contrary,  to  support  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy. 
Therefore, policy-makers need to set proper incentives to promote “good” deleveraging and 
to steer clear of “bad” or “ugly” deleveraging. 
Monetary  policy  has  a  vital  role  to  play  here,  notably  by  providing  the  necessary  liquidity 
support. But ultimately, it is up to policy-makers in other domains to ensure that the banking 
system is restored to health, and becomes fit for supporting the recovery and the reallocation 
of production factors in the euro area. Here, the steps being taken towards a banking union 
and the comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets are crucial. They will establish 
the conditions necessary for a transparent, competitive and stable banking sector. And they 
will help monetary policy to regain traction across the euro area. 
One final remark: for all this to work, the banking union needs to be complete. We need not 
only  a  single  supervisory  mechanism,  but  also  a  single  resolution  mechanism  (SRM)  and 
single resolution fund (SRF) and, at a later stage, a single deposit insurance scheme. If we 
fail to establish the SRM and SRF, bank resolution will remain a national task, resulting in a 
misalignment of responsibilities, and entrenching the link between banks and sovereigns. Not 
moving promptly towards the SRM and SRF would prolong uselessly financial fragmentation, 
leave the euro area financial system exposed to systemic fragility, and, ultimately, be harmful 
for growth and jobs. This would in particular be the case if the SRF is only slowly mutualised, 
and if it cannot resort to a common European backstop from the outset. 
I thank you for your attention.  
                                                
5  Ryan, R., M. O’Toole and F. McCann (2014), “Does bank market power affect SME financing constraints?”, 
Journal of Banking & Finance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
