  Ewald Nowotny: Emerging markets – boom and bust 
Speech by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Austria, 
before the United Nations Economic and Social Council, New York, 14 April 2014. 
 Recent economic developments in emerging markets and outlook 
The global economy has gone through turbulent times since the outbreak of the financial and 
economic crisis in 2008. Following the “great recession” in 2009, the global economy gained 
momentum  in  2010  and  2011,  mostly  on  the  back  of  the  strong  economic  performance  of 
emerging  market  economies.  After  another  slump  in  economic  activity  in  2012  and  2013, 
mostly due to the sovereign debt crisis in Europe, advanced economies are now back on the 
recovery track while emerging markets have come under pressure. 
A  decisive  factor  in  this  context  seems  to  be  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in 
advanced economies. The increase in government bond yields in the U.S.A. since early 2013 
and  the  Fed’s  indication  of  May  2013  that  it may  taper  its  unconventional  monetary  policy 
have correlated with sizable capital outflows and currency depreciation in emerging markets; 
this  points  to  pronounced  global  macro-financial  interdependencies.  However,  as  I  will 
discuss  in  more  detail  later  on,  it  should  be  noted  that  domestic  macroeconomic 
fundamentals  play  an  equally  decisive  role  in  emerging  markets.  Apparently,  emerging 
market  economies  with  larger  external  and  internal  imbalances  have  been  faced  with 
stronger currency depreciations (as shown in the IMF’s GFSR, October 2013). 
Most  of  the  countries  under  pressure  tightened  their  monetary  policies  to  dampen  capital 
outflows. Although these actions have so far helped to lift some pressure on financial market 
indicators, the cost of capital has increased, which is expected to dampen investment and 
weigh  on  growth.  Accordingly,  in  its  recent  World  Economic  Outlook  the  IMF  revised 
downward the 2014 and 2015 GDP growth forecasts for several emerging market economies 
(among others, Argentina, Russia and Turkey). 
Let me briefly stress the related impact on countries in Central, Eastern and Southeastern 
Europe  (CESEE,  “emerging  Europe”).  Most  of  these  countries  have  so  far  weathered  the 
pullback  of  capital  rather  well.  Since  2008,  current  account  and  fiscal  imbalances  have 
decreased  and  most  CESEE  countries  have  become  less  reliant  on  foreign  capital.  As  a 
result, these CESEE countries will most likely not be forced to abruptly raise interest rates to 
fight currency depreciation. For those CESEE countries with well-capitalized banking sectors 
that do not rely on capital imports, some weakening of their currencies could even give some 
momentum to economic recovery. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  have  seen  that  the  Fed’s  announcement  of  tapering  has  had  a 
substantial  impact  on  Russia,  Ukraine  and  Turkey,  which  have  been  experiencing 
considerable  capital  outflows  and  currency  depreciation  since  mid-2013.  These 
developments in Russia and Ukraine were exacerbated by rising political uncertainty, which 
reached its climax in the context of the geopolitical tensions caused by the crisis over Crimea 
in March 2014. A further escalation of the conflict, including EU sanctions vis-à-vis Russia, 
could severely affect the economic situation of the whole region. So far, however, the impact 
of  the  political  crisis  on  other  CESEE  countries  has  been  contained.  The  countries  have 
relatively  limited  direct  export  linkages  with  Ukraine.  Also,  Russian  gas  exports  seem  to 
continue to run smoothly. Similarly, the crisis has so far had only limited impact on financial 
markets in the region. The Russian economy, by contrast, already seems to be substantially 
affected (rising capital outflows, rating downgrades, slowdown of economic activity). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  From boom to bust or back to balance? The nature of current emerging market 
problems 
In  order  to  better  understand  the  general  picture  behind  the  shift  in  capital  flows  and  the 
depreciation pressure in several emerging markets, let me briefly reflect on the build-up of 
these problems. Apparently, they are rooted in the period of easy finance after 2008. Global 
liquidity  and  access  to  foreign  capital  at  relatively  low  cost  were  ample  during  this  period. 
While advanced economies contracted, many emerging market countries launched domestic 
stimulus measures and eased the monetary policy stance to compensate for the decline in 
exports. In many emerging markets, moderate credit growth before 2008 turned into credit 
booms and rapid asset price increases, as these countries strengthened domestic demand 
and took advantage of capital flowing out of advanced economies. 
At  the  same  time,  the  drive  for  reform  diminished,  resulting  in  a  loss  in  external 
competitiveness.  Altogether,  these  developments  led  to  considerable  exchange  rate 
appreciation and a significant increase in current account deficits in most emerging market 
economies  (also  Russia  has  experienced  a  shrinking  current  account  surplus).  Several 
emerging markets eased monetary conditions further to limit exchange rate pressures. As a 
consequence, a number of emerging market economies were challenged by a combination 
of  exceedingly  large  current  account  deficits,  too  strong  exchange  rates  and  overly  low 
interest rates when entering the recent period of economic recovery and pending exit from 
expansionary monetary policy in the U.S.A. 
The question arises whether what we see now is just a reversal of imbalances that will be 
accompanied by a soft landing or whether we have to worry about a severe economic bust. 
In  general,  there  is  ample  empirical  evidence  that  compared  to  advanced  economies, 
emerging  economies  experience  larger  output  volatility  and  a  more  frequent  sequence  of 
boom-bust  cycles.  However,  although  each  crisis  has  its  own  particularities,  and  “sudden 
stop” events are nearly impossible to predict, I do not believe that at the current stage we are 
facing an emerging market crisis of a dimension similar to the one of the 1990s. 
What are the key differences to the emerging market crises in the 1990s? 
Let  me  first  point  out  the  positive  developments  we  have  seen  over  the  past  decade: 
Macroeconomic  policy  frameworks  and  structural  fundamentals  have  improved  in  many 
emerging market economies. Most notably, emerging markets should now be less prone to 
exchange  rate  mismatches.  Most  of  them  have  shifted  toward  exchange  rate  flexibility;  in 
many  instances,  exchange  rates  are  no  longer  the  nominal  anchor,  as  emerging  market 
central  banks  are  now  largely  pursuing  inflation  targeting.  Moreover, foreign  currency  debt 
has been settled to a large extent, while sizable foreign currency reserves have been piled 
up  during  the  boom  years.  At  the  same  time,  domestic-currency  bond  markets  have  been 
established.  Equally  noteworthy  are  substantial  reforms 
financial  regulation  and 
supervision as well as more fiscal vigilance and lower public debt ratios. 
Nevertheless, as I have mentioned before, some new risks have emerged and they must be 
taken seriously. 
• 
First,  the  current  combination  of  interest  rate  hikes  and  slowing  GDP  growth  in 
several emerging markets may put stress on domestic borrowers and the banking 
sector.  If  this  pressure  is  significant  enough,  additional  capital  exit  and  currency 
depreciation could be the consequence. 
Second,  emerging  markets  and  advanced  economies  are  now  much  more 
integrated  than  they  used  to  be  in  the  1990s.  The  share  of  emerging  markets  in 
global  trade  and  GDP  has  increased  strongly.  In  addition,  despite  the  build-up  of 
domestic-currency bond markets, there is still considerable dependence on foreign 
funding  as  a  large  share  of  local  currency  bonds  is  held  by  foreign  investors. 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
     Altogether,  these  observations  point  to  an  easier  transmission  of  shocks  from 
advanced to emerging economies and vice versa. 
Third, tighter monetary policy conditions in advanced economies could also result in 
lower  global  commodity  prices,  which  would  have  a  negative  impact  on  emerging 
markets as many of them are the main exporters of commodities. 
Fourth  and  probably  most  worrisome,  in  several  emerging  market  countries 
considerable  political  tensions  have  emerged  recently,  which  may  have  been 
masked  by  the  economic  boom  of  previous  years.  We  must  not  forget  that  the 
people’s  trust  in  their  governments  is  a  key  prerequisite  for  a  soft  landing  and 
maintaining financial sector stability. 
What policy challenges lie ahead? 
Let  me  conclude  with  some  policy  considerations.  At  the  current  stage  it  is  of  utmost 
importance  that  a  further  escalation  of  geopolitical  tensions  in  Ukraine  can  be  avoided.  A 
spiral of economic sanctions of increasing severity cannot be in the interest of either Russia 
or the EU or the U.S.A. Moreover, it is important to contain political risks in other emerging 
markets. 
The  delay  in  the  Fed’s  tapering  should  be  used  to  address  external  and  internal 
macroeconomic imbalances in the emerging market economies as soon as possible in order 
to  be  better  prepared  for  the  eventual  monetary  tightening  in  the  U.S.A.  Prudent 
macrofinancial measures are necessary to address potential negative balance sheet effects 
on domestic borrowers or a stagnation in lending, which could arise in the medium run from 
the combination of increasing interest rates and relenting GDP growth. 
Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that global financial  stability  is  a  shared  responsibility.  The  Fed 
should  therefore  clearly  communicate  the  path  of  its  intended  policy  actions  to  minimize 
negative spillovers which could undermine the policy adjustment efforts of emerging markets. 
Altogether  I  believe  that  emerging  market  economies  will  be  able  to  address  these 
challenges  appropriately  and  that  they  will  emerge  from  this  crisis  situation  stronger  and 
more resilient!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
