Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 3 April 2014. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Rehn. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged. Incoming information confirms that the moderate recovery of the 
euro area economy is proceeding in line with our previous assessment. At the same  time, 
recent  information  remains  consistent  with  our  expectation  of  a  prolonged  period  of  low 
inflation followed by a gradual upward movement in HICP inflation rates. The signals from 
the monetary analysis confirm the picture of subdued underlying price pressures in the euro 
area over the medium term. Inflation expectations for the euro area over the medium to long 
term continue to be firmly anchored in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, 
but close to, 2%. 
Looking ahead, we will monitor developments very closely and will consider all instruments 
available to us. We are resolute in our determination to maintain a high degree of monetary 
accommodation  and  to  act  swiftly  if  required.  Hence,  we  do  not  exclude  further  monetary 
policy easing and we firmly reiterate that we continue to expect the key ECB interest rates to 
remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time. This expectation is based 
on an overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, given the broad-
based weakness of the economy, the high degree of unutilised capacity and subdued money 
and  credit  creation.  At  the  same  time,  we  are  closely  following  developments  on  money 
markets.  The  Governing  Council 
to  using  also 
unconventional instruments within its mandate in order to cope effectively with risks of a too 
prolonged period of low inflation. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real GDP in the euro area rose by 0.2%, quarter on quarter, in the last quarter of 2013, after 
0.1% and 0.3% in the previous two quarters respectively. Survey data that encompass the 
first quarter of this year are consistent with continued moderate growth, confirming previous 
expectations that the ongoing recovery is increasingly supported by firmer domestic demand. 
Looking  ahead,  some  further  improvement  in  domestic  demand  should  materialise, 
supported  by  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance,  ongoing  improvements  in 
financing conditions working their way through to the real economy, and the progress made 
in  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms.  In  addition,  real  incomes  are  supported  by 
moderate  price  developments,  in  particular  lower  energy  prices.  Economic  activity  is  also 
expected  to  benefit from  a  gradual  strengthening  of  demand for  euro  area  exports.  At  the 
same  time,  although  labour  markets  have  shown  the  first  signs  of  improvement, 
unemployment  in  the  euro  area  remains  high  and,  overall,  unutilised  capacity  is  sizeable. 
Moreover,  the  necessary  balance  sheet  adjustments  in  the  public  and  private  sectors  will 
continue to weigh on the pace of the economic recovery. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  continue  to  be  on  the 
downside. Developments in global financial markets and in emerging market economies, as 
well  as  geopolitical  risks,  may  have  the  potential  to  affect  economic  conditions  negatively. 
Other  downside  risks  include  weaker  than  expected  domestic  demand  and  insufficient 
implementation of structural reforms in euro area countries, as well as weaker export growth. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.5% in March 
2014, down from 0.7% in February. The decrease reflects falls in the annual rates of change 
its  commitment 
is  unanimous 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
of  the  food,  goods  and  services  components,  partly  offset  by  a  more  moderate  decline  in 
energy  prices.  On  the  basis  of  current  exchange  rates  and  prevailing  futures  prices  for 
energy, annual HICP inflation is expected to pick up somewhat in April, partly related to the 
volatility of service prices in the months around Easter. Over the following months, annual 
HICP inflation is expected to remain low, before gradually increasing during 2015 to reach 
levels closer to 2% towards the end of 2016. At the same time, medium to long-term inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored in line with price stability. 
The  Governing  Council  sees  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments  as  limited  and  broadly  balanced  over  the  medium  term.  In  this  context,  the 
possible  repercussions  of  both  geopolitical  risks  and  exchange  rate  developments  will  be 
monitored closely. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  data  for  February  2014  point  to  subdued  underlying 
growth in broad money (M3). Annual growth in M3 was broadly stable in February at 1.3%, 
compared with 1.2% in January. The growth of the narrow monetary aggregate M1 remained 
robust  at  6.2%  in  February,  after  6.1%  in  January.  The  main  factor  supporting  annual  M3 
growth continued to be the increase in the MFI net external asset position, reflecting the keen 
interest of international investors in euro area assets. 
MFI loans to the private sector continued to decline in February. The annual rate of change 
of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) was –3.1%, 
compared  with  –2.8%  in  January.  Weak  loan  dynamics  for  non-financial  corporations 
continue  to  reflect  their  lagged  relationship  with  the  business  cycle,  credit  risk  and  the 
ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets. The annual growth 
rate  of  loans  to  households  (adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation)  stood  at  0.4%  in 
February 2014, still broadly unchanged since the beginning of 2013. 
Since  the  summer  of  2012,  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  improving  the  funding 
situation  of  banks.  In  order  to  ensure  an  adequate  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the 
financing conditions in euro area countries, it is essential that the fragmentation of euro area 
credit  markets  declines  further  and  that  the  resilience  of  banks  is  strengthened  where 
needed. This is the objective of the ongoing comprehensive assessment by the ECB. 
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  confirms  our  expectation  of  a  prolonged  period  of  low 
inflation followed by a gradual upward movement in HICP inflation rates towards levels closer 
to 2%. A cross-check with the signals from the monetary analysis confirms the picture of 
subdued underlying price pressures in the euro area over the medium term. 
As regards fiscal policies, euro area countries have made important progress in correcting 
fiscal imbalances. They should not unravel past consolidation achievements and should put 
high government debt ratios on a downward trajectory over the medium term, in line with the 
Stability and Growth Pact. Fiscal strategies should ensure a growth-friendly composition of 
consolidation  to  achieve  better  quality  and  more  efficient  public  services,  while  minimising 
the  distortionary  effects  of  taxation.  Further  decisive  steps  are  needed  to  reform  product 
and  labour  markets  with  a  view  to  improving  competitiveness,  raising  potential  growth, 
generating employment opportunities and making euro area economies more flexible. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
