  
 
Andrew Bailey: The capital adequacy of banks – today’s issues and what 
we have learned from the past 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer of the Prudential Regulation Authority at the Bank of England, at Bloomberg, London, 
10 July 2014. 
 I would like to thank David Curry, Hywel Dawes, Simon Dixon, Marc Farag, John Jackson, Duncan Mackinnon, 
Sasha Mills, Jitendra Patil, Rhys Phillips, David Rule and Vicky Saporta for their help in preparing this speech. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of any other members of the Bank of England. 
Good morning and thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak on the subject of bank 
capital adequacy. I am going to focus on the design of the capital adequacy regime. I am 
going  to  draw  out  the  failings  of  the  old  regime  and  why  those  failings  were  so  critical, 
comment  on  the  major  progress  made  over  recent  years,  and  use  all  of  this  to  draw  out 
design questions that remain to be settled. In doing so, I will examine a set of key objectives 
of  the  regime:  first,  that  it  creates  good  incentives  for  the  behaviour  of  regulated  firms; 
second, that it is appropriately forward-looking – at the risks in the future; and third, that it 
encourages and requires appropriate transparency which fosters market discipline. 
Covering the failings of previous regimes is not simply some academic exercise, it is crucial 
in  understanding  why  regulators  have  taken  the  actions  they  have,  and  why  there  is  still 
some work to be done. 
The Basel capital adequacy regime dates back to the Basel Accord of 1988, which led to the 
introduction of what we now know as Basel I. This was an historic agreement, representing 
the  first  international  initiative  on  bank  capital  standards.  Basel  I  focussed  mainly  on  the 
assessment  of  the  quantity  of  credit  risk,  and  had  a  (what  now  looks  like)  simple 
categorisation of assets on risk grounds into one of five categories, with risk weightings of 
0%, 20%, 50%, 100% and finally a set of assets that were fully deducted from capital, the 
most  risky  sort.  There  was  also  a  simple  reporting  framework  for  off  balance  sheet  items 
which were factored into the risk-weighted asset framework. Basel I also set out for the first 
time an internationally agreed definition of the quality of qualifying capital for banks. 
Basel I was simple, and I will return to the consequences of that later. The first amendment 
to Basel I came in 1996 and 1997 in the form of the so-called Market Risk Amendment. It 
was significant both in extending the Basel Accord to capture market risk, and in introducing 
two alternative approaches to the measurement of market risk, a standardised method and 
an  internal  models  approach.  The  latter  was  the  first  appearance  of the  use  of firms’  own 
models in the capital framework. 
Basel II was first published in June 2004, though it was not widely implemented prior to the 
outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis  in  2007.  It  introduced  the  concept  of  “three  pillars”:  Pillar  I, 
minimum capital requirements; Pillar II, supervisory review which enabled additional capital 
to  be  required  on  a  firm-by-firm  basis;  and  Pillar  III  market  discipline  through  greater 
transparency of information on the application of the capital regime to each bank. In doing 
so, Basel II extended the ability to use firms’ own models to credit and counterparty credit 
risk. It also introduced the requirement to hold capital against operational risk. Basel II did not 
make  major  changes  to  the  definition  of  capital,  or  the  quality  of  capital,  required  to  meet 
banks’ risks. 
One  further  point  to  note  is  that  a  leverage  ratio  was  not  a  feature  of  Basel  I  or  II.  Some 
countries maintained leverage ratio requirements alongside the risk-based Basel regimes eg 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
the  US  and  Canada1  (though  importantly  neither  incorporated  all  off  balance  sheet  items, 
something that the Basel III leverage ratio seeks to amend) but many, like the UK did not. 
I want to turn now to looking at why the pre-financial crisis capital regime failed to provide the 
necessary  protection  to  the  financial  system  when  the  crisis  hit.  There  are  a  number  of 
reasons, which cover both the numerator and denominator of the capital ratio. In brief: the 
definition of capital set in Basel I included instruments that did not properly absorb losses; 
capital requirements were too low in relation to the underlying riskiness of assets, particularly 
for the trading book; and banks were able to move risk assets increasingly into the trading 
book. The finger is often pointed at Basel II for enabling all of this to happen, but the timeline 
suggests that the problems built up under the combined Basel I and Market Risk Amendment 
regime.  That  said,  Basel  II  had  its  own  flaws,  and  was  not  well  implemented,  points  I  will 
return to later. 
But, first, I want to look more at the flaws of the pre-crisis regime, starting with the definition 
of capital. This was flawed from the outset in the late 1980s, both in the definition of eligible 
capital  instruments  and  the  approach  taken  to  the  adjustments  which  should  ensure  that 
accounting balance sheet items such as goodwill are not recognised in regulatory capital. A 
further issue in my view has been the treatment of provisions. 
Basel I allowed hybrid debt instruments to count as Tier 1 capital even though they had no 
principal loss absorbency mechanism on a going concern basis. They only absorbed losses 
after reserves (equity) were exhausted or in insolvency. It was possible to operate with no 
more  than  two  per  cent  of  risk-weighted  assets  in  the  form  of  equity.  The  fundamental 
problem with this arrangement was that these hybrid debt instruments often only absorbed 
losses when the bank entered either a formal resolution or insolvency process. It was more 
often  the  latter  in  many  countries,  including  the  UK,  since  there  was  no  special  resolution 
regime  for  banks  (unlike  today).  But  the  insolvency  procedure  could  not  in  fact  be  used 
because  the  essence  of  too  big  or  important  to  fail  was  that  large  banks  could  not  enter 
insolvency  as  the  consequences  were  too  damaging  for  customers,  financial  systems  and 
economies more broadly. 
There were other flaws in the construction of these capital instruments. They often included 
incentives to redeem which undermined their permanence. They were supposed to have full 
discretion not to pay coupons and not to be redeemed in the event of a shock to the bank’s 
condition.  But  banks  argued  that  the  exercise  of  such  discretion  would  create  an  adverse 
market reaction which would be disproportionate to the benefits, thus undermining the quality 
of  the  capital.  More  broadly,  these  so-called  innovative  instruments  introduced  complexity 
into banks’ capital structures which resulted from the endeavour by banks to optimise across 
tax, accounting and prudential standards. 
The  big  lesson  from  this  history  is  that  a  going  concern  capital  instrument  must 
unambiguously be able  to absorb losses when the bank is a going concern. Apologies for 
stating the blindingly obvious, but history painfully demonstrates why it is important to state 
the obvious. Bringing the issue up to date, this is why there are clear benefits to banks if they 
issue contingent convertible capital instruments with a trigger point that is safely above the 
point at which there is likely to be a question mark as to whether the bank remains a going 
concern – in other words before it is too late. Also, holders of these instruments have to be 
very  clear  that  they  are  at  risk  of  conversion  or  write-down.  We  cannot  have  a  situation 
where holders gamble on an assumption that the trigger will not be pulled – it will. 
                                                
1   Canada introduced the “asset-to-capital” multiple in the early 1980s. The definition pre-crisis was defined as 
on and some off-balance sheet exposures as a ratio of total capital. Generally, this was set at the assets being 
no more than 20 times the total capital amount. However supervisory discretion could permit a higher multiple 
(up to 23 times) if the firm met certain conditions. In the US a minimum everage ratio was introduced in the 
early 1980s. Pre-crisis, the definition used was Tier 1 capital/on-balance sheet assets, as measured under US 
GAAP. Firms had to meet a 3% ratio if considered “strong”, and 4% otherwise. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  On  the  form  and  use  of  capital  instruments,  the  Basel  I  Accord  also  allowed  hybrid  debt 
capital instruments to support the required deductions from the capital calculation, such as 
goodwill, expected losses (introduced later under Basel II with the internal models regime for 
credit risk) and investments in other banks’ capital instruments. However, as a matter of fact, 
rather than reporting, any losses arising from these items hit common equity because it will 
absorb  losses  first  in  the  going  concern  state,  according  to  the  hierarchy  of  the  capital 
structure. As a result applying these deductions at the level of total capital, or Tier 1 capital, 
has the effect of overstating the core equity capital ratio. The Accord therefore incentivised 
wrongly the issuance of hybrid debt capital instruments to cover deductions. A further flaw 
was  that  deferred  tax  assets  were  not  deducted  from  capital  and  minority  interest  assets 
were recognised in full. This, too, was a mistake. DTAs depend on future profitability (which 
is not assured) and minority interests are not fully transferable to absorb losses for a group. 
Last on the capital side, there were problems starting in the original Basel Accord in relation 
to  the  treatment  of  provisions.  Under  the  current  international  accounting  standards 
provisions are based on incurred rather than expected losses. As a consequence, the bank 
capital framework de facto becomes a partial substitute means of achieving more forward-
looking  provisioning,  through  the  internal  models  regime  for  credit  risk  which  requires  the 
deduction  from  capital  of  expected  losses  in  excess  of  provisions.  A  forward-looking 
approach to provisioning based on expected losses would help move to a more appropriate 
position where the accounting standard requires a prudent valuation of banking book assets 
and the capital regime can focus on unexpected loss. I hope that implementation of the new 
accounting standard for provisioning, IFRS 9, is a step in this direction. 
I now want to turn to the issues around risk-weighted assets in the capital framework. Basel I 
was  a  simple  framework,  as  I  described  earlier.  In  my  view,  that  was  its  strength  and 
weakness. The strength was that it was quite easy (certainly by today’s standards) to see the 
balance sheets even of the largest banks laid out and broken down by broad risk weights. 
The weaknesses were two-fold. First, it provided little insight into how firms measured and 
managed risk. As a supervisor in the late 1980s and early 1990s, I remember well meetings 
with  firms  which  would  start  by  the  firm  reminding  that  while  they  had  filled  in  the  risk 
weighted assets form faithfully, it bore no resemblance to how they assessed and managed 
risk in the business – what is often called “economic” as opposed to “regulatory” capital. In 
one sense, this should not matter if the regulatory capital calculation provides a robust floor 
below which the “economic” capital should not fall. But it was unclear how we could know this 
was  so,  and  the  lack  of  line  of  sight  into  how  the  firm  managed  risk  was  disturbing.  The 
second weakness is generic to simple systems which conflate different levels of inherent risk, 
namely that they tend to create incentives for banks to increase the average level of riskiness 
of their assets. And, one thing we now know, incentives are hugely important in the capital 
regime. 
As I noted earlier, Basel II was not in place properly when the crisis broke, but the Market 
Risk Amendment was, and this introduced the use of banks’ own so-called “internal” models. 
As an aside, my experience suggests that the contribution of Basel II to the crisis was far 
more that it diverted the attention and effort of regulators and the industry away from broader 
risk  management  and  into  the  implementation  of  a  new  and  more  detailed  approach  to 
regulation.  This  was  especially  so  for  large  banks  seeking  approval  to  use  their  internal 
models. Moreover, this process was not well done. 
The  Market  Risk  Amendment  and  Basel  II  dramatically  increased  the  complexity  of  the 
capital  framework,  and  whilst  it  intended  to  increase  the  scope  of  risk  capture  in  the 
regulatory capital measure it ended up creating new opportunities for “optimising” regulatory 
capital. Even more difficult, the potential benefits – better differentiation and rank ordering of 
risk  –  were  undermined  by  the  problems  of  calibrating  overall  capital  standards,  and  poor 
implementation in the rush to achieve compliance. Under Basel I and II, capital ratios were 
too low to sustain confidence in banks, and thus the system as a whole, through a severe 
stress, as the crisis sadly demonstrated. The minimum Tier I ratio was 4% of Risk Weighted 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Assets.  And,  crucially  as  the  Tier  I  ratio  included  capital  instruments  with  the  flaws  I 
described earlier, the core (equity) ratio could be as low as 2%. In the trading book, under 
the  Market  Risk  Amendment,  capital  requirements  could  be  less  than  1%  of  trading  book 
assets. To illustrate this last point, here is a quote from the FSA’s report into the failure of 
RBS. 
“The capital regime was most deficient, moreover, in respect of the trading books 
of  the  banks,  when  required  capital  for  many  instruments  was  estimated  using 
value-at-risk (VaR) approaches. The acquisition of ABN AMRO meant that RBS’s 
trading book assets almost doubled between end-2006 and end-2007. The low 
risk weights assigned to trading assets suggested that only £2.3bn of core tier 1 
capital was held to cover potential trading losses which might result from assets 
carried at around £470bn on the firm’s balance sheet. In fact, in 2008, losses of 
£12.2bn  arose  in  the  credit  trading  area  alone  (a  subset  of  total  trading  book 
assets).  A  regime  which  inadequately  evaluated  trading  book  risks  was, 
therefore,  fundamental  to  RBS’s  failure.  This  inadequacy  was  particularly 
significant for RBS, given that the purchase of ABN AMRO significantly increased 
RBS’s  trading  book  assets.  RBS  was  allowed  by  the  existing  regulations 
massively to increase its trading risk exposure counterbalanced only by a small 
increase in capital buffers available to absorb loss.” 
The  Basel  Committee  recognised  that  across  internationally  active  banks,  Basel  II  would 
likely lead to an overall reduction in the required capital compared with that required under 
Basel I and that the reduction in required capital would be larger for banks adopting the more 
advanced  modelling  options  for  credit  risk.2  In  other  words,  other  things  equal  reported 
capital ratios would tend to be higher under Basel II than Basel I. Our own  work suggests 
that Basel I would have required major UK banks to hold approximately £45bn more capital 
than  Basel  II  against  the  credit  and  counterparty  credit  risks  in  their  end-2013  balance 
sheets. This amounts to a decrease of about 25% under Basel II compared with Basel I. 
Another way of looking at this is to examine the pattern of average risk weights. For a set of 
17  major  international  banks  (designated  as  G-SIBs)3  average  risk  weights  fell  almost 
continuously from 70% in 1993 to below 40% in 2012. But this fall in average risk weights did 
not represent a systematic reduction in risk within the banking system. The level of capital 
was therefore wrong – too little capital was required, and the appearance of strong economic 
conditions  before the  crisis  appears  to  have  provided  a  justification for even  lower  capital, 
under Basel II. 
What I have described was the application of the Pillar I element of the Basel regime, namely 
the  minimum  capital  requirements  on  the  common  approach.  As  I  noted  earlier,  Basel  II 
introduced  the  three  pillar  approach,  with  the  second  pillar  enabling  supervisors  to  set 
additional capital requirements on a firm specific basis. The second pillar was however not 
consistently  or  rigorously  applied  prior  to  the  response  to  the  financial  crisis.  In  2008,  the 
major UK banks had a Pillar II capital requirement £22bn (equivalent to 10% of then Pillar I 
capital requirement). In summary, the system was flawed both in terms of the definition of 
capital – the quality – and the quantity required to be held. 
The first step in response to the financial crisis was agreement in July 2009 to significantly 
increase  capital  requirements  against  market  risk  via  the  so-called  Basel  II.5  package  – 
addressing  the  widely  recognised  undercapitalisation  of  risk  in  banks’  trading  operations. 
Building on that improvement the next step, was the agreement on, and now introduction of, 
                                                
2   http://www.bis.org/press/p060524.htm. 
3   Data  Source:  The  Banker  and  Bank  of  England  calculations.  Sample  comprises:  Deutsche  Bank,  HSBC, 
BNP Paribas,  Barclays,  Citigroup,  UBS,  BAML,  BONY,  Commerzbank,  ING,  JPM,  LBG,  RBS,  Santander, 
State Street, UniCredit, Wells Fargo. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Basel III. The new standard was very much a response to the financial crisis, the first reform 
of the Accord to be backed by a remit from world leaders to effect real change on the global 
scale. It built on a number of more immediate domestic responses, including in the UK the 
FSA’s so-called 4–6–8 approach. The new standard requires more and better quality capital, 
and is a step change in capital adequacy. 
For the largest UK banks, and taking into account all of the changes brought in by Basel III, 
there  is  a  seven-fold  increase  in  the  amount  of  Core  Tier  I  capital,  the  highest  quality  of 
capital that must have the characteristics of equity which major banks are expected to hold. 
Under the Basel II regime, the Pillar I minimum requirement was £38bn of this highest quality 
capital  for  the  largest  five  UK  Banks.  Compared  to  this,  taking  both  capital  minima  and 
capital  buffers  together  when  Basel  III  is  fully  implemented  the  figure  will  be  £271bn4,  as 
measured  in  September  2013  (ie  on  a  like-for-like  basis  in  terms  of  the  point  in  time). 
Breaking  down  this  increase  of  £233bn  in  Core  Tier  I  capital,  the  largest  part  (£80bn)  is 
accounted for by the change in the definition of capital resources, a further £61bn relates to 
raising the minimum requirement from 2% to 4.5% of risk weighted assets (and changes to 
the risk weights), £55bn to the Basel III Capital Conservation Buffer, and £37bn to the Basel 
III Globally Significant Banks Buffer. 
The  changes  that  we  have  seen  include  action  under  both  Pillars  I  and  II  of  the  Basel 
framework. The numbers I gave for minimum capital requirements (the change from £38bn to 
£271bn) represent Pillar I. I mentioned earlier that Pillar II was not consistently or rigorously 
applied before the crisis. Between 2008 and today the Pillar IIA capital requirements for the 
major  UK  banks  have  risen  from  £22bn  to  £53bn.  This  increase  in  capital  required  is 
additional to the impact of Basel III and the resulting increase in core capital requirements of 
around 7 times I set out above. The PRA’s approach to supervision emphasises the use of 
judgement on a forward-looking basis, and the use of Pillar II is evidence of that. 
A further important element of the new framework of supervision is so-called Asset Quality 
Reviews (AQRs), undertaken either by or at the request of supervisors like the PRA. AQRs 
are  designed  to  assess  the  more  structural  features  of  loan  books  as  well  as  their 
performance, including whether forbearance is being applied by the lender. The granularity 
with which AQRs are undertaken can vary with their purpose, but there is always a fairly high 
level  of  intensity  in  terms  of  the  closeness  of  the  inspection.  In  the  best  of  all  worlds, 
supervisory initiated AQRs should not reveal anything that isn’t already known. I will just say 
that experience shows that we are not there yet. 
Basel III requires more and better quality capital in banks. The good news is that since the 
crisis  broke,  banks  in  the  UK  and  elsewhere  have  made  significant  progress  in  rebuilding 
capital. Evidence to support this is that at its last meeting in June, the Bank’s Financial Policy 
Committee decided to close its recommendation of March last year that the largest UK banks 
and building societies should meet a minimum 7% Common Equity Tier One ratio on the so-
called end-point (ie full implementation) basis set out in the EU rules to implement Basel III, 
after taking into account adjustments for expected loss on more vulnerable loan portfolios, 
the impact of future conduct of business costs, and prudent use of risk weights. Since then 
the actions taken by a number of major UK banks and building societies have put them on 
course  or  ahead  of the planned  actions  to  meet  the  FPC’s  test.  In  a few  cases,  there  are 
more  actions  to  be  undertaken  in  their  plans,  but  overall  this  is  a  welcome  story  of  action 
taken to strengthen capital positions. 
I  do  however  accept  that  there  remains  a  perception  in  some  quarters  that  higher  capital 
standards are bad for lending and thus for a sustained economic recovery. I agree with those 
who argue that banks have a lot more to do to demonstrate that they support lending to small 
businesses.  Interestingly,  in  recent  weeks  the  messages  I  have  seen  from  the  Bank  of 
                                                
4   Bank calculations based on supervisory data. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  England’s  regional  agents  suggest  that  the  supply  of  loans  on  offer  has  increased,  but 
businesses are understandably cautious on the take up. Looking at the broader picture, the 
post-crisis  adjustment  of  the  capital  adequacy  standard  is  a  welcome  and  necessary 
correction of the excessively lax underwriting and pricing of risk which caused the build up of 
fragility in the banking system and led to the crisis. I do not however accept the view that 
raising  capital  standards  damages  lending.  There  are  few,  if  any,  banks  that  have  been 
weakened as a result of raising capital. 
Analysis  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  indicates  that  in  the  post  crisis  period 
banks with higher capital ratios have experienced higher asset and loan growth5. Other work 
by  the  BIS  also  shows  a  positive  relationship  between  bank  capitalisation  and  lending 
growth, and that the impact of higher capital levels on lending may be especially significant 
during a stress period6. IMF analysis indicates that banks with stronger core capital are less 
likely to reduce certain types of lending when impacted by an adverse funding shock7. And 
our own analysis indicates that banks with larger capital buffers tend to reduce lending less 
when  faced  with  an  increase  in  capital  requirements.  These  banks  are  less  likely  to  cut 
lending aggressively in response to a shock8. 
These empirical results are intuitive and accord with our supervisory experience, namely that 
a weakly capitalised bank is not in a position to expand its lending. Higher quality capital and 
larger  capital  buffers  are  critical  to  bank  resilience  –  delivering  a  more  stable  system  both 
through lower sensitivity of lending behaviour to shocks and reducing the probability of failure 
and with it the risk of dramatic shifts in lending behaviour. 
The  capital  adequacy  framework  has  made  much  needed  progress  in  recent  years.  The 
framework is now being designed to be fit for purpose both for the micro-prudential purpose 
of each firm’s safety and soundness, and for the macro-prudential purposes of addressing 
the  risk  certain  major  firms  individually  present  to  financial  stability  and  the  risk  that 
imbalances building up in the sector as a whole, or part of it, may threaten financial stability. 
The key elements of the framework are: 
- 
first, a common definition of capital resources focussed on genuine loss absorbency 
in a going concern – Common Equity Tier 1. In doing so, we must define robustly 
the boundary between going and gone concern loss absorbency ; 
second, a framework for capital which comprises minimum capital requirements and 
capital buffers, with the buffers varying in size depending on a bank’s size and the 
nature of its activity and risk, and varying through the cycle; 
third, using a combination of different approaches to assessing capital adequacy – 
risk-based approaches, stress tests, and a leverage ratio; 
fourth,  within  the  risk-based  approach,  striking  a  balance  which  recognises  the 
potential benefits of firms’ internal models while guarding against their weaknesses 
and the incentive problems they create. 
   A  major  principle  of  the  new  framework  is  that  there  is  no  single  “right”  approach  to 
assessing  capital  adequacy.  The  very  important  role  that  is  now  given  to  stress  tests 
illustrates the point. This year the PRA and FPC are running their first concurrent stress tests 
for  the  major  UK  banks,  building  on  the  past  development  by  the  FSA  and  then  PRA  of 
sequential firm-by-firm stress tests. This is a key device to examine and mitigate tail risks, 
                                                
5   http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1309e.prf. 
6   http://www.bis.org/publ/work357.htm. 
7  https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2013/wp13102.pdf. 
8   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2014/wp486.pdf. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and like all good forecasting exercises, the stress test is designed to probe important issues 
rather than just provide a single answer. 
A  second  key  principle  of  capital  adequacy  is  that  establishing  the  boundary  between  the 
going and gone concern (or resolution) regimes for loss absorbency is important. This is one 
reason why the work on resolution and gone concern loss absorbency is so important. Put 
simply, if we don’t convincingly deal with the too big to fail problem, the boundary between 
going and gone concerns will need to be re-set, and the former will need to be strengthened. 
This should not be necessary with a good outcome on the gone concern side. For me, the 
issue of gone-concern loss absorbency is the key outstanding one on the current agenda. 
The  idea  that  there  is  no  single  right  measure  of  the  capital  a  bank  requires  is  gaining 
ground.  Each  approach  –  risk-based,  stress  tests,  leverage  ratio  –  has  its  strengths  and 
weaknesses. For me, there are a number of governing principles. First, supervision is about 
assessing and mitigating risks. That is the core of our job. We therefore naturally think in risk-
based  terms.  That  said,  the  leverage  ratio  is  a  very  useful  complement,  which  is  why  the 
PRA  has  moved  to  using  a  baseline  leverage  ratio  more  rapidly  than  the  international 
standard  requires.  It  is  a  very  useful  check  and  balance  and  it  should  prompt  searching 
questions about the danger of model errors in more complex capital assessments. It is not a 
substitute for a risk-based approach, but it is a very good complement. The FPC will shortly 
be consulting on the scope and form of its application, and that will be a welcome debate. 
Getting  the  incentives  right  for  banks  in  terms  of  the  capital  adequacy  regime  is  hugely 
important.  The  leverage  ratio  is  simple  and  that  is  its  appeal,  but  on  its  own  it  could 
encourage banks to take more risk per unit of assets. In contrast, internal models and stress 
tests are complicated, and therefore carry the risk of opacity and model error. There is now a 
growing  debate  on  the  use  of  models  and  stress  tests.  In  many  respects,  the  debate  has 
common  ground,  since  models  are  intrinsic  to  stress  tests.  My  view  is  that  this  is  not  a 
debate about whether or not supervisors should use models. That question was answered a 
long  time  ago  in  the  reasoning  for  the  switch  away  from  Basel  I.  The  design  and 
implementation of Basel II was not done well, and a substantial charge has been required. A 
major  lesson  is  that  to  use  models  and  stress  tests  effectively  requires  intensive 
development  and  maintenance  by  firms  and  a  highly  skilled  body  of  supervisors  and  a 
regime  where  judgement  can  be  used.  It  also  requires  the  supervisor  to  have  a  credible 
capacity to withdraw the permission given to a firm to use a particular model if the model is 
considered to be inadequate or the firm has not demonstrated the capacity to use it safely. In 
another  case,  the  supervisor  could  withdraw  permission for  whole  types  of models,  as the 
FSA/PRA  did  for  the  commercial  property  models  of  UK  Banks  by  requiring  a  substitute 
“simple slotting approach” to be used – which is still a model, but a very simple one. 
Then I think the debate becomes more around whether the relevant risks can be modelled, 
how easy it is for supervisors and firms to observe the performance of models, and the ability 
of supervisors to police the performance of models. None of this is easy. There is also a very 
good question around whether supervisors should supplement the use of firms’ models by 
developing their own models. In the US, the Federal Reserve has gone down this road, and 
in  doing  so  advanced  their  use  of  stress  testing.  So  far,  we  have  gone  down  the  road  of 
pushing banks to improve their models, and to be more realistic about what the models can 
and  cannot  do.  My  guess  is  that  we  may  eventually  end  up  with  greater  international 
convergence  of  supervisory  approaches  on  the  use  of  models,  and  that  would  be  a  good 
thing in terms of more efficient supervision and use of our scarce resources. But I would note 
that  today  I  have  an  open  mind  as  to  where  that  convergence  will  lead  to  in  terms  of  the 
capital adequacy regime. 
Much  of  this  speech  has  been  about  the  incentives  in  the  regime  of  capital  adequacy  for 
banks. I want to end with a few words on transparency. Quite simply, there will in my view be 
more of it in the future. When I started in supervision in the late 1980s, we prohibited banks 
from disclosing their Basel I capital ratios, and we got exercised when they did nonetheless 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  declare their ratios. That was a relatively simple regime. The Basel III regime is undoubtedly 
more complex and it is not about the single capital ratio. Capital requirements and buffers will 
vary between firms and over time, for good reasons. Banks and investors do complain about 
the  lack  of  clarity  about  their  future  requirements  in  this  regime.  But  that  precision  is  not 
realistic. Within defined parameters the regime is designed so that buffers adjust in relation 
to  risk  and  the  impact  of  firm  failure.  Counter  cyclical  buffers  can  be  varied  over  time 
depending on conditions, and banks can move between GSIB buffers as they change size 
and structure. Likewise, supervisory work, including stress testing, can lead our judgement 
about  appropriate  buffers  to  change.  The  regime  is  built  this  way  deliberately  to  include  a 
greater element of judgement by supervisors. My view is that this will inevitably lead to more 
transparency  and  disclosure,  which  is  fine  and  to  be  encouraged  providing  it  can  deliver 
useful guidance. That means we have to work hard to deliver as much clarity as is possible 
in an uncertain world. 
And finally, we know that there is change on many fronts, the scale of which may only be 
exceeded by the scale of the crisis to which it is a response. As supervisors we are on the 
look  out  for  unintended  consequences  of  this  change,  and  we  will  assess  and  refine  our 
approach as needed. Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
