  Haruhiko Kuroda: Deflation, the labor market, and QQE 
Remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 23 August 2014. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to have been invited to this policy symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City. 
One  of  the  key  topics  of  the  symposium  is  the  cyclical  and  structural  effects  of  the  global 
financial crisis and the recovery from the crisis on the labor market in each country. To talk 
about Japan’s experience in this regard, however, I have to take you back to long before the 
crisis. Almost a quarter of a century ago, at the beginning of the 1990s, Japan suffered the 
burst of a major asset bubble, forcing firms and financial institutions to repair their balance 
sheets,  which  had  been  substantially  impaired.  From  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  Japan 
experienced  about  15  years  of  deflation.  At  the  same  time,  Japan  experienced  rapid 
population aging at a pace that put it ahead of other countries. What problems have these 
developments  given  rise  to  in  Japan’s  labor  market?  How  is  Japan  overcoming  these 
problems and where is Japan’s economy headed? These are the issues I would like to talk 
about. 
The labor market under deflation 
I.  
The unemployment rate in Japan is now 3.7 percent. That means it has fallen to the level of 
the structural unemployment rate, which is estimated to be around 3.5 percent (Chart 1). The 
number  of  discouraged  workers  and  hence  what  can  be  called  hidden  unemployment  has 
also been decreasing. According to a business survey conducted by the Bank of Japan, the 
number  of  firms  suffering  from  a  shortage  of  workers  has  been  exceeding  that  of  firms 
suffering  from  an  excess  of  workers  (Chart  2).  In  fact,  in  some  industries,  a  shortage  of 
workers  is  now  acting  as  a  constraint  on  firms  seeking  to  expand  their  business.  This 
situation is quite different from that in the United States and Europe, where unemployment is 
the problem. 
However, this does not mean that all is well and there are no concerns regarding Japan’s 
labor market. Although Japan’s labor market is now on its way to escape from the problems 
brought  about  by  the  aforementioned  balance  sheet  adjustments  and  prolonged  deflation, 
there still remain important challenges to be addressed. In what follows, let me share with 
you  Japan’s  experience  concerning  changes  in  the  labor  market  brought  about  by  the 
protracted deflation and their macroeconomic consequences. 
In  the  2000s,  reflecting  increasing  deflationary  pressure,  firms  were  unable  to  raise  sales 
prices. Faced with stagnant sales, firms resorted to cutting expenses, including labor costs, 
to secure profits. Efforts to restrain labor costs first took the form of a shift to the use of non-
regular employees. The share of part-time workers in total employees consistently increased 
in the 1990s following the burst of the asset bubble at the beginning of the decade, and the 
increase continued unabated in the 2000s (Chart 3). Efforts to restrain labor costs also took 
the form of restraining wages. Wages of non-regular employees are largely determined on an 
ad hoc basis and fluctuate reflecting changes in supply and demand conditions. By contrast, 
wages for regular employees are largely determined based on long-term implicit contracts. In 
the  face  of  protracted  deflation  and  severe  labor  conditions,  employees  were  put  at  a 
disadvantage and accepted employers’ demand to reduce wages rather than lose their job. 
Thus, unlike in the United States and Europe, where unemployment tends to increase during 
a  recession,  in  Japan  unemployment  did  not  increase  substantially,  but  instead  wages 
declined  considerably.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  wages  was  above  that  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  consumer price index (CPI) until the late 1990s, but has generally been below it since then 
(Chart 4). Consequently, on a macro basis, Japan’s labor share declined noticeably in the 
2000s.  Although  the  labor  share  fluctuated  considerably  during  and  immediately  after  the 
global financial crisis, the average for the decade was lower than that for the 1990s (Chart 5). 
Furthermore,  deflation  significantly  affected  firms’  investment  behavior.  The  prospect  of 
deflation  reduced  the  discounted  present  value  of  investment  returns  and  lowered  firms’ 
investment appetite. In addition, it led firms to hoard cash to prepare for potential losses in 
the future. As a result, firms, which used to be net investors, turned into net savers and have 
stayed  in  that  position  (Chart  6).  Following  the  burst  of  the  asset  bubble,  Japanese  firms 
were forced to save in order to reduce excess debt. However, they continued to save even 
after the excess debt problem had been resolved in the 2000s. Particularly in recent years, 
net saving in the corporate sector has become much larger than net saving in the household 
sector. 
This  change  of  firms  into  net  savers  has  thrown  the  economy  into  a  contractionary 
equilibrium through the paradox of thrift. If firms use profits obtained through wage cuts to 
build  up  internal  funds  rather  than  for  investment,  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy  will 
shrink.  And  since  a  decline  in  aggregate  demand  will  lower  corporate  profits,  firms  will  be 
forced  to  cut  wages  further.  This  is  a  typical  example  of  the  fallacy  of  composition.  The 
vicious cycle of declining wages and declining aggregate demand was initially set in motion 
by  the  balance  sheet  adjustments  following  the  burst  of  the  asset  bubble,  but  it  became 
entrenched due to the spread of deflationary sentiment. 
Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and the labor market 
II.  
Let me now turn to how Japan is in the process of escaping from this state of contractionary 
equilibrium.  If  uncertainty  and  concern  over  the  future  were  the  cause  of  the  decline  in 
wages,  then  for  wages  to  rise,  it  is  necessary  that  both  employers  and  employees  see 
brighter prospects for the future. Therefore, the first step is to change Japan’s economy from 
one suffering from stagnation under deflation to one that grows sustainably under moderate 
inflation.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing 
(QQE),  which  I  explained  in  detail  at  this  symposium  last  year,  has  been  producing  its 
intended effects. And as a result of these effects, Japan’s labor market situation has shown 
improvement, as mentioned earlier. 
However, closer inspection shows that the Japanese labor market still suffers from some of 
the  problems  that  arose  during  the  period  of  deflation.  For  example,  there  has  been  no 
reversal  in  the  growing  reliance  on  part-time  workers.  In  fact,  the  recent  increase  in  the 
number of workers is due mainly to an increase in the number of part-time workers (Chart 7). 
In general, in the early stages of economic recovery, it is demand for marginal workers such 
as part-time workers that increases first. In addition, the current economic recovery is led by 
the  nonmanufacturing  sector,  where  the  share  of  part-time  workers  is  higher  than  in  the 
manufacturing  sector.  Furthermore,  the  continuing  shift  to  a  service  economy  means  that 
demand for part-time workers has increased over time. That being said, most recently, there 
has  been  an  acceleration  in  the  increase  in  the  number  of  full-time  workers,  which  is  a 
welcome sign. This shift from growing demand for marginal labor such as part-time workers 
to  growing  demand  for  permanent  workers  suggests  that  firms’  growth  prospects  have 
started  to  improve.  If  economic  growth  is  sustained  and  thus  underpins  firms’  growth 
prospects,  Japan  is  likely  to  experience  a  full-fledged  increase  in  the  number  of  full-time 
workers. 
A  more  troublesome  problem  is  that  wage-setting  practices  have  changed  during  the 
prolonged  period  of  deflation.  Because  of  low  labor  mobility  due  to  relatively  widespread 
lifetime  employment,  wages  of  regular  employees  in  Japan  tend  to  reflect  labor  market 
conditions only insufficiently, at least in the short term. Therefore, some kind of mechanism, 
a “visible hand,” is necessary for wages to rise. Prior to the period of deflation, the so-called 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  spring  offensive  of  the  practice  of  simultaneous  wage  negotiations  between  management 
and  labor  at  major  firms  in  spring  served  as  such  a  mechanism  for  negotiating  wage 
increases.  However,  as  deflation  continued,  this  mechanism  stopped  working  effectively. 
That is, firms needed to cut wages in order to reduce costs against the background of falling 
prices,  while  it  was  rational  for  workers  to  accept  a  decline  in  wages  in  exchange  for  job 
guarantees. As a result, in the past decade or so, the practice of raising base wages through 
the spring offensive had more or less disappeared. 
This  spring,  however,  has  seen  increases  in  base  wages  and/or  bonuses  not  only  among 
large  firms  but  also  among  small  and  medium  enterprises,  partly  reflecting  calls  by  the 
government. For wages to increase at an appropriate pace in the future, it is necessary to 
have  some  kind  of  coordination  mechanism  to  bring  about  wage  increases.  In  such  a 
mechanism, the Bank of Japan’s price stability target can serve as a benchmark for firms in 
their  wage  setting.  That  is,  once  the  Bank  has  succeeded  in  firmly  anchoring  inflation 
expectations at 2 percent, this could provide the basis on which wage negotiations between 
management and labor are conducted. Firms and households can then base their economic 
decisions firmly on the expectation that prices will rise at a rate of around 2 percent. Thus, 
creating  an  appropriate  wage-setting  mechanism  plays  an  important  part  in  anchoring 
inflation expectations at 2 percent. 
Concluding remarks 
I have so far talked about the effects of balance sheet adjustments and deflation on the labor 
market,  but  there  is  one  topic  I  have  yet  to  touch  on.  This  is  an  issue  that  concerns  the 
supply of labor, namely, demographic changes. Reflecting the aging of Japan’s population, 
the labor force participation rate has been on a downtrend, and serious labor shortages are 
likely to emerge in the future. The downtrend in the labor force participation rate is due to 
Japan’s demographic composition and therefore does not come as a surprise. However, until 
recently, this did not manifest itself in the form of labor shortages, since labor demand has 
been  sluggish,  so  that  the  problem  was  not  sufficiently  addressed.  Fortunately,  during  the 
current economic recovery, labor force participation rates, in particular those of women and 
the elderly, have been rising (Chart 8). It is critical to ensure that this phenomenon is not a 
cyclical one, but becomes permanent by creating a work environment favorable to women 
and  the  elderly  in  order  to  mitigate  labor  force  shortages  over  time.  Utilization  of  foreign 
workers  also  deserves  consideration.  Another  way  to  mitigate  future  labor  shortages  is  to 
prompt  investment  in  labor-saving  technology  and  research  and  development  for  such 
investment.  All  of  these  issues  are  incorporated  in  the  government’s  growth  strategy.  If, 
despite  the delays,  the  strategy  is  implemented  in  a  steady  fashion,  Japan’s  economy  will 
regain its vitality and achieve sustained growth. 
I  have  talked  about  Japan’s  labor  market,  focusing  on  the  effects  of  balance  sheet 
adjustments, deflation, and demographic changes. While some of these problems are unique 
to Japan, the issues I discussed may nevertheless be of relevance for the challenges faced 
by other countries today or in the future. I hope that Japan’s experience can provide a helpful 
reference in this regard. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  4 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5
  6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7
