Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 6 February 2014. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged. Incoming information confirms that the moderate recovery of the 
euro area economy is proceeding in line with our previous assessment. At the same time, 
underlying price pressures in the euro area remain weak and monetary and credit dynamics 
are subdued. Inflation expectations for the euro area over the medium to long term continue 
to be firmly anchored in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 
2%. As stated previously, we are now experiencing a prolonged period of low inflation, which 
will be followed by a gradual upward movement towards inflation rates below, but close to, 
2% later on. Regarding the medium-term outlook for prices and growth, further information 
and  analysis  will  become  available  in  early  March.  Recent  evidence  fully  confirms  our 
decision to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy for as long as necessary, 
which  will  assist  the  gradual  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area.  We  firmly  reiterate  our 
forward guidance. We continue to expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or 
lower levels for an extended period of time. This expectation is based on an overall subdued 
outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, given the broad-based weakness of the 
economy  and  subdued  monetary  dynamics.  With  regard  to  recent  money  market  volatility 
and  its  potential  impact  on  our  monetary  policy  stance,  we  are  monitoring  developments 
closely  and  are  ready  to  consider  all  available  instruments.  Overall,  we  remain  firmly 
determined  to  maintain  the  high  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  and  to  take  further 
decisive action if required. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Following  two  quarters  of  positive  real  GDP  growth,  developments  in  recent  data  and 
surveys  overall  suggest  that  the  moderate  recovery  continued  in  the  last  quarter  of  2013. 
Looking ahead, our previous assessment of economic growth has been confirmed. Output in 
the  euro  area  is  expected  to  recover  at  a  slow  pace.  In  particular,  some  improvement  in 
domestic  demand  should  materialise,  supported  by  the  accommodative  monetary  policy 
stance,  improving  financing  conditions  and  the  progress  made  in  fiscal  consolidation  and 
structural  reforms.  In  addition,  real  incomes  are  supported  by  lower  energy  price  inflation. 
Economic  activity  is  also  expected  to  benefit  from  a  gradual  strengthening  of  demand  for 
euro area exports. At the same time, although unemployment in the euro area is stabilising, it 
remains  high,  and  the  necessary  balance  sheet  adjustments  in  the  public  and  the  private 
sector will continue to weigh on the pace of the economic recovery. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  continue  to  be  on  the 
downside.  Developments  in  global  money  and  financial  market  conditions  and  related 
uncertainties, notably in emerging market economies, may have the potential to negatively 
affect  economic  conditions.  Other  downside  risks  include  weaker  than  expected  domestic 
demand  and  export  growth  and  slow  or  insufficient  implementation  of  structural  reforms  in 
euro area countries. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.7% in January 
2014, after 0.8% in December. This decline was mainly due to energy price developments. 
At the same time, the inflation rate in January 2014 was lower than generally expected. On 
the  basis  of  current  information  and  prevailing  futures  prices  for  energy,  annual  HICP 
inflation rates are expected to remain at around current levels in the coming months. Over 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  medium  term,  underlying  price  pressures  in  the  euro  area  are  expected  to  remain 
subdued. Inflation expectations for the euro area over the medium to long term continue to 
be firmly anchored in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. 
Both  upside  and  downside  risks  to the  outlook for  price  developments remain  limited,  and 
they continue to be broadly balanced over the medium term. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  data  for  December  2013  confirm  the  assessment  of 
subdued underlying growth in broad money (M3) and credit. Annual growth in M3 moderated 
to 1.0% in December, from 1.5% in November. Deposit outflows in December mirrored the 
strong sales of government and private sector securities by euro area MFIs, which, in part, 
could  be  related  to  adjustments  by  banks  in  anticipation  of  the  ECB’s  comprehensive 
assessment of banks’ balance sheets. These developments also affected annual growth in 
M1, which moderated to 5.8% in December but remained strong. As in previous months, the 
main  factor  supporting  annual  M3  growth  was  an  increase  in  the  MFI  net  external  asset 
position,  which  continued  to  reflect  the  increased  interest  of  international  investors  in  euro 
area assets. The annual rate of change of loans to the private sector continued to contract. 
The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) 
stood at 0.3% in December, broadly unchanged since the beginning of 2013. The annual rate 
of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) 
was –2.9% in December, after –3.1% in November. The January 2014 bank lending survey 
provides indications of some further stabilisation in credit conditions for firms and households 
and a smaller net decline in loan demand by enterprises. Overall, weak loan dynamics for 
non-financial  corporations  continue  to  reflect  their  lagged  relationship  with  the  business 
cycle,  credit  risk  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance 
sheets. 
Since  the  summer  of  2012  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  improving  the  funding 
situation  of  banks.  In  order  to  ensure  an  adequate  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the 
financing conditions in euro area countries, it is essential that the fragmentation of euro area 
credit  markets  declines  further  and  that  the  resilience  of  banks  is  strengthened  where 
needed.  This  is  the  objective  of  the  ECB’s  comprehensive  assessment,  while  the  timely 
implementation  of  additional  steps  to  establish  a  banking  union  will  further  help  to  restore 
confidence in the financial system. 
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  confirms  our  expectation  of  a  prolonged  period  of  low 
inflation,  to  be  followed  by  a  gradual  upward  movement  towards  inflation  rates  below,  but 
close to, 2% later on. A cross-check with the signals from the monetary analysis confirms 
the picture of subdued underlying price pressures in the euro area over the medium term. 
As regards fiscal policies, euro area countries should not unravel past consolidation efforts 
and should put high government debt on a downward trajectory over the medium term. Fiscal 
strategies should be in line with the Stability and Growth Pact and should ensure a growth-
friendly composition of consolidation which combines improving the quality and efficiency of 
public services  with minimising distortionary effects of taxation. When accompanied by the 
decisive implementation of structural reforms, these strategies will further support the still 
fragile  economic  recovery.  Governments  must  therefore  continue  with  product  and  labour 
market  reforms.  These  reforms  will  help  to  enhance  the  euro  area’s  growth  potential  and 
reduce the high unemployment rates in many countries. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
