  Njuguna Ndung’u: Revolutionising finance for agricultural value chains 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the opening 
ceremony  of  the  international  conference  on  “Revolutionising  finance  for  agricultural  value 
chains”, Kenya School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 15 July 2014. 
 His Excellency, Hon. William Ruto, Deputy President of the Republic of Kenya; 
Her  Excellency,  Tumusiime  Rhoda  Peace,  Commissioner  for  Rural  Economy  and 
Agriculture, African Union Commission; 
Hon.  Akinwumi  Ayodeji  Adesina,  Minister  for  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development, 
Nigeria; 
Mr. Henry Rotich, Cabinet Secretary for The National Treasury; 
Mr. Felix Koskei, Cabinet Secretary for Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries; 
Honourable Ministers; 
Ambassadors; 
Development Partners; 
Fellow Governors and Deputy Governors of Central Banks; 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure,  on  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  the  Kenya  School  of 
Monetary Studies and on my own behalf, to welcome you to Nairobi and to this Conference 
on “Revolutionising finance for agricultural value chains”. 
I  would,  like,  first  of  all,  to  recognize  the  role  of  the  Technical  Centre  for  Agricultural  and 
Rural Cooperation for African Caribbean and Pacific countries (CTA) in bringing together the 
stakeholders  in  agricultural  and  development  finance  to  discuss  this  highly  important 
development agenda. 
The Conference seeks to share experiences on innovative models of financing agricultural 
value  chains  and  to  further  explore  opportunities  and  challenges  in  expanding  financial 
inclusion to rural households. The objective of this conference is very much in line with the 
development goal of promoting inclusive growth and the facilitative role of the financial sector 
in achieving this goal. The presence of His Excellency, the Deputy President of the Republic 
of  Kenya  in  this  opening  ceremony,  goes  to  show  the  commitment  of  the  Kenyan 
Government to the inclusive finance and growth objective. 
Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen; Evidence shows that much of the gains in growth 
experienced in Africa in recent decades have largely been driven by efficiency gains and not 
due to new investments in the productive sectors. Achieving the growth targets envisioned in 
our national development objectives such as Vision 2030, would therefore require unlocking 
the bottlenecks to growth. These include among others, increasing savings and investment; 
improving 
reducing 
telecommunications costs; and formalizing the informal sector. 
In the last few years, Kenya has made great strides in unlocking some of these bottlenecks 
in  the  financial  sector.  Innovations  in  technology  that  enable  ICT-empowered  financial 
services  platform  coupled  with  conducive  regulations  have  led  to  a  large  proportion  of  the 
previously unbanked population to be mainstreamed in the formal banking system. Central 
banks in the region are committed to improving access to financial services and products to a 
much larger number of individuals and small businesses because it is good for management 
of both monetary policy and the stability of the financial system. 
the  business  environment;  closing 
infrastructure  gaps; 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Your  Excellency,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  the  overall  objective  of  this  Conference  is  to 
promote the development of smallholder and agri-business inclusive finance. To this effect, 
the Conference brings together: 
1.  
2.  
3.  
Financial institutions to learn about innovative financial tools and products; 
Farmers organisations that will help solve their members’ financial challenges; 
Central  banks,  Ministries  of  Finance,  agriculture  and  other  government  agencies 
seeking to discover how to develop and strengthen an enabling environment, that 
will  enhance  financial  access  and  unlock  agricultural  growth  in  their  respective 
countries; 
ICT  developers  willing  to  showcase  their  agri-finance  innovations  and  build  a 
strategic network; 
Development practitioners and the academia who will share their experiences, get 
acquainted with new developments and challenges, and strike new partnerships. 
4.  
5.  
Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen: Banks all over the world are concerned with risk 
mitigation  and  appropriately  pricing  these  risks.  This  is  more  pervasive  in  the  agricultural 
sector. This forum seeks to address these issues by sharing experiences of innovations that 
are aiding banks, insurance companies and other financial institutions to safely reach out to 
such sectors and sub-sectors in sustainable ways. This is the model we would like to learn 
and enact in our economies. 
With these remarks, ladies and gentlemen, it is my honour and duty to once again welcome 
you all to the Kenya School of Monetary Studies, and to our international guests, we feel very 
honoured to host you. I now wish to invite the Chairman of AFRACA to give his remarks. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
