  Jacqueline Loh: Public-private partnership – the way forward for natural 
catastrophe risk management in Asia 
Opening address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority 
of Singapore, at the 5th Institute of Catastrophe Risk Management Symposium, Singapore, 
24 April 2014. 
 Professor Bertil Andersson (President, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore), 
Professor  Haresh  Shah  (Founding  Chairman,  Institute  of  Catastrophe  Risk  Management 
(“ICRM”)), 
Professor Pan (Director, ICRM), 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
in  Natural  Catastrophe  Management”,  highlights 
Introduction 
1. 
It is my pleasure to join you today at the 5th ICRM Symposium. The theme for this 
year’s Symposium, “Financing of Natural Catastrophes in Asia – The Role of Private Sectors, 
Governments  and  Regulators 
the 
importance  of  having  both  the  private  and  public  sectors  collectively  manage  natural 
catastrophe risks. Management of catastrophe risks spans a spectrum of activities across the 
entire risk management value chain, from raising risk awareness, to promoting effective risk 
assessment  and  pricing,  and  co-developing  ex-ante  risk financing  solutions. This  is  a  very 
relevant  discussion  topic,  at  a  time  when  Asia  is  facing  increasing  vulnerability  to  natural 
catastrophes. 
2. 
In keeping with the conference theme, I will be sharing a few observations on how 
we can strive towards sustainable risk financing using a Public-Private Partnership (“PPP”) 
approach. Asia is more at risk from natural catastrophes 
Over  the  last  30  years,  Asia  has  borne  the  brunt  of  natural  catastrophe  losses, 
3. 
accounting for almost half of the world’s estimated economic losses from natural disasters1. 
However,  less  than  5%  of  the  losses  were  insured,  compared  to  40%  in  developed 
countries2. Over the last five years, the region experienced a series of high-profile and very 
painful disasters such as the Tohoku Earthquake and Tsunami in Japan, floods in Thailand, 
and  the  Super  Typhoon  Haiyan  in  the  Philippines.  Losses  from  these  three  disasters  are 
estimated  to  be  close  to  USD  360  billion3,  about  the  average  GDP  of  the  Philippines  and 
Thailand in 2012. As these economies were underinsured, the bulk of the financial burden 
was ultimately borne by the governments. 
4. 
The development of catastrophe risk management in Asia is still at a nascent stage, 
compared to more mature markets in the US and Europe. Yet Asia is expected to continue to 
experience  a  rise  in  natural  catastrophe  losses,  as  a  result  of  climate  change,  and  rapid 
population  growth,  urbanization  as  well  as  economic  concentration  in  heavily  exposed 
regions. So With this confluence of factors, the financial burden from natural catastrophes is 
expected to intensify. 
                                                
1   “Source: EM-DAT – The International Disaster Database”. 
2   “Risk Financing is Key to Building Resilience Against Disasters – Study”, ABD, 31 January 2013. 
3   “Based on Swiss Re and Aon Benfield’s estimates”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Minding the protection gap in natural catastrophe risk management 
5. 
Going forward, governments can no longer act as the “insurer of last resort”. In light 
of Asia’s widening protection gap, governments would need to shift away from retaining risks, 
and transfer a larger proportion of risks to the insurance industry, in order to increase their 
national  resilience  against  natural  disasters.  Instead  of  tapping  on  ex-post  disaster  risk 
financing  options  such  as  government  budgets,  public  debt  issuances  and  international 
donations,  it  is  increasingly  important  for  economies  in  the  region  to  pursue  ex-ante  risk 
financing solutions to finance natural catastrophe losses. 
6. 
Amongst the various risk financing solutions, insurance in particular, has been found 
to exert a positive effect in mitigating financial consequences of a natural catastrophe event. 
A study on the macroeconomic costs of natural catastrophes4 has shown that an increase in 
insurance  penetration  by  1  percentage  point  can  lower  the  cost  borne  by  taxpayers  by 
approximately  22  percent.  It  has  also  been  found  that  with  adequate  insurance  coverage, 
economic  activity  returned  to  pre-catastrophe  levels  long  before  reconstruction  was 
completed. 
7. 
governments in two ways5: 
(i) 
Specifically,  insurance  can  lower  the  fiscal  impact  of  natural  catastrophes  on 
Firstly,  it  has  a  preventative  effect  by  providing  price  signals,  which  in  turn  create 
incentives  for  the  insured  to  undertake  physical  risk  prevention  measures.  This 
reduces their physical vulnerability to natural hazards, and can help to avoid more 
costly damages in a loss event. 
Secondly,  it  has  a  loss  mitigation  effect  by  providing  prompt  financial  relief  to 
support immediate reconstruction efforts, which will help to moderate further indirect 
losses,  such  as from  business  interruption. This  reduces the  need for  private  and 
public borrowing following a natural catastrophe. 
(ii) 
Public and private sectors each has its role to play in increasing insurance penetration 
8. 
The responsibility of ensuring adequate insurance coverage does not reside solely 
with  the  governments.  Individuals  and  businesses,  too,  should  have  vested  interests  to 
ensure that their respective exposures to natural catastrophe risks are sufficiently mitigated 
and insured. 
9. 
and here I will highlight three: 
(i) 
However,  increasing  insurance  penetration  is  certainly  not  without  its  challenges, 
Firstly,  the  lack  of  awareness  of  natural  catastrophe  risk  and  solutions  amongst 
individuals,  businesses  and  governments;  which  can  go  some  way  to  explain  the 
lack of appetite for catastrophe risk transfer solutions in Asia. This is where I think 
the  insurance  industry  can  play  a  proactive  role  in  raising  awareness,  through 
lending expertise and offering risk management advice, engaging governments and 
organizations  in  regional  collaborative  efforts,  ,and  through  industry  conferences 
such as the ICRM Symposium. 
Secondly, a lack of quality Asian catastrophe risk data, which impedes the industry’s 
ability to conduct robust risk assessments, modeling and underwriting for the region. 
In  response  to  the  importance  of  quality  quantification  of  catastrophe  risk  in  the 
region, we have seen many notable efforts being undertaken in various quarters. 
(ii) 
                                                
4   “Loyd’s Global Underinsurance Report, October 2012”. 
5   “Peter, Dahlen, Saxena (2012), ‘Unmitigated disasters? New evidence on the macroeconomic cost of natural 
catastrophes’”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  At the regional level, the ASEAN Natural Disasters Research Works Sharing (“ANDREWS”) 
Committee  has  been  formed  to  facilitate  dialogue  and  information  exchange  between 
academia and insurance industry professionals on latest research and market developments 
relating to natural catastrophes. In Singapore, industry players have ramped up catastrophe 
analytics  and  modeling  efforts  rapidly  in  recent  years.  This  is  supported  by  scientific  and 
state-of-the-art  catastrophe  risk  research  undertaken  by  research  institutes  such  as  the 
ICRM, the NUS Centre of Hazards Research and the Earth Observatory of Singapore. 
(iii) 
Thirdly,  a  shortage  of  expertise  to  properly  understand  and  assess  catastrophe 
risks. Even where catastrophe models are employed, it is essential to overlay deep 
expertise and good judgment to challenge assumptions in modeling outputs, in order 
to  have  a  more  robust  assessment  and  interpretation  of  the  risks.  The  Thailand 
floods in 2011, for example, offered useful learning lessons about how there can be 
blind spots, without a deep understanding of the underlying risks: 
(a)  Thailand was not even designated by insurers as a catastrophe-prone prior to 
the floods, despite the potential risks and exposures; 
(b)  Secondary  losses  arising from  the  business  interruption  claims  were  heavily 
underestimated; and 
(c)  The  accumulation  of  risks  arising  from  Japanese  cedants  relocating  their 
supply and production chains to Thailand from Japan, which had been hit with 
an earthquake and tsunami just months before, was generally overlooked. 
Therefore, I would encourage the industry to build deep expertise in the regional markets and 
be  in  close  proximity  to  Asia,  so  as  to  attain  a  good  understanding  of  the  Asian  risk  and 
underwriting environment. 
10. 
While  the  industry  is  taking  measures  to  enhance  its  capabilities  in  risk  modeling 
and  analytics,  regulators  also  play  an  impartial  role  in  steering  the  industry  to  model 
uncertainties better and in turn, strengthen the financial resilience of the industry. This has 
been done via new regulations which explicitly take into consideration insurance catastrophe 
risks in capital frameworks. We have seen these in countries such as Australia, Switzerland, 
Bermuda and the Euro Area. In Singapore, MAS has proposed the introduction of insurance 
catastrophe risk requirements in the RBC 2 framework, where we are currently working very 
closely with the industry in the calibration of catastrophe risk charges. In addition, the set of 
Enterprise Risk Management (“ERM”) requirements, which came into force from 1 Jan this 
year, can steer industry to model catastrophe risks better as insurers are required to identify 
and manage material risks such as catastrophe risks. The panel discussion on the topic of 
“Regulatory Environment on Catastrophe Risks in Asia” this afternoon would focus on how 
the regulatory environment can support the effective financing of natural catastrophes in the 
region. 
PPP – A collaborative approach for sustainable disaster risk financing in Asia 
11. 
While it is important to have different stakeholders step up in their respective roles in 
natural  catastrophe  risk  management,  it  is  not  likely  to  be  sufficient.  A  corroborative  effort 
involving  both  public  and  private  sectors,  through  a  public-private  partnership,  is  key, 
especially in Asia. This is in light of the large size of risks to be insured, the substantive size 
of population which needs insurance cover but remains unreachable, and the lack of natural 
incentives for the private sector to offer sufficient coverage for certain risks. A PPP approach 
recognizes the different roles as well as limitations of governments and private insurers, and 
can  enable  innovative  solutions  collectively.  Public-private  financing  solutions,  such  as 
natural catastrophe insurance pools, micro insurance, and alternative risk transfer solutions 
such as catastrophe bonds, have the potential to enlarge the financial capacity of insurance 
solutions,  by  providing  affordable  cover  to  a  wider  pool.  With  the  expertise  and  capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  support from international and regional organisations, the public and private sectors can work 
together in developing purposeful risk transfer solutions for the region. 
12. 
It is encouraging that governments, regulators, industry, academia and international 
organisations in Asia have already taken initial steps to develop effective PPPs to enhance 
natural catastrophe risks management. In October last year, for example, the International 
Finance Cooperation (“IFC”), a member of the World Bank Group, announced a partnership 
agreement  with  MAIPARK  Indonesia,  a  specialised  catastrophe  reinsurer  formed  by  the 
government and industry, to develop an earthquake-index insurance product to help protect 
banks that provide loans to individuals and micro, small and medium enterprises from losses 
due to natural disasters such as earthquakes6. 
Singapore as a PPP knowledge partner 
13. 
As the leading reinsurance hub in Asia-Pacific, Singapore can play a critical role by 
being  the  first  responder  to  natural  catastrophe  events  in  the  region.  Over  the  years, 
Singapore has developed a strong ecosystem to support Asia’s growing needs; comprising 
reinsurers  specialized  in  property-catastrophe  risks,  a  network  of  brokers  with  catastrophe 
risk  modeling  capabilities,  commercial  catastrophe  modeling  vendors  and  research 
institutions.  I  am  very  heartened  to  see  the  insurance  industry’s  active  participation  in  the 
Natural Catastrophe Risk Working Group, which is an industry panel formed by the MAS in 
October last year. To meet increasing protection needs in Asia Pacific, the Working Group is 
looking  at  recommending  policies  and  initiatives  which  could  catalyze  the  development  of 
underwriting  capacity  and  expertise  in  Singapore’s  catastrophe  insurance  and  reinsurance 
market;  and  raise  the  overall  risk  awareness  in  the  region.  One  of  the  initiatives  being 
explored is the proposed establishment of a Natural Catastrophe Data Analytics Exchange – 
this is a facility which we hope could aggregate data from both private and public sectors, 
with  the  aim  of  generating  new  insights  and  catalyzing  innovative  disaster  risk  financing 
solutions for the region. This is a concept which will be validated with the industry over the 
next  few  months,  and  we  look forward  to  engaging  both the  public  and  private  sectors  on 
this. 
14. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  commend  ICRM  as  Asia’s  first  and  only 
multidisciplinary  research  institute  that  is  dedicated  to  enhancing  the  understanding  of 
catastrophe risks in the region. I understand that ICRM is actively involved in a number of 
PPPs  in  the  region,  including  the  Global  Earthquake  Model  (“GEM”),  a  PPP  with  OECD 
aimed  at  developing  and  deploying  tools  and  expertise  for  earthquake  risk  assessment 
worldwide;  and  the  ASEAN  Earthquake  Model  (“AEM”), targeted  at  developing  earthquake 
risk assessments for the region. 
Conclusion 
15. 
Let me conclude. Natural catastrophe risk management will be an increasing priority 
for  Asia.  The  interconnectedness  of  natural  catastrophe  risk  management  calls  for  going 
beyond  borders;  and  across  stakeholders,  both  government  and  industry,  to  coordinate 
holistic strategies and manage natural catastrophe risks in a sustainable manner. 
16. 
The  ICRM  annual  symposium  serves  as  a  unique  opportunity  for  various 
stakeholders  to  come  together  to  discuss  challenges,  and  chart  the  course  for  natural 
catastrophe risk management in Asia going forward. I understand that there is a line-up of 
interesting presentations covering very pertinent topics such as post-disaster impact analysis 
                                                
6   “Source: ‘IFC Partners with  MAIPARK to Provide Earthquake-Index Insurance for Indonesian Banks’”, CAN 
Newswire, 1 October 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  experiences and the types of catastrophe risk transfer and financing solutions, over the next 
2 days. 
17. 
Singapore. Thank you. 
On this note, I wish you a productive and memorable time at this Symposium and in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
