  Mario Draghi: Introductory statement to the press conference 
Remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
7 August 2014. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest  rates  unchanged.  The  available 
information  remains  consistent  with  our 
assessment of a continued moderate and uneven recovery of the euro area economy, with 
low rates of inflation and subdued monetary and credit dynamics. At the same time, inflation 
expectations for the euro area over the medium to long term continue to be firmly anchored 
in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. The monetary policy 
measures decided in early June have led to an easing of the monetary policy stance. This is 
in  line  with  our  forward  guidance  and  adequately  reflects  the  outlook  for  the  euro  area 
economy,  as  well  as  the  differences  in  terms  of  the  monetary  policy  cycle  between  major 
advanced economies. The targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) that are to 
take place over the coming months will enhance our accommodative monetary policy stance. 
These  operations  will  provide  long-term  funding  at  attractive  terms  and  conditions  over  a 
period  of  up  to  four  years  for  all  banks  that  meet  certain  benchmarks  applicable  to  their 
lending  to  the  real  economy.  This  should  help  to  ease  funding  conditions  further  and 
stimulate credit provision to the real economy. As our measures work their way through to 
the economy they will contribute to a return of inflation rates to levels closer to 2%. 
As stated previously, and as a follow-up to our decision in early June, we have intensified 
preparatory  work  related  to  outright  purchases  in  the  asset-backed  securities  market  to 
enhance the functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
Looking ahead, we will maintain a high degree of monetary accommodation. Concerning our 
forward guidance, the key ECB interest rates will remain at present levels for an extended 
period of time in view of the current outlook for inflation. Moreover, the Governing Council is 
unanimous in its commitment to also using unconventional instruments within its mandate, 
should it become necessary to further address risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation. 
We are strongly determined to safeguard the firm anchoring of inflation expectations over the 
medium to long term. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
In the first quarter of this year euro area real GDP rose by 0.2%, quarter on quarter. With 
regard  to  the  second  quarter,  monthly  indicators  have  been  somewhat  volatile,  partly 
reflecting  technical  factors.  Overall,  recent  information,  including  survey  data  available  for 
July, remains consistent with our expectation of a continued moderate and uneven recovery 
of  the  euro  area  economy.  Looking  ahead,  domestic  demand  should  be  supported  by  a 
number  of  factors,  including  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  and  the  ongoing 
improvements in financial conditions. In addition, the progress made in fiscal consolidation 
and structural reforms, as well as gains in real disposable income, should make a positive 
contribution to economic growth. Furthermore, demand for exports should benefit from the 
ongoing global recovery. However, although labour markets have shown some further signs 
of  improvement,  unemployment  remains  high  in  the  euro  area  and,  overall,  unutilised 
capacity continues to be sizeable. Moreover, the annual rate of change of MFI loans to the 
private sector remained negative in June and the necessary balance sheet adjustments in 
the  public  and  private  sectors  are  likely  to  continue  to  dampen  the  pace  of  the  economic 
recovery. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  risks  surrounding the  economic  outlook for  the  euro  area remain  on  the  downside.  In 
particular,  heightened  geopolitical  risks,  as  well  as  developments  in  emerging  market 
economies  and  global  financial  markets,  may  have  the  potential  to  affect  economic 
conditions negatively, including through effects on energy prices and global demand for euro 
area products. A further downside risk relates to insufficient structural reforms in euro area 
countries, as well as weaker than expected domestic demand. 
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  0.4%  in  July 
2014, after 0.5% in June. This reflects primarily lower energy price inflation, while the other 
main  components  of  the  HICP  remained  broadly  unchanged.  On  the  basis  of  current 
information,  annual  HICP  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  at  low  levels  over  the  coming 
months, before increasing gradually during 2015 and 2016. Meanwhile, inflation expectations 
for the euro area over the medium to long term continue to be firmly anchored in line with our 
aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. 
The  Governing  Council  sees  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments as limited and broadly balanced over the medium term. In this context, we will 
closely  monitor  the  possible  repercussions  of  heightened  geopolitical  risks  and  exchange 
rate developments. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  data  for  June  2014  continue  to  point  to  subdued 
underlying  growth  in  broad  money  (M3),  with  annual  growth  standing  at  1.5%  in  June, 
compared  with  1.0%  in  May.  The  growth  of  the  narrow  monetary  aggregate  M1  stood  at 
5.3%  in  June,  up  from  5.0%  in  May.  The  increase  in  the  MFI  net  external  asset  position, 
reflecting  in  part  the  continued  interest  of  international  investors  in  euro  area  assets, 
remained an important factor supporting annual M3 growth. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) remained negative at –2.3% in June, compared with –2.5% in May and –3.2% 
in  February.  Lending  to  non-financial  corporations  continues  to  be  weak,  reflecting  the 
lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit risk, credit supply factors and the ongoing 
adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets. At the same time, in terms of 
monthly flows, loans to non-financial corporations have shown some signs of a stabilisation 
over recent months, after recording sizeable negative monthly flows earlier in the year. This 
is  consistent  with  the  results  of the  bank  lending survey for the  second  quarter  of  2014  in 
which banks reported that credit standards for loans to enterprises had eased in net terms. 
However,  they  remain  rather  tight  overall,  when  seen  from  a  historical  perspective.  In 
addition, banks reported an improvement in net loan demand by non-financial corporations 
and households. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) was 0.5% in June, broadly unchanged since the beginning of 2013. 
Against  the  background  of  weak  credit  growth,  the  ECB’s  ongoing  comprehensive 
assessment of banks’ balance sheets is of key importance. Banks should take full advantage 
of  this  exercise  to  improve  their  capital  position,  thereby  supporting  the  scope  for  credit 
expansion during the next stages of the recovery. 
To sum up, the economic analysis indicates that the current low level of inflation should be 
followed by a gradual upward movement in HICP inflation rates towards levels closer to 2%. 
A cross-check with the signals from the monetary analysis confirms this picture. 
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  comprehensive  fiscal  consolidation  in  recent  years  has 
contributed to reducing budgetary imbalances. Important structural reforms have increased 
competitiveness  and  the  adjustment  capacity  of  countries’  labour  and  product  markets. 
These  efforts  now  need  to  gain  momentum  to  enhance  the  euro  area’s  growth  potential. 
Structural reforms should focus on fostering private investment and job creation. To restore 
sound  public  finances,  euro  area  countries  should  proceed  in  line  with  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact  and  should  not  unravel  the  progress  made  with  fiscal  consolidation.  Fiscal 
consolidation  should  be  designed 
in  a  growth-friendly  way.  A  full  and  consistent 
implementation of the euro area’s existing fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance framework 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  is key to bringing down high public debt ratios, to raising potential growth and to increasing 
the euro area’s resilience to shocks. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
