Thomas Jordan: A new role for central banks? 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the Zürcher Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft, Zurich, 16 January 2014. 
 The speaker would like to thank Peter Kuster for his valuable support in preparing this speech. I am also indebted 
to Katrin Assenmacher, Rita Kobel, Thomas Moser, Attilio Zanetti and the SNB’s Language Services. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
A  country’s  prosperity  largely  depends  on  how  the  different  agents  perceive  their  role  and 
their responsibility. This is true for both private agents and government institutions. 
Within the regulatory framework, private agents must continuously reappraise their role and 
their business model and make adjustments so they can compete in the marketplace in the 
long  term.  This  is  the  only  way  for  them  to  create  and  secure  jobs  and  income  for  the 
population.  Given  the  dramatic  changes  both  in  the  regulatory  framework  and  in  the 
economic environment in the past few years, this is no easy task. 
Today, however, I am not going to speak about the future role of others and the challenges 
they face, but rather look into the mirror, as it were. Should central banks not also have to 
fundamentally  rethink  and  perhaps  redefine  their  role  after  the  financial  and  debt  crisis? 
Unlike other private agents in an economy, central banks are obviously bound to their legal 
mandate.  In  most  countries,  however,  this  mandate  is  purposely  defined  in  comparatively 
loose terms, with the main focus on ensuring price stability. 
As  has  become  evident  in  the  past  few  years,  central  banks  have  considerable  room  for 
manoeuvre in implementing this mandate. In response to the crisis, they first lowered interest 
rates  to  zero  and  subsequently  eased  monetary  policy  further  using  new  kinds  of 
instruments. At the same time, central banks had to provide the banking system with large-
scale  liquidity  assistance  to  ensure  financial  stability.  As  a  consequence,  central  banks’ 
balance sheets have now reached levels beyond all previous imagination. In addition, many 
central  banks  have  been  given  additional  responsibilities  and  have  taken  on  new  tasks,  in 
particular in the area of financial stability. 
The shocks triggered by the global financial crisis did not leave Switzerland unscathed either. 
The Swiss National Bank (SNB), therefore, had no choice but to move into uncharted waters. 
During  the  crisis,  maintaining  a  functioning  Swiss  franc  money  market  and  subsequently 
stabilising  our  country’s  largest  bank  were  the first  priorities.  At  a  later stage, the massive 
appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  threatened  the  economy  at  its  core,  creating  a  risk  of 
deflation. The SNB came to the rescue by injecting liquidity into the market, setting up the 
StabFund,  intervening  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  introducing  the  minimum 
exchange  rate.  Our  balance  sheet  is  a  reliable  indicator  of  just  how  intense  these 
interventions were. Prior to the outbreak of the crisis at the end of 2006, the balance sheet 
total was just over CHF 100 billion. Today, it amounts to nearly CHF 500 billion. In the area 
of financial stability, the SNB, too, was entrusted with some new tasks, especially with regard 
to macroprudential measures. The countercyclical capital buffer as well as the designation of 
systemically important banks and their functions are probably the most well-known of these 
measures. 
On the whole, central banks around the world have thus far been successful in their role as 
firefighters. They managed to prevent the global economy from falling into a depression and 
to ensure price stability. In addition, in many countries, they worked side by side with their 
governments  to  shore  up  the  banking  system.  This  has  bought  some  time  –  time  that  in 
numerous  places  should  be  used  to  solve  the  underlying  problems.  In  many  countries, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
measures that should be undertaken to achieve this include well-designed structural reforms 
of the economy and comprehensive restructuring of government finances. 
The downside of the central banks’ success is that it could give the impression that treating 
the  root  of  the  structural  problems  is  not  necessary  at  all. To  put  it somewhat  bluntly,  this 
fallacy can be described as follows: Now that the central banks have done so much to save 
the economy and the financial system from collapsing, they should be permanently in charge 
of ensuring sound economic growth, high employment, low interest rates and a healthy real 
estate market. 
Such  extremely  high  expectations  are  exceedingly  dangerous.  Central  banks  would  be 
forced into a role in which they had to fulfil tasks for which they neither have the requisite 
responsibilities nor the appropriate instruments. As a result, other agents could be induced to 
neglect their responsibilities. While the crisis might be delayed, it most certainly would not be 
overcome.  It  may  appear  politically  opportune  to  put  problems  on  the  back  burner,  rather 
than working out solutions. In the long term, however, the cost to the economy and to society 
would be horrendous. 
What can central banks do to counter such unrealistic expectations? They can, for instance, 
communicate clearly and emphatically what their role is and where their limits are. With this 
in mind, I invite you to join me on a brief tour d’horizon. 
I  would  like  to  start  by  examining  a  few  selected  aspects  of  monetary  policy,  focusing  on 
long-term effects. I will then look at the area of financial stability. Finally, I would like to use 
the  insights  gained  in  this  brief  overview  to  answer  the  question  posed  in  the  title  of  this 
presentation  about  the  role  of  central  banks.  Since  every  country  has  its  own  set  of 
idiosyncrasies,  I  can  obviously  not  speak  for  all  central  banks.  I  will  therefore  focus  on 
Switzerland and the SNB. As in other areas of the economy, however, developments abroad 
affect Switzerland and thus the SNB via the global financial markets. This just goes to show 
how important it is for us that the right direction for central banks is also set abroad. 
Role of monetary policy largely unchanged 
I would now like to say a few words about the central banks’ role in monetary policy. In my 
opinion,  the  core  mandate  should  remain  unchanged.  The  SNB’s  monetary  policy  is  still 
credible. The SNB must, as an independent central bank, ensure price stability while taking 
due  account  of  economic  developments.  The  National  Bank  Act  grants  us  substantial 
flexibility in implementing this mandate, and this has made a major contribution to retaining 
our freedom of action, even under extreme conditions. When the zero bound was reached, 
we were able to use new instruments swiftly and rigorously even though this was associated 
with considerable balance sheet risks. As a result, we successfully fulfilled our mandate and 
ensured price stability. How else, for instance, could we have credibly set and enforced the 
minimum exchange rate, if the law had imposed restrictions on the SNB  with regard to its 
balance sheet? 
The  key  importance  of  price  stability  was  uncontested  for  a  long  time.  Now,  however,  the 
relatively old discussion about the optimal goal of monetary policy has been fuelled by the 
crisis. 
First, the question is being raised as to whether price stability should not be interpreted more 
broadly and should include asset prices in addition to consumer prices, in order to prevent 
future financial crises. In my view, this would be the wrong conclusion. Although it is correct 
that  central  banks  cannot  and  may  not  neglect  the  movements  of  asset  prices,  and,  in 
particular, those of real estate prices, they should not attempt to stabilise asset prices with 
the aid of the interest rate tool, if this would lead to a conflict of goals with respect to price 
stability.  Macroprudential  tools  are  therefore  needed  in  such  a  case,  in  order  to  counter 
imbalances on the real estate markets. I will return to this point in my comments on the role 
of central banks in financial stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Second, the question is raised as to whether the inflation targets set by most central banks 
might not be too low. The argument is that, in normal times, higher inflation targets would 
lead  to  higher  nominal  interest  rates.  This  would  open  up  the  freedom  of  action  for 
conventional monetary policy because the zero bound for interest rate policy would not be 
reached  so  quickly.  This  reasoning  does  not  seem  conclusive  to  me  either.  For  instance, 
given  the  history  of  the  struggle  against  inflation,  it  is  rather  bold  to  assume  that  well-
anchored inflation expectations can simply be released and then immediately locked in at a 
desired higher level. As a rule, higher inflation is also associated with greater fluctuations in 
inflation. The costs of higher and strongly fluctuating inflation would have to be set against 
the alleged benefits, which, in fact, are likely to be minimal. The zero bound for interest rate 
policy has not proved to be an insurmountable obstacle for monetary policy. Moreover, it is 
questionable  whether  an  additional  one  to  two  percentage  points  of  nominal  interest  rates 
would have provided sufficient freedom of action to avoid the zero bound in the crisis. 
Third, it is suggested that further criteria be added to price stability – relating to employment 
and  growth,  for  instance.  Growth  and  employment  are,  of  course,  essential  economic 
parameters. Our mandate takes them into account with its reference to the development of 
the economy. However, specific requirements with regard to growth and employment would, 
once again, raise expectations which the SNB could not meet in the long term. Instead, the 
goal  of  monetary  policy  with  respect  to  the  economy  must  be  to  reduce  larger  risks  and 
alleviate  extreme  situations.  A  clear  example  of  this  was  the  massive  appreciation  of  the 
Swiss franc in the summer months of 2011, to which, as you will know, we responded with 
the minimum exchange rate. 
Monetary  policy  is  not  suited  to  fine-tuning  the  economy,  however.  In  practice,  we  have 
learned that it is impossible to conduct a monetary policy which responds immediately and in 
a differentiated manner to all kinds of business cycle fluctuation. Neither can monetary policy 
replace a sustainable growth policy, a  well-balanced fiscal policy, a  well-functioning labour 
market or an open world trade regime. It is important to avoid any illusions in this respect. 
Monetary policy cannot assume responsibility for everything. 
Deeds needed, not just words 
Alongside  the  discussions  about  the  right  goal  of  monetary  policy,  the  crisis  has  also 
prompted  a  debate  about  the  best  way  of  communicating  this  policy.  There  is  general 
agreement on one point, which  is that, in principle, the more unconventional the monetary 
policy measures, the greater the public’s entitlement to be informed. The distribution effects 
of  unconventional  measures  differ,  potentially,  from  those  of  monetary  policy  using  a 
conventional toolkit. Accordingly, a central bank using these resources must clearly explain 
why they are absolutely necessary for fulfilling its mandate. 
The  explanation  of  monetary  policy  decisions,  and  the  reasons  provided,  must  be  as 
transparent  as  possible.  Monetary  policy  must  be  comprehensible  for  markets,  politicians 
and economic agents. The SNB attaches great importance to this; we therefore endeavour to 
provide detailed explanations of the reasons for our monetary policy decisions and enter into 
extensive public dialogue on the topic. Yet for transparency, it is also true that more is not 
necessarily better in every case. Sometimes transparency can be counterproductive. 
One example of this is the publication of the minutes of SNB Governing Board discussions 
on monetary policy decisions. In this respect, it is important to take account of Switzerland’s 
special situation. By international standards, the Governing Board is a very small decision-
making  body  made  up of just  three  people.  Also,  it traditionally  reaches  its  decisions  by  a 
process of consensus. If the minutes of its meetings were to be published, discussions within 
the  body  would  probably  become  less  candid  and  open  and  –  ultimately  –  the  quality  of 
decision-making would suffer as a result. Moreover, it is unlikely that publishing the minutes 
would in fact lead to better public understanding of monetary policy within Switzerland. That 
is why, in view of these special Swiss features, we have decided not to release the minutes 
of our meetings. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
An  additional  way  of  increasing  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy,  and  thus  its 
effectiveness, could be the provision of information on the future path of reference interest 
rates. “Forward guidance” of this kind may be useful for many central banks. However, there 
are pitfalls and this could easily lead to confusion in the market, especially if the guidance is 
attached to too many conditions. However, I would not want you to misunderstand me. It is 
absolutely right that central banks should explain to the general public how monetary policy 
would  react  to  certain  developments.  This  is  nothing  new.  In  the  case  of  the  SNB,  for 
instance, the conditional inflation forecast – our main interest rate indicator and an important 
element in our communications – already provides certain information about the future path 
of interest rates. In addition, we are currently emphasising the fact that, as a result of the low 
rate of inflation and the risk of appreciation, the minimum exchange rate will be the focus of 
monetary policy implementation for the foreseeable future.  
So you see, the SNB is carefully monitoring international debates about the right objective 
and the best way of communicating monetary policy. Nevertheless, no central bank should 
simply jump on the latest monetary policy bandwagon without careful consideration. On the 
contrary.  Changes  must  be  undertaken  with  great  caution  and  care.  Our  monetary  policy 
strategy worked well during the crisis, so there is no reason for us to abandon it. This also 
applies to the way we communicate, where – obviously – the demands are particularly great 
in times of crisis, and it is necessary to focus more than ever on the key messages. To avoid 
any misunderstanding, these messages must be simple and absolutely clear. Nevertheless, 
words alone are not always sufficient. A central bank must be prepared to back up its words 
by  deeds.  A  good  example  of  this  was  the  situation  in  early  summer  2012.  With  the 
European  debt  crisis  escalating  and,  as  a  result,  extreme  upward  pressure  on  the  Swiss 
franc  in  the  currency  market,  we  rigorously  enforced  the  minimum  exchange  rate  through 
extensive foreign currency purchases. 
I would like to make a final point on monetary policy. During the crisis, central banks worked 
particularly  closely  together  at  the  international  level.  For  instance,  in  2008,  the  SNB  was 
involved in a coordinated reduction of interest rates, it concluded swap lines with the aim of 
alleviating  tensions  in  money  markets,  and  it  remained  in  close  consultation  with  other 
central banks. However, the principle that the SNB conducts an independent monetary policy 
for its own currency area remains completely unaffected by these activities. Cooperation and 
independence  are  not  irreconcilable.  On  the  contrary.  Good  cooperation  promotes  and 
reinforces 
taken 
independently.  Perhaps  this  can  be  illustrated,  once  again,  by  using  the  example  of  the 
minimum exchange rate, which enjoys a high level of international acceptance – not least as 
a result of our excellent dialogue with other central banks. Neither are independence and the 
minimum  exchange  rate  irreconcilable.  The  minimum  exchange  rate  does  not  restrict  our 
monetary  policy  independence,  as  some  observers  wrongly  claim.  Rather,  it  is  a  genuine 
expression of our monetary policy independence. The minimum exchange rate is not a move 
towards  the  euro  and  most  certainly  not  any  tie  to  the  European  currency. What  it  in  fact 
does  is  to  ensure  appropriate  monetary  conditions  for  our  country  in  an  economic 
environment which remains extremely difficult. Meanwhile, the value of the Swiss franc is still 
high. 
In the long run, a central bank can only pursue an autonomous monetary policy in line with 
the needs of its country if it is independent. Independence is therefore a further condition for 
ensuring that a central bank retains its freedom of action at all times. Independence is more 
than an abstract construct. It gives the central bank the freedom to act swiftly, resolutely and 
credibly, if needed. What independence also means, however, is the responsibility to use this 
freedom strictly within the meaning of the statutory mandate, no matter what the prevailing 
political climate may be. Independence cannot be taken for granted, it is a privilege. It was 
granted to us under the Constitution in order that we could achieve the goal of price stability 
in  the  long  term.  As  a  counterweight  to  its  independence,  the  SNB  has  a  duty  of 
accountability  and  information  with  respect  to  parliament  and  the  public.  The  SNB  is  thus 
the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  decisions  which  have  been 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
firmly  anchored  in  our  constitutional  democracy.  In  a  free  society,  an  authority  with  a 
complete free hand would be a foreign body. 
Favourable environment created by Confederation and cantons 
Yet  independence  must  also  be  lived.  The  SNB  may  not  accept  instructions  from  political 
authorities;  neither  can  it  allow  itself  to  be  put  under  pressure  by  public  opinion.  It  must 
conduct a monetary policy that serves the interests of the country as a whole, to the best of 
its  ability,  and  in  accordance  with  its  mandate.  It  is  only  natural  that  our  monetary  policy 
cannot please everyone at all times. However, an independent central bank must not be put 
off by this. 
The  relevant  legislation  contains  a  number  of  mechanisms  designed  to  ensure  the  SNB’s 
independence. One of these is our distribution practice, which has been developed on the 
basis of the provisions of the National Bank Act (NBA). We are happy to make distributions 
to the Confederation and the cantons; we can only do so, however, where the balance sheet 
and annual results allow for this. As we announced some days ago, this will unfortunately not 
be the case for the 2013 business year – the first time since we began our profit distributions 
in the current form, over 20 years ago. Thus the provisions regarding profit distribution clearly 
set out in the NBA have come into effect. This ruling takes automatic account of the fact that 
the risks in our balance sheet have increased as a result of combating the crisis. According 
to the legislative authority, a strong SNB balance sheet is more important than distributions 
to shareholders or to the Confederation and the cantons. It therefore supports the SNB in its 
conduct  of  an  independent  monetary  policy,  something  which  is  particularly  valuable  in 
difficult  times.  Nevertheless,  I  am  conscious  that  the  lack  of  a  distribution  can  be  very 
distressing  for  the  Confederation  and  the  cantons,  in  particular,  and  will  be  a  challenge. 
However, distributions will not be assured in the future either, since our results will continue 
to be subject to considerable fluctuations. 
However, there is another area in which the Confederation and cantons have made an even 
more important contribution to the independence of monetary policy. They put the favourable 
years before the crisis to good use by making their public finances pretty weatherproof. As a 
result,  Switzerland  was  one  of  the  few  countries  where  government  finances  did  not 
deteriorate substantially in the crisis. Sound government finances are essential not only for 
the competitive strength of an economy but also for safeguarding social security institutions – 
and thus for social cohesion. In the long term, excessive government indebtedness can also 
endanger price stability and the independence of monetary policy; one reason for this is that 
it increases the temptation to keep interest rates very low for longer than necessary. 
At this point, I would like to draw a preliminary conclusion with regard to the SNB’s role in 
monetary  policy.  I  am  firmly  convinced  that  no  change  is  needed  in  the  SNB’s  current 
mandate and therefore with regard to its fundamental role in monetary policy. Our job is to 
ensure price stability while taking due account of economic developments. This is a sensible 
and credible mandate. Our clear definition of price stability has also stood the test of time. 
The SNB equates price stability with a rise in the national consumer price index of less than 
2% a year. Deflation – in other words, a protracted decline in the price level – also breaches 
the  goal  of  price  stability.  However,  we  do  not  react  automatically  to  inflationary 
developments.  What  is  also  important  is  our  high  degree  of  flexibility  in  the  use  of 
instruments  and  lengthening  of  the  balance  sheet. These  two  facilities  allow  us  to  combat 
major  economic  disruptions  rapidly  and  effectively,  as  shown  so  impressively  in  the  crisis. 
New  monetary  policy  instruments  merely  serve  to  fulfil  our  mandate  in  a  transformed 
environment. 
What  also  appears  important  to  me  is  that  central  banks  do  not  take  on  tasks  that  they 
cannot  tackle  with  their  existing  instruments,  thereby  awakening  false  expectations  and 
hopes. To ensure that monetary policy remains effective, it is important that central banks do 
not depart from their mandate of price stability. If expectations are too high, central banks are 
bound to disappoint them in the long run. This will cause them to lose credibility in their core 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
area,  and  this  could  lead  to  politicians  becoming  involved.  In  this  situation,  central  banks’ 
independence would be at stake. Caution is to be recommended with respect to monetary 
policy  trends.  Certainly,  the  SNB  will  not  simply  go  with  the  general  flow,  but  will  instead 
pursue its own path tailored to the needs of our country. 
Extended role and new financial stability approach 
I  will  now  say  a  few  words  about  financial  stability.  Financial  stability  means  that  financial 
system participants are able to carry out their functions and are resilient to disruptions. It is 
an  important  prerequisite  for  economic  development  and  effective  monetary  policy 
implementation.  Consequently,  it  is  clear  –  and  well-established  historically  –  that  central 
banks make an important contribution to financial stability. In fact, several central banks were 
founded specifically for this purpose. The idea was that the central bank should serve as the 
lender of last resort, thereby protecting the banking system from collapse. 
In Switzerland, the SNB has always been the lender of last resort. In the revision of the NBA 
carried  out  ten  years  ago,  the  SNB  received  for  the  first  time  an  explicit  mandate  to 
contribute  to  financial  stability.  The  term  “contribute”  expresses  the  fact  that  other  state 
institutions also have an influence on financial stability and that, in addition, this stability can 
never be absolutely guaranteed. 
Until recently, the SNB had two options for its contribution to financial stability, in addition to 
the monetary policy toolkit, which was mainly based on interest rates. The first was to rely on 
the persuasive power of its sound arguments and hope that banks and other financial market 
participants would draw the right conclusions from these, so that a crisis did not arise. The 
most important example for a persuasive approach is our annual Financial Stability Report. 
Since 2003, this report has conducted an assessment of the stability of the banking industry, 
highlighted tensions and imbalances, and made recommendations. The second option was 
for the SNB to provide a bank facing a crisis with emergency liquidity assistance, if this was 
necessary  for  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  An  example  of  emergency  liquidity 
assistance of this kind was the support provided to UBS in 2008. 
Prevention is better than cure 
The  crisis  showed,  first,  that  it  is  not  easy  for  central  banks  to  identify  all  of  the  risks  in 
advance.  Second,  it  became  clear  that  when  central  banks  talk  about  specific  risks,  their 
warnings often go unheeded. The crisis also showed that policies limited to clearing up once 
a situation is out of control can be extremely costly. Moreover, there are contexts in which, 
for  monetary  policy  reasons,  the  interest  rate  tool  cannot  be  used  for  financial  stability 
purposes. This situation has been only too familiar to us in Switzerland for some years now. 
Imbalances are developing on the mortgage and real estate markets, thereby posing a risk to 
financial stability. In principle, this risk could be combated by higher interest rates. However, 
the higher ranking monetary policy goal of price stability does not allow for any increase in 
interest rates in the foreseeable future. 
Thus monetary policy instruments, rhetoric and emergency assistance alone are not enough 
to  make  an  effective  contribution  to  financial  stability.  That  is  why  new  tools  –  the  new 
macroprudential  measures  –  have  been  developed  internationally  in  accordance  with  the 
principle that prevention is better than cure. Their aim is to strengthen the resilience of the 
financial system as a whole and to prevent the build-up of such excesses on the asset and 
credit markets. 
Yet the concerns which used to be expressed about preventive approaches are not entirely 
without foundation. It is not usually possible for central banks to fully measure the build-up of 
excesses on financial and asset markets in real time, to intervene at exactly the right time 
and thus put a stop to dangerous bubble formations at precisely the right moment. However, 
the  current  macroprudential  toolkit  neither  claims  nor  intends  to  do  this.  Just  as  monetary 
policy is unsuited to fine-tuning the economy, macroprudential measures are also little suited 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to  fine-tuning  asset  and  credit  markets.  Instead,  what  is  involved  are  relatively  limited 
interventions in order to prevent foreseeable larger imbalances that might possibly endanger 
financial stability at a later stage. 
While there is broad international consensus that the new instruments make sense, there is a 
wide difference of opinion about how the institutions that use them should be organised. In 
some cases, new bodies have been created to examine the use of these instruments, while 
in other cases responsibility has been placed fully in the hands of the central bank. A number 
of countries have gone even further by handing over the traditional area of individual banking 
supervision to central banks as well. Similarly, it is equally impossible to use a one-size-fits-
all approach for all the measures and instruments introduced in different countries. A priori, 
there  is  no  right  or  wrong  approach  here,  since  the  design  and  character  of  the 
macroprudential instruments chosen must take account of the special features of the banking 
system in the individual country in question. 
What approach has Switzerland chosen? In the area of financial stability, it has opted for an 
approach in which responsibilities are clearly allocated to existing institutions. The principle 
adopted  in  the  case  of  the  structures  and  tools  is  “as  much  as  needed  but  as  little  as 
possible”. In my view, this regulation approach is well suited to our country. Concentrations 
of power are not in line with the culture of balance and limitation of powers which is fostered 
in our country – a culture which has served it well. Thus, contrary to the international trend, 
microprudential  banking  supervision  here  has  not  been  transferred  to  the  central  bank, 
remaining the responsibility of the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority, FINMA.  
A lean approach was also chosen for the macroprudential area, with the new responsibilities 
clearly divided between  the two institutions. FINMA is responsible for measures of a more 
structural  nature,  such  as  the  increased  capital  requirements  which  systemically  important 
financial institutions are required to meet in order to alleviate the “too big to fail” issue. The 
aim of these instruments is to improve regulation of and incentives for individual institutions. 
Consequently, it makes sense that FINMA, which is experienced in supervising institutions, is 
responsible for this area. Conversely, the SNB takes on a key role when it comes to cyclical 
measures.  The  thinking  behind  this  division  is  that  measures  of  this  kind  require 
comprehensive  economic  analyses,  with  which  we  are  familiar.  An  excellent  example  of  a 
cyclical  measure  is  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer.  The  Federal  Council  decides  on  the 
activation of this tool at the request of the SNB. In the designation of systemically important 
banks  and functions, the  SNB  also  has  a  comparative  advantage  because  its  approach  is 
geared to the financial system as a whole. 
Although  powers  and  responsibility  for  specific  macroprudential  measures  are  clearly 
allocated  to  one  authority,  overlapping  and  mutual  dependencies  can  always  occur. 
Consequently, it is very useful for the institutions to work together closely and engage in a 
certain amount of coordination. That is why the Swiss authorities have clearly specified how 
they will differentiate their tasks and work together.  
From  a  purely  theoretical  point  of  view,  a  strategy  where  one  institution  bears  sole 
responsibility for financial stability might be more appealing. However, experience from the 
financial crisis does not provide any evidence that the one-authority-for-all model is superior 
– in systematic terms – to other organisational forms. On the contrary. In this country, the 
UBS case clearly showed that it is very possible, in an emergency situation, to carefully and 
discretely draw up a bundle of comprehensive measures in support of financial stability, and 
to implement these in good time, even where various institutions are involved. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Exercising care and caution in uncharted macroprudential waters 
The authorities are sailing in uncharted waters when it comes to macroprudential measures. 
The complex interrelationships between monetary policy, traditional banking supervision and 
the  macroprudential  toolkit  are  difficult  to  assess.  Consequently,  we  do  not  always  know 
exactly how the different measures will work. The need for analysis and research in this field 
is correspondingly great. 
However,  to  be  realistic,  we  will  never  have  all  the  answers  or  be  able  to  dispel  all 
uncertainties, as – incidentally – is always the case in monetary policy. But this should not 
stop  us  using  these  instruments  when  we  judge  it  to  be  necessary.  In  doing  so,  we 
endeavour  to  exercise  the  requisite  care  and  caution.  Consequently,  we  undertake 
comprehensive investigations, evaluate the results carefully and systematically, and carry out 
our  measures  based  on  criteria  which  have  been  specified  in  advance.  As  in  the  case  of 
monetary  policy,  if  decision-making  is  as  free  as  possible  from  political  influence  and 
manipulation attempts, its quality will be improved. 
Following these thoughts, I would like to return to my initial question concerning the SNB’s 
role in financial stability, as a kind of interim conclusion. Central banks have always had an 
important  role  in  financial  stability.  However,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  the  traditional 
approach, which relies exclusively on the power of persuasion and the extinguishing of fires, 
can be very expensive. Consequently, it makes sense, in principle, for central banks to take 
on macroprudential tasks as part of their contribution to financial stability. However, because 
the  situation  can  vary  depending  on  the  individual  country,  there  is  no  consensus  about 
either  the  extent  of  these  measures  or  the  institutional  responsibilities.  Switzerland  has 
limited its macroprudential arsenal to what is absolutely necessary and has clearly allocated 
responsibilities  to  the  different  authorities.  In  this  respect,  the  relevant  legislation  has 
extended the SNB’s role in financial stability in some areas but not completely changed it. I 
am fully convinced that this cautious approach with clear allocation of responsibilities makes 
sense. We  are  doing  everything  we  can  to  fulfil  this  extended  role  as  best  we  can,  in  the 
interests of our country; in doing so we can draw on our wealth of experience in “traditional” 
financial stability. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  reached  the  end  of  our  perusal  of  monetary  policy  and 
financial stability. I particularly wanted to show you which roles can and cannot be assumed 
by central banks and especially the SNB. 
As  regards  monetary  policy,  our  role  has  not  changed,  even  if  the  use  and  the  extent  of 
monetary policy instruments have taken on new dimensions since the beginning of the crisis. 
In the case of financial stability, our role was extended as a result of the experiences gained 
in the financial crisis, although the adjustments have been much less extensive than in some 
other countries. 
The SNB is not closing itself off to changes that will be necessary over the course of time. 
However,  it  is  worth  recalling  here  that  central  banks  are  not  all-powerful.  What  remains 
decisive for us is that our mandate for monetary policy and financial stability is formulated in 
a  sensible  manner  and  can  be  fulfilled.  However,  the  SNB  must  also  have  the  necessary 
instruments and be in a position to use them flexibly. In addition, it is essential that it can act 
independently when fulfilling its mandate. It can only take responsibility for its mandate under 
these  conditions.  This  is  another  important  reason  why  we  are  generally  reserved  when 
confronted with new tasks. 
A  central  bank  which  is  guided  by  this  model  when  fulfilling  its  mandate  and  consistently 
discourages  excessive  expectations  makes  the  biggest  contribution  towards  a  prosperous 
development of the economy, thereby serving the overall interests of the country in the best 
manner.  By  fulfilling  its  price  and  financial  stability  mandate  steadily  and  reliably  over  a 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
longer period, a central bank builds up confidence in the general public and on the markets – 
confidence  which  is  extremely  important  for  the  development  of  the  economy.  If  I  have 
succeeded in persuading you to share this conviction with me, or strengthened your belief in 
it, my talk this evening has achieved its purpose. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
