Øystein Olsen: Economic perspectives 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  to 
invited foreign embassy representatives, Norges Bank, Oslo, 3 April 2014. 
 The speech is based on the annual address 2014, Monetary Policy Report 1/14 and previous speeches. Please 
note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech and on the Norges Bank website. 
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all, I would like to welcome you once again to Norges Bank. 
This year is the bicentenary of the signing of the Constitution of Norway. Two hundred years 
ago,  Norway  was  a  poor  country  on  the  periphery  of  a  Europe  that  was  then  the  world’s 
economic centre of gravity. 
For the 112 sworn representatives, popularly known as the men of Eidsvoll, who took their 
places  as  the  Constituent  Assembly  in  spring  1814,  the  atmosphere  was  full  of  hope  for 
freedom and a better future. Several of them had spent time abroad and had been influenced 
by philosophers and by  the American and French revolutions. The Norwegian Constitution 
was inspired by the ideas they brought home. Absolute monarchy under the Danish king was 
to  be  replaced  by  the  sovereignty  of the  people  and  the  separation  of powers.  Institutions 
with  clearly  distinguished  roles  would  prevent  the  arbitrary  use  of  power  and  foster 
confidence. 
In  the  discussion  at  Eidsvoll,  Christian  Magnus  Falsen,  a  key  member  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly, said that no state can exist without a well-functioning monetary system. Another 
prominent  member  of  the  Assembly,  Count Wedel  Jarlsberg,  insisted  that  the  nation  must 
have its own bank. 
The people’s elected representatives took responsibility for the monetary system, as stated 
in  Article  75  of  the  Constitution:  «It  devolves  upon  the  Storting  to  supervise  the  monetary 
affairs of the Realm». 
The Storting delegated the task of supervising the monetary system to Norges Bank, which 
was established in 1816. The king would no longer have the authority to print money at his 
own will. 
At its inception, Norges Bank’s head office was located in Trondheim, a twelve-day journey 
from the government in Christiania, and even farther from Stockholm, giving the central bank 
a geographical – and not just formal – distance from the government authorities. 
Much has happened since 1814. Norway no longer lags behind other western economies. 
Inflation is low and stable. We have established a clear division of responsibility for economic 
policy  and  well  developed  institutions  founded  on  the  Constitution  written  at  Eidsvoll 
200 years ago. 
Chart: Shift in the world’s economic centre of gravity 
In 1814, the great powers of Europe dominated world trade. The world’s economic centre of 
gravity has since then shifted westward. Today, in the 21st century, the centre of gravity is 
moving across the Pacific to Asia. 
When China became a member of the World Trade Organization in 2001, its foreign trade 
was  30  percent  of  that  of  the  US.  The  Chinese  economy  has  since  grown  at  an 
unprecedented pace. In 2013, China overtook the US as the world’s largest trading nation. 
Ample  labour  supply  and  low  cost  levels  have  given  China  and  the  other  emerging 
economies of Asia strong competitive advantages in international markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The global flow of credit over the past 15 years has taken an untraditional direction – from 
relatively  poor  countries  with  strong  economic  growth  to  more  prosperous,  mature 
economies experiencing lower growth. For a long period, this shift contributed to substantial 
imbalances  in  the  global  economy.  Ample  supply  of  credit  in  western  economies  pushed 
down borrowing rates. 
Facing  competition  from  Asia,  it  became  relatively  less  profitable  for  firms  in  the  west  to 
invest in new productive capacity in their home countries. Instead, cheap credit was widely 
used  to  finance  consumption  and  housing,  particularly  in  the  US  and  Europe.  Banks  and 
financial institutions were, in practice, free to fuel credit growth. 
In retrospect, it is clear that a vast amount of capital was squandered. Many businesses and 
a number of countries are struggling with high debt levels. Governments that ran economies 
on  cheap  credit  are  now  paying  a  high  price  in  the  form  of  austerity  measures  and 
unemployment.  In  parts  of  Europe,  unfinished  infrastructure  and  empty  buildings  are  not 
uncommon sights. 
Chart: Productivity growth in advanced economies 
Productivity  growth  has  been  declining  in  advanced  economies  since  the  beginning  of  the 
2000s. The willingness to invest has been low since the financial crisis. To what extent this is 
related  to  the  economic  downturn  remains  to  be  seen.  Better  times  may  eventually  entice 
investors, but it is also possible that the substantial changes in the global economy have had 
a  more  lasting  effect  on  the  willingness  to  invest  and  the  growth  capacity  of  western 
economies. 
Chart: Real wages in mainland Norway, the US and Germany 
A demanding restructuring process is underway in the traditional industrialised countries. In 
the US and Germany, real wages have barely risen since the turn of the millennium. Income 
inequality  has  deepened.  This  may  in  part  be  related  to  the  global  change  in  the  price  of 
labour. In other countries, particularly in Europe, economic restructuring is throwing a large 
number of people into unemployment. Over 26 million people are now unemployed in the EU 
today, almost 10 million more than in 2007. 
Low  growth,  high  unemployment  and  high  debt  levels  are  not  a  good  combination.  Even 
though there are signs of a moderate revival of activity abroad, growth may remain low for a 
protracted period. 
Chart: Real wages and productivity for mainland Norway 
Real wage growth in Norway has diverged substantially from that observed in Germany and 
the  US.  This  is  attributable  to  the  sharp  price  rise  for  Norwegian  goods  in  recent  years. 
Norway’s terms of trade have improved. The gains are shared between owners and workers. 
Real wage growth in Norway has been considerably higher than productivity growth. 
But  the  economic  picture for  Norway  may  be  changing. We  cannot  assume  that  Norway’s 
terms  of trade  will  continue  to  improve.  Investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  is  levelling  off. 
Output growth in the mainland economy has slackened. 
When  activity  in  the  petroleum  sector  eventually  declines,  there  will  also  be  a  need  for 
economic restructuring in Norway. The business sector will have to seek new markets, where 
competition may be intense. Restructuring may prove particularly demanding given Norway’s 
high cost level. 
Although restructuring will be a gradual process and may lie some years ahead, Norway may 
find that sustaining growth and keeping unemployment low in the coming years may become 
a challenge more on a par with that facing other economies today. 
The economic policy framework matters. Fiscal policy follows the fiscal rule, which aims to 
ensure a sustainable level of petroleum revenue spending over the long term. In the event of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
major  aggregate  demand  shocks,  fiscal  policy,  in  line  with  the  fiscal  rule,  can  be  used  to 
alleviate the situation in the short term, as evidenced during the recent financial crisis. But an 
imbalance arising from a cost level that is too high and weak competitiveness cannot in the 
long term be addressed by means of an expansionary fiscal policy. This approach could, on 
the contrary, amplify the problem by crowding out businesses. 
The  fiscal  policy  stance  can  affect  the  growth  capacity  of  the  economy.  Government 
regulation  and  various  features  of  the  tax  system  can  influence  corporate  decisions  with 
regard  to  localisation,  investment  and  technology.  Other  measures  can  affect  the  labour 
force and the functioning of the labour market. 
Over  time,  real  wages  must  move  in  line  with  productivity  and  real  wages.  The  social 
partners determine wage growth. We have seen in previous periods that they pull in the right 
direction when that is needed. The alternative could be a more painful adjustment with higher 
unemployment. 
The objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation over time, while at the same time 
smoothing fluctuations in output and employment. 
As  long  as  inflation  is  low  and  stable,  the  krone  can  act  as  a  buffer  during  periods  of 
adjustment.  We  cannot,  however,  rely  on  a  depreciation  of  the  krone  to  ensure  Norway’s 
competitiveness in the longer run. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  influence  the  long-term  growth  capacity  of  the  economy.  The 
challenges associated with low growth and changes in business structure must be addressed 
using other policy measures. 
Chart: Low growth results in low interest rates 
Monetary policy easing and low interest rates do not lead to longer term higher growth. The 
inverse  is  true:  prospects  for  persistently  weak  growth  result  in  low  interest  rates  for  a 
sustained period. 
In order to prevent deflation and recession, the central banks of major advanced countries 
have implemented extraordinary measures to keep both short- and long-term interest rates 
low.  The  medicine  has  worked.  The  US  economy  in  particular  is  on  the  road  to  recovery. 
Financial market participants see opportunities, not just problems. However, in a number of 
emerging economies volatile capital flows are creating problems. High debt growth and rising 
house prices may constitute a risk. The recovery abroad is fragile. 
The key policy rate is also low in Norway. Our inflation target is slightly higher than that of 
other European countries. As a result, inflation and nominal interest rates in Norway are also 
slightly  higher.  But  prospects  for  a  persistently  low  interest  rate  level  internationally  will 
inevitably  also  have  consequences  for  Norway.  The  real  interest  rate  in  a  small  open 
economy cannot in the long run differ substantially from that of our closest trading partners. 
Given the prevailing long-term interest rates abroad, it will likely take a number of years for 
interest rates  in  Norway  to  move  up  towards  a  level  that  was  previously  considered  to  be 
normal. 
When  the  drafters  of  the  Constitution  gathered  at  Eidsvoll  200  years  ago,  there  were  no 
private banks in Norway. It was not until the latter half of the 1800s that a private banking 
system  truly  came  into  being.  Norges  Bank  acquired  its  present-day  role  as  lender  of  last 
resort. 
With private banking came banking crises. The 1899 crash in Christiania triggered the first 
serious banking crisis in Norway. A real estate bubble in the capital burst and house prices 
plummeted.  It  took  more  than  100  years  for  real  house  prices  in  Oslo  to  return  to  their 
pre-crisis level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Banks play a key role in the payments system and channel credit from savers to investors. If 
the  flow  of  credit  dries  up,  problems  will  rapidly  spread  through  the  entire  economy,  as 
witnessed during the latest financial crisis. 
This  is  why  the  authorities  ultimately  intervene  in  support  of  failing  banks.  This  happened 
during the Christiania crash – and it has occurred many times since then, both in Norway and 
other countries. 
It  may  be  necessary  to  provide  support  to  banks  in  distress,  but  it  comes  with  a  major 
drawback:  Banks  will  expect  support  also  in  the  future.  The  phenomenon  is  called  moral 
hazard.  Although  this  is  not  about  morals,  but  about  incentives.  The  banks’  creditors  are 
induced  to  charge  low  interest  rates  on  loans  to  banks.  This  leads  to  underpricing  of risk, 
which may in turn lead to excessive risk-taking in the banking sector. 
The problem must be solved down to its roots. No bank should be promised life eternal. 
A new regulatory framework for the recovery and resolution of banks is underway. All banks 
must have a plan for orderly resolution. It must be possible to allocate banks’ losses to both 
owners and creditors, while core banking services continue. 
For a market to function properly, there must be scope for new entrants and for the closure of 
loss-making  companies.  This  also  applies  to  financial  markets.  The  banking  sector  is 
characterised  by  large  entities  and  complex  products.  Banking  regulation  is  also  complex 
and  rich  in  detail.  If  the  authorities  succeed  in  developing  a  system  for  resolving  failing 
banks, perhaps we can take one step back with regard to other detailed regulations. 
The  work  on  reforms  that  has  been  engaged  abroad  must  be  followed  up  in  Norway.  A 
national bank resolution authority must be designated. It should be placed in a unit under the 
Ministry of Finance. This is not a natural role for a central bank. 
Among Norges Bank’s key tasks is the management of Norway’s foreign exchange reserves. 
This responsibility has followed the Bank since its establishment in 1816, first in the form of 
silver  and  gold  reserves.  Later,  reserves  were  expanded  to  include  bank  deposits  and 
securities in various currencies. 
Norges  Bank  was  charged  with  managing  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund  when  the  first 
capital  transfers  were  made  to  the  Fund  in  1996.  This  was  a  natural  extension  of  our 
responsibility for managing foreign exchange reserves. 
The aim of the Government Pension Fund Global, as it is now called, is to ensure that the 
income from our oil and gas resources will also accrue to future generations. 
The Fund is the nation’s family silver. It is no longer held in Norges Bank’s vault, as it was 
during  the  periods  of  the  silver  and  gold  standards.  The  Fund  is  invested  in  fixed-income 
securities,  equities  and  real  estate  across  the  world.  When  Norges  Bank  had  finished 
collecting  the  silver  tax  around  1820,  the  Bank’s  silver  holdings  came  to  somewhat  more 
than 50 grams per inhabitant, which is the equivalent of about one silver spoon. The value of 
the Fund has just recently exceeded NOK 5 trillion, or about NOK 1 million per inhabitant. 
Chart: Return on Fund accounts for one third of its total value 
The Fund’s results have been favourable. Since 1998, the cumulative return on the Fund has 
been close to NOK 1 800 billion, which is more than a third of the Fund’s total value. So far, 
our nation has earned a solid return on its investments. 
Quite paradoxically, low growth and low interest rates abroad are probably the main factors 
behind the solid performance of the Fund over the past two to three years. 
Chart: Annual return on the GPFG 
Since the end of the 1990s, a persistent fall in yields has driven up government bond prices. 
In recent years, the unconventional monetary policy measures of the world’s major central 
banks have contributed to even lower interest rates and higher prices for equities and other 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
securities. This has resulted in above-normal returns on the Fund’s investments. But today 
there is no longer room for a considerable fall in interest rates and equity prices have risen to 
fairly high levels. 
Chart: Return consists of two elements 
Our measure of final return includes both capital gains and direct cash flows, which comprise 
dividend and interest income. The market value of the Fund and its investment returns will 
therefore  swing  in  tandem  with  equity  and  bond  prices.  This  may  draw  a  veil  over  the 
progression of the Fund’s underlying earnings. 
In the long run, it is the Fund’s cash flow that makes a permanent contribution to our national 
income. The Fund’s cash flow is therefore a good cross-check for measured capital returns. 
Chart: Cash flow from the GPFG and petroleum revenue spending over the fiscal budget 
The  cash flow  presently  matches  the  actual  level  of  petroleum  revenue  spending  over  the 
fiscal budget – of about 3 percent of the Fund’s value. This is reassuring since it implies that 
the Fund’s capital is not being depleted. 
Above  all  we  should  recognise  that  future  returns  on  the  Fund  are  uncertain.  Ultimately, 
returns depend on the pace of growth in the world economy and the share of that growth that 
accrues  as  value  in  the  companies  and  bonds  in  the  Fund’s  investment  portfolio.  These 
variables are uncertain. Growth in the world economy may come to a halt. Governments may 
default on interest payments. Real properties may fall in value when bubbles burst. 
To achieve returns, we must take on risk. The Fund features a very long investment horizon 
and a sizeable capacity to bear short-term risk. If we can exploit these distinctive features 
when  making  investment  choices,  it  should  be  possible  to  obtain  a  return  in  excess  of 
average market return. 
Shareholders  are  last  in  line  when  company  profits  are  to  be  distributed.  They  bear  a 
considerable risk. As compensation, shareholders have received a higher return over time – 
a risk premium. It is a good strategy for a fund such as ours to exploit this risk premium to 
seek excess returns. This is why the chosen allocation to equities is relatively high. 
In addition, a reasonable distribution between bonds and equities can contribute to reducing 
the Fund’s overall risk, as bond and equity prices tend to move inversely. The bond portfolio 
may thus be seen as a kind of hedge against a drop in equity prices. 
In recent years, the Fund has also invested directly in real estate. In the light of its size and 
long horizon, the Fund is well positioned to make gains in low liquidity markets. 
Real  estate  investment  is  an  example.  The  mandate  provides  for  an  increase  in  the  real 
estate  allocation  up  to  5  percent,  while  the  allocation  to  fixed-income  instruments  is  to  be 
reduced from 40 percent to 35 percent. 
A  few  years  from  now,  almost  two-thirds  of  the  Fund  will  thus  be  invested  in  real  assets. 
This is a fairly high share. A pertinent question may still be whether as much as a third of 
the Fund should be invested in low-yielding instruments. In the long run, a bond allocation of 
20–25 percent should suffice to maintain the Fund’s needed hedge against a fall in equity 
prices. 
Risk management must encompass the Fund’s overall risk. This can only be achieved if total 
risk is managed and controlled. This is why the Fund is an integrated entity located in Norges 
Bank. 
Norges Bank works to preserve the Fund’s long-term financial value. Responsible investment 
is part of that task. As a long-term financial investor, the Fund stands to benefit from sound 
and sustainable growth in the companies and markets included in its investment universe. 
We  use  a  variety  of  instruments  to  exercise  our  ownership  rights.  We  engage  in  close 
dialogue  with  companies,  investors  and  regulatory  authorities.  We  vote  at  shareholder 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
integrates 
to  corporate  governance, 
the  considerations  relating 
meetings in line with pre-defined principles and publish our voting results on a regular basis. 
We  also  submit  shareholder  proposals  and  participate  in  consultations  based  on  the 
fundamental principles that we apply in the exercise of ownership rights. 
Norges  Bank 
the 
environment and social conditions into the investment process. Because the Fund is a long-
term financial investor, we place considerable emphasis on our role as responsible investor. 
The  overriding  goal,  which  is  the  highest  possible  return  at  an  acceptable  level  of  risk, 
remains firmly established. 
If Norges Bank is assessed using criteria other than return and risk, its mission will become 
unclear.  This  might  also  impact  return  performance.  There  must  be  no  doubt  as  to  the 
objective of investment management. 
Norway’s  enormous  economic  progress  since  1814  has  not  been  linear.  Rapid  population 
growth and food crises in the latter half of the 1800s led to the massive emigration of close to 
1  million  Norwegians  to  America.  Norway  gradually  became  an  industrialised  country,  and 
trade  and  shipping  provided  our  new  nation  with  much  needed  income.  Moreover,  an 
abundance  of  natural  resources  has  been  essential  for  our  country’s  prosperity.  Norway 
never did become a true manufacturing nation. 
We  cannot  expect  the  strong  growth  in  national  income  we  have  seen  in  recent  years  to 
continue. Norway is not immune to shifting circumstances and external shocks. But we have 
a good starting point. The beneficial tailwinds have been put to good use and Norway is in a 
solid position to tackle challenges when the winds shift. 
The  Constitution  is  the  foundation  of  modern  Norway.  This  year’s  bicentenary  of  the 
Norwegian Constitution is an occasion to remember the importance of good institutions that 
have clearly defined roles. This is essential for stability and progress. 
Thank you for your attention.  
 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
