  Luis M Linde: “The Financial System ahead of the Banking Union” 
Opening speech by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 5th edition of the 
Expansion – KPMG Financial Forum, Madrid, 23 May 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is for me a pleasure to open this fifth edition of the Expansion – KPMG Financial Forum 
and  to  introduce  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism. 
Sabine  Lautenschläger –  I  hope  my  German  pronunciation  is  approximately  correct  –  is  a 
very well known and respected European expert in banking supervision and central banking. 
After graduating in law at the University of Bonn, she joined the German Federal Financial 
Supervisory  Authority,  Bafin,  in  1995,  where  she  held  relevant  positions,  serving  as  Chief 
Executive Director of Banking Supervision. She was also a member of the Basel Committee 
of  Banking  Supervision  and  of  the  European  Banking  Authority’s  Management  Board.  In 
2011 she joined the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank as its Deputy President. 
Let me turn now very briefly to the topic of this event, namely The Financial System ahead of 
the Banking Union. 
It is indeed a very timely issue as the ECB is currently immersed in the preparatory work to 
assume  its  new  banking  supervision  functions,  within  the  framework  of  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), on 4th November. 
The  entry  into  force  of  the  SSM  will  really  mark  a  major  milestone  on  the  road  to  the 
completion  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  and  to the  construction  of  Europe. It  will 
contribute  to  fostering  financial  integration  and  to  breaking  the  loop  between  banking  and 
sovereign risk: In sum, it will strengthen financial stability in Europe. 
In  the  run-up  to  assuming  supervisory  functions,  the  ECB  and  the  National  Competent 
Authorities are conducting together a comprehensive assessment, to check the soundness of 
the 128 banks that will be under the direct supervision of the ECB. The ultimate aim of this 
exercise,  which  began  in  October  2013,  is  to  build  confidence  as to  the  soundness  of the 
banks under the SSM by two means: transparency and, if needed, recapitalisation. 
As  it  is  well  known,  the  assessment  consists  of  two  pillars:  an  asset  quality  review  and  a 
stress test. 
The first pillar, the Asset Quality Review, began in February and will conclude in August. It 
examines the asset side of bank balance sheets as of 31 December 2013. 
The  second  pillar,  the  stress  test,  began  in  May  and  will  evaluate  the  ability  to  maintain 
adequate solvency levels under stress, using the methodology agreed by the ECB and the 
European Banking Authority. This process will conclude in September and the publication of 
the  results  of  the  whole  exercise  is  expected  in  late  October.  After  this  disclosure,  those 
banks facing a capital shortfall will have to submit their recapitalisation plans to the ECB. 
I would like to say that, as we all know, the Spanish financial system has undergone intense 
restructuring  and  recapitalisation,  as  well  as  a  significant  consolidation  process.  I  am 
confident that Spanish banks are prepared for this rigorous exercise. 
Setting up the Single Supervisory Mechanism and making it operational is not going to be a 
simple  task.  Both  from  the  procedural  and  organisational  standpoints,  it  will  be  a  complex 
process, requiring great effort, and will be a major responsibility for those who take on the 
leadership of this new European Union-wide institution. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger’s  responsibilities  as  member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the SSM place her in a 
unique  position.  I  have  no  doubt  that  her  intervention  will  be  extremely  interesting  and 
informative to us all. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
