  Raghuram Rajan: Competition in the banking sector – opportunities and 
challenges 
Talk  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Annual  Day 
Lecture of the Competition Commission of India, New Delhi, 20 May 2014. 
 Good  evening.  Shri  Ashok  Chawla,  distinguished  invitees,  our  friends  from  the  press,  and 
ladies and gentlemen: 
It  is  a  great  honour  to  be  invited  to  deliver  the  Annual  Day  lecture  at  the  Competition 
Commission of India. Competition is the life force of a modern economy – it replaces dated 
and  inefficient  methods  while  preserving  valuable  traditions;  it  rewards  the  innovative  and 
energetic and punishes the merely connected; it destroys the stability of the status quo while 
giving hope to the young and the outsider. True competition eliminates the need to plan, for 
as gravity guides water through the shortest path, competition naturally guides the economy 
to the most productive route. 
Healthy  competition  is  not  just  the  best  way  to  grow  but  also  the  best  way  to  include  all 
citizens;  what  better  way  to  get  needed  services  to  a  poor  housewife  than  to  encourage 
providers  to  compete  for  her  money?  What  better  way  to  uplift  a  member  of  a  backward 
community than for private employers to compete to hire her for a good job? 
Healthy  growth-inducing  inclusive  competition  does  not,  however,  emerge  on  its  own. 
Without  intervention,  we  get  the  competition  of  the  jungle,  where  the  strong  prey  on  the 
weak. Such competition only encourages a certain kind of winner, one who is adapted to the 
jungle  rather  than  the  world  we  want  to  live  in.  In  contrast,  healthy  competition  needs  the 
helping hand of the government; to ensure the playing field is level, that entry barriers are 
low, that there are reasonable rules of the game and clear enforcement of contracts, and that 
all participants have the basic capabilities such as education and skills to compete. 
Governments have historically found it difficult to ensure such healthy competition because 
intervention has to be just right. Governments typically are tempted to go beyond intervening 
to create a fair competitive environment, and instead have turned to determining winners and 
losers themselves. This typically has not worked out well. With this caveat, the creation of a 
healthier, more competitive environment in India could be the government’s most important 
contribution  to  sustainable  economic  growth  in  India  over  the  medium  term.  And  the 
Competition Commission will be a central player in this endeavour. Whether in questioning 
existing government monopolies or the excessive market power of private players, you will 
be a key institution in the years to come. And for the sake of our country, I wish you the very 
best of success. 
Today, I want to focus on the coming competitive environment in the banking sector. At the 
Reserve Bank of India, we have spent a few months thinking about how we see that shaping 
up, and I want to share that vision with you. My intent here is to further the debate rather than 
to announce any final decisions. 
The grand bargains 
Competition in the banking sector in India is best seen as the product of two grand bargains. 
The first was between successive governments and the banks, whereby banks got privileged 
access to low cost demand and time deposits, to the central bank’s liquidity facilities, as well 
as some protection from competition, in return for accepting obligations such as financing the 
government (through the Statutory Liquidity Ratio or SLR), helping in monetary transmission 
(through maintaining the Cash Reserve Ratio or CRR), opening branches in unbanked areas 
and making loans to the priority sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The second grand bargain was between the public sector banks (PSBs) and the government, 
whereby  these  banks  undertook  special  services  and  risks  for  the  government,  and  were 
compensated in part, by the government standing behind the public sector banks. As India 
has developed, both these bargains are coming under pressure. And it is development and 
competition that is breaking them down. 
Today, the investment needs of the economy, especially long term investment in areas like 
infrastructure, have increased. The government can no longer undertake these investments. 
Private entrepreneurs have been asked to take them up. To create space for financing, the 
government has to pre-empt less of the banking system’s assets. But the nature of financing 
required is also changing. Private investment is risky, so there has to be more risk absorbing 
financing such as from corporate bond markets and from equity markets. As more sources of 
financing emerge, not only will banks no longer be able to have a monopoly over financing 
corporations and households, they  will also have to compete for the best clients, who can 
access domestic and international markets. 
Similarly, deposit financing will no longer be as cheap, as banks will have to compete with 
financial markets and real assets for the household’s savings. As households become more 
sophisticated, they will be unwilling to leave a lot of money in low interest bearing accounts. 
Of course, households will still be willing to accept low interest rates in return for liquidity. So 
privileged access to the central bank’s liquidity windows will allow banks to offer households 
these liquidity services safely and get a rent, but this advantage will also become eroded as 
new payments institutions and technologies emerge. 
The first grand bargain – cheap deposits in return for financing the government – is therefore 
being  threatened  from  both  sides.  Deposits  will  not  continue  to  be  cheap,  while  the 
government cannot continue to pre-empt financing at the scale it has in the past if we are to 
have a modern entrepreneurial economy. This is yet another reason why fiscal discipline will 
be central to sustainable growth going forward. 
Public sector banks are, if anything, in a worse position than private sector banks, which is 
why the second bargain is also under threat. As low risk enterprises migrate to financing from 
the markets, banks are left both with very large risky infrastructure projects and with lending 
to small and medium sized firms. The alternative to taking these risks is to plunge into very 
competitive  retail  lending,  so  public  sector  banks  may  have  little  option  especially  if  the 
government pushes them to lend to infrastructure. 
Many of the projects being financed today, however, require sophisticated project evaluation 
skills and careful design of the capital structure. Successful lending requires the lender to act 
to secure his position at the first sign of trouble, otherwise the slow banker ends up providing 
the  loss  cover  for  more  agile  bankers  or  for  unscrupulous  promoters.  To  survive  in  the 
changing  business  of  lending,  public  sector  banks  need  to  have  strong  capabilities, 
undertake careful project monitoring, and move quickly to rectify problems when necessary. 
In the past, PSBs had the best talent. But today, past hiring freezes have decimated their 
middle-management  ranks,  and  private  banks  have  also  poached  talented  personnel  from 
PSBs. PSBs need to be able to recruit laterally, while retaining the talent they have, but to do 
so they need to be able to promise employees responsibility as well as the freedom of action. 
Unfortunately, employee actions in public sector banks are constrained by government rules 
and  second-guessed  by  vigilance  authorities,  even  while  pay  is  limited.  It  will  be  hard  for 
public sector banks to compete for talent. If, in addition, these banks are asked to make sub-
optimal  decisions  in  what  is  deemed the  public  interest,  their  performance  will  suffer  more 
than in the past. This will make it hard for them to raise funds, especially capital. With the 
government strapped for funds, its ability to support the capital needs of public sector banks 
as part of the second grand bargain is also coming into question. 
We  cannot  go  backwards  to  revive  the  two  bargains  –  that  means  reversing  development 
and bottling the genie of competition, neither of which would be desirable for the economy 
even  if  feasible.  Instead,  the  best  approach  may  be  to  develop  the  financial  sector  by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  increasing competition and variety, even while giving banks, especially public sector banks, a 
greater ability to compete. Let me be more specific. 
Increasing competition in banking 
The Reserve Bank of India is committed to freeing entry in banking. We just announced two 
new  commercial  bank  licenses  after  a  rigorous  vetting  process.  We  are  examining  this 
experience, and after making appropriate changes, will announce a more regular process of 
giving licenses – what has been termed licenses on tap. 
Because of the public’s trust in banks and the presence of universal deposit insurance, we 
have  to  be  careful  in  giving  out  the  normal  commercial  bank  licenses.  To  be  absolutely 
confident of the capabilities and integrity of applicants, we give licenses only to those who 
have  a  proven  track  record  and  reasonable  capital.  But  what  of  those  who  have  no  track 
record or no large fund base but do have capabilities? And what of those who see synergies 
in doing only one part of the banking business such as payments? 
The RBI can take more of a chance with new players if they get the license to open only a 
small bank or to conduct only one segment of banking business. Such differentiated licenses 
– licenses with restrictions on the geographical reach or the products offered by a new bank 
– can generate more organizational variety and efficiency. Small banks tend to be better at 
catering to local needs, including needs of small and medium businesses. A payments bank, 
which  will  take  deposits  and  offer  payment  and  remittance  services  but  be  constrained  to 
invest  all  its  funds  in  safe  instruments  such  as  government  securities,  could  be  very 
synergistic with other existing services. For example, the proposed Post Bank could start as 
a payment bank, making use of post office outlets to raise deposits and make payments. 
Key in any new structure is that there should be no arbitrage possibilities hurting the current 
banking  system.  Today,  a  commercial  bank  can  convert  itself  into  a  payment  bank  by 
maintaining  100  percent  SLR  margins. Of  course,  it  may  not  want  to,  because  it  seeks to 
make more money through corporate lending, but this possibility indicates regulations will not 
favour  a  payments  bank  unduly.  Some  of  my  colleagues  believe  a  payments  bank  will  be 
unviable,  while  others  believe  that  it  will  skim  the  cream  of  banking  business  away  from 
regular commercial banks. We can debate this issue for a long time, or we can experiment 
by allowing a few payments banks and monitoring their performance. The RBI proposes to 
discuss further steps with stakeholders in this regard. 
If  payments  banks  are  successful,  they  will  allow  us  to  steadily  reduce  some  of  the 
obligations  we  impose  on  commercial  banks.  For  instance,  as  payments  banks  hold 
government  securities  for  liquidity  purposes,  we  can  reduce  the  quantity  of  government 
securities we ask commercial banks to hold as part of SLR. 
While  on  the  issue  of  bank  obligations,  there  is  an  area  where  they  do  seem  to  be  at  a 
disadvantage  vis-a-vis  other  financial  institutions  –  in  the  raising  and  lending  of  long  term 
money. This becomes especially important for infrastructure, where banks can be essential 
in early stage construction financing. Since construction lasts for 5–7 years, banks should be 
able to raise long tenor money for these purposes. But if they raise such money today, they 
immediately become subject to CRR and SLR requirements, and any lending they do attracts 
further priority sector obligations. To the extent that banks raise long term bonds and use it 
for infrastructure financing, could we relieve them of such obligations? This will immediately 
put  them  on  par  with  other financial  institutions such  as  insurance  companies  and finance 
companies in funding long term infrastructure. 
The priority sector obligation will probably be necessary for some more time in a developing 
country  like  ours,  though  we  need  to  deliberate  more  on  what  sectors  should  constitute 
priority  as  the  economy  develops.  But  even  without  entering  this  potentially  contentious 
debate, can we allow banks to fulfil existing norms more efficiently? For instance, if one bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  is more efficient at rural lending, can it over-achieve its obligations and then “sell” its excess 
to another bank that is an underachiever? We are examining such possibilities. 
Finally,  we  have  had  only  limited  success  in  achieving  inclusion  when  it  is  seen  as  a 
mandate. Banks sometimes open branches in remote areas but the officers that staff them 
do  not  really  reach  out  to  the  local  population;  banks  open  no-frills  accounts  but  many  lie 
dormant. The reality is that if the mandate is unprofitable, banks will find ways to avoid them. 
Not all forms of inclusion can be made profitable, but we should give banks the freedom to 
try new approaches, perhaps drawing in other institutions that can traverse the last mile to 
the underserved where necessary. The RBI will come out with new relaxations on business 
correspondents shortly. Also, some of the entities that become payments banks may be very 
well suited to support or substitute commercial banks in reaching remote areas. 
In  sum  then,  we  can  increase  competition  in  the  banking  sector  while,  at  the  same  time, 
strengthening banks by reducing the burden of obligations on them. In this way, they will be 
able to contribute to sustainable growth even after the breakdown of the first grand bargain. 
Freeing public sector banks to compete 
Let  us  turn  next  to  the  public  sector  banks.  There  are  well-managed  public  sector  banks 
across the world and even in India today. So privatization is not necessary to improve the 
competitiveness  of  the  public  sector.  But  a  change  in  governance,  management,  and 
operational  and  compensation  flexibility  are  almost  surely  needed  in  India  to  improve  the 
functioning of most PSBs, as the Dr. P.J. Nayak Committee has just reiterated. 
A  number  of  eminently  practicable  suggestions have  been  made to reform  PSBs,  such  as 
creating a holding company to hold government PSB shares, increasing the length of PSB 
CEO  tenures,  breaking  up  the  position  of  Chairman  and  CEO,  bringing  more  independent 
professionals on bank boards and empowering boards with the task of selecting the CEO, 
becoming more selective in cases that are followed up for vigilance investigations. 
We  need  to  examine  all  these  ideas  carefully,  many  of  which  will  help  give  public  sector 
banks  the  flexibility  to  compete  in  the  new  environment.  Let  us  remember  that  what  is  at 
stake is not just the tremendous amount of national value that is represented by public sector 
banks but future financing and investment in our economy. 
If  public  sector  banks  become  competitive,  and  especially  if  they  do  so  by  distancing 
themselves from the influence of the government without sacrificing their “public” character, 
they  will  be  able  to  raise  money  much  more  easily  from  the  markets.  Indeed,  the  better 
performers  will  be  able  to  raise  more,  unlike  the  current  situation  where  the  not  so  good 
performers have a greater call on the public purse. Competition will improve efficiency. The 
second grand bargain will also become irrelevant. 
Conclusion 
The banking sector is on the cusp of revolutionary change. In the next few years, I hope we 
will see a much more varied set of banking institutions using information and technology to 
their fullest, a healthy public sector banking system, distant from government influence but 
not  from  the  public  purpose,  and  a  deep  and  liquid  financial  markets  that  will  not  only 
compete  with,  but  also  support,  the  banks.  Such  a  vision  is  not  just  a  possibility,  it  is  a 
necessity if we are to finance the enormous needs of the real economy. As India resumes its 
path to strong and sustainable growth, it is the RBI’s firm conviction that the Indian banking 
sector will be a supportive partner every inch of the way. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
