  Agus D W Martowardojo: Maintaining balance for sustainable growth 
Keynote speech by Mr Agus D W Martowardojo, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Fitch 
Ratings Credit Briefing on Indonesia, Jakarta, 13 March 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Honorable Speakers, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good Morning to you all. 
1.  First  of  all,  allow  me  to  congratulate  the  organizer  of  this  event,  the  Fitch  Ratings 
Indonesia, for successfully arranging this forum. It gives me a warm feeling to see such of a 
good crowd of committed and distinguished business people attending this forum. I hope this 
gathering  will  give  the  opportunity  of  a  healthy  exchange  of  views  to  ensure  better 
understanding of each others’ visions for the future. 
2.  With  that  spirit,  I  find  this  event  provides  a  great  time  to  take  a  fresh  look  at  the 
opportunities  in  Indonesia  at  this  challenging  juncture.  To  give  you  the  background,  I  will 
share  my  view  from  the  perspective  of  the  central  bank  on  “how  Indonesia  thus  far 
successfully navigates throughout the global storm and our optimism to deliver a sustainable 
growth”. 
Indonesia in a challenging time 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
3.  The  year  of  2013  was,  without  doubt,  a  challenging  time  for  Indonesia’s  economy.  A 
combination  of  unfavorable  elements  in  global  environment  such  as  slowing  economic 
growth,  declining  commodity  prices,  and  global  liquidity  shift  from  emerging  to  advanced 
economies, has generated considerable pressures on the country’s economy and financial 
market through both trade and financial channel. 
4. A combination of a slowdown of China’s growth – as the main Indonesia’s trading partners – 
and  the  deteriorating  trend  of  commodity  prices  continues  trimming  down  the  Indonesia 
exports. Simultaneously, as the economy gained traction and grow with the speed more than 
6%,  in  nature  it  would  need  sufficient  support  of  imported  goods,  in  particular,  capital  and 
intermediate goods. By 3rd quarter of 2013, as we all noticed, current account deficit widened. 
Meanwhile the inflation escalated as a consequence of the fiscal policy adjustment to reduce 
fuel subsidies. 
5. We have also been through the most challenging time since the mid-2013 when the scale 
of  the  global  financial  shockwaves  hitting  Indonesia  triggered  by  the  announcement  of  the 
Fed tapering, followed with a massive portfolio out flows. During June 2013 alone, portfolio 
investment registered net outflows of $4.0 billion. 
6.  Since  then,  Indonesian  rupiah  have  come  under  significant  pressure  and  fall  by  26% 
throughout 2013. I should accept the fact that the magnitude of pressure was exacerbated by 
thin  forex  liquidity  in  the  domestic  market.  In  the  midst  of  heightening  pressure  stemming 
from  capital  outflows  and  strong  depreciation,  natural  suppliers  of  dollars  (exporters)  have 
been on the sidelines which contributed to the low market volume. 
7.  The  widespread  ramifications  of  global  factors  to  our  economy  should  serve  as  an 
important  “wake  up  call”.  It  is  a  strong  reminder  that  we  have  a  number  of  home-grown 
structural problems as well, among others are reliance on primary resources commodities in 
our export, and high dependency on import for energy and food supply. On top of that, we 
have underdeveloped financial markets that often add complication to the existing problems. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  8. Responding to the challenges, Bank Indonesia focused its policy to drive inflation back to 
its  target  corridor.  The  policies  were  also  aimed  at  narrowing  current  account  deficit  to  a 
healthier level to support the sustainability of the economic growth. This was performed in a 
pre-emptive  way  and  therefore  demonstrated  our  bold,  decisive  actions  in  preserving 
macroeconomic  stability.  Bank  Indonesia  also  pursued  an  intensive  coordination  with  the 
Government  to  ensure  an  optimal  mix  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  We  realized  that 
coordination is paramount in such challenging-time. 
Indonesian economy is on the right track 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
9. We proudly share that the recent development particularly since the final quarter of 2013 
revealed that the pre-emptive and decisive policy action carried out by Bank Indonesia and 
the  Government  has  successfully  steered  the  economy  to  the  right  track.  In  the  last  two 
months inflation remains under control and expect could be brought back to its target corridor 
of  4.5%±1%  in  2014  (Graph 1).  Meanwhile,  the  economic  growth  for  2013  have  been 
maintained at reasonably high 5.76% with a more balanced structure as a result of stronger 
real exports and moderation of domestic demand (Graph 2) 
10.  Current  account  deficit  is  moving  towards  a  healthier  and  a  more  sustainable  level.  It 
decreased sharply during the final quarter of 2013, amounting to just USD 4 billion or 1.98% 
of GDP, which is well below the 3.85% of GDP reported in the 3rd quarter of 2013 (Graph 3). 
On the other hand, capital and financial account recorded an increasing surplus buttressed 
by a massive inflows both in terms of FDI and portfolio investment. After three quarters of 
deficit, BoP finally returned to positive territory by posting USD4,4 billion surplus in Q4 2013. 
11.  Better  economic  fundamentals  braced  by  pro-active  policy  has  bolstered  market 
confidence,  hence  pushed  foreign  portfolio  flows  back  to  domestic  financial  market 
(Graph 4). As a result, since early January 2014, the Indonesian Rupiah gained 6,0% as of 7 
March  2014  or  as  the  strongest  currency  among  Emerging  Market  currencies  (Table 1). 
Likewise, the credit default swap premium dropped from 233 bps in December 2013 to 177 
bps in 7 March 2014, suggesting a better appetite on the Indonesian financial asset (Table 2) 
12. There also a mark positive in the microstructure of domestic foreign exchange market. 
Interbank forex liquidity is now easier with a greater interbank trading volume in the range of 
USD 1,5–1,8 billion a day, compared to only USD 200–500 million average during mid-2013 
(Graph  5).  Moreover,  there  is  a  greater  transparency  in  the  forex  price  discovery  and  the 
market seems to take the JISDOR onshore fix as positive. 
13. This positive development in the forex market microstructure certainly help alleviate the past 
perception where the central bank was perceived as the sole main supplier of US dollar. As a 
result, the international reserve have been back on the rise and reached USD 102,6 billion at 
the  end  of  February  2014  (Graph 6). Our  next  step  is to  implement the Code  of  Conduct to 
strengthen the credibility of domestic foreign exchange market. 
14.  Once  considered  a  “fragile  five  currencies”,  Rupiah  now  set  itself  apart  as  a  result  of 
careful  and  coordinated  policy  actions.  In  short,  the  policy  mix  pursued  jointly  by  Bank 
Indonesia  and  the  Government  has  managed  to  allow  for  an  orderly  adjustment  in  the 
economy  without  sacrificing  too much  growth.  Indonesia’s  economy  is  now  running  on  the 
right track.  
Lesson learned 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
15.  The  dynamics  in  the  economy  throughout  2013  has  brought  home  a  lesson  about  the 
importance  of  having  an  optimal  balance  on  external  and  internal  sector.  A  sustainable 
economic growth requires not only a low and stable inflation, but also a healthy posture in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  current account. In addition, such balance must also be attained in the dynamics between 
the goods market (ie. inflation) and the financial markets (ie. asset price). 
16. This lesson has a few policy implications. First, we need a discipline, forward looking, 
and  bold  macroeconomic  policy  from  both  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  to  achieve  the 
desired optimal balance in the economy in the medium term. 
17. Second, the role of financial system stability cannot be undermined. It is critical to have a 
well-functioning  financial  system  through  which  money  would  go  to  support  productive 
economic activities. In this context, we have pursued various macroprudential policies to help 
navigate economic uncertainties in 2013. 
18.  Third,  macroeconomic  policies  alone  are  not  sufficient.  The  dynamics  in  2013  also 
taught an important lesson about the role of structural reform in sustaining economic growth. 
Without  effective  structural  policy,  an  external  shock  would  always  require  substantial 
adjustment in the demand side that will only intensify boom-and-bust cycle in the economy. 
Economic outlook and risk 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
19. Despite lingering uncertainties, we believe the economy will be more stable and balanced 
in  2014.  Domestic  demand  will  continue  to  moderate  but  exports  are  expected  to  perform 
more  favourably  in  line  with  the  global  economic  recovery.  Therefore,  growth  in  2014  is 
projected to hit the lower end of the 5.8–6.2% range. 
20.  Bank  Indonesia  expects  the  balance  of  payments  to  continue  improving  in  2014, 
supported by shrinking current account deficit and growing surplus in the capital and financial 
account. We estimate the current account deficit will be below 3% in 2014. Bank Indonesia 
asserts that inflation will remain under control and within its target corridor of 4.5±1% in 2014. 
Credit is projected to grow at 15–17% range which is consistent with the effort to bring the 
economy to a healthier and more balanced level. 
21.  Going  ahead,  challenges  remain.  We  have  to  prepare  ourselves  to  face  a  rocky  and 
bumpy road ahead. Global uncertainties concerning the Fed normalization policy as well as 
the risk of an economic slowdown in China are among the critical risk factors that we have to 
anticipate.  These  risks  could  rekindle  similar  environment  that  have  put  our  economy  in 
jeopardy last year. 
Policy direction and further agenda 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
22.  For  that  reason,  at  no  time  we  should  be  complacent.  The  bumpy  road  ahead 
necessitates  a  wide  ranging  policy  initiatives  to  enable  a  smooth  ride  for  the  Indonesian 
economy. 
23.  Bank  Indonesia  will  continue  to  pursue  monetary  policy  that  is  consistently  directed 
towards reducing current account deficit to healthier level and controlling inflation within its 
target  corridor  of  4.5±1%  in  2014  and  4.0±1%  in  2015. We  do  not  tolerate  inflation  move 
beyond  the  upper  bound  of  the  target  range.  Bank  Indonesia  will  also  strengthen  policy 
coordination with the Government to manage domestic demand. 
24.  But  again,  as  I  mentioned  before  about  lesson  from  2013  experience,  a  sound 
macroeconomic  policy  is  not  sufficient  to  sustain  economic  growth.  It  is  imperative  to 
augment it with structural reform. We have to address our reliance on the export of primary 
commodities given the boom of commodity prices is over. At the same time, efforts should be 
made to address our heavy reliance on energy and food imports. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  25. In the financial sector, financial market reform is also imperative. We, in Bank Indonesia, 
with  close  collaboration  with  OJK,  have  committed  to  boost  financial  market  deepening 
initiatives.  This  includes  elements  such  as  well-functioning  securities  and  money  market, 
seamless payment system, and well developed long-term financing.  
A nation in transition 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
26. The year of 2014 is rather special. With the general election at our doorstep, maintaining 
macroeconomic  stability  is  a  key.  Macroeconomic  stability,  in  our  view,  is  the  element  of 
continuity for the Indonesian economy in transition. In this regard, I would like reiterate our 
commitment to maintain the stability of our economy. 
27. I would also like to emphasize here the remarkable progress in the nation’s journey to 
democracy.  Less  than  two  decades  ago,  if  we  recall,  there  was  an  imminent  risk  of 
“balkanisation” following a devastating financial crisis and an abrupt regime change. But now 
we are viewed as a strong and stable democracy, supported by institutional reforms in both 
private and public spheres. 
28.  With  more  than  500  elected  offices  throughout  the  archipelago,  election  and  peaceful 
transition of power actually occur almost every  day in this country. I am confident that the 
upcoming parliament and presidential elections will be no different. And it will be a testament 
to the strength of our democracy and its ability to support economic development. 
Closing 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
29. Before concluding this remark, I would like to remind us that Fitch Rating is the first rating 
agency  to  award  investment  grade  to  Indonesia  after  losing  the  credential  due  to  97/98 
financial crisis. We believe that such decision was taken after an elaborate assessment on 
the country’s economic and financial data. And as we all have witnessed in 2013, it turned 
out  to  be  an  accurate  assessment.  Indonesia’s  economy  is  indeed  resilient  and  is  able  to 
withstand challenges that may have come to its way. 
30.  I  am  confident  that  Fitch  Rating  will  continue  to  have  faith  in  the  prospect  of  the 
Indonesia’s  economy  on  the  ground  of careful  and  comprehensive  analysis.  In  fact,  we  all 
need to believe in the ability of our economy to move forward despite challenges and doubts. 
31. I am closing my speech today with a relevant quote from Franklin D. Roosevelt – former 
US President. 
“The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will be our doubts of today. Let us move forward 
with strong and active faith.” 
Thank you and I wish you a fruitful discussion in the rest of the conference. 
Governor of Bank Indonesia 
Agus D.W. Martowardojo 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
