 Juyeol Lee: Inaugural address 
 Inaugural address by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, Seoul, 1 April 2014. 
 Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea! 
It has been two years since I left the Bank, and I am overwhelmed to be seeing you all again. 
While taking it as a great honor to be appointed Governor of the Bank of Korea, where I have 
worked for all but the last two years of my entire career, I at the same time feel an enormous 
sense of responsibility to devote myself to bringing our economy up onto a strong foundation. 
But although I feel weighted down with important duties, I must also say that I feel reassured 
to be with our seasoned MPC members equipped with their very valuable experience, and 
with colleagues who always do their best at every responsibility given them. 
Taking  this  opportunity,  I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  my  predecessor  Governor 
Choongsoo Kim, for his leadership at the Bank of Korea over the past four years. I would like 
to  ask  Governor  Kim  for  his  unstinting  guidance  and  support,  for  the  development  of  our 
national economy and the Bank. 
Dear Bank of Korea colleagues! 
I  think  you  are  all  well  aware  that,  on  the  occasion  of  my  appointment  as  Bank  of  Korea 
Governor, discussions on the role of the Bank of Korea have been active in every corner of 
society.  Watching  these  discussions,  I  have  been  able  to  reaffirm  that  the  people’s 
expectations of the Bank have become higher and more varied than ever before. Since the 
2008  global  financial  crisis  a  consensus  has  been  reached  that  the  central  bank  must 
promote financial as well as price stability, and in reflection of this financial stability has been 
added to the Bank of Korea’s mandate. Recently, as concerns about a secular decline in the 
potential  growth  rate  have  arisen,  the  opinion  has  gained  interest  that  monetary  policy’s 
focus should be placed on economic growth and employment as well. 
And I think that the reason these multilayered demands, which sometimes even conflict with 
each other, are being raised so strongly, is that the environment surrounding us has changed 
so greatly compared to the past. 
Although the advanced economies are gradually recovering, they have not yet fully emerged 
from the shocks from the crisis. It is also uncertain whether China, which has risen as one of 
the  G2  along  with  the  U.S.,  will  be  able  to  continue  its  stable  growth.  The  QE  policies 
conducted by the U.S., Japan and other advanced economy central banks to overcome the 
crisis were so unprecedented that it is difficult to predict the channels, the extents and the 
intensities of their impacts. There is a view that the expanded liquidity supplied  will create 
new  bubbles,  while  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve’s  QE  tapering  beginning  from  last  year  has 
also caused financial instability in some EMEs. 
Our Korean economy is also confronting many difficulties. Our growth potential is weakening 
due  to  the  slowing  rate  of  increase  in  our  economically  active  population,  to  sluggish 
corporate  investment  stemming  largely  from  the  uncertainties  about  the  business  outlook, 
and  to  regulatory  hurdles.  Income  and  wealth  gaps  across  industries,  corporations  and 
individuals  have  widened,  as  the fruits  of growth  have  not  been  evenly  divided.  Excessive 
household debt, which constrains private consumption, is not only weighing on growth, but 
also narrowing the scope for our macroeconomic policy operations. 
My dear friends and colleagues, 
I  would  like  now  to  share  with  you  some  of  the  things  that  I  will  keep  in  mind  during  my 
governorship. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to  come  up  with 
First, I believe that the role and responsibilities of the Bank of Korea must be redefined, in 
line with the changes in the economic structure and the external environment. We need to 
consider  deeply  how  to  meet  the  people’s  demand  that  the  current  monetary  policy 
framework pursue not only price stability but also financial stability and economic growth, in 
harmony. There is a need for us to review and discuss in earnest how our policy objectives 
and instruments should be changed to accommodate this new demand for an evolution of 
the  Bank  of  Korea’s  role.  If  social  consensus  on  this  is  reached,  even  if  it  takes  time,  the 
Bank of Korea will develop into a more advanced central bank. 
Next, we need to devote our utmost efforts to achieving a rebirth of the Bank of Korea as a 
central bank trusted by the Korean people. The essence of monetary policy lies in effectively 
managing the expectations of economic agents, and this is only achievable with the people’s 
belief in their central bank. I will devote myself to enhancing our Bank’s policy effectiveness, 
through efficient communication and consistent and predictable policy operations. 
Third, I will devote close attention to preparing against potential risks and ensuring that our 
economy  maintains  a  stable  recovery  while  sustaining  price  stability.  In  particular,  I  will 
thoroughly monitor external risk factors, such as changes in the monetary policy stances of 
major economies and the possibilities of resulting unrest in the global financial markets and 
emerging  market  economies,  and  endeavor 
the  necessary 
countermeasures. In this process, I will work to ensure that we can achieve more effective 
financial cooperation with major central banks and international financial organizations. We 
also need to pool our wisdom for the stable management of household debt. 
Dear members of the BOK family! 
The last two years have afforded me a good opportunity to look at the Bank of Korea from a 
more  objective  perspective.  The  outside  evaluations  of  the  Bank  differ  from  what  we 
ourselves believe we are, and I think contain many points that we can refer to in conducting 
our tasks. Here today, I would like to request the following: 
We need to look back once again, and consider the appropriateness of our ways of thinking 
and handling the work that we have taken as natural until now. All organizations tend to have 
their own thoughts and patterns of behavior distinct from those of other organizations. From 
the outsider’s view, however, this can be seen as a kind of institutional self-centeredness that 
tries to disregard changes in the environment. As I mentioned earlier, people’s expectations 
for the central bank are at this time higher than ever before . We should bear in mind that, if 
we do not think outside the box, it can be difficult for us to play the role and carry out the 
mission befitting the needs of our time. 
Particularly, since the Bank of Korea is a national policy organization, we should always look 
squarely at the problems which the Korean economy faces and maintain a positive attitude 
while seeking the appropriate policy options. Only then will the Bank of Korea be able to be 
recognized as working together with the people, and contributing to the development of the 
national  economy.  To  this  end,  I  hope  that  all  of  you  will  devote  yourselves  to  self-
improvement, and to being top-class specialists in your areas of work. 
I  will  devote  myself  to  creating  an  environment  in  which  all  employees  can  trust  and 
communicate  candidly  with  one  another.  We  should  never  forget  that  a  workplace  culture 
where  seniors,  juniors  and  coworkers  trust,  respect  and  care  about  one  another  is  a  very 
valuable asset which our predecessors have cultivated for a long time. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea! 
I  would  like  to  briefly  tell  you  my  thoughts  related  to  this  organization  and  to  its  human 
resource management. 
I will completely reexamine the efficiency of our current management administration system 
and operating procedures. I will work to further enhance the positive aspects of the various 
reforms  taken  in  the  internal  management  area  in  the  past  years.  If,  however,  there  are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  measures that have had adverse side-effects contrary to their original purposes, such as the 
lowering of work efficiency, they will need to be improved on as soon as possible. And so I 
will  begin  to  work  on  this  immediately.  I  will  also  examine  carefully  whether  the  current 
organization  of  our  bank  allows  us  to  commit  ourselves  to  our  natural  duties  including  the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy,  and  devote  myself  to  ensuring  improvements  in  any  areas 
needing it. 
Related  to  human  resource  management,  as  I  have  mentioned  before  the  most  important 
criteria should be performance and reputation built up over a long period of time. I believe 
that only these criteria will encourage us to further ourselves from a long-term perspective 
and dedicate ourselves to the development of our bank. And while seeking the stability of our 
organization based upon this principle, I will also pursue diversity and openness. 
Dear fellow BOK staff, 
The Bank of Korea is a public asset, which the people have entrusted to our care, and we 
are therefore responsible for contributing to the development of our national economy. Let us 
reconfirm our responsibility for committing ourselves only to our national economy and to the 
people of Korea. I am confident that, by combining our outstanding 64-year tradition with the 
flexibility  of  thought  that  the  new  environment  requires,  we  can feel  a strong motivation  to 
work with dignity and pride. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
