  Andreas Dombret: The economist and the lamp-post – lessons from the 
crisis 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at a reception hosted by the Deutsche Bundesbank at the 2014 annual meeting 
of the Verein für Socialpolitik, Hamburg, 9 September 2014. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  reception  we  at  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  are 
hosting here at the annual meeting of the Verein für Socialpolitik. 
When I see so many economists assembled in one place, I am naturally tempted to tell one 
of the many economist jokes making the rounds. However, the short story I am about to tell 
you is also connected with the topic of my short speech. 
In  the  middle  of  the  night,  a  policeman  on  his  beat  finds  an  economist  walking  around  a 
lamp-post, looking down at the ground. “What are you doing?” the policeman asks. “Looking 
for my wallet,” says the economist. “Where did you lose your wallet?”, the policeman wants 
to know. The economist points to the other side of the street. “It might be a better idea to look 
over there,” the policeman advises. “Well, but it’s too dark over there.” 
Theory and economic policy 
2. 
Dear guests, “evidence-based economic policy” is the motto of this year’s annual meeting. 
What  this  motto  implies  is  that  economic  policy-making  should  be  based  not  on  what  we 
think we know about the world, but on what we actually do know about the world. 
This  is  ultimately  in  the  tradition  of  Popper  and  his  dictum  that  a  good  theory  must  be 
falsifiable. We therefore need empirical research. Empiricism is merely the attempt to falsify 
theories  by  subjecting  them  to  a  reality  check.  And  only  theories  that  stand  up  to  such  a 
reality check should be used as a basis for economic policy. 
Ideally,  empirical  review  of theories  is  part  of  scientific  practice.  Sometimes,  however,  this 
reality  check  overtakes  science  and  reveals,  in  a  very  real  fashion,  gaps  in  theory.  The 
financial crisis was one such reality check. 
In October 2008, Alan Greenspan testified before the US Congress that the meltdown had 
left him in a state of “shocked disbelief”. Many economists and economic policy makers are 
likely to have had similar feelings. 
To  the  general  public,  the  crisis  represented  the  intellectual  bankruptcy  of  economic 
research.  Nearly  two  weeks  ago,  Chancellor  Merkel  also  made  reference  to  this.  At  the 
5th Lindau Meeting on Economic Sciences (attended by Nobel Laureates in this field), she 
noted that “we are coming from years in which one (...) did not always have the impression 
that economics already knew everything about the future.” 
Many are now indeed wondering quite fundamentally what use economics is to society. The 
question  of  the  usefulness  of  economics  to  society  is  probably  also  a  reason  why,  at  the 
aforementioned  gathering  of  Nobel  Laureates,  the  closing  panel  discussion  was  entitled 
“How Useful is Economics – How is Economics Useful?” 
The lessons of the crisis 
3. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  Christoph  Schmidt,  chair  of  the  German  Council  of  Economic 
Experts,  was  quoted  in  yesterday’s  Frankfurter  Allgemeine  Zeitung  newspaper  as  saying 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the 
integrating 
financial  sector 
that, “Despite the uncertainty surrounding our statements, our work is still important because 
we can contribute to imposing a limited amount of order on a complex and uncertain world 
without feigning false certainties.” 
The job of economics is to explain economic interrelationships and to use these explanations 
as  a  basis  for  making  economic  policy  designed  to  increase  public  welfare.  Economics  is 
thus, if we accept that view, a discipline which is certainly of relevance to society. 
However, we must admit that economics has not always been up to the task. The financial 
crisis showed that there were many things about financial markets which we did not know, 
and that much of what we thought we knew was not reality-based. This is not least because, 
some of the time, economists act much like the one in the story I told you at the beginning. 
Often, they were looking where the light was, not necessarily where the knowledge was. 
In  that  vein,  precisely  what  the  standard  macroeconomic  models  were  lacking  was  the 
financial  sector,  which  made  these  models  incapable  of  predicting  the  financial  crisis.  The 
framework of these models therefore needs to be broadened. In the meantime, many high-
ranking  economists  are  working  on 
into  standard 
macroeconomic  models:  Mark  Gertler,  Lawrence  Christiano,  Massimo  Rostagno,  Roberto 
Motto  and  Markus  Brunnermeier,  to  name  but  a  few.  Although  progress  is  being  made, 
research has not yet reached the finishing line. 
But  why  was  the  financial  sector  missing  from  the  models?  Well,  it  is  undoubtedly  very 
difficult to model it mathematically. This seems to have been a hurdle initially not regarded as 
being  worth  overcoming.  For  we  thought  we  knew  something  about  the  financial  markets 
which has now turned out to be false. 
We believed the financial markets would generally perform their task efficiently and smoothly. 
And if financial markets do what they are supposed to, at least most of the time, there is no 
need to model them specifically. However, it was the financial crisis, if not beforehand, which 
showed that the financial markets sometimes do not do what they are supposed to be doing 
– and on a large scale. 
Let me briefly give an example of a problem in the financial markets which, I believe, played 
a central role in the crisis: banks’ systemic importance, the “too-big-to-fail” problem. 
It  is  a  core  tenet  of  market  economies  that  firms  can  fail.  Joseph  Schumpeter  called  this 
“creative destruction”; Allan Meltzer put an even finer point on it: “Capitalism without failure is 
like religion without sin. It doesn’t work.” 
Not taken into account with regard to banks were the side effects of failure. And one thing 
came to light in the crisis: these side effects can be so severe that failure is no longer the 
basis of a healthy market but, in a worst case scenario, the downfall of the market. In order to 
prevent such a downfall, central government has to intervene and rescue banks. By creating 
flawed incentives, this implicit government guarantee ultimately exacerbates the underlying 
problem – a problem that the markets believe has still not yet been solved, as studies by the 
IMF and other institutions show. 
Are these really new insights? No, this is certainly not news. It is precisely here in Germany 
where  the  premises  of  the  ordo-liberal  school  of  thought  are  cited  in  this  context.  Walter 
Eucken  is  quoted  again  and  again  with  respect  to  the  “too-big-to-fail”  problem.  More  than 
60 years ago, he came up with a short and snappy solution to the problem: “Whoever reaps 
the benefits must also bear the liability.” 
Incentives are appropriate only where the banks’ shareholders and creditors are liable. And 
only  where the banks’ shareholders and creditors are liable will taxpayers not be asked to 
foot the bill. The knowledge that regulatory policy came up with a fundamental answer to the 
“too-big-to-fail” problem decades ago is not the end of the road, however. 
Although the principles of Ordnungspolitik are pointing in the right direction, they do not give 
us the precise route. They do not tell us the size at which a bank actually becomes “too big to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  fail”. They cannot help us understand the exact routes of contagion channels in the financial 
system. And they cannot help us develop the precise mechanisms for bailing in shareholders 
and creditors. 
We  need  formal  models  to  solve  these  problems.  And  this  brings  us  to  what  post-crisis 
economic  research  needs  to  achieve:  it  must  pour  old  knowledge  into  new  models. 
Economics needs to seek the answers to its questions where they are actually to be found, 
even though there might not be a lamp to shine a light on the solution. 
Awarding of the Carl Menger Prize 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, economists are facing major challenges, for which they have recently 
received a lot of criticism but precious little praise. I am therefore glad to now present the 
Carl Menger Prize, which will be awarded biennially at our annual meeting. Since this is a 
first, I would like to begin by saying a thing or two about the prize. 
The  Carl  Menger  Prize  is  awarded  by  the  Verein  für  Socialpolitik  in  honour  of  innovative 
international research accomplishments in the field of monetary macroeconomics, monetary 
policy and foreign exchange policy – precisely the areas in which the crisis revealed gaps. 
Jointly  awarded  by  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  and  the 
Bundesbank, the prize money is €20,000. 
Candidates can be nominated in written proposals detailing their worthiness by the heads of 
the research departments of the three central banks as well as by the heads of the Verein für 
Socialpolitik’s  committees  for  monetary  theory  and  policy,  macroreconomics,  and  external 
economics theory and policy. 
The  lead  editors  of  our  association  periodicals  –  the  German  Economic  Review  and 
Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik – are also eligible to nominate candidates. 
The prizewinners are chosen by a vote among the Verein’s former and current chairs and by 
one  representative  (each)  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  the  Swiss  National  Bank 
and the Bundesbank. 
I  would  like  to  leave  the  “technicalities”  of  the  new  prize  at  that.  What  is  much  more 
interesting is: who will the prizewinner be? 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  announce  that,  for  her  outstanding 
academic  achievements,  the  first  Carl  Menger  Prize  is  awarded  to  –  Ms  Hélène  Rey.  Ms 
Rey, my warmest congratulations! 
Hélène Rey has been researching and teaching at the London Business School since 2007. 
Before that,  she  was  at  Princeton  University  and  the  London  School  of  Economics.  In  her 
research, she particularly focuses on both the determinants and implications of globalisation 
for product and factor markets. 
Her  findings  help  to  better  understand  how,  under  current  conditions,  exchange  rates  are 
determined; how external imbalances emerge; and what pros and cons are associated with 
the further integration of the global economy. 
More recently, Hélène Rey has conducted research into how international capital flows can 
contribute to financial crises, and looked at the options central banks have in fulfilling their 
objectives in a globalised world. 
Hélène Rey’s research has not only substantially advanced the academic discussion; proving 
its practical relevance, it has also found its way into the concrete work of central banks. 
Ms Rey, among your academic contributions which can be found on your impressive list of 
publications,  a  preliminary  working  paper  is  entitled  “Exorbitant  Privilege  and  Exorbitant 
Duty”,  referring  to  the  specific  role  of  the  United  States  within  the  international  monetary 
system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In this paper, you argue that privilege and duty are two sides of the same coin, which means 
they cannot be separated from one another. Fortunately, privilege and duty are not always 
inseparable in daily life. 
For with respect to this evening, I want to underscore that awarding the Carl Menger Prize to 
you is by no means a duty to me: quite simply, it is an absolute privilege and a pleasure. 
My colleagues from the Verein für Socialpolitik, the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, the Swiss 
National  Bank, 
too,  congratulate  you 
wholeheartedly on being awarded the Prize and on your impressive academic achievements 
so far. 
May the Prize serve as an incentive for you to continue in this direction – we are definitely 
looking forward to your future work! 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for listening. The buffet is open. 
the  Bundesbank  and  certainly 
I  personally, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
