  Fahad Bin Abdullah Al-Mubarak: Economic, financial and supervisory 
developments in Saudi Arabia 
Opening speech by H E Dr Fahad Bin Abdullah Al-Mubarak, Governor of the Saudi Arabian 
Monetary  Agency,  on  the  occasion  of  the  issuance  of  the  49th  Annual  Report,  Riyadh, 
17 March 2014. 
 It gives me pleasure to meet you today. I would like to welcome you at SAMA and thank you 
for attending this conference on the occasion of the issuance of SAMA 49th Annual Report. 
We are deeply sorry for the delay of this gathering for reasons beyond our control. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
At the beginning, I would like to review the latest economic developments in the Kingdom. 
Our  economy  continued  its  growth  for  the  14th  consecutive  year.  The  real  GDP  grew  by 
3.8 percent during 2013, which was greater than the global economic growth of 2.9 percent 
for the same year. The private sector grew by 5.5 percent. The growth of the Saudi economy 
was  ascribed  to  the  continuous  government  investment  expenditure,  especially  on 
infrastructure  projects,  and  continuous  high-paced  growth  due  to  the  achievements  in  the 
area of updating and improving regulations and enhancement of the business environment, 
which  promoted  domestic  and  foreign  investments.  The  growth  was  also  attributed  to  the 
finance provided by the domestic banks and specialized credit funds to the various economic 
activities in the Kingdom. 
According  to  data  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Kingdom  registered  a  real  surplus  of 
SAR 180.3  billion  (6.5  percent  of  GDP)  in  its  budget  during  2013.  The  public  debt  fell  to 
SAR 75.1  billion  (representing  2.7  percent  of  GDP).  Moreover,  the  Kingdom  achieved  a 
surplus of SAR 486.8 billion (17.4 percent of GDP) in the current account of the balance of 
payments (compared to 22.4 percent in the preceding year). The inflation rate increased from 
2.9 percent in 2012 to 3.5 percent in 2013. However, it is still under control. According to the 
latest data of the Central Department of Statistics and Information, the inflation annual rate 
declined to 2.8 percent during February 2014, given that the inflation rate in emerging and 
developing  economies  was  estimated  at  6.2  percent  in  2013.  Inflationary  pressures  in  the 
Kingdom were due to the housing sector and food prices. 
At  the  time  when  a  number  of  industrial  countries  are  witnessing  a  decline  in  their  credit 
rating, Fitch Credit Rating Agency promoted the Kingdom’s sovereign credit rating from (AA-) 
to (AA) with a stable outlook, strengthening confidence in our national economy and making 
it more attractive to investments. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow me to talk about activities supervised by SAMA. In the banking sector, domestic banks 
continued to play their roles in serving the national economy in accordance with latest secure 
technologies in the banking services field. Monetary base (M3) increased by 10.8 percent in 
2013 (by 12.8 percent in January of this year). Credit extended to the private sector went up 
by  12.1  percent  to  SAR  1,076.4  billion  in  2013  (by  12.3  percent  in  January  of  this  year). 
Domestic banks maintained their good financial solvency, recording a capital adequacy ratio 
of 17.9 percent at the end of 2013. 
The number of domestic and foreign banks operating in the Kingdom currently is 23, 12 of 
which are domestic and 11 are foreign which became 12 after licensing the Industrial and 
Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) in 2012. Driven by the aim of achieving a better spread 
and  service  to  a  larger portion  of  citizens  and  expatriates,  bank  branches  operating  in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Kingdom grew up by 4.2 percent (72 branches) to 1,768 branches at the end of 2013. The 
number of ATMs stood at 13,883, increasing by 9.2 percent (11,71 machines) at the end of 
2013 compared to 2012. At the same time, POS went up by 16.5 percent to 107,783. 
With  regard  to  the  insurance  sector  in  the  Kingdom,  SAMA  continued  to  guide  this  sector 
toward  further  regulation  to  work  in  accordance  with  highly  professional  standards  and 
practices,  aiming  at  promoting  the  competence  of  its  staff  and  providing  better  insurance 
services to policy holders. The insurance sector witnessed a quantum leap over the past few 
years represented by developed potentials, skills and technical expertise of companies and 
increased awareness of insurance benefits. This contributed to better provision of insurance 
services  at  competitive  prices  and  coverage,  thereby,  achieving  higher growth  rates  in  the 
market. The number of insurance and reinsurance companies at the end of the third quarter 
of  2013  stood  at  34  in  addition  to  180  insurance-related  service  companies  to  support 
insurance services. Gross written premiums stood at SAR 19.2 billion at the end of the third 
quarter of 2013, compared to SAR 15.7 billion in 2012, growing by 22.3 percent. The ratio of 
insurance  written  premiums  to GDP  stood at  0.69  percent  up to  the third quarter  of  2013, 
indicating significant opportunities of growth for this sector in the coming years. 
SAMA attached great attention to insured persons’ rights. The Implementation Regulation of 
The Cooperative Insurance Companies Control Law obligates insurance companies to settle 
customers’  claims  in  a  period  not  exceeding  15  days.  SAMA  supervises  companies’ 
compliance with the provisions of this article on a continuous basis. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In the area of finance, SAMA has published the Implementing Regulations for the Finance 
Laws,  and  issued  Implementing  Regulations  of  the  Financial  Leasing  Law  in  coordination 
with the Ministry of Justice. It has also issued the Implementing Regulations of the Finance 
Companies  Control  Law.  In  this  context,  SAMA  applies  the  best  internationally  recognized 
practices, ensuring the soundness of the sector and its stability, fairness of its transactions, 
in addition to encouraging legitimate and fair competition between finance companies, taking 
appropriate  means  to  develop  the  sector,  working  on  Saudization  of  jobs,  and  raising 
efficiency of its employees. SAMA works side by side in cooperation with relevant authorities, 
namely,  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Ministry  of  Housing,  Ministry  of  Justice,  Ministry  of 
Commerce and Industry to achieve the cherished objectives of the Finance Laws. 
The  Implementing  Regulations  of  the  Real  Estate  Finance  Law  address  criteria  and 
conditions  to  be  observed  in  the  exercise  of  this  activity  for  the  purpose  of  regulating  the 
finance  sector,  and  protecting  the  rights  of  the  dealers  therein.  The  Regulations  set  a 
maximum limit on real estate financing that should not exceed 70 percent of the house value 
subject  of  the  real  estate  finance  contract.  The  Regulations  also  set  up  a  regulatory 
framework  for  real  estate  refinancing,  thereby,  establishing  a  secondary  market  that 
contributing  to  providing  the  necessary  liquidity  and  reducing  the  cost  of  financing  to  the 
consumer.  The  Public  Investment  Fund  will  contribute  to  the  ownership  of  the  Saudi 
Refinancing Company with a capital of five billion Riyals. 
The Implementing Regulations of the Financial Leasing Law include provisions related to the 
Financial Leasing contracts. The Regulations identify the basic rights and obligations of both 
the lessor and lessee, including determining the amount of ownership right and dues of the 
lessee and lessor in case of the cancellation of the contract. The Regulations provide for the 
registration process of Financial Leasing contracts in accordance with the best practices in 
this area through a company incorporated for this purpose. The Implementing Regulations of 
the  Finance  Companies  Control  Law  include  supervisory  and  control  provisions  of  the 
finance sector, including licensing requirements, conditions and procedures, and work rules 
of finance companies, the regulatory standards to be observed in practicing the activity, the 
requirements  and  standards  necessary  for  the  protection  of  consumer  rights  in  finance 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  services,  including  determining  the  method  of  calculating  the  annual  percentage  rate  of 
financing, and clarity of procedures and criteria for early repayment. 
Activation  of  the  Finance  Laws  is  expected  to  have  a  positive  impact  on  developing  and 
promoting  the  finance  activity  in  the  Kingdom,  improving  the  level  of  provided  services  by 
taking  advantage  of  available  assets  and  capital,  in  addition  to  finding  new  sources  of 
funding to finance the activities of finance companies through the secondary market, which 
will be reflected positively on economic activity and create more jobs. 
SAMA has established the Department of Consumer Protection to ensure the clients’ rights 
in the sectors supervised by SAMA and to look into their complaints and improve the level of 
services of these sectors. SAMA will be happy to receive all complaints as it attaches great 
importance to protecting the rights of customers and raising the level of services provided to 
them. 
In  conclusion,  I  welcome  this  distinctive  elite  of  media  journalists,  and  I  am  pleased  to 
answer your questions. Asslam Alaikum Wa Rhmat Allah Wa Barakatuh. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
