  Dimitar Bogov: Towards recovery and sustainable growth in the altered 
global environment 
Address by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
at  the  3rd  Research  Conference  “Towards  recovery  and  sustainable  growth  in  the  altered 
global environment”, Skopje, 28–29 April 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Your Excellences, 
Dear guests, 
It is indeed with great pleasure that I welcome you all to our third Research Conference! Just 
like in the previous years, we hope to have a fruitful discussion on the main topics from the 
current surrounding and the economic prospects of the region and the global economy. 
This  year’s  conference  will  be  focused  on  the  recovery  process  in  the  wake  of  the  long 
lasting global financial and debt crisis and making a floor for sustainable growth in the altered 
global  environment.  Today,  we  would  like  to  talk  with  you  about  consequences  from  the 
crisis, the  lessons  learnt  and  the  impact  of the  regulatory  and  institutional  changes on  the 
recovery process. To touch upon the issues: Why did it take so long to come to this point and 
how sound this recovery is? How close are we to the normalization of policies setup and the 
desirable growth rates? How successful the fiscal consolidation  will be  and is the financial 
system more resilient to shocks now? It is still difficult to judge on many of these issues, but 
we  are  here  to  identify  the  strengths  and  weaknesses,  to  express  the  pros  and  cons,  to 
present  our  estimates  and  results  that  will  certainly  extend  our  mutual  knowledge  and 
wisdom for better guidance through the recovery process and beyond. 
Changes in the global environment 
Many  changes  in  the  regulatory  framework,  policy  implementation,  even  in  the  way  of 
reasoning and perceiving the actual developments, have taken place in the last seven years. 
The  developed  economies,  besides  zero  bound  lowered  rates,  also  needed  additional 
monetary policy accommodation through the quantitative easing. They also turned into using 
a kind of forward guidance framework as a tool for announcing monetary policy stance in a 
longer  horizon  than  the  usual  one.  Central  banks  around  the  globe,  depending  on  the 
circumstances, were using a range of non-standard measures designed in a way to tackle 
specific  drawbacks  of  the  crisis.  Exceptional  conditions  called  upon  exceptional  measures, 
including “whatever it takes” approach in the euro zone in the peak of the debt crisis, which in 
total, mostly gave a positive feedback towards economic recovery. 
Considering  the  fact  that  this  crisis  originated  from  the  financial  system,  a  comprehensive 
reform  of  the  financial  regulatory  framework  has  been  launched  during  the  crisis  through 
Basel III – new capital and liquidity requirements are waiting to be implemented in practice. 
In addition, the euro zone has undergone tremendous changes in the institutional settings by 
the establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism by the ECB, along with the Single 
Resolution Mechanism and other accompanied ongoing or upcoming reforms. 
Another  area  of  reforms  in  the  European  Union  was  the  strengthening  of  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic  policy  through  the  Fiscal  Compact  and  accompanying  macroeconomic 
surveillance  mechanism,  aiming  at  sound  public 
from 
macroeconomic imbalances. What urgently came to our knowledge during the last crisis was 
the importance of the financial stability for the overall macroeconomic stability, but also the 
so-called “doom loop” between banks and sovereign that emerged from this crisis, adding yet 
another specific experience that we should all be aware of in the future. 
finances  and  preventing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  On the recovery process and sustainable growth 
The data since mid of the last year and the forecast for this year are pointing to an upturn of 
the  global  economy,  although  it  is  still  fragile  and  surrounded  by  risks.  The  economic 
recovery of the European Union is crucial for stronger revival of the region, considering the 
trade relations, although due to specific factors, countries in the region differ in terms of their 
position in the economic cycle. 
In 2013, the Macedonian economy grew by 3.1%, mainly driven by the strong net export and 
the strengthening of private consumption in line with curbing down of the unemployment. In 
this view, it is worth mentioning the positive contribution of the new FDI inflows in tradable 
sector,  which  contributed  to  both  higher  and  more  diversified  net  export  and  higher 
employment. In addition, economic recovery was supported by the fiscal stimulus as well as 
the accommodative monetary policy stance. Since July last year, the main policy rate is at 
the  historical  lowest  level  of  3.25%.  Moreover,  during  the  crisis  period,  a  combination  of 
standard and non-standard measures have been undertaken by the central bank aimed to 
give  additional  support  specifically  to  the  credit  growth  and  accordingly,  to  the  economic 
growth, while still preserving the price and financial stability in the economy. The outlook for 
this  year  is  also  positive.  We  expect  GDP  growth  of  close  to  4%,  and  therefore  we  see 
economy going up on the cycle. What one can learn from our experience is the fact that the 
implementation of sound structural reforms can definitely move the economy upward – even 
during the crisis – that is an important message for the macroeconomic policy afterwards. 
When discussing the recovery from the crisis, we need to point out some related issues that 
are  dealing  with  the  exit  of  non-standard  policy  measures  and  turning  towards  fiscal 
consolidation, currently being the topical issues between the policy makers worldwide. The 
tapering decision by the FED by the end of the last year somehow announced the need of 
this  reversal  that  will  eventually  be  recognized  in  other  countries,  too.  We  already 
acknowledged the benefits from all specific measures implemented during the crisis, but we 
should be aware of their transitory role and the need to get back to the standard policy tools. 
Of course, the signs of current recovery are pointing to different stages of the normalization 
path and therefore, this reversal in the policy settings will differ from country to country. The 
new threat of deflation in the advanced economies is yet another potential obstacle in this 
reversal. 
From this point, that is already a challenging one, the next big challenge will be to return to a 
solid and sustainable growth. During this crisis, we experienced a lot and we learnt a lot. A 
number  of  weaknesses,  mainly  in  the  financial  and  fiscal  areas,  have  been  detected  and 
addressed. Anyway, with the first signs of economic recovery, not everything has been fixed 
yet. There is still a need to repair banks’ balance sheets, to squeeze central banks’ balance 
sheets,  to  restore  market  confidence  and  to  strengthen  public  debt  management.  The 
prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  has  created  a  room  for  fiscal  expansion  and  public 
debt increase, but the fiscal authorities must be aware that the end of this period is just about 
to  come.  The  regulatory  and  institutional  reforms  undertaken  in  the  last  years  should 
contribute to the soundness and stability of the financial systems. What has been done in this 
field in the last years should be fruitful on a longer horizon. 
 To sum up, the global economy is on the recovery path although there is still a long way to 
go towards sound and sustainable growth. Reshaping of the banking and financial sector will 
definitely contribute in this regard and the contribution in the same direction is expected from 
the  fiscal  sector,  too.  The  central  banks  worldwide  have  proven  their  flexibility,  but  the 
monetary policy must not be overburdened in the long run and should get back to its primary 
function.  A  sustainable  growth  needs  sound  policies  and  accelerating  reforms  towards 
building more competitive and more flexible economies. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  I hope I have already triggered many issues to be discussed in details later on, during this 
conference. Considering the eminent keynote speakers that we have in the first session and 
the high quality research papers to be presented in the next sessions, I have no doubt that all 
together  we  will  enlighten  this  complex  “package”  of  issues  related  to  the  recovery  in  the 
aftermath of the crisis. 
Thank you so much for attending our conference and thank you for your attention! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
