  Jwala Rambarran: Venture capital financing in the Caribbean – its 
relevance to the economic transformation agenda 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  3rd  Caribbean  Business  Executive  Seminar  “Venture  capital  financing  in  the 
Caribbean – its relevance to the economic transformation agenda”, Port of Spain, 4 April 2014. 
 Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me first thank the Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance (CCMF) for inviting me to 
deliver  Opening  Remarks  at  its  3rd  Caribbean  Business  Executive  Seminar  on  Venture 
Capital  Financing. I  commend  CCMF  for  bringing together  a  wide  cross  section  of  C  level 
executives from finance and government as well as academic experts to share experiences 
and best practices on the policies to promote venture capital finance in the Caribbean. 
This Seminar is particularly timely, since it is taking place against the backdrop of a global 
environment  that  is  likely  to  be  less  favorable  than  in  the  recent  past  because  of  tighter 
financing  conditions  as  well  as  slower  growth  in  some  advanced  economies  and  major 
emerging markets. Caribbean policymakers, in their search for new sources of development 
finance, are rekindling their interest in venture capital to help spur innovation, create jobs and 
support economic growth. 
I  say  rekindling  interest  because  the  regional  venture  capital  landscape  is,  at  best,  in  an 
embryonic stage. In Caribbean economies, venture capital fundraising (as a percent of GDP) 
is  negligible,  or  at  zero.  Several  venture  capital  funds  have  closed  since  2008.  In  fact,  in 
Trinidad and Tobago, the venture capital industry has collapsed. And most venture capital 
investment,  even  when  finally  deployed,  has  financed  start-ups  of  small  to  medium 
enterprises without any discernable positive economic impact.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  for  a  region  discovered  some  525  years  ago  thanks  to  venture 
capital  financing,  the  Caribbean  has  failed  to  develop  a  vibrant  and  indigenous  venture 
capital industry. 
Think  about  it.  Christopher  Columbus  created  a  model  for  the  modern  Caribbean 
entrepreneur to follow. 
Columbus spent seven years pitching his business plan to Genoese bankers (the world’s first 
angel networks) before convincing King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain (institutional 
investors at heart, if not in name) to fund his risky start-up venture in 1492. 
His  business  plan  called  for  using  three  ships  to  discover  a  faster  sea  route  to  India  and 
China by sailing west into the Atlantic. Columbus persuaded Ferdinand and Isabella that a 
new  route  to  Asia  would  disrupt  Portugal’s  monopoly  on  Asian  exploration  and  give  Spain 
vast riches such as silk, spices, gold and precious stones. He also convinced the royals that 
a new sea route would give Spain the glory of a new discovery, expand the Spanish Empire 
and propagate the spread of Christianity. 
Columbus, the explorer and adventurer, had no spectacular track record nor demonstrated 
any  remarkable  abilities  as  a  mariner  but  he  did  have  some  “skin  in  the  game”,  investing 
some  of  his  own  resources  into  the  venture.  According  to  the  term  sheet  Columbus 
successfully  negotiated,  he  would  be  entitled  to  10  percent  of  all  revenues  from  the  new 
lands  he  discovered;  and  he  would  have  the  option  of  buying  one-eighth  interest  in  any 
commercial venture with the new lands and receive one-eighth of the profits for all trips made 
by Spain to the New World. 
Like  all  entrepreneurs,  Columbus  miscalculated  the  risks  of  his  westward  voyage.  Many 
things could have gone wrong that would prevent Columbus from returning to Spain: getting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  lost,  starving,  shipwreck  and  mutiny.  In  fact,  Columbus  had  the  confidence,  tact  and 
charisma  to  fend  off  a  near-mutiny  by  convincing  his  crew  that  newly  sighted  birds  and 
floating vegetation meant Asia was (literally) over the horizon. 
At the same time, all Ferdinand and Isabella risked was investment capital but could benefit 
tremendously from the upside potential. Even after granting all of Columbus’ demands, Spain 
still  retained  seven-eighths  of  any  returns  from  the  first  voyage,  and  seven-eighths  of  any 
returns  from  subsequent  voyages.  Ferdinand  and  Isabella’s  risky  venture  paid  off 
handsomely.  The  mineral  wealth  extracted  from  the  New  World  laid  the  foundation  for 
Spain’s domination of Europe for the next century. 
The world is not so different today than 525 years ago. Financing entrepreneurial ventures 
has changed little over the centuries. Today, we know that venture capital involves long term 
investments in risky, young companies, often with unproven management teams addressing 
new  technologies  in  uncertain  markets.  Yet  the  innovation  that  occurs  in  these  small 
companies is an important force in moving a country into the knowledge economy. 
In this regard, Caribbean governments have an important but carefully balanced role to play 
in creating a healthy ecosystem in which venture capital can truly thrive. Many governments 
including  ours  in Trinidad  and Tobago  have  attempted  to  implement  policies  to  encourage 
venture  capital  investment,  but  unfortunately  these  efforts  have  either  been  misguided  or 
failed to deliver the anticipated results. 
Daniel Isenberg, Professor of Management Practice at Babson College, in his path-breaking 
June 2010 article in the Harvard Business Review offers several contrarian prescriptions for 
starting an entrepreneurial revolution, all of which, I believe, are relevant to the Caribbean 
economic  transformation  agenda. I  would  like  to  highlight three key  lessons for  Caribbean 
policymakers. 
The first lesson is to stop attempting to duplicate Silicon Valley. Many governments have the 
near  universal  ambition  to  develop  the  next  Silicon  Valley,  which  is  home  to  a  veritable 
“who’s who” of hi-tech giants such as Apple, eBay, Google, Intel, LinkedIn, and Oracle. Yet, 
ironically, Silicon Valley could not even replicate itself today if it tried. Its ecosystem evolved 
from the convergence of a unique set of circumstances: a large pool of skilled engineers and 
scientists  from  major  universities  in  the  area;  the  laid-back  but  driven  for  speed  California 
culture;  generous  funding  from  a  strong  aerospace  market  with  the  Defense  Department; 
development  of  an  efficient  network  of  venture  capital  firms;  the  institutional  leadership  of 
world-class Stanford University; and pure luck, among other things. 
In 2008, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago decided to create its own version of Silicon 
Valley  by  investing  an  estimated  US$150  million  in  the  Caribbean’s  first  Science  and 
Technology Park, known as the Tamana InTech Park. The principal purpose of the Tamana 
InTech  Park  was  to  drive  economic  diversification  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  through  the 
establishment  of  technology  intensive,  knowledge-driven  industries  in  the  non-energy 
sectors. 
The Park would be home to major technology players and the place where groundbreaking 
and  innovative  ideas  would  emerge.  One  of  the  Park’s  largest  tenants,  The  University  of 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  (UTT),  would  provide  the  necessary  synergy  between  industry  and 
academia  in  bringing  emerging  technologies  to  market.  Unfortunately,  despite  several 
expressions of interest, Tamana InTech Park is yet to sign one tenant. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  brings  me  to  my  second  lesson.  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s 
experience  with  Tamana  InTech  Park  shows  that  governments  cannot  build  ecosystems 
alone. Governments should engage the private sector, ideally from the start, and let it keep 
or  acquire  a  significant  stake  in  the  ecosystem’s  success.  One  way  the  Government  of 
Trinidad and Tobago could avoid problems such as the empty buildings in Tamana InTech 
Park would be to seek matching funds from private investors, either locally or overseas.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  government  can  directly  approach  technology  investment  firms  and  technology 
researchers  to  determine  what  they  need  to  develop  a  world-class  industry.  If  the  private 
investor  then  offers  to  match  say  half  of  the  funds,  ambitions  would  be  tempered  and 
targeted to meet the specific needs of the market. Furthermore, requiring matching funds not 
only ensures the private sector is willing to risk its own money but also tests the potential of 
the technology or investment firm. Several venture capital programs such as Israel’s Yozma, 
the  New  Zealand  Venture  Investment  Fund,  and  Brazil’s  INOVAR  Seed  Fund  have  all 
developed successful matching mechanisms for private investors. 
In this regard, I throw out a challenge to the Caribbean private sector. Tamana InTech Park 
is  an  opportunity  to  get off  the  sidelines  and  into  the  game.  Bring  your money,  bring  your 
technology  and,  like  all  risky  ventures,  you  may  or  may  not  have  the  opportunity  to  reap 
substantial rewards. 
My  third  and  final  lesson  is  that  small,  open  Caribbean  economies  need  to favor  scale-up 
rather than start-up ventures. Here is a thought-provoking question: Would you allocate more 
of society’s resources to giving birth to more babies or to raising children well? Many parents 
in the audience might agree that the long, complicated and often thankless job of growing a 
healthy, educated and moral child seems more challenging than giving birth. 
In  the  context  of  enterprise  creation,  there  has  been  a  dramatic  proliferation  of  start-up 
programs around the world: Start-up America, Start-up Chile, Start-up Russia and dozens of 
others. I believe this sends two flawed messages. The first is that the most difficult task of the 
entrepreneur  is  to  launch  the  venture.  The  second  is  that  the  more  start-ups,  the  more 
successful the program. 
Since  small  size  is  the  major  constraint  to  economic  growth  in  the  Caribbean,  there  is  a 
compelling  argument  for  policymakers  to  stop  treating  the  quantity  of  start-ups  as  an 
indicator  of  success  and  to  start  looking  at  the  quality  of  those  start-ups  that  grow  and 
eventually scale-up. One high-potential venture which grows to 100 people in five years does 
create  the  same  number  of  jobs  as  50  bottom-of-the-pyramid  ventures  which  stagnate  at 
2 people.  But  many  experts  argue  that  the  high-potential  venture  has  a  much  greater 
economic impact than the small-scale venture. 
Contrary to popular opinion, high-potential is not always synonymous with high-tech. And it is 
not the surest path to competitiveness and prosperity. In fact, Caribbean economies may get 
more  development  “bang  for  the  buck”  by  supporting  “low  tech”  sectors  such  as  food 
processing  and  forestry  than  by  trying  to  develop  a  few  high-tech  niche  products  and 
industries.  In  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  for  example,  the  agricultural  sector  offers  many  high-
potential,  low-tech,  foreign  exchange  generating  business  opportunities  such  as  cocoa, 
pineapple, tilapia and coconut, waiting to be fully exploited by private investors. 
In  closing,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  return  to  where  I  started  –  Christopher  Columbus. 
Columbus might not have been the great hero that history books make him out to be. Even 
so, by charting a route to the New World, he showed that confident entrepreneurs with the 
backing  of  venture  capitalists  willing  to  take  great  risks  can  achieve  world-changing 
disruptions. 
Five centuries and nearly twenty five years later, it is time for the Caribbean to continue the 
venture capital voyage started by the master entrepreneur, Columbus. 
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
