  Charles I Plosser: Monetary rules – theory and practice 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the Frameworks for Central Banking in the Next Century 
Policy Conference, Hoover Institution, Stanford, CA, 30 May 2014. 
 The view expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
President Plosser presented related remarks on May 28, 2014, at the 2014 Bank of Japan – Institute for Monetary 
and Economic Studies Conference. 
Highlights 
• 
  President Charles Plosser discusses his views on the benefits of a systematic and 
rule-like approach to monetary policy. 
President Plosser outlines his proposals to indicate the likely behavior of the policy 
rate based on a few different Taylor-like rules that have been consistent with past 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  are  robust  to  our  uncertainties  regarding  the  true 
economic model. 
President  Plosser  believes  that  the  model  created  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Board 
staff,  called  FRB/US,  seems  to  be  a  reasonable  starting  point  for  providing 
economic  forecasts  based  on  those  rule-based  policies;  however,  other  models 
would be useful to consider. 
Introduction 
I would like to thank John Taylor for inviting me to participate in this panel discussion about a 
subject  that  I  feel  is  very  important.  Rules-based  policy  is  a  topic  that  I  have  discussed 
numerous  times  in  the  past  few  years,  urging  policymakers  to  seek  a  more  systematic 
approach to policymaking. I am particularly honored to be on a panel with my colleague John 
Williams, whose research in this area has been an important influence on my views, as well 
as Tom Sargent. In Tom’s case, there probably isn’t an economist in this room who hasn’t 
been influenced by his work and his contributions to economics. But before I go any further, I 
should  begin  with  the  usual  disclaimer  that  my  views  are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily 
reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market 
Committee (FOMC). 
The theoretical justification for rules 
The theory part of this session’s title is well established. In their Nobel Prize-winning work, 
Finn Kydland and Ed Prescott demonstrated that a credible commitment by policymakers to 
behave in a systematic, rule-like manner over time leads to better outcomes than discretion.1 
Since  then,  numerous  papers  using  a  variety  of  models  have  investigated  the  benefits  of 
rule-like  behavior  in  monetary  policy  and  found  that  there  are  indeed  significant  benefits.2 
Policies characterized by commitment have been shown to lead to more economic stability – 
lower and less volatile inflation and less volatile output. In fact, the mainstream theoretical 
                                                
1   Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” 
Journal of Political Economy, 85 (June 1977), pp. 473–91. 
2   For  an  excellent  overview,  see  Richard  Clarida,  Jordi  Gali,  and  Mark  Gertler,  “The  Science  of  Monetary 
Policy,” Journal of Economic Literature (December 1999), pp. 1661–1707. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  models that we use for monetary and macroeconomic analysis are built on the notion that 
monetary policy is conducted in a rule-like manner. 
The practice 
The  practice  part  of  the  session  title  has  proven  to  be  a  bit  more  elusive.  The  science  of 
monetary policy has not progressed to the point where we can specify the optimal rule for 
setting  monetary  policy.  The  reason  is  that  optimal  rules,  that  is,  those  that  maximize 
economic welfare, are highly dependent on the particular model from which they are derived, 
and there is no broad-based consensus for the right model. More relevant is the finding that 
the optimal rule for one model can produce very bad outcomes in another model. In addition, 
optimal  rules  can  often  be  quite  complex,  thus  making  them  difficult  to  implement  and  to 
communicate to the public. In other words, they may not be very transparent. 
However,  these  limitations  to  implementing  optimal  policy  rules  should  not  deter  us  from 
efforts  to  adopt  a  more  systematic  rule-like  approach  to  the  conduct  of  policy.  There  has 
been a great deal of progress made in identifying simple rules that appear to perform well in 
a  variety  of  models  and  environments.  Such  robust  rules  can  form  a  basis  for  developing 
more systematic, rule-like policymaking. 
One important and desirable characteristic of a systematic and rule-like approach to policy 
relates to communication. In particular, it is an approach that is easily communicated to the 
public  and  thus  greatly  improves  the  transparency  and  predictability  of  monetary  policy, 
which  reduces  surprises.  The  public  and  markets  are  more  informed  about  the  course  of 
monetary policy because they understand how policymakers are likely to react to changing 
economic  circumstances.  Equally  important  in  my  view  is  that  greater  clarity  about  the 
policymakers’ reaction function strengthens accountability and thus can serve to preserve the 
central bank’s independence. 
The most well-known simple rule, of course, is the one proposed by John Taylor in 1993.3 
The Taylor rule and the family of rules it has inspired call for setting the nominal fed funds 
rate based on three factors: the economy’s long-run real interest rate plus the Fed’s target 
rate of inflation, the deviation of inflation from the central bank’s target, and the departure of 
real GDP from some measure of “potential” GDP. The rule implies, for example, that when 
inflation is above target, the funds rate should increase by more than one-for-one with the 
deviation, and when GDP is below “potential,” the funds rate should be reduced. 
The attractiveness of Taylor-like rules for monetary policy goes beyond their intuitive appeal 
or the fact that they seem to describe the actual behavior of monetary policy reasonably well. 
Taylor-like rules tend to fall in the class of those rules that are robust. That is, they yield good 
results in a variety of theoretical settings. This feature is of enormous practical importance. 
Given our uncertainty about the true model of the economy, knowing that systematic policy in 
the  form  of  a  Taylor-like  rule  delivers  good  outcomes  in  a  variety  of  models  means  that 
simple, robust rules can provide useful guidance for policy. 
Given model uncertainty and data measurement problems, there are, of course, limitations to 
the use of a simple rule. The rule is basically intended to work well on average, but central 
banks  look  at  many  variables  in  determining  policy.  There  inevitably  will  be  times  when 
economic developments fall outside the scope of our models and warrant unusual monetary 
policy  action.  Events  such  as  9/11,  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers,  and  the  1987  stock  market  crash  may  require  departures  from  a  simple  rule. 
Having articulated a rule guiding policymaking in normal times, however, policymakers will be 
expected to explain the departures from the rule in these unusual circumstances. With a rule 
                                                
3   John  B.  Taylor,  “Discretion  Versus  Policy  Rules  in  Practice,”  Carnegie-Rochester  Series  on  Public  Policy, 
North-Holland, 39, 1993, pp. 195–214. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  as  a  baseline,  departures  can  be  quantified  and  inform  us  how  excessively  tight  or  easy 
policy  might  be  relative  to  normal.  If  the  events  are  temporary,  policymakers  will  have  to 
explain  how  and  when  policy  is  likely  to  return  to  normal.  Thus,  a  simple  rule  provides  a 
valuable benchmark for assessing the appropriate stance of policy. That makes it a useful 
tool to enhance effective communication and transparency. 
Rules and forward guidance 
In addition to providing important guidance for current policy decisions, Taylor-like rules can 
also be extremely useful in providing guidance for the expected future path of policy. Such 
forward  guidance  has  received  a  good  deal  of  attention  recently.  One  reason  for  this 
increased attention is that short-term rates have been constrained by the zero lower bound. 
Thus, forward guidance and communication regarding future policy decisions take on greater 
significance. 
However, forward guidance is not a separate or independent policy tool. Its effectiveness is 
intimately related to other features of monetary policy. Monetary policy should be thought of 
more holistically, if you will. How effective we are with forward guidance, for example, can 
only be assessed or thought of in the context of a central bank’s overall approach to policy, 
including its approach to communication and transparency. 
In  particular,  I  see  a  credible,  rule-like  approach  to  policy  and  the  general  openness  and 
transparency of the policy process as essential elements in shaping expectations. Indeed, a 
commitment to a policy framework that is systematic and rule-like provides the foundation for 
establishing expectations concerning the future path of policy and thus forward guidance. 
Rules as benchmarks: A step forward 
So from my perspective, using Taylor-like rules to shape current and expected future policy 
is an important and useful part of any monetary policy framework. The operational question 
is how might one go about such an effort? This is not a trivial assignment. As I mentioned at 
the outset, it has proved to be quite elusive. 
In  a  stylized  world,  where  there  is  a  single  monetary  policymaker  who  has  considerable 
confidence in a model of the economy, communication would include a forecast derived from 
this  model.  This  forecast  would  incorporate  a  policy  path  that  yields  the  best  economic 
outcomes based on that single policymaker’s views. 
Unfortunately,  we  don’t  live  in  such  a  world.  Monetary  policymaking  is  often  conducted  by 
committee, and divergent views can and often do exist. While this can be clumsy at times, 
such governance mechanisms ensure that various views are heard in an environment that 
promotes better decisions and better outcomes. 
Nevertheless,  I  believe  that given  the  nature  of U.S.  institutional  arrangements, Taylor-like 
rules can serve a very useful purpose. Specifically, they could underpin the construction of a 
periodic detailed monetary policy report, a feature of communication that has been adopted 
by  many  central  banks  around  the  world.  However,  while  these  reports  have  many 
similarities, there are some key differences. 
Many central banks include detailed forecasts in their published reports and highlight risks 
along  with  the  outlook. This  communication  about  the  evolution  of key  economic  variables 
that shape policy is important, but there is still debate about the nature of the forecasts and 
the assumptions that underlie them. 
A critical piece of a forecast emanating from the central bank is the nature of the future path 
of the policy rate. Should a central bank’s published forecast be based on its assessment of 
what the policy rate path is likely to be, perhaps based on its reaction function, or should the 
forecast be based on an interest rate path that is more arbitrary, such as a constant interest 
rate path or one that is related to market expectations? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  An alternative approach that could easily be adopted would be to indicate the likely behavior 
of interest rates based on a few different Taylor-like rules that have been consistent with the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  the  past  or  ones  that  are  considered  robust  across  various 
models of the economy. Doing so would require agreement on a particular model in order to 
produce the resulting rule-based behavior. For the Fed, the economic model developed by 
the Board’s staff, called FRB/US, seems like a reasonable place to start. Such an exercise 
could  also  be  enhanced,  I  believe,  by  using  some  of  the  dynamic  stochastic  general 
equilibrium, or DSGE, models that have been developed within the Federal Reserve System. 
The FOMC could then use its biannual monetary policy reports to communicate the results 
and  whether  and  why  it  anticipates  policy  to  be  somewhat  more  restrained  or  more 
accommodative  relative  to  the  projections  given  by  the  various  rules.  The  monetary  policy 
report could also include various views that may differ from the baseline summaries. Policy 
statements  between  reports  can  refer  back  to  the  reports  to  provide  consistency  in  the 
Committee’s communications with the public. 
Performing  this  exercise  would  illustrate  the  various  dimensions  of  uncertainty  that 
policymakers  face.  For  example,  there  is  model  uncertainty,  forecast  uncertainty,  and  the 
variations implied by different rules. Many central banks use fan charts and other devices to 
highlight such bands of uncertainty about the forecast, and the Fed should do the same. It 
would provide a better sense of the likely direction of policy and the variables most related 
systematically to that policy. Further, this type of communication would push the FOMC to 
conduct  policy  in  a  more  systematic  manner,  which  I  believe  will  lead  to  better  economic 
outcomes over the longer run. 
Conclusions 
I am fully aware that we need to take great care in providing more specific forms of forward 
guidance so that we avoid a false sense of certainty and a mistaken sense of commitment. 
Yet, 
I  believe  systematic  rule-like  monetary  policymaking  can  enhance  economic 
performance,  and  therefore,  I  favor  clearer  communication  concerning  the  formulation  of 
policy. 
Providing  information  about  how  the  policy  path  is  likely  to  evolve  forces  policymakers  to 
think more deeply and more systematically about policy. Communication about that path, in 
turn, gives the public a much deeper understanding of the analytical approach that guides 
monetary policy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
