Yaseen Anwar: Fiscal and monetary policies 
Speech by Mr Yaseen Anwar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at National Defence 
University, Islamabad, 4 November 2013. 
 Respected guests, esteemed servicemen, and students of this prestigious institution, 
Assalam-o-Alaikum! 
I  am  delighted  to  be  invited  to  the  National  Defence  University  to  talk  about  Fiscal  and 
Monetary Policies in general and in the context of Pakistan. 
It is a fact, not many students like economics as a subject. But it is also true that not many 
subjects impact our lives as does economics. It is therefore not surprising that everyone likes 
to  jump  into  discussion  on  economic  issues  even  if  their  knowledge  (on  the  subject)  is 
rudimentary.  One  just  has  to  flip  thru  channels  on  TV  to  see  the  variety  of  views  on  the 
subject, which are not always correct or informed. Over the years SBP through its various 
publications  and  seminars,  has  been  trying  to  enhance  the  understanding  of  the  general 
public  on  various  economic  issues.  I  would  like  to  think  that  it  is  partly  because  of  SBP’s 
efforts, that the general public today is much more aware of economic issues than they were, 
say ten years ago. 
I am sure you already have heard a great deal about monetary and fiscal policies, and there 
may be little I can add to enhance your knowledge on the subject. What I can do however, is 
to  try  to  bridge  the  gap  between  theory  and  practice.  In  text  books,  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies  appear  simple  enough  and  desired  objectives  can  be  achieved  by  manipulating 
policy instruments. The question arises: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The reason is that policy goals often conflict with each other, and economic variables cannot 
be  determined  in  isolation.  Therefore,  while  it  is  important  to  know  about  the  policies 
individually it is equally if not more important to understand how these policies interact with 
each other. 
Broadly  speaking,  monetary  policy  involves  central  banks’  use  of  policy  instruments  to 
influence  interest  rates  and  money  supply  in  order  to  keep  overall  prices  and  financial 
markets  stable.  The  policy  could  be  “expansionary”,  to  stimulate  economic  growth  or 
“contractionary”, to check the rising price levels (inflation). 
Fiscal  policy,  on  the  other  hand,  is  government’s  management  of  its  revenues  and 
expenditures  to  achieve  economic  stability.  The  revenues  mainly  come  through  direct  and 
indirect taxes besides non-tax collections through privatization and auction of license (like 3G 
licenses  in  telecom  sector).  Hence  one  can  say  that  Fiscal  Policy  is  managed  by  the 
Government whereas Monetary Policy is conducted by the Central Bank. 
Best  practices  require  that  both  policies  are  coordinated  in  order  to  achieve  the  common 
objectives of financial and economic stabilization to promote sustainable growth. 
The global financial crisis and the subsequent recession, particularly in the developed world, 
have,  however,  elicited  unconventional  changes  in  the  design  and  implementation  of 
monetary as well as fiscal policies. The magnitude and the spread of the crisis have not only 
tested  all  the  policy  options  available  to  policymakers  across  the  board  but  have  also 
Why do countries find it so difficult to get their policy mix right? 
Why countries cannot strictly control the supply of money to keep inflation in check? 
Why do countries struggle to smooth out economic fluctuations? 
Why are countries’ fiscal accounts always imbalanced? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
renewed debate on the longstanding pillars of macroeconomics. Monetary authorities in the 
advanced  economies  responded  by  aggressively  cutting  policy  rates  and  adopting  several 
other “unconventional” measures aimed at providing stimulus to the economy directly. These 
measures  represent  important  policy  relevance  for  the  existing  institutional  framework  and 
policy instruments across world economies. 
Governments, these days, through their fiscal policy, do not limit themselves to accounting 
for  revenues,  expenditures  and  budget  making.  Nor  do  they  restrict  themselves  to  just 
mobilizing, allocating and redistributing national resources in the short and medium term. The 
ever  changing  economic  landscape  has  forced  countries  to  expand  the  ambit  of  their 
policies, both monetary and fiscal, to ensure financial stability as  well.  The global financial 
crisis of 2008 is one such example where the governments of the developed world (like USA 
and UK) had to step in and bail out their distressed financial institutions, at an unprecedented 
scale, using tax payer’s money. 
The  ripple  effects  of  the  crisis,  which  primarily  began  in  the  developed  countries,  soon 
spread  globally.  Especially,  those  countries  which  had  borrowed  beyond  their  capacity  to 
repay were the hardest hit. As cheap liquidity dried up and lenders started demanding higher 
interest  rates  or  in  some  cases  even  refused  to  lend,  highly  indebted  countries  of  Europe 
such as Greece and Italy, then had to agree to severe austerity measures proposed by the 
Troika  (IMF,  European  Commissions  and  European  Central  Bank)  as  part  of  the  bailout 
terms. The imprudent fiscal policies of the governments of those countries were to blame for 
their plight. 
* 
The  use  of  monetary  policy  was  also  broadened  from  keeping  prices  in  check  through 
optimal  determination  of  interest  rates,  to  fighting  recessions.  During  the  crisis,  apart  from 
utilizing  standard  tools  such  as  interest  rates,  central  banks  around  the  world  used 
unconventional measures such as quantitative easing (QE) to provide cheap liquidity in the 
market  to  stem  erosion  of  investor  confidence.  Thus,  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  are  no 
longer restricted to their traditional roles. 
In  Pakistan,  however,  the  situation  under  which  the  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  have  to 
operate  is  fundamentally  different  and  far  more  complicated.  First,  we  have  not  had 
sustained periods of political and economic stability in recent history. We have been at the 
forefront of the war on terror for over a decade now. Besides damage to life and property, 
this participation has resulted in a huge strain on our country’s meager resources, which has 
not  been  fully  compensated  for.  Second,  the  power  sector  crisis  has  crippled  a  significant 
part of economic activity. Inappropriate policies, which offered guaranteed equity returns and 
disregarded what is an appropriate fuel mix for the country,1 price distortions, expensive and 
poorly  targeted  subsidies,  inefficiencies  in  the  energy  supply  and  distribution,  and  low 
recoveries have resulted in a crisis gripping the power sector. Persistent energy shortages 
have resulted in a decline in the productive capacity of our industrial sector which has lead to 
an  increase  in  unemployment.  Third,  lack  of  diversification  and  innovation  in  the  economy 
combined with scarcity of entrepreneurial talent has made us depend on a few sectors for 
economic growth and export earnings, such as textiles. 
Fourth, instead of exploring and developing abundant natural resources in the country, we 
import a number of essential goods like crude oil, that are, to a large extent, price inelastic 
(FYI every $5 reduction in price saver us $750 million in FX for the year). Fifth, from general 
public to higher echelons there is a general culture of tax evasion which limits the ability of 
the government to raise an appropriate amount of revenues. Sixth, a sizeable chunk of our 
                                                
1  Munir, Kamal A. and Khalid, Salman. 2012. “Pakistan’s Power Crisis: How Did We Get Here?” The Lahore 
Journal of Economics 17: 73–82. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
economy  is  in  the informal  sector  which  remains  undocumented  and  therefore  beyond  the 
tax  net.  Seventh,  public  sector  enterprises  instead  of  being  a  source  of  revenue  for  the 
government eat up scarce resources every year. 
Finally,  we  have  had  the  misfortune  of  sufferings  due  to  natural  disasters  i.e.  floods  and 
earthquakes in the recent past. All these endogenous and exogenous factors have resulted 
in domestic and external sector deficits with the private sector unwilling to invest and limited 
participation of foreign investors. 
Given these circumstances and successive government’s failure to implement major reforms, 
fiscal policy in Pakistan in recent years has mostly been “fire-fighting”. We have been trying 
to  bridge  the  gap  between  growing  expenditures  amid  falling  revenues  mostly  through 
borrowings (both internally and externally). 
Since the year FY06, we have not witnessed any substantial primary surplus in our budget. 
The  current  revenues  have  not  been  enough  to  account  for  current  expenditures  of  the 
government.  If  we  add  to  it  the  ballooning  interest  payments,  our  budget  deficit  has  been 
hovering around 6.5 percent of GDP, on average, over the last five years (FY09–FY13). In 
FY13  alone  our  budget  deficit  was  8  percent  of  GDP,  which  is  one  of  the  highest  for 
Pakistan. 
The  primary  reason  for  these  large  budget  deficits  has  been  low  tax  collections.  Although 
there has been a consistent gap between Federal Board of Revenue’s (FBR) budget targets 
and actual outcomes in the last few years, the gap of Rs445 billion in FY13 was exceptionally 
high. In fact, this was more than the cumulative shortfall of Rs349 billion during the last five 
years. Not surprisingly, therefore, the estimated fiscal deficit of 8.0 percent of GDP in FY13 
was considerably higher than the budgeted target of 4.7 percent of GDP. 
Development  expenditures,  needed  to  sustain  economic  growth  in  the  wake  of  receding 
private investments, have remained in a narrow range of 2.8 percent to 3.6 percent of GDP, 
during  the  last  five  years.  On  the  other  hand,  debt  servicing  to  current  expenditure  has 
jumped up from 35 percent in FY08 to 42 percent in FY13. This has resulted in average real 
economic growth remaining around 2.9 percent during the last five years. In fact the stock of 
government’s  domestic  debt  i.e.  borrowings  has  almost  tripled  since  FY08  to  reach 
Rs9.5 trillion as of end FY13. 
That  the  private  sector  investment  is  being  crowded  out  due  to  excessive  government 
borrowing from the banking system does not bode well for the external front as well. Despite 
SBP’s  incentive  scheme  for  exporters,  the  exports  have  remained  stagnant  at  around 
10 percent  of  GDP  while  imports  have  increased  to  17  percent  of  GDP  over  the  last  five 
years. The resulting trade deficit coupled with meager net capital and financial flows and the 
external debt servicing costs put tremendous pressure on the reserve position of the central 
bank. A ray of hope is our workers’ remittances, which were around USD14 billion in FY13 
with a 9% increase in the first quarter of this financial year. However, unless we are able to 
bring  our  trade  deficit  to  a  manageable  level  and  create  an  enabling  environment  to  help 
increase  net foreign  capital  and  financial  flows,  workers’  remittances  alone  cannot  provide 
sustained support to our reserves position. 
Under these circumstances, the Government had to approach the IMF again for a medium 
term loan (i.e. Extended Fund Facility or EFF) to ease pressure on our balance of payments. 
Being in the IMF program increases the chances of receiving a higher amount of financial 
inflows besides stabilizing markets and improving the credibility of the country. 
* 
As a consequence of dwindling foreign inflows and low tax collection, the government had to 
resort to high level of borrowings from the banking system. During FY13, it borrowed over 
Rs1.4 trillion from the banking system of which Rs506 billion was borrowed directly from the 
central bank and the rest from the scheduled banks. Considering that the proposed outlay of 
the entire budget was Rs3.2 trillion, this volume of borrowing constituted 43 percent of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
budget.  This  trend  is  indeed  problematic  and  does  not  augur  well  for  the  economic 
management and growth of the country. 
Given this fiscal dominance and its impact on the balance sheet of the central bank, the role 
of monetary policy has been severely restrained. Some might argue that the State Bank, as 
an  independent  organization,  should  have  taken  a  tough  stand  against  the  government’s 
insatiable bank borrowings. But, it is imperative to understand that any disruption in payment 
systems can potentially result in as negative repercussions for the economy as its inflationary 
consequences.  This  is  the  reason  that  SBP,  despite  not  being  comfortable  to  the  idea, 
allowed the government to borrow from the banking system. Nevertheless, this trend needs 
to be checked in future. 
Notwithstanding  constraints,  SBP  took  several  measures  to  achieve  price  stability  and 
economic  growth.  In  addition,  it  also  took  steps  to  safeguard  depositors’  interest  in  recent 
years.  SBP  followed  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  by  lowering  interest  rates  by 
500 basis points over the last two years in the wake of declining inflation. It also undertook 
interventions  to  contain  volatility  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  It  calibrated  its  liquidity 
operations  in  a  manner  that  balanced  financial  stability  considerations  and  medium-term 
inflation risks. 
Moreover,  to  protect  the  depositors  of  the  banking  system  from  any  undue  decrease  in 
interest rates by the banks, SBP imposed a minimum rate of 6 percent on savings deposits 
and  has  recently  linked  this  minimum  rate  to  its  repo  rate.  The  minimum  rate  on  savings 
deposits now stands at 6.5 percent. 
As a result of these actions, the weighted average lending rate declined by 423 basis points 
by  end-July  2013  while  deposits  of  the  banking  system  grew  by  15.9  percent  and  the 
depreciation of the exchange rate was limited to 5.1 percent in FY13. Moreover, a declining 
interest  rate  environment  did  contribute  in  a  marginal  pick  up  in  loans  to  some  sectors  of 
private businesses in FY13 and Q1-FY14. 
However,  as  has  been  the  case  for  some  years  now,  most  of  the  credit  disbursed  during 
FY13 was utilized for working capital requirements only; loans availed for fixed investments 
show retirement. Thus, there has been no real broad-based recovery in credit utilization by 
the private sector. As a result, real private investment expenditures have declined for the fifth 
consecutive year, reaching 8.7 as percent of GDP in FY13. 
This shows that higher interest rates were not the major constraining reason for the private 
sector  credit  off-take.  Two  fundamental  factors  responsible  for  the  lackluster  increase  in 
credit  demand  are:  persistence  of  energy  shortages  and  deterioration  in  law  and  order 
conditions. Unless we overcome these, chances of reviving the economy through monetary 
policy stimulus would remain thin. 
Despite  being  in  the  IMF  program,  going  forward,  however,  the  challenges  remain.  The 
pressure  on  the  external  front  has  not  fully  abated.  The  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the 
central  bank  as  of  October  end,  2013  stand  at  US$4.3  billion  and  rupee  dollar  parity  at 
Rs106 per dollar. Moreover, there are certain performance criteria for the IMF loan that we 
have  to  meet. We  also  need  to  implement  strict  reforms  on  the fiscal  side.  It  needs  to  be 
understood  that  these  reforms  are  absolutely  essential.  The  aim  of  these  reforms  is  to 
balance the budget in the medium term and reduce public debt to create space for private 
sector investments. 
Further, we need to be highly cautious and selective in terms of public expenditures as our 
debt burden continues to grow. It should be kept in mind that excessive public indebtedness 
cannot  be  cured  with  more  debt.  No  government  can  sustain  itself  for  long  by  borrowing 
heavily  from the  banking  system. The  unsustainable  level  of  public  debt  and  its  borrowing 
costs can severely impact the economy. Some countries in the European Union, like Greece 
and Cyprus are an example. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Furthermore, a host of issues need to be tackled including but not limited to law and order 
situation  and  energy  shortfalls.  A  sustainable  level  of  public  debt  will  create  space  for  the 
development  expenditure  to  build  infrastructure  for  sustainable  economic  growth;  the 
deterioration of law and order situation is a big barrier and erodes investors’ confidence, both 
local as well as overseas; and the energy shortages hamper industrial growth and hence the 
real growth of the economy. A long term and sustainable solution to these problems should 
top the economic agenda of the government. 
In the end, I would  like to say that if we commit ourselves to making tough decisions and 
implement reforms in the fiscal and external sectors then the problems faced by us can be 
resolved. 
Thank you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
