 Salvatore Rossi: Finance for growth 
 Speech  by  Mr  Salvatore  Rossi,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  Banca 
Popolare di Sondrio, Sondrio, 12 September 2014. 
 Growth 
Italy has long strayed from the path of economic growth. Common sense tells us this is so 
and the data confirm it. 
In  the  last  six  years  the  recession  has  doubled  the  rate  of  unemployment  and  eroded 
11 percentage points from per capita GDP. But our problems go back much further than that: 
in  2008,  on  the  eve  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  average  amount  of  goods  and  services 
produced by Italian workers was basically unchanged from 1995. In the same period other 
countries,  spurred  by  the  technological  paradigm  shift  of  ICT,  had  seen  their  productivity 
rates soar. 
The  strong  growth  in  employment  that  was  nevertheless  recorded  in  Italy  in  the  pre-crisis 
years,  favoured  by  the  introduction  of  more  flexible  work  contracts,  proved  insufficient  to 
offset the effect of the stagnation of productivity on households’ disposable income. At the 
outbreak of the crisis, for the average household this was at the same level as in the mid-
1990s and only the progressive reduction of the saving rate had enabled modest growth in 
consumption. 
The  diminishing  ability  to  generate  income  heralds  a  decline  in  living  standards,  both  with 
respect to this country’s past and to the world’s main players. This is all the more worrying 
when  one  considers that  in forty  years’  time  the  ratio  of  people  of  working  age (20–69)  to 
elderly retirees will have halved, from 4 to 2. Even just to maintain per capita living standards 
at their current levels would require an increase in labour productivity of 25 per cent. 
More jobs, more output: but how to achieve both together? Certainly, the recession has been 
keeping  Italian  consumers  and  investors  in  a  state  of  suspension  for  too  long  now,  more 
because of uncertainty and poor confidence than a lack of income. Stimulus must therefore 
come from macroeconomic policy. At European level, monetary policy is already acting as a 
spur and is stepping up its action.1 At national level, fiscal policy can only change the mix: 
fewer  taxes,  less  unproductive  expenditure.  Most  of  the  government’s  efforts  should  go  to 
tackling the long-standing failings of our society, those that condition Italy’s entrepreneurial 
spirit. 
Jobs  and  productivity  are  only  formed  within  businesses.  The  State  cannot  create  them 
directly and would not know how to. The rules of good business have been neglected in Italy 
for  almost  half  a  century:  by  many  entrepreneurs  reluctant  to  expand  their  firms,  and  by 
public and political opinion prone to defending small and large rents. 
A good business is one that researches and develops new products and new methods, and 
pursues  new  markets.  In  the  globalized  economy,  dominated  by  technologies  that  convey 
information  and  alter  consumer  tastes  at  the  speed  of  light,  the  small,  mature  firm  that  is 
typically  Italian  does  not  have  a  very  bright  future;  sometimes  it  does  not  even  have  a 
present.  Of  the  main  European  countries,  Italy  is  the  one  with  the  widest  productivity  gap 
between small and medium- large businesses.2 Businesses start out small everywhere, but 
                                                
1  ECB (2014). 
2  Based on data provided by the Structural Business Statistics of Eurostat, in 2010 added value per employee in 
Italian  firms  with  more  than  250  workers  was  approximately  three  times  that  of  firms  with  fewer  than 
10 workers; in equivalent firms in Spain it was double that of firms with fewer than 10 workers, in Germany 
one and a half times, and in France more than one fourth greater. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  then they either die or grow rapidly. In Italy, if they do not die, they remain in the small-size 
limbo for a long time: the proportion of small, mature firms (those in operation for at least ten 
years) is over 50 per cent here, compared with 45 per cent in Spain and 40 per cent in the 
United States and France.3  
Encouraging  new  start-ups,  convincing  existing  entrepreneurs  to  expand  their  firms  by 
separating them from the founding family’s fortunes, rewarding courage and inventiveness, 
and discouraging rents: these are the priorities of economic policy in Italy today. Reforming 
the bloated fiscal and legislative systems and unravelling the tangle of red tape that litters the 
path  of  entrepreneurs  would  enable  Italy  to  move  up  several  places  in  the  global  Doing 
Business  rankings  and  spark  a  virtuous  circle  between  favourable  expectations  that  then 
become self-fulfilling; it would free the energies that this country still has in abundance. 
Finance4 
In the meantime, however, the recession is burning up resources and hopes. In the political 
debate reported  in Italy’s  daily  press, the  hunt  is  on for  the  culprits  of  the failed  economic 
recovery of these months. Banks are a recurring target, accused by some of denying credit 
to firms and households, thereby impeding the country’s exit from the crisis. But for such an 
accusation  to  make  sense,  first  the  fact  has  to  be  established  and  then,  to  use  the  legal 
terms, it must be proved that there was negligence or malice aforethought, in other words 
that  banks  –  currently  lumped together  in  a general  category  –  are  refusing to  lend  to  the 
economy either because they would rather use the money available for unspecified financial 
adventures (malice) or out of incompetence or laziness (negligence). 
Let’s look at the facts by taking two snapshots of the situation of bank lending, one at the end 
of June 2008, immediately before the financial crisis erupted fully, and the other at the end of 
June  2014.  In  this  period  total  outstanding  bank  loans  to  Italian  firms  declined  from 
€860 billion to €830 billion, a lower level certainly, but not by much. In the initial phase of the 
crisis, however, credit had risen to over €910 billion in December 2011, so the reduction with 
respect to the peak was €80 billion. As a share of GDP (53 per cent), though, bank lending 
today  is  still  higher  than,  say,  in  Germany  and  France.  Lending  to  households,  instead, 
expanded  in the six  years, from €520 to €600 billion. In the meantime, wholesale funding, 
primarily  by  foreign  banks  and  large  international  investors,  fell  dramatically,  from  almost 
€800 to €550 billion, mainly owing in the last three years to the loss of confidence in Italy 
following the global markets’ reassessment of our sovereign debt. Banks have managed to 
combat the drying up of foreign funding by increasing domestic retail funding and above all 
by  participating  in  the  long-term  refinancing  operations  of  the  European  Central  Bank. 
Without these, the credit squeeze would have been much more severe. 
This  was  not  the  main  cause  of  the  deterioration,  however.  Due  to  the  persistence  of  the 
recession  between  2008  and  2013  the  total  stock  of  non-performing  loans  to  firms  and 
households  increased  by  just  over  €100  billion  to  €320  billion  or  by  16  per  cent  of  total 
outstanding  loans.  As  far  as  it  is  possible  to  understand  from  a  comparison  of  data  that 
reflect very different national definitions, this is higher than the average level in Europe. The 
outcome, partly owing to increased reserve requirements, has been a dramatic fall in bank 
profits, while the riskiness of firms’ new credit demand has increased sharply. 
 
 
                                                
3  Criscuolo, Gal and Menon (2014). 
4  This section reprises and develops a line of thinking elaborated on in recent months by Visco (2013, 2014), 
Rossi (2013), and Panetta (2014). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Furthermore,  in  recent  years  the  banks  have  had  to  strengthen  their  capital  bases.  They 
were prompted to do so even more than by regulations and supervisors5 by the recession 
itself  (in  that  capital  must  be  proportional  to  the  riskiness  of  assets)  and  by  the  markets, 
where confidence in the banks most exposed to more risky sovereigns was faltering. Over 
the  six  years  Italian  banks  expanded  their  core  tier  one  capital  by  €50  billion,  from 
€134 billion to €184 billion. This capitalization drive  was sustained by raising equity on the 
market  while  at  the  same  time  retaining  earnings  –  an  arduous  combination,  as  potential 
subscribers  of the  capital  increases  had to  be offered  the  prospect  of good future returns. 
The banks’ shareholders were called on to bear the brunt of the problems of debtor firms, 
with loan write-downs totalling nearly €140 billion. 
From  the  banks’  standpoint,  the  situation  can  be  summarized  as  follows:  before  the  crisis 
bank credit was abundant because funding on the wholesale markets (mostly abroad) was 
easy and because given low borrower risk no massive loan loss provisions were required. 
With  crisis  and  recession,  both  of  these  conditions  vanished,  so  the  rational  course  for  a 
bank, in the interest first and foremost of the savers who entrust their resources for prudent 
investment,  is  to  slow  or  reduce  lending  to  the  firms  perceived  as  riskier  and  step  up 
investment  in  other,  less  risky  and  more  profitable  assets,  such  as  government  securities. 
Banks’ deleveraging was intensified by the sharp decline in credit demand from the less risky 
firms, many of which cut back or suspended planned investments. 
This straightforward analysis excludes the highly imaginative theory of “malice aforethought”. 
Let  us  now  consider  a  second  hypothesis,  namely  “negligence”,  i.e.  the  banks’  culpable 
incapacity  for  sagacious,  farsighted  assessment  of  individual  borrowers’  creditworthiness. 
Here,  judgment  must  be  more  nuanced.  The  heterogeneity  of  behaviour  among  banks 
makes  generic,  summary  judgment  inadvisable.  If  we  nevertheless  intend  to  consider  the 
system  as  a  whole,  it  would  seem  to  me  that  Italy  is  in  the  grip  of  a  perverse  interaction 
between  the  structural  characteristics  of  the  corporate  system  and  those  of  the  financial 
system. 
In too many cases Italian firms are not only small but financially fragile and bank- dependent. 
Their  financial  leverage  rose  prior  to  the  crisis  and  is  now  high  by  international  standards 
(44 per  cent).  Two  thirds  of  their  debt  is  bank  debt.  These  features  are  more  pronounced 
among  the  smaller  firms,  precisely  those  most  severely  affected  by  the  tightening  credit 
supply. For that matter, the typical features of Italian small businesses – diminutive size, little 
commitment of shareholder capital, lack of transparency – make it nearly impracticable for 
them  to  access  the  bond  and  equity  markets  directly,  even  if  they  wanted  to  (which  they 
rarely do). 
For its part, the Italian financial system is notoriously bank-centred. At the end of last year 
bank loans accounted for 40 per cent of the total financial liabilities of households and firms 
(financial debt plus corporate equity), compared with 15 per cent in the United States, 23 per 
cent  in  France,  and  30  per  cent  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Only  Germany,  another  “bank-
centred” economy, had a share comparable to Italy’s. Equity investment by venture capital 
and  private  equity  funds,  which  specialize  in  start-ups  and  stimulating  the  growth  of  small 
businesses, amounts to 0.2 per cent of GDP in Italy, as in Germany, or half as much as in 
France and a fifth as much as in Britain. 
For many years the Italian banking system favoured the family-based, fragmented structure 
of  its  business  customers  because  this  gave  them  positional  rents,  sheltering  them  from 
competition from other sources of funds, namely the financial and equity markets. Now the 
banking  system  has  become  polarized:  on  the  one  hand,  major  players  that  tend  to 
                                                
5  Many European banks brought forward their adjustment to the new Basel 3 regulatory framework and then 
readied themselves for the comprehensive assessment exercise under the Eurosystem’s Single Supervisory 
Mechanism. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  concentrate on the largest customers, using quantitative risk measurement methods; and on 
the other, a vast array of smaller banks, serving mainly small customers whose accounts are 
often inadequate and opaque, and accordingly require direct knowledge of the business. 
Such knowledge can be gained in two ways – by personal relationships or by analytical tools 
for assessing the firm’s technology and market characteristics. Both are useful, but each has 
a specific drawback. Personal relationships are more approximate and riskier, analytical tools 
costlier;  in  particular,  as  the  latter  have  variable  as  well  as  overhead  costs,  they  may  be 
prohibitive where the business and the loan are very small. Add the consideration that in the 
event of default the inefficiency of Italian civil justice sometimes makes it uneconomic even to 
initiate  a  credit recovery  action,  so that  banks  will  write  off  virtually  the entire  amount  of  a 
small non-performing loan, even if the expected loss, measured objectively, is limited. This 
practice impacts on banks’ lending decisions and the interest rates they charge. 
This  situation  would  appear  to  constitute  a  “market  failure”.  The  private  sector  parties, 
borrowers  and  lenders,  are  incapable  of  making  the  credit  mechanism  work  efficiently 
because each responds to incentives and disincentives that clash with the general interest. 
Small  businesses  want  to  stay  as  “opaque”  as  possible;  indeed,  they  are  accustomed  to 
understating  their  actual  earnings  for  tax  reasons.  And  in  some  instances  banks  do  not 
procure adequate facilities or methods for evaluating firms, it being more convenient, and in 
the short run less costly, to rely on personal relationships. The outcome is adverse selection 
and credit rationing.6 In some of the most pathological cases there have been outright bank 
failures. In short, if the hypothesis of “negligence” is well founded, it applies to both sides of 
the credit market. 
This vicious circle, in which ultimately everyone loses and nobody gains, must be broken. It 
is  a  life-or-death  question  for  the  many  Italian  SMEs  that,  while  severely  strained  by 
recession, still retain their markets, innovative capacity and technological assets, and have 
the potential to recover. Half of our GDP is produced by small to medium-sized firms with 
fewer than 250 employees. These SMEs must be helped to grow, not left to die when they 
are not in fact terminally ill. 
First of all, they should be enabled to get off the IV support of bank credit alone and learn to 
raise funds in the market as well. This will take time. In the short term no more than a fraction 
of bank credit can be readily replaced. So this market failure must be remedied, to the benefit 
of all, by public intervention. But what form should that intervention take? In any case, public 
intervention must be respectful of the market and compatible with the budget constraints. 
The main tools available are government guarantees7 and securitization. A very substantial 
contribution  could  also  come  from  legislative  and  regulatory  intervention  to  shorten  credit 
recovery  time  by  making  bankruptcy  procedures  simpler  and  more  efficient,  and  the 
securities collateral system more flexible.8  
Public guarantees offset the information shortfall between lenders and SMEs without taking 
the former’s place in assessing creditworthiness and without being a burden on the budget in 
the  immediate,  but  only  after  bankruptcy  is  announced  and  within  the  limit  of  the  ratio  of 
insolvencies  to  the  total  guarantees  granted.  A  good  example  is  already  provided  by  the 
Central  Guarantee  Fund  operating  under 
the  Ministry  for  Economic 
Development,  which  partially  guarantees  banks  that  grant  loans  to  small  firms  and 
participates in the latter’s screening. Since 2009 the Fund has granted guarantees on loans 
amounting  to  more  than  €40  billion.  The  scale  of  the  Fund’s  operations  could  be  further 
increased. 
the  aegis  of 
                                                
6  See, among others, Panetta (2014) and the classic Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) cited therein. 
7  Agenda possibile (2013), Panetta (2014). 
8  Haselmann, Pistor and Vig (2010). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Securitizations serve essentially to distribute the risk inherent in bank loans to SMEs among 
a large number of bank and non-bank institutional investors. In view of the small size of the 
loans, it is necessary to create asset-backed securities, i.e. packages of loans in the form of 
bonds, of which it is not too difficult to assess the quality, and place the various tranches with 
different  investors  according  to  their  risk  appetite.  Operations  can  be  carried  out  by  the 
originator banks themselves or by other financial entities. These instruments could also be 
backed  in  part  by  public  guarantees.  Notable  among  the  possible  investors  are  insurance 
companies,  which  are  often  hard  put  in  the  present  phase  of  the  cycle  to  find  desirable 
investments for their technical provisions in terms of risk/return and maturity. 
To  develop  such  a  market  some  regulatory  problems  must  be  overcome,  firstly  at 
international level. The global financial crisis has discredited instruments such as ABS, which 
were  abused  by  pushing  their  complexity  and  opacity  to  the  limit.  But  the  abuses  can  be 
forbidden without eliminating the instrument itself, which retains its rational basis. The ECB 
has  launched  a  very  large  programme  for  the  purchase  of  simple  and  transparent  ABS  in 
order among other objectives to facilitate the financing of SMEs. The Bank of Italy and Ivass 
are following the matter closely. With great rapidity this summer Ivass drafted amendments 
to the regulations on insurance companies’ investments consistent with the new legislative 
provisions introduced recently to increase the competitiveness of the Italian economy. The 
new prudential regulations, aimed at achieving greater diversification of risk, will also allow 
insurance companies to grant credit directly subject to well-defined limits and conditions. The 
second  public  consultation,  made  necessary  by  the  innovations  introduced  during  the 
conversion of the competitiveness decree law, is drawing to a close; Ivass will shortly issue 
the new regulations. 
However,  markets  able  to  channel  large  volumes  of  financial  resources  from  non-bank 
investors  to  SMEs  cannot  easily  be  created  from  one  day  to  the  next.  Even  when  the 
regulatory  questions  have  been  settled,  there  will  still  be  the  problem  of  the  information 
asymmetry between borrower firms and investors. Those who, better than others, know or 
understand the present and prospective conditions of firms, first and foremost the banks that 
originated the loans, therefore have an essential role to play. 
It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  in  Italy,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  main  problem 
regarding the functionality of the system lies in firms’ financial fragility. The most important 
task of public action is therefore to push firms towards equity financing rather than additional 
borrowing, using every possible means, regulatory and fiscal. But bank borrowing too can be 
made more rational by examining its technical forms. For example, traditional overdrafts are 
so widespread in Italy that they stand out by international standards. The fact that they do not 
establish  a  time  limit for  the  credit  actually  granted  creates  problems for  the  calculation of 
interest and lessens their eligibility as collateral; in order to accept such loans as collateral, 
the Bank of Italy has recently asked for the inclusion of specific contractual clauses. 
Using finance to the advantage of growth 
The question of what are the determinants of economic growth in the long term has been at 
the centre of economic analysis since this came into being as a separate science. More than 
half  a  century  ago  attention  was  focused  on  productivity  and  technical  progress  as  the 
decisive  factors  for  growth,  demoting  the  accumulation  of  physical  capital,  which  had 
previously been considered the motor of capitalist growth.9 Today a new conceptual leap is 
being attempted, moving up the scale of causes and effects; searching, in other words, for 
what determines productivity and technical progress, and finding it in the ability of a firm, an 
                                                
9  Schumpeter (1934), Solow (1956, 1957). There then followed numerous theoretical and empirical refinements 
of Solow’s model, such as Romer (1990), Grossman and Helpman (1991) and Aghion and Howitt (1992). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
economy, a society to “learn” continuously,10 in dynamism, in endogenous inventiveness, in 
the taste for intellectual and entrepreneurial challenges.11 
Such ability may be found embedded in the culture and customs of a nation, as a result of a 
favourable historical confluence. Or it can be constructed, fed, by reasoned political action, 
as  well  as  by  entrepreneurs’  creative  impulse.  This  is  a  complex  task  that  involves  all  the 
different aspects of associative life, first and foremost the educational system; and not only 
this, but also the legal system, the condition of competition and the efficiency of the public 
administration. 
And finance? The financial system can be an engine of prosperity or a cause of backsliding. 
The history of economies, both old and new, has given us examples of one and the other 
situation. The whole world is still reeling from the destructive potential that finance revealed 
six  years  ago.  It  chooses  how  and  where  to  distribute  the  resources:  the  incentives  that 
orient these choices influence economic growth.12  
To be able to make these choices correctly, the financial system must “know” the corporate 
system.  But  what  does  financial  system  mean?  For  an  Anglo-American  it  basically  means 
markets, and the whole world of analysts, consultants, speculative investors and institutional 
investors  that  wheel  about  them.  For  a  European,  and  even  more  for  an  Italian,  it  means 
banks.  Markets  and  banks  have  different  ways  of  knowing  the  firms  that  require  finance. 
Markets  can  only  gather  and  process  data.  Banks,  in  addition  to  data,  can  acquire  direct 
knowledge of firms. 
A mass of studies and analyses in the last quarter of a century have argued that a broad and 
sophisticated  financial  system  is  essential  for  economic  growth.  It  is  a  literature  that  is 
considerably influenced by the Anglo-American model, which sees markets as the heart of 
the system. After the “big chill” brought on by the global crisis, the basic assumption – the 
importance  of  finance  for  growth  –  has  not  been  eroded,  but  there  have  been  increasing 
qualifications and some rethinkings, for example on the recognition of an important role for 
intermediation, especially in getting credit to SMEs.13  
In  Italy,  as  we  have  seen,  the  share  of  sources  of  funding  other  than  bank  credit  is 
particularly  small  and  should  certainly  be  encouraged  to  grow.  Our  traditional  banking 
activities can find new life, however, in a virtuous rediscovery of the mission to get to know 
firms, in particular the smallest ones. All the mechanisms for gathering and analysing data on 
firms need to be strengthened, including the ways in which that in formation is publicized and 
shared.  Banks  must  increase  their  level  of  technical  knowledge,  including  expertise  in 
products, production methods, markets, about the firms applying for loans, particularly in this 
recession, when loan applications tend to be for generic purposes and less tied to investment 
plans, which are easier to evaluate objectively.14  
We are moving towards a different financial system from the one we are used to. Policies, 
laws and practices must be geared to allowing firms – especially innovative ones – to have 
more of their own capital, paid in by the owners or from specialized funds, but also raised on 
the capital market.15 For this reason Italian SMEs must take a decisive step towards ensuring 
                                                
10  As Stiglitz and Greenwald say (2014), starting from Arrow’s lesson (1962), “learn to learn, learning”. 
11  Phelps (2013). 
12  Levine (2014). 
13  See, for example, Beck (2013) and CBI (2012). 
14  Bain & Company and IIF (2013). 
15  According to our calculations, today in Italy there are 500 enterprises that meet the criteria and would benefit 
by being listed on the stock exchange. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  that information about their status is reliable and widely available. The level of bank debt will 
have to be reduced. 
Banks in turn must accelerate a change that has already begun for some of them. They too 
are entering a new phase in which it is essential for them to be very well capitalized because 
of  the  risks  of  which  we  are  now  all  well  aware:  they  must  therefore  satisfy  the  general 
conditions of profitability, transparency and good governance that will allow them to obtain 
funding at competitive rates (to pass on to lending rates, reducing them) and, if necessary, to 
raise new capital rapidly and in sufficient quantity. 
Besides  improving  their  capacity  to  understand  which  companies  to  lend  money  to,  they 
must also add financial consultancy to their traditional lending activities, thus helping firms to 
decide the best level and composition of their financial liabilities and supporting their entry to 
the markets. These new services could build income streams that would at least offset the 
loss of a part of traditional banking activities. 
Conclusion 
We Italians told ourselves from the outset that we were not to blame for the global financial 
crisis, and it was true: on the eve of the flare-up, we had a financial and a banking system 
that  were  largely  immune  to  the  problems  famously  discovered  in  the  Anglo-American 
systems. 
Our fault was another: over the preceding decade we allowed the economy to lose strength 
until it stopped growing, without taking steps to counter a trend whose deep and long-term 
nature we ignored despite warnings from some quarters. The outcome is before our eyes: we 
are one of the economies worst hit by the recessive effects of the financial crisis. We worry 
about the timing and strength of the recovery, about how our country will fare in ten years’ 
time,  about  the  employment  prospects  and  future  well-being  of  the  generation  on  the 
threshold of adulthood. 
A prosperous society knows how to ensure a constant improvement in the quality of life of its 
members. First and foremost by promoting employment, that is by creating the conditions so 
that anyone who wants to work, especially at the start of adult life, can find or create a job 
that is not too unpleasant or ill-paid and that as far as possible fulfils their vocation. Working 
allows people to plan their future, to access a variety of high quality goods and services, and 
to grow as a person. 
This is what we should understand by “development”: a constant, innovative increase in the 
variety and quality of everything that makes life better, starting from a secure environment, 
cultural  heritage  and  natural  landscape.  A  well-designed  statistical  system  can  calculate 
national income in such a way as to include the quality of goods and services and not only 
their quantity. In any case, a static vision of a society that can be crystallized in an eternal 
present,  maintaining  resources  and  production  capacity  unchanged,  is  naive  and  has 
repeatedly been disproved by history. Stasis is not possible: either we go forward or we will 
decline, and only in the former case can we mitigate social inequalities.16  
Economic policy today in the advanced countries must first distinguish the vicissitudes of the 
economic  cycle  from  structural  trends  and  act  on  both  with  the  appropriate  instruments. 
Employment  is  the  first  challenge.  An  important  role  in  promoting  employment  and 
participation  in  the  labour  market  and  aiming  for  levels  and  trends  in  pay  that  reconcile 
competitiveness  with  workers’  aspirations  falls  to  both  macroeconomic  policies,  aimed  at 
restoring steady expansion of aggregate demand and the economy, and structural policies 
designed  to  remedy  the  age-old  defects  of  the  labour  market  and  more  generally  of  the 
                                                
16  Picketty (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
economic  system,  which  pre-dated  the  crisis  and  were  merely  aggravated  by  its  assault.17 
Structural  problems  and  policies  are  particularly  significant  in  a  number  of  countries, 
including our own. 
For our economy, the return to sustained development cannot be taken for granted, nor is it 
easily  within  our  reach.  Italian  history  from  the  Renaissance  to  the  present  has  witnessed 
alternating periods of rapid progress and sometimes long phases of stagnation and decline. 
However, we have no lack of energy, ideas and projects. The financial system is central to 
the allocation of resources among alternative uses whose contribution to the productivity of 
firms and the system must be evaluated; this, as I have tried to show in these remarks, is 
another area of forthcoming structural changes to be assimilated and encouraged. 
Confidence must be restored on all fronts, the tapestry of legislation, practices, and principles 
that  govern  economic  activity  must  be  regenerated.  The  process  has  begun.  We  must  all 
become convinced that defending thousands of narrow individual interests, even when they 
are  legitimate,  has  to  take  second  place  where  the  ability  of  a  national  community  to 
generate its own progress is at stake. 
il 
2013 
istituito 
30  marzo 
dal  Presidente 
References 
Agenda possibile (2013), “Relazione del Gruppo di lavoro in materia economico-sociale ed 
europea 
della  Repubblica”, 
www.quirinale.it/qrnw/statico/attivita/consultazioni/c_20mar2013/gruppi_lavoro/2013–04-12_ 
agenda_possibile.pdf. 
Aghion.  P.  and  P.  Howitt  (1992),  “A  Model  of  Growth  Through  Creative  Destruction”, 
Econometrica, 60(2). 
Arrow,  K.  (1962),  “The Economic  Implications  of  Learning  by  Doing”,  Review  of  Economic 
Studies, 29. 
Bain  &  Company  and  IIF  (2013),  Restoring  financing  and  growth  to  Europe’s  SMEs, 
www.bain.com/Images/REPORT_Restoring_financing_and_growth_to_Europe%27s_SMEs.
pdf. 
Beck,  T.  (2013),  Finance  and  growth:  too  much  of  a  good  thing  ?,  www.voxeu.org/ 
article/finance-and-growth . 
CBI 
financing_for_growth.pdf . 
Criscuolo, C., P. N. Gal and C. Menon (2014), “The Dynamics of Employment Growth: New 
Evidence  from  18  Countries”,  OECD  Science,  Technology  and  Industry  Policy  Papers, 
No. 14, OECD Publishing. 
Draghi, 
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/html/sp140822.en.html. 
ECB  (2014),  Introductory  statement  to  the  press  conference  (with  Q&A),  04/09/2014, 
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2014/html/is140904.en.html. 
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1991), Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, MIT 
Press. 
http://www.cbi.org.uk/media/1673105/cbi_ 
Unemployment 
Financing 
growth, 
(2014), 
(2012), 
area, 
euro 
the 
for 
M. 
in 
                                                
17  This was the main point of discussion at the latest meeting organized by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City  on  22–23  August  2014  at  Jackson  Hole.  See,  in  particular,  the  speeches  by  Yellen  (2014)  and 
Draghi (2014). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  F. 
Un 
per 
and 
(2014), 
growth, 
sistema 
long-run 
crescita, 
economic 
finanziario 
opportunity, 
(2014),  Finance, 
Haselmann, R., K. Pistor and V. Vig (2010), “How law affects lending”, Review of Financial 
Studies, 23(2). 
Levine,  R. 
http://www.voxeu.org/article/finance-long-run-growth-and-economic-opportunity. 
Panetta, 
la 
http://www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/intaltri_mdir/finanza_rossi/rossi_141113.pdf. 
Phelps, E. (2013), Mass Flourishing, Princeton University Press.  
Piketty, T. (2014), Capital in the 21st Century, Harvard University Press. 
Romer,  P.  (1990),  “Endogenous  Technological  Change”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy, 
98 (5). 
Rossi, S. (2014), Finanza e crescita dopo la crisi, www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/intaltri_mdir/ 
finanza_rossi/rossi_141113.pdf . 
Solow, R. M. (1956), “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth”, Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 70 (1). 
Solow, R. M. (1957), “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function”, Review of 
Economics and Statistics, 39(3). 
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934), Theory of Economic Development; 
Stiglitz,  J.  and  Weiss,  A.  (1981),  “Credit  Rationing  in  Markets  with  Imperfect  Information”, 
The American Economic Review. 
Stiglitz  J.  and  B.  Greenwald  (2014),  Creating  a  Learning  Society:  A  New  Approach  to 
Growth, Development, and Social Progress, Columbia University Press. 
Visco,  I.  (2014),  Considerazioni  finali  sul  2013,  www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/integov/2014/ 
cf_13/cf_13/cf13_considerazioni_finali.pdf 
VV. AA. (2013), Agenda possibile, Report by the Group on Socio-economic and European 
Matters  set  up  on  30  March  2013  by 
Italy, 
www.quirinale.it/qrnw/statico/attivita/consultazioni/c_20mar2013/gruppi_lavoro/2013–04-12_ 
agenda_possibile.pdf. 
Yellen, 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20140822a.htm. 
the  President  of 
the  Republic  of 
and  Monetary 
Labor  Market 
Dynamics 
(2014), 
Policy, 
J.L. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
