  Njuguna Ndung’u: Dissemination of the results of the Kenya Financial 
Diaries, 2014. 
Keynote address by Professor Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at 
the dissemination of the Kenya Financial Diaries, Nairobi, 12 August 2014. 
 Distinguished Guest; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is my honour and pleasure to join you during this breakfast event to disseminate the results 
of  the  Kenya  Financial  Diaries,  2014.  This  is  a  commendable  and  timely  study  by  the 
Financial Sector Deepening Kenya aimed at understanding behaviour of the consumers of 
financial services in the country. By focusing on low income peoples’ lives the findings of the 
Diaries will help policy makers, industry players, researchers and others to better understand 
the  challenges  faced  by  low-income  groups  and  recognise  new  opportunities  to  develop 
appropriate interventions and financial service options that better meet their needs. 
As  you  will  recall,  towards  the  end  of  last  year,  we  launched  the  results  of  the  FinAccess 
National  Survey,  2013,  and  early  this  year,  we  launched  the  FinAccess  Geographic 
Information  System  (GIS)  Mapping  of  all  financial  access  points  results  carried  out  by  the 
Financial  Access  Partnership  (FAP)  that  include  both  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  (CBK)  and 
Financial Sector Deepening (FSD), Kenya. 
I am therefore happy to see that FSD Kenya has taken the initiative to also commission the 
Kenya Financial Diaries, 2014. This is very complementary to the other regular studies that 
we have undertaken together, like FinAccess surveys. It will help the researchers on financial 
sector issues more deeply understand what is behind the trends that we see in FinAccess 
surveys  and  uncover  new  opportunities  to  push  the  financial  inclusion  frontier  in  Kenya 
further.  The  information is  equally  critical  for  informed  decisions  by  consumers  of financial 
services. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: In line with Vision 2030, we have transformed the financial sector 
into a dynamic and growth pulling sector. But the goals set by Vision 2030 have not yet been 
achieved,  although  we  are  confident  to  achieve  them.  These  goals  will  be  achieved  by 
addressing  the  Vision’s  three  core  objectives,  namely:  enhancing  financial  system 
stability, efficiency, and expanding financial access to all Kenyans. 
The Financial Diaries give us an opportunity to consider these issues of stability, efficiency 
and inclusion in a very different light, through the eyes of low income Kenyans, and in many 
ways it shows us that those goals for financial sector are really quite intertwined. Financial 
inclusion is important to the Central Bank because of its impacts on the economy at large as 
well as its potential to improve the lives of the poor. When the majority of the population has 
access  to  and  use  of  quality  and  affordable  financial  services  and  products,  it  fuels  the 
national  savings/  investments  cycle,  thus  allowing  for  capital  accumulation  and  asset 
building, which enables the poor to escape the poverty cycles. When the poor have secure 
savings,  it  reduces  their  vulnerability  to  periodic  economic  and  social  shocks.  Increased 
access to and use of finance will expand the number of participants in our financial system 
and so lower the unit costs. None of these are trivial impacts. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  This  morning  marks  a  major  milestone  as  we  ruminate  on  the 
implications of this important Financial Diaries study results. I would like to highlight four key 
findings that I believe have particular bearing on the advancement as well as development of 
the financial sector in Kenya. 
• 
The  first  is  that  the  financial  lives  of  the  poor  are  incredibly  dynamic  and 
complex. We have all observed this, in our families, estates and communities, but 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
        2 
  here  we  see  complexity  quantified.  The  median  household  has  not  one  income 
source, but 10 separate income sources! 
Hence, expanding access to financial services is not just about what I’m calling the 
3Ps: Presence, Price and Pushing, but also about relevance and fit with the needs 
of  clients. Technological  innovations  have  helped  us  dramatically  increase  access 
and usage in Kenya. Getting to the next level of application –  and application that is 
meaningful  for  all  Kenyans  –  is  going  to  require  a  new  generation  of  financial 
services and service improvements that meet the real needs of markets and people. 
When we see the diversity and number of financial devices that Kenyans are using 
and continue adapting, we can see that they are willing to try new solutions. This is 
a good reception to the dynamic solutions coming to the market. 
The  results  also  highlight  important  gaps  in  current  offerings  in  our  market,  while 
also  giving  us  a  much  deeper  understanding  of  peoples’  earning  and  spending 
patterns and behaviour. I hope that these rich insights inspire some creative thinking 
by  the  private  sector  players  to  tackle  product  relevance  challenge  and  consider 
some new approaches to the low income market. 
Second, the results makes it clear that financial devices play a very important 
role  in  helping  poor  people  meet  their  basic  needs  and  invest in  the  future. 
Reading the study report, we see how taking a loan from a local bank, one father 
was able to help his daughter get treatment that she needed after a miscarriage. We 
see  how  the  credit  facilities  that  schools  extend  to  parents  over  the  course  of  a 
school  year  enables  poor  parents  stretch  their  budgets  and  afford  this  major 
investment in their children’s future. This also enhances the family capacity for the 
future.  Indeed,  financial  services  are  making  themselves  present  at  every  turn  for 
these families. Finance is not a luxury, but absolutely a necessity in poor people’s 
lives, just as surely as it is for everyone. That is why when we look at the range of 
needs, we can focus on the pricing to make it sustainable and enlarge the market. 
Third, poor Kenyans are in fact saving, but they are choosing to hold most of 
that  savings  in  informal  financial  devices  e.g.  rotating  group  saving  and 
lending. Few other studies are able to tell us about money that Kenyans are holding 
in informal financial devices, and one of the great values of the Financial Diaries is 
that it gives us this more comprehensive portfolio view especially as regards the mix 
of  savings  in  banks  and  durable  goods.  As  you  know,  the  Central  Bank  is  very 
concerned about savings. We know that achieving growth as a nation requires that 
deposits be available for productive investment. 
We  expected  that  increasing  the  savings  rate  here  in  Kenya  is  about  getting  our 
people to save more. But, we also know that this will be enhanced after a particular 
threshold  of  income  is  achieved  and  surpassed.  The  Financial  Diaries  report 
suggest that we may need to explore that more. Perhaps in addition to saving more, 
we  also  need  to  save  differently.  In  the  Diaries  households,  only  9%  of  financial 
assets are being held in the formal financial sector and the balance in the informal 
segment. 
The authors of the report also point out that getting this kind of informal to formal 
shift  is  going  to  be  difficult  when  savers  want  to  see  their  money  working.  One 
advantage of the informal financial sector, that is, the non-organised non-institutional 
sector  and  in  SACCOs  and  some  MFIs  is  that  savings  are  more  visibly  deployed 
among other group members and in one’s own self. It is visibly doing a job, and that 
can be harder to see when returns on savings are low and the investments those 
savings finance are not immediately visible. 
I  have  no  easy  answer  about  how  Kenya’s  financial  sector  can  address  this 
challenge, but it is an important insight that we need to understand better. How can 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    we show people that their savings in the formal financial sector are in fact working? 
How  can  we  improve  the  proportion  of  saving  in  formal  institutions  alongside  the 
informal  institutions  that  are  already  working  for  people  and  helping  them 
accomplish  many  of  their  financial  goals?  This  demonstrates  the  need  to  create 
appropriate incentives to save for the poor. 
Finally,  this  study  results  also  suggests  that  it’s  not  just  the  proposition  or 
service offering that is inhibiting growth in use or application by the poor in 
formal institutions, but also the service experience.  Bank  clients  are  reporting 
losses in their formal accounts and they do not always understand the cause and 
nature of the loss because of breakdown in the communication of costs and fees. 
The  breakdowns  in  service  quality  that  these  respondents  experience  help  us 
understand why the banks are not always the preferred destination for poor people’s 
savings. I believe there is much more that formal providers can do to improve these 
service  experiences  and  earn  the  utmost  confidence  and  trust  of  potential  and 
current clients. 
The Central Bank has already taken strides to encourage greater transparency and 
accountability in pricing of financial services to foster effective competition. We will 
continue  to  do  so,  and,  if  I  can  make  a  prediction,  I  would  expect  to  see  more 
providers in the future competing with one another on the quality of their service as 
well as pricing their financial services as we move into the future. This study results 
shows us just how thoughtful, active, and discerning consumers in our market can 
be, and they will continue to vote for their preferred providers with their feet and their 
money. 
I appreciate these findings and look forward to seeing how various financial service providers 
begin to incorporate these important insights into their operations and product developments. 
This  is  how  we  can  target  that  25  percent  or  so  of  the  population  still  excluded  from  the 
financial sector. I encourage all of you to read the report and take advantage of opportunities 
that FSD Kenya offers to engage more deeply with the content in ways that are specific to 
your businesses. This is tremendously a valuable new resource for all of us working in the 
financial sector in Kenya. 
Let me take this opportunity to thank FSD Kenya again for sponsoring this study and hosting 
this breakfast event and also acknowledge Digital Divide Data Kenya and Bankable Frontier 
Associates for their commendable job in executing the research and preparing the report that 
we are witnessing today. 
With these few remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, I welcome you to this breakfast event. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
