  Martin Flodén: The low inflation – should we be worried and can we do 
anything about it? 
Speech  by  Mr  Martin  Flodén,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  SACO  (the 
Swedish Confederation of Professional Associations), Stockholm, 14 May 2014. 
 Thank you to Björn Andersson, Charlotta Edler, Gabriela Guibourg, Kerstin Hallsten, Marianne Sterner, Christina 
Nyman,  Stefan  Palmqvist,  Ulf  Söderström  and  other  employees  at  the  Riksbank  for  valuable  discussions  and 
views on earlier versions of the text, and to André Reslow for help with data production. The views expressed in 
this  speech  are  my  own  and  are  not  necessarily  shared  by  the  other  members  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Riksbank. 
Those of you who follow the debate on monetary policy will probably not be surprised that 
the theme of my speech today is the low rate of inflation. This is the most important question 
for  monetary  policy  right  now.  Over  the  past  year,  I  have  emphasised  the  importance  of 
ensuring that inflation does not get stuck far below the target of two per cent and said that 
monetary  policy  therefore  needs  to  focus  on  avoiding  such  a  situation.  Consequently,  I 
entered  a  reservation  against  holding  the  Riksbank’s  policy  rate  unchanged  at  the  most 
recent monetary policy meeting in early April. Instead, I was in favour of a repo rate cut of 
0.25 percentage points. 
Today I intend to focus on two issues. First, I wish to explain why I am worried by the low 
inflation rate. The reasons I will take up concern wage formation, the credibility of monetary 
policy,  a  too  high  real  interest  rate,  and  arbitrary  reallocation  from  borrowers  to  lenders.  I 
consider  these  to  be  serious  problems.  But  at  the  same  time  I  find  some  of  the  recent 
discussion on the problems with deflation – falling prices – to be exaggerated and focused on 
the wrong risks. 
Second, I wish to discuss the ability of monetary policy to prevent inflation from falling too 
low.  Sweden  is  a  small  open  economy  and  is  affected  to  a  great  extent  by  international 
developments.  This  fact  sometimes  causes  commentators  to  question  rather  resignedly 
whether  the  Riksbank  can  actually  influence  inflation.  I  consider  this  attitude  to  be  wrong. 
Monetary  policy  determines  how  high  average  inflation  will  be.  Having  said  this,  I  am  not 
claiming  that  we  can  control  inflation  with  precision.  Monetary  policy  can  prevent  inflation 
from falling way below the target over a long period of time. It is, however, neither desirable 
nor possible for monetary policy to continuously hold inflation stable very close to the inflation 
target of 2 per cent. 
But  let  me  start  by  commenting  on  where  we  are  coming  from  and  the  current  situation. 
Inflation has been on average 1 per cent in Sweden for the past three years, when measured 
in terms of the CPIF.1 The Riksbank and other analysts have had forecasts that have shown 
that  inflation  would  be  low  over  a  relatively  long period  of time,  but that  it  would  gradually 
rise.  However,  the  timing  of  the  rise  has  been  repeatedly  postponed  in  our  forecasts  and 
inflation has instead fallen. I will provide some perspective on why this has happened and 
discuss various factors that might explain this development. 
Low inflation in Sweden early on, but now also a global phenomenon 
Sweden is not the only country where inflation is currently low. Around half of all the OECD 
countries have had an inflation rate that has on average been below 2 per cent during the 
past two years. The trend also appears to be strengthening. During last year, inflation was 
                                                
 1  The CPIF is the consumer price index (CPI) with a fixed interest rate and aims to eliminate the direct effect of 
changes in the repo rate from the CPI. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  below  2  per  cent  for  around  two  out  of  three  OECD  countries.  Of  course,  not  all  of  these 
countries  have  an  inflation  target  that  is  2  per  cent  and  in  the  countries  which  have  an 
inflation target, this may be formulated in different ways. It is nevertheless clear that many 
central banks, in addition to the Riksbank, are currently undershooting their targets. 
 
However, inflation fell several years earlier in Sweden than in other countries, and Sweden is 
one of the OECD countries that has had the lowest inflation in recent years (see Figure 1). 
This is despite the fact that growth has been higher and the employment rate has not fallen 
as  much  as  in  many  other  countries.  This  applies  regardless  of  whether  one  measures 
Swedish  inflation  in  terms  of  the  CPI,  the  CPIF  or  the  internationally  harmonised  HICP.2 
Inflation  in  several  of  the  crisis-torn  countries  in  Europe  has  been  pushed  up  by  the 
increases in indirect taxes implemented to improve public finances. And this explains some 
of the difference with regard to inflation in Sweden. But even taking this into account, it is 
clear that inflation has been more subdued in Sweden than in Europe in general since 2011 
(see Figure 2). 
                                                
2  The HICP is calculated in detail for the countries within the EU and at aggregate level also for a couple of 
countries outside of the EU. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The fall in inflation is broad 
A closer examination of developments in Sweden shows that the fall in inflation is broad and 
not caused by any individual component. We have already noted that inflation measured in 
terms of the CPI, the CPIF and the HICP is low, compared with both the inflation target and 
other  countries.  This  also  applies  to  measures  of  underlying  inflation,  that  is,  measures 
where one tries by various means to take into account that some prices vary a lot and may 
temporarily  influence  the  CPI.3  Regardless  of  which  measure  one  looks  at,  it  is  clear  that 
underlying inflation has shown a falling trend since 2012 or earlier. 
Price  developments  for  sub-groups  behind  the  CPI  measures  show  a  similar  picture  (see 
Figure 3).4,5 Over the past two years, goods prices have fallen somewhat faster than normal. 
Prices  of  services  have  increased  more  slowly  since  the  beginning  of  last  year.  This 
                                                
3  See Figure A1 in the appendix. Trim85 is a measure that excludes the prices that have varied most and least. 
UND24 is a measure that weighs together the prices included in the CPI in a different way – the prices that 
have varied the most in historical terms are given the lowest weighting, and vice versa. 
4  Please note that there has not been time to update the figures I show here with the inflation outcome for April 
published by Statistics Sweden yesterday. CPI inflation then rose to 0 per cent, that is, prices in April were 
unchanged in relation to April 2013. 
5  Normally, one divides the CPI into prices of energy, foods, goods (excluding energy and foods), services and 
interest expenditure. One reason for this particular division is that energy and food prices met by consumers 
are to a large degree influenced by developments in commodity prices on the global market. It may thus be 
interesting to study the sub-groups separately. The component in the CPI that measures interest expenditures 
is also special, as it is affected by the Riksbank’s changes in the repo rate. It is for this reason that, in addition 
to the CPI, the Riksbank also looks at the CPIF measure, in which interest rates are fixed and not allowed to 
vary. Figures A2 and A3 in the appendix show the developments in prices in recent years for goods, services, 
energy and foods. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  development  has  generated  some  attention,  as  the  rate  of  increase  in  service  prices  was 
relatively stable during the years prior to this. Energy prices are volatile but usually increase 
faster than the inflation rate, but they have been unusually stable during the past two years. 
Finally,  we  have  interest  expenditure,  which  has  pushed  down  CPI  inflation  via  lower 
mortgage rates. 
 Why is inflation low? 
Our  examination  of  developments  in  prices  for  the  sub-groups  behind  the  CPI  measures 
shows that the fall in inflation is broad and not due to any individual component. 
It is also difficult to point to any individual factor that has led to inflation in Sweden being low. 
It  has  rather  been  a  combination  of  factors.  One  important  factor  that  can  hardly  be 
disregarded is monetary policy. The repo rate has been held higher due to consideration of 
risks  linked  to  household  indebtedness  than  it  would  have  been  if  the  aim  was  solely  to 
stabilise inflation around the target. It was after the Riksbank began to raise the repo rate in 
summer 2010 that inflation in Sweden – unlike inflation in other countries – began to fall (see 
Figures 2 and 4). The monetary policy strategy has most likely contributed to inflation being 
lower than it would otherwise have been. 
Another  important  explanation  for  the  low  inflation  is  the  weak  international  economic 
development.  Sweden 
international 
developments.  The  prices  of  the  goods  Swedish  companies  import  are  affected  partly  by 
global market prices of traded goods and services and partly by the exchange rate.6 
is  a  small  open  economy 
is  affected  by 
that 
                                                
6  The  Riksbank’s  method  of measuring  global  market  prices  of  traded goods and services  involves  weighing 
together developments in prices of exports in countries that are important for Swedish imports. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Global  market  prices  appear  to  follow  international  economic  developments  relatively  well. 
Like  global  GDP,  prices  of  traded  goods  and  services  fell  in  connection  with  the  financial 
crisis  in  2008. When  the  international  recovery  began  in  2010, these  prices  also  began  to 
rise. However, in recent years, global economic activity has slowed down again and at the 
same  time  the  rate  of  increase  in  global  market  prices  of  traded  goods  and  services  has 
fallen. Over the past year, these prices have remained in principle unchanged. 
The  prices  Swedish  companies  pay  in  SEK  for  imports  are  also  affected  by  the  krona 
exchange rate. The krona weakened substantially against other currencies in connection with 
the  financial  crisis,  which  meant  that  import  prices  for  consumer  goods  in  the  producer 
channel actually increased quite substantially when measured in Swedish krona, despite the 
fall  in  international  prices.  Import  prices  have  been  falling  since  the  middle  of  2012.  One 
contributory factor was the rapid strengthening of the krona in the summer of 2012. During 
2013,  the  krona  fluctuated  somewhat,  but  on  average  it  was  stronger  than  in  2012.  This, 
together  with  the fact that global  export  prices  have  in  principle  remained  unchanged,  has 
continued to dampen import prices although these are no longer falling to any great extent.7 
Sometimes  the  impact  of  developments  in  international  economic  activity  and  prices  on 
domestic inflation is regarded as unrelated to monetary policy in Sweden. I consider this to 
be a mistaken point of view. But before I return to this question, I would like to explain why I 
am worried about inflation being so low. 
                                                
7  Figure A4 in the appendix shows developments for global market prices (global export prices), the nominal 
exchange rate and import prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Why should we worry about low inflation? 
We have thus noted that inflation has been below the two per cent target in recent years, and 
also lower than the Riksbank and other analysts had expected. But is the low inflation really 
something we need to worry about? My answer is yes. I shall explain why. 
Surprisingly low inflation leads to arbitrary reallocation 
Some of the problems with low inflation arise if inflation is surprisingly low. For example, this 
leads to arbitrary reallocations from borrowers to lenders. The real cost of a loan, that is, the 
interest cost adjusted for inflation, becomes higher if inflation is surprisingly low. Another way 
of describing this so-called debt deflation is that surprisingly low inflation means that the real 
value  of  debts  rises.  It then  becomes more  difficult for  borrowers to  pay  off their  debts,  at 
least unless their real incomes also rise.8 
One can expect that the problems will be particularly extensive if inflation is surprisingly low 
during an economic downturn that coincides with high private or public debt. This is because 
those  who  try  to  reduce  their  debt  do  so  by  reducing  their  expenditure,  which  means  that 
demand in the economy declines.9 And this reinforces the economic downturn. 
We are not seeing such a scenario in Sweden right now. Although household debt is high, 
economic  activity  is  beginning  to  pick  up  and  household  consumption  has  developed 
relatively well in recent years.10 The risk that many see with the high household indebtedness 
is  rather  that  a  future  economic  downturn  would  be  reinforced  by  households  rapidly 
reducing their consumption. A relevant question – without an obvious answer – is whether 
such  concern  should  be  countered  with  a  tight monetary  policy  that  dampens  households’ 
propensity  to  increase  their  nominal  debts  or  with  an  expansionary  monetary  policy  that 
ensures inflation does not become surprisingly low. The idea behind the latter strategy is to 
limit growth in households’ real debts.11 
The  low  inflation  could  thus  worsen  the  situation  for  households  with  a  high  level  of 
indebtedness.  But  even  if  we  disregard  the  problems  of  debt  deflation,  it  is  a  problem  if 
inflation fluctuates in an unexpected manner. A stable and predictable development in prices 
gives  a  better  functioning  economy,  where  it  is  simpler  to  make  well-founded  long-term 
economic decisions. 
Wage formation deteriorates when inflation is too low 
Another area where problems may arise if inflation is too low is wage formation. Surprisingly 
low  inflation  means  that  real  wages  eventually  prove  to  have  become  higher  than  was 
planned when the nominal wage agreements were signed. This sort of wage development 
would  make  companies  less  willing  to  employ  and  would  ultimately  contribute  to  higher 
unemployment.12 
                                                
8  The reasoning on debt deflation goes back to Fisher (1933). 
9  Of course, every debt is someone else’s asset, so one might perhaps think that the fall in demand should be 
compensated by increased demand from the lenders who benefit from the increase in real debt values. But 
assets can be held abroad or be concentrated to a few individuals whose demand is not particularly sensitive 
to changes in wealth. See Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) for an analysis of these mechanisms. 
10  In  the  crisis  countries  in  the  euro  area,  on  the  other  hand,  high  debt  is  a  central  element  in  the  economic 
downturn. As Moghadam et al. (2014) note, there is a significant risk that low inflation in these countries may 
lead to an increase in the debt burden and to a deeper economic downturn. 
11  Lars  E.O.  Svensson  has  argued  in  favour  of  this  point  of  view  in  several  papers  and  commentaries  (for 
example Svensson 2013a). 
12  It  is  difficult  to  quantify  how  much  higher  unemployment  becomes  when  inflation  is  low.  According  to 
Svensson  (2013b),  unemployment  was  on  average  0.8  percentage  points  higher  during  1997–2011  than  it 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  But wage formation will probably deteriorate even if the low inflation is entirely anticipated. 
This is because it is difficult to reduce nominal wages. If inflation is low, it will be more difficult 
to  adjust real  wages  between  different  sectors  and  between  the  individuals  in  a  company. 
This could also mean that average real wages increase faster than is justified by the growth 
in  productivity,  particularly  if  the  rate  of  inflation  is  very  low  or  negative.  Both  problems  in 
adjusting  relative  wages  and  unjustifiably  high  real  wages  would  lead  to  a  rise  in 
unemployment. 
Repo rate has a lower bound 
A  low  inflation  rate  can  also  make  it  difficult  for  monetary  policy  to  be  sufficiently 
expansionary.  The  economy’s  real  interest  rate  is  comprised  of  the  nominal  interest  rate 
minus  the  (expected)  inflation  rate.  As  the  nominal  interest  rate  has  a  natural  floor 
somewhere around zero per cent, a lower (expected) inflation rate will raise the lowest level 
that can be attained for the real interest rate. After the financial crisis, many central banks 
have long been limited by the lower bound for their policy rates.13 The problem has, however, 
not been as acute in Sweden. Although the repo rate was cut to 0.25 per cent in 2009, it has 
been higher than this since summer 2010. The problem is rather that it may be desirable in 
the future to stimulate the economy further, for instance, if the economic recovery comes to a 
halt. The scope for further cuts in the repo rate may then be limited. 
The credibility of the inflation target could be impaired 
Finally, it is a problem if monetary policy and the Riksbank start to lose credibility. The value 
of money in modern economies is entirely based on expectations. Firmly-anchored inflation 
expectations  and  confidence  in  the  central  bank’s  actions  therefore  comprise  the  basis for 
monetary  policy.  The  inflation-targeting  policy  has  successfully  built  up  this  credibility  by 
communicating a clear overall target – a particular inflation rate. It has also become possible 
to gradually give greater consideration to the stability of economic activity as credibility has 
accumulated, although the primary target has become somewhat less clear as a result of this 
flexible inflation-targeting policy. 
However, monetary policy can hardly maintain its credibility if the inflation rate deviates from 
the target for too long. One question that has been discussed frequently in the wake of the 
recent financial crisis is whether central banks should use their policy rates to try to mitigate 
the credit cycle.14 Monetary policy could possibly contribute to this type of stabilisation for a 
                                                                                                                                                   
would have been if inflation had averaged two per cent during this period. And according to Svensson (2013c), 
60,000 more people are now unemployed than if the repo rate had not been raised since 2010. 
It  hardly  needs  to  be  pointed  out  that  such  calculations  are  very  uncertain.  I  have  previously  criticised 
Svensson (2013b) for focusing on a specific measure of inflation expectations. If one instead uses a different, 
more  accurate,  measure  of  expectations,  almost  all  of  the  unemployment  effect  Svensson  has  calculated 
disappears  (Flodén,  2012).  And  Söderström  and  Vredin  (2013)  point  to  problems  with  interpreting  causal 
relationships behind Svensson’s estimated Phillips curve.  
The  claim  that  unemployment  would  have  been  lower  if  a  more  expansionary  monetary  policy  had  been 
conducted since 2010 appears more plausible, however. But one can find objections to this conclusion. First, 
the reasoning presumes that a more expansionary monetary policy would not have caused the crisis scenario 
that a majority of Executive Board members have expressed as a risk that justifies a higher repo rate (see the 
article in Monetary Policy Report February 2014). Second, higher unemployment now can be counterbalanced 
by lower unemployment in the future, as monetary policy can become more expansionary in the future when 
inflation and inflation  expectations  today  are low.  The  question  is  thus  whether  the  low  inflation  affects  the 
average level of unemployment or merely the volatility of unemployment over the business cycle. 
13  Examples are the US Federal Reserve, the Bank of England and the European Central Bank (ECB). The two 
first-named banks have supplemented low policy rates with quantitative easing to try to make monetary policy 
more expansionary. 
14  See Smets (2013) for a review of various points of view on this question. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  short time before other macroprudential policy measures are in place. But studies show that 
typical credit cycles are much more protracted than normal business cycles.15 The status of 
the inflation target would probably be questioned if monetary policy “leans against the wind” 
–  that  is,  results  in  an  inflation  rate  below  the  target  –  for  many  years  to  dampen  an 
expanding credit cycle. 
This reasoning becomes increasingly important the lower the inflation and policy rates are. If 
inflation expectations fall, increasingly expansionary monetary policy will be required to bring 
inflation back up to the target.16 And as the policy rate has a lower bound, it may be difficult 
to make monetary policy sufficiently expansionary once this bound has been reached. One 
conclusion  from  these  insights  may  be  that  monetary  policy  should  react  asymmetrically 
when  inflation  is  low.  Monetary  policy  should  then  counteract  falling  inflation  particularly 
strongly if there is a risk that the policy rate will otherwise reach its lower bound.17 
But the danger of deflation should not be exaggerated 
The low inflation in Sweden and the euro area has recently led to much discussion on the 
risks of deflation, that is, a general fall in price levels.18 Although I am worried that Swedish 
inflation  has  been  too  low  for  several  years,  I  believe  that  the  debate  on  deflation  is 
sometimes too foreboding and that it often focuses on the wrong risks. 
To  begin  with,  I  do  not  see  a  lengthy  period  with  falling  prices  as  a  likely  scenario  for 
Sweden. Growth is relatively strong, which should contribute to a rise in prices. Moreover, we 
have  the  scope  to  counteract  falling  prices  with  more  expansionary  monetary  policy.  The 
repo rate can be cut by at least 50 basis points before the lower bound is reached. If this 
were not enough, we could draw up other monetary policy measures that would contribute to 
a rise in inflation. 
Moreover,  nothing  dramatic  will  happen  merely  because  inflation  falls  below  zero  and  is 
weakly negative rather than weakly positive. The problems of low inflation that I have listed 
above  gradually  increase  when  inflation  is  lower  and  this  will  of  course  continue  to  apply 
when inflation is negative. But the problem with prices falling is often said to be that demand 
will then collapse as households are postponing consumption while waiting for prices to fall 
so they can buy more cheaply.19 This reasoning is not necessarily wrong, but is really only a 
reformulation of the problem I mentioned above; that low inflation limits the scope for making 
monetary  policy  more  expansionary.  There  is  a  risk  that  households  will  postpone  their 
consumption – that is, that they will increase their saving – if the real interest rate becomes 
unjustifiably high. Here it is necessary to put price developments in relation to developments 
in  wages  and  the  return  on  saving.  There  is  therefore  scarcely  reason  to  believe  that 
anything dramatic will begin to happen just as the general rate of inflation becomes negative. 
One  should  also  remember  that  substantial  differences  are  hidden  in  the  price  trends  for 
different  product  groups  that  lie  behind  the  general  rate  of  inflation.  One  example  is 
developments in prices for technology-intensive goods such as TVs, computers and mobile 
                                                
15  According to Drehmann et al. (2012), an average financial cycle, in which the credit cycle is a central element, 
is 16 years long. The length of an average business cycle is much shorter, perhaps five years. 
16  Inflation  expectations  have  fallen  in  recent  years  in  the  surveys  conducted  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Economic Research and Prospera. Short-term expectations are now just below one per cent, but long-term 
expectations are still close to the two per cent inflation target.  
17  See the reasoning on this in Williams (2009) and Bayoumi et al. (2014). 
18  See for example Krugman (2014) and Pettersson (2014). 
19  Bordo  and  Filardo  (2005)  note  that  episodes  of  deflation  have  been  common  throughout  history  and  often 
been  unproblematic.  But  they  also  note  that  these  unproblematic  episodes  often  occurred  under  the  gold 
standard  regime  and  that  long-term  inflation  expectations  were  then  firmly  anchored.  Mechanisms  that  are 
based on expectations of lower prices in the future then do not arise so easily. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  phones.  The  price  level  for  these  goods  has  fallen  fairly  quickly,  as  a  result  of  the  rapid 
productivity  growth,  even  during  periods  when  the  general  inflation  rate  has  been  clearly 
positive  (see  Figure  5).  But  despite  the  falling  prices,  demand  for  these  goods  has  not 
collapsed, but rather increased over time. 
 
To summarise, I am thus worried about the low inflation in Sweden in recent years. I see it as 
particularly  problematic  that  the  low  rate  of  inflation  risks  impairing  wage  formation  and 
contributing to unnecessarily high unemployment. There is also a risk that the credibility and 
efficiency  of  monetary  policy  will  deteriorate  and  that  there  will  be  arbitrary  reallocations 
between lenders and borrowers. 
But, at the same time, I believe that some concerns and problems have been exaggerated in 
the debate. I see it as a small risk that Sweden would suffer a prolonged period with falling 
prices. And if this were nevertheless to happen, the consequences would probably only be a 
gradual strengthening of the problems I already see with the current low inflation. 
The risk that we would face a prolonged period of deflation is partly linked to the view of what 
monetary  policy  can  achieve.  I  sometimes  see  an  overly  pessimistic  attitude  to  the 
Riksbank’s  ability  to  influence  Swedish  inflation  rate.  Let  me  discuss  this  question  in 
conclusion. 
Monetary policy determines the inflation rate 
Central banks often talk about the so-called transmission mechanism, that is, how a change 
in the policy rate affects different aspects of the economy and ultimately the rate of inflation. 
But how well does this transmission actually work? Does a small open economy like Sweden 
need to adapt to monetary policy and price trends abroad? Has the transmission mechanism 
been damaged or weakened by the financial crisis? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  My perspective on these questions is perhaps rather split. It is clear – and has been so for a 
long time – that we do not completely understand how the transmission mechanism works. 
The description we give is simplified and partly based on theories and hypotheses that have 
not been completely verified by data. But at the same time, empirical studies and practical 
experience show that the policy rate is a useful tool for influencing economic activity and the 
inflation rate. 
It is of course true that a small open economy like Sweden is dependent on developments 
abroad.  Low  demand  abroad  contributes  to  low  demand  in  Sweden,  too.  And  low  price 
increases  abroad  contribute  to  low  import  prices  at  a  given  exchange  rate.  However,  this 
does  not  mean  that  monetary  policy  lacks  the  ability  to  counteract  these  developments.  I 
usually think of this as a rowing boat in a strong current. If we do not row, the current (global 
developments)  will  determine  what  direction  the  boat  moves  in.  But  if  we  row,  we  have  a 
better ability to get where we want to go, particularly if we try to keep away from the parts of 
the water where the current is strongest. 
The  monetary  transmission  mechanism  is  usually  divided  up  into  different  channels  (see 
Figure 6).20 The channel most often mentioned is probably the interest rate channel. A lower 
interest rate makes it more attractive to consume and invest. This increases demand in the 
economy. And in the long run, the higher demand means that prices and wages rise, that is, 
inflation increases. 
In  an  economy  like  Sweden’s,  which  is  so  dependent  on  international  developments,  the 
exchange  rate  channel  probably  has  greater  importance,  at  least  for  the  development  of 
inflation. An (unexpected) repo rate cut means that the krona weakens. The weaker krona 
leads to an increase in demand for Swedish goods at the cost of foreign goods. In addition, 
there is a direct inflation effect that arises when imports become more expensive as a result 
of the weaker exchange rate. 
The importance of the direct inflation effect is confirmed by empirical studies using Swedish 
data (Hopkins et al., 2009); inflation in Sweden is affected almost immediately when the repo 
rate is changed, and most of the inflation effect arises through the exchange rate channel.21 
I  note  that  in  line  with  this  reasoning,  the  krona  strengthened  after  the  Riksbank  began 
raising the repo rate in summer 2010. And, as I pointed out earlier, it was after these repo-
rate increases that inflation in Sweden – unlike other parts of the world – began to fall. 
                                                
20  See  Hopkins  et  al  (2009)  for  a  description  of  the  transmission  mechanism  and  empirical  studies  of  how  it 
works in Sweden. 
21  The greatest effects on inflation between two quarters arise during the first quarter after a change in the repo 
rate, but it takes a year until the greatest effects are attained for the twelve-monthly inflation figures. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Short-term inflation expectations are a component of the transmission mechanism that I feel 
are paid too little attention as a possible explanation for the low inflation. When firms set their 
prices, important factors are how they believe other companies will set their prices, and how 
they believe their customers will react to price changes. The same applies when employers 
and employees negotiate wages. If one believes that other companies will keep their prices 
and wages unchanged, it is more difficult to raise one’s own prices and wages. As inflation 
expectations appear closely linked to the most recent inflation outcomes, there is thus a risk 
that the low inflation becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. 
One consequence of this type of reasoning is that it is important that monetary policy reacts 
early on when inflation begins to fall. The later one tries to deal with the problems, the more 
expansionary monetary policy will need to be to bring inflation up to the target. Or to return to 
the rowing boat metaphor; when one finds oneself in a very strong current, one needs to row 
very hard to get back. 
Note that the two transmission channels I have focused on, the exchange rate channel and 
the  expectations  channel,  do  not  necessarily  have  an  effect  through  the  real  side  of  the 
economy.  It  is  therefore  fully  possible  that  monetary  policy  has  a  substantial  ability  to 
influence the inflation rate even if real variables like unemployment and GDP growth are not 
so tangibly affected. 
Based on this reasoning, my view is that monetary policy in Sweden has good potential to 
bring inflation back to the target of two per cent. But I often come across arguments disputing 
this  conclusion.  Let  me  conclude  by  giving  my  interpretation  of  these  arguments  and 
explaining why I am not convinced by them. 
Misinterpreted: The impact of the repo rate on other interest rates has been weakened 
After  the  financial  crisis  the  repo  rate  was  cut  by  nearly  five  percentage  points.  But  the 
interest rates households and companies could borrow at did not fall as much, as risk and 
liquidity  premiums  increased  at  the  same  time. However,  these  observations  do  not  mean 
that the effects of changes in the repo rate have altered. A more reasonable interpretation is 
that the cuts in the repo rate have been counteracted by, and perhaps sometimes drowned 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  
 
in,  other  effects.22  If  the  repo  rate  had  not  been  cut  as  aggressively,  households  and 
companies would most probably have had to pay higher interest rates. 
Misinterpreted: Monetary policy in small economies is determined internationally 
A traditional textbook account would say that a country that has a floating exchange rate and 
allows the free mobility of capital across national borders can formulate its monetary policy to 
attain a domestic inflation target. But Rey (2013) claimed recently in a widely-read paper that 
this  conclusion  is  no  longer  valid.  She  argued  that  globalisation  and  the  increasing 
international  flows  of  capital  meant  that  monetary  policy  around  the  world  must  adapt  to 
monetary policy in the dominant economies, primarily the United States. 
Rey’s theory is that large amounts of capital will flow into a country that tries to conduct a 
tighter monetary policy. The capital inflow will either lead to an undesired appreciation of the 
country’s currency or to asset prices in the country rising too quickly. This theory, which Rey 
formulated with emerging markets in mind, could very well also be correct and relevant for 
more  developed  economies,  like  Sweden.  My  interpretation  of  such  arguments  is  that 
monetary policy in Sweden then cannot deviate too far from monetary policy in the United 
States and the euro area without giving rise to an unjustified appreciation of the krona.23 
Misinterpreted: Inflation is also low in countries with more expansionary monetary 
policy 
Inflation  is  also  falling  now  in  countries  and  currency  areas  where  the  central  banks  have 
conducted a more, sometimes much more, expansionary monetary policy than the Riksbank. 
I have sometimes heard these observations put forward as arguments proving that a more 
expansionary  monetary  policy  would  not  have  much  impact.  This  is  not  a  very  convincing 
conclusion. 
To begin with, it is only a year or so ago that there was much international discussion as to 
why inflation was so surprisingly high.24 The background to this discussion was that the weak 
economic developments in many parts of the world did not appear to have any great effect 
on  inflation.  Despite  the  low  demand  in  the  economy  and  high  unemployment,  inflation 
remained at levels that did not appear compatible with historical patterns. 25 
To some extent, one can probably say that monetary policy abroad was more successful in 
stabilising inflation than economic activity, at least for a period of time. Without the powerful 
monetary  policy  stimulus,  inflation  would  probably  have  been  much  lower.  And  in  the 
countries which have perhaps conducted the most expansionary monetary policy, the United 
                                                
22  In line with this interpretation, Karlsson and Fredriksson (2013) find that the repo rate has had the same short-
term impact on mortgage rates before and after the financial crisis. 
23  The conclusion that Rey emphasises is that monetary policy needs to be supplemented with other tools; either 
macroprudential policy measures that can counteract undesired fluctuations in asset prices, or restrictions to 
the international mobility of capital to quite simply throttle the mechanism causing concern. 
24  See, for instance, Ball and Mazumder (2011), Coibon and Gorodnichenko (2013) and the IMF (2013). 
25  One of the explanations most often given for inflation initially being held up is that inflation expectations had 
become  anchored  around  the  level  of  the  inflation  target  and  that  this  contributed  to  temporarily  keeping 
inflation  up  in  a  different  way  than  in  earlier  economic  downturns.  This  explanation  is  also,  at  least  partly, 
consistent with the conclusions I have drawn on the ability of monetary policy to influence inflation even if the 
effects on economic developments are less tangible. Another, closely-related, explanation given is that the link 
between aggregate demand and inflation is weaker when inflation is low to start with. Over the past decade or 
two, inflation has been low in relation to the levels common in the 1970s and 1980s. When the financial crisis 
began, inflation was thus already low. And when inflation is low, there are factors that counteract a further fall. 
Wage rigidity may be one such factor. During periods of high unemployment it is not unusual that wages are 
not increased. On the other hand, it is more unusual that wages are actually reduced, and this in turn has 
significance for how low price increases will be.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  States and the United Kingdom, inflation does not appear to fall to levels as low as in, for 
instance, Sweden and the euro area. 
Misinterpreted: Rapid technological development leads to falling prices 
The most common misunderstanding I hear concerns falling international goods prices. For 
instance,  one  usually  notes  that  Swedish  goods  prices  have  fallen  in  recent  years  and 
perhaps also that the price of technology-intensive goods is falling rapidly.26 
But  here  one  confuses  relative  prices  with  the  general  level  of  inflation.  It  is  no  new 
phenomenon that goods prices are increasing at a slower pace than services prices.27 Nor is 
it  a  surprise. While  wage  increases  are  roughly  the  same  in  both  the  goods  and  services 
industries,  productivity  increases  are  higher  in  the  goods  industries.  This  means  that  unit 
labour costs are increasing more slowly there, which in turn means that price increases for 
goods always tend to be lower than those for services. And for the goods industries with the 
most rapid growth in productivity, the price increases will be even lower. 
However, these insights do not say anything about average price changes – inflation – only 
something  about  how  price  developments  in  different  goods  and  services  relate  to  one 
another. As an example, it can be mentioned that prices for technology-intensive goods rose 
much more slowly than prices for services, even when inflation was high in Sweden during 
the  1980s.  And  inflation  is  currently  much  higher  in  many  countries  around  the  world, 
although  they  face  the  same  development  in  international  prices  for  technology-intensive 
goods as Sweden. 
In connection with this discussion, I would like to make it clear that an inflation target of two 
per cent does not mean that prices in each of the sub-groups behind the CPI will increase by 
an  average  of  two  per  cent.  As  goods  prices  are  expected  to  increase  more  slowly  than 
services prices, service prices must probably increase faster than two per cent on average if 
the inflation target is to be attained.28 Figure A2 shows that this has not been the case. 
Closing comments 
Today I have tried to explain why I am worried about inflation having been below the inflation 
target  for  the  past  three  years.  This  is  mainly  because  a  low  rate  of  inflation  can  have  a 
negative effect on wage formation and thereby the functioning of the labour market, and that 
the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  can  be  damaged,  which  can  mean  that  future  monetary 
policy  is  less  efficient  and  that  economic  planning  is  made  more  difficult  by  unnecessary 
uncertainty over future prices. 
I have also tried to communicate that monetary policy has considerable potential to influence 
the  development  of  inflation,  but  that  this  influence  does  not  necessarily  presume  that 
monetary  policy  also  has  substantial  effects  on  economic  activity.  Expectations  of  the 
Riksbank’s ability to meet the inflation target are sometimes too low, while expectations of 
our  ability  to  reduce  average  unemployment  are  too  high.  It  is  monetary  policy  that 
determines how high average inflation will be. The average level of unemployment, on the 
other hand, is mainly determined by factors beyond the Riksbank’s control. 
                                                
26  The fact that goods prices have fallen can be seen in Figure A2, while the rapid fall in prices of technology-
intensive goods can be seen in Figure 5.  
27  Figure  A5  in  the  appendix  shows  that  services  prices  have  increased  faster  than  goods  prices  since  the 
beginning of the 1980s. 
28  This conclusion assumes that the average rates of increase for energy and food prices are not far above two 
per cent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  Finally, I would like to repeat what I said at the beginning of my speech. I am not trying to say 
that the Riksbank can control inflation with any precision. It is neither desirable nor possible 
for monetary policy to continuously hold inflation stable and close to the inflation target of 2 
per cent. But monetary policy can prevent inflation from falling way below the target over a 
long period of time. 
References 
Ball,  Laurence  and  Sandeep  Mazumder  (2011),  “Inflation  Dynamics  and  the  Great 
Recession”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring 2011 42(1), 337–405. 
Bayoumi,  Tamim,  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia,  Karl  Habermeier,  Tomaso  Mancini-Griffoli  and 
Fabian  Valencia  (2014),  “Monetary  Policy  in  the  New  Normal”,  IMF  Staff  Discussion 
Note 14/3. 
Bordo, Michael and Andrew Filardo (2005), “Deflation in a Historical Perspective”, Bank for 
International Settlements Working Papers No. 186. 
Coibon, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2013), “Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well After 
All? Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation”, NBER Working Papers No. 19598. 
Drehmann,  Mathias,  Claudio  Borio  and  Kostas  Tsatsaronis  (2012),  “Characterising  the 
Financial Cycle: Don’t Lose Sight of the Medium Term!”, Bank for International Settlements 
Working Papers No. 380. 
Eggertsson, Gauti and Paul Krugman (2012), “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A 
Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1469–1513. 
Fisher,  Irving  (1933),  “The  debt-deflation  theory  of  great  depressions”,  Econometrica  1,   
337–357. 
Flodén, Martin (2012), “A Note on Swedish Inflation and Inflation Expectations”, manuscript, 
Stockholm University. 
Hopkins,  Elisabeth,  Jesper  Lindé  and  Ulf  Söderström  (2009),  “The  monetary  transmission 
mechanism”, Economic Review 2009 (2), Sveriges Riksbank. 
IMF (2013), Chapter 3 – the Dog that Didn’t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled Or Was It Just 
Sleeping? World Economic Outlook, April 2013. International Monetary Fund. 
Karlsson,  Olov  and  Richard  Fredriksson  (2013),  “Hur  har  genomslaget  från  reporäntan  till 
bolåneräntorna påverkats till följd av finanskrisen?” (how has the impact of the repo rate on 
mortgage  rates  been  affected  by  the financial  crisis?),  BA  thesis  in  economics,  Stockholm 
University. 
Krugman, Paul (2014), “Sweden Turns Japanese”, New York Times, 20 April. 
Moghadam,  Reza,  Ranjit  Teja  and  Pelin  Berkmen  (2014),  “Euro  Area  –  ‘Deflation’  Versus 
‘Lowflation’”, iMFdirect, 4 March 2014. 
Pettersson, Ola  (2014), “Riksbanken klarar  inte sitt  uppdrag”  (the  Riksbank  is  not  carrying 
out its task), Expressen newspaper, 6 May. 
Rey,  Helene  (2013),  “Dilemma  not  Trilemma:  The  Global  Financial  Cycle  and  Monetary 
Policy Independence”, 25th Jackson Hole Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Smets,  Frank  (2013),  “Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy:  How  Closely  Interlinked?” 
Economic Review 2013:3, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2013a),  “Leaning  Against  the  Wind  Leads  to  a  Higher  (Not  Lower) 
Household Debt-to-GDP Ratio”, manuscript, SIFR, Swedish House of Finance. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2013b), “The Possible Unemployment Cost of Average Inflation below 
a Credible Target”, under publication in American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2013c),  “Reservation  against  the  Account  of  monetary  policy  2012”, 
Appendix B to the minutes of the Executive Board meeting no. 7, 19 March 2013, Sveriges 
Riksbank. 
Söderström, Ulf and Anders Vredin (2013), “Inflation, unemployment and monetary policy”, 
Economic Commentary no. 1 2013, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Williams,  John  (2009),  “Heeding  Daedalus:  Optimal  Inflation  and  the  Zero  Lower  Bound”, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2009 (2), 1–37. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17 
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
