  Luis M Linde: “The New Hegemon or Last Country Still Standing” 
Speech by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the Frankfurt Finance Summit 
2014,  Panel  IV:  The  New  Hegemon  or  Last  Country  Still  Standing,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
20 May 2014. 
 As a result of the crisis, the institutional and intellectual setup of European Monetary Union is 
being  deeply  revised.  Fresh  views  on  the  role  of  stability  across  several  dimensions  – 
including fiscal and macro-financial – have emerged and taken over the old approach of the 
Maastricht  Treaty.  Several  players,  including,  indeed,  the  ECB,  are  contributing  to  this 
overhaul. 
I  would  like  to  review  the  main  elements  of  the  old  institutional  setup,  the  weaknesses 
revealed  by  the  crisis  and  the  way  a  reinforced  culture  of  stability  is  contributing  to  their 
repair. 
The monetary union designed in Maastricht included, in addition to the ECB and the single 
monetary policy, a relatively loose governance framework for the euro area based, first, on a 
fiscal discipline device – the Stability and Growth Pact – and, second, on coordination for the 
remaining  economic  policies  –  the  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines  –.  The  setup  also 
relied on governments, households and firms being able to internalise the stability patterns 
required  within  a  monetary  union  and  counted  on  financial  markets  penalising  those  who 
would not do so. 
What we observed before the crisis, and what we became painfully aware of when it erupted 
was,  however,  that  public  and  private  agents  in  some  countries  did  not  change  their 
behaviour,  that  financial  markets  did  not  play  any  disciplining  role  and  that  the  loose 
application  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines 
rendered  them  ineffective  as  stabilisation  devices.  The  Pact  and  the  Guidelines  were  not 
strong enough to prevent the accumulation of a series of imbalances. 
We also discovered two other gaps during the crisis: too little attention had been paid to how 
financial markets work within a monetary union and no crisis management mechanism was 
available. 
To be stable, the European building needed operational repairs. The stability principles, as 
conceived in Maastricht, were insufficient and a new culture of stability had to take over. 
The  ECB  acted  on  several  occasions  to  curb  the  so-called  “tail  risks”  –  the  risk  of  the 
monetary union breaking up – and to gain the time needed for others’ actions to bear fruit. It 
is  worth  noting,  however,  that  monetary  action  can  hardly  go  beyond  this  as  the  cracks 
detected  in  the  building  were  not  of  a  monetary  nature.  At  the  Member  State  level,  fiscal 
consolidation  policies  and  structural  reforms  were  needed  and  are  being  implemented  to 
better  accommodate  domestic  behaviour  to  the  patterns  of  stability  required  within  a 
Monetary Union. 
As for euro area governance, a deep process of reform has been undertaken. The Stability 
and Growth Pact has been strengthened to preserve fiscal stability; and a new procedure – 
the  Macroeconomic 
the 
accumulation  of  other  non-fiscal  imbalances.  Also,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  and 
the banking union process have filled in two serious gaps. 
Now, to conclude, I shall try and respond to the questions to this panel about Germany’s role 
in the European debt crisis and whether Germany is a reluctant hegemon.  
Indeed, Germany has played a key role in the response by the European Monetary Union to 
its financial and fiscal crisis and to the dangers this crisis has entailed for the Union and the 
euro.  In  early  2012,  many  analysts  and  politicians  considered  it  very  possible  that  certain 
Imbalance  Procedure  –  has  been  established 
to  prevent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  countries might exit the Monetary Union, thereby triggering an extremely serious crisis. Many 
believed the European  Monetary Union  was running an almost terminal risk, at least in its 
formulation under the Maastricht Treaty. 
To Germany, then. Its economy and its Government have been fundamental in facing and 
overcoming these risks. Without a German political stance in defence of the Monetary Union 
and the euro, the single currency would surely not have survived. Obviously, Germany has 
not acted alone, but as the euro area’s leading economy, its role has been crucial.  
I do not believe Germany may be said to have exercised this role reluctantly. In Germany, as 
in  other  euro  are  countries,  there  were  and  are  forces  in  disagreement  with  the  Monetary 
Union, analysts and economic agents who considered the break-up of the euro as likely. But 
what  counts  is  what  the  German  Government’s  position  was  and  its  support,  at  key 
moments,  to  save  the  Monetary  Union  and  the  euro,  its  support  to  the  programmes  for 
stressed countries and the Banking Union process. 
Rather, we can say that the new hegemon is the culture of monetary and fiscal stability that 
has gained in strength over the course of the crisis. 
The strengthening of the institutions and of the rules to ensure fiscal stability is essential for 
maintaining the stability of the Monetary Union and of the euro. This is because, as we all 
know,  the  source  of  the  Monetary  Union  crisis  lay  basically  in  certain  countries’  fiscal 
performance, even more so than in the banking crisis which has also affected – to differing 
degrees of intensity – virtually all the euro area members.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
