  Stephen S Poloz: Canada’s hot – and not – economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 24 April 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you for that kind introduction,  and thank you  to  all  of  you for coming  today. It’s my 
pleasure  to  be  here  with  the  Saskatchewan  Trade  and  Export  Partnership.  I  applaud  your 
efforts  to develop  exports from  this  province  to  the  rest  of  the  world  –  Canada’s  economy 
needs those exports. 
From my vantage point at the Bank of Canada, I take a broad view of the Canadian economy 
as a whole. But, depending on where you work or where you live, your sense of how well the 
economy is doing will vary. From one region of Canada to another, from one sector of the 
economy to another, we are seeing fundamental differences in the demand for our products, 
in employment, in wages and in housing. In fact, we are seeing markedly different rates of 
economic growth. Some sectors and some regions are hot – and some are not. 
This shows up most tangibly in employment and housing. In places like Fort McMurray, it’s 
fairly easy to find a job, but hard to find a place to live. In other cities, the reverse is true. 
In the time I have with you today, I’d like to talk about what’s hot and what’s not – and the 
forces fuelling the economy’s heating and cooling systems. My job today is to pass on some 
of  the  Bank’s  analysis  so  that  you  can  use  it  to  make  informed  financial  and  economic 
decisions for yourselves and your families, your businesses, and your futures. 
What’s hot? Oil 
One  of  the  most  important  forces  powering  Canada’s  economy  today  is  the  long-term 
strength in global prices for resources. For Canada, oil stands out. We have the world’s third-
largest reserves of crude oil. And we’re number one in potash production. This means money 
in our pockets. 
In technical terms, it is a positive terms-of-trade shock. In non-technical terms, it’s a gift. As 
the value of the resources we export goes up, and as the value of the products we import 
either remains low or rises more slowly – or, as our terms of trade improve – more wealth 
flows to Canadians. 
Let  me  put  it  this  way.  You’ve  got  a  box  of  old  hockey  cards  in  the  basement,  right? 
Everybody  does. What  if  in  that  box  you’ve  got a  Chris  Kunitz  card from  his  rookie  days? 
Hey,  now  that  the  Regina  native  is  an  Olympic  gold  medallist  and  two-time  Stanley  Cup 
winner, that card is suddenly worth a lot – and you have the incentive you need to go dig it 
out of the basement. 
It’s the same thing with a terms-of-trade shock. Since 2002, we have enjoyed the benefit of 
an almost 25 per cent rise in Canada’s terms of trade. With the average world price of oil 
over  the  past  decade  more  than  double  that  of  the  previous  three  decades,  Canada’s 
resources are suddenly worth a lot – and we have the incentive we need to go dig them out 
of the ground. 
That’s  what’s  been  happening.  Higher  oil  prices  have  stimulated  oil  production  in  Canada, 
magnifying the benefits from the improvement in the terms of trade. This is particularly true of 
Canada’s vast oil sands, where the higher prices have made them economically viable. 
To step up production requires more workers and more money. Where do they come from? 
What  draws  them  in?  The  economy  has  natural  market  mechanisms  that  help.  With  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  higher prices these sectors command on the world markets, profits, job markets and wages 
heat up, attracting more investors and more workers. As people earn more, they spend more 
and, as this work force grows, they need more of everything – from Tim Hortons to pickup 
trucks. This leads to more jobs and higher wages in other sectors and other regions of the 
economy, so everyone benefits. 
People move to where it’s hot 
As a share of GDP, investment in mining and oil and gas extraction has doubled since 2002. 
As companies step up their investments, they set off a chain of events that draws people in. 
Over the past ten years, about a quarter of a million people, net – roughly the population of 
Saskatoon – have moved from other provinces to Alberta. Last year alone, net migration to 
Alberta from the  rest  of Canada  totalled  nearly  45,000.  Saskatchewan, too,  has  had  more 
people move in than out over the past year. Between 2006 and 2011, about one in every five 
Saskatchewanians was either a newcomer or had moved a long distance within the province. 
For all of Canada’s workers, this is a sea change. 
While  Alberta  and  Saskatchewan  may  be  net  recipients  of  people,  there  is  still  significant 
gross movement of people into and out of the “cooler” provinces and sectors. The fact is, lots 
of jobs are being created all over the country, demonstrating the economy’s ability to respond 
to changing circumstances. 
People are crossing the country not just for the jobs, but also for better wages. No matter 
how  you  cut  the  data,  they  consistently  show  that  workers  in  Alberta,  Saskatchewan,  and 
Newfoundland  and  Labrador  have  seen  their  wages  go  up  faster  than  anywhere  else  in 
Canada in recent years. 
Interestingly, in part because of this movement of people, gaps in the unemployment rates 
among the provinces have not widened in response to the terms-of-trade shock; rather, they 
have actually become smaller than they once  were. The growth in job opportunities in hot 
areas is almost matched by a net migration of workers out of provinces where opportunities 
are less plentiful. Canada’s labour force is demonstrating remarkable flexibility, as workers 
from across the country move to find good jobs and good pay. 
However, this is not to say it’s easy. In places where it’s hot, they are scrambling to keep up 
with the demand for housing. Here in Saskatchewan and next door in Alberta, many more 
houses  proportionately  are  going  up  than  elsewhere  in  Canada.  Further,  the  cost  of 
maintaining a home in these provinces has increased by far more than anywhere else. 
For people outside the hot spots, it is a really big decision to move across the country. The 
people moving to the hot economies are leaving other areas – of both the country and the 
economy – and they are taking income and potential with them. This upheaval can be difficult 
for  the  regions  and  sectors  that  are  losing  workers.  For  families,  the  long-distance 
relationships it creates can be tough. 
In  the  long  run,  however,  we  are  all  better  off  with  a  positive  terms-of-trade  shock.  While 
different regions and sectors adjust differently, and while these adjustments can be painful, 
they  allow  us  to  maximize  the  benefits  of  our  rich  energy  endowment  –  and  ultimately 
everyone  gets  the  gift.  Overall,  Canada’s  gross  domestic  income  (GDI),  a  measure  of  the 
purchasing  power  of  all  income  generated  by  domestic  production,  is  approximately  7  per 
cent  higher  than  it  would  have  been  without  the  improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade  since 
2002. 
Yes, when we break this down by region, big benefits are accruing to the three oil-producing 
provinces. But those who suspect GDI is falling elsewhere will have to think again. Rather, 
everywhere in Canada, GDI is higher than it would have been without the improvement in our 
terms of trade. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Where the terms of trade go, the loonie follows 
For  Canada  as  a  whole,  where  the  terms  of  trade  go,  the  loonie  follows.  International 
investors buy good-news stories and, when they buy Canada’s, the value of the Canadian 
dollar goes up. As a consequence, our terms of trade and the dollar move together, although 
not necessarily always in sync. 
It’s like walking a dog on one of those leashes that stretch out and snap back. You might 
hope he’ll stick by your side, but in reality the dog is always off in all directions. By the end, 
your respective tracks zigzag all over the place, much like an economist’s chart. But when 
you  leave  the  park,  you’re  still  together.  That’s  how  the  relationship  between  the  terms  of 
trade and the dollar looks: it’s loose, but dependable. 
It is also how the gift of a positive terms-of-trade shock gets spread even further. A stronger 
dollar gives the whole country greater purchasing power on global markets by bringing down 
the Canadian-dollar prices of imported goods and services. That means cheaper televisions, 
cheaper trips, cheaper tools. That’s good for Canadian consumers and for companies that 
buy machinery and equipment. Yes, it is true that, for some businesses, the stronger dollar 
also  reduces  their  ability  to  compete  in  world  markets  –  I’ll  speak  more  about  that  in  a 
moment. 
It is important to note that the terms of trade are not the only thing that affects the exchange 
rate.  Other  forces,  of  course,  are  important,  in  particular  the  U.S.  dollar.  In  the  post-crisis 
period, the U.S. dollar tended to be weaker against many other currencies, including ours. 
But in recent months, with the U.S. economy regaining its momentum, the loonie’s strength 
has diminished, coming down from its post-crisis peak. 
What’s not hot? Non-energy exports 
So far, I have been focusing mainly on the hot side of Canada’s economy. But let’s look at 
where growth is cooler – in the manufacturing sector. Here, the story is not so cut and dried. 
As  I  mentioned,  the  strengthening  Canadian  dollar  in  response  to  an  improvement  in  the 
terms of trade contributes to the competitiveness headwinds faced by non-energy exporting 
companies, especially manufacturers. Added to this was the pain inflicted on manufacturers 
across advanced economies by the Great Recession that followed the financial crisis. 
Here in Canada, the crisis lowered the temperatures of both the energy and manufacturing 
tracks of our economy. But due in part to the magnitude of the hit felt south of our border and 
to the severe impact felt by the U.S. sectors important to Canadian manufacturers – including 
its  residential  housing  sector  and  auto  production  –  the  crisis  was  particularly  hard  on  our 
manufacturing exporters. Many manufacturers and manufacturing jobs simply disappeared. 
For the sector as a whole, the recovery has been a long time coming. 
Together,  the  two  shocks  –  the  terms-of-trade  shock  and  the  crisis  –  have  walloped 
Canada’s manufacturers. Now, the world recovery is beginning to get under way, which will 
relieve the pressure of the shock of the crisis. However, the forces related to the changing 
terms of trade will continue to be felt, even as the global recovery proceeds. One shock is 
going away, but the other continues. 
Competitiveness challenges have prompted many Canadian manufacturers to become more 
productive.  Some  have  streamlined  their  activities,  introduced  new  products  and  services, 
entered  new  markets,  and  invested  in  cost-saving  technologies.  Others  have  outsourced 
product  fabrication,  but  invested  in  product  development  and  sales  and  service  for  new 
markets. 
We have seen gains in productivity among those manufacturing subsectors in which Canada 
has  natural  advantages,  including  primary  metals,  wood  products,  paper,  and  food.  Since 
2002,  the  greatest  increases  in  manufacturing  output  per  worker  have  occurred  in  these 
industries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  We all know Canada’s is an export-driven economy. Growth since the crisis has been fuelled 
by  policy,  not  natural  forces. We  need  our  economy  to  shift gears  and  for  exports  to  lead 
again. 
The importance of manufacturing to the economy and, in particular, manufacturing exporters 
–  and  the  growing  wedge  between  our  export  performance  and  foreign  demand  –  led  the 
Bank to dig a little deeper to better understand the dynamics of what’s happening. 
To do that, we broke down the non-energy export sector into 31 subsectors and investigated 
at this more detailed level. We are discovering that, for many of these subsectors, exports 
have been behaving broadly in line with the fundamentals of foreign activity – or even better. 
For them, business is heating up. 
Subsectors that are expected to thrive as U.S. investment picks up include machinery and 
equipment,  building  materials,  commercial  services,  and  aircraft  and  aircraft  parts.  Other 
strong  subsectors  that  are  poised  to  heat  up  include  pharmaceuticals,  plastics,  metal 
products,  and  travel  and  tourism.  Some  of  these  subsectors  are  expected  to  benefit  from 
both the recent decline in the Canadian dollar and the stronger U.S. activity. Taken together, 
these subsectors constitute about half of Canada’s exports. So we are hopeful that, as their 
temperatures rise, these industries will help drive the recovery in Canada’s exports. 
Other  subsectors,  however,  are  still  coping  with  competitiveness  challenges,  which  have 
been  developing  for  a  long  time  and  weigh  on  their  ability  to  benefit from  stronger growth 
abroad. These include auto and truck makers, food and beverage suppliers, and chemicals. 
Because their issues are longer-term, the recovery for these groups will be slower, even as 
they could be helped by the recent decline in the strength of the Canadian dollar. 
The Bank’s analysis has given us a more granular interpretation of the export picture – and 
gives  us  more  hope  for  the  recovery  of  our  non-energy  export  sector.  However,  it  also 
implies  that  the  wedge  we’ve  observed  between  exports  and  foreign  demand  persists  to 
some degree. While there is more restructuring of the Canadian economy in store, we expect 
a  gradual  convergence  between  the  growth  rate  of  Canada’s  exports  and  that  of  foreign 
demand. 
The Bank is looking to industries that are out in front in terms of their knowledge, technical 
expertise or production advantages to lead the growth in Canada’s non-energy exports; for 
example, some of those companies supported by Innovation Place here in Saskatoon. We 
are  looking  to  industries  that  have  posted  solid  performance  over  the  past  decade  and, 
frankly, industries of the future that we may not even be able to currently identify. Chances 
are, big bursts of growth will come from brand-new companies with brand-new products and 
services. But this process will take time; we need to be patient. 
In order to achieve a sustainably stronger profile of export growth, we cannot rely solely on 
the  U.S.  market.  There  is  no  doubt  that  an  improving  U.S.  economy  is  good  for  Canada. 
However, the growth potential of emerging-market economies is projected to be about four 
times that of the world’s advanced economies. Ultimately, in addition to capitalizing on the 
stronger growth of these markets, diversifying our export markets will help reduce the risks 
associated with weakness in one export market. We can do this now, but as our various free-
trade agreements fall into place, we will be able to do so even more effectively. 
Overall,  we  remain  hopeful  that  rising  global  demand  for  Canadian  goods  and  services, 
combined  with  the  continued  high  level  of  oil  prices,  will  stimulate  business  investment  in 
Canada and shift the economy onto a more sustainable growth track. 
Consistent  with  this  view,  manufacturers  interviewed  by  the  Bank  for  our  spring  Business 
Outlook  Survey  indicated  that,  in  an  effort  to  improve  competitiveness  or  to  create 
opportunities for growth,  they  are  planning  to  increase  their  investments  in  machinery  and 
equipment. Such intentions are somewhat more prominent among small and medium-sized 
firms  and  among  export-oriented  firms.  Statistics  Canada’s  recent  survey  of  private  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  public  investment  intentions  also  shows  that  manufacturers  across  a  broad  range  of 
subsectors are planning to increase investment. I’m encouraged by these intentions. 
With  Canada’s  stronger  terms  of  trade,  with  our  healthy  business  environment,  with  our 
ability  to  innovate,  the  future  of  Canada’s  manufacturing  sector  is  bright.  Just  as  your 
favourite  maple  tree  looks  different  every  spring,  the  sector  will  evolve,  at  least  on  the 
surface.  For  instance,  we  can  expect  some  parts  of  the  manufacturing  process  to  move 
offshore  to  lower-cost  venues.  In  this  respect,  manufacturing  is  not  just  fabrication.  Of 
course,  it  involves  much  more.  Prior  to  fabrication,  there’s  research  and  development  and 
design. Pre- and post-fabrication activities are high value-added services that reward skilled 
workers with high wages. At the same time, our rich resource endowment makes Canada a 
natural place for manufacturers of food, fabricated and primary metals, and forestry products. 
Hot or not: Where does monetary policy fit in? 
How does monetary policy fit into this? In effect, we make sure the big picture is balanced 
and we let these forces work themselves out beneath the surface. Our contribution is to keep 
inflation  on  track.  However,  even  though  monetary  policy  does  not  address  sectoral  or 
regional  issues  and,  instead,  is  designed  for  the  economy  as  a  whole,  the  analysis  I’ve 
described here feeds critically into our policy decision making. 
Our forecast is that, as a result of higher consumer energy prices, total inflation will rise in the 
next few quarters. These increases will have, by definition, transitory effects on trend inflation 
and in a year from now, they will come out of the numbers. In the meantime, what is crucial 
to the underlying inflation story is that we start from a low inflation rate. And that’s why we 
say  that  the  downside  risks  to  inflation  remain  important  –  because  they  would  have  the 
potential  to  push  inflation  significantly  further  away  from  our  2  per  cent  target.  If  we  ask 
ourselves  where  those  risks  might  come  from,  obviously,  our  story  hinges  critically  on  the 
outlook for our exports. 
We already have what looks like a soft landing emerging in housing, so it is crucial that at the 
same  time  there  is  a  pickup  of  momentum  in  our  exports,  which  we  believe  will  then  be 
followed  by  a  pickup  in  business  investment.  Those  two  shifts  will  put  our  economy  on  a 
sustainable growth track. 
However, if, for some reason, the export recovery were less than we’re predicting, then total 
inflation, having gone up to target, will simply drift back down to converge with core inflation 
at perhaps around 1 per cent, because the output gap will be just as big as before. 
Either way, it should be clear that we are still a long way from home, as it will take until early 
2016 to get underlying inflation back up to 2 per cent. Our economy has room to grow. And, 
when we do get home, there is a growing consensus that interest rates will still be lower than 
we  were  accustomed  to  in  the  past  –  both  because  of  our  shifting  demographics  and 
because, after such a long period at such unusually low levels, interest rates won’t need to 
move as much to have the same impact on the economy. 
Last week, reflecting our analysis, we maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1 per 
cent. 
Conclusion 
It’s time to wrap up. We can’t be 100 per cent sure that oil prices will stay high indefinitely. 
We have a forecast, but the circumstances can obviously change. What’s crucial is that the 
Canadian  economy  maintain  its  ability  to  adapt  to  shifting  temperatures.  Diversifying  our 
export markets is important to future growth and resilience. 
Just as when you travel from one part of Canada to another, the weather can be dramatically 
different  –  hot  in  the  Okanagan,  bone-chilling  cold  in  the  Prairies  and  moderate  in  the 
Maritimes – local economies can cover the gamut from hot to not. We are fortunate that we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  can see these shifts in economic temperatures as they occur. The key is having an economy 
that is flexible enough to sustain the shocks and adjust to them smoothly. The more we know 
about the shocks and adjustments, the better prepared we are and the better able we are to 
benefit from everything this great country of ours has to offer. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
