  
 
 
Andrew Gracie: Making resolution work in Europe and beyond – the case 
for gone concern loss absorbing capacity 
Speech given by Mr Andrew Gracie, Executive Director of Resolution, Bank of England, at 
the Bruegel breakfast panel event, Brussels, 17 July 2014. 
 Introduction 
It  is  nearly  three  years  since  the  FSB  published  its  Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution 
Regimes (KAs) and, as we look forward to the G20 summit in Brisbane in November, it is 
worth taking stock of the progress that has been made to end Too Big to Fail. 
In  Europe  we  now  have  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)1.  Broadly 
speaking this maps to the FSB Key Attributes: the BRRD establishes a comprehensive set of 
legal powers and articulates the process through which recovery and resolution planning will 
take place to ensure that firms develop and maintain effective recovery plans, and that the 
necessary actions are taken to ensure that they are resolvable. And the objective is in line 
with  the  Key  Attributes:  both  view  resolution  in  terms  of  ensuring  the  continuity  of  critical 
functions without recourse to public funds. 
So it will be a real step forward for us here in Europe when the BRRD is implemented. The 
1 January 2015 deadline for doing so is fast approaching and all Member States are working 
hard to revise their national laws and bank resolution frameworks by then. 
Given  this  progress,  I  propose  to  talk  about  what  a  resolution  transaction  looks  like  in 
practice before turning to some of the preconditions for resolution to be feasible and credible. 
I  will  focus  in  particular  on  making  liability  structures  compatible  with  resolution.  The  FSB 
was asked by G20 leaders to prepare, by the time of the Brisbane summit, proposals on the 
adequacy  of  global  systemically  important  banks’  (G-SIBs)  loss  absorbing  capacity  when 
they  fail.  Such  loss  absorbing  capacity  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  “gone  concern  loss 
absorbing  capacity”,  or  GLAC.  The  equivalent  provision  in  BRRD  is  the  Minimum 
Requirement for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities, or MREL. In both contexts the concept is 
essentially  the  same:  both  GLAC  and  MREL  aim  to  ensure  that  banks  have  in  place  an 
adequate stock of liabilities that can be used to cover losses and meet recapitalisation needs 
in a resolution. 
I will concentrate my remarks on large international banking groups, or Global Systemically 
Important Banks (G-SIBs) in the parlance of the FSB.  
The BRRD applies to all credit institutions and certain investment firms. Member States will 
therefore need to think through how MREL should apply to other firms. 
But, crucially, EU G-SIBs are often active in third countries and non-EU firms have extensive 
EU operations. This explains why the FSB’s proposals on GLAC are a crucial part of ending 
the problem of Too Big to Fail and in effect internationalise the concept of MREL beyond the 
EU. 
Resolution transaction 
The resolution of a G-SIB is likely to involve bail-in. Why do I say this, when we have other 
resolution  tools  available?  I  say  this  because  of  the  importance  of  protecting  critical 
                                                
1  http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.L_.2014.173.01.0190.01.ENG 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
 
functions. It is simply not credible to think that a G-SIB could be dismantled over a resolution 
weekend  without  a  destabilising  disruption  to  critical  functions.  Finding  a  private  sector 
purchaser capable of taking on the business – in whole or in parts – is likely to be even more 
difficult. 
Bail-in  enables  us  to  stabilise  a  firm.  It  buys  the  time  that  will  allow  for  an  orderly 
reorganisation or wind down of all or part of a failing firm, in order to address the underlying 
cause of the failure. There is more than one way to effect a bail-in: either through the use of 
write-down and conversion powers directly, or via a bridge institution. In a bridge, liabilities 
are exposed to loss by leaving them behind in an insolvency process with the activity that is 
to  continue  transferred  to  a  new  legal  entity.  In  contrast,  where  the  bail-in  tool  is  applied 
directly, liabilities are written down or converted into equity within the existing legal entity. 
Applying the bail-in tool directly has a number of advantages over the bridge approach, at 
least  in  the  context  of  a  resolution  at  the  level  of  an  operating  company.  In  particular, 
because  no  new  entity  is  required,  it  will  not  be  necessary  over  a  resolution  weekend  to 
authorise a new entity, or to change the contract documentation to which the firm is a party, 
and memberships of Financial Market Infrastructures can remain intact.  
But, whichever approach is pursued, the essential elements of the transaction are the same. 
These are set out in the KAs and are included in some detail in the BRRD: 
• 
Entry into resolution: The trigger for entry into resolution is twofold2: first, a firm must 
be failing, or likely to fail to meet its conditions for authorisation; second, it must be 
reasonably  likely  that  no  action  is  available  to  remedy  this  situation  within  a 
reasonable timeframe.  
This  is  intentionally  forward  looking;  it  is  designed  to  allow  recovery  actions  to  be 
taken  to  remedy  a  breach,  or  likely  breach,  of  threshold  conditions,  when  the 
existing  owners  and  management  of  the  firm  can  take  actions  that  might  be 
successful  in  rectifying  the  breach.  But,  when  recovery  is  not  reasonably  likely, 
resolution authorities have the option to put the firm into resolution and deploy their 
toolkit. And the BRRD goes beyond this – it includes the obligation that, when these 
two triggers are met, capital instruments are written down or converted to the extent 
necessary  to  meet  resolution  objectives,  putting  in  statute  the  Basel  Committee’s 
requirement that capital must be fully loss-absorbing when firms meet the point of 
non-viability. 
Early  termination:  For  resolution  to  work  effectively,  resolution  authorities  need  to 
ensure that counterparties do not use entry into resolution of a firm as grounds for 
closing  out  derivatives  and  other  contracts.  Disorderly  close  out  could  generate 
exactly  the  adverse  impact  of  failure  on  the  broader  system  that  resolution  is 
intended to avoid. For that reason, powers to apply a stay on contract terminations 
and  cross  defaults  are  part  of  the  Key  Attributes.  This  power  is  included  in  the 
BRRD,  along  with  to  apply  a  stay  power  in  recognition  so  that  resolution  actions 
taken  by  non-EU  resolution  authorities  can  be  enforced  within  the  EU.  There  are 
also provisions in the BRRD that will give resolution authorities the power to impose 
requirements that where EU firms are operating outside the EU, in the absence of a 
recognition  power  in  the  host  regime,  their  financial  contracts  include  terms  that 
ensure the actions of the home resolution authority are enforceable3. 
                                                  
2  BRRD article 32. 
3  BRRD article 55. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     
 
 
Bail-in: So to the bail-in where again the KAs and the BRRD are aligned4. The most 
important thing to note here is that bail-in must respect the creditor hierarchy. Under 
BRRD, a small number of liabilities are excluded from bail-in – for example those 
with an original maturity of less than seven days, and in exceptional circumstances 
some  additional  liabilities  may  be  excluded  –  for  example  in  order  to  maintain 
continuity in critical functions. But the principle is clear that liabilities will be written 
down and converted according to the creditor hierarchy and, within a given class, all 
affected  creditors  will  be  treated  equally.  Moreover,  there  is  an  explicit  safeguard 
that  creditors  shall  be  left  no  worse  off  following  the  application  of  the  bail-in  tool 
than they would have been in insolvency. This enables resolution authorities to act 
with sufficient speed and flexibility, whilst providing shareholders and creditors with 
an appropriate degree of certainty as to how they will be treated. 
Valuation: Determining the amount of write-down and conversion of debt required to 
recapitalise a failed bank and calculating the counterfactual insolvency valuation for 
the no creditor worse off test are at the heart of the bail-in. A series of valuations are 
therefore required in the course of a resolution transaction, as the BRRD sets out in 
some detail5. First, a “going concern” valuation of the firm’s assets and liabilities will 
be used to the gauge the size of any bail-in that is required. A core purpose of this 
valuation is to quantify expected future losses and so the recapitalisation need at the 
point of resolution. Second, an equity valuation is needed to inform the terms of the 
exchange and the allocation of the net asset value generated via the bail-in to the 
liability holders that have been written down or converted. And, finally, a no creditor 
worse  off  valuation  measures  the  counterfactual  valuation  of  the  firm  in  an 
insolvency to ensure that shareholders or creditors are left no worse off than they 
would have been in an insolvency. The EBA’s technical standards in this area will be 
a key determinant of our approach to valuation. 
Exchange:  A  desirable  feature  of  resolution  by  bail-in,  is  to  be  able  to  transfer  to 
those  bond  holders  subject  to  bail,  any  compensation  they  are  due  as  soon  as 
possible. Compensation would take the form of the firm’s shares or other securities 
and the resolution would be structured so as to deliver as quickly as possible to the 
relevant  bond  holders  an  interim  instrument  which  is  tradeable  but  also  facilitates 
the  change  of  ownership  that  follows  a  bail-in  to  meet  the  relevant  regulatory 
requirements.  To  this  end  we  have  been  working  on  Certificates  of  Entitlement 
(CEs)  which  may  provide  a  possible  solution.  CEs,  issued  by  the  resolved  bank, 
represent  the  contingent  right  to  receive  the  firm’s  shares  as  compensation.  Over 
the resolution weekend, trading and settlement of the firm’s bonds will be blocked 
and  CEs  will  be  credited  to  the  bondholders’  accounts  in  the  clearing  systems 
(through their custodians). The bondholders, now CE holders, will have a beneficial 
interest in the ordinary shares of the firm. Once the terms of the bail-in are finalised, 
conversion ratios for the CEs into shares will be established and CE holders will be 
able to exercise their rights under the CEs resulting in legal title and voting rights 
being transferred to those bailed in bondholders entitled to compensation. In order 
to receive legal title and voting rights to the shares, the CE holders are required to 
provide evidence of their underlying beneficial ownership of the bonds, confirm that 
they are not acting as a controller and provide instructions for settlement. In this way 
beneficial  ownership  of  the  bank  in  resolution  will  stay  in  the  private  sector 
throughout the process. 
                                                
4  e.g. BRRD article 43. 
5  BRRD articles 36 and 74 and associated technical standards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
 
 
Reorganisation: Finally, where a firm has been stabilised through a bail-in, this must 
be  accompanied  by  a  comprehensive  restructuring  plan.  Bail-in  is  –  explicitly  –  a 
prelude  to reorganisation  and  the stability  that  it  creates  buys  the  time to  achieve 
this6. How much time is required will depend on the options available and how easily 
and  quickly  they  may  be  implemented  but  it  is  essential  to  address  directly  the 
causes  of  failure  and  to  restore  market  confidence  so  that  the  firm  can  access 
funding and operate normally. Part of the resolution planning process with firms is 
discussion of the options available for reorganising critical functions in a resolution, 
whether  they  are  to  continue  within  the  firm,  to  be  transferred  elsewhere  in  the 
market,  or  to  be  wound  down.  Authorities  may  require  firms  to  make  changes  ex 
ante in the way they are organised or operate in order to be adequately resolvable. 
Structural  reforms  have  been  introduced  in  some  jurisdictions  to  guarantee  that 
options to separate critical functions in resolution exist. The creation of ring-fenced 
banks in the UK is one such example. 
So  what  does  all  this  tell  us?  First  and  foremost  it  tells  us  that  failing firms  are not  being 
resurrected  in  a  bail-in.  The  reality  of  a  G-SIB  is  that  its  activities  cannot  be  shut  down 
immediately and it will need to be adequately recapitalised to sustain its critical functions and 
stabilise  the  situation  while  a  reorganisation  or  orderly  wind-down  takes  place.  In  order  to 
achieve this, firms must have a liability structure that allows them to absorb losses and to 
restore  solvency  to  the  point  that  a  G-SIB  can  be  reauthorised,  and  command  market 
confidence and access to normal central bank facilities following the resolution. 
Loss absorbing capacity in resolution 
That is what GLAC and MREL are meant to help achieve. If G-SIBs do not have adequate 
loss-absorbing  capacity  when  they  fail,  then  the  resolution  authority  may  not  be  able  to 
stabilise them without recourse to public funds. This will mean the pernicious problem of “Too 
Big  To  Fail”  will  remain  unsolved,  and  the  destructive  link  between  banks  and  their 
sovereigns will not be severed. 
But what exactly does “adequate” loss absorbency in resolution mean? That will depend on 
the size and systemic importance of a firm; a very small bank with a few hundred depositors 
may  not  need  any  loss-absorbing  capacity  as  its  critical  functions  may  be  limited  to  the 
insured  deposits  it  provides,  which  are  covered  by  the  deposit  guarantee  scheme  (DGS). 
Any cessation in service is unlikely to cause financial instability – although, even in the case 
of the smallest banks, it is important that insured depositors are able quickly to recover their 
funds  via  the  DGS.  But,  as  I  have  already  noted,  given  their  size  and  complexity,  it  is 
important for G-SIBs that there is adequate GLAC to allow the bank to be stabilised without 
disrupting  its  critical  functions.  This  has  implications  for  the  size,  quality,  location  and 
disclosure of G-SIBs’ GLAC in G-SIBs. 
Taking  size  first:  in  order  that  critical  functions  are  not  disrupted,  prudential  authorities 
around the world must be able to permit the firm in resolution to continue to provide its critical 
functions (e.g. deposit taking). This implies that, at a very minimum, there must be sufficient 
GLAC to restore minimum capital requirements. Whatever backward-looking accounting may 
have indicated, experience suggests there is usually little or no equity value left in a bank 
once  it  has  failed.  The  prudent,  fair  and  realistic  valuation  that  resolution  authorities  must 
conduct  in  resolution  (as  required  in  the  BRRD)  will  likely  crystallise  previously  unrealised 
losses or expected losses on the asset side of the bank’s balance sheet. This suggests that 
GLAC  should  at  least  be  equivalent  to  minimum  Tier  1  capital  requirements.  It  is  likely  to 
need a capital position at least as strong as other banks in the market. And for a bank that 
                                                
6  BRRD article 43(3). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
 
has  undergone  resolution  to  command  market  confidence,  it  is  likely  to  need  at  least  as 
much  capital  as  other  banks  in  the  market.  It  would  be  sensible  therefore  for  G-SIBs  to 
maintain sufficient GLAC to be able at least to restore fully regulatory capital buffers above 
capital minima, in order to maintain market confidence that they would be able to absorb any 
further losses during the restructuring phase without re-entering resolution. One final point on 
quantum – the ability of stressed systemically important banks to raise their capital position 
by  shedding  assets  in  short  order  is  not  sufficiently  reliable  to  warrant  a  lower  GLAC 
requirement for G-SIBs. 
So, we can see how much loss-absorbency we might need, but how much of what, exactly? 
In principle, it should be possible to expose every unsecured, uninsured liability of a bank to 
loss in resolution, just as would happen in insolvency. But, from experience, we know that 
some  uninsured,  unsecured  liabilities  are  not  as  reliably  loss  absorbing  in  resolution  as 
others and, in practice, it has been difficult to break into the senior class. In part this is due to 
an absence of legal powers to facilitate this – and the BRRD addresses that problem. But in 
part it is because of the potential adverse consequences of taking resolution action within a 
class which includes liabilities that it is difficult to bail-in and  where, although we have the 
power to exercise discretion in exceptional circumstances, it is undesirable and legally risky 
to  rely  on  this  discretion.  Just  as  we  require  G-SIBs  to  maintain  high-quality,  long-dated 
capital instruments that can reliably absorb losses in a going-concern in order to reduce the 
probability that they fail, so too we should require G-SIBs to maintain high-quality, long-dated 
liabilities that can reliably absorb losses in a gone-concern, in order to reduce the probability 
that they fail in a disorderly way. 
So,  which  liabilities  are  sufficiently  reliably  loss  absorbing  in  resolution  to  count  towards  a 
firm’s GLAC? Well, any liability that meets the following conditions: 
• 
First, it must be sufficiently likely that the liability will actually be there when the firm 
enters resolution. The BRRD requires that, in order to count toward MREL, liabilities 
must have a residual maturity of at least 12 months. 
Second, the liability must be within the scope of the relevant authority’s resolution 
tools.  That  means  that  instruments  issued  under  foreign  law  must  contain  explicit 
contractual provisions to bring them within scope of the authority’s powers, unless 
there is explicit and watertight statutory provision for this. 
Third, the instrument must be easy to value in resolution, and operationally straight-
forward to expose to loss (and this is easier for debt than it is for deposits) without 
disrupting  the  critical  functions  of  the  G-SIB.  Otherwise  it  may  not  be  possible  to 
stabilise the firm quickly whilst achieving the resolution objectives. 
Fourth,  exposing  the  liability  to  loss  must  not  be  likely  to  give  rise  to  valid  legal 
challenge  or  “No  Creditor Worse Off”  compensation  claims (NCWO) for  breach  of 
the NCWO creditor safeguard. 
   There  is  a  broad  consensus  amongst  regulators  and  resolution  authorities  that  capital 
instruments and long-term, vanilla unsecured bonded debt meets all of the above conditions, 
subject  to  a  couple  of  caveats.  One  of  the  main  ones  being  that  if  senior  debt  ranks 
alongside  liabilities  that  are  less  reliably  loss  absorbing,  such  as  sight  or  other  short-term 
deposits and derivatives, then such debt cannot meet condition four above without bailing in 
instruments  that  fail  condition  three.  This  is  because  if  equally-ranking  liabilities  are  not 
exposed  to  loss,  and  the  resolution  authority  departs  from  the  creditor  hierarchy,  then  the 
senior bond holders may have valid NCWO compensation claims. This could put public funds 
at risk. Equally as importantly, the protection afforded to senior bondholders by the NCWO 
compensation claim could mean that market discipline is diluted. This issue is related to a 
topic I will return to; adequate disclosure of GLAC, and the ability of creditors to be able to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
 
assess  accurately  their  position  in  the  creditor  hierarchy  and  the  corresponding  risk  their 
exposures have. 
But first, I would like to point out that requiring eligible instruments to rank below excluded 
liabilities  (such  as  derivatives),  does  not  mean  that  G-SIBs  will  have  to  meet  GLAC  with 
traditional  Tier  2  debt.  There  are  various  mechanisms  available  through  which  “senior” 
bonded  debt  could  remain  senior  to  traditional  subordinated  debt  but  junior  to  the  general 
creditor class. For example, this could be achieved via contractual provisions; as resolution 
authorities are empowered to require for MREL in the BRRD. Another option is for G-SIBs to 
issue  GLAC-eligible  instruments  from  a  holding  company  and  downstream  the  proceeds 
(often referred to as “structural subordination”). Another option that has been suggested is 
either  to  prefer  excluded  liabilities  or  subordinate  eligible  liabilities  in  statute  –  although 
agreeing changes to national insolvency laws could prove challenging. Again, whatever the 
approach,  adequate  disclosure  at  the  legal  entity  level  will  be  crucial  to  allow  creditors  to 
identify easily their position in the creditor hierarchy. With such adequate disclosure, there is 
no  a  priori  reason  why  the  cost  of  meeting  such  a  requirement  would  differ  between  the 
approaches. 
A final, crucial, aspect in rationalising G-SIBs’ liability structures to make them resolvable is 
to ensure that the loss-absorbing capacity is issued from the right place in the group. G-SIBs 
have hundreds, sometimes thousands, of legal entities. Applying resolution tools to each one 
is not possible. Therefore the resolution strategy for each G-SIB will involve resolving either 
the whole group, or parts of the group, by applying resolution tools to a single parent, or a 
small number of intermediate parent entities – or, in FSB parlance, resolution entities which 
serve  as  the  point  or  points  of  entry  to resolution. There must  be mechanisms  in  place  to 
ensure that key operating subsidiaries of each resolution entity have reliable access to the 
GLAC issued by the resolution entity. One way of achieving this is for the resolution entity to 
downstream  the  resources  raised  by  external  issuance  of  GLAC-eligible  instruments  to 
material  subsidiaries  as  long-term  debt  that  ranks  junior  to  the  subsidiaries’  non-capital 
instruments.  This  pre-positioned  intragroup  GLAC  could  contain  provisions  that  allow  the 
losses to flow up to the resolution entity by converting the intragroup debt to equity without 
placing the subsidiary into resolution, if home and host authorities agree this is necessary. 
Since, in a cross-border resolution of a G-SIB, it is in the interests of both home and host 
resolution authorities that key subsidiaries that are not themselves resolution entities do not 
formally enter resolution, and instead resolution tools are applied only to resolution entities, 
this will incentivise cooperation between home and host and reduce incentives to ringfence 
assets locally in an uncooperative manner. 
So,  if  there  is  sufficient  GLAC  of  adequate  quality  that  is  distributed  appropriately  within 
G-SIB  groups,  we  will  have  made  a  further,  major  step  in  making  G-SIBs  resolvable  and 
ending TBTF. Again, let me emphasise the importance of disclosure at the legal entity level. 
It is important that investors in GLAC, and creditors of G-SIBs generally, can identify their 
place  in  the  creditor  hierarchy  and  therefore  better  estimate  their  expected  losses  should 
resolution become necessary. This will reduce moral hazard, improve certainty of outcomes 
in the event of failure, and so incentivise investors to ensure the firms they are investing in 
are run in a prudent manner. 
Conclusion 
I want to emphasise just how much progress has been made in last three years: resolution 
regimes  and  authorities  are  now  in  place  where  there  were  none  previously  in  many 
countries.  Resolution  planning  for  systemic  banks  is  taking  place  in  Crisis  Management 
Groups and will soon be taking place in EU resolution colleges too. We look forward to the 
guidance and technical standards from the European Banking Authority on how resolutions 
will be transacted. I think, in time, the EU BRRD will come to be seen as one of the most 
significant pieces of banking legislation to emerge from the financial crisis.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
 
But we must finish the job. For effective resolution to be feasible (i.e. technically practicable) 
and credible (i.e. widely understood and believable), firms need to be resolvable. MREL  is 
central to this. And for the world’s largest banks, for almost all of whom the EU is either home 
or host, it is crucial that the FSB develops an internationally-agreed standard that establishes 
a common framework, like MREL, outside Europe and ensures that G-SIBs have sufficient 
appropriately  loss  absorbing  capacity  should  they  fail  in  order  to  be  able  to  implement  an 
orderly, effective resolution of any firm and therefore end “Too Big to Fail”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
