  Manuel Sánchez: Mexican structural reforms and the binational 
relationship 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  Latino 
Business  and  Community  Leader  Luncheon,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco, 
Los Angeles, California, 9 September 2014. 
 I would like to thank the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco for inviting me to participate 
in this luncheon with the business and community leaders of the great city of Los Angeles. It 
is an honor to speak on Mexico’s structural reforms and how they will enhance the economic 
ties between our countries. 
Today  I  would  like  to  organize  my  comments  in  three  parts:  first,  the  binational  economic 
relationship;  second,  the  opportunities  stemming from  Mexico’s  ambitious  structural  reform 
agenda;  and,  third,  recent  developments  and  the  outlook  for  the  economy.  As  usual,  my 
comments are entirely my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Mexico or 
its Governing Board. 
The binational economic relationship 
The United States and Mexico have long had strong economic ties, which have grown tighter 
in recent years. The relationship encompasses trade in goods and services as well as labor 
migration. 
In  the  last  two  decades,  the  annual  dollar  value  of  Mexican  merchandise  exports  to  the 
United  States  has  almost  sextupled,  while  U.S.  sales  to  Mexico  have  more  than  tripled. 
California has been a significant destination and origin for these trade flows. 
Both countries have clearly exploited their comparative advantages. The abundance of labor 
in Mexico has combined with new technologies and know-how from the United States and 
other  advanced  nations  to  allow  the  country  to  produce  a  host  of  products  of  increasing 
sophistication at low cost. At the same time, Mexico has enjoyed a considerable degree of 
specialization in products such as autos. 
Economic engagement has been facilitated by geographic proximity, as well as two decades 
of  life  with  the  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA).  Furthermore,  integration 
between the two countries has occurred in a context of ever-deepening globalization. 
The effects of increased trade due to NAFTA seem to have overridden any potential trade 
diversion from the preferential trade agreement. In fact, during recent years, Mexican exports 
have  seen  geographic  diversification.  While  at  the  turn  of  this  century,  approximately 
90 percent of Mexico’s total nonoil exports went to the United States, currently this proportion 
is roughly ten basis points lower. 
In services, exchange between the two countries has been significant in tourism and finance. 
In particular, major direct and portfolio investments come from and go to the United States. 
Additionally, net migration to the United States has been considerable for a long time. A few 
facts of note include the following. The migration corridor from Mexico to the United States, 
by number of immigrants, is by far the most important in the world. The largest demographic 
minority in the United States is now comprised of the Hispanic population, with families of 
Mexican heritage forming the largest bloc in that group.1 
                                                
1  The  Hispanic  or  Latino  ethnic  group  refers  to  people  of  Cuban,  Mexican,  Puerto  Rican,  South  or  Central 
American, or other Spanish culture or origin regardless of race. See United States Census Bureau.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  California, with an economy almost twice as large as that of Mexico, is the state that absorbs 
the most Mexican migrants. This is a significant reason Mexico and California are becoming 
more  and  more  intertwined.  But  Mexico’s  influence  in  the  United  States  has  become  ever 
broader as immigration has spread to areas that are far away from the immigration corridor, 
such as small towns in North Carolina and ranches in Northern Colorado. 
Also,  Mexican  immigrants  in  the  United  States  tend  to  get  attached  to  this  country,  as 
suggested  by  the  relatively  high  proportion  of  immigrants  owning  a  house  and  the  low 
fraction of total earned income sent in the form of remittances to Mexico.2 
During  this  century,  annual  net  migration  flows  to  the  United  States  have,  on  average, 
declined, and since 2008 they have been slightly negative.3 There are several explanations 
for  this  phenomenon,  the  most  important  being  a  combination  of  demographic  factors 
stemming from a previous decline in the fertility rate, and the aftermath of the big financial 
crisis. 
Indeed, Mexican immigrants living in the United States were likely hit hard by lower economic 
growth, especially in sectors with high concentrations of Mexican labor, such as construction. 
Remittances to Mexico from abroad have declined since the crisis, and economic recovery 
has been weak, thus affecting the incomes of Mexican families back home. 
It  is  reasonable  to  expect  that,  as  the  U.S.  economy  recovers  ground,  migration  may 
increase. However, the aforementioned demographic trends and new labor opportunities in 
Mexico,  derived  from  higher  economic  growth  and  structural  reforms,  may  result  in  lower 
migration flows than those of the 1990s.4 
Empirical evidence suggests that immigration has not hurt job creation in the United States 
and  has  contributed  to  output  and  productivity.  Other  studies  posit  that  legalization  of 
immigrants in the United States could increase economic efficiency through channels such 
as higher labor mobility, better matches between wages and skill levels, and investment in 
training and education.5 
Structural reforms 
The  Mexican  government  has  embarked  on  an  ambitious  reform  agenda  encompassing 
many sectors of the economy. The broad array of reforms is likely to yield benefits in terms of 
greater  investment  and  productivity,  thus  enhancing  potential  long-term  economic  growth 
and the general well-being of Mexicans. 
A stronger economy south of the border should, in turn, have spill-over effects in the United 
States, with greater demand for U.S. products, and further deepening integrated production 
processes, such as in software and high-tech industries. 
Mexico’s reforms have changed the rules of the game and the legal frameworks affecting the 
labor  markets,  education,  the  telecommunications  sector,  the  financial  system  and  the 
 2   See, for example, Cervantes, J.A., and A. Rodríguez (2014), “Propiedad de la vivienda en Estados Unidos de 
la  población  inmigrante  de  origen  Latinoamericano  y  del  Caribe.”  CEMLA,  Documentos  de  Remesas,  2; 
Cervantes, J.A. (2014), “El perfil de la población de origen guatemalteco en Estados Unidos.” Programa de 
aplicación de los principios generales para los mercados de remesas de América Latina y el Caribe, CEMLA-
BID, July. 
3   See Cervantes, J.A (2014), “Indicadores sobre migración Mexicana hacia Estados Unidos.” CEMLA, August. 
4   A  similar  argument  was  advanced  by  Gary  Becker.  See  Becker,  G.S.  (2013),  “The  decline  in  illegal 
immigration from Mexico.” http://www.becker-posner-blog.com/2013/03/the-decline-in-illegal-immigration-from-
mexico-becker.html  
5   See  Peri,  G.  (2012),  “The  effect  of  immigration  on  productivity:  evidence  from  U.S.  states.” The  Review  of 
Economics  and  Statistics,  94(1):  348–358;  Hinojosa-Ojeda,  R.  (2012),  “The  economic  benefits  of 
comprehensive immigration reform.” Cato Journal, 32(1).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  energy sector, among others. The general aim has been towards making markets operate 
more freely, reducing obstacles to private investment and increasing competition.6 
Among other changes, with the new labor legislation, temporary hiring is allowed, and wages 
can be determined by productivity rather than seniority. Also, mandatory back wages after 
labor  disputes  have  been  capped,  and  the  “closed  shop  clause”  for  unions  was  repealed, 
meaning that if a worker leaves a union, the employer does not have to terminate the labor 
relationship anymore. 
The  education  reform  enforces  hiring  and  promotion  based  on  qualifications  and 
performance  for  teachers  in  public  education  at  all  levels  before  college.  An  autonomous 
evaluation institute is in charge of the process, open not only to candidates from teachers’ 
schools. 
In  telecommunications  all  operators  are  allowed  to  provide  triple  play  services  subject  to 
restrictions for dominant firms, and limits on foreign direct investment (FDI) are reduced. New 
licenses for TV frequencies will be auctioned to form at least two new national-coverage TV 
companies. A new regulatory authority is now in place. 
The financial reform pursues stronger protection for creditors’ property rights, by closing legal 
loopholes used by debtors to prolong the debt resolution process, and reducing obstacles to 
expediency  in  the  judicial  process  to  recover  collateral.  More  competition  is  encouraged 
through  the  facilitation  of  loan  substitution  by  debtors  across  banks  and  the  prohibition  of 
bundled sales of financial products. Regulation and supervision are strengthened, and a new 
banking resolution mechanism has been established. 
Of  particular  interest  is  the  energy  reform.  Before  the  reform,  production  and  most  other 
activities in this sector were open only to government monopolies. The reform has modified 
the Mexican Constitution to allow wide access to the energy sector to private participants. 
Major  changes  include  contracts  in  exploration  and  extraction  for  oil  and  hydrocarbons; 
permits  in  gas  processing  and  oil  refining,  transportation,  storage,  distribution,  and 
commercialization; and participation in electricity generation and sales. 
The depth of the benefits the reforms could eventually bring depends greatly on how they are 
implemented.  Additionally,  to  more  profoundly  transform  Mexico’s  economy,  other  policy 
measures  would  help,  such  as  strengthening  the  rule  of  law,  enhancing  physical 
infrastructure, and improving public security. 
Meanwhile, the reforms undertaken offer great scope for further U.S. investment in Mexico, 
thus further binding the two economies. 
Mexico’s economic outlook 
After  a  year  and  a  half  of  deceleration,  during  2014  Mexico’s  economy  has  been  gaining 
steam.  Higher momentum  has  been  supported by  stronger manufacturing  output  which,  in 
turn, has been linked to increasing external demand, notably from the United States. Auto 
exports to this country, in particular, have posted a significant rise since February. 
Following six quarters of decline and stagnation, mainly reflecting lower public spending and 
the bankruptcy of the three major housing developers, construction picked up in the second 
quarter.  Domestic  spending  also  has  begun  showing  signs  of  recovery.  Both  private 
consumption  and  total  investment  have  rebounded,  although  the  latter  remains  below  the 
                                                
6   For an identification of obstacles to productivity growth in Mexico and the potential of reforms, see Hanson, 
G.H.  (2011),  Understanding  Mexico’s  economic  underperformance.  Washington,  DC:  Migration  Institute 
Policy; Arias, J., et al. (2010), “Policies to promote growth and economic efficiency in Mexico.” Institute for the 
Study of Labor Discussion Paper 4740.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  levels prevailing two years ago. Unfortunately, consumer and producer confidence indexes 
remain relatively low. 
Notwithstanding  some  recent  pressure  partly  from  geopolitical  risks,  international  financial 
volatility  has  declined  so  far  this  year,  largely  reflecting  the  market’s  perception  that  the 
normalization  of  monetary  policy  in  the  United  States  is  not  imminent  and  will  be  gradual. 
Declining  international  risk  aversion  has  fueled  some  appreciation  of  Mexican  financial 
assets. The yield curve has shifted downward in tandem with that of the United States. 
As  in  many  other  emerging-market  economies,  the  proportion  of  nonresidents’  holdings  of 
Mexican  government  peso  securities  has  remained  relatively  stable  since  2013.  This  may 
attenuate concerns about possibly ever-increasing financial risk in the economy. 
However,  as  experience  confirms,  portfolio  capital  flows  can  easily  stop  and  even  revert 
following a change in market sentiment. Due to longstanding, extraordinarily accommodative 
monetary policies in advanced nations, international markets have tended to react negatively 
to  good  news  from  those  economies  and  vice  versa.  This  apparently  awkward  behavior 
seems to reflect the search for yield facilitated by those policies. 
Mexico’s  strong  fundamentals  have  drawn  players  with  long-term  investment  profiles.  Yet, 
Mexico  is  not  immune  to  spillover  effects  from  factors  unrelated  to  fundamentals,  such  as 
anticipation of the path of U.S. interest rates, which could induce a redirection of capital flows 
away from emerging markets. Hence, domestic financial risks should be monitored. 
On the back of expected higher U.S. growth, a gradual recovery of the Mexican economy this 
year  and  next  is  predicted.  The  Bank  of  Mexico’s  GDP  interval  forecast  is  for  2-  to  2.8-
percent growth in 2014, and 3.2- to 4.2-percent growth for next year. Analysts’ consensus 
point forecasts currently fall within these ranges.7 
Some risks to these forecasts persist. To the upside, faster U.S. output growth and a greater-
than-foreseen  positive  impact  from  structural  reforms  could  occur.  To  the  downside, 
insufficient improvement in consumer and producer confidence is also a possibility. 
In  the  context  of  slower  GDP  growth,  since  March  2013,  monetary  policy  accommodation 
has  been  successively  broadened.  The  objective  for  the  policy  interest  rate,  which  is  the 
interbank overnight rate, has accumulated a reduction of 150 basis points during this period. 
On the other hand, since July, annual headline inflation has breached the upper limit of the 
variability interval around the 3 percent permanent target. Pressures from both the core and 
noncore components of the National Consumer Price Index have contributed. 
Going forward, some inflation risks should be watched. Second-round effects from possible 
minimum wage hikes, unfavorable shocks to noncore inflation and volatility in global financial 
markets may make convergence of inflation to the 3 percent permanent target challenging. 
Concluding remarks 
Mexico and the United States have been growing closer in recent years, both economically 
and culturally. Trade in goods and services, as well as labor migration, have benefitted both 
countries.  In  this  connection,  California,  the  state  with  the  largest  Mexican  population,  has 
played an important role. 
An ambitious Mexican reform agenda opens up a great variety of business opportunities to 
U.S. investors. While potential gains from the reforms may be to the advantage of the entire 
Mexican  economy,  certain  sectors  such  as  energy  and  telecommunications  are  likely  to 
emerge as highly attractive destinations for FDI. 
 7   See  Banco  de  México  (2014),  Quarterly  Report,  April  –  June  2014,  Summary,  August;  and  Blue  Chip 
Economic Indicators, September 2014.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Finally, recent developments reveal that the Mexican economy has begun to rebound, and 
higher  expected  growth  in  the  United  States  provides  a  foundation  for  the  widely  held 
forecast  of  Mexico’s  gradual  economic  recovery.  Some  inflation  risks  should  be  watched, 
since  if  they  materialize,  they  could  make  convergence  to  the  3  percent  permanent  target 
difficult. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
