  Charles I Plosser: The economic outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  Pennsylvania  Association  of  Community  Bankers’ 
137th Annual Convention, Amelia Island, Florida, 6 September 2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
   President  Charles  Plosser  gives  his  views  on  the  economy  and  shares  some 
thoughts about the stance of monetary policy. 
President  Plosser  believes  that  forward  guidance  should  be  adjusted  to  reflect 
economic realities and to give the FOMC the flexibility to respond gradually to the 
evolution of the economy. 
President Plosser counters the view that rates cannot be raised because the labor 
market has not “completely” healed. He discusses two major risks with this strategy. 
First,  economists  do  not  know  what  maximum  employment  is  and  cannot  easily 
measure it. Second, waiting until we are completely confident the labor market has 
fully recovered risks that monetary policy will be behind the curve and could lead to 
a return to abrupt “go-stop” policies of the past that led to unwelcome volatility. 
While  he  is  not  suggesting  that  rates  should  necessarily  be  increased  now, 
President  Plosser  sees  that  the  first  task  is  to  change  the  language  and  to  begin 
signaling  that  liftoff  may  occur  sooner  than  many  now  anticipate  and  sooner  than 
suggested by the current FOMC guidance. 
Introduction 
Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity to speak at this 137th annual convention of the 
Pennsylvania  Association  of  Community  Bankers.  Community  banks  have  a  long  and 
venerable history in our nation, and the 137 years of the PACB is a powerful testament to 
your  roots  as  stalwarts  in  our  financial  system.  I  would  note  that  the  longevity  of  this 
convention means that your organization significantly predates the Federal Reserve System, 
which  is  observing  its  centennial  this  year.  My  suspicion  is  that  there  are  a  number  of 
community bankers here today who can trace their corporate histories to firms that petitioned 
for the  establishment  of  a  Federal  Reserve  Bank  in  Philadelphia  100  years  ago.  I  actually 
have two letters here. One from the New Tripoli National Bank dated December 27, 1913, 
and  one  from  the  First  National  Bank  of  Mifflintown  dated  December  26,  1913,  both 
addressed to William McAdoo, Secretary of the Treasury, requesting the establishment of a 
Federal Reserve Bank in the City of Philadelphia. 
Over the years, community banking organizations, whether they are state member banks or 
not, have provided important links between the Federal Reserve Banks and the businesses 
and  communities  your  institutions  serve. We  have  reached  out  and  listened  to  community 
bankers  through  their  representation  on  our  boards  of  directors  and  advisory  councils,  as 
well as through our ongoing contacts with individual firms and the business organizations you 
serve. 
The  insights  we  gather  from  community  bankers  in  our  District  help  me  as  a  policymaker 
bring  Main  Street  perspectives  to  the  national  policy  table  each  time  the  Federal  Open 
Market  Committee,  or  FOMC,  meets  in  Washington.  When  such  information  from  all  the 
Districts comes together at our meetings, it forms a rich mosaic of our economy that helps 
shape our monetary policy decisions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  So, I want to thank Nick DiFrancesco, president and CEO of the PACB, and Dennis Cirucci, 
your chairman, for inviting me here today. I also want to publicly thank Dennis for serving so 
ably on our Bank’s Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, or CDIAC, and as 
our council’s representative to the Board of Governors. 
My last opportunity to address the PACB was in September 2007, a very different economic 
environment than we find ourselves in today. I used that speech seven years ago to discuss 
the Federal Reserve’s initial responses to growing financial instability in the housing sector. I 
explained that the Fed’s role in promoting financial stability rather than its monetary policy 
responsibilities had prompted the short-term injection of some $68 billion in liquidity through 
open market operations in early August 2007, a mere 12 months after I joined the Fed. That 
seems like a long time ago and much has transpired since then. At the time, the FOMC had 
yet to lower the federal funds rate from its target of 5.25 percent. Weeks later, though, the 
FOMC began to lower the federal funds rate target and then kept lowering it to essentially 
zero  in  December  2008,  as  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  ensuing  Great  Recession 
enveloped economies around the world. 
The  rate  has  been  near  zero  for  nearly  six  years  now,  and  the  Fed  has  augmented  its 
aggressive  policy  actions  through  large-scale  asset  purchases,  now  tallying  in  the  trillions, 
rather than in the billions of dollars. 
Today, I would like to give you my assessment of the U.S. economy and then share some 
thoughts about the stance of monetary policy. 
I should note that my views are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve 
Board or my colleagues on the FOMC, which will shortly become apparent. 
Economic conditions 
So, let me begin with an overview of the U.S. economy. We are more than five years into a 
recovery that began in June 2009. While the pace has been sluggish and uneven, I believe 
the progress is undeniable. In fact, despite a winter cold spell in the first quarter, I remain 
mostly positive about the prospects ahead. 
The severe winter led to a decline in gross domestic product (GDP) during the first quarter of 
the year, but second-quarter growth rebounded to 4.2 percent, according to the most recent 
estimate. This largely confirmed that the disappointing performance in the first quarter was 
mostly a temporary weather-related slowdown rather than a more persistent retrenchment in 
the  ongoing  recovery.  In  the  second  quarter,  the  strongest  recoveries  were  in  categories 
most  directly  affected  by  the  first  quarter’s  severe  weather,  including  investment  in 
equipment,  residential  structures,  inventory  accumulation,  and  exports.  Exports  declined 
sharply at an annual rate of 10.1 percent in the first quarter and then jumped 9.5 percent in 
the second. Total private domestic investment fell 6.9 percent in the first-quarter freeze but 
then grew 17.5 percent during the second-quarter thaw. 
Personal consumption, the largest spending sector of the economy, slowed during the first 
quarter  to  1.2  percent.  In  the  second  quarter,  personal  consumption  growth  approximately 
doubled to 2.5 percent. Durable goods, which advanced at an annualized rate of 14 percent, 
were the strongest component of personal consumption in the second quarter. 
I believe consumer and business spending will help real GDP to grow at about 3 percent for 
the  remainder  of  this  year  and  next  before  reverting  to  trend,  which  I  see  as  about 
2.4 percent. 
The Philadelphia Fed’s Manufacturing Business Outlook Survey in our region has proven to 
be a reliable indicator of national manufacturing trends in the U.S. In August, the diffusion 
index  of  current  activity  increased  for  the  third  consecutive  month  and  had  its  strongest 
reading  since  March  2011.  The  survey  also  indicated  that  expectations  for  manufacturing 
activity six months ahead remained strong. Underlying details of the report included strong 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  results  for  new  orders  and  shipments.  The  current  indicators  for  labor  conditions  also 
suggested continued expansion in employment. The employment index has been positive for 
14 months, and the workweek index was positive for the sixth month. 
These  data  suggest  continued  improvement  in  U.S.  labor  market  conditions,  despite  a 
somewhat softer August number yesterday, which showed that 142,000 jobs were added to 
nonfarm  U.S.  payrolls. However,  I  prefer to  look  at  longer-term trends rather  than monthly 
numbers  that  are  still  subject  to  revision.  Year-to-date  monthly  average  job  growth  has 
amounted  to  215,000  jobs  this  year,  compared  with  a  monthly  average  of  194,000  jobs 
added last year. 
Despite the slowdown in August, job creation has improved markedly this year. The economy 
has created 1.7 million jobs since the start of the year, nearly 10 percent more than the same 
period in 2013, 20 percent more than in 2012, and 30 percent more than in 2011. 
The unemployment rate was 6.1 percent in August, down more than a full percentage point 
from  a  year  ago.  This  means  the  unemployment  rate  continues  to  fall  faster  than  many 
policymakers had been forecasting. For instance, in the Summary of Economic Projections 
(SEP) submitted in December 2013, the central tendency of FOMC participants was to end 
2014 with an unemployment rate of 6.3 to 6.6 percent, and by the end of 2015, the central 
tendency  was  expected  to  be  5.8 to  6.1  percent. We  have  clearly  exceeded  expectations. 
The  unemployment  rate  is  below  where  the  Committee  thought  it  would  be  at  the  end  of 
2014 and is now within the range expected at the end of 2015. Thus, it is fair to say that we 
are at least a year ahead of where we thought we would be when we started to taper asset 
purchases. 
In  Pennsylvania,  job  growth  has  been  positive  as  well.  The  state  added  more  than 
54,000 jobs  over  the  past  12  months.  July’s  unemployment  rate  in  Pennsylvania  was 
5.7 percent, down from 7.5 percent a year ago and from a peak of 8.7 percent immediately 
following the recession. 
It  is  not  just  that  the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen,  other  measures  of  labor  market 
conditions have improved as well. Long-term unemployment in the nation, those unemployed 
for more than 27 weeks, has dropped by about 1.3 million from a year ago; the duration of 
unemployment spells has declined; job openings have returned to prerecession levels; and 
the rate at which employees voluntarily leave their jobs, called the quit rate, has risen. 
This is not to claim that all is rosy in the labor markets. Many Americans remain frustrated 
and  disappointed  in  their  jobs  and  job  prospects.  For  example,  there  remains  a  large 
contingent  of  those  working  part  time  for  reasons  economists  don’t  fully  understand. 
Nonetheless, we have to acknowledge that significant progress has been made. 
Inflation remains somewhat below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent, but it appears to 
be  drifting  upward.  Headline  inflation  as  measured  by  year-over-year  change  in  the 
consumer price index, or CPI, was 2 percent in July, the fourth month at or above that level. 
The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation is the year-over-year change in the price index for 
personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. In December of last year, that figure 
stood at 1.2 percent. The most recent reading for July 2014 was 1.6 percent. Compare that 
with December 2013 SEP estimates for 2014, and you will find that we are already at the top 
of the FOMC’s central tendency of 1.4 to 1.6 percent for PCE inflation. 
In the June SEP, FOMC participants modestly increased their assessment of inflation, raising 
the  central  tendency  for  PCE  inflation  by  the  fourth  quarter  of  2014  to  between  1.5  and 
1.7 percent.  The  Philadelphia  Fed’s  most  recent  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  also 
increased  its  average  estimate  of  headline  PCE  inflation  to  1.8  percent  in  2014,  up  from 
1.6 percent  in  the  last  survey.  The  survey  also  increased  the  estimate  of  PCE  inflation  to 
2.0 percent in 2015, up 0.1 percentage point from the previous estimate. All of these figures 
suggest that inflation appears to be gradually moving closer to our target of 2 percent and 
doing so more quickly than anticipated in December 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Monetary policy 
Let me turn to some thoughts on monetary policy, including why I departed from the majority 
view at the July FOMC meeting. 
As I noted in the beginning of my remarks, the Fed has taken extraordinary monetary policy 
actions,  keeping  the  federal  funds  rate  near  zero  for  nearly  six  years  and  expanding  its 
balance sheet to more than $4 trillion. Indeed, the balance sheet continues to expand, so the 
Fed is still trying to increase accommodation even though the pace of purchases is slowing 
and is expected to end in October. 
Yet, the recovery began over five years ago, and the unemployment rate has declined from 
10 percent in October 2009, to 6.1 percent now. Whether you believe that the labor market 
has fully recovered or not, it is clear that we have made considerable progress toward full 
employment and price stability. We are no longer in the depths of a financial crisis nor is the 
labor market in the same dire straits it was five years ago. 
In its July statement, the FOMC reaffirmed its highly accommodative stance. The statement 
noted that “in determining how long to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for 
the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess progress – both realized and expected – 
toward  its  objectives  of  maximum  employment  and  2  percent  inflation.”  In  assessing  this 
progress, the Committee reported that it will look at a wide range of information, including 
measures  of  labor  market  conditions,  indicators  of  inflation  pressures  and  inflation 
expectations, and readings on financial developments. 
The  FOMC  also  noted,  based  on  its  assessment  of  these  factors,  “that  it  likely  will  be 
appropriate to keep its target federal funds rate near zero for a considerable time after the 
asset purchase program ends ...” 
I objected to this forward guidance regarding the expected timing for raising the funds rate 
because I believe this language is no longer appropriate or warranted. Appropriate monetary 
policy  must  respond  to  the  data.  I  believe  that  by  indicating  that  the  FOMC  continues  to 
anticipate that  it  will  be  a  “considerable  time”  after  the  end  of  asset  purchases  before  it  is 
likely  that  the  Committee  will  raise  interest  rates  does  not  reflect  the  significant  progress 
toward our goals. It also limits the Committee’s flexibility to take action going forward. 
We have moved much closer to our goals since last December, and, as we do so, the stance 
of  monetary  policy  should  reflect  such  progress  and  begin  to  gradually  adjust.  That  is  the 
essence  of  being  data  dependent.  In  the  current  context,  we  must  acknowledge  and  thus 
prepare  the  markets  for  the  fact  that  interest  rates  may  begin  to  increase  sooner  than 
previously  anticipated.  I  felt  that  adjusting  our  language  was  the  appropriate  first  step  in 
responding to better-than-anticipated economic conditions. 
My  view  is  informed,  as  I  have  indicated,  by  realized  and  projected  economic  progress 
toward our goals. But it is also influenced by guidance gained from the historical conduct of 
past monetary policy. In particular, my views on the appropriate funds rate setting are – and 
continue to be – informed by Taylor-type monetary policy rules that depict the past behavior 
of monetary policy. I find such rules useful for benchmarking my policy prescriptions. These 
rules have been widely investigated and have been shown to be robust, in that they deliver 
good results in a wide variety of models and circumstances. 
The guidance I take from such robust rules is that we should no longer consider monetary 
policy  as  being  constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound.  A  variety  of  these  rules,  which  I 
discussed in a speech earlier this summer, indicates that under current conditions the funds 
rate should already be above zero or should be lifting off in the very near future.1 I am not 
                                                
1   Charles I. Plosser, “Systematic Monetary Policy and Communication,” remarks to the Economic Club of New 
York, New York, NY, June 24, 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  suggesting that rates should necessarily be increased now. Our first task is to change the 
language in a way that allows for liftoff sooner than many now anticipate and sooner than 
suggested by our current guidance. Raising rates sooner rather than later also reduces the 
chance  that  inflation  will  accelerate  and,  in  so  doing,  require  policy  to  become  fairly 
aggressive with perhaps unsettling consequences. Thus, I believe that our forward guidance 
should  be  adjusted  to  reflect  economic  realities  and  to  give  us  the  flexibility  to  respond 
sooner and more gradually to the evolution of the economy. 
There  is  a  point  of  view  that  rates  cannot  be  raised  because  the  labor  market  has  not 
completely healed. That is, we must wait, maintaining our current stance of policy until we 
have achieved our goals. I think this is a risky strategy for two reasons. 
First, we do not know how to confidently determine whether the labor market is fully healed 
or  when  we  have  reached  full  employment.  In  January  2012,  the  FOMC  affirmed  in  its 
statement  of  longer  run  goals  and  strategies  that,  “The  maximum  level  of  employment  is 
largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor 
market.  These  factors  may  change  over  time  and  may  not  be  directly  measurable.”  Chair 
Yellen gave an excellent speech at the Jackson Hole conference just a couple of weeks ago 
that highlighted some of the structural and nonmonetary factors affecting the labor market. 
Economists don’t fully understand how these factors may be influencing our efforts to assess 
the meaning and measurement of full employment. 
Second, if monetary policy waits until it is certain that the labor market has fully recovered 
before beginning to raise rates, policy will be far behind the curve. One risk of waiting is that 
the Committee may be forced to raise rates very quickly to prevent an increase in inflation. In 
so doing, this may create unnecessary volatility and a rapid tightening of financial conditions 
– either of which could be disruptive to the economy. 
This would represent a return of the so-called “go-stop” policies of the past. Such language 
was  used  to  describe  episodes  when  the  Fed  was  viewed  as  providing  lots  of 
accommodation  to  stimulate  employment  and  the  economy  –  the  go  phase  –  only  to  find 
itself  forced  to  apply  the  brakes  abruptly  to  prevent  a  rapid  uptick  in  inflation  –  the  stop 
phase.  This  approach  to  policy  led  to  more  volatility  and  was  more  disruptive  than  many 
found desirable. 
For these reasons, I would prefer that we start to raise rates sooner rather than later. This 
may  allow  us  to  increase  rates  more  gradually  as  the  data  improve  rather  than  face  the 
prospect of a more abrupt increase in rates to catch up with market forces, which could be 
the outcome of a prolonged delay in our willingness to act. 
Conclusion 
To  summarize,  my  own  forecast  is  positive.  Second-quarter  growth  has  rebounded, 
confirming that the disappointing performance in the first quarter was mostly weather related 
rather than a retrenchment to the ongoing recovery. 
Unemployment  continues  to  improve  more  quickly  than  many  had  expected,  and  inflation 
appears to be drifting up toward our 2 percent goal. 
If  monetary  policy  is  to  be  truly  data  dependent,  then  our  stance  of  policy  must  begin  to 
change. I’m not suggesting a rate increase now, but changing the forward guidance would at 
least  afford  us  the  flexibility  to  gradually  raise  rates  beginning  earlier  than  currently 
anticipated. 
Waiting too long to begin raising rates – especially waiting until we have fully met our goals 
for maximum employment – is risky because we cannot know when we have arrived. That 
could also put monetary policy behind the curve and could lead to a return to abrupt go-stop 
policies that in the past led to unwelcome volatility. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
