  Yves Mersch: For a European capital markets union – securing stability, 
overcoming fragmentation 
Closing  keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the Zeit Konferenz “Banken & Wirtschaft”, Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry, Frankfurt am Main, 10 September 2014. 
 Dr Esser (Managing Director, ZEIT Verlagsgruppe), 
Dr Raettig (Vice-President, Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Frankfurt am Main), 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would first like to thank you for inviting me to deliver the closing speech of this high-calibre 
conference. 
I would do an injustice to the participants in the previous two panel discussions if I attempted 
to sum up the day’s deliberations. Instead, I’d like to conclude by linking together financial 
market policy, which has already been discussed at length today, our monetary policy and 
the overall functioning of Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union. 
A common currency in a union of states such as the European Union can only work in the 
long  term  if  financial  market  policy,  economic  policy  and  fiscal  policy  interact  at  European 
level  and  in  the  Member  States  within  the  framework  of  common  rules.  In  this  way,  the 
independent  central  bank  is  given  the  opportunity  to  fulfil  its  monetary  policy  mandate. 
Unfortunately we are quite some distance from this ideal condition. 
The crisis has shown us just how much the various policies affect each other. It has shown 
how easily bad budgetary management, excesses in the financial markets and a steady loss 
of competitiveness can reinforce each other. 
I am convinced that Europe has understood this. But I’m not sure if it is ready to draw all 
necessary conclusions. 
Without  doubt,  some  changes  for  the  better  have  taken  place  since  the  beginning  of  the 
crisis:  most  of  the  Member  States  and  in  particular  the  programme  countries  have  made 
significant efforts to put their budgets in order and improve their competitiveness. With the 
banking  union  we  are  now  taking  a  decisive  step  at  European  level.  It  will  increase  the 
stability  of  the  banking  system  in  the  euro  area  and  protect  taxpayers  in  the  future  more 
effectively against expensive bank bailouts by linking risk and liability more closely. 
However,  the  economic  recovery  is  still  some  way  off:  in  the  last  quarter,  the  economy 
stagnated in the euro area. Unemployment is still at 11.5%. Prices in August rose by only 
0.3%, but inflation expectations are anchored. 
All in all, these figures should give us cause for concern. They point out that Europe is still 
not out of danger. The patient is in a sense still poorly and unfortunately relapses cannot be 
ruled out. 
Financial market policy, fiscal policy and economic policy are still insufficiently harmonised, 
because  all  too  often  the  political  courage  is  lacking  to  push  through  the  necessary  but 
sometimes  unpopular  measures  in  the  face  of  resistance.  I  am  convinced  that  this  is  an 
important reason for the current economic weakness. As a result, the ECB’s monetary policy 
cannot optimally fulfil its mandate. To change this, we need to further improve the functioning 
of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  In  other  words,  we  need  to  draw  the  right  conclusions 
from the crisis. 
All three policies mentioned – financial market policy, fiscal policy and economic policy – are 
essential  to  this  process.  Ambitious  structural  reforms  are  just  as  important  as  good 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  housekeeping. But as we are talking about financial market policy today, I want to focus on 
the  completion  of  Europe’s  internal  market  for  capital.  We  should  not  stop  at  the  banking 
union.  It  is  an  important  step.  But  the  current  situation  in  the  euro  area  demands  that  we 
consider even more seriously how financing channels, especially for small and medium-sized 
enterprises,  may  be  opened  up  beyond  the  banking  system.  This  would  also  benefit  the 
implementation  of  our  monetary  policy.  That’s  why  today  I  wish  to  speak  out  in  favour  of 
developing the banking union into a comprehensive capital markets union. 
Monetary policy in times of uncertainty and fragmentation 
A capital markets union would be an important step towards a better allocation of capital in 
the  euro  area  and  thus towards  higher growth  and  employment  in  Europe.  To  understand 
how such a move could support the recovery in the euro area, it is advisable, however, to 
begin by considering our own monetary policy. 
The current economic climate is unquestionably making monetary policy action very difficult. 
Low growth, high unemployment and very low inflation rates call for a very accommodative 
monetary policy in order to ensure price stability over the medium term. The ECB has been 
meeting this demand for quite some time. 
I understand why investors in this country, mindful of their savings accounts, are viewing this 
policy  critically.  But  it  is  true  for  savers  as  well  that  too  low  an  inflation  level  for  too  long 
would hold back economic development in the euro area and thus the return on savings. 
In addition, the Treaty requires the ECB to maintain price stability in the euro area – and this 
applies in both directions: the people of the euro area should be protected against any spurt 
in inflation and against deflation. 
Over ten years ago the ECB defined price stability as an annual inflation rate of below, but 
close to, 2% in the medium term. For this year, however, we can expect price increases of 
only 0.6%, for 2015 only 1.1% and for 2016 only 1.4%. This clearly shows why our current 
very accommodative monetary policy stance is not only economically appropriate, but also a 
necessary measure to fulfil our treaty obligation. The Governing Council is unanimous on this 
point. 
At the heart of this accommodative strategy is undoubtedly the fact that the ECB has steadily 
cut the interest rate on the main refinancing operations to its lowest possible point in recent 
years. However, the still existing functional deficits of the financial markets are hindering an 
optimal transmission of the monetary policy signals coming from this very low interest rate. 
Small and medium-sized enterprises in particular still aren’t feeling enough of the monetary 
policy accommodation. We call this an impaired transmission mechanism. 
That’s why the Governing Council unanimously adopted in June a series of measures which 
will improve the transmission of our monetary policy: first, we decided to continue to conduct 
our main refinancing operations as fixed-rate tender procedures with full allotment for as long 
as  necessary,  and  at  least  until  December  2016.  Banks  will  therefore  receive  as  much 
liquidity  as  they  need  as  long  as  they  can  offer  adequate  collateral.  Second,  we  have 
reduced  the  interest  rate  on  the  deposit  facility  to  below  zero  for  the  first  time  and  cut  it 
further last week. 
By the way, this is not to punish the banks, as I have often read. Rather, we are giving them 
an incentive not to park liquidity at the central bank, but to pass it on in a productive way to 
the  real  economy.  In  an  environment  in  which  it  is  already  difficult  for  businesses  to  gain 
access to capital for their own investments, it is important that banks also provide sufficient 
funds for profitable projects. 
Third,  we  have  decided,  within  a  framework  of  eight  targeted  longer-term  refinancing 
operations,  to  make  available  long-term  liquidity  to  banks  for  a  period  up  to  2018  –  in 
proportion to their credit volume relative to the real economy. Thus, banks are encouraged to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  lend  to  enterprises  in  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time,  the  uncertainty  about  the  liquidity 
situation of banks is reduced, so that banks can increasingly lend each other money again, 
even across the borders of the Member States. 
The focus of this instrument on the real economy is particularly illustrated by the fact that not 
only in the first step is the existing loan portfolio crucial for the allocation of liquidity, but also 
in  the  second  step  the  trend  over  the  period  of  the  transaction  will  be  considered.  Thus, 
banks are required to expand further their lending to business and households in the coming 
months and years. 
To reinforce these measures, the Governing Council decided last week to start purchasing 
asset-backed securities (ABS) as well as covered bonds, such as Pfandbriefe, in October. 
The details of these two programmes will be announced after the Council meeting in early 
October. 
The  decision  to  start  buying  ABS  is  the  first  result  of  intensive  preparations  that  are  still 
ongoing.  For  me  it  is  clear  that  these  measures  are  aimed  at  the  monetary  policy 
transmission channel. They should not be equated with a broad programme of quantitative 
easing (QE), nor with overtures to it. 
Moreover, the economic logic of the Anglo-Saxon QE programmes cannot be applied one to 
one to a bank-financed economic system like that of the euro area. Also, QE effectiveness 
would be questionable in the light of the eroded yields of marketable securities. The surge in 
the  markets  for  interest-bearing  securities  would  also  strain  the  soundness  of  our  balance 
sheet, should we make large-scale purchases in such an environment. And it goes almost 
without saying that the purchase of government bonds would raise considerable institutional, 
instrumental and legal issues. 
Although some are apparently pushing in this direction, this option would only be considered 
on two conditions: 
1. 
2. 
But  back to  the  market for  ABS. We  have  been  looking  at this  closely  for  some  time. We 
believe  that  it  could  be  an  important  channel  for  increased  lending  to  small  and  medium-
sized enterprises. 
Because  of  their  size,  SMEs  cannot  generally  issue  bonds.  If  banks  now  get  a  chance  to 
securitise loans to SMEs, and to sell them to other investors, a major obstacle to long-term 
lending to these enterprises is removed, namely the risk of non-payment and the low liquidity 
of these loans in difficult times. 
A functioning ABS market can therefore make an important contribution to ensuring that our 
monetary policy has an impact right across the real economy. 
This brings me back to my initial hypothesis – namely that monetary policy in the euro area 
may  work  better  if  other  policy  areas  play  their  part.  Because  the  dynamics  of  the  ABS 
market are significantly influenced by the regulatory framework. And there is still work to be 
done here. 
Let  me  say  quite clearly:  no  one  wants  to  have  the  complex,  opaque  products  of  the  pre-
crisis years. Also, repackagings of the umpteenth tranche of a financial derivative should be 
things of the past. 
No  one  wants  to  promote  a  certain  class  of  product  just for  its  own  sake.  And  securitised 
sub-prime  mortgages  in  the  United  States  certainly  made  an  inglorious  contribution  to  the 
emergence of the financial crisis. But the regulatory framework should be appropriate for the 
actual risk. And in this respect there are significant differences between current and previous 
securitisations and between the experiences in the US and those in Europe. 
if prices stay at their current very low level for too long, and 
strict compliance with our monetary policy mandate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Since the start of the 2007–08 financial crisis, the default rates of European ABS were on 
average between 0.6% and 1.5%. In the US over the same period, they  were on average 
9.3%  to  18.4%.  European  SME  ABS  are  even  further  below  these  default  rates,  at  about 
0.1%. 
The  current  rules  lump  all  ABS  together  and  are  much  too  conservative.  They  effectively 
question their existence. 
Under  the  current  regulatory  conditions  simple,  transparent  ABS  built  on  real  assets  face 
almost as many problems as much more complex financial products. The ECB has therefore, 
in cooperation with the Bank of England, made a number of proposals for a better functioning 
securitisation  market  in  the  European  Union.  That  this  approach  has  been  welcomed  in 
principle by the governments of the Member States is shown by the joint working paper of 
the finance ministries in Berlin and Paris. 
The proposals are derived in part from the quality and transparency demands that the central 
banks  place  on  ABS,  which  can  be  deposited  as  collateral  in  monetary  policy  operations. 
And because we, as a central bank, have to protect our balance sheet, these demands have 
always been very high. The ABS market is therefore a good example of how financial market 
policy  can  benefit  our  monetary  policy  and  can also  contribute  to  the  recovery  in  the  euro 
area. Thus, two goals of good financial market policy in the European context can be named: 
it should be growth-friendly and it should support a successful implementation of monetary 
policy.  There  is,  of  course,  a  third  goal,  which  goes  back  to  before  the  financial  crisis: 
maintaining financial stability and mitigating systemic risks. 
From the banking union to the capital markets union 
For the banking sector, this triad has been understood and implemented to a large extent, 
although some work still remains to be done. The banking union with the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  at  the  ECB  is  a  milestone  in  the  history  of  European  integration.  Our 
comprehensive  balance  sheet  valuation  and  our  stress  test  will  bring  about  greater 
transparency  and  a  healthier  banking  system  in  the  euro  area.  The  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism (SRM) will play its part too. It will lessen the risk that taxpayers in future will have 
to  foot  the  bill  to  rescue  banks  in  trouble.  In  addition,  it  will  continue  to  tackle  the 
fragmentation by sustainably reducing the interdependence of banks and governments. 
At the same time, with the Single Supervisory Mechanism under construction, it’s becoming 
clear  that  the  banking  union  is  not  a  system  closed  in  on  itself.  Rather,  Europe’s  banking 
supervision  is  also  dependent  on  standards  in  other  areas  that  are  as  uniform  and 
transparent as possible. Some of you may be aware of the discussion about the definition of 
so-called “bad loans” in the context of the comprehensive assessment. Banking supervision, 
which  has  to  work  permanently  with  18  different  national  regulatory  regimes  is  neither 
particularly  efficient,  nor  can  it  achieve  the  goal  of  comparable  cross-border  bank  balance 
sheets in the long run. 
Thus, in the banking sector the question arises of how far we need to think in future beyond 
the banking union in order to achieve a functioning internal market for financial services. To 
answer this question, in my opinion three dimensions play a role. The first dimension is the 
opening of the market itself. In this regard, we have already achieved a great deal within the 
EU. The second dimension is the introduction of common uniform regulatory standards for 
the  internal  financial  market.  The  third  dimension  consists  of  common  institutions  which 
enforce these regulatory standards. How much integration do we need therefore beyond the 
banking system? For example, isn’t it a one-sided approach only to tackle fragmentation in 
respect of the banking system, and how do we  handle the shadow banking system in this 
context? If banking supervision is becoming European, can payment systems continue to be 
monitored  nationally?  How  do  we  manage  to  give  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
access to capital markets beyond the banks, if those markets are fragmented and regulated 
in a non-uniform way? 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  All  these  questions  call  for  a  coherent  response.  In  my  view,  this  response  could  be  the 
further  development  of  the  banking  union  and  of  the  piecemeal  regulation  of  the  financial 
system into a real capital markets union at European Union level. 
Financial markets are complex and a capital markets union would affect a large number of 
different areas. Allow me therefore, in conclusion, to draw attention to three points. 
First, we must be certain that a stringent regulation of the banking system does not lead to a 
shifting of bad risks into the non-banking sectors, without ensuring that they cannot cause 
systemic damage there. Apart from the fact that the term “shadow banking” is a particularly 
unfortunate one, I regard transparency as being very important here. At the same time, only 
those areas should be regulated which can in fact trigger systemic risk. Innovations in the 
financial sector should not be blocked per se. 
Second,  many  financial  instruments  are  not  uniformly  European  and  are  sometimes 
insufficiently comparable because of a lack of standards and a lack of transparency. I have 
already  mentioned  the  problem  of  ABS.  The  lack  of  proper  information  in  this  area  is  a 
problem for SMEs’ access to credit. Here and in relation to many other financial instruments, 
regulatory actions can help to support the market. As I also mentioned, the joint paper by the 
Bank of England and the ECB may provide a good basis here. 
Third,  in  the  field  of  payment  systems  and  securities  settlement  there  are  also  challenges 
that a capital markets union must address: despite much progress over the past decade in 
payment systems, securities settlement in the euro area remains fragmented, inefficient and 
not  very  customer-friendly.  This  is  not  just  a  problem  for  smaller  businesses,  for  whom 
adapting to different conditions in the Member States often entails high costs, but also for the 
integration  and  functioning  of  the  internal  market  as  a  whole.  Possible  solutions  include 
harmonised European market infrastructures for retail and large-value payment systems and 
the  processing  of  securities  transactions,  as  well  as  a  coordinated  and  more  harmonised 
monitoring  of  critical  market  infrastructures.  In  all  these  areas,  in  which  the  Eurosystem  is 
competent,  relevant  initiatives  were  launched  several  years  ago  and  have  already  made 
significant progress. In retail payments, for example, since August 2014 there has been no 
distinction between national credit transfers and direct debits of businesses and individuals, 
and cross-border ones. This, and the fact that the IBAN has become a part of our daily lives, 
shows how far we have progressed in the field of retail payments. The Single Euro Payments 
Area,  SEPA,  is  an  important  European  integration  project  from  which  all  businesses  and 
individuals in Europe benefit directly. 
A comparable degree of integration would be also desirable for card payments, so that they 
are not discriminated against by virtual border posts within Europe. In the long term, there 
should be no “roaming charges” for European payments. 
Progress has been made, but many challenges remain before the euro area can become a 
“single  euro  payment  and  settlement  space”.  These  include  barriers  that  result  from 
differences in market practices and standards as well as tax, accounting and legal systems in 
the  Member  States.  The  removal  of  these  barriers  lies  outside  the  competence  of  the 
Eurosystem. Other players must also take steps to make the capital markets union a reality. 
These are just three examples, but a genuine capital markets union could go much further, of 
course. Differences in all these areas nurture fragmentation and could be addressed within 
the capital markets union project. In addition, there is also the question of the actors which 
could  play  a  part.  What  functions  could  be  performed,  for  instance,  by  the  European 
supervisory  authorities  EBA,  ESMA  and  EIOPA,  whose  activities  and  tasks  are  currently 
being checked in Brussels? And not least, we must identify the areas in which the EU can 
take the initiative and those in which the Member States can be active. 
I am very aware that these ambitious proposals cannot be implemented overnight. But the 
fact  that  the  future  President  of  the  European  Commission  has  already  taken  up  the  idea 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  makes  me  optimistic.  The  challenge  in  the  coming  months  will  be  to  create  a  political 
awareness of the enormous economic importance of this highly technical area. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Late last year, Helmut Schmidt, the publisher of Die Zeit and former German Chancellor, said 
that  it’s  not  written  in  any  Bible  that  the  European  Union  will  last  until  the  end  of  the 
21th century in its present form. It was an expression of concern, but he hoped that he would 
be wrong. 
This  logic  also  works  the  other  way  around:  because  the  global  environment  in  which  we 
operate has changed radically and because Europe is today facing quite different challenges 
on the world’s markets than it did 20 or 30 years ago, the Union also has to steadily adapt. It 
is good that Die Zeit has today brought us together here, in the spirit of Helmut Schmidt, to 
discuss these developments in financial market policy. And I am convinced that the capital 
markets union could play an important part in making Europe fit for the global challenges that 
the former Chancellor has been analysing for many years. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
