  Mario Draghi: Keynote speech at the Eurofi Financial Forum 
Keynote speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Eurofi 
Financial Forum, Milan, 11 September 2014. 
 Summary 
We  are  facing  a  set  of  conditions  –  low  growth  and  low  inflation,  high  debt  and  high 
unemployment – that can only be addressed by concerted action on both the demand and 
supply sides of the economy. This requires that all actors – both at national and European 
levels – play their parts in line with their respective mandate as laid down in the EU Treaties. 
No monetary or fiscal stimulus can be successful if not accompanied by the right structural 
policies – policies that foster potential growth and instil confidence. 
Investment has been one of the great casualties of the crisis. From peak to trough business 
investment in the euro area decreased by around 20% since 2008, against 15% in the 1992 
recession. We will not see a sustainable recovery unless this changes. 
A decisive rise in investment is essential to bring inflation where we would want to see it, to 
kick-start the economy and to bring down unemployment. 
There  are  two  key  areas  where  national  and  European  level  government  action  can  help 
revive  investment.  First,  the  regulatory  environment  should  be  made  more  favourable  to 
economic growth. Second, companies need to have access to more diversified sources of 
financing:  the  launch  of  a  capital  markets  union  could  contribute  to  achieving  this.  It  is  an 
idea that the ECB fully supports. 
The development of the market for simple and transparent Asset Backed Securities deserves 
particular  support.  Member  States  should  consider  the  provision  of  public  guarantees  to 
support lending to small and medium sized enterprises. 
There also needs to be a consistent and credible application of the Stability and Growth Pact 
across  time  and  across  countries.  Within  the  existing  framework,  countries  should  explore 
how to support productive investment. 
In  monetary  policy,  we  have  deployed  a  number  of  non-standard  tools  to  ensure  our  very 
accommodative monetary policy stance is transmitted to the real economy. Last week, the 
Governing  Council  decided  to  start  the  purchase  of  certain  high-quality  asset-backed 
securities and covered bonds in October. Senior tranches of such ABS have proven to be 
high quality assets. 
Alongside  our  Targeted  Longer  Term  Refinancing  Operations,  we  expect  these  measures 
will enhance the functioning of monetary policy transmission, provide further accommodation 
now that we are at the lower bound, and have a sizeable impact on our balance sheet. 
*** 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here tonight with you in Milan. 
In  a  recent  speech  in  Jackson  Hole,  I  spoke  about  the  need  for  a  policy  mix  involving 
monetary, fiscal and structural policies to jump-start the economic recovery in the euro area. 
We are currently facing a set of conditions – low growth and low inflation, high debt and high 
unemployment – that can only be addressed by concerted action on both the demand and 
supply sides of the economy. This requires all actors – both at national and European level – 
to play their parts in line with their respective mandates as laid down in the EU Treaties. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  No monetary stimulus, indeed no fiscal stimulus, can be successful unless accompanied by 
the right structural policies – policies that foster potential growth and instil confidence. 
I  would  like  to  illustrate  this  argument  by  focusing  on  investment,  which  will  also  be 
discussed  at  the  informal  ECOFIN  this  weekend.  Investment  has  been  one  of  the  great 
casualties of this crisis. 
The  downturn  in  business  investment  in  the  euro  area  since  2008  has  been  much  more 
severe than in earlier business cycles. From peak to trough, business investment decreased 
by around 20%, against 15% in the 1992 recession. The level of business investment in the 
euro area has only slightly improved since 2008, whereas in the US it is above its pre-crisis 
level. 
We will not see a sustainable recovery unless this changes. A decisive rise in investment is 
essential to bring inflation closer to where we would want to see it, to stimulate the economy, 
and to bring down unemployment. So what can we policy-makers do to revive investment? 
My  main  message  today  is  that  only  if  structural,  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  go  hand  in 
hand  will  the  euro  area  see  investment  return.  Let  me  focus  in  particular  on  the  decisive 
contribution which structural policies can make. 
A policy mix to revive investment 
I  see two  key  areas  where government  action  both  at  national  and  European  level  should 
help to revive business investment. First, the regulatory environment should be made more 
favourable to economic growth. Second, companies need to have access to more diversified 
sources of financing: the launch of a capital markets union could contribute to achieving this 
and, at the same time, help overcome the remaining fragmentation of financial markets. Let 
me briefly elaborate on each of these points. 
Improving the regulatory environment 
Business activity would greatly benefit from an improvement in the regulatory environment, in 
particular as regards product and labour markets. The differences between Member States 
are  quite  striking  in  respect  of  wage  differentiation  (across  workers  and  between  sectors), 
employment  adjustment  rigidities,  barriers  to  entry  in  product  markets  and  the  ease  of 
opening and running businesses. For example, in some Member States contractual disputes 
between firms take on average little more than a year to resolve, while in other countries they 
take more than three years. Start-ups in the latter countries have to deal with more red tape 
than  their  counterparts  elsewhere.  Another  telling  example  relates  to  the  regulated 
professions whose number varies considerably across euro area Member States [from 45 in 
Estonia, 170 in Italy, 219 in France to 304 in Slovakia, according to European Commission 
figures]. Such barriers to entry limit competition and employment, creating undue rents for a 
select few to the detriment of customers. These are just a few examples. 
In many cases, these obstacles sap entrepreneurial spirits, especially of young, innovative 
firms that create most of the new jobs and that are highly sensitive to changes in investment 
opportunities. These examples show how converging towards best practice in the euro area 
would  mean  radical  improvements  in  the  business  environment.  Spain  provides  an 
encouraging  example  in  this  regard.  Among  the  large  euro  area  countries,  investment  in 
Spain  is  projected  to  rebound  strongly  over  the  coming  two  years,  notably  due  to  the 
combination  of  business-friendly  reforms  and  lower  personal  and  corporate  taxes.  More 
recently,  other  countries  have  also  committed  to  improve  the  business  environment.  A 
forceful and swift implementation of the necessary reforms is now key in order to reap the 
benefits as quickly as possible. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Strengthening the financing side 
A  second  area  of  key  relevance  for  investment  and  also  of  direct  interest  to  the  Eurofi 
community  here  tonight  is  the  need  to  diversify  sources  of  financing  and  to  overcome 
financial  fragmentation.  Until  now,  banks  have  been  the  main  source  of  lending  to 
companies. The crisis has shown the drawbacks of over-reliance on a bank-centred lending 
model. So we also need to develop reliable sources of non-bank lending, such as equity and 
bond  markets,  securitisation,  lending  from  insurance  companies  and  asset  managers, 
venture capital and crowdfunding. 
This is why the ECB fully supports the intention of the incoming President of the European 
Commission to create a capital markets union. Such a step would be a natural development 
of the Single Market and would benefit all EU Member States. 
We  believe  that  one  area  that  deserves  particular  attention  is  the  development  of  a  well-
functioning  market  for  simple,  transparent  and  real  asset-backed  securities  (ABS).  This 
would  allow  banks  to  still  originate  loans  –  notably  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
(SMEs) – while preserving their balance sheet capacity. In order to achieve a well-functioning 
ABS market, it is important that the regulatory treatment of securitisation is proportional to 
the risk of ABS. In this respect, the ECB welcomes efforts to have a differentiated regulatory 
treatment of simple, transparent ABS built on real assets. Moreover, the provision of public 
guarantees should be considered to support lending to SMEs, as other countries do, such as 
the US. 
A further integration of corporate bond and equities markets is also essential to overcome the 
present fragmentation in the euro area and to ensure more robust cross-border lending and 
investment flows. To achieve this, we will have to streamline differences between countries, 
for  instance,  in  the  legal  protection  of  borrowers’  and  lenders’ rights  as well  as  in  national 
taxation and insolvency procedures. 
To sum up, structural policies are more multifaceted than they are often perceived to be in 
the political debate and can have a very significant impact on investment in a variety of ways. 
Growth-friendly fiscal policy 
Yet this is not the only area where governments can make a difference. They have at their 
disposal  a  second  policy  lever  of  direct  relevance  for  investment,  namely  fiscal  policy. 
Companies  will  only  invest  in  the  future  when  there  is  confidence  and  certainty  about  the 
future, about the medium-term fiscal path, and ultimately about taxes. We need a consistent 
and credible application of the Stability and Growth Pact across time and across countries. 
Within the existing framework, governments can find space to support productive investment, 
and achieve a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies by lowering the tax burden 
and  reducing  unproductive  current  expenditures.  In  parallel,  it  may  be  useful  to  have  a 
discussion  on  the  overall  fiscal  stance  of  the  euro  area  with  the  view  to  raising  public 
investment where there is fiscal space to do so. In this regard, there is also a complementary 
role  to  play  at  European  level  in  supporting  the  rebound  in  private  investment.  I  therefore 
welcome  the  €300  billion  package  announced  by  the  incoming  Commission  President  two 
months ago. 
The role of monetary policy 
Let me finally say a few words on the contribution of monetary policy. We successfully fought 
the confidence crisis in the euro that raised interest rates to abnormal levels. We provided 
the euro area banking system with unprecedented funding. We have continuously lowered 
our  policy  rates.  Now  we  have  reached  the  lower  bound.  To  ensure  that  this  very 
accommodative monetary policy stance is transmitted to the real economy across the euro 
area  in  an  equal  manner,  we  have  also  deployed  a  number  of  non-standard  tools. 
Increasingly  our  focus  here  has  shifted  towards  the  financing  of  small  and  medium-sized 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  enterprises, which heavily rely on bank financing and in many cases are struggling to retain 
access to credit. These companies may be small, but when they face a funding problem, it is 
a big problem for all of us, given that they employ around three-quarters of the euro area’s 
workforce. 
In  June,  we  decided  to  launch  a  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  
– TLTROs – to ensure that banks have sufficient liquidity to lend to the real economy. The 
TLTROs  have  been  designed  to  encourage  banks  to  increase  their  lending  to  the  non-
financial corporate sector. 
In addition, we have also taken measures to underpin specific market segments that play a 
key role in the financing of the economy. Last week, the Governing Council decided to start 
buying high-quality asset-backed securities and covered bonds in October. We will purchase 
both existing and newly issued ABS, which are simple, transparent and real in the sense that 
the underlying assets consist of loans to the euro area non-financial private sector. 
Let me respond to the concerns recently expressed about the risks posed to the integrity of 
our balance sheet. It is worth recalling that senior tranches of ABS have proven to be high-
quality assets. According to the Association of Financial  Markets in Europe, only 0.12% of 
European  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  (RMBS)  outstanding  in  mid-2007  have 
defaulted  since  then  –  compared  with  22.05%  for  US  RMBS.  Default  rates  for  consumer 
finance ABS and SME collateralised loan obligations have also remained low, well below 1%, 
throughout the worst financial and economic crisis we have experienced. 
As regards covered bonds, credit quality is ensured by a double recourse (on the underlying 
assets and on the issuer), which is in fact comparable with the double protection that exists 
in our standard repo operations. 
Overall, the decisions announced last week were taken with a view to underpinning the firm 
anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations, in line with our aim of maintaining 
inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  We  expect  the  two  purchase  programmes  to 
effectively  complement  the  TLTROs  in  enhancing  the  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  and  in  providing  further  monetary  accommodation  given  that  we  have  now 
reached the lower bound. The newly decided measures, together with the TLTROs, will have 
a sizeable impact on our balance sheet, which is expected to move towards the dimensions it 
used  to  have  at  the  beginning  of  2012,  and  the  Governing  Council  stands  ready  to  take 
further action if needed, in compliance with its mandate to maintain price stability. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is time for me to conclude. 
My bottom line is also my starting line. Investment is rightly said to be today’s demand and 
tomorrow’s  supply.  Yet  investment  in  Europe  is  falling  short.  If  we  don’t  manage  to  get 
investment  going  again,  we  will  weaken  the  economy  in  the  short  run  and  undermine  its 
prospects in the long run. 
Our efforts should therefore be focused on jump-starting investment. However, and this was 
really  the  crux  of  my  argument,  we  will  only  manage  to  stimulate  investment  if  structural, 
fiscal and monetary policies mutually reinforce each other. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
