Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Islamic banking and finance in the Philippines – 
opportunities and challenges 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  Workshop,  Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas, Manila, 11 March 2014. 
 Hon. Cesar Virata, Ms. Amina Rasul Bernardo, Mr. Warren Hoye, Mr.  Saffrullah Dipatuan, 
distinguished  resource  persons,  special  guests  from  the  private  sector,  and  multilateral 
institutions, colleagues in government, ladies and gentlemen, good morning to all of you and 
a warm welcome to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. 
I join our co-organizers, the Philippine Center for Islam and Democracy and the Foundation 
for  Economic  Freedom,  in  welcoming  you  to  this  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  Workshop. 
This is a valuable opportunity, an occasion where experts from government, private sector 
and  international  institutions  can  share  insights,  perspectives  and  ideas  on  the  timely  and 
nationally significant topic of Islamic Banking and Finance. 
The underpinnings of Islamic finance 
Islamic banking is a bit of a mystery to many, particularly in the Philippines. While a good 
number of Filipinos may already have an appreciation that Islamic Finance is not limited to 
those who are of the Muslim faith. Not many have a clear understanding of Islamic finance 
being  founded  on  the  principles  of  Shariah  or  Islamic  Law.  Also,  not  many  know  that  the 
Shariah is based on the principles of justice, fair dealings and harmony through the equitable 
distribution of wealth. 
The most known characteristic of Islamic banking is that the Shariah prohibits the payment 
and  receipt  of  a  predetermined  rate  of  return.  To  those  who  are  familiar  only  with 
conventional banking, the concept of “no interest paid or received” is difficult to comprehend. 
This  construct  could  lead  the  purely  conventional  bankers  to  think  that  there  are  no 
opportunities to be gained in such an environment. That such a system could also encourage 
a  reversion  to  an  all-cash  or  barter  economy  and  discourages  wealth  creation.  As  I 
understand it, however, these concerns are farthest from the principles of Islamic banking. 
Foundational in Islamic finance is the principle of risk sharing. Risk sharing is the justification 
for  the  fundamental  requirements  of  profit  and  loss  sharing.  Guarantees  or  assurances  of 
return of capital and return on capital, rewards without commensurate risk and preferential 
awards  are  all  not  permissible  in  Islamic  finance.  Trading  and  partnership  or  joint  venture 
arrangements are thus the appropriate risk-reward paradigms. 
Another  underpinning  of  Islamic  finance  is  the  tenet  that  financial  transactions  should  be 
supported  by  genuine  productive  economic  activity  that  subscribes  to  the  ethics  of  the 
Islamic faith. Notably, this principle can serve to reinforce links between finance and the real 
sector, reducing the perils of unbridled innovation excessive and risk taking. In this context, it 
contributes to financial stability in the system. 
Together, these two principles help to ensure a more equitable distribution of wealth, where 
the only acceptable form of investment is ethical investing. 
Ladies and gentlemen, reflecting on these principles would lead one to the conclusion that at 
the  end  of  the  day,  similar  prescriptions  should  govern  a  good  banking  framework.  More 
specifically, that the goal of financial transactions should be to improve a country’s overall 
economic  activity,  raise  the  level  of  its  shared  economic  prosperity  and  promote  the  well-
being of individual economic agents.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Opportunities in Islamic finance 
Is there a place for Islamic banking in the Philippines? I believe the answer is yes. 
Although Islamic banking could also cater to those outside the Islamic faith, we can begin 
looking at market needs and opportunities in the millions of Muslims in the Philippines today. 
They mostly reside in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). 
Conventional banking has been slow to cover the ARMM. With just 20 banks and 28 ATMs 
present, only 8% of the municipalities of the ARMM have a banking presence. 
This is an unfortunate state of affairs, considering that the ARMM is a resource-rich area with 
vast potential. It is one of the country’s top sources of marine and fish products. It also holds 
large  mineral  deposits,  including  of  copper  and  gold.  There  is  therefore  a  significant 
untapped market opportunity, not just for conventional banking but also and more importantly 
for Islamic banking. 
The latest available regional GDP data (2012) puts the real GDP growth in the ARMM at only 
1.2 pct.  But  when  we  consider  broader  Mindanao,  the  number  rises  about  sevenfold  to 
8.2 pct. This tells us, that there is an enormous potential in the Mindanao region in general, 
and the ARMM in particular. 
Challenges to Islamic finance in the Philippines 
At  present,  there  is  only  one  Islamic  bank  in  the  Philippines,  the  Al-Amanah  Islamic 
Investment Bank of the Philippines. Al-Amanah Bank was established in 1973. While it has 
been over four decades since the creation of the first Islamic Bank, Islamic banking itself has 
not  grown  in  large  part  because  of  legal  constraints.  The  Al-Amanah  Charter  created  the 
Bank but not a framework for Islamic banking per se. No such enabling law has so far been 
passed.  In  fact,  the  General  Banking  Law  of  2000  defines  Islamic  bank  as  specifically 
pertaining  to  Al-Amanah  Bank  only.  The  GBL  does  not  provide  for  the  creation  of  other 
Islamic banks. 
If we are to create a truly responsive system of Islamic banks, from a BSP standpoint, certain 
principles will be important. 
First, the system must allow for a critical mass of market players under a competitive but well 
regulated environment. The public must be provided with appropriate choices to suit their risk 
appetite and financial needs. 
Second,  appropriate  linkages,  including  inter-bank  markets  that  cater  to  the  unique 
characteristics of Islamic banking, must be present. 
Third, the regulatory and supervisory framework must encourage a level playing field where 
the Islamic banking system can operate alongside conventional banking. There  must be a 
coherent,  consistent  and  comprehensive  set  of  regulations  and  standards  that  would 
appropriately  apply  to  all  banks.  In  other  words,  the  privileges  that  are  available  for 
conventional banks must also be available to Islamic banks. In the same vein, the prudential 
requirements that cover conventional banks, must also apply to Islamic banks. The design 
and implementation of standards, of course, would need to take into account, the particular 
characteristics of Islamic finance. 
Fourth, the regulatory environment must encourage the provision of innovative products and 
services to address the distinctive needs of Islamic finance. Islamic financial players should 
be  encouraged  and  not  inhibited  from  introducing  Islamic  finance  products.  The  regulatory 
framework could consider the substance [more than the form] of the Islamic products, assess 
the economic risks involved and use that assessment as basis for regulation. 
To support this approach, the system must allow for the development of a pool of experts on 
Islamic finance. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Fifth,  the  regulatory  framework  must  help  build  a  broader  customer  and  asset  base  by 
increasing investor awareness and acceptance, while ensuring consumer protection. 
While the BSP would like to promote an increase in the number of Islamic banks that operate 
alongside  conventional  banks,  the  BSP  is  also  looking  at  an  “open  approach”  whereby 
conventional banks can operate Islamic banking windows, if they so desire, as long as the 
principles outlined just now are followed. 
Fortunately, there is growing literature on how these principles can be realized. We can learn 
from the research and expertise of the Islamic Financial Services Board, of which the BSP is 
an associate member, other international organizations and friendly governments which have 
signified interest in supporting BSP in this initiative, as well as from the rich experiences of 
outstanding practitioners of Islamic banking. 
To achieve all these objectives, the BSP intends to work towards attaining a suitable legal 
framework for Islamic banking in the Philippines. We are currently in the very early stages of 
drafting a general law for the creation and regulation of Islamic banks. Consistent with this, 
we  have  included  in  our  list  of  proposed  amendments  to  our  charter,  a  provision  that  will 
enable  the  BSP  to  develop  regulations  for  the  extension  of  financial  facilities  to  Islamic 
banks. 
Concluding thoughts 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  there  is  much  work  for  all  of  us  to  do.  The  task  requires  strong 
partnerships  among  key  stakeholders  in  the  government  and  the  private  sector  and  the 
support of key international organizations and friendly governments. 
Today’s workshop is another important step for all of us to work together, share ideas and 
mobilize support toward promoting Islamic banking and finance in the country. 
Indeed, a well-crafted framework for an Islamic banking and finance system  would ensure 
that our goal of stretching the coverage of our financial system [so it casts a wider net] is 
attained.  In  addition,  Islamic  finance  with  the  vast  opportunities  it  offers  could  potentially 
trigger inflows of foreign investments. Investments, which in turn, could be deployed towards 
building the necessary infrastructure and other projects to accelerate and sustain economic 
growth. 
For certain, an appropriate Islamic banking and finance framework would help ensure that 
the Philippines’ financial system would truly be a more effective catalyst of broad-based and 
inclusive growth. 
On that note, let me wish you a most productive Workshop. 
Thank you and good morning.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
