  Jwala Rambarran: The changing face of supervision 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Caribbean Group of Banking Supervisors XXXII Annual Conference, Port of 
Spain, 5 June 2014. 
 Good morning, 
To all our friends from the Caribbean and beyond, I extend a warm welcome to Trinidad and 
Tobago. 
For the next two days, you will be discussing, “The Changing Face of Supervision”. To us, 
it’s  a  catchy  theme,  but  just  say  this  to  the  man  on  the  street  here  in  Port  of  Spain,  in 
Kingston, or even in Castries, and they will see little connection to their lives. 
But if their bank crashed next week and they can’t access their life savings, the man in the 
street  would  immediately  demand  an  explanation.  Fingers  would  naturally  point  towards 
government  who  would  rightfully  say  “talk  to  central  bank,  it’s  their  job”.  The  “who”  is  to 
blame would be of little comfort to the man in the street who has lost his money. However, 
someone must be called upon to account for the bank failure and, of course, that “someone” 
will be us, the central bankers. 
If I sound like I’m talking from experience, well, you all know that I am. Following the collapse 
of CLICO, our largest insurance company, we at the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, 
have  been  listening  to  these  sentiments  repeatedly  over  the  last  five  years,  and  we  know 
many of you in this room have also had to deal with the contagion effects of the CLICO crisis 
which  sent  shockwaves  throughout  the  Caribbean.  So,  I  therefore  want  to  give  you  three 
messages, as we begin this Conference on the changing face of supervision. 
1. 
First,  let’s  consider  CLICO  and  its  contagion  as  an  early  warning  for  us  in  the 
Caribbean region. Let’s look at it as a warm up for something even bigger, as the 
risks to the regional financial system are ominously gathering in the distance...This 
leads to my second message. 
Our  protection  against  those  gathering  storms  is  changes  in  the  approach  to 
supervision…and finally my third message. 
The changing face of supervision is each one of you in this room. 
3. 
I’m going to start with my third message first – you – the face of supervision, as each of you 
represents the change that needs to occur in supervision. As supervisors you are, of course, 
distinct  from  supervision;  you  are  the  heads,  the  reasoning,  the  human  element,  while 
supervision is essentially black or white, there are hardly any shades of grey. 
Today’s central banker no longer enjoys obscurity. The spotlight has been beaming on us as 
supervisors  for  the  last  six  years.  Supervision  of  the  financial  system  is  a  task,  a 
responsibility and, perhaps at times, a burden, we must carry for our countries. Before 2008, 
the typical person with a savings account, a mortgage, or an insurance policy, never really 
cared about who was keeping an eye on the people and institutions managing their money. 
Now we are more scrutinized than the financial players themselves. 
No  regulation,  no  matter  how  sophisticated,  can  fully  anticipate  all  potential  situations.  As 
supervisors we now have to look at the entire financial ecosystem over which  we preside. 
We must not only pay particular attention to the individual trees but, more importantly, to how 
their  branches  intertwine  with  nearby  trees,  forming  the  entire  forest  and  supporting  its 
existence. 
In this financial ecosystem there are some who may want to play with fire; and don’t care if 
they burn down the entire forest. Our success, as supervisors, is measured by managing, or 
even better, preventing fires from actually starting. When they first occur, these may be small 
2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  fires or sparks that we can quickly stamp out. Such prevention is, of course, much cheaper 
than the billions it would cost to resuscitate an entire ecosystem. 
Here  at  home,  the  CLICO  fire  has  so  far  cost  the  taxpayers  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  over 
US$3  billion  dollars.  Three  billion  US  dollars,  that’s  more  than  the  size  of  eight  of  our 
neighboring  economies  in  the  Caribbean.  In  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  that  US$3  billion  could 
have  built  twenty  new,  state-of-the-art  Children’s  Hospitals,  or  built  and  fully  outfitted  one 
thousand new primary schools (more than double the existing number of primary schools), or 
purchase  medicine  for  all  our  major  hospitals  for  the  next  decade.  CLICO  also  damaged 
confidence in the financial sector and left psychological scars on many citizens, in Trinidad 
and Tobago and in your countries, as well. 
Successful supervision happens behind the scenes. It is what the public will never ever see. 
We will never be thanked for this job, because no one is supposed to see these sparks, far 
less smell or see smoke. But when we save the day we get to go home with lighter hearts. 
It’s the fires that supervisors miss or could not control in time that bring the villagers running 
out with their pitchforks and ropes for the fire starters and for us, the supervisors. 
So  what  does  this  have  to  do  with  my  third  message  which  in  the  changing  face  of 
supervision is “you”. The word “Face” gives supervision a human element, so all supervisors 
are the face of supervision. So how is the metaphorical/symbolic face of supervision – yours, 
the supervisors and inspectors – changing? 
Good  supervision  is  an  extremely  challenging  and  often  underappreciated  task.  At  the 
Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  two  initiatives  are  supporting  good  supervision:  the 
ability  to  act  and  the  will  to  act.  This  is  intended  to  give  the  face  of  supervision,  our 
supervisors,  more  power  and  presence .  . .  after  all  a  face should  not just  be  about good 
looks. 
We currently  regulate the  banking,  insurance  and  private  pensions  sectors  of  the financial 
system,  but  we  are  also  planning  to  supervise  five  systemically  important  financial 
institutions, credit unions and bureau de change. We have re-examined the areas we must 
now  supervise  and  are  re-resourcing  to  suit.  We  do  not  have  the  luxury  of  time  to  grow 
supervisors from entry level to seasoned professionals – a process that can take upwards of 
a  decade.  The  country  will  not  tolerate  the  excuse  of  not  having  enough  competent  and 
highly-skilled supervisors. 
We are, therefore, taking a more pragmatic approach to building supervisory capacity. We 
are aggressively recruiting experienced people from the private sector and placing them in 
key  supervisory  positions  in  the  Financial  Institutions  Supervision  Department.  We  have 
recruited a Second Deputy Inspector, brought in a highly sought after Chief Actuary and for 
the first time we have hired a Pension Fund Specialist, Credit Risk Specialist and Anti Money 
Laundering  expert.  The  faces  are  changing.  They  are  moving  from  middle-aged  central 
bankers who came up through the ranks, to more specialized experienced professionals who 
come from the private sector. 
We are exploring all the areas that currently need our supervisory attention and also thinking 
ahead. We will continue to head-hunt respected talent from the private sector. Let me ask 
you  this  question,  “What  are  the  backgrounds  of  your  staff  in  your  respective  supervision 
departments?” 
Therefore while you are the changing face of supervision, and I’ve discussed that face and 
how  it  is  changing  and  what  it  should  go  to,  please  allow  me  to  address  some  major 
changes, not to the face of supervision, but to supervision itself, the black and white. 
My  second  message  is  about  changing  your  approach  to  supervision.  Your  approach 
represents  one  of  the  changes  desperately  needed  for  true  success,  to  ensure  no  sparks 
turn into raging fires. The CLICO crisis taught us that it’s even more important for supervisors 
at all levels to keep their eyes on the ball, at all times. Here at the Central Bank of Trinidad 
and  Tobago,  we  are  instilling  in  our  supervisors  the  need  to  be  more  intrusive.  Our 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  supervisors  must  no  longer  stay  on  the  sidelines  of  regulated  financial  institutions,  relying 
solely on the results of institutions’ “internal controls and risk management systems”. 
Over the past five years, supervisory priorities at the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago 
seem  to  have  been  seriously  affected  by  the  CLICO  crisis,  leading  to  a  more  legalistic 
approach  to  dealing  with  supervised  institutions.  I  find  supervisors  are  displaying  an 
overemphasis  on  compliance  and  formal  letters  notifying  institutions  of  sometimes  minor 
breaches, which, in my respectful view, is diverting attention away from important issues of 
safety and soundness of institutions. 
For example, the minutes of one of FISD’s “Breaches Meetings” referred to efforts to force a 
financial  institution  to  address  a  perceived  under-provision  for  doubtful  accounts.  These 
efforts included consultations with the legal department as well as six letters and two emails 
to  the  affected  institution.  I  wonder  whether  this  matter  could  have  been  dealt  with  in  one 
meeting following completion of FISD’s analysis, in which the institution was advised to make 
the additional provision, and quietly reminded of the Central Bank’s legal powers. 
Of course, I fully understand and appreciate the need for enforcement activity to ensure a 
high standard of compliance with laws and regulation. While this is important, I believe it is 
not as important as addressing the safety and soundness of financial institutions, whether or 
not such issues are covered in specific legislative requirements. 
Without  abandoning  the  compliance  function,  supervisors  must  find  ways  to  balance  rules 
with discretion, and so free up the time for supervision of those issues that could cause an 
institution to fail, and potentially destabilize the financial system. You must move beyond the 
compliance mentality, where your inspections are considered thorough once you check the 
boxes. You must be brave and look beyond, to places that are not on your list of boxes to 
tick. Supervisors need to move from being inspectors to investigators. 
So  while  supervisors  in  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  must  not  stay  on  the 
sidelines,  if  I  may  humbly  suggest,  and  I  know  virtually  everyone  in  this  room  knows  this 
already, ALL supervisors in the Caribbean must become more intrusive. Look for the risks 
that are not before you. If you identify or suspect a risk, saying nothing, because it is not your 
territory, it makes you just as culpable as the fire starters. 
I know some of you may be taken aback by what I am saying, as we are often warned about 
straying out of our territory and peeking over fences not in our jurisdiction. However, another 
change that has come about in supervision at the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago is 
that we have teamed up with fellow regulators and signed Memoranda of Understanding to 
work  with  them  to  share  information  so  we  can  cover  all  our  bases  when  it  comes  to 
supervision. So if we come across something suspicious that’s not in our jurisdiction, we can 
refer it to one, or perhaps our two partners, the Financial Intelligence Unit and the Trinidad 
and Tobago Securities and Exchange Commission. 
There is the cliché, timing is everything, and this should not be overlooked in the context of 
our Conference. While you gather and enter into discussions here for the next two days, I 
want  you  to  keep  my  second  message  in  mind  about  the  changes  to  supervision  and  my 
third message that you are the face of supervision, so this all rests in you. Let me take you to 
my first message – the gathering risks to the Caribbean region. 
We are  in  a  precarious position  right  now.  Several financial  conglomerates  control  a  large 
market share in many countries throughout the Caribbean and are interconnected to other 
financial 
rising 
interconnectedness in the Caribbean financial sector. 
• 
The  four  largest  banking  groups  –  RBC  Financial,  Scotiabank,  First  Caribbean 
International  Bank  and Republic  Bank  –  control  about  75  percent  of total  banking 
assets in the region. 
institutions.  Please  allow  me 
three  examples  of 
to  give 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    In the Eastern Caribbean, many governments and their national insurance schemes 
are  connected  to  indigenous  banks,  not  only  as  shareholders  but  they  are  also 
important providers of deposits. 
The  Sagicor  Financial  Group,  which  has  the  largest  insurance  network  in  the 
Caribbean,  has  60  percent  of  its  investment  portfolio  in  Jamaica  and  Barbados, 
making the Group connected and vulnerable to sovereign credit risk events in these 
two countries, both of which are rated non-investment grade by Standard and Poors. 
The  two  largest  shareholders  of  Sagicor  are  the  National  Insurance  Board  of 
Barbados and Republic Bank. 
This  increasing  interconnectedness  is  building  up  systemic  risks  and  raises  the  chance  of 
financial  contagion  spreading  throughout  the  Caribbean  region,  especially  if  another  major 
hurricane  strikes  or  another  government  undertakes  a  significant  restructuring  of  its 
sovereign debt. I must remind you all that we are living in one of the most natural-disaster-
prone  regions  in  the  world:  the  six  small  island  states  in  the  Eastern  Caribbean  Currency 
Union stand out in terms of the frequency of hurricanes. A natural disaster can be expected 
to hit the Eastern Caribbean roughly once every two and a half years. The Caribbean is also 
home  to  nine  small  island  states  considered  to  be  among  the  world’s  heavily  indebted 
countries,  with  a  rising  probability  of  debt  default.  Grenada  is  currently  negotiating  a 
restructuring of its sovereign debt, which, when completed, will bring to ten (10) the number 
of sovereign debt restructuring episodes in the Caribbean within the past decade. 
We, therefore, cannot afford a tick-box, compliance mentality. As supervisors, we must not 
underestimate  these  gathering  risks.  We  must  expand  cross-border  cooperation  through 
exchange  of  information  and  policy  collaboration.  Remember  …  the  Caribbean’s  financial 
ecosystem is at stake. 
As I close, let me encourage you to use this opportunity for discussion, but not just as a talk 
shop. Take this meeting seriously, as given our current situation what is discussed here can 
have the potential to impact the Caribbean region. Take this experience and return to your 
home, wiser and ready to act. 
As supervisors, we need to remember who are at the heart of the financial system. We need 
to remember it is real human hearts: a teacher with a loan, a market vendor with a savings 
account  in  a  bank,  a  bus  driver  with  an  insurance  policy,  or  a  doubles  vendor  with  an 
investment  in  a  mutual  fund.  Our  duty  is  to  these  market  participants,  who  all  rely  on  us. 
When the story is told, let it be said you, we as the guardians of the financial system, did all 
we could in our power, to protect the economies of our region. 
To conclude, let me reiterate the following key messages: 
• 
First, CLICO and its contagion was an early warning for us in the Caribbean. Rising 
financial  interconnectedness  is  building  up  systemic  risks  and  the  likelihood  of 
financial contagion throughout the region. This requires supervisors to see the whole 
financial ecosystem and not just the individual trees. 
Second, changes to supervision are our protection against those gathering financial 
storms.  Supervisors  must  be  brave  enough to  move  beyond  the  compliance,  tick-
box  mentality  to  being  investigators,  addressing  the  safety  and  soundness  of 
financial institutions, whether or not such issues are covered in specific legislative 
requirements. 
• 
Finally, every one of you in this room must be the desired changing face of supervision. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, our work has just begun. I am confident we can continue to improve 
and  learn  from  each  other’s  experience,  applying  these  lessons  to  preventing  another 
systemic financial failure in the Caribbean in the future. 
I wish you a productive session and hope you enjoy your stay. 
I thank you. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
