  Ardian Fullani: Imagine the future – for a better economic cooperation. 
Economic chamber’s and bank’s responsibilities 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the 10th Vienna Economic 
Forum, Vienna, 7 May 2014. 
 Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Dear colleagues and participants of the Vienna Economic Forum, 
I  am  honoured  and  delighted  to  return  and  speak  to  such  a  constructive  and  important 
economic  forum,  discussing  with  you  the  economic  development  topics,  which  affect  the 
present and the future of our economies. 
The  topic  of  this  forum  is  very  important  for  the  economies  of  the  South  East  Europe.  It 
creates the proper environment, which enables the examination of the problems faced by our 
economies during the crises. We can certainly draw few lessons from what we have learned 
during  the  recent  years,  following  the  global  economic  and  financial  crises.  These 
discussions  and  the  harmonization  of  economic  policies  will  help  us  to  project  a  strong 
coordinated economic structure for the long term future of our economies. 
It  is  particularly  important  to  converge  here  in  Vienna  and  discus  the  cooperation  issue 
because one of the obvious outcomes (lessons) of the developments during the recent years 
is that the economic developments in particular for small open economies of the South East 
European region, are not local or regional anymore. Just like the flu, it is rather unexceptional 
and highly transmittable from one economy to the other, from one sector of the economy to 
the other. 
Most  importantly,  European  economies  and  their  financial  systems,  among  which  the 
Austrian financial system enjoys a significant share of the market, define the globalization for 
the  region  and  are,  to  a  large  extent,  important  determinants  for  the  success  or  failure  of 
these economies. Given the large share of the European financial groups, they have and will 
play  an  important  role  in  the  transmission  of  global  shocks  in  the  region.  What  is  more 
important, they have a significant role in the transmission of legislative and regulative shocks 
carried over by European monetary and supervisory authorities. The size is such that even a 
simple  change  in  the  future  business  plans  of  a  single  European  financial  institution  can 
transform into real shocks for the economies of the region. 
It became evident during the crisis and afterwards that an increase in risk and uncertainty, 
led  to  increased  incentives  for  banks  to  withdraw  from  the  Emerging  Europe  economies. 
Though this was mostly prevented due to increased cooperation through institutions such as 
the Vienna Initiative, the concerns from our perspective have not completely dissipated. In 
this respect the business plan of EU based groups can play a potentially important role in the 
nature and outcomes of this cooperation. The crisis showed few weakness in the model of 
growth adopted by the emerging economies of South East Europe, but is also true that, to 
some extent this behaviour was also encouraged by the development strategies of financial 
groups in the region, as it is also true that there was also some weakness in the coordination 
and collaboration between different European Union institutions, such as monetary policies 
(ECB),  fiscal  policies  (of  member  countries)  and  the  inexistence  of  specific  mechanisms 
(such as bailout funds) to safeguard the European Union during difficult economic times. 
This  conference  pays  homage  to  these  lessons,  while  acknowledging  the  importance  of 
coordination,  by  mutually  collaborating  in  multidimensional  institutional  levels,  within  the 
region  and  with  our  common  partner  countries.  We  in  the  region  hope  that  our  foreign 
partners share this same view. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  Albanian  economy  and  its financial  market share  similar characteristics  with  the  other 
economies of the region. Our main trade and financial partners come from the EU economy. 
Therefore,  developments  in  the  EU  are  directly  and  indirectly  transmitted  and  play  an 
important role in economic developments in Albania. Our reliance on EU affected not only 
our economic development but also constrained the effect of policy measures. 
Several  European  banking  groups  operate  in  the  Albanian  financial  sector.  These  entities 
brought into the Albanian market a lot of valuable know-how and experience, playing, thus, a 
crucial  role  in  the  financial  integration  of  the  Albanian  economy  to  the  European  Union. 
However, EU supervisory regulations and risk requirements for European financial groups, 
along with the approach in which they are implemented, are posing significant constrains on 
our economy and the efficiency of monetary policy to respond to economic developments. 
Faced with new and stringent capital and risk requirements, banks are trying to comply by 
adjusting their future business plans and the size and composition of their balance sheets in 
the economies of the region. 
These tighter regulations approved by European Supervisory and Banking Authorities and, 
subsequently,  implemented  by  parent  banks  have  already  been  accompanied  by  a 
decreasing  level  of  credit  to  the  economy.  Our  research  shows  that  further  tightening  of 
crediting, due to the legal reforms currently under way, could have an  important effect not 
only  on  economic  activity  but  also  on  commercial  bank  asset  quality  itself,  in  particular 
situation  with  non-performing  loans.  A  deterioration  of  economic  activity  would  play  out 
mostly in the same way, leading to worsening of NPL ratio, leading to smaller banks’ profit 
and  tighter  capital  constrains,  along  with  slower  growth.  This  second  channel  is  seen  as 
arguably  more  dangerous,  with  the  empirical  research  pointing  out  that  the  elasticities  are 
close to twice as large for a shock of similar size. 
Such adjustments are imposing significant constrains on our economies. More directly, we 
have observed a decrease in financial intermediation, by tightened lending procedures even 
for economies or sectors that were doing ok during the crises. As a result, this was reflected 
in stagnating investments and slowing down dynamics of the Albanian economy, both in the 
private and public sectors. Moreover, current business practices and policy orientations are 
imposing significant constrains in the efficiency of monetary policy transmission mechanism, 
and the ability of authorities to provide much needed stimulus to the economy. 
It is understandable that banks would have to be careful, prudent and responsible given the 
current situation with non-performing loans; however, they must also consider the fact that 
credit  and  financial  intermediation  is  important  for  growth,  which,  in  turn,  can  improve  the 
ability of economic agents to repay their loans. This is especially true for particular sectors 
like agriculture and agro-business, which, so far, have not benefited from credit expansion, 
but have large untapped potential for growth. 
The  era  of  an  economic  growth  model,  led  mainly  by  the  domestic  consumption,  is  now 
gone.  Banks,  their  European  headquarters  and  their  supervisory  authorities  should  work 
together  with  authorities  of  host  countries  to  develop  a  new  long-term  and  sustainable 
economic growth model. This new model needs to be based on investments in productive 
sectors of the economy. Our products and services need to be competitive not only in the 
home  market,  but  they  should  also  offer  comparative  advantages  in  the  regional  and 
European Union markets. It is clear that cooperation is the only choice for the future. 
For  more  than  15  years  now,  the  European  integration,  in  all  its  politic,  economic  and 
financial dimensions, has been main driving force for the economic and social prosperity of 
South East European region. EU represents the main trading partner, a large share of FDI, 
by  far  the  biggest  investor  in  the  Banking  System. Our  countries  have  undergone  through 
structural  reforms,  adaptations  of  regulatory  and  legislative  frameworks,  institutional 
adaptations to adjust to these partnerships. 
Led by the European integration process, countries of the region have also signed bilateral 
free  trade  agreements  among  them.  Our  studies  at  Bank  of  Albania  show  that  these  free 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  trade  agreements  have  positively  affected  trade  flows  among  West  Balkan  countries. 
However, these studies also suggest that trade flows among Balkan countries are below their 
potentials.  The  aims  of  these  bilateral  free  trade  agreements  are  to  create  a  regional  free 
trade area among West Balkan countries. 
Authorities  in  South  East  European  countries  have  shown  signs  of  consistent  regional 
collaboration;  however,  they  need  to  make  additional  efforts  to  unify  and  harmonize  their 
legal,  institutional,  regulatory  and  infrastructural  frameworks.  These  efforts  need  to  be 
supported  by  a  clear  commitment  by  EU  financial  groups  to  the  region’s  small  open 
economies. The development of the regional markets for products and factors, investment in 
education  and  improvement  of  human  capital,  exploitation  of  economies  of  scale  and 
comparative  advantages,  will  depend  on  the  availability  of  credit  and  investment  and  the 
financial  support  of  the  banking  system.  In  this  respect,  EU  financial  groups  will  be 
instrumental factors for building bridges of cooperation among economies of the region and 
its  transformation  into  a  larger,  better  integrated,  more  competitive,  more  profitable  and 
prosperous economy, eventually leading to a prosperous economic future through economic 
cooperation.  In  this  respect,  I  encourage  foreign  groups  to  adopt  a  regional  rather  than  a 
country specific view when considering their future in the region. It goes without saying that 
any policy that restricts commitment and exposure of EU financial groups in the region does 
not  support  economic  cooperation  among  our  countries.  It  rather  creates  a  struggling 
environment and a less prosperous future for all economies of the region. 
The Western  Balkans  region  offers  great  opportunities  and  profitable  perspectives  for  EU-
based corporations and financial groups. The harmonization of above-mentioned reforms will 
create  an  even  more  attractive  environment  for  different  private  entities  interested  in 
investing in our region. I invite EU financial groups to see the region under this perspective. 
European  institutions  and  financial  groups  should  support  and  become  a  positive  force  to 
facilitate, smoothen and support regional economic cooperation, which will lead to a better 
prosperous future and a faster European integration process of the region. 
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
