  Haruhiko Kuroda: Asia’s contribution to the global economy – prospects 
and challenges for the transition to domestic demand-led growth 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 4th Bank of Thailand 
Policy Forum, Bangkok, 24 July 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Governor, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
Thank you for inviting me to the 4th Bank of Thailand Policy Forum. It is a great honor to 
address such distinguished guests who are leading the Thai economy. I would like to extend 
my  heartfelt  gratitude  to  Governor  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul  for  giving  me  this  valuable 
opportunity.  
Thailand  was  the  first  Southeast  Asian  nation  to  establish  diplomatic  relations  with  Japan, 
and the year 2017 will mark the 130th anniversary of this significant event. The two countries 
have been engaged in active cultural exchange at least since the Ayutthaya dynasty. In more 
recent years, our two nations have established close ties as important economic partners, 
providing support to each other in times of difficulty. The Bank of Japan received generous 
donations  from  the  Bank  of  Thailand  and  the  Bank’s  staff  to  help  the  victims  of  the  Great 
East Japan earthquake in 2011. All of us at the Bank of Japan remain deeply grateful for this 
kindness. I learned about these donations immediately after I became Governor of the Bank 
and felt deep reverence for and strong gratitude to our friends in Thailand. I would like to take 
this opportunity to renew our thanks.  
Thailand is a key base in Southeast Asia for the economic activities of Japanese firms, of 
which more than 1,500 are members of the Japanese Chamber of Commerce in Bangkok. 
Last year, Japan was Thailand’s largest importing trade partner, and its third largest export 
destination.  The  very  close  ties  between  the  two  countries  are  shown  in  the  results  of  a 
survey conducted by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan, where 97 percent of the people 
in Thailand regarded Japan as a friendly nation.  
Today,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  views  on  Asia’s  contribution  to  global  economy. 
These views are based on my 16 months’ experience as Governor of the Bank of Japan, and 
my 8 years as President of the Asian Development Bank before that. 
A change in growth model for the Asian economies 
I. 
Even  when  growth  in  the  major  advanced  economies  slowed  considerably  following  the 
global financial crisis, the Asian economies continued to register solid growth. Moreover, the 
region’s economies have contributed significantly to the recovery and subsequent growth of 
the global economy. The Asian economies accounted for two-thirds of the recent growth of 
the global economy (Chart 1).  
The Asian economies have benefited greatly from sophistication of global supply chains and 
trade liberalization. Exports have played a leading role in the region’s high economic growth. 
Asia’s  industrial  base  was  built  upon  the  combination  of  foreign  capital  and  a  plentiful, 
diligent,  well-educated  labor  force.  This  industrial  base  has  boosted  export-led  growth  in 
Asian economies. In recent years, however, domestic demand, primarily consumption, has 
also  begun  to  play  an  increasingly  important  role.  This  is  not  only  China,  India,  and 
Indonesia, with the largest populations in the world, but other Asian economies too. Asian 
economies  have  enjoyed  rising  income  levels  and  have  seen  the  emergence  of  a  middle 
consumer  class  that  actively  purchases  goods  and  services  from  around  the  world.  A 
virtuous  cycle  among  production,  income,  and  spending  in  the  region  has  given  rise  to 
growing domestic demand, which has contributed to the growth of the global economy. This 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  suggests that a more balanced growth model is emerging in Asia, to replace the conventional 
model of export-led growth that depended on demand from advanced economies (Chart 2). 
led 
to  an 
increase 
in  aggregate  supply  capacity  and 
Fundamental background to the expansion of domestic demand 
II. 
Rising domestic income levels created an affluent and aspiring middle class during the phase 
of  demographic  dividend  with  an  increase  in  the  proportion  of  the  working-age  population. 
This  is  the  fundamental  background  to  the  expansion  in  domestic  demand  in  the  Asian 
economies.  
First,  many  rural  residents  moved  to  more  developed  urban  areas.  This  increase  in  labor 
supply 
improved  export 
competitiveness. The improvement in household incomes, especially for residents in urban 
areas, has led to a rise in consumption and an increase in aggregate demand.  
Second, the growth of the middle class boosted demand for higher value-added goods and 
services.  In  response  to  this  increased  demand,  there  was  parallel  progress  in  the  supply 
side.  Wider  use  of  foreign  technology  in  production  facilities  of  domestic  industries,  for 
instance, brought improvements in productivity.  
However,  some  medium-  and  long-term  challenges  need  to  be  addressed  to  ensure  a 
smooth  transition  to  a  well-balanced  economic  growth  that  combines  both  exports  and 
domestic demand. These challenges include demographic changes, as well as the risks of 
excessive credit expansion under high economic growth and destabilization of the financial 
system.  Let  us  consider  some  possible  countermeasures  to  these  challenges,  based  on 
Japan’s experience. 
to 
Demographics and domestic demand: Japan’s experience 
III. 
Japan is in the midst of dealing with some significant demographic challenges of an ageing 
population and a decline in the overall size of the population. In Asia, China and Korea are 
next in line to phase out of demographic dividend into demographic onus. Thailand is not far 
behind. Let me talk about the experience of Japan.  
The  transition  from  demographic  dividend  to  demographic  onus  brings  with  it  a  series  of 
problems. Perhaps the most pressing of these problems are a decline in the potential growth 
rate,  a  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  balance,  and  intergenerational  income  transfers.  These 
problems put downward pressure on the growth of domestic demand.  
In Japan, the potential growth rate has been pushed down by a decline in labor input. There 
are  two  reasons  for  this  decline.  First,  the  number  of  workers  has  declined  due  to 
demographic  changes.  Second,  working  hours  have  become  shorter  as  the  economy  has 
matured. Firms’ slow response to demographic changes has contributed to sluggish growth 
in aggregate capacity to supply goods and services that reflect the changing environment. 
The demographic onus has also led to deterioration in fiscal deficits, impairing the pension 
and health-care insurance systems. Delays in reforms to these social security systems have 
increased the burden on future generations and raised the issue of intergenerational income 
transfers.  
There has been a growing consensus in Japan that greater efforts are needed to address the 
adverse effects of demographic changes. These efforts are expected to provide new growth 
momentum for Japan’s economy. For example, there has been progress in initiatives to raise 
the labor participation rate of women and the elderly, to address the decline in the number of 
workers. There have also been initiatives to attract more highly-skilled foreign workers. Firms 
are also making headway in areas such as retail, tourism, medical and nursing services in an 
effort to provide goods and services for the elderly and families with small children.  
While demographic changes can be predicted quite accurately, reversing them is extremely 
difficult. However, as is often the case when problems seem too serious or difficult, initiatives 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  to  address  those  problems  tend  to  be  put  off.  Although  Japan’s  working-age  population 
started to decline in the mid-1990s, concrete action was taken only after the total population 
started to decline in the latter half of the 2000s. Japan’s experience thus suggests that it is 
crucial not only to debate the challenges posed by the demographic onus, but also to take 
the  necessary  action  at  an  early  stage.  Prompt  action  is  needed  to  preserve  the  growth 
momentum of the domestic demand-led economy in Asia. 
Global monetary accommodation and domestic credit growth 
IV. 
High economic growth is often associated with an increase in domestic credit. The current 
growth  in  domestic  demand  in  Asian  economies  is  mainly  driven  by  domestic  structural 
factors such as the increase in the middle consumer class. But, it has also been reinforced 
by  a  combination  of  global  monetary  accommodation  and  the  concomitant  expansion  in 
domestic credit.  
History tells us that bubbles often arise when people’s expectations become bullish due to 
the experience of continued high growth and domestic demand expansion. Examples of such 
situations  where  domestic  demand  growth  became  excessive  and  ill-balanced  are  now  all 
too familiar. We saw this in the bubble economy in Japan, in the housing bubble in the United 
States, and in the overheating in real estate markets in peripheral European countries. These 
economies  eventually  fell  into  financial  crises.  And  the  symptoms  were  common  in  each 
case: a rapid increase in credit and an emergence of euphoria based on the belief that the 
country had entered a new phase.  
There is also the danger of an unsustainable increase in domestic credit reliant on short-term 
foreign borrowings. This is due to the lack of deep domestic financial markets. The current 
global  accommodative  financial  conditions  raise  the  possibility  of  unhealthy  global  capital 
flows into Asian economies. Such capital flows could result in the build-up of distortions and 
risks  in  the  financial  systems  of  these  economies.  For  example,  several  economies  have 
seen  considerable  increases  in  real  estate  prices  partly  due  to  foreign  capital  inflows. 
Needless  to  say,  if  there  were  a  substantial  decline  in  real  estate  markets,  nonperforming 
assets  could  pile  up  in  the  financial  sector.  Such  a  scenario  could  hamper  growth 
substantially and for a prolonged period, depending on the magnitude of the problem.  
To  prevent  such  distortions  and  risks  from  building  up,  commercial  banks  and  financial 
supervisory authorities need to enhance their credit risk management capacity. They need to 
instill a credit culture in which credit is proactively managed in response to changes in the 
environment. These actions could be effective throughout Asian economies.  
Another  possible  course 
to  use  macroprudential  policy.  While  discussions  on 
macroprudential  policy  continue,  particularly  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  some  Asian 
economies  have  already  gone  ahead  and  introduced  them.  For  instance,  the  Bank  of 
Thailand has implemented policy measures such as LTV limits for mortgage loans.  
Further improvements in financial infrastructure are also crucial; for example, in accounting 
practices,  corporate  governance,  and  the  judicial  system.  At  the  same  time,  authorities 
should  make  efforts  to  further  develop  domestic  financial  markets  so  that  financial 
intermediaries can make effective use of domestic savings.  
The appropriate mix of these policy measures may differ from country to country, depending 
on each country’s policy objectives and financial system. Still, it is important for any economy 
to pursue sound macroeconomic policies as well as efforts to enhance the robustness of its 
domestic financial system.  
There  are  some  key  factors  to  pursue  so  that  Asian  economies  can  continue  to  enjoy 
domestic demand-led growth. The first is efforts to prevent any excessive expansion of credit 
with help of appropriate prudential policies. The second is actions to ensure that the financial 
system remains sufficiently robust to withstand any economic shocks. The third is to maintain 
the resilience of the financial system to be restored after any damage from such shocks. 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Initiatives to improve regional safety nets 
V. 
Such  strengthening  of  the  domestic  financial  system  will  also  help  to  prepare  for  shocks 
generated abroad. Concerns have been expressed regarding the impact of monetary policy 
in advanced economies on international capital flows. There was a period of market volatility 
after  May  last  year  due  to  heightened  speculation  about  a  withdrawal  of  monetary  easing 
measures  in  the  United  States.  During  that  period,  some  countries  suffered  large  capital 
outflows.  These  are  countries  where  structural  vulnerabilities  such  as  current  account  or 
fiscal  deficit  were  a  concern.  This  highlights  the  importance  of  addressing  structural 
weaknesses from a medium- to long-term perspective.  
It is also important to establish regional safety nets to prepare for possible external shocks. 
Regional safety nets increase confidence in a country’s financial system and economy, and 
reduce the threat of a financial crisis. A prime example of such a regional safety net in the 
Asian region is the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation (CMIM). This initiative, involving 
the ASEAN countries, together with China, Japan and Korea, has been expanded to provide 
a backstop in case any of the countries faces a short-term liquidity shortage.  
The role that safety nets play may also be affected by changes in the activities of firms and 
financial  institutions  in  Asia.  With  Asia  no  longer  serving  as  a  production  base  for  exports 
only,  but  also  representing  a  major  consumer  market,  global  firms  have  been  actively 
expanding in Asian markets and have been localizing their businesses. For instance, in order 
to capture the growing domestic demand in Asian economies, Japanese manufacturing firms 
have  been  increasing  local  production.  Japanese  firms  also  have  been  focusing  on  local 
consumers in a wide range of businesses, including retail and other services. In response to 
these developments, Japanese banks have been making efforts to further localize their Asian 
business.  
For firms expanding their businesses in Asia, securing stable funding in the local currency is 
becoming a challenge. To meet this challenge, it is important to establish ways in which firms 
can obtain local funds from banks. Development of domestic financial markets can provide 
banks with stable access to liquidity and underpin their provisioning of funds to firms. This 
will not only contribute to stabilizing the domestic financial system in Asian economies, but 
also create a virtuous cycle encouraging the entry of more global firms and the localization of 
their businesses.  
The challenge for central banks is to nurture a sound banking system that ensures secure 
funding and fosters liquid interbank markets. The availability of local currency funding differs 
across countries, depending on the stage of development of money markets and of funding 
tools  using  collateral.  The  Bank  of  Japan  has  agreed  on  cross-border  collateral 
arrangements with other Asian central banks as one of the backstops for developing financial 
markets in this region (Chart 3). For example, with the Bank of Thailand, the Bank of Japan 
has  already  established  a  framework  providing  Thai  Bahts  to  financial  institutions  against 
Japanese government securities and Japanese Yen as collateral.  
In running a regional safety net, it is important to monitor carefully the regional financial and 
economic conditions. It is also necessary to share relevant information among the region’s 
countries in a timely manner. Information on macroeconomic policies and the challenges that 
each country faces should be exchanged on a regular basis. At the same time, it is essential 
to  create  a  network  of  swift  information  sharing  and  rapid  response  to  sudden  changes  in 
international  financial  markets.  To  help  strengthen  such  cooperation  among  central  banks, 
the Bank of Japan has been actively participating in the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-
Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP), together with the Bank of Thailand and other Asian central 
banks.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Concluding remarks 
Compared with European countries, Asian countries are much more diverse in terms of their 
economic  and  social  makeup,  so  that  the  challenges  of  managing  the  economy  vary 
significantly. At the same time, however, Asian economies face challenges similar to those of 
other  economies,  including  the  advanced  economies.  Therefore,  active  discussion  in  the 
region  to  share  the  experience  and  wisdom  in  Asian  economies  can  also  be  beneficial  to 
other regions. Asian countries can make a substantial contribution to the global economy not 
only by achieving sustainable growth that balances both domestic and external demand, but 
also by playing an active role in discussions toward global challenges.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 
 
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
  6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
