Daniel Mminele: South Africa in the global regulatory context – progress, 
challenges and opportunities 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Daniel  Mminele,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank, at the 8th Risk and Return Conference, Cape Town, 13 March 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. Thank you to Incisive Media for the kind invitation and 
the  privilege  for  me  to  deliver  the  opening  keynote  address  for  this  8th  Risk  and  Return 
South  Africa  conference.  This  conference  provides  a  good  opportunity  for  dialogue  and 
sharing of experiences as it brings together a wide spectrum of financial market participants, 
especially risk and investment management professionals, at a time when there are critical, 
wide-ranging and historic changes to the financial markets landscape. 
While  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  major  disagreement  around  the  weaknesses  and 
vulnerabilities  that  were  exposed  by  the  global  financial  crisis,  there  have  been  intense 
debates  around  how  best  to  go  about  strengthening  regulatory  frameworks  to  restore 
confidence  in  financial  systems.  These  range  from  appropriateness  of  certain  regulatory 
standards based on country-specific circumstances (danger of “one-size-fits-all” approach), 
the  speed  and  sequencing  of  implementation,  to  possible  unintended  consequences  that 
could stifle innovation and development, reduce liquidity in certain markets, or affect the flow 
and cost of credit. 
I  have  been  asked  to  speak  on  the  progress,  challenges  and  opportunities  of  global 
regulatory developments, and in particular, South Africa’s experience.  
The  global  financial  regulatory  reform  agenda  is  a  daunting  and  gigantic  project  for  all 
involved,  and  in  the  limited  time  available  this  morning  one  is  unlikely  to  do  justice  to  the 
task. Following some remarks to set the context, I will talk about the regulatory alignment and 
supervisory change in South Africa, make brief comments about our regulatory architecture 
reform,  then  touch  on  the  2014  G20  priorities  for  financial  regulatory  reform  and  look  at 
where South Africa is in relation to that. 
From crisis to Basel III 
2. 
The  costs  of  the  global financial crisis  were  significant  and  included substantial job  losses 
and depressed economic activity. The severity of it was compounded by a number of factors, 
including a pro-cyclical deleveraging process and weaknesses in the banking sector, such as 
inadequate and low-quality capital, and insufficient liquidity buffers. The interconnectedness 
of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs)  meant  that  these  weaknesses  and 
consequences thereof, quickly spread to other countries and regions. On the regulatory side, 
inadequate  mandates,  autonomy,  resources  and  instances  of  regulatory  capture  also 
contributed.  Shortcomings  were  highlighted  in  evaluations  such  as  the  Financial  Sector 
Assessment  Programmes  (FSAP).  It  is  not  surprising  then,  that  regulators  and  standard-
setting  bodies  decided  on  the  need  for  a  major  overhaul  of  the  global  banking  regulatory 
framework, hence Basel III. 
Prior  to  the  events  of  2008,  regulators  were  already  faced  with  evidence  highlighting  the 
shortcomings of Basel II, including over-reliance on financial risk models to determine capital 
levels and the role of credit rating agencies (I see the conference programme includes the 
important topic of model risk). In early 2008, Basel II had only recently been adopted in some 
of  the  world’s  dominant  economies,  with  preparations  underway  for  a  comparable  capital 
regime  in  the  insurance  industry  in  the  form  of  Solvency  II.  Basel  II.5,  which  focused  on 
tougher  controls  on  trade  credit  and  securitisation  derivatives,  was  introduced  too  late  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
have  any  mitigating  effect  on  banking  capital.  Therefore,  some  argue  that  its  publication 
essentially became a matter of course that had to be dispensed with before the framework in 
its  entirety  received  renewed  scrutiny.  Basel  III,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision’s (BCBS)1 response to the global financial crisis, sought to improve the banking 
sector’s shock absorbing ability, thus reducing the risk of spill over from the financial sector 
to the real economy. 
As time passed, the complexity of the financial reform agenda increased, particularly in terms 
of institutions covered, instruments subject to regulation, and cross-border implications. As I 
indicated  earlier,  now  that  we  have  reached  the  point  of  implementation  and  monitoring, 
concerns  are  being  raised  around 
the  domestic 
implementation of the new regulatory standards and their applicability to all countries, and 
possible  “unintended  consequences”,  which  include  the  economic  impact  of  the  reforms 
which  need  to  be  balanced  against  the  need  for  financial  stability.  The  G20,  which  put 
financial  regulation  high  on  its  agenda  since  the  first  Leaders’  summit  in  2008,  has 
recognised  the  importance  of  “finishing  the  job”,  and  the  focus  for  2014  is  to  deliver  on  a 
range of outstanding reform issues, which I will elaborate on later. 
issues  such  as 
inconsistency 
in 
Regulatory alignment and supervisory change in South Africa 
3. 
South Africa, as a member of the G20, seeks to adhere to international standards of financial 
supervision and regulation as far as possible, taking into account domestic circumstances. 
Basel  II  compliance  by  South  African  registered  banks  commenced  in  January  2008.  As 
alluded to earlier, not all G20 member jurisdictions managed to meet the deadlines, leading 
to uneven playing fields. Alignment with Basel II played a role in sensitising South African 
banks  and  the  regulator  to  risk  and  capital,  complementing  a  pre-existing  culture  of 
responsibility and relative conservatism, and led to the practice where banks were required 
to hold more capital than the internationally prescribed 8 per cent. It can be argued that to 
some extent this stricter and more conservative approach to bank regulation in South Africa 
served to cushion the domestic industry from the practices that led to problems elsewhere.  
Basel III primarily addresses the problem of counter-cyclicality, quality and quantity of capital 
held at banks to absorb losses, and will introduce new standards for leverage and liquidity. 
Some elements of these new standards (such as the Liquidity Coverage Ratio) have already 
been  agreed  upon  whilst  others  (such  as  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio)  are  still  being 
finalised in accordance with the agreed gradual phasing-in up to 2019. As many of you are 
aware, their impact is substantial and not limited to the banking industry as it flows over into 
the  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  market  and  so-called  shadow  banking  activities. 
Simultaneously the role of (SIFIs) took centre-stage, with tightened capital requirements and 
other  regulatory  requirements  such  as  resolution  plans.  The  concept  of  increased  capital 
charges  for  global  systemically-important  banks  has  been  carried  over  to  domestically-
important  banks  and  a  similar  process  began  for  the  insurance  industry  as  well  as  the 
non-bank, non-insurance financial industry. 
This was followed by the standard-setting bodies agreeing that SIFIs should have recovery 
plans  and  that  resolution  authorities  should  be  established  to  implement  resolution 
frameworks.  Whilst  these  undertakings  are  easily  defined  in  principle,  the  cross-border 
implications  of  resolution  are  proving  to  be  very  challenging.  Resolution  frameworks  are 
fraught with implementation complexity and global comparability is further complicated by the 
significant differences between national legal systems and the intricate interaction between 
                                                 
1  The Basel Committee is the primary global standard-setter for the prudential regulation of banks and provides 
a  forum  for  cooperation  on  banking  supervisory  matters.  Its  mandate  is  to  strengthen  the  regulation, 
supervision and practices of banks worldwide with the purpose of enhancing financial stability. The Committee 
reports to and seeks endorsement for its major decisions and work programme from the Group of Governors 
and Heads of Supervision (GHOS). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
proposed  resolution-  and  other  contingent  laws.  Clearly,  achieving  some  sense  of 
appropriate or best practice will take time and the G20 has therefore set a target that by the 
November 2014 Brisbane Summit, a framework for recognition of cross-border actions will be 
in place. 
South  African  banks  are  in  general  well-positioned  to  meet  the  Basel  III  requirements  for 
higher  and  better  quality  capital  as  they  are  phased-in.  There  are  other  areas,  however, 
which have  proven to be more difficult. Compliance with the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) 
presents  a  challenge  for  countries  like  South  Africa  with  less  liquid  corporate  debt  capital 
markets  and  limited  availability  of  government  debt  securities.  The  Bank  has  therefore 
provided a collateralised Committed Liquidity Facility (CLF) to assist banks where necessary 
in meeting up to 40 per cent of these new liquidity requirements. This facility came into effect 
in  January  2013,  two  years  before  the  Basel  III  compliance  date.  .  A  bigger  challenge  for 
South Africa is the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), which comes into effect in 2018, and 
which  favours  retail  funding  with  maturity  in  excess  of  one  year.  Such  a  requirement 
disadvantages  a  banking  system  like  that  of  South  Africa,  which  while  relying  more  on 
wholesale  funding  has  nevertheless  been  part  of  a  sound  financial  system.  The  Liquidity 
working  group  of  the  BCBS,  which  the  Bank  is  represented  on,  is  in  the  process  of 
considering various options, including rule changes. However, for South Africa the availability 
of  high  quality  liquid  assets  will  continue  to  be  an  issue  for  a  while  because  of  structural 
constraints. 
The  revised  leverage  ratio2  framework  was  published  on  12  January  2014  and  disclosure 
requirements  come  into  effect  from  1  January  2015.  The  Basel  standard  was  set  at 
3 per cent,  but  subsequently  jurisdictions  have  debated  imposing  the  leverage  ratio  at  far 
higher levels nationally, suggesting a global revision to a far more conservative level. 
Derivative  markets,  often  the  source  of  misunderstanding  and  occasional  fear  amongst 
regulators,  were  destined  to  bear  some  responsibility  for  the  crisis.  In  order  to  tighten 
controls  on  this  market,  reforms  are  focused  on  the  totality  of  the  derivative  system,  both 
within  and  beyond  the  normal  reach  of  financial  regulation.  The  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB)  and  standard  setting  bodies  are  working  to  enhance  the  transparency  of  OTC 
transactions through requirements to trade on organised platforms, to report transactions to 
trade  repositories,  by  placing  central  counterparties  (CCPs)  between  the  two  parties  to  a 
transaction, and by setting minimum capital and margining requirements. Jurisdictions that 
already had these CCP and trade repository infrastructures had an immediate advantage in 
the timetable to compliance. Other countries, which do not have these structures in place, 
like  South  Africa,  still  have  to  establish  requisite  structures  and  appropriate  rules.  In  this 
regard, as a country with a small, but stable and growing OTC market, it is important for us to 
ensure  that  differing  enforcement  dates  and  approaches,  especially  in  larger  jurisdictions, 
combined  with  cross-border  application  of  domestic  regulations,  do  not  unduly  stifle 
development 
their  banks 
economically-favourable compromises to the Basel OTC derivatives capital charges, which is 
to  the  detriment  of  our  own  banks  and  corporate  customers.  Operational  and  legal 
complexities arising from jurisdictional differences, exacerbated by the cross-border nature of 
OTC derivatives, have not yet been resolved. In South Africa regulations for OTC derivative 
infrastructures  are  prescribed  in  regulations  under  the  recently-implemented  Financial 
Markets Act which is a critical element in our national OTC financial reform programme. 
As for regulatory alignment overall, I would say that South Africa has made good progress in 
adopting  and  implementing  the  new  international  standards  and  has  been  an  active 
participant in the relevant fora in which regulatory reform efforts are being addressed. Where 
financial  markets.  Some 
jurisdictions  are  offering 
in  our 
                                                 
2  Measures  the  degree  to  which  an  institution’s  capital  is  converted  to  both  on-  and  off-balance  sheet 
exposures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
appropriate we have indicated our concerns around the uneven implementation of Basel III 
across different jurisdictions. 
Regulatory architecture reform 
4. 
Even  though  South  Africa’s  financial  system  weathered  the  storm  of  the  financial  crisis 
relatively  well  and  is  generally  commented  upon  favourably,  and  has  received  positive 
ratings  in  various  surveys,  South  African  authorities  felt  that  there  should  be  no  room  for 
complacency, and embarked on a wide-ranging set of reforms to make the financial sector 
better and safer. 
Our  national  regulatory  architecture  is  thus  undergoing  significant  transformation.  Late  last 
year,  Cabinet  approved  and  released  for  public  comment  the  Financial  Sector  Regulation 
Bill. Once passed by Parliament, the legislation will establish two new regulatory agencies: a 
Prudential  Authority,  in  the  SARB;  and  a  Market  Conduct  Authority  that  will  replace  the 
Financial Services Board. 
The principles behind the revised structure include integration of the banking and insurance 
supervisory  functions,  increased  focus  on  financial  stability  responsibilities,  expansion  of 
supervision to financial markets infrastructures, focused conglomerate supervision, reduced 
potential 
increased  organisational  effectiveness.  These 
structures  are  widely  regarded  as  essential  to  ensure  the  fluent  supervision  of  a  vastly 
changing financial landscape. Good things it is said, like Rome, are seldom designed, built 
and functioning in a day. The SARB, National Treasury and the Financial Services Board are 
engaged  in  thorough  preparation  and  look  forward  to  robust  implementation  of  the  new 
regulatory architecture. We trust that you, the practitioners and other stakeholders involved in 
our markets, will also be reaping the benefits in the not-too distant future. 
for  regulatory  arbitrage  and 
The G20 agenda for financial regulatory reform in 2014 
5. 
At  the  time  of  the  Brisbane  G20  Summit  in  November  2014,  four  core  financial  reform 
deliverables  will  be  assessed  which  ties  in  with  the  FSB  focus  for  the  upcoming  year  on 
“completing  the  job”.  The  policy  priorities  needed  to  “complete  the  job”  are:  building  the 
resilience  of  financial  institutions;  ending  too-big-to-fail;  transforming  shadow  banking;  and 
making derivatives markets safer. The FSB will also undertake a review of its governance 
structures and submit a final report to the G-20 Leaders Summit. I will address each of these 
policy priorities separately, without going into too much detail, in particular in those areas I 
have already touched on such as the OTC derivatives market. 
Building  the  resilience  of  financial  institutions:  The  outstanding  reform  issues  revolve 
around  the  Basle  III  capital  framework  and  include  the  finalisation  of  the  LCR,  the  NSFR, 
capital requirements for the trading book and addressing the various methodologies followed 
to  determine  risk  weighted  assets.  South  Africa  fully  implemented  the  risk-based  capital 
component of the Basel III framework on 1 January 2013, with the exception that the capital 
charge for credit valuation adjustment (CVA) risk on banks’ exposures to ZAR-denominated 
OTC derivatives and non-ZAR OTC derivatives transacted purely between domestic entities, 
was zero-rated for 2013, which exemption has been extended to 2014. The CVA exemptions 
have  been  a  necessity  because  of  the  lack  of  a  domestic  CCP  and  a  similar  carve  out  in 
larger jurisdictions like Europe. 
Another focus area is to improve the comparability across banks of the risk weights that they 
use in their internal risk models. A high degree of convergence and harmonisation should be 
reached so as to level the playing fields. 
Ending too-big-to-fail (TBTF): Only a few jurisdictions (most notably the US and the EU) 
have  made  the  necessary  legislative  reforms  to  implement  the  Key  Attributes  of  Effective 
Resolution Regimes, which all G20 jurisdictions are expected to fully implement in substance 
and scope by the end of 2015.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  earlier  mentioned  Financial  Sector  Regulation  Bill  establishes  the  Bank  as  the 
Resolution  Authority  for  domestic  SIFIs  and  market  infrastructures,  and  affords  certain 
resolution  powers  to  the  Bank.  During  2012/13  the  Bank  focused  on  the  development  of 
recovery  and  resolution  plans  (RRPs,  also  called  “living  wills”)  by  all  banks  registered  in 
South  Africa.  A  Resolution  Policy  Working  Group  (RPWG)  was  established,  consisting  of 
representatives from National Treasury, the Financial Services Board and the Bank, which is 
to draft the Resolution Bill taking cognisance of the requirements of the Key Attributes. We 
hope to have this Bill finalised by the end of 2014. 
Strengthening  oversight  and  regulation  of  shadow  banking  entities:  The  shadow 
banking industry has grown tremendously in recent years. The FSB’s 2013 report indicated 
that non-bank financial intermediation grew by US$5 trillion in 2012 to reach US$71 trillion. 
The assets in the shadow banking system expanded in most jurisdictions in 2012, helped by 
a  general  increase  in  valuation  of  global  financial  markets,  while  bank  assets  stagnated. 
Globally  the  assets  of  Other  Financial  Intermediaries  (OFIs)  represents  on  average  about 
24 per cent of total financial assets, about half of banking system assets and 117 per cent of 
GDP. 
A  broad  regulatory  policy  framework  for  strengthening  oversight  and  regulation  of  shadow 
banking  entities  was  endorsed  by  all  G20  members.  The  framework  addresses  five  policy 
areas:  mitigation  of  risks  in  banks’  interactions  with  shadow  banking  entities;  reducing  the 
susceptibility of money  market funds (MMFs) to runs; improving transparency and aligning 
incentives  in  securitization;  dampening  pro-cyclicality  and  other  financial  stability  risks  in 
securities financing transactions such as repos and securities lending; and, assessing and 
mitigating financial stability risks posed by other shadow banking entities and activities. Peer 
reviews by IOSCO of implementation on the regulation of money market funds will start in 
2014. 
A  particular  issue  for  South  Africa  is  that  the  definition  of  shadow  banking  namely,  “credit 
intermediation  involving  entities  and  activities  outside  the  regular  banking  system”  –  has 
different implications in different countries. In the case of advanced economies, it is primarily 
applicable  to  such  entities  as  money  market  funds,  hedge  funds  and  private  equity  funds 
which play a large role in the financial systems of these countries. In the case of EMDEs like 
South Africa, these entities are less prominent and although we agree with the intent to bring 
unregulated  or  under-regulated  activities  into  mainstream  regulation,  there  could  again  be 
unintended consequences that require careful consideration during implementation. In South 
Africa  the  definition  of  shadow  banking  as  currently  stated  would  cover  credit-extending 
institutions that address the financial needs of individuals and SMEs who are not adequately 
integrated  into  the  traditional  banking  sector.  Some  of  these  institutions  play  an  important 
role in deepening our financial system and advancing financial inclusion. A careful balance 
therefore  needs  to  be  struck  between  creating  an  enabling  environment  on  the  one  hand, 
and ensuring appropriate market conduct provisions, protection of consumers and guarding 
against irresponsible and exploitative lending practices on the other. 
FSB Governance Review:  As  part  of  the  process  to  enhance  trust  and  confidence  in  the 
financial  system,  the  FSB  has  proposed  a  review  of  its  governance  structure  to  ensure  a 
comprehensive  approach  to  representation  in  the  FSB  across  all  levels.  South  Africa 
recognises  the  value  of  having  the  widest  possible  participation  when  developing  global 
solutions to regulation in a highly globalised financial system and supports the principle of 
equal and balanced representation. The development of global financial standards, principles 
and processes require coordination between central banks, prudential and market  conduct 
regulators,  as  well  as  policy  making  institutions  such  as  the  Ministries  of  Finance.  A 
representative member body, in which each participant is able to contribute effectively, will 
improve the FSB’s ability to develop standards and rules that are responsive to the needs of 
key stakeholders in the global regulatory community, and will lead to greater compliance with 
global financial standards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Before  I  conclude,  let  me  say  that  completing  the  four  remaining  core  reforms  is  quite  an 
ambitious  agenda  which  if  rushed  through  could  result  in  compromises  being  made  and 
create its own challenges in the future. The fact that the leading global regulators have not 
reached  sufficient  agreement  to  issue  joint  regulations  is  causing  divergences  and  market 
fragmentation between them. It is also having a big impact on efficiency and financial stability 
and  is  increasing  the  business  costs  for  both  the  providers  and  the  users  of  financial 
services. South Africa is suffering direct and indirect consequences from this situation. More 
impetus  and  direction  to  address  the  current  situation  of  fragmentation  and  arbitrage  and 
push  for  a  higher  level  of  coordination  is  required.  In  the  past,  we  have  stressed  the 
importance of national discretion and flexibility and we should continue in this vein. However, 
the  scope,  substance  and  spirit  of  the  global  regulatory  objective  should  still  be  met  and 
demonstrated at all times. 
Conclusion 
6. 
In conclusion, the task of global regulatory reform is complicated by the fact of blurring lines 
between banking, insurance and capital markets. Interconnectedness of markets within and 
across  countries  requires  an  element  of  harmonisation  without  neglecting  country-specific 
circumstances. The other challenge is that “we are making our way as we go”, because the 
crisis is not over yet, and we are working on the basis of preliminary lessons without being 
able to fully assess the likely consequences. 
This  calls  for  a  collaborative  effort  between  regulators  to  minimise  uncertainty  for  financial 
institutions and markets, so as to allow them to structure their risk management processes, 
price products and embark on long-term planning. Similarly, financial market participants and 
institutions need to take responsibility for being responsive to, accepting and communicating 
to their other stakeholders the need for and benefits of regulatory reform. Standards such as 
Basel III will not address good day-to-day risk management within banks, or the lack thereof, 
including  strategic  risks  that  banks  undertake  in  pursuit  of  return  on  equity  demands  from 
shareholders  who  often  have  a  short  term  view  of  the  world.  And  of  course  Basel III  only 
covers banks and therefore the financial system as a whole will remain vulnerable until we 
have regulations in place for the system as a whole. 
I  wish  you  a  successful  conference  and  hope  that  you  will  be  able  to  take  away  useful 
insights to help you navigate the challenging environment. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
