  Guy Debelle: Capital flows and the Australian dollar 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the Financial Services Institute of Australia, Adelaide, 20 May 2014. 
 Thanks to Anthony Rush, Michelle Wright and Mark Wyrzykowski in the preparation of this speech. 
The Australian economy has been a net recipient of capital inflows from the rest of the world 
for  almost  all  of  its  history.  These  net  capital  inflows  –  or  the  difference  between  foreign 
investment in Australia and Australian investment abroad – are the financial counterpart to 
Australia’s current account deficit. Put differently, investment in the Australian economy has 
consistently exceeded domestic saving and this gap has been funded from offshore. 
As  I,  and  others,  have  previously  argued,  Australia’s  current  account  deficit  –  and  the 
associated capital inflows – is a good thing, not a bad thing.1 Cross-border capital flows allow 
for a more efficient allocation of global capital and can confer large benefits. In Australia’s 
case, foreign investment has been attracted by the favourable risk-adjusted returns on offer 
here  and  has  helped  to  expand  our  domestic  productive  capacity.  Most  recently,  this  has 
been particularly evident in the role foreign investment has played in expanding the capacity 
of Australia’s resources sector in order to meet growing demand for our bulk commodities – 
particularly from China. 
Although  net  capital  inflows  have  been  a  consistent  feature  of  Australia’s  balance  of 
payments,  the  composition  of  these  capital  inflows  –  and  the  gross  inflows  and  outflows 
underlying them – has varied significantly over time. I talked about this a little while ago,2 but 
it is worth revisiting today as there have been a few significant changes since then and some 
others are in prospect. 
So, today I will discuss some of these compositional changes in capital flows in more detail. I 
will also comment on some aspects of the relationship between these capital flows and the 
Australian dollar, although this is not straightforward. At a basic level, net capital inflows can 
be thought of as representing the appetite of foreign investors to purchase Australian dollar 
assets and the exchange rate is the price which adjusts so that they are willing to do this and 
maintain that exposure. 
I will conclude with a few observations on the outlook for Australian capital flows. 
Recent developments in Australian capital flows 
In  the  decade  prior  to  2007,  the  net  inflow  of  capital  to  the  Australian  economy  averaged 
around 5 per cent of GDP and peaked at almost 7 per cent of GDP just prior to the onset of 
the  financial  crisis  (Graph  1).  Since  then,  net  capital  inflows  have  declined  to  be  under 
3 per cent of GDP currently. 
                                                
1  For a more detailed discussion, see Debelle G (2011), “In Defence of Current Account Deficits”, Address at 
ADBI/UniSA Workshop on Growth and Integration in Asia, Adelaide, 8 July.  
2  See Debelle G (2013), “Funding the Resources Investment Boom”, Address to the Melbourne Institute Public 
Economic Forum, Canberra, 16 April.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Graph 1 
 This decline in net inflows has coincided with a marked reduction in gross capital flows from 
their  pre-crisis  levels.  This  is  not  unique  to  Australia  but  is  evident  globally  where  cross-
border  flows  are  considerably  lower  than  they  were  pre-crisis  (Graph  2).  Gross  foreign 
investment  in  Australia  has  fallen  from  around  17  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2006  to  around 
6 per cent of GDP currently, while Australian investment abroad has fallen from 12 per cent 
of GDP to about 3 per cent over the same period. 
 Graph 2 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  2. 
As  well  as  the  decline  in  gross  flows,  there  have  been  three  notable  changes  in  their 
composition: 
1. 
The flows to the Australian banking sector have gone from sizeable net inflows pre-
crisis to around zero, and even small net outflows, in recent years. 
A marked increase in foreign direct investment inflows, particularly to the resources 
sector. 
A sizeable increase in foreigners’ purchases of Australian government debt. 
3. 
I will discuss each of these in turn. 
Net capital inflows to the banking sector averaged around 5½ per cent of GDP in the decade 
preceding the financial crisis, but have subsequently averaged close to zero (Table 1). This 
reflects two main factors. The first is a shift in the composition of banks’ funding. The onset of 
the  global  financial  crisis  led  to  a  reassessment  of  the  perceived  risks  associated  with 
different  types  of  funding  and  has  seen  banks  shift  their  funding  base  towards  domestic 
deposits  and  away  from  wholesale  debt.3  This  development  does  not  reflect  a  lack  of 
appetite for Australian bank paper, as banks’ cost of issuance has generally declined over 
recent years to be currently not far from pre-crisis spreads. The second factor is a reduction 
in loan asset growth over recent years relative to its pre-crisis levels, that is, credit growth 
has been slower.  
 Table 1: 
Net Capital Inflows* 
Per cent of GDP 
Average over: 
1998–2007 
2008–2013 
5.0 
5.4 
−0.2 
1.6 
n/a 
−0.1 
1.7 
−2.0 
−2.0 
3.8 
1.6 
2.1 
  Private sector 
Banks** 
Other financials 
Non-financials 
– Resources sector 
Public sector 
(*) Excluding households and the RBA 
(**) Adjusted for the US dollar swap facility in 2008 and 2009. Includes securitisers. 
Sources: ABS; RBA  
 
As a result, banks have scaled back the pace of offshore debt issuance, with net wholesale 
debt issuance averaging 1−2 per cent of GDP over 2008−2013 compared with average net 
debt issuance equivalent to about 5 per cent of GDP over the previous 10 years (Graph 3).4  
                                                
3  For a more in-depth discussion of developments in banks’ funding, see Stewart C, B Robertson and A Heath 
(2013), “Trends in the Funding and Lending Behaviour of Australian Banks”, RBA Research Discussion Paper 
No 2013-15.  
4  The Australian banking sector also continues to raise short-term debt offshore, including through US money 
market funds as well as foreign currency deposits from customers including foreign central banks. In part, this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Graph 3 
  The slowdown in credit growth post-crisis has been particularly evident in the low growth of 
lending to businesses. This is related to the second key development in the composition of 
Australian  capital  flows over  recent  years:  an  increase  in  net  capital  inflows  directly  to  the 
corporate  sector,  rather  than  the  funding  being  intermediated  by  the  banking  sector.  Net 
inflows  to  private  non-financial  businesses  have  stepped  up  from  an  average  of  around 
1½ per  cent  of  annual  GDP  in  the  10  years  prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis  to  around 
4 per cent of annual GDP in the post-2007 period.  
Investment in the resources sector has been the important driver of this shift. Since 2011, 
around  70  per cent  of  foreign  investment  in  the  Australian  private  non-financial  sector  has 
been directed to the resources sector (Graph 4). As outlined in previous RBA work on the 
topic,  a  significant  share  of  the  very  large  increase  in  investment  in  resource  projects  has 
been  funded  through  foreign  direct  investment  in  the  form  of  retained  earnings.5  To  the 
extent  that  resource  companies  have  also  used  external  funding  sources,  they  have 
generally  accessed  offshore  debt  markets  directly,  rather  than  obtain  funds  through  the 
domestic banking sector.6  
                                                                                                                                                   
reflects the fact that Australian banks have higher credit ratings than most other banks, proving attractive to 
customers whose mandates are rating constrained. Another contributing factor is that the Australian banking 
sector can raise US dollar deposits from customers who do not have direct access to the US Federal Reserve 
and then deposit the funds at the Fed and earn the (small) spread. One might expect this activity to decline 
when US interest rates move away from zero. 
5  Arsov  I,  B  Shanahan  and  T  Williams  (2013),  “Funding  the  Australian  Resources  Investment  Boom”,  RBA 
Bulletin, March, pp 51–61.  
6  As I have previously discussed, a part of the reason for this preference is that a number of these resource 
companies have been able to access debt markets more cheaply than the banks themselves. See Debelle G 
(2013),  “Funding  the  Resources  Investment  Boom”,  Address  to  the  Melbourne  Institute  Public  Economic 
Forum, Canberra, 16 April.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 4 
  The third key development has been an increase in net capital inflows to the public sector, 
reflecting an increase in foreign holdings of Australian Commonwealth government debt over 
recent years. Gross inflows to the public sector have risen from an average of close to zero 
in  the  decade  prior  to  the  crisis  to  around  2½  per  cent  of  GDP,  on  average,  over  the 
2008−2013  period.  The  increase  in  foreign  purchases  of  Australian  government  debt  has 
seen  the  foreign  ownership  share  of  the  stock  of  Commonwealth  Government  securities 
(CGS) increase from 50 per cent in the early 2000s to be just under 70 per cent currently, 
even as the stock of issuance has risen fivefold (Graph 5). At the same time, there have also 
been  smaller  net  foreign  purchases  of  Australian  state  government  debt.  But  these 
purchases  have  not  kept  pace  with  net  issuance  by  the  states,  resulting  in  the  foreign 
ownership  share  of  state  government  debt  declining  from  around  45  per  cent  in  2008,  to 
around 30 per cent currently.  
Graph 5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
  The  increased  foreign  investment  in  Australian  national  government  debt  appears  to  have 
been  underpinned  by  increased  “official”  holdings  of  Australian  assets  by  foreign  reserve 
managers, including central banks. I say “appears” because we don’t have any particularly 
concrete  evidence  of  this.  The  ABS  statistics  do  not  break  down  the  holders  of  Australian 
government  debt.  However,  our  analysis  of  information  published  by  some  of  these 
sovereign  asset  managers  suggests  this  is  the  case.  This  evidence  is  far  from  complete, 
however.  
With yields on Australian government debt remaining relatively high compared to a range of 
alternative reserve assets, and the Australian government maintaining its AAA credit rating, 
asset managers appear to have regarded the risk-return trade-off and diversification benefits 
associated  with  holding  Australian  government  debt  increasingly  favourably.  But  while  the 
foreign  ownership  share  of  Australian  government  debt  remains  historically  high,  the 
Australian  dollar  share  of  global  reserve  holdings  is  modest  at  less  than  2  per  cent  on 
average (for those central banks for whom information on the currency denomination of their 
reserve assets is known).  
My general sense is that the bulk of sovereign asset managers now have Australian dollar 
assets as part of their portfolios, so there are not many new buyers left to emerge. The main 
chunk  of  diversification  occurred  through  2010  to  2012,  although  demand  has  remained 
robust since then.  
These  changes  in  the  composition  of  Australia’s  capital  inflows  have  been  reflected  in 
changes in the composition of the stock of Australia’s foreign assets and – most notably – in 
the composition of the stock of Australia’s foreign liabilities (Graph 6). In particular, between 
December 2007 and December 2013, the banking sector’s gross foreign debt liabilities have 
fallen  by  the  equivalent  of  around  10  percentage  points  of  GDP  to  around  55  per  cent. 
Meanwhile,  the  public  sector’s  gross  foreign  debt  liabilities  have  more  than  doubled  as  a 
share of GDP over this period (and are currently equivalent to around 20 per cent of GDP). 
The stock of private non-financial sector liabilities has increased by the equivalent of around 
4 percentage points of GDP over this period to be currently equivalent to about 70 per cent of 
GDP.  
Graph 6 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  These  changes  in  the  sectoral  composition  of  Australia’s  foreign  liabilities  have  occurred 
even  though  in  overall  magnitude,  Australia’s  net  liability  position  has  been  broadly 
unchanged  at  around  55  per  cent  of GDP  since  2007  (Graph  7).  There  has  also  been  an 
increase in the share of net long-term debt liabilities and a corresponding decline in the share 
of  net  short-term  liabilities,  consistent  both  with  the  lengthening  in  the  average  tenor  of 
banks’ debt liabilities and the shift from bank debt to public debt (public debt has a longer 
average tenor than bank debt).7  
Graph 7 
 Australia’s  net  equity  liability  position  has  declined  slightly  as  a  share  of  GDP  since  2007 
and, in the December quarter last year, switched to a (small) net asset position for the first 
time since the series began. That is, Australians now own more equity investments offshore 
than foreigners’ own equity in Australia. The majority of this decline reflects valuation effects, 
rather  than  a  marked  decline  or  compositional  change  in  net  inflows  of  equity  capital. 
Notably,  Australian  non-financial  firms  have  continued  to  receive  equity  inflows,  while 
Australian  superannuation  funds  have  continued  to  accumulate  (large)  holdings  of  foreign 
equities.  
The change in the composition of the stock of foreign liabilities has had a noticeable impact 
on the net income deficit, which is the part of the current account deficit that measures the 
net cost of servicing these liabilities. The net income deficit has recently declined to around 
its  lowest  share  of  GDP  in  a  number  of  decades.  In  part,  this  reflects  the  lower  yields  on 
government debt than on debt issued by the banking sector as well as the historically  low 
level of interest rates both locally and globally at the moment.8  
                                                
7  Debelle  G  (2014),  “The  Australian  Bond  Market”,  Speech  to  the  Economic  Society  of  Australia,  Canberra, 
15 April.  
8  These developments are discussed in Ma S (forthcoming), “Why has the Net Income Deficit Narrowed?”, RBA 
Bulletin, June.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  The outlook for capital flows 
Given that changes in gross inflows to the banking, resources and government sectors have 
had a significant influence on changes in the composition of Australian capital inflows over 
recent years, it is worth considering what factors might affect these flows in the future.  
In terms of the banking sector, it seems unlikely that the pattern of capital flows will change 
materially any time soon. The banks are likely to continue with little net debt issuance in the 
period ahead; that is, only issuing enough debt to replace that maturing. To the extent that 
investment  in  the  non-resources  sector  is  more  likely  to  be  intermediated  by  the  banking 
sector  than  resources  sector  investment,  the  RBA’s  forecast  pick-up  in  investment  in  the 
non-resources sector might see some pick-up in business credit from its current low rate of 
growth.  Even  so,  this  would  not  require  much  of  an  increase  in  wholesale  debt  issuance 
given that deposit growth continues to outstrip lending growth by a few percentage points.  
Turning  to  the  resources  sector,  the  investment  phase  of  the  resource  boom  has  peaked, 
and  a  number  of  resource  projects  are  moving  into  the  production  phase.  As  foreign 
investors  have  played  a  large  part  in  the  financing  of  this  investment,  a  move  to  the 
production phase should result in reduced capital inflows. At the same time, the increase in 
resource  export  volumes  should  increase  the  resources  sector’s  export  revenue.  The 
combination of higher revenues and lower capital expenditure outlays could be expected to 
lead to an increase in resources sector profits and, particularly, an increase in the share of 
these profits that are paid out as dividends to investors. Given that the resources sector is 
largely foreign-owned, this would be accompanied by an increase in dividend payments to 
foreign investors (an outflow on the net income component of the current account).  
Although the resources sector’s transition from investment to production will likely result in a 
reduction  in  net  capital  inflows  to  the  sector,  the  effect  on  the  Australian  dollar  is  more 
nuanced.  While  capital  inflows  to  the  resources  sector  may  be  expected  to  fall  (and  thus 
reduce demand for Australian dollars), this will also be associated with declining imports to 
the  sector,  as  resource  investment  has  relied  heavily  on  imported  capital  and  labour. 
Moreover, the balance of payments records these notional foreign direct investment flows as 
capital inflows (and imports on the current account) even though the respective flows may 
have been predominantly in US dollars. The (still substantial) part of the capital inflow that 
represented  an  actual  transaction  in  Australian  dollars  was  that  needed  to  pay  for  their 
workforce in Australia and the often small share of the assembly done locally.  
Additionally,  to  the  extent  that  resource  firms’  revenues  are  primarily  denominated  in  US 
dollars and their shareholder base chooses to be paid dividends denominated in US dollars, 
these flows will have no net direct influence on the exchange rate. Only those flows needed 
to  pay  for  the  operations  in  Australia,  to  pay  dividends  to  the  Australian  shareholder  base 
and taxes to the Australian Government will result in purchases of Australian dollars. The net 
result of all of this is that we might expect to see reduced capital flows and reduced demand 
for Australian dollars as the resources sector moves into the production phase.  
Finally, on the outlook for investment inflows to the public sector, while the foreign ownership 
share of Australian government debt has declined somewhat from its peak, it remains at a 
historically high level. Sovereign investors tend to be relatively slow to change their portfolio 
allocations.  Hence  we  might  expect  these  holdings  to  be  relatively  sticky.  Recent  capital 
inflows  to  the  sector  suggest  that  demand for Australian  government  debt  remains  robust. 
The  extent  of  any  additional  purchases  will  depend  in  part  on  the  extent  of further foreign 
exchange reserve accumulation by other central banks.  
One  source  of  potential  additional  demand  for  government  securities  is  from  Japanese 
investors, who have historically held sizeable shares of Australian government debt. While 
there  is  limited  evidence  to  date  that  the  program  of  quantitative  easing  in  Japan  has 
encouraged investors to substantially increase their purchases of other countries’ assets, the 
most  recent  data  suggest  that  demand  for  Australian  debt  from  Japanese  investors  has 
started to pick up.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Notwithstanding  the  possibility  of  these  flows  from  Japan,  the  net  implication  of  these 
developments is that one might expect to see reduced capital inflows in the period ahead, 
with the possibility of a consequent further decline in the Australian dollar. This would help in 
achieving balanced growth in the economy. That said, the ability of economists to forecast 
exchange rate movements is notoriously poor, but at least this might give you some idea of 
some of the dynamics at play in the period ahead.  
Concluding remarks 
To conclude, the main purpose of my speech today has been to run you through some of the 
notable changes in the composition of capital flows into Australia that have taken place over 
the  past  seven  years  or  so  and  indicate  how  they  might  evolve  in  the  period  ahead.  The 
major developments have been firstly, a marked reduction of net offshore debt issuance by 
the  Australian  banking  sector;  a  trend  which may  be  expected  to  continue  for  a  while  yet. 
Secondly, there has been a sizeable capital inflow (at least notionally) to fund the resources 
investment  boom.  As  that  investment  boom  is  now  transitioning  into  the  production  and 
export  phase,  these  capital  inflows  may  be  expected  to  decline  and  their  composition 
change.  The  third  main  development  has  been  a  marked  increase  in  foreign  holdings  of 
Australian government debt. While this might not increase much further from here, nor is it 
likely to decline anytime soon.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
