  Claudia Buch: The banking union – setting the course for better 
integrated and more stable financial markets in Europe? 
Speech  by  Prof  Claudia  Buch,  Deputy  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
19th Handelsblatt Annual Conference, London, 4 September 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to express my sincere thanks for the invitation to speak to you today. 
The topic of this conference is “banks in transition”. It is not just the banking sector, but also 
banking supervision, that is experiencing a transitional phase. 
The  creation  of  the  banking  union  is  a  mammoth  project  which  is  being  implemented  with 
breathtaking  speed.  In  May  2013,  a  comment  in  a  newspaper  –  not  the  Handelsblatt1  – 
included  the  following  line:  “No  self-respecting  European  is  refraining  from  calling  for  the 
speedy  launch  of  the  banking  union  in  public  speeches  at  present.”  Today,  just  under 
16 months  later,  the  banking  union  is  truly  just  around  the  corner.  The  question  now  is 
whether it can actually fulfil the expectations and hopes bound up in it. 
My predecessor at the Bundesbank, Sabine Lautenschläger, already spoke at length about 
the imminent launch of the Single Supervisory Mechanism yesterday. I would therefore like 
to begin by just briefly outlining the key facts about the upcoming “sea change”. 
 
In the second half of October the results of the comprehensive assessment will be 
published. 
The  European  Central  Bank  will  assume  responsibility  for  banking  supervision  in 
November.  It  will  directly  supervise  the  120  most  significant  banks,  including 
21 German  institutions.  The  ECB  can  also  take  on  supervision  of  smaller  banks. 
This is appropriate, as even these institutions can give rise to risks, for instance if 
they have similar business models and are hit by a common shock. The savings and 
loans crisis in the United States at the end of the 1980s and the Spanish cajas crisis 
are striking examples of this. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism is just one pillar of the banking union, however. 
The Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), which is scheduled to enter into force at 
the  start  of  2016,  will  introduce  a  European  resolution  authority  and  a  bank 
resolution fund. 
  What are the aims of the banking union? 
1. 
The emerging banking union comes with many expectations: 
 
 
 
the integration of the financial markets is to be promoted, 
risks of banks and governments untangled, and 
the stability of banks improved. 
                                                 
1   Börsenzeitung of 21 May 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Similar expectations were attached to the introduction of the euro. The Delors Report of 1989 
already highlighted that in a single market for financial services within a monetary union, a 
single monetary policy could make a positive contribution to financial market integration.2 
I consider the banking union to be an important and necessary extension of monetary union. 
It closes a vulnerable gap in the single currency by harmonising rules for the supervision and 
resolution of credit institutions at the European level and establishing European supervisory 
authorities. This is important, regardless of whether you wish to continue monetary union in 
the spirit of a “Maastricht 2.0” with decentralised responsibility for fiscal policy or to develop it 
into a fiscal union with mutualisation of liability and control. 
In  the  Eurosystem,  the  ECB  provides  banks  with  liquidity  in  its  capacity  as  lender  of  last 
resort. Supervision organised purely along national lines is no longer fitting with the times. 
Liquidity assistance from national central banks can have an impact on the single monetary 
policy.  The restructuring  or  resolution  of  financial  institutions  can  overstretch  the  individual 
member states’ financial means. 
The banking union does not mean an extension of joint fiscal liability, however – its aim is 
anything  but  that.  Rather,  the  banking  union  can  play  a  role  in  establishing  the  liability 
principle at the European level in a better way than before. In future, private investors will 
have to shoulder losses. By contrast, public funding mechanisms may only be used in very 
tightly restricted exceptional cases, for example if the stability of the entire financial system is 
at  risk.  And  if  public  funds  have  to  be  used,  these  should  be  national  funds  in  the  first 
instance. 
In this sense, the comprehensive assessment serves to ensure that apparent legacy risks do 
not fall within the scope of the new supervision and resolution regime. They should instead 
remain where they arose – at the national level and under national control. 
So is the banking union the solution to our problems? 
It  could  be  an  important  part  of  the  solution.  But  further  steps  are  needed  to  make  it  a 
success. 
 
First,  we  must  –  as  previously  addressed  –  ensure  that  private  investors  are 
adequately liable for losses incurred. 
Second, the banking union on its own is not the key to better separating the risks of 
banks and governments. We must also make further progress in regulation and put 
an end to the preferential treatment afforded to government debt instruments. 
Third, earlier reforms of the financial markets in Europe have focused on the banks. 
It should not be overlooked here that the integration of the markets for capital can 
make an important contribution to sharing opportunities and risks in monetary union. 
I  would  now  like  to  proceed  by  discussing  how  the  banking  union  can  contribute  to  better 
identifying and handling risks. But first I shall address the question of how opportunities and 
risks are distributed across integrated financial markets. 
  2. 
How are opportunities and risks distributed across integrated financial 
markets? 
The European project is globally unique. Sovereign states have committed to integrating their 
markets  for  goods,  labour  and  capital.  The  integration  of  the  financial  markets  has  made 
                                                 
2   “Once every banking institution […] is free to accept deposits from, and to grant loans to, any customer […] 
the  area  in  which  ‘its’  banking  system  operates  will  be  lost.  Indeed,  the  growing  coordination  of  monetary 
policies will make a positive contribution to financial market integration.” Committee for the Study of Economic 
and Monetary Union, Report on economic and monetary union in the European Community, 1989, p 16. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  for  enterprises  and  deposit  business 
progress  in  many  respects.  In  the  years  leading  up  to  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis, 
European banks’ claims within Europe had grown from 36 % of GDP at the end of the 1990s 
to 77 % in 2008. Since then, however, these claims have fallen back to around 48 % of GDP. 
But the strong increase in banks’ cross-border exposures masked the fact that the integration 
of the markets remained incomplete.3 In the banking sector, integration concentrated on the 
interbank  market;  credit  markets 
remained 
predominantly  national.  In  the  big  European  countries,  banks  are  mainly  domestically 
owned.4  The  integration  of  the  markets  for  capital  may  have  increased  in  Europe,  but  the 
ownership  structures  of  many  enterprises  are  nonetheless  strongly  national.  Improved 
market integration is hindered by differences in national taxation and legal systems as well 
as by varying market practices. Political resistance to cross-border ownership structures is 
another factor. 
The relatively low level of integration in the markets for capital makes it difficult for risks to be 
assumed via the financial markets. A comparison with the United States shows that equity 
holdings there are dispersed much more widely throughout the entire country. If a negative 
shock hits an industry or a specific region, then this loss is spread widely beyond that region. 
The same applies to positive developments, which are reflected in higher dividends. Equity 
investors participate directly in economic risk and in gains and losses. Creditors, on the other 
hand, are not exposed to losses – except in the case of insolvency. 
Empirical  studies  for  the  United  States  show  that  integrated  markets  for  capital  cushion 
around 40 % of the cyclical fluctuations between the US federal states. A share of around 25 
%  is  smoothed  via  the  credit  markets.  Fiscal  mechanisms  cushion  just  20  %  of  shocks.5 
Studies  for  Canada  and  Sweden  as  well  as  the  German  federal  states  come  to  similar 
conclusions. 
The  integration  of  banks  in  Europe  has  certainly  had  positive  effects  on  growth  and 
investment.  But  the  risks  arising  from  integration  were  frequently  overlooked.  What  would 
happen if assumed risks became loss events, if losses materialised, if European banks were 
hit by a bigger shock? None of these questions were seriously posed until the crisis struck. 
During the crisis, it became clear that many banks had taken on excessive risk. That’s why 
they  ran  into  funding  problems  almost  simultaneously  and  had  to  offload  exposures.  The 
freed-up capital often provided inadequate protection against the remaining risks. Up until the 
crisis, however, there was no special insolvency law for banks that allowed creditors to be 
bailed in and took account of risks to financial stability. 
Fiscal and monetary policy had to step into the breach. The outcome is higher public fiscal 
debt and greater risks in central bank balance sheets. Some banks are still lumbered with 
legacy exposures and can only play an inadequate part in the necessary structural change in 
the real economy. 
In this situation, the banking union can play a significant role in better identifying risks in the 
future by way of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. At the same time, the Single Resolution 
Mechanism  represents  a  considerable  step  towards  improving  the  manner  in  which  risk  is 
handled in a monetary union made up of sovereign states. 
                                                 
3   A Sapir and G Wolff (2013), The Neglected Side of Banking Union: Reshaping Europe’s Financial System, 
Policy contribution presented at the informal ECOFIN in Vilnius. 
4   European Commission, DG Internal Market and Services, European Financial Stability and Integration Report 
2013, Brussels, 2014 p 49ff. 
5   M  Hoffmann  and  B  Sorensen,  Don’t  expect  too  much  from  EZ  fiscal  union  –  and  complete  the  unfinished 
integration of European capital markets! VoxEU, 9 November 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Can risks be better identified in future? 
3. 
Identifying risks better is the aim of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. It was designed to 
roll  out  uniform  supervisory  standards  across  all  participating  member  states.  The  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism will thus make an important contribution to better integration of the 
markets,  which  is  currently  being  hampered,  amongst  other  things,  by  inconsistent 
supervisory standards. 
One  of  the  major  advantages  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is  that  it  obtains 
comprehensive information. All supervisory reporting data for the most significant banks will 
thus be accumulated by a central authority in future. This information, which previously only 
existed at the national level, can be bundled to facilitate cross-border comparisons. In this 
way, the supervisor should be able to identify risks faster and better in future. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism also reduces the risk of supervisors developing an all too 
close relationship with “their” banks. Local knowledge is certainly of great importance in the 
banking  business.  But  we  should  also  keep  an  eye  on  possible  misaligned  incentives  in 
national  supervision.  Experiences  in  the  United  States  show  that  local  and  national 
supervisors apply uniform supervisory standards with varying levels of strictness.6 This is why 
we should do our utmost to apply rules uniformly in Europe, thereby creating a genuine level 
playing field for banks. 
There  are  also  areas  in  which  the  institutional  framework  can  be  improved  for  efficient 
European supervision. 
 
First, different tasks are bundled in the ECB. Alongside its actual task of monetary 
policy,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  is  ultimately  also  responsible  for  supervisory 
issues.  These  relate  to  microprudential  and  macroprudential  supervision,  with  the 
latter  addressing  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  If,  however, 
monetary policy decisions are influenced by supervisory considerations, this would 
significantly impact on the credibility of monetary policy. 
Second, the non-euro-area countries in the ECB Governing Council are not entitled 
to vote. This hinders their inclusion in the banking union – and thus the integration of 
the banking markets in Europe as a whole. Central and eastern European countries, 
in which foreign banks have large market shares, are affected by this in particular. 
Clear-cut  inclusion  of  these  countries  in  the  banking  union  would  therefore  be 
sensible for the creation of a single banking market. 
Third,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is  extremely  complex.  A  stringent 
organisational structure with clearly defined processes and reporting channels could 
alleviate the ensuing frictions, but certainly not eliminate them completely. 
  We ought to keep a watchful eye on these problems. Practice will show whether they can be 
satisfactorily  resolved  within  the  existing  legal  framework.  If  this  is  not  the  case,  then  we 
should make the necessary adjustments. 
Will the banking union improve how risks that materialise are dealt with? 
4. 
But  having  a  uniform  set  of  standards  in  banking  supervision  is  not  enough.  We  need 
procedures for dealing with banks that run into difficulties. What will happen in the future if 
the  ECB,  as  the  single  supervisor,  withdraws  a  bank’s  licence?  How  can  we  ensure  that 
individual weak banks are able to exit the market? 
                                                 
6   See S Agarwal, D Lucca, A Seru and F Trebbi (2012), Inconsistent regulators: Evidence from banking, NBER 
Working Paper No 17736, Cambridge. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The second pillar of the banking union, the Single Resolution Mechanism, was designed to 
provide the answer to these questions. National solutions can normally be found for smaller 
ailing banks. In Germany, for example, there were a good 4,700 banks in the market at the 
start of the 1990s – today there are around 1,800. The bulk of these changes came about 
through mergers of smaller institutions with economically stronger ones. 
There  are  hardly  any  tried  and  tested  mechanisms  for  restructuring  and  resolving  major 
banks,  however.  Risks  to  financial  stability  can  be  posed  if  key  business  areas  fail. 
Furthermore, coordination across national borders is required. 
These problems are not easy to resolve. All too often, stressed banks were given too much 
time  to  resolve  the  economic  problems  they  faced.  In  earlier  crises,  finance  ministers  and 
supervisors  often  acted  too  late  and  too  indecisively.  Some  shied  away  from  the 
consequences of banking crises for government budgets, others from the loss of reputation 
for supervisors. Empirical studies indicate that banking crises come at a high real economic 
and fiscal cost.7 A wait-and-see strategy is the most expensive approach of all, however. 
That’s why the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) is an important step towards 
better  handling  troubled  banks.  It  harmonises  the  legal  framework  for  bank  resolutions  in 
Europe. The BRRD defines the liability cascade: shareholders are liable first, followed by the 
creditors of subordinated and unsecured bonds. Depositors are protected up to Euro100,000 
by the statutory deposit guarantee scheme. 
If the capital freed up in this way is insufficient, funds from the single European resolution 
fund can be used, under certain conditions. This fund is intended to hold Euro55 billion. It is 
to be built up over time and funded by bank levies. 
The exact structure of this bank levy is currently being negotiated. Regardless of the details, 
it is particularly important in my view that the bank levy is as clear and simple to calculate as 
possible and does not allow for any exceptions. 
To ensure that liability and control are kept in balance, banks that are subject to European 
supervision also need to be resolved at the European level. But this also means that losses 
originating from the time before the launch of the banking union need to be remedied under 
national responsibility. 
With regard to resolution financing, national fiscal backstops and – as an ultima ratio – the 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM) are of central importance. In the case of legacy risks, it 
should also be taken into account that direct recapitalisation of banks by the ESM breaches 
the liability principle. After all, the legacy risks arose on the watch of national supervisors. 
Practical application could reveal that subsequent improvements to the current institutional 
structures might be needed in two areas to ensure that the new resolution mechanisms are 
effective. 
First, the decision-making structures of the SRM – much like those of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  –  are  extremely  complex.  The  short  deadline  of  one  weekend  will  hardly  be 
sufficient for a restructuring or resolution to be initiated at a large bank in a way that does not 
place  an  excessive  strain  on  the  system  as  a  whole.  For  this  reason,  a  check  should  be 
carried out on the extent to which the legal framework needs to be altered in order to arrive 
at more efficient decision-making structures in the resolution mechanism. 
The second problematic point is the authorities’ relatively broad scope for discretion, which 
allows them to exclude private creditors from loss-sharing. This assessment is not an easy 
one to make. 
                                                 
7   L Laeven and F Valencia (2012), Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update, IMF Working Paper 12/163. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
   The  higher  the  losses  assumed  by  private  creditors,  the  greater  the  potential 
negative effects for the stability of the financial system. 
The lower the private loss absorption, however, the higher the costs for government 
budgets – and the lower the disciplining effect for investors as well. 
 The  resolution  authority  therefore  faces  a  conflict  of  interests:  if  it  aims  to  deflect  risks  to 
financial stability, it must trust that ultimately a fiscal backstop will be available. 
The  American  model  of  systemic  risk  exception  is  of  interest  for  implementing  the  liability 
principle  and  permitting  as  few  exceptions  from  the  bail-in  of  creditors  as  possible.  The 
principle of bailing in creditors can only be deviated from in systemic crises. Each deviation 
must be approved by a clear majority of the relevant decision-making bodies – in this case, 
the  deposit  guarantee  scheme  and  the  central  bank.  The  finance  minister  must  sign  off  a 
deviation in consultation with the president. This is intended to secure the financing of bank 
restructurings.  This  is  a  sensible  approach  to  strengthening  the  credibility  of  resolution 
regimes and being capable of acting during systemic crises at the same time. 
One point is of particular importance to me here: fiscal backstops are not the path towards to 
greater mutual liability. Fiscal means can only ever be the last resort within a well-defined 
liability cascade. But without this last resort, there is the risk of bank recoveries or resolutions 
being delayed. This is why it must be ensured in advance that fiscal means are available to 
plug any capital shortfalls in an emergency. Only then will the resolution authority at the head 
of the decision-making chain take on the risk of resolving a systemically important institution. 
This will make creditor bail-ins the rule and not the exception. This, in turn, is the prerequisite 
for risks being adequately priced by lenders. 
Where is further economic policy action needed? 
5. 
I mentioned three aims of the banking union at the beginning of my speech: more strongly 
integrated  and  also  more  stable  financial  markets,  as  well  as  the  need  to  disentangle  the 
risks of banks and governments. 
The banking union alone will not be able to achieve these aims, but it is a key building block 
that must be augmented and soundly anchored. I would like to emphasise three areas. 
 
important 
for  systemically 
the  additional  capital  requirements 
First,  credibly  separating  the  risks  of  banks  and  governments  requires  further 
regulatory  action  plans.  The  banking  union  by  itself  does  not  change  banking 
regulation.  In  future,  the  resilience  of  institutions  will  be  strengthened  by  Basel  III 
and 
financial 
institutions. But this is not enough. 
The preferential treatment afforded to government debt instruments needs to be put 
to an end in the medium term. Sovereign bonds need, like other bank exposures as 
well,  to  be  backed  by  capital.  The  existing  limits  on  large  exposures  should  be 
gradually extended to cover sovereign debt. 
Second,  deeper  integration  of  the  markets  for  capital  in  Europe  should  be  made 
possible. After all, cross-border investment allows opportunities – and risks – to be 
better  shared.  This  strengthens  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  Despite  the 
essentially free movement of capital, there are still legal and institutional barriers in 
Europe. 
Third,  the  banking  union  can  accelerate  integration  of  the  financial  markets  by 
introducing  a  common  set  of  supervisory  standards.  But  above  all,  it  can  also 
contribute  to  better  risk  assumption  by  the  private  sector.  The  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism  in  particular  is  expected  to  make  private  investors  participate  in  risks 
that materialise. But for this to become reality, the new rules need to be rigorously 
applied, and exceptions to the bail-in of creditors must be minimised. 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  On  the  whole,  the  banking  union  means  that  the  authority  for  supervising  banks  will  be 
transferred  to  the  European  level.  The  need  for  this  is  nothing  new  –  the  Delors  Report 
already  pointed  out  exaggerations  that  financial  markets  are  prone  to,  and  the  associated 
constraints that this entails for national economic policy.8 
Thank you very much. 
 
                                                 
8   “Financial  markets  […]  penalize  deviations  […]  and  thus  exert  pressure  for  sounder  policies.  Market  views 
about  the  creditworthiness  […]  tend  to  change  abruptly.  The  constraints  imposed  by  market  forces  might 
either be too slow and weak or too sudden and disruptive. Hence countries would have to accept that sharing 
a common market and a single currency area imposed policy constraints.” See Committee for the Study of 
Economic and Monetary Union (1989), Report on economic and monetary union in the European Community, 
p 20. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
