Karnit Flug: Where is society headed? 
Main  points  of  a  speech  by  Dr  Karnit  Flug,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Central 
Bureau of Statistics Conference, Jerusalem, 17 February 2014. 
 I  will  begin  my  remarks  with  data  from  the  OECD,  which  compared  GDP  per  capita  in  its 
member countries with the US, broken down into factors which explain the gap between the 
various countries and the US. In 2011, the gap between GDP per capita in Israel and the US 
was  close  to  50  percent.  The  OECD  also  tried  to  project  what  the  picture  will  look  like  in 
2060,  assuming  that  current  policy  trends  in  the  various  countries,  and  expected 
demographic  trends,  continue.  The  gap  between  Israel  and  the  US  is  expected  to  remain 
more or less the same, as Israel is forecast to decline by four places in the country ranking. 
This is clearly a troubling picture. 
Economic  policy  is  conducted  under  various  trends  and  constraints,  though  we  must 
obviously  remember  that  over  the  long  term  we  can  affect  the  overall  framework  of  the 
constraints  as  well.  These  trends  and  constraints  include  demographic  trends,  the 
geopolitical situation, the level of governance and efficiency in the public sector, the scope of 
public expenditures, taxes and the debt, and of course, the global environment in which we 
work is very challenging. 
Expected demographic trends point to two very dominant factors. A change is expected in 
the composition of the population, by sector, with an increase in the share of the Arab sector, 
and more so of the ultra-Orthodox sector, in the overall population. There is also a change 
expected  in  the  age  distribution  –  Israel’s  population  is  relatively  young,  compared  with 
advanced  economies,  but  there  is  an  aging  trend  by  us  as  well,  and  the  share  of  those 
65 years and older, currently around 10 percent, is expected to reach 17 percent. 
In  the  labor  market,  the  employment  rates  of  ultra-Orthodox  men  and  Arab  women,  as 
known,  are  low.  The  productivity  of  the  people  from  those  population  segments  who  do 
participate  in  the  labor  market  is  low,  on  average.  The  good  news  is  that  there  is 
improvement, albeit slow, in the employment rate of these two segments of the population. 
However, if we make a radical assumption, that the participation rates of those sectors will 
remain  at  current  levels,  demographic  trends  on  their  own  are  expected  to  reduce  the 
employment  rate  by  7  percent  in  the  long  term.  Thus,  it  is  important  that  we  continue  to 
invest in increasing the participation and productivity of the Arab and ultra-Orthodox sectors; 
otherwise, not only will we not remain in place, but we will even widen the gap vis-à-vis the 
advanced  economies.  For  example,  in  educational  achievements,  already  today  there  is 
some gap between Israel and advanced economies, and it can be assumed that the Arab 
and ultra-Orthodox sectors are themselves at some gap vis-à-vis the general population in 
such  achievements.  The  implication  is  that  under  current  conditions,  the  increase  in  labor 
force  participation  of  these  sectors  will  be  reflected  in  the  addition  of  employees  whose 
productivity is low to the workforce. 
The data indicate that in recent decades, the gap between Israel and advanced economies in 
output  per  hour  has  remained.  Among  the  factors  in  this  phenomenon  are  an  unfriendly 
business environment, as reflected in international indices such as the Doing Business index, 
the problem of low competitiveness in specific industries, and a low rate of investment which 
leads to insufficient capital stock. Looking at per capita GDP, as well, indicates that we have 
not closed the gap in recent decades. Although we have seen more rapid growth of our per 
capita GDP in recent years, in light of the relatively moderate negative impact of the crisis on 
Israel’s economy compared with other advanced economies, we clearly don’t want to hope 
for a continued contraction of the gap between Israel and other advanced economies based 
on the this factor. The two demographic trends that I discussed – the decline in the share of 
the  working  age  population,  and  the  increase  in  the  share  of  sectors  with  relatively  low 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
employment rates – are expected to deduct 1.3 percentage points from the annual growth 
rate. In this regard, I of course noted the improvement, which is still slow, in the employment 
trends in the Arab and ultra-Orthodox sectors. 
The  aging  of  the  population  is  expected  to  lead  to  a  sharp  decline  in  the  ratio  of  number 
people of working age to the number of the elderly, from 5.5 today to 3 in 2050. The meaning 
of  this  is  that  there  will  be  a  need  to  increase  the  allocations  for  old  age  allowances,  on 
healthcare expenditure, nursing care, and such, in order to maintain the current level of these 
allowances and services. Poverty is another issue with which we will need to deal. In recent 
years there has been a trend of increase in the poverty rate among families with workers, 
while  the  stability  in  the  general  poverty  rate  is  the  result  of  an  increase  in  the  share  of 
families with one or both parents working, which is an outcome of the trend of increase in 
labor force participation. The picture is essentially of workers whose earning power does not 
allow  them  a  respectable  livelihood,  and  so  there  is  an  increase  in  the  number  of  poor 
families in which there are one or two wage-earners. In this context, expanding the earned 
income tax credit (negative income tax) is an efficient policy tool to deal with the problem, as 
it focuses on the working poor, and in contrast to a policy of allowances, it does not contain 
negative  incentives.  In  the  long  term,  of  course,  the  main  key  to  solving  the  problem  of 
poverty is continued investment in education and increasing earning power. 
The  challenges  I  have  presented  here  will  require  a  significant  increase  of  civilian 
expenditure  on  services  such  as  education,  healthcare,  welfare,  and  infrastructure,  even  if 
only to maintain the current level of services, given the expected changes in composition of 
the  population.  In  order  to  ensure  that  maintaining  the  civilian  expenditure  level  will  not 
negatively impact on the important effort to continue to reduce the debt burden, there will be 
a need to continue to increase tax revenues. This can be achieved in 3 ways, each on its 
own or in some combination of the three: 
1. 
2. 
Increasing tax rates, which obviously increases the burden on activity and growth. 
Reassessing the tax exemption system. In this regard, it should be remembered that 
some of the estimates of the cost of existing exemptions are biased upward, since 
they  do  not  take  into  account  the  expected  change  in  activity  resulting  from  the 
cancellation of the exemption. 
Reducing  the  shadow  economy  and  enhancing  collection.  It  is  clear  that  from  the 
perspective of statistics bureaus worldwide, estimating the extent of the unreported 
economy poses a large challenge. A very rough estimate by the World Bank, which 
apparently  has  a  large  margin  of  error,  assesses  that  the  unreported  economy  is 
about 20 percent of GDP in Israel. In this regard, there are several processes which 
are being discussed: definition, in legislation, of severe tax crimes as source crimes 
under the Prohibition on Money Laundering Law, which would allow the transfer of 
information between the Israel Money Laundering and Terror Financing Prohibition 
Authority and the Israel Tax Authority, and making punishment for tax crimes more 
severe;  collaboration  between  all 
transfer  of 
professional  and  intelligence  information  which  will  make  enforcement  against  tax 
evaders more efficient; and a reduction in the use of cash and third-party checks, 
which is currently being considered by the Locker Committee. 
the  enforcement  entities  and 
3. 
To the extent that we will be able to do more in increasing the efficiency of the tax exemption 
system and enhancing tax collection, we will be able to increase overall tax revenues without 
increasing tax rates. 
To  summarize,  the  economy  faces  the  challenge  of  supporting  inclusive  growth,  which 
integrates population sectors with low participation rates, while increasing their human capital 
and earning capacity and increasing productivity. To that end, we must formulate a focused 
strategic  plan,  which  will  include  integrating  population  sectors  into  employment  (ultra-
Orthodox,  Arabs,  older  workers),  dealing  with  increasing  human  capital,  dealing  with  the 
factors  leading  to  slow  growth  of  productivity  (infrastructure,  business  environment, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
competitiveness), preparing public services systems (healthcare, nursing, etc.), and reducing 
the unreported economy by collaboration between all entities. 
The data I presented in the beginning of my remarks showed that an “automatic pilot” policy 
will not lead us to reducing the gaps with other advanced economies; however, there is some 
room  for  optimism,  as  an  effective  and  well  thought-out  policy  can  definitely  improve  our 
situation over the long term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
