Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Developments in Malaysia’s money services 
business 
Speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at 
the  Launch  of  the  Malaysian  Association  of  Money  Services  Business,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
9 January 2014. 
 Over the last two years, this industry has experienced significant change with the introduction 
of a new and strengthened legislative framework for the industry. We have been encouraged 
by  the  positive  developments  that  have  been  achieved  during  this  period.  Many  of  you 
supported  this  change  and  are  well  on  your  way  to  build  businesses  that  will  succeed 
through  time  with  higher  standards  of  professional  service  and  integrity.  Through  our 
interaction and engagement with members of the industry, we hope that by now, the industry 
is clear that the status quo cannot be an option. The industry must be able to operate with a 
high degree of transparency and in full compliance with applicable laws and regulations. This 
is important not only to build confidence in the services that the industry provides, but also to 
protect  the  integrity  of  the  broader  financial  system.  The  sanctity  of  financial  system  is  of 
utmost importance as it is the pillar for our economy. 
Vision and regulatory expectation for the industry 
With the enactment of the Money Services Business Act 2011, the law provides the powers 
to  create  an  enabling  condition  to  deliver  better  consumer  protection,  improve  business 
opportunities,  and  strengthen  safeguards  against  the  risk  of  money  laundering  and  other 
illegal activities. Significant resources have been devoted by the Bank in the last two years to 
achieve these objectives. One of it was the relicensing process. We had reassessed a total 
of  839  money  changing  companies  and  remittance  service  providers  and  issued  new 
licences  to  those  that  met  the  necessary  requirements.  We  have  also  provided  time  for 
companies  to  improve  their  operations.  These  companies  had  demonstrated  that  they  are 
able to comply with the required rules. 
For  those  that  qualify  the  licensing  processes,  improvements  in  their  operations  could  be 
achieved  within  a  reasonable  timeframe.  We  have  also  made  it  clear  to  the  industry  that 
companies found to be carrying out unauthorised activities will be firmly dealt with through 
enforcement  actions.  Out  of  the  839  licenses  issued  earlier,  the  relicensing  process  had 
reduced  a  total  of  365  licenses  as  a  result  of  revocation,  merger,  voluntary  surrender  of 
license  or  industry  players  themselves  decided  to  convert  to  become  an  agent  of  a  larger 
entity. 
We  have  significantly  increased  our  interactions  with  the  industry  to  help  companies 
understand  the  regulatory  requirements  that  must  be  observed.  These  engagements  have 
also helped the Bank better understand the practical issues that are faced by the  industry 
and we have responded accordingly to some of these issues. I can assure you that we will 
continue to work with the industry to find solutions to legitimate issues raised by the industry 
but the industry must act responsibly and with the public’s interest in mind. 
Enforcing  compliance  will  continue  to  be  an  important  focus  of  the  Bank.  This  focus  will 
increase  as  non-bank  institutions  such  as  those  in  this  industry  potentially  become  more 
vulnerable to financial abuses as a result of strict implementation of anti-money laundering 
and counter financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) measures imposed on the banking institutions. 
The enhanced focus is part of Malaysia’s effort to counter money laundering and terrorism 
financing  risks.  Another  potential  risk  is  in  the  exploitation  of  new  products  and  services 
made  possible  with  the  advancements  in  technology,  where  the  money  services  business 
industry might become a target to channel proceeds from illegal activities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Specific regulatory  requirements  have  been  introduced,  in  particular  on  maintaining  proper 
records  and  source  documents,  and  the  essential  requirements  to  conduct  customer 
identifications and to verify sources and purpose of funds. These steps should reduce these 
risks. In addition, the Bank will continue to conduct on-site visits to your businesses to check 
compliance, and where  necessary, we shall use the enforcement tools provided under the 
law to enforce compliance. The punitive measures would include the revocation of licences, 
monetary penalties for non-compliances and prosecution for the more serious offences. 
We will also continue to act swiftly to stamp out illegal operators and those who assist them 
in  facilitating  unauthorised  money  services  business  activities. To  date,  actions  have  been 
and are being taken against more than 180 entities, which include the revocation of licence, 
removal  of  key  responsible  persons  for  serious  failures  to  comply  with  regulatory 
requirements, and compounds for non-compliances with various regulatory and operational 
requirements.  Several  entities  have  been  charged  in  court  and  some  of  these  had  been 
convicted. 
While  we  will  sustain  these  efforts  to  continue  to  raise  standards  of  compliance  in  the 
industry,  the  primary  responsibility  for  ensuring  compliance  rests  with  the  industry  itself.  It 
starts  with  every  company  having  clear  processes,  well-trained  and  informed  staff,  and 
effective systems and records that assist in complying with regulatory requirements. 
The industry has made some progress, and we are encouraged by the efforts that are being 
made  at  individual  companies  and  at  the  industry  level.  Some  of  you  have  made  more 
progress  than  others.  For  those  that  continue  to  wait,  time  is  running  out  and  it  is  very 
important  that  plans  be  developed  immediately  and  implemented  aggressively  to  establish 
the necessary systems to improve compliance with the law. Overall, while the industry has 
done a commendable job, a lot more can be accomplished and it is in the industry’s interest 
to  show  improvements,  as  we  enter  into  the  next  round  of  compliance  assessment  of 
individual companies. 
Expectations on MAMSB 
We  have  high  hopes  and  expectations  for  the  association.  The  establishment  of  this 
association  is  very  timely  for  it  to  play  a  central  role  for  the  benefit  of  the  industry.  The 
Association  should  spearhead  and  drive  capacity  building  efforts  that  will  support  the 
objectives  of  promoting  modernisation  and  elevating  the  standards  of  compliance  and 
professionalism in the industry. 
Firstly,  the  association  is  expected  to  take  on  an  important  role  in  instilling  professional 
conduct and good business practices amongst the industry players. In this respect, the Bank 
looks forward to a code of conduct for the industry to be established and implemented by the 
industry this year. The code of conduct should comprise a set of key principles and guidance 
for  proper  business  practices  that  instil  greater  market  discipline  and  confidence,  and  to 
create a culture of healthy competition within the industry. This should be complemented by 
a process that ensures that individuals responsible for managing money services business 
operations have the relevant knowledge and experience to meet the minimum professional 
standards set by the industry, and are able to offer quality services to the public. 
In relation to this, the association should consider implementing a certification or qualification 
process, for example, by conducting entrance examinations for its members sometime in the 
future. 
We also expect the association to play a proactive role to improve the image of the industry 
players  and  weed  out  the  black  sheep  within  the  industry,  through  the  effective 
implementation  and  enforcement  of the  code  of  conduct,  and  by  working  with  the  relevant 
authorities to help combat illicit transfers of funds and unauthorised activities. 
Secondly,  the  association  will  also  serve  as  the  central  platform  to  drive  and  implement 
development  initiatives  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  the  industry.  The  Bank  has  high 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
expectations for the  association  to  play  a key  educational  role to  promote greater  industry 
understanding  on  regulatory  compliance  and  the  latest  industry  trends,  through  holistic 
education  and  training  program  such  as  requirements  under  the  relevant  laws  and  best 
practices, risk management and consumer protection. Properly structured, the training and 
development program would result in higher professional standards of conduct and should 
strengthened safeguards against possible abuses and contravention of the law. 
Thirdly,  as  the  collective  voice  of  the  industry,  the  association  will  provide  the  bridge  for 
constructive engagement between the Bank and the industry. Through regular engagement, 
the  association  can  play  an  effective  facilitative  role  in  addressing  issues  concerning 
developments  in  the  industry,  by  providing  meaningful  feedback  and  input  to  the  Bank  or 
other relevant authorities. We have found over the years that industry associations can add 
tremendous value in consolidating fragmented views of the industry on important issues and 
could assist in formulating public policy. 
There are many benchmarks that the association can draw on, both in Malaysia and globally, 
in organising itself as an effective association. But of paramount, the players must be united 
in supporting the Association. 
Last  but  not  least,  the  association  is  expected  to  undertake  an  active  role  in  educating 
consumers  on  the  services  that  the  industry  provides  and  in  addressing  consumer  issues 
and complaints. In relation to this, the association should leverage on its nationwide network 
to increase awareness among the public of their responsibility to deal only with authorised 
money  services.  Part  of  this  should  also  include  explaining  the  relevant  regulatory 
requirements to the public, such as the need to produce identification documents for large 
transactions. 
Over  the  last  4  months,  I  am  encouraged  by  the  numerous  initiatives  undertaken  by  the 
Association and the fruitful engagements and consultations with the Bank. I understand that 
the  Association  has  embarked  on  a  series  of  nationwide  training  to  help  its  members 
implement  effective  corporate  governance  practices,  develop 
internal  policies  and 
procedures and put in place AML/CFT compliance programmes. It has also helped to resolve 
a  number  of  industry  issues,  including  assisting  members  to  obtain  business  insurance 
coverage  at  reasonable  rates,  and  liaising  with  system  vendors  to  ensure  the  provision  of 
suitable and reliable management information systems. 
These are admirable progress and demonstrate the tremendous value that the association 
can bring to its membership. 
On  this  note,  let  me  take  the  opportunity  to  congratulate  the  Council  members  and  the 
industry  on  this  official  launch.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  fully  supports  the  Malaysian 
Association of Money Services Business in its important endeavour, and we are confident of 
the significant impact that this Association can make in taking the money services business 
industry to the next level of development. 
It now gives me great pleasure to officiate the launch of the Malaysian Association of Money 
Services Business. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
