  Linah K Mohohlo: Botswana’s Monetary Policy Statement for 2014 
Remarks by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the launch of the 
Monetary Policy Statement for 2014, Gaborone, 28 February 2014. 
 I wish to welcome you to the launch of the Monetary Policy Statement for 2014, which is by 
now well-known to be the premier event for the Bank. The Statement informs stakeholders 
how  one  of  the  Bank’s  key  functions  is  discharged,  and  that  is  the  formulation  and 
implementation  of  monetary  policy.  The  Statement  is  issued  each  year  because  the  Bank 
attaches importance to the need for transparency and accountability in the discharge of this 
key mandate. That is why your dedicated patronage on this occasion is sincerely valued and 
appreciated.  
As  has  been  regularly  explained,  the  principal  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  to  achieve 
sustainable,  low  and  predictable  level  of  inflation  and,  at  the  same  time,  ensuring  that  the 
economy  is  financially  stable.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  sustainably  low  inflation  and  a 
conducive  financial  environment  support  economic  growth  by  fostering  savings  and 
productive  investment,  while  promoting  the  competitiveness  of  domestic  producers  and 
contributing towards a more equitable income distribution.  
This  is  the  seventeenth  year  since  the  Bank  has  issued  the  annual  Monetary  Policy 
Statement; and perhaps this year’s Statement is of particular interest. It is the first time that 
the launch takes place in circumstances in which inflation has been comfortably within the 
Bank’s medium-term objective range for a sustained period. This outcome has afforded the 
Bank the scope to ease monetary policy in the course of 2013. I will have more to say about 
this shortly.  
While  this  is,  without  a  doubt,  a  positive  development,  it  does  not  suggest  a  time  for 
complacency with respect to the Bank’s approach to monetary policy. On the contrary, the 
early  weeks  of  2014  have  reminded  us  of  the  considerable  uncertainty  that  continues  to 
surround  prospects  for  the  global  economy,  and  the  vulnerability  of  emerging  markets  to 
related  risks  is  turning  out  to  be  particularly  acute.  Therefore,  the  vigilance  of  the  Bank, 
through  the  work  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  supporting  structures  remains 
undiminished.  
As I intimated earlier, one of the core functions of the Bank is conducting monetary policy. 
Indeed,  the  framework  through  which  the  Bank  carries  out  this  function  is  now  widely-
known; you can bear testimony to the fact that any adjustment to policy is communicated to 
the  public  immediately  after  each  meeting  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee.  The  policy 
framework  is  forecast-based,  with  a  medium-term  outlook  that  primarily  guides  the  Bank’s 
response  to  anticipated  movements  in  inflation,  while  taking  account  of  prospects  for 
economic growth.  
Central  to  the  forecast  is  an  assessment  of  the  prevailing  gap  between  long-term  trend 
output and actual output as a leading indicator of inflation. It is recognised that other factors 
also  contribute  to  inflation.  These  other  factors  include  foreign  inflation,  exchange  rate 
movements, changes in domestic administered prices and taxes, as well as expectations of 
future price movements.  
Therefore,  it  is  essential  that  policy  credibility  is  underpinned  by  rigorous  analysis  of 
economic  and  financial  developments,  and  by  an  assessment  of  future  trends  and 
associated  risks,  with  a  focus  on  anticipated  price  changes  and  their  implications  for  the 
medium-term inflation outlook. There is also a consideration of relevant indicators of financial 
stability  in  the  domestic  economy.  All  these  considerations  will  form  the  basis  for  the 
formulation and implementation of monetary policy in 2014.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  now  wish  to  highlight  inflation  trends  and  other  economic  developments  of  the  past 
year. You may recall that global output growth slowed marginally in 2013, from 3.1 percent in 
2012  to  an  estimated  3  percent,  resulting  in  modest  inflationary  pressures,  as  capacity 
utilisation  and  high  unemployment 
in  major  economies  persisted.  With  respect  to 
commodities, international oil prices were stable because of the emergence of new sources 
of supply and the easing of geopolitical tensions in some oil producing regions. The increase 
in  food  prices  was  also  restrained  due  to  ample  grain  production.  Consequently,  global 
inflation decreased from 4 percent in 2012 to 3.8 percent in 2013.  
Average inflation for Botswana’s trading partner countries declined from 4 percent in 2012 to 
3.4 percent last year. The countries the currencies of which comprise the Special Drawing 
Rights (that is, the United States of America, Eurozone, Japan and the United Kingdom) also 
experienced a decline in inflation, from an average of 1.9 percent to 1.3 percent in the same 
period,  mostly  due  to  weak  economic  activity,  lower  food  inflation  and  the  moderation  in 
international  oil  prices.  Price  movements  in  South  Africa  followed  the  same  trend;  they 
slowed down from 5.7 percent in 2012 to 5.4 percent in 2013, in this way, remaining within 
the medium-term target range of 3–6 percent.  
In Botswana, inflation maintained a downward trend too, moving within the Bank’s medium-
term  objective  range  by  June  2013.  By  the  end  of  the  year,  inflation  had  declined  to 
4.1 percent, compared to 7.4 percent in December 2012.  
In  the  event,  price  increases  were  subdued  across  a  broad  range  of  goods  and  services, 
including  food.  In  fact,  commodity  groups  representing  about  90  percent  of  goods  and 
services  in  the  Consumer  Price  Index  basket  were  within  the  objective  range.  Overall, 
inflation  excluding  administered  prices  decreased  from  6.8  percent  in  December  2012  to 
4.7 percent in December 2013, while the 16 percent trimmed mean measure of core inflation 
fell from 7.1 percent to 4 percent.  
The sustained decline in inflation was due to a dissipation of the impact of the increase in 
administered prices effected in 2012. The moderate increase in prices was also indicative of 
benign  domestic  demand  pressures.  The  impact  of  government  spending  on  economic 
activity  was  small  in  the  context  of fiscal  consolidation  measures,  with  annual  government 
expenditure growth limited to only 2 percent.  
To  some  extent,  demand  was  supported  by  continued  growth  in  commercial  bank  credit, 
especially to households, which went up at a faster rate, from 21 percent in December 2012 
to 24.2 percent by the end of 2013. It was observed that growth in household credit was led 
by  mortgage  lending,  which  grew  by  43.3  percent.  The  continued  rapid  expansion  in 
household  credit  also  reflected,  in  part,  some  improvements  in  financial  services  provision 
and  financial  inclusion.  Nevertheless,  the  level  of  household  debt,  which  is  dominated  by 
personal loans, in an environment of slow growth in incomes, is a cause for concern. While 
current indicators, such as low default ratios, suggest that widespread default risks are not 
imminent,  the  related  emerging  debt  repayment  burden  for  households  warrants  close 
attention.  
In  contrast,  there  was  a  marked  deceleration  in  the  growth  of  business  credit,  from 
26.8 percent in December 2012 to only 4.6 percent in December 2013. The slowdown in the 
growth of business credit is reflected in virtually all economic sectors, and is in line with the 
moderation  of  growth  in  economic  activity.  For  instance,  the  annual  growth  in  non-mining 
GDP slowed to 5.1 percent in the twelve months to September 2013, compared to 8 percent 
a year earlier.  
Honoured Guests: 
Implementation of monetary policy in the past year posed an interesting challenge. From 
a global perspective, there was sluggish demand, weak economic activity, lacklustre financial 
intermediation and benign inflationary pressures. All the same, there was positive sentiment 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  flowing from faster output growth and decreasing unemployment rates in the United States of 
America and United Kingdom; the euro area too emerged from recession. Output expansion 
in emerging market economies remained robust and spurred global economic performance. 
Monetary policy in major economies carried the burden of supporting economic recovery as 
fiscal austerity programmes remained in place. It was mostly accommodative and involved 
maintenance and, in some instances, reduction of the already low policy interest rates. Some 
of the major central banks used forward guidance to indicate thresholds for unemployment 
and growth; this was adopted with a view to guiding market interest rates in the medium term 
and to foster investment and demand. In contrast, the more imminent threat of rising inflation 
in emerging market economies resulted in some policy tightening.  
Here at home, monetary policy was conducted principally through open market operations to 
absorb  excess  liquidity  from  the  banking  system  and  maintain  market  interest  rates  at 
required levels. The Monetary Policy Committee continued to assess the impact of economic 
and financial developments on inflation prospects. The effect of credit growth on the quality 
of  banks’  assets,  the  growing  burden  of  household  debt  and  the  potential  for  asset  price 
bubbles were also kept under review. The result was the reduction of the Bank Rate by a 
cumulative  2  percentage  points to  7.5  percent  during  the  year,  against the  background  of, 
among  others,  below-trend  GDP  growth  and  a  positive  outlook  for  inflation  in  the  medium 
term. Accordingly, commercial banks reduced their prime lending interest rates by the same 
magnitude to 9 percent, with corresponding movements in most other market interest rates.  
As a related matter, and in a bid to reward depositors, commercial banks have been advised 
to  publish  and  offer  to  customers  their  91-day  deposit  products.  These  products  pay  an 
interest rate that is, at a minimum, 3.5 percentage points below the Bank Rate. Longer dated 
deposits are expected to attract commensurately higher interest rates.  
In terms of the outlook for inflation, the global economy is projected to grow by 3.7 percent 
in 2014. This compares with the estimated growth of 3 percent for 2013. The recent upward 
revision  to  the  forecast  reflects  improving  sentiment  for  global  economic  prospects.  There 
are some risks to the forecast, however, which relate to a potential reversal of capital flows 
that could follow the ongoing wind-down of asset purchases in the United States of America. 
This could undermine growth prospects for emerging market economies, which have been a 
major source of global economic growth.  
Global  inflation  is  projected  to  maintain  the  2013  level  of  3.8  percent.  This  is  against  the 
background  of  stable  commodity  prices,  subdued  output  growth  and  persistence  of  spare 
capacity, as well as high unemployment rates in major economies. There may, however, be 
upward pressure on inflation in some emerging market economies, given robust economic 
activity and lower unemployment rates.  
Monetary policy in major economies is expected to focus on maintaining an accommodative 
stance,  providing  liquidity  and  fostering  resilience  of  the  financial  sector.  In  contrast, 
emerging  economies  are  likely  to  have  a  bias  towards  policy  tightening,  in  response  to 
emerging global risks of capital outflows to industrialised economies, and the need to focus 
on structural weaknesses of their respective domestic economies.  
The domestic economy is forecast to grow by 5.1 percent in 2014, compared to last year’s 
GDP  growth  of  5.4  percent.  Demand  will  be  supported  by  the  growth  in  government 
expenditure, for which budgetary allocations for the 2014/15 fiscal year have increased by 
8.5  percent,  with  the  bulk  of  the  additional  spending  concentrated  in  the  recurrent  budget. 
Business  confidence  remains  muted,  but  the  recent  successful  transfer  of  diamond 
aggregation and sales functions from the De Beers London office to Botswana should serve 
to boost domestic economic activity.  
On the exchange rate front, I wish to submit that the crawling band exchange rate policy has 
continued  to  serve  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  established,  which  is  to  render  domestic 
industries  internationally  competitive  and  contribute  towards  macroeconomic  stability  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  economic diversification. You  will, by now, know that the parameters of the exchange rate 
policy  were recently made public by the Honourable  Minister of Finance and Development 
Planning. Indeed for 2014, the Pula basket weights are 55 percent for the South African rand 
and  45  percent  for  the  Special  Drawing  Rights.  The  Pula  will  crawl  downward  by 
0.16 percent, given that the inflation objective range of 3–6 percent is marginally higher than 
the projected average inflation range of trading partner countries of 3–4 percent.  
Overall, it is expected that pressure on inflation from domestic demand will be low in 2014, 
as will the impact of foreign price developments. Therefore, inflation is projected to remain 
within  the  medium-term  objective  range  of  3–6  percent.  This  means  there  will  be  further 
scope for monetary policy to support economic activity through the current accommodative 
policy stance, while maintaining price stability. As usual, the Bank will respond appropriately 
to  any  sustained  deviation  of  the  inflation  forecast  from  the  objective  range  and  to  any 
emerging threat to financial stability, where the causal factors can be influenced by monetary 
policy  action.  Be  that  as  it  may,  any  upward  adjustment  in  administered  prices  and 
government  levies  or  any  increase  in  international  food  and  oil  prices  beyond  current 
forecasts will present upside risks to the inflation outlook. Furthermore, any substantial civil 
service  wage  increase  could  also  generate  inflationary  pressures  through  higher  demand 
and inflation expectations.  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I conclude by reiterating that the domestic economy is expected to be characterised by an 
environment  of  benign  inflationary  developments  in  2014.  The  Bank’s  formulation  and 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  will  focus  on  entrenching  expectations  of  low  and 
sustainable  inflation  in  the  medium  term, through  timely  responses  to  price  developments, 
while ensuring that credit and other market developments are consistent with lasting financial 
stability.  
I thank you for your attention.  
Copies of the detailed Monetary Policy Statement are in the foyer of the Auditorium; please 
obtain a copy so you can read it at your leisure.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
