James McAndrews: Rising household borrowing 
Remarks  by  Mr  James McAndrews,  Executive  Vice  President  and  Director  of  Research  of 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  before  the  CFA  Society  of  Stamford,  Stamford, 
Connecticut, 5 March 2014. 
 Accompanying  charts  can  be  found  at  the  end  of  the  speech  or  on  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York’ 
website. 
Good evening. It’s a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak with you today on the subject 
of  the  economy,  and  especially  the  household  sector.  As  is  always  the  case,  my  remarks 
reflect my own opinions, not those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or the Federal 
Reserve System. 
National economic conditions 
From  the  end  of  the  Great  Recession  in  mid-2009  through  mid-2013,  real  gross  domestic 
product  (GDP),  or  the  aggregate  value,  after  adjusting  for  inflation,  of  all  the  goods  and 
services produced within the borders of the United States, grew at a rather tepid 2¼ percent 
annual rate. Then, in the second half of 2013, the pace of growth moved up a full percentage 
point to around 3¼ percent. 
Roughly half of this increase in the growth rate of real GDP stemmed from a strengthening of 
consumer  spending.  While  I  will  discuss  the  factors  behind  this  improvement  in  consumer 
spending  in  more  detail  in  what  follows,  the  main  driver  appears  to  be  the  substantial 
stabilization  in  household  balance  sheets  that  has  occurred  over  the  past  few  years. 
Household  net  worth  has  rebounded  from  its  levels  after  financial  crisis  and  ensuing 
recession  because  of  increases  in  asset  values  and  decreases  in  liabilities.  In  fact,  the 
financial  obligation  burden  of  the  aggregate  household  sector,  or  long-term  financial 
obligations expressed as a percentage of disposable income, is now the lowest it has been 
since the early 1980s. 
In addition to the firming in consumer spending, growth of exports was quite strong over the 
second half of last year. Following a few years of lackluster performance, economic growth 
among our major trading partners improved, providing a boost to employment and output in 
our  manufacturing  sector.  In  addition,  a  secular  trend  of  increasing  energy  exports  and 
declining energy imports is now providing steady improvement in our trade balance. 
Another  contributing  factor  is  that  federal  fiscal  restraint  lessened  substantially  over  the 
second half of 2013. This development is in sharp contrast to the first half of the year, when 
the payroll tax cut expired, tax rates on higher-income households were raised, a series of 
taxes associated with the Affordable Care Act took effect, and owing to the sequester and 
the  gradual  winding  down  of  foreign  military  operations,  federal  spending  was  restrained. 
Moreover,  the  sustained  contraction  in  revenue,  spending,  and  employment  by  state  and 
local governments appears to be nearing an end. 
While overall labor market indicators for the second half of 2013 were not particularly strong, 
the  unemployment  rate  did  fall  sharply  over  that  period,  from  7.5  percent  in  June  to 
6.6 percent  in  January  of  this  year.  However,  as  has  been  the  case  since  October  2009 
when the unemployment rate peaked at 10 percent, this decline in the unemployment rate 
was associated with an almost equal percentage point decline in the labor force participation 
rate. Much has been written about the forces that are causing this decline of the participation 
rate.  Researchers  have  shown  that  the  aging  of  the  population  is  playing  a  role,  as  are 
changes in behavior. But our own analysis suggests that the cyclical weakness of demand 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
for labor is an important contributing factor, and so we do not take as much comfort from the 
decline of the unemployment rate as we otherwise might. 
Looking  forward,  I  believe  that  the  underlying  fundamentals  of  the  U.S.  economy  have 
improved  to  the  point  where  we  can  expect  sustained  growth  above  the  recent  pace  of 
2 1/4 percent. That being said, I doubt that over the near term we will see growth as rapid as 
that in the second half of last year. Special, one-time factors, such as very rapid growth of 
exports and sustained inventory building, are unlikely to be repeated over the first half of this 
year. Moreover, while there is now a much better balance between supply and demand in the 
housing  market,  that  market  is  still  adjusting  to  the  roughly  100  basis  point  increase  in 
mortgage interest rates that occurred in mid-2013. 
Finally, with somewhat stronger growth of output, I expect inflation to gradually rise toward 
the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee’s  objective  of  2  percent  as  measured  by  the  PCE 
deflator. This forecast is based on the projected gradual increase in the levels of resource 
utilization,  which  would  lessen  downward  pressure  on  firms’  marginal  costs  and  prices,  a 
firming  in  global  demand,  and  the  continued  upward  pull  exercised  by  stable  inflation 
expectations on actual inflation. Underpinning the latter assumption is the broad stability of 
long-term  inflation  expectations  across  different  financial  and  survey  measures,  combined 
with ongoing moderate growth of wages and unit labor costs, all of which are consistent with 
well-anchored inflation expectations. 
As  mentioned  above,  the  key  development  behind  the  firmer  tone  of  consumer  spending 
over the second half of 2013 is the significant strengthening in household balance sheets. 
One  aspect  of  that  improvement  is  that  from  mid-2008  through  mid-2013,  total  household 
liabilities declined significantly after a period  of quite rapid debt growth over the preceding 
decade. The reduction in household debt is an extremely rare event for the U.S. economy. In 
fact, this has been the only period of sustained declines in nominal household indebtedness 
over the period since the early 1950s. 
The household sector 
In  the  remainder  of  my  remarks,  I’d  like  to  focus  on  the  finding,  made  public  in  our  most 
recent  Quarterly  Report  on  Household  Debt  and  Credit,  that  for  the  first  time  since  2008, 
households increased their borrowing on a year-over-year basis, at least in nominal terms. I’ll 
argue  that  this  is  an  encouraging  development,  although  we  should  be  cautious  both  in 
predicting future borrowing and in recognizing that the aggregate increase in borrowing may 
mask the fact that many individual households remain constrained by prior borrowing and/or 
a reduction of income. These households are still engaged in attempting to reduce their debt 
burden  by  pay-downs  in  debt.  Furthermore,  I’ll  explain  how  the  type  of  borrowing  by 
households has changed over time. Here too there is a reason for some caution, because 
borrowing  for  education  has  become  more  common  for  U.S.  households.  It  appears  that 
heavy  student  debt  can  restrain  the  consumption  activity  of  those  individuals  who  are 
burdened  with  it.  If  this  is  the  “new  normal”  for  the  economy,  it  might  result  in  delayed 
purchases of homes and autos for those graduates who finance their education by taking on 
large amounts of debt. This is a potential development that bears close monitoring. 
Why do I suggest that an increase in household borrowing is an encouraging development? 
While in recent years we have certainly seen that household debt can carry serious negative 
consequences,  overall  an  increasing  level  of  borrowing  indicates  that  the  economy  is 
returning  to  normal  patterns.  After  all,  with  rising  GDP  and  an  expanding  population,  we 
should not be surprised to see debt increasing, if only modestly. Of course, the kinds of debts 
that people are taking on and the riskiness of those loans – to both the borrower  and the 
lender – are important issues, and I will return to them later in the talk. 
Now  households  borrow  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  but  we  can  generalize  to  say  that 
households  borrow  to  smooth  their  consumption.  For  households  whose  incomes  are 
temporarily  low,  perhaps  because  they  are  just  starting  their  careers,  borrowing  makes  it 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
possible to enjoy today some of the consumption that would otherwise have to be delayed far 
into the future. Another aspect of consumption smoothing is borrowing to invest in durable 
goods or to make household investments, such as the purchase of autos and houses or the 
funding of higher education. By borrowing, households can avoid what otherwise might be 
severe  and  protracted  reductions  in  their  current  consumption  in  order  to  make  such 
investments. For example, without mortgages, households would have to delay purchasing a 
home until they had accumulated sufficient wealth to pay cash for the purchase, which for 
most  would  require  draconian  cuts  to  their  other  spending  for  years.  Regardless  of  its 
motivation, the incurring of debt is predicated on expectations of the ability to repay through 
diversion of some portion of their future income. 
Once  acquired,  however,  debt  can  impose  strains  on  households’  finances  if  their  future 
incomes  do  not  accrue  at  the  rate  expected,  or  if  the  cost  of  servicing  the  debt  rises 
unexpectedly.  These  strains  in  household  finances  from  suddenly  excessive  debt  service 
burdens  are  met  by  households  in  a  variety  of  ways:  through  default,  foreclosures,  and 
bankruptcy,  or  renegotiation  of  the  terms  of  repayment,  but  also  through  continued  higher 
principal  and  interest  payments  accompanied  by  much  lower  consumption  than  the 
household had previously planned. 
As  we  see  in  Chart  1  (Employment  declined  dramatically)  job  losses  in  the  recent 
recession were extremely large and prolonged, a problem that resulted, in part, in significant 
delinquencies  in  debt  repayment.  Furthermore,  the  significant  decline  in  house  values 
imposed  a  much  stricter  limit  on  how  much  households  could  borrow  if  they  needed,  for 
example, to adjust to the effects of a temporary loss of income. Recent economic research 
has  examined  how  the  macroeconomy  is  affected  when  households  suddenly  experience 
reduced borrowing capacity. Eggertsson and Krugman consider the case of households that 
have  borrowed  up  to  some  limit  and  now  see  their  debt  limit  reduced;  these  households 
suddenly find themselves over-indebted and are forced to cut spending.1 If the required cuts 
in  spending  are  large  enough,  then  even  a  very  active  monetary  policy  will  be  unable  to 
offset  them  completely.  Other  research  has  also  suggested  similar  mechanisms.  Hall  has 
pointed  out  that  a  tighter  household  borrowing  constraint  can  help  explain  the  depth  and 
persistence  of  the  most  recent  recession  in  the  U.S.2  Mian  and  Sufi  observe  that 
unemployment is much higher in counties across the U.S. where households were more debt 
constrained by the fall in the price of housing.3 Their finding provides further support for the 
hypothesis that it is the especially debt-constrained households that are under the greatest 
pressure to reduce current consumption. 
Given  the  effect  that  sudden  reductions  in  borrowing  capacity  are  expected  to  have  on 
broader economic activity, it is then encouraging to see that, at least at the aggregate level, 
households  are  increasing  their  borrowing.  This  suggests  that  the  forced  cuts  in  spending 
caused  by  declines  in  borrowing  capacity  are  becoming  less  of  a  major  concern  for 
households. 
I’d now like to turn to some of the empirical analysis that can help explain both the decline in 
aggregate U.S. borrowing after 2008 and the subsequent turnaround of this trend in 2013. 
First, as we now know all too well – and as seen in Chart 2 (House Prices Peaked and Fell 
Precipitously), house prices in the U.S. rose at steadily increasing rates from 2000 through 
2006,  followed  by  an  approximately  31  percent  reversal  that  persisted  through  2011.  That 
                                                 
1  See Gauti B. Eggertsson and Paul Krugman (2012), “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-
Minsky-Koo Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1469–1513. 
2  See Robert E. Hall (2011), ‘‘The Long Slump,’’ American Economic Review 102, 431–69. 
3  See Atif Mian and Amir Sufi (2011), ‘‘House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S. Household 
‘‘What  Explains  High 
Leverage  Crisis,’’  American  Economic  Review  101,  2132–56,  and  (2011), 
Unemployment? The Aggregate Demand Channel,’’ University of Chicago, unpublished paper. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
reversal  reduced  the  aggregate  wealth  of  homeowners  and,  in  the  worst  case,  left  many 
“underwater,” meaning that the amount of mortgage debt secured by their home exceeded its 
current  value.  This  outcome  is  reflected  in  the  dramatic  decline  in  owners’  equity  in 
household real estate, seen in Chart 3 (Result was a Huge Decline in Owners’ Equity in 
HH RE). It is interesting to note that while home prices rose during the boom, homeowner’s 
equity  share  remained  constant.  Thus,  prior  to  the  end  of  2006,  on  average  for  each 
1 percent increase in home prices, homeowners increased their mortgage debt by 1 percent 
(through  higher  balances  on  first  mortgages,  cash-out  refinances,  second  mortgages,  and 
home equity lines of credit). 
When  house  values  began  to  fall,  so  did  corporate  equity  values,  which  depressed 
household  wealth  further  Chart  4  (Stock  Market  Wealth  also  Fell  Sharply),  limiting 
households’  options  for  reducing  their  debt  burdens  or  sustaining  their  prior  levels  of 
consumption. 
Consequently, and in line with the logic of the research I discussed earlier, U.S. households 
decreased the cash flow available for consumption by paying down debt during the recession 
and early recovery. In Chart 5 (Four-quarter cash flow from borrowing) we measure the 
amount of borrowing – both mortgage and nonmortgage borrowing – that U.S. households 
were engaging in over time. Consider that in 2007, households were receiving in aggregate 
$330  billion  in  cash  from  borrowing.  These  funds  were  available  for  consumption 
expenditures or for household investments such as home improvements. However, with their 
borrowing limits lowered as house values fell and income levels declined, households began 
to pay down debt rapidly. (Of course, while many households acted to pay down debt, some 
debt  was  written  off  through  foreclosures  and  bankruptcies,  and  other  households  were 
increasing debt by borrowing for home purchases, as normally would be the case. But we 
exclude  those  kinds  of  transactions  here.)  In  sum,  however,  households  in  2010  actively 
reduced their net indebtedness by $150 billion. The reversal in cash available for household 
expenditures was a massive $480 billion over the period from 2007 to 2010. This fact was 
established by Brown, Haughwout, Lee, and van der Klaauw in our Liberty Street Economics 
blog in 2011.4  
Allow me a brief digression here, because I think it touches on an important point. A lot of 
people refer to this pay-down of debt as “deleveraging,” but in my view that’s a misuse of the 
term. Since the distinction is more than just semantic, let me explain what I mean. 
Financial  leverage  is  usually  thought  of  as  a  ratio.  Consider  a  typical home  purchase  with 
20 percent down. Here, the buyer makes a down payment equal to 20 percent of the asset 
value  and  borrows  the  other  80  percent  of  the  purchase  price  in  the  form  of  a  home 
mortgage. We would say that the borrower’s leverage is 5 (the asset value divided by the 
equity share). Now, it’s easy to see that reducing debt and reducing leverage are the same 
thing  when  asset  values  are  constant.  If  the  borrower  in  our  example  pays  down  half  the 
mortgage and the house value doesn’t change, her leverage has fallen to 2.5. 
Unfortunately,  house  values  fell  from  2007  to  2011.  So  while  households  were  trying  their 
best  to  reduce  their  mortgage  debt,  their  leverage  was  actually  rising,  since  house  values 
were falling much faster than debt. It was really only in 2012 that leverage in residential real 
estate  began  to  fall,  because  house  prices  stopped  declining  faster  than  housing  debt.  In 
2013,  leverage  continued  to  fall,  even  though  net  mortgage  borrowing  resumed,  because 
house values rose even faster. 
I think this distinction is important, because if we think that households have been steadily 
deleveraging since 2008 we might wonder whether we were getting close to the finish line. 
                                                 
4  Meta Brown, Andrew Haughwout, Donghoon Lee, and Wilbert van der Klaauw (2011), Have Consumers Been 
Deleveraging? Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics blog, March. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
After  all,  the  labor  market  has  been  recovering,  albeit  slowly,  for  several  years.  But  in  my 
view, the fact that households saw their leverage increasing in spite of their efforts to pay 
down debt helps explain why they kept at it. Households may well be trying to reestablish a 
more  normal  and  sustainable  leverage  ratio.  This  view  also  underlines  the  importance  of 
avoiding busts in house prices as a fundamental underpinning of a recovery in borrowing and 
consumption. 
It is likely that these reductions in debt and new borrowing during the recession and the early 
part  of  the  recovery  stemmed  from  what  we  might  label  decreases  in  the  demand  for 
borrowing. As households saw their wealth decline, especially the wealth represented by the 
value  of  their  home,  and  as  unemployment  grew  and  remained  elevated,  households’ 
capacity to repay debt declined, and, as a result, their desired stock of debt declined as well. 
At  the  same  time,  banks  too  were  suffering  from  heavy  losses  on  mortgages  and  other 
lending, and reduced the supply of credit available to households. We can see this in Chart 6 
(Banks  and  Lenders  Imposed  Tighter  Mortgage  Lending  Standards)  which  shows  the 
sustained tightening of lending standards reported by banks starting in 2007. Furthermore, 
Chart 7 (Origination by Risk Score: First Mortgages) shows the percentage of prime first 
mortgage originations by the credit score of the borrower. The chart reveals a quite dramatic 
tightening  of  credit  standards  during  2008  and  2009.  Here  we  see  that  the  share  of  new 
mortgage  borrowing  by  applicants  of  all  credit  scores  below  the  highest  quartile  declined, 
while  that  of  the  highest  quartile  increased  from  about  40  percent  to  70  percent.  This 
suggests that lenders were far more selective in their underwriting standards for mortgages 
than they had been in the period between 2000 and 2006. 
Many  of  these  powerful  forces  of  demand  and  supply  that  together  led  to  the  decline  in 
household borrowing, and hence to the fall-off in resources available for consumption, have 
either  diminished  or  slowly  reversed  as  the  economic  recovery  that  began  in  2009  has 
continued. First, equity values, which dropped 51% between October 2007 and March 2009, 
as  measured  by  the  S&P  500  index,  have  recovered  significantly,  rising  by  almost  140% 
percent  through  the  end  of  2013  Chart  8  (Stock  Market  Wealth  also  Fell  Sharply, 
2nd half). In addition, as seen in Chart 9 (House Prices Peaked and Fell Precipitously, 
2nd half) house prices have finally begun to recover, and have been doing so on a broad 
geographical  basis.  House  prices  are  up  21  percent  since  their  nadir  in  2011.  This  has 
helped  restore  owners’  equity  in  their  homes  Chart  10  (Result  was  a  huge  decline  in 
Owners’ Equity in HH RE, 2nd half). In sum, as seen in Chart 11 (Household Net Worth), 
aggregate household wealth has recovered substantially as a percent of disposable income, 
albeit  with  a  lesser  contribution  from  housing  and  a  greater  contribution  from  corporate 
equities. 
At  roughly  the  same  time,  starting  in  2011,  we’ve  seen  a  substantial  loosening  in 
nonmortgage  lending  standards  by  banks,  an  important  sign  of  normalization  in  credit 
markets, as Chart 12 (Standards have loosened since 2011 on non-mortgage products) 
suggests. Perhaps not surprisingly, mortgage standards have only in recent quarters begun 
very slowly to reverse the significant tightening that followed the housing bust; see Chart 13 
(Banks and Lenders Imposed Tighter Mortgage Lending Standards, 2nd half). 
Broad increases in wealth, continued recovery in the overall economy with higher levels of 
employment and income, a relaxation of credit standards, and historically low interest rates 
have led to improvements in delinquency rates and increases in both demand and supply for 
borrowing by U.S. households. In 2013, we see the consequent increase in household debt. 
In the last quarter of 2013, aggregate consumer debt increased by $241 billion, the largest 
quarter-to-quarter increase since 2007. More importantly, as shown in Chart 14 (Total Debt 
Balance and Its Composition, in 2013 total household debt rose $180 billion, marking the 
first four-quarter increase in outstanding debt since 2008. This is at most the beginning of a 
turnaround,  of  course:  for  example,  once  we  adjust  for  inflation,  debt  per  capita  has  just 
barely stopped falling, as Chart 15 (Real Household Liabilities Per Capita) suggests. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Further analysis based on our Consumer Credit Panel shows that the growth rates in auto 
and student loan borrowing have been positive for some time now. The reversal in overall 
borrowing during 2013 was driven by increased credit card and mortgage debt among the 
young  and  those  with  high  credit  scores.  While  this  suggests  that  lenders  are  concerned 
about  the  safe  underwriting  of  such  loans,  it  also  points  to  the  overall  importance  of 
borrowing by younger individuals. Not only did borrowers under age forty-nine take on more 
credit card and mortgage debt in 2013, they also did most of the borrowing to finance auto 
purchases and college educations. This is not new – historically, younger individuals account 
for most new loan originations, while older individuals on average pay down their outstanding 
debt. Nonetheless, while borrowing for such things as cars and houses is up among younger 
individuals, it remains somewhat subdued. 
Now, this overall picture – young borrowers getting loans while older borrowers are reducing 
their  debts  –  makes  sense,  and  it  is  consistent  with  a  growing  population  and  improving 
income  prospects  for  the  young.  The  fact  that  (unlike  2006)  we  now  see  reductions  in 
mortgage debt for the least creditworthy borrowers tells us about how unusual lending was 
during  the  credit  boom  of  the  mid-2000s,  and  it  is  instructive  and  reassuring  to  see  that 
today’s patterns look different. 
In  spite  of  the  improved  outlook  for  income  growth  and  consumption  implied  by  these 
changes  in  the  way  households  view  and  use  debt,  some  imponderables  remain  on  the 
horizon. For one, the dramatic increase in student debt implies that a fundamental change 
has taken place in the way we finance higher education in the U.S. A combination of rising 
college  costs,  reduced  subsidies  from  cash-strapped  state  governments  to  their  state 
universities, and cutbacks in home equity loans and other sources of financing has left new 
college attendees with larger debts. 
There’s  been  a  tremendous  amount  of  attention  to  the  growth  of  student  loans  in  recent 
years, and our data indicate some of the reasons why. First, student loans are the only form 
of debt that grew consistently even through the depths of the crisis and the long period of 
debt  paydown.  Second,  the  growth  in  educational  debt,  like  that  of  auto  loans,  is 
concentrated among the lower and middle credit-score groups. 
Unlike  other  types  of  loans,  student  debt  continued  to  grow  steadily  during  and  after  the 
recession;  now,  at  almost  $1.1 trillion,  it  comprises  9 percent  of  household  debt  and 
represents the second largest source of debt for U.S. households after mortgages. Student 
loans provide critical access to schooling, given the challenge presented by the increasing 
costs of higher education. Those with college degrees earn a high return on their educations; 
they  are  much  less  likely  to  be  unemployed,  and  they  earn  on  average  twice  as  much  as 
those with only high school diplomas. 
Our research indicates that the large growth in student debt, and an associated high level of 
student debt delinquencies, has been associated with a reduction in mortgage and auto loan 
borrowing  among  younger  people.  While  younger  individuals  were  previously  much  more 
likely to finance home and car purchases by age thirty, Chart 16 (Proportion of Borrowers 
with Home-secured Debt at Age 30) shows that those with student debt are now less likely 
to do so than those with no student debt, as shown by Brown and Caldwell in a Liberty Street 
Economics blog post in 2013.5 In fact, our research suggests that student debt appears to 
have replaced or crowded out other types of debt, so that the difference in average total debt 
held by student-loan and non-student-loan borrowers has remained stable over time. 
We suspect that this decline in taking on other types of debt by student-loan borrowers partly 
reflects increased uncertainty about the future. However, in addition to a possibly reduced 
                                                 
5  Meta  Brown  and  Sydnee  Caldwell  (2013),  Young  Student  Loan  Borrowers  Retreat  from  Housing  and  Auto 
Markets Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics blog, April. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
appetite for borrowing, a reduction in access to credit is also likely to play an important role, 
despite the comparatively high earning potential of those with a college education. 
Consumers with substantial student debt may not be able to meet the stricter debt-to-income 
(DTI) ratio standards that are now being applied by lenders, particularly on mortgage loans. 
We  believe  that  student  debt  growth  among  new  graduates  has  been  higher  in  the  most 
recent years than growth in their incomes. In addition, delinquency in repayment has become 
more prevalent among student borrowers, and those with past delinquencies are likely to find 
it much more difficult to borrow. This decline in credit accessibility is also captured by credit 
scores. During most of the first decade of the 2000s, those with and without student loans 
had comparable average credit scores at ages twenty-five and thirty, but since 2010, student 
loan  borrowers  have  had  significantly  lower  average  credit  scores.  As  a  result  of  tighter 
underwriting standards, higher delinquency rates, and lower credit scores, consumers with 
educational debt may on average have more limited access to housing and auto loans and, 
as a result, more limited options in the housing and vehicle markets. This disadvantage may 
compound the difficulties of young people who enter a depressed labor market; in addition to 
facing a spell of unemployment that may lead to reduced earnings for a considerable period 
of time, they may also face tighter future credit constraints as a result of delinquencies on 
their student loans. 
In this light, the recent increase in borrowing among younger individuals is consistent with an 
improvement in labor market prospects and some loosening of credit standards, although the 
increase in borrowing by younger age cohorts is modest and remains below their pre-crisis 
level.  The  high  level  of  student  debt  may  create  the  risk  of  a  drag  on  future  consumption 
growth. In fact, while highly skilled young workers have traditionally provided a vital influx of 
new,  affluent  consumers  to  U.S.  housing  and  auto  markets,  the  unprecedented  growth  in 
student debt and the persistently high student loan delinquency rates are likely to dampen 
the  influence  of  this  group  in  today’s  marketplace  and  may  represent  a  structural  or  long-
lasting change in household credit markets. 
To summarize, I have reviewed the many positive signals we should take from the fact that in 
2013 we observed the first year-over-year increase in borrowing by U.S. households since 
2008.  The  willingness  of  U.S.  households  to  increase  their  debt  levels  in  aggregate  likely 
reflects the restorative influences of significant turnarounds in house prices and stock market 
values  since  their  lows  in  2009–10,  somewhat  better  employment  outcomes,  and  much 
stronger  household  balance  sheets  as  a  result  of  write-offs  and  pay-downs  of  earlier 
indebtedness.  In  addition,  a  gradual  loosening  of  credit  availability  is  likely  to  have 
accommodated the increased demand for credit, although mortgage lending continues to be 
subject  to  high  credit  standards.  Together,  these  developments  bode  well  for  the 
macroeconomy,  suggesting  that  U.S.  households  can  return  to  more  normal  patterns  of 
borrowing to smooth consumption and to invest in autos and houses. 
Still,  despite  the  return  to  more  normal  patterns  of  borrowing,  it  is  worth  pondering  the 
significance of the recent change in the composition of household debt as student loans have 
grown  to  be  the  second-largest  category  of  household  debt  after  mortgages.  While  these 
loans  provide  critical  access  to  schooling,  they  may  constrain  the  consumption  choices  of 
young people, especially those who graduate in periods of poor employment prospects. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  15
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  16 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
