Jens Weidmann: External imbalances in the euro area 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the International 
Business Cycle Conference, Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Kiel, 17 March 2014. 
 Introduction 
1 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The International Business Cycle Conference has become a firm fixture within an institution 
that is itself very much a fixture of the German economics landscape. Truly international in its 
focus from the start, the Kiel Institute for the World Economy has nevertheless shaped the 
national economic discourse like few other institutions have done. 
Over  the  last  hundred  years,  its  global  perspective,  research  quality  and  policy  relevance 
have made it one of Germany’s leading economic research institutes. And to me, this sounds 
like a formula for success in the 21st century as well. I am therefore grateful for the invitation 
and for the opportunity to speak here today. 
Analysing international developments and Germany’s role in them is the Kiel Institute’s core 
competence. But as the English writer Charles Caleb Colton once pointed out, imitation is the 
sincerest form of flattery. So let me celebrate the Kiel Institute’s centenary by having a go at 
analysing international developments, and Germany’s role in them, myself. 
In the next 25 minutes or so, I wish to present my take on the external imbalances in the euro 
area and Germany’s role in this context. In particular, I will be focussing on three points: 
• 
that compared to a fixed exchange rate regime, the adjustment pressure of a deficit 
country  in  a  currency  area  is  cushioned  by  the  single  monetary  policy,  avoiding 
excessive adjustment costs, but which also calls for additional rules; 
that stimulating German demand cannot be a substitute for removing rigidities in the 
deficit countries, but that strengthening Germany’s growth potential, for instance by 
increasing  competition  in  the  services  sector,  will  be  helpful  with  regard  to  the 
current account as well; 
that due to its demographics and degree of economic development, Germany’s role 
as  a  capital  exporter  is  unlikely  to  change,  which  means  that,  to  a  certain  extent, 
German surpluses are here to stay. 
  Let me start by taking a closer look at the role of external imbalances in a monetary union. 
Macroeconomic imbalances in a monetary union 
2 
In the early stages of European economic and monetary union, interest rates in the member 
states  converged  at  a  low  level  following  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risk.  From  the 
perspective  of  deeper  economic  and  financial  market  integration,  this  was  desirable  in 
principle. 
However,  the  favourable  financing  conditions  in  the  euro-area  countries  with  previously 
higher interest rates stimulated their domestic demand. A procyclical real interest rate effect 
then  ensued.  Higher  domestic  demand  led  to  above-average  inflation  in  the  respective 
countries,  while  nominal  interest  rates  hardly  differed  across  the  euro  area,  causing  real 
interest rates to fall even further in the countries concerned. 
At  the  same  time,  higher  demand  caused  wages  to  rise  as  well,  which  pushed  the  real 
exchange rate up and reduced price competitiveness. But the dampening effect on exports 
due to the rise in the real exchange rate did not suffice to moderate wage developments in 
the countries concerned. In other words, the interest rate effect dominated the exchange rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
effect.  Consequently,  worsening  exports  did  not  trigger  adjustment,  and  current  account 
deficits continued. As a result, the deficit countries built up ever-larger external liabilities. 
However,  large  external  debts,  especially  when  funded  through  short-term  financing,  can 
exacerbate  existing  national  dysfunctions  and  vulnerabilities.  This  is  precisely  what 
happened  in  some  peripheral  euro-area  countries  during  the  current  crisis:  they  could  no 
longer  finance  their  deficits  through  private  capital  inflows,  requiring  macroeconomic 
rebalancing. And this is precisely what I would call a balance of payments crisis: a sudden 
stop in the inflow of private capital that requires a correction of unsustainable developments 
and policies. 
The reason for the sudden stop in private capital inflow was a loss in creditors’ confidence in 
countries’ solvency. In this context, financial markets appeared to recall one important, and 
hitherto ignored, institutional aspect of the European monetary union: the no-bail out clause. 
No euro-area country or a European institution is allowed to finance the debt of another euro-
area country. 
Prior to the current crisis, the possibility of national balance of payments crises occurring in a 
monetary union like the European one was largely discarded in economic policy discussions. 
It  was  believed  that  individual  countries  within  a  monetary  union  and  as  part  of  a  single 
money and capital market would no longer experience funding shortages after exchange rate 
risk had been eliminated. 
In fact, it was long deemed unnecessary to even analyse national balances of payments, as 
it was thought that a single currency area  would prevent balance of payments crises from 
occurring in individual member states. 
As  we  know  now,  this  theory  proved  incorrect.  Although  the  balance  of  payments  is  an 
ex-post accounting record, from an economic perspective it expresses an important budget 
constraint: deficits need to be financed. 
Furthermore,  the  current  crisis  has  shown  that  national  imbalances  can  create  significant 
contagion  effects  in  a  monetary  union.  In  this  regard,  financial  integration  has  proved  a 
double-edged  sword:  while  it  deepened  funding  reservoirs  in  good  times,  the  increased 
interconnectedness also served to propagate shocks far more strongly than before, creating 
new vulnerabilities. 
In the end, to prevent financial stability risks in the euro area from materialising, public funds 
were  used  to  substitute  the  drained  private  funds  to  finance  the  deficits:  first,  through 
intergovernmental  loans  or  through  the  European  rescue  funds,  that  is  the  EFSF  and  the 
ESM;  and  second,  through  refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  with  banks  in  the 
peripheral countries; a point to which I will return later. 
It is a well-known fact that in a fixed exchange rate regime, the national central bank can, at 
least in the short term, choose between directly intervening by selling foreign currency and 
raising its key interest rate in order to uphold the exchange rate. This is precisely what we 
have seen recently in some emerging market countries. 
Both of these measures produce a squeeze in the domestic money supply and therefore in 
credit  demand,  which  ultimately  reduces  the  demand  for  goods  and  services  in  the  real 
economy. In the long run, sustainability is restored through the imposed reduction of relative 
prices and wages. 
In contrast to balance of payments crises under fixed exchange rate regimes, the adjustment 
process in the euro area is cushioned and protracted by the single monetary policy through 
harmonised short-term interest rates and liquidity assistance measures of the Eurosystem. 
This means that the national stock of money in circulation in an individual deficit country is 
not generally reduced to the same extent as private net capital outflows. Instead, commercial 
banks can cover their existing financing needs via greater refinancing from the central bank – 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
at least if they have sufficient collateral and if the central bank has no limit in place for the 
stock of refinancing credit. 
This  is  precisely  the  fixed-rate  full  allotment  policy  the  Eurosystem  introduced  in  2008  to 
safeguard the liquidity of the euro-area banking system after the common European money 
market had encountered severe strains. As a result, there is no monetary policy pressure to 
adjust prices and wages. 
Indeed,  empirical  studies  carried  out  by  the  Bundesbank  staff  have  confirmed  that  current 
account adjustments take longer in a monetary union than in fixed exchange rate regimes. 
One could say that the common monetary policy acts as an anti-lock braking system (ABS). 
It prevents the funding of external deficits from coming to a screeching halt. But a balance of 
payments  crisis  is  a  bumpy  ride  on  a  rough  surface,  and  under  these  conditions  an  ABS 
prolongs rather than shortens the braking distance. That is why rally cars do not have ABS. 
In other words, economic adjustment risks stalling. 
But policy room for manoeuvre might be limited in a crisis and the long-term functioning of 
the monetary union risks being further undermined by the crisis and by attempts to cope with 
it – as we saw recently. Some crisis measures tilted further the balance between control and 
liability and monetary policy came under pressure to ease the impact of the crisis on banks 
and states. 
With  regard  to  short-term  crisis  management,  however,  it  is  essential  to  keep  monetary 
policy  and  fiscal  policy  segregated.  In  a  crisis,  central  banks  play  an  important  role  as 
lenders  of  last  resort  to  solvent  banks.  This  involves  short-term  refinancing  operations  in 
return for high-quality collateral. 
Every support measure for a financial institution that goes clearly beyond this means that the 
central bank is performing a quasi-fiscal role. Measures like financial aid to insolvent banks 
or the take-over of banks’ balance sheet risks rightly belong in the domain of parliaments and 
elected governments. 
Only  parliaments  and  elected  governments  have  the  democratic  legitimacy  needed  to 
redistribute risks between euro-area countries. If central banks were to perform a quasi-fiscal 
role,  they  risk  becoming  dominated  by  fiscal  policy,  which  could  undermine  their  ability  to 
maintain price stability. 
To  avoid  such  a  situation,  it  is  important  to  prevent  the  build-up  of  imbalances.  Hence, 
additional safety systems in the form of pre-emptive rules are essential. 
In  the  first  place,  excessive  public  deficits  have  to  be  avoided  by  strict  deficit  rules.  Such 
rules were introduced by the Stability and Growth Pact even before the euro was introduced. 
Unfortunately, these rules were not enforced strictly enough; they were violated more than 
once, not least by Germany and France. 
In response to the crisis, the rules were stiffened. But the procedure became overly complex 
and  affords  considerable  political  leeway.  And  so  far,  the  Commission’s  interpretation  has 
been rather lenient, undermining the binding effect of the new rules. 
Additionally, greater economic policy surveillance is crucial. The macroeconomic surveillance 
procedure is instrumental in detecting and counteracting unhealthy economic developments. 
But  while  safety  systems  are  important,  we  also  need  to  strengthen  the  chassis  of  the 
monetary union itself. 
The  balance  of  payments  results  from  the  interplay  of  international  trade  and  investment 
decisions. It’s not a case of the capital account passively following the current account: both 
interact through interest rate and price signals. Distortions can therefore originate from both 
sides, as indeed happened in the run-up to the current crisis. Capital has not always been 
put to its most productive use. And structural rigidities have hampered adjustment through a 
shift from the non-tradable to the tradable sector, and curbed growth potential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Regarding  the  removal  of  rigidities  in  product  and  labour  markets,  reforms  are  now 
underway. Unit labour costs of deficit countries have fallen as a result, and current accounts 
have improved – not only because of shrinking imports, but because of expanding exports as 
well. 
Factors of production are being reallocated to sectors with a strong focus on exports. The 
construction sector in Ireland accounted for over half the decrease in aggregate employment; 
in Spain, Italy and Portugal, it accounted for around two-fifths. In industry, by contrast, either 
far fewer jobs have been cut or – as in Ireland – new jobs have recently been created. 
Real  value  added,  in  particular,  already  far  exceeded  its  pre-crisis  level  in  the  export-
intensive  information  and  communication  sector  in  Spain  and  Ireland  in  2012.  In  Ireland, 
other business-related services also showed substantial growth. Compared to its pre-crisis 
level,  real  value  added  in  trade  and  tourism  increased  in  Portugal  and  remained  virtually 
unchanged in Spain. 
These sectoral differences are also reflected in credit reallocation, e.g. in Spain. While loans 
to the Spanish construction sector fell, the more productive export-oriented industrial sector 
is  able  to  receive  loans.  This  aspect  is  often  forgotten  when  discussing  credit  growth  in 
periphery countries. 
Progress  has  been  uneven,  though,  and  further  reforms  are  needed  to  facilitate  this  shift 
from the non-tradable to the tradable sector and, therefore, to strengthen sustainable growth. 
What is also important, however, is that the banking systems in some euro-area countries 
haven’t  correctly  fulfilled  their  economic  function.  And  the  national  banking  supervisory 
authorities have intervened too little, and too late. 
Providing for a more stable financial system and contributing to a more efficient allocation of 
capital are the ultimate goals of the banking union, which will consist of a Single Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM) and a Single Restructuring and Resolution Mechanism (SRM). 
To prevent future financial crises, an effective restructuring and resolution regime is of the 
essence. A functioning resolution regime with a credible bail-in of shareholders and creditors 
strengthens incentives for effective credit monitoring and moderates banks’ risk appetites. In 
so doing, it reduces the risk that, in the event of future bank failures, taxpayers are again the 
first line of defence. This will enhance the allocation of capital and reduce the risk of a bubble 
emerging. 
The role of Germany 
3 
However, the euro area comprises not only balance of payments deficit countries but surplus 
countries  as  well,  most  prominently  Germany.  Germany’s  surplus  vis-à-vis  the  rest  of  the 
euro area has fallen as a mirror-image of the improvements in deficit countries. Last year, it 
was about half of its previous high. 
Nevertheless, there have been repeated calls for German competitiveness to be lowered to 
reduce the imbalances in the euro area. One possible solution that has been suggested is a 
considerable hike in German wages – in other words, a larger increase than is warranted by 
conditions on the domestic labour market. 
The  idea  behind  this  is  that  competitiveness  is  relative:  one  country’s  loss  is  another 
country’s gain. In terms of the euro area, however, this would only work if the euro area were 
an island in the world economy and not competing with the outside world. Correspondingly, 
estimates we have carried out show that the results of such a policy would disappoint. 
In  our  estimates  we  assumed  an  additional  wage  increase  in  Germany  of  2  percentage 
points above what would normally be expected as the outcome of wage bargaining. Then we 
used  our  economic  models  to  calculate  the  effect  such  an  increase  would  have  on  the 
exports of peripheral euro-area countries. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Given  the  nature  of  the trade flows  between  Germany  and  peripheral  countries, the  effect 
there  would  be  close  to  zero.  Only  Ireland  could  expect  a  moderate  lift.  By  contrast, 
Germany’s  economy  would  suffer.  Depending  on  the  model,  employment  would  ultimately 
fall by as much as 1%, and output by ¾%. 
And a credit-financed increase in public spending would spur exports of peripheral countries 
even  less.  The  import  share  of  German  public  demand  is  only  9%,  less  than  half  of  the 
import  share  of  private  demand  at  21%  and  less  than  a  quarter  of  the  import  share  of 
German exports at just under 41 ½ %. 
Fundamentally,  Germany’s  surplus  is  not  due  to  distortions,  but  the  result  of  market 
processes.  As  the  European  Commission  pointed  out  in  its  recently  published  In-Depth 
Review,  the  surplus  is  the  result  of  an  interplay  of  various  factors  and  developments  in 
Germany as well as globally and among its euro-area partners which affected savings and 
investment in the domestic economy. 
Germany’s  post-reunification  situation  was  marked  by  high  unit  labour  costs  and  high 
unemployment.  To  bring  real  wages  down  to  a  market  clearing  level,  a  period  of  wage 
moderation  ensued.  This,  combined  with  the  realisation  that  demographic  developments 
would  require  greater  private  savings  to  ensure  a  comfortable  retirement,  has  caused  the 
saving rate of households to rise gradually over the last decade. 
A  similar  picture  holds  for  the  development  of  corporate  savings.  At  the  turn  of  the 
millennium, German companies were highly leveraged. At the same time, regulatory and tax 
incentives made equity more attractive by comparison. Both developments led companies to 
scale  back  investment  and  bolster  their  equity  positions  by  retaining  earnings  –  to  a  point 
where  savings  actually  exceeded  investment,  an  oddity  as  far  as  the  corporate  sector  is 
concerned. 
While both household and corporate savings rose, overall investment remained subdued – 
Germany went from being a capital importer in the 1990s to a capital exporter, and so from 
posting a current account deficit to a surplus. 
The  low  level  of  overall  investment  is  attributable  to  numerous  factors.  Residential 
investment fell markedly  in  the  aftermath  of  the real  estate  bubble  of  the  1990s.  Business 
investment has been muted on average as well. The overall investment ratio was 16.7% in 
2013, compared with 22.3% in the year 2000. 
Following  the  sharp  downturn  induced  by  the  financial  crisis,  corporate  investment 
rebounded at first, but then fell a second time, as uncertainty due to the crisis in the euro 
area started to weigh on growth prospects. 
Finally, the consolidation of public finances was accompanied by a fall in public investment. 
Overall,  cyclical  factors  feature  prominently  when  trying  to  explain  the  low  levels  of 
investment  over  the  last  10  to  15  years.  Looking  ahead,  some  of  these  effects  can  be 
expected to abate. 
Residential  investment  has  gone  up  markedly  in  recent  years,  fuelled  by  pent-up  housing 
demand and low interest rates. Demographic trends suggest, however, that this development 
should slow down over the medium term. 
Corporate investment should follow an upward trajectory as well, as uncertainty surrounding 
the euro area crisis is slowly subsiding. And almost half of all investment in machinery and 
equipment is comprised of imports; the moderating effect on the current account is therefore 
comparatively high. 
Finally, the German government has also announced an increase, albeit modest, in public 
investment. 
But cyclical factors do not tell the whole story. When looking at sectoral developments, one 
fact is striking. For the last 20 years, total factor productivity (TFP) growth in services has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
markedly  lagged  TFP  growth  in  manufacturing.  In  fact,  while  TFP  in  manufacturing  has 
grown by more than 30%, TFP growth in services has barely budged. 
What is behind this phenomenon? The data point to a higher degree of competition in the 
manufacturing sector following the launch of the common market: mark-ups, an indicator of 
the pricing power of firms, have gone down since then. By contrast, mark-ups on services 
have stayed high in Germany, higher even than in many other European countries. 
Opening  up  closed  professions,  cutting  red  tape,  and  improving  financing  conditions  for 
nascent digital firms, would serve to improve the functioning of the services sector. 
But  while  there  is  room  for  improvement  in  Germany  especially  when  it  comes  to  the 
efficiency  of  its  services  sector,  the  fact  is  that  European  mark-ups  are  high  in  general, 
compared to the US, for example. It is therefore high time to fully harness the forces of the 
market for Europe, by making the most of its main catalyst for competition and growth, the 
European single market. 
In his report to the European Commission, former Commissioner Mario Monti estimated the 
potential growth effects of creating a digital single market, which is largely services-based, to 
be about 4%, on a par with the gains made since 1993. Further benefits would ensue from a 
reduction in the vast number of exemptions in the services directive. 
Reforms  that  strengthen  competition  in  the  services  sector  therefore  hold  the  promise  of 
delivering  stronger  and  more  balanced  growth.  And  more  balanced  growth  is  likely  to 
translate into a moderation of the current account as well. 
Still,  given  its  demographics  and  degree  of  development,  Germany’s  role  as  a  capital 
exporter is unlikely to be completely reversed. This means that, to a certain extent, German 
surpluses  are  here  to  stay  –  a  point  that  the  Commission  also  emphasised  in  its  recent 
report. 
Conclusion 
4 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
The  crisis  has  shown  that  a  monetary  union  is  not  a  shield  against  balance  of  payments 
problems in the face of persistent imbalances. 
Adjustment pressure in a currency area is cushioned by the single monetary policy,  which 
avoids abrupt adjustment but also necessitates additional rules. 
Regarding  the  euro-area  imbalances,  significant  progress  has  been  made.  But  further 
reforms  are  needed  to facilitate  the  shift from  the  non-tradable  to the  tradable  sector  and, 
hence, to strengthen sustainable growth. 
Stimulating German demand by means of an excessive wage increase or a credit-financed 
increase in public spending cannot be a substitute for that. And given its demographics and 
degree of economic development, Germany’s current account is likely to have a positive sign 
in the future as well. 
But  by  removing  rigidities  in  the  services  sector,  Germany  might  not  only  strengthen  its 
growth potential, but could do so in a way that is likely to have a moderating impact on the 
current account as well. 
Reforms like these show that adjusting imbalances in the euro area does not need to be a 
zero-sum  game.  If  done  properly,  it  will  serve  the  interests  of  everyone,  and  this  is  why, 
despite the struggle and setbacks, it is a path worth pursuing. 
I now look forward to our discussion! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
