Raghuram Rajan: Financial inclusion – technology, institutions and 
policies 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
NASSCOM  (The  National  Association  of  Software  and  Services  Companies)  India 
Leadership Forum, Mumbai, 12 February 2014. 
 Distinguished members of NASSCOM and distinguished guests: Thank you for inviting me to 
speak here today. The Indian information and communications technology industry that you 
represent has a proud history of accomplishment. You have done India great service, not just 
by creating a world class industry but also by showing the rest of us what is possible. I am 
hopeful that financial firms can join hands with you to build a technology-enabled financial 
sector  that  can  reach  every  nook  and  cranny  of  India,  and  even  across  borders,  to  foster 
growth.  This  will  entail  new,  uniquely  Indian  models,  much  as  you  have  developed  in 
software or in mobile communications. The Dr. Nachiket Mor Committee Report has given 
the RBI much food for thought on these issues. I want to reflect on the recommendations, 
even while putting some additional issues on the table. 
Financial inclusion is about (a) the broadening of financial services to those people who do 
not  have  access  to  financial  services  sector;  (b)  the  deepening  of  financial  services  for 
people who have minimal financial services; and (c) greater financial literacy and consumer 
protection  so  that  those  who  are  offered  the  products  can  make  appropriate  choices.  The 
imperative  for  financial  inclusion  is  both  a  moral  one  as  well  as  one  based  on  economic 
efficiency.  Should  we  not  give  everyone  that  is  capable  the  tools  and  resources  to  better 
themselves, and in doing so, better the country? 
Last week, I met with some members of Ela Bhatt’s Self-Employed Women’s Association. In 
a room full of poor but confident women entrepreneurs, I asked how many borrowed from 
moneylenders before they came to SEWA. About half the women raised their hands. When 
asked  how  many  thought  of  approaching  a  regular  bank  before  they  came  to  SEWA’s 
cooperative  bank,  not  one  raised  her  hand.  Interestingly,  many  of  them  said  that  the  loan 
from SEWA freed them from the moneylender’s high interest rate, which gave them enough 
to service SEWA’s loan fully even while focusing on other productive activities. I have heard 
this  from  other  micro-entrepreneurs  –  the  highest  return  initial  investment  is  often  to  free 
oneself of the clutches of the moneylender. Despite this high return from the delivery of credit 
to the poor, and despite much of our financial inclusion efforts being focused on credit, we 
still reach too few of the target population. So there is much more to be achieved. 
We  have  tried  to  effect  inclusion  in  the  past  through  mandates  –  whether  it  be  through 
direction on branch opening or on lending to priority sectors. That we are still far short of our 
goals has led some critics to suggest we should abandon mandates because the market will 
take care of needs; If the poor have demand for financial services, the critics say, providers 
will emerge to supply it. Markets do respond to need, and competition is a very healthy force 
for  improvement,  but  market  functioning  can  be  impeded  by  poor  infrastructure,  uneven 
regulation, natural or regulatory monopolies, and even cartelization. 
While  enlisting  competitive  forces  wherever  possible  to  compete  for  the  bottom  of  the 
pyramid’s business, as a development central bank we also need to offer a supportive hand. 
By putting in place the right infrastructure and enabling regulation, we have to encourage the 
development of the products, institutions, and networks that will foster inclusion. 
Let  us  start  with  products.  We  have  been  trying  for  decades  to  expand  credit.  We  have 
focused  much  less  on  easing  payments  and  remittances  or  on  expanding  remunerative 
savings  vehicles  or  on  providing  easy-to-understand  insurance  against  emergencies. 
Perhaps  we  should  try  to  expand  financial  inclusion  by  encouraging  these  other  products, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
and  allow  credit  to  follow  them  rather  than  lead.  Indeed,  many  successful  organizations 
working with the poorest of the poor try to get them to put aside some money as savings, no 
matter how little, before giving them loans. Some of our self-help groups (SHGs) work on this 
principle. Not only does the savings habit, once inculcated, allow the customer to handle the 
burden  of  repayment  better,  it  may  also  lead  to  better  credit  allocation. With  the  power  of 
information technology, perhaps the analysis of the savings and payment patterns of a client 
can indicate which one of them is ready to use credit well. 
One roadblock to access, even to something as simple as a universal basic savings account, 
is Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements. Experts have emphasized the need to make it 
far  simpler  to  open  basic  accounts,  and  have  suggested  minimizing  the  required 
documentation. In an effort to do so, the Dr. Nachiket Mor Committee recommends requiring 
proof  of  only  a  permanent  address.  This  is  nevertheless  more  onerous  than  current  RBI 
norms,  which  allow  an  applicant  to  self-certify  her  address  and  other  details  for  accounts 
below Rs. 50,000. But despite the RBI’s exhortations, few banks have reduced their demand 
for documentation – they fear that they will be held responsible if something goes wrong, no 
matter  what  the  regulatory  norms.  The  acceptance  of  third  party  KYC  certification  is 
particularly difficult. 
Today,  stringent  KYC  norms  keep  too  many  out  of  the  banking  system,  and  lead  to 
unnecessary  harassment  for  others.  Banks  may  adopt  these  norms  more  because  of 
regulatory or legal liability than to safeguard against true criminal or terrorist activity. Can’t we 
do better? Some bankers suggest that by monitoring activity patterns in accounts carefully, 
even while putting some limits on basic accounts (such as holding a large value cheque for a 
few days before it is cashed), much of the suspicious activity can be detected and stopped. 
Could  we  allow  a  commercial  bank  some  regulatory  dispensation  in  case  there  is  minor 
mischief  in  some  low  value  accounts,  provided  the  bank  has  a reliable  system  in  place  to 
detect  greater  mischief?  Could  the  gains  in  easing  widespread  access  to  safe  accounts 
outweigh the costs of minor fraud? How can we get entities within the system to rely on each 
other’s KYC, without the process having to be continuously repeated? How can technology 
assist in effectively addressing the above issues? These are questions we have to examine 
and address. 
The broader issue is whether through sophisticated state-of-the-art technology, we can offer 
customers  products  that  are  simple,  low-cost,  and  easy  to  use.  We  have  done  this  with 
mobile  phones,  can  we  do  it  with  banking?  Payments  may  be  another  obvious  product.  I 
should note that our payments infrastructure in India is very advanced. We have three large 
RBI  technology  centers  devoted  to  supporting  payments.  For  large  value  transactions,  we 
have  a  state-of-the-art  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  System  (RTGS).  In  the  National 
Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) system, our flagship retail funds transfer system, we have 
near-real  time  transaction  processing  ––  we  continuously  send  messages  to  banks  even 
though net settlement takes place at hourly intervals. We also send a positive confirmation to 
the remitter after the funds have been credited to the beneficiary’s account. 
We have  introduced  an additional  factor  of  authentication for  all  e-commerce transactions, 
and are swiftly moving to Chip and PIN technology for credit card transactions.SMS alerts for 
bank and credit card transactions are a welcome advance relative to even the United States, 
where  thieves  find  it  easy  to  bill  thousands  of  dollars  to  your  credit  card  even  before  you 
know it is stolen. All this means that we have the infrastructure to provide cheap and safe 
payments  and  remittances.  What  we  need  are  non-governmental  players  to  utilize  this 
infrastructure to provide the products and access that people want. 
A lot is already happening. Real-time funds transfer through the Immediate Payment Service 
(IMPS) put in place by NPCI has contributed significantly towards growth of mobile banking. 
The Aadhaar Payment Bridge System (APBS) allows government benefits to be transferred 
through  the  use  of  Unique  Identification  number  given  to  the  citizens.  But  we  are  still  not 
where we should be either on mobile payments or on direct benefit transfers. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
With over 900 million mobile phones, the potential for mobile banking as a delivery channel 
for financial services is a big opportunity in India. We have consciously adopted the bank led 
model for mobile  banking,  while  the  non-banks, including  Mobile  Network Operators,  have 
been permitted to issue mobile wallets, where cash withdrawal is not permitted as of now. 
The key to cheap and universal payments and remittances will be if we can find a safe way 
to allow funds to be freely transferred between bank accounts and mobile wallets, as well as 
cashed  out  of  mobile  wallets,  through  a  much  larger  and  ubiquitous  network  of  business 
correspondents. The Nachiket Mor Committee suggests the creation of Payment Banks as a 
step  towards  this  goal.  Other  suggestions  include  interoperable  business  correspondents 
who will get the scale economies to serve in remote locations, and the usage of NBFCs as 
banking correspondents. We will examine all this. 
In  the  meantime,  interesting  solutions  are  emerging.  Cashing  out  is  important  for 
remittances, because we have a large recipient population in the country, most of whom do 
not  have  access  to  formal  banking  services.  We  have  recently  approved  the  in-principle 
setting  up  of  a  payment  system  which  will  facilitate  the  funds  transfer  from  bank  account 
holders  to  those  without  accounts  through  ATMs.  Essentially,  the  sender  can  have  the 
money withdrawn from his account through an ATM transaction. The intermediary processes 
the payment, and sends a code to the recipient on his mobile that allows him to withdraw the 
money from any nearby bank’s ATM. The system will take care of necessary safeguards of 
customer  identification,  transaction  validation,  velocity  checks  etc.  We  need  more  such 
innovative products, some of which mobile companies are providing. 
In India, despite the high mobile density, it is also a reality that most of the handsets are very 
basic  ones  and  many  of  the  mobile  connections  are  prepaid  subscriptions.  These  are 
important  constraints.  The  RBI’s  Technical  Committee  on  Mobile  Banking  has 
recommended,  among  others,  the  need  for  a  standardized  and  simplified  procedure  for 
registration/authentication of customers for mobile banking services, a cohesive awareness 
programme  to  be  put  in  place,  the  adoption  of  a  common  application  platform  across  all 
banks to be delivered to the customers independent of the handset being used, along with 
use  of  SMS  and  USSD  technology  for  providing  necessary  level  of  security  (through 
encryption)  for  such  transactions.  The  Telecom  Regulatory  Authority  of  India  (TRAI)  has 
prescribed optimum service parameters, as also a ceiling on charges for provision of USSD 
services by telecom operators to the banks and their agents. We have a great opportunity for 
banks and telecom service providers to come together to deliver mobile banking services of 
all kinds in a seamless and secure manner to their customers. In the next few months, we 
will accelerate the dialog between key players. 
Technology can also be used to facilitate credit, a product I started the talk with. MSMEs get 
squeezed all the time by their large buyers, who pay after long delays. All would be better off 
if the MSME could sell its claim on the large buyer in the market. The MSME would get its 
money quickly, while the market would get a claim on the better rated large buyer instead of 
holding a claim on the MSME. The large buyer could get a better price for his purchases. All 
this requires setting up a Trade-receivables Exchange, which the RBI has been discussing 
with market participants. Once again, the key is to reduce transaction costs by automating 
almost every aspect of the transaction so that even the smallest MSMEs can benefit. 
One of the difficulties the poor and small businesses have in accessing credit is the lack of 
information about them, both up front as they are being evaluated for credit, and after lending 
where the lender has to monitor them. If savings and payments products are sold widely, and 
information,  including  payments  to  mobile  companies,  utility  companies,  as  well  as  the 
government,  collected,  then  the  excluded  can  build  information records that  will  help  them 
access  credit.  If,  in  addition,  negative  information  on  defaults  is  shared  in  a  fair  and 
responsible way through the financial network, every individual borrower will have something 
at stake – their credit history – which can serve to encourage timely repayment. This, in turn, 
can improve the willingness of banks to lend. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Finally, let me turn to consumer literacy and protection. As we reach more and more of the 
population, we have to be sure that they understand the products they are being sold and 
have the information to make sensible decisions. Caveat emptor or let the buyer beware is 
typically the standard used in financial markets – that is, so long as the buyer is not actively 
misled,  she  is  responsible  for  researching  her  product  choices  and  making  purchase 
decisions. While this puts a lot of burden on the buyer to do due diligence, it also gives her a 
lot of freedom to make choices, including of course the freedom to make bad choices. 
But with poorly informed and unsophisticated investors, we should consider the Dr. Nachiket 
Mor Committee’s recommendation of setting some guidelines on what products are suitable 
for different categories of investors. Broadly speaking, the more complicated the product the 
more sophisticated should be the target customer. Should we move to a norm where a suite 
of  simple  products  is  pre-approved  for  dissemination  to  all,  but  as  products  get  more 
complicated, financial sector providers bear more and more responsibility to show that the 
buyer was sophisticated and/or appropriately counseled before she purchased? 
Of  course,  the  longer  run  answer  is  for  customers  to  become  more  savvy.  Can  the 
technology  sector  help  educate  people  in  financial  matters?  After  all,  finance  is  not 
something most people learn in schools, but it is something they encounter every day in the 
world.  Low  cost  but  high  quality  distance  finance  education  is  something  the  country  very 
much needs and we look to entrepreneurs here to think of innovative ways to provide it. 
Before  I  conclude,  one  caveat.  Technology  can  magnify  the  reach  of  finance  for  bad 
purposes as well as good. Many of you must receive frequent emails, purportedly from me, 
informing you of a large sum of money that awaits you at the RBI, and urging you to send me 
your account details so that I can transfer the money to you. Let me assure you that the RBI 
does not give out money, I do not send these emails, and if you do fall for such emails, you 
will lose a lot of money to crooks and be reminded of the adage – if anything looks too good 
to be true, it probably is not true. 
Of course, technology can also offer answers to check fraud. Can we enlist social media in 
enabling the public to identify fraud and help regulation? How can we do this in a responsible 
way? Again, these are questions at this point, but I am sure we will find the answers. 
Let me conclude. Technology, with its capacity to reduce transaction costs, is key to enabling 
the large volume low ticket transaction that is at the center of financial inclusion. By collecting 
and  processing  large  volumes  of  data  easily,  technology  can  also  improve  the  quality  of 
financial decision making. When products have network effects, technology can ensure not 
just  interoperability,  key  to  obtaining  the  benefits  of  networking,  but  also  security,  key  to 
maintaining the confidence of people and preventing them from withdrawing from the formal 
financial  system  once  again.  Can  the  successful  ICT  industry  partner  with  the  finance 
industry to revolutionize financial inclusion in this country? I sincerely hope you will. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
