Manuel Sánchez: Evolving global challenges and policy options for Latin 
America 
Remarks  by  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  2014 
IIF (Institute  of  International  Finance)  Latin  America  Economic  Forum,  Bahia,  Brazil, 
29 March 2014. 
 It is certainly a pleasure to be invited to the stunningly beautiful Brazilian coast to participate 
in  the  2014  IIF  Latin  America  Economic  Forum.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Institute  of 
International Finance for the chance to share some thoughts with you on the challenges and 
opportunities faced by Latin America in the current economic environment. 
I will organize my remarks as follows. First, I will comment on the changing global context for 
emerging  markets;  second,  I  will  highlight  some  policy  options  that  our  countries  may 
entertain  to  confront  likely  external  financial  headwinds;  and  finally,  I  will  make  a  few 
comments on the Mexican economy. 
Evolving global challenges 
Two  trends  are  particularly  noticeable  in  recent world  economic  developments. The first  is 
decreasing growth since 2010, especially for emerging economies, amid modest post-crisis 
global  improvement.  Softening  commodity  prices  and  the  economic  deceleration  of  China 
have  contributed  to  this  tendency,  affecting  some  Latin  American  commodity  exporters.  In 
particular, grains and metals have seen moderately falling prices, if from high levels. 
The  second  trend  is  a  reversal  of  fortune  in  global  financial  conditions  for  emerging 
economies. Whereas in the wake of the Great Recession, these countries drew substantial 
capital inflows, especially portfolio funds, and saw the prices of their financial assets rise, in 
2013, the tables turned. In particular, the expectation and eventual beginning of the tapering 
of asset purchases by the U.S. Federal Reserve sharpened global risk aversion. 
Since May of last year, portfolio capital inflows to emerging economies, previously the darling 
destination for foreign funds, have contracted and in some countries, even become outflows. 
At  the  same  time,  the  prices  of  many  financial  assets  seen  as  risky  have  fallen  abruptly. 
Emerging-market  bonds,  equities  and  currencies  were  affected  by  the  change  in  market 
sentiment. Also contributing to lower asset holdings and values has been a weaker relative 
outlook for growth in emerging economies. 
However,  not  all  countries  have  been  treated equally.  Investors  have  differentiated  among 
destinations  according  to  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  prospects  for  economic 
expansion, among other factors. Nations with large financial imbalances, whether internal or 
external, have been hit hardest, including countries in the Latin American region. 
More  recently,  political  tensions  and  uncertainty  on  the  ability  of  some  governments  to 
resolve  external  financing  and  inflation  problems  have  turned  up  the  pressure  on  various 
nations  to  act  swiftly.  For  almost  a  year,  negative  spillover  effects  to  other  emerging 
economies have resulted. 
Moving forward, the foreseeable real and financial environment for emerging economies will 
continue to be challenging. Specifically, the world economic upturn will remain muted. One 
reason is that the recovery is now being led by advanced countries.1 
 1  See, for example, Consensus Economics (2014), Consensus Forecasts, March; and Consensus Economics 
(2014), Latin American Consensus Forecasts, March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Higher growth for developed nations is good news. But support from them will be moderate. 
Mature  economies  by  nature  only  grow  so  fast.  Also,  output  will  probably  remain  below 
secular trends given the fact these countries need to continue fiscal consolidation measures 
in  the  wake  of  past  expansionary  cyclical  postures  and  given  increasing  long-term 
government obligations. 
Another  factor  calling  for  prudent  expectations  on  global  recovery  is  economic  change 
undertaken  by  China,  where  the  authorities  are  making  efforts  to  adjust  to  developments. 
Rapid credit growth has fed real estate price pressures and affected bank balance sheets; 
shadow banking operations may pose stability risks; and signs of swift expansion in certain 
sectors may require restrictive policies. For all these reasons, some commodities are likely to 
see lower demand from China, which may dampen commodity price growth. 
Furthermore,  conditions  in  financial  markets  will  probably  continue  to  be  bumpy.  A  major 
reason  is  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  process  of  reversing  the  extraordinary  monetary 
stimulus in advanced countries, above all in the United States. 
As it reflects better economic prospects, unwinding is a welcome development. But central 
banks  are  nonetheless  sailing  in  uncharted  waters.  Unconventional  monetary  policies, 
including asset purchases and forward guidance, are unprecedented; changes in the use of 
these  instruments  compound  uncertainty  related  to  the  eventual  decision  to  raise  policy 
interest rates. 
Authorities  will  no  doubt  withdraw  monetary  expansion  in  the  most  cautious  way  possible. 
However, dissonance between their communication and public perceptions of future actions 
may give rise to sharp market fluctuations, as occurred in 2013. In any case, even without 
future  turbulence,  financing  for  emerging  economies  will  likely  become  tighter,  chilling 
enthusiasm somewhat from portfolio investors for their assets. 
Policy implications 
In the context of a modest recovery and less favorable financial conditions, what can policy 
makers in Latin America do to make the best of things for their economies? As always, there 
is no  valid one-size-fits-all response, and desirable measures necessarily depend on each 
country’s  circumstances.  But  two  separate  situations  may  help  us  identify  a  few  policy 
options. 
First,  in  cases  of  significant  market  stress,  emergency  measures,  such  as  those  oriented 
toward  managing  the  foreign-exchange  market  and  capital  flows,  might  be  considered.  In 
particular, the use of international reserves to attenuate market volatility may be helpful, as 
shown  by  recent  responses  in  various  severely  stressed  economies,  which  also  tightened 
monetary policy. 
However,  evidence  on  the  effectiveness  of  foreign-exchange  market  intervention  is  mixed, 
and the impact is almost always temporary. In addition, use of this policy should not impede 
adjustment  to  any  existing  large  external  imbalances.  Moreover,  the  imposition  of  capital 
controls  has  limited  short-term  success,  usually  affects  only  the  composition  of  flows,  and 
may harm prospects for future financing.2 
In cases of homegrown economic stresses, the limitations of emergency measures are more 
obvious.  For  example,  some  nations  have  experienced  over-leveraging  and  price  bubbles 
either from capital booms or loose fiscal and financial policies, which may have weakened 
                                                
2  Empirical evidence on the effectiveness of policy interventions on foreign exchange markets and capital flows 
can be found in Broto, C. (2013), “The effectiveness of forex interventions in four Latin American countries,” 
Emerging Markets Review 17; and Forbes, et. al. (2013), “Capital Controls and Macroprudential Measures: 
What Are They Good For?” DIW Berlin, German Institute for Economic Research, Discussion paper 1343. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
banks’  balance  sheets.  Tackling  underlying  problems  as  soon  as  possible  is  a  necessary 
condition to regain stability. 
Available  tools  include  fiscal  and  monetary  tightening, micro  and macro  prudential  policies 
and  exchange  rate  adjustment.  In  the  short  term,  some  tradeoffs  may  be  involved.  For 
example,  more  restrictive  monetary  policy  to  counteract  capital  outflows  may  weaken  a 
cyclical upturn and result in disorderly deleveraging, but keeping monetary policy loose could 
trigger inflation and exacerbate balance-of-payment problems. 
Second, even if no significant imbalance is evident, preventive policies are always called for 
to  prepare  for  potential  financial  strain.  Possible  fragilities  to  watch  for  and  correct 
preemptively include rapidly rising external debt and foreign currency mismatches, as well as 
domestic  asset  price  bubbles.  All  in  all,  the  best  strategy  is  to  strengthen  macroeconomic 
foundations, fortify the financial system through better regulation and oversight, and promote 
reforms that enhance economic efficiency and hence potential growth. 
The Mexican economy 
During recent years, Mexico has been an important recipient of foreign portfolio funds among 
emerging economies. The country has also fared relatively well in the current less favorable 
external  financial  environment.  In  particular,  since  May  2013,  the  Mexican  peso  has 
depreciated less than many other emerging-market currencies. This is noteworthy as in this 
period Mexico has not resorted to any type of foreign exchange intervention, a policy that has 
become more pervasive in several other countries. The freely floating exchange rate regime 
in Mexico is clearly in force.3 
Since last May, the yield curve has steepened in tandem with that of the United States. Shifts 
in  the  yield  curve  have  mainly  reflected  higher  term  premiums,  stemming  from  anticipated 
unwinding of the expansionary monetary stance in the United States. Possible effects from 
domestic expected inflation, currency risk and future policy interest rate hikes do not seem to 
have  played  an  important  role.  Also,  country  risk  indicators,  such  as  the  Mexican 
government’s credit default swaps, rose less than those of many other emerging economies.4 
Moreover, capital flows have continued to increase, albeit at a slower pace, particularly those 
oriented  toward  fixed-income  assets.  Foreign  holdings  of  peso-denominated  government 
bonds  have  reached  new  highs,  although  portfolio  duration  has  dropped  slightly.  This 
contrasts with the reductions of holdings observed in emerging markets as a whole. 
Mexico’s  ability  to  weather  recent  market  turmoil  may  reflect  several  factors,  including  the 
flexible  exchange  rate  regime  that  has  long  served  as  a  buffer  to  external  shocks, 
transmitting global financial signals to the domestic economy efficiently. 
Also, no clear imbalances built up during the capital boom years. Current account and fiscal 
deficits  have  remained  moderate  relative  to  GDP.  Furthermore,  the  ratio  of  private-sector 
credit  to  output,  if  anything,  stayed  too  low  if  international  comparisons  are  taken  into 
account. The growth in this ratio during the last few years has been one of the lowest among 
emerging economies, which poses challenges for making credit more available in Mexico. 
Longstanding  prudential  regulation  and  more  adequate  business  models  have  made  the 
banking system solid, with healthy levels of capital, provisions and asset quality. Bank rules 
designed  to  forestall  foreign  currency  mismatches  cover  deposits,  net  liabilities,  net  open 
positions and liquidity ratios. 
                                                
3  Pursuant  to  regulation  issued  by  the  Bank  of  Mexico  in  accordance  with  its  law,  the  Federal  Treasury  and 
Pemex must carry out all of their foreign currency transactions with the central bank. Proceeds from Pemex 
transactions have largely been the source of international reserves accumulated by the Bank of Mexico. 
4  See Banco de México (2014), Informe Trimestral, Octubre – Diciembre 2013, February, pp. 50–53. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Mexico needs to stay the course, buttressing its economy through effective monetary policy 
to  keep  inflation  subdued,  as  it  has  been  in  the  last  decade.  A  list  of  sound  economic 
fundamentals does not imply that the economy is free of risks. Stability cannot be taken for 
granted,  and  authorities  will  have  to  continue  monitoring  conditions  for  signs  of  any 
weaknesses in order to prevent any potential market disarray. 
Finally, the Mexican economy is undergoing a period of low cyclical growth that began in the 
middle of 2012. Some factors should be of a temporary nature, such as a slowing of Mexican 
exports due to the previous deceleration of the U.S. economy, lower government spending 
tied  to  the  beginning  of  a  new  federal  administration  and  the  restructuring  of  the  housing 
developers market in the wake of the failure of the three largest firms in the sector. 
Thus,  improvement  in  these  factors  should  lead  to  an  upturn.  In  particular,  close  linkages 
with  the  U.S.  economy  could  make  future  growth  more  solid  than  that  derived  from  the 
dependence of exports on commodity prices.5 
Other  more  lasting  problems  center  on  the  stagnation  of  total  factor  productivity,  which 
contributes  largely  to  Mexico’s  disappointing  long-term  economic  performance.  Current 
momentum  on  structural  reforms,  which  seek  to  generate  greater  efficiency,  is  highly 
promising. The agenda is ample, covering many sectors of the economy. Although the full 
effects of the reforms may take years to materialize, their direction and the confidence that 
comes  with  positive  expectations  have  likely  already  helped  to  attract  continued  capital 
inflows, and should fuel a sustained recovery.6 
Concluding remarks 
The present environment is a challenging one for all emerging economies, including those of 
Latin America, but challenges, of course, always carry with them potential opportunities. The 
expected  global  economic  rebound  is  good  news,  especially  for  those  countries  poised  to 
benefit from strong ties with the world’s biggest consumers. 
Future market  conditions  may  be  rocky,  posing  risks  in  particular to  nations  with  financing 
vulnerabilities.  The  best  ring-fencing  strategy  is  to  correct  imbalances  as  efficiently  as 
possible.  In  any  case,  a  preemptive  approach  to  strengthen  macroeconomic  and  financial 
foundations is imperative. Furthermore, structural reforms to foster productivity may show the 
way to more sustainable long-term economic growth. 
                                                
5  Commodities make up less than 20 percent of Mexico’s total exports, while the average share in other Latin 
American countries surpasses 60 percent. Source: own calculations with data from Banco de México and the 
World Trade Organization Statistical Database. 
6  For a summary of some salient structural reforms see Sanchez, M. (2013), “Mexico’s prospects for economic 
growth,” presented at the United States‐Mexico Chamber of Commerce, N.Y., October. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
