Emsley Tromp: The policy challenges in the Monetary Union of Curaçao 
and Sint Maarten 
Speech by Dr Emsley Tromp, President of the Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten, at 
the Inauguration of the Simpson Bay Causeway, Sint Maarten, 25 January 2014. 
 Good evening ladies and gentlemen, 
First, allow me to congratulate the people of Sint Maarten on the inauguration of the Simpson 
Bay Causeway. For many years, traffic congestion in this area was a major obstacle; it had 
an increasingly negative impact on the quality of life on the island and was an impediment to 
economic  growth.  We  are  convinced  that  the  completion  of  this  infrastructure  project  will 
remove  an  obstacle  to  growth  in  Sint  Maarten.  Authorities  now  have  to  direct  their  policy 
actions to other complementary measures to put Sint Maarten’s economy on a higher and 
sustained growth path. As you know, the Centrale Bank van Curaçao en Sint Maarten was 
involved in the financing of this important project. The Bank’s involvement, as I will elaborate 
on later, was motivated by our desire to help further the development of the capital market in 
Sint Maarten and, as with the Aqualectra loan, to broaden our instruments to conduct a more 
market-based monetary policy. However, it would be a remiss if I do not mention here the 
motivation and dedication with which my colleague drs Rob Reijnaert put into this endeavor 
to make our participation possible. A heartfelt thanks is at the order. Thank you Rob! 
I’d like to use this opportunity to discuss the main economic developments in the monetary 
union  during  2013  and  the  economic  prospects  for  2014.  My  focus  today  will  be  on  the 
economy  of  Sint  Maarten.  As  mentioned, I  will  also  elaborate  on  the reasons  why,  from  a 
monetary  perspective,  the  Bank  was  actively  involved  in  the  process  of  financing  the 
Causeway project. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  preliminary  figures  reveal  that  economic  developments  in  the 
monetary  union  were  mixed  during  2013.  On  the  one  hand,  Sint  Maarten  recorded  an 
economic  expansion  of  1.1%,  which  was  a  slowdown  compared  to  the  growth  of  1.5% 
registered  in  2012.  On  the  other  hand,  the  economy  of  Curaçao  shrank  by  0.5%  in  2013, 
following a contraction of 0.1% in 2012. Both countries benefited from the lower international 
oil and food prices during 2013. As a result, Sint Maarten’s inflation rate dropped from 4.0% 
in 2012 to 2.7% in 2013. Meanwhile, Curaçao posted an inflation rate of 1.5% in 2013, down 
from the 2.3% a year earlier. 
An  analysis  based  on  preliminary  data  of  the  sectoral  performance  in Sint  Maarten  shows 
that  the  real  GDP  growth  in  2013  resulted  primarily  from  the  manufacturing  and  the 
construction sectors, mitigated by a decline in the financial intermediation sector. Real output 
growth  in  the  manufacturing  sector  was  the  result  of  more  repair  activities  on  yachts  that 
visited  Sint  Maarten.  The  construction  sector  performed  well  due  to  an  increase  in  both 
private  and  public  investments.  investments  rose  because  of  public  infrastructure  projects, 
including the construction of the Simpson Bay Causeway. 
In  the  utilities  sector,  real  value  added  grew  primarily  because  of  an  increase  in  water 
production.  Activities  in  the  wholesale  and  retail  trade  sector  also  expanded  because  of  a 
rise in domestic spending, moderated by a decline in tourism spending. 
Meanwhile,  real  value  added  growth  in  the  restaurants  &  hotels  sector  remained  flat, 
attributable mainly to weakened activities in stay-over tourism. While the number of visitors 
from  North  America  and  the  Caribbean  increased,  the  European,  South  American  and 
Central American markets witnessed a decline. Cruise tourism contracted during the first half 
of 2013, but picked up afterwards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The transport, storage & communication sector recorded no growth as an increase in airport-
related activities  was offset by a decline in activities in the harbor. Airport-related activities 
rose, driven by more passenger traffic at the Princess Juliana International Airport. The poor 
performance of the harbor was caused by a decline in the number of ships that visited the 
port of Sint Maarten. The financial intermediation sector put a drag on real GDP growth, due 
to a decline in net interest income of the commercial banks. 
Looking  ahead,  growth  in  Sint  Maarten  has  to  be  seen  against  the  background  of 
developments  in  the  world  economy.  In  2014,  we  expect  world  economic  growth  to 
accelerate  supported  by  increased  output  growth  in  the  advanced  economies.  Meanwhile, 
growth in the emerging economies will slow down. Sint Maarten will benefit particularly from 
the projected improving economy of the United States. Therefore, real GDP in Sint Maarten 
is  projected  to  expand  by  1.6%  in  2014  driven  by  increased  activities  in  the  tourism  and 
transportation sectors. Meanwhile, inflationary pressures will ease to 2.4% due mainly to a 
projected further decline in international oil and food prices. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  one  of  the  main  challenges  that  we  have  been  confronting  in  the 
monetary union is the high deficit on the current account of the balance of payments. The 
current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  is  structurally  in  deficit,  as  the  trade  deficit 
cannot  be  compensated  by  the  services,  income,  and  current  transfers  balances.  Since 
2010, the deficit on the current account has been above 15% of GDP. Conventional wisdom 
suggests that in the case of open and small economies such as Curaçao and Sint Maarten, 
deficits over 4-5% of GDP are not sustainable in the long run. 
Until  2011,  high  capital  inflows  and  external  financing  exceeded  the  deficit  on  the  current 
account  resulting  in  an  increase  in  the  gross  official  reserves.  However,  in  2012,  a 
turnaround occurred as the inflow of capital and external financing was not sufficient to cover 
the  current  account  deficit.  Consequently,  the  monetary  union  recorded  a  deficit  on  the 
balance of payments as reflected by a decline in our gross official reserves. 
It is against this background that the Centrale Bank van Curaçao en Sint Maarten has aimed 
its  monetary  policy  at  tightening  the  excess  liquidity  in  the  money  market.  Given  the  high 
deficit  on  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments,  a  private  sector  credit  growth 
exceeding GDP growth, and a declining trend in international reserves, the Bank has been 
gradually  increasing  the  reserve  requirement  percentage.  The  rationale  for  increasing  the 
reserve  requirement  is  that  by  reducing  the  available  liquidity  in  the  money  market, 
commercial banks’ credit extension and thereby domestic spending and import growth can 
be  contained.  However,  increasing  the  reserve  requirement  alone  has  not  been  sufficient 
because of the high excess liquidity in the money market. 
Consequently,  the  Bank  complemented  the  reserve  requirement  instrument  with  a  credit 
measure  to  contain  the  growth  in  private  credit  extension  and  bring  it  more  in  line  with 
nominal GDP growth. Since its introduction in February 2012, the credit measure has been 
extended  three  times,  for  a  period  of  6  months,  the  current  period  ending  at  the  end  of 
February 2014. Also, the credit measure has been eased gradually and loans to projects that 
strengthen the economy and international reserves are exempted. At its introduction in 2012, 
no growth of private credit extension was allowed; however, for the period September 2013 
to  February  2014,  a  maximum  growth  in  credit  extension  of  3%  compared  to  the  end  of 
August 2012 has been allowed. 
I should like to emphasize that the credit measure sets a limit only on the growth of credit. 
Hence, in the case of Sint Maarten, where credit extension has actually been declining since 
2011,  the  credit  measure  has  no  effect.  The  decline  in  private  credit  extension  in  Sint 
Maarten  clearly 
the  economy’s  macroeconomic 
environment.  These  weaknesses  may  be  the  result  of  either  a  decline  in  the  demand  for 
credit or a reduction in the supply of credit by commercial banks. 
Ladies and gentlemen, so far, the Bank’s monetary policy has produced the intended results 
by  moderating  credit  growth,  improving  the  current  account  deficit  on  the  balance  of 
indicates  certain  weaknesses 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
payments, and stemming the decline in reserves in the monetary union. In 2013, the deficit 
on  the  current  account of  the  balance  of  payments  dropped further,  primarily  because  the 
growth  in  exports  of  goods  and  services  exceeded  the  rise  in  imports.  Export  growth  was 
driven  largely  by  the  tourism  and  transportation  sectors,  mitigated  by  a  decline  in  the  re-
export  activities  by  the  free-zone  companies  in  Curaçao.  Imports  rose  as  a  result  of  more 
merchandise  imports  to  meet  tourism  demand  and  the  import  of  construction  materials 
related to investment projects, including the Simpson Bay Causeway. However, a decline in 
merchandise  imports  by  the  free-zone  companies  in  Curaçao  combined  with  a  decline  in 
domestic demand in Curaçao moderated import growth. Also, the lower international oil and 
food prices contained the increase in the import bill. 
The deficit on the current account was financed primarily by external financing to the private 
sector, as reflected by a worsening of the direct investment, portfolio investment, and loans 
and  credit  balances.  As  the  inflow  of  capital  during  2013  exceeded  the  current  account 
deficit, the balance of payments of the monetary union recorded a surplus as reflected by an 
increase of approximately NAf.77 million in the gross official reserves. 
We  should  not  consider  the  improved  situation  on  the  balance  of  payments  in  2013  as  a 
reason to lessen our efforts to address the imbalances on the current account. After all, the 
current  account  deficit  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  is  still  too  high.  In  this  context,  we  must 
realize  that  the  deployment  of  monetary  tools  can  bring  only  a  short-term  solution  to  a 
structural  problem. The situation  on the  balance  of  payments  can  be  structurally  improved 
only if both Curaçao and Sint Maarten take the necessary actions. 
An analysis of the developments on the current account of the balance of payments over the 
period  2007–2012  reveals  that  the  current  account  deficit  was  the  result  of  imbalances  in 
both  Curaçao  and  Sint  Maarten.  However,  the  deficit  in  Sint  Maarten  has  been  declining 
during recent years while the deficit in Curacao has remained well above the benchmark of 
4–5 % of GDP. Even though the center of gravity of the problem seems to be in Curaçao, 
both countries bear responsibility for addressing the situation of the balance of payments in 
the monetary union. 
In  this  regard,  regular  consultations  and  coordination  of  policy  actions  between  the  two 
countries are imperative. However, since 2010, the focus of the discussion has been on the 
political wisdom of a monetary union between Curaçao and Sint Maarten rather than on how 
this current situation should be addressed through coordinated actions. 
The  balance  of  payments  can  be  structurally  improved  if  both  countries  strengthen  their 
competitiveness vis-à-vis their main trading partners. Over the past years, the international 
competitiveness of Curaçao and Sint Maarten, as measured by the real effective exchange 
rate  (REER),  has  deteriorated.  The  REER,  which  assesses  a  country’s  international  price 
competitiveness,  has  been  deteriorating  in  Curaçao  since  2009  and  in  Sint  Maarten  since 
2008. The reduced competitiveness of both countries has contributed to the widening of the 
current account deficit. Gains in competitiveness can be achieved through more wage and 
price flexibility,  increased  labor  productivity,  and  an  improvement  of the  overall  investment 
climate. Therefore, the governments of Curaçao and Sint Maarten should embark on a policy 
path of structural economic reforms to strengthen the balance of payments in a sustainable 
way. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  we  celebrate  the  inauguration  of  this  causeway,  I  would  like  to 
address the reasons why the Bank facilitated the financing of the Simpson Bay Causeway of 
Sint  Maarten  Harbour  Group.  As  I  mentioned  on  several  occasions,  we  live  in  a  period  of 
Unconventional  Monetary  Policy.  In  a  speech  during  the  National  Economic  Forum  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Curaçao  on  October  14,  2013,  I  quoted  Jean-Claude  Trichet1,  the  former  president  of  the 
European  Central  Bank:  “…we  all  have  had,  since  mid-2007,  the  great  privilege  to 
experience  extraordinary  demanding  and  difficult  times…”  He  went  on  to  say:  “The 
widespread  introduction  of  so-called  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  by  major 
central  banks  has  been  a  defining  characteristic  of  the  global  financial  crisis.”  These 
unprecedented  monetary  policy  measures  included  the  intervention  in  specific  market 
segments  to  support  market  functioning  through  actions  such  as  the  introduction  and 
expansion  of  asset  purchase  programs  for  commercial  paper,  corporate  bonds,  and 
government  debt.  The  main  purpose  of  these  measures,  conducted  by,  for  example,  the 
Bank of England, and the Federal Reserves of the United States and the Bank of Japan, was 
to counteract market dysfunction and restore confidence. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  advances  in  understanding  entail  thinking  in  a  somewhat  different 
way. Sometimes even a highly educated and broadly read person can feel resistance when 
new knowledge takes us into areas we did not know were even there-spaces that are hard to 
assimilate into the comfortable world we feel we know. Therefore, I would not be surprised if 
several years hence, when students of monetary economics reading the history of this period 
may be as dumbfounded regarding the resistance to innovation as we are now regarding the 
seventeenth-century resistance to the discovery  that the heart is a meat pump. Let us not 
forget that it took the Catholic church 400 years after Galileo’s arrest to concede what every 
moderately well-educated person knew to be true: earth is not the center of the universe. 
I have spent most of my professional life thinking and practicing monetary policy. The basic 
tenet of my thesis was and is that in a small open economy such as ours, fiscal consolidation 
is an indispensible condition for monetary stability. The debt relief program in the context of 
the constitutional changes was the fulfillment of that expectation. However, suddenly in the 
blink  of  an  eye,  the  market  for  government  bonds  dried  up,  depriving  the  Bank  of  an 
important  policy  instrument,  namely,  the  ability  to  conduct  monetary  policy  through  open 
market operations. At the same time, because of the conditions of the debt relief program, 
more specifically the interest burden rule and the standing subscription, high yield investment 
instruments for our local institutional investors on the local market became very limited. To fill 
that vacuum, we embarked on the development of the corporate bond market. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  development  of  a  well-functioning  corporate  bond  market  in 
Curaçao  and  Sint  Maarten  is  an  important,  albeit  not  sufficient  precondition  for  business 
creation,  investment,  and  economic  growth.  Along  with  equity  financing  and  bank  lending, 
corporate  bonds  are  one  of  the  ways  companies  fund  their  investments,  and  they  are 
considered a stable and reliable source of finance. A well-functioning corporate bond market 
enhances the efficiency of the financial system as companies compete with each other for 
finance, and it expands the financial sector and promotes the use of cost-effective financing 
instruments. However, while the corporate bond market has been gaining new momentum 
elsewhere, the development is being viewed with apprehension here. 
We embarked on this policy to develop a corporate bond market in 2009 when we acquired 
the  so-called  Aqualectra  bonds.  In  2012,  we  participated  in  the  bond  issue  of  the  Sint 
Maarten  Harbour  Company.  The  case  of  Sint  Maarten  is  a  special  one.  Contrary  to  the 
Aqualectra  bond,  the  Sint  Maarten  Harbour  bonds  have  a  much  wider  and  broader 
participation as more market participants acquired the bonds. This increased participation is 
also thanks to the standby arrangement according to which the Central Bank stands ready to 
buy or sell bonds at all times as dictated by the monetary conditions of the union. However, a 
necessary condition for this arrangement to be successful is that our public enterprises have 
                                                
1   Unconventional Monetary Policy Measures: Principles-Conditions-Raison d’être. Speech delivered at the IJCB 
conference “Central Banking: Before, During, and After the Crisis” held on March 23–24, 2012, at the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, DC. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to be well managed and sound. In this regard, I concur with dr. Age Bakker2, chairman of the 
Board of Financial Supervision – CFT – who last November during the Kingdom Conference 
stated that, “The Sint Maarten economy has been performing well during the past decade. 
The  budgetary  challenges  in  Sint  Maarten  are  less  pronounced  than  in  Curacao,  the 
Netherlands, and Aruba. The main reasons are that Sint Maarten has a younger population, 
well capitalized social funds, and sound public enterprises.” That the Sint Maarten Harbour 
Company is well managed, was another important consideration for the Bank to facilitate the 
bond issue of the Sint Maarten Harbour Company. 
Ladies and gentlemen, with a much broader set of policy instruments, we hope that the Bank 
can  continue  to  promote  the  stability  of  the  guilder,  thereby  creating  an  environment 
conducive  to  more  growth  and  prosperity.  As  recent  policy  measures  of  the  Bank 
demonstrated,  we  were  able  to  reduce  the  current  account  deficit  and  turn  the  balance  of 
payments  deficit  into  a  surplus.  However,  for  these  results  to  be  sustainable,  we  have  to 
strengthen  our  export-generating  capacity  by  making  Sint  Maarten  a  welcome  place  to 
invest.  That  means  that  we  have  to  bring  our  immigration,  tax,  investment,  and  labor  and 
product market policies in line with our objective to make Sint Maarten the preeminent place 
to do business. 
We also must realize that as long as a monetary union exists, efforts that benefit growth in 
one  of  the  countries  of  the  union  benefit  the  union  as  a  whole.  I  am  convinced  that  the 
positive spin-off of the Simpson Bay Causeway for the economy of Sint Maarten and thereby 
also  the  monetary  union  of  Curaçao  and  Sint  Maarten  will  prove  that  the  actions  of  the 
central bank were right. 
Looking ahead, for the further development of the corporate bond market, it is imperative that 
the  government  continues  to  ensure  the  sound  management  of  public  enterprises  by 
strengthening  corporate  governance,  including  transparency  and  accountability.  After  all, 
sound and well-managed enterprises imply a lower risk premium and, consequently, a lower 
interest rate. This condition will lead to more investment and higher economic growth. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  times  have  changed  and  so  has  our  monetary  policy.  Since  2010, 
Curaçao and Sint Maarten have comprised a monetary union and this union is facing some 
challenges with the balance of payments. To effectively deal with those challenges, we need 
to  take  coordinated  actions.  Recent  policy  actions  in  the  union,  both  in  the  monetary  and 
fiscal fields, indicate that concerted action to address our economic challenges is possible. 
However,  we  should  remain  always  cognizant  that  these  measures  are  taken  ultimately  to 
improve  the  welfare  of  the  citizens.  Therefore,  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  these 
policy measures, due regard should be given to their social costs. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
2   Gezonde  overheidsfinanciën.  Een  solide  basis  voor  duurzame  groei  in  het  Caribisch  Koninkrijk.  Speech 
delivered  at  the  “Congres  Koninkrijk  en  duurzaamheid”  held  on  November  28,  2013,  in  the  Hague,  the 
Netherlands. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
