Glenn Stevens: The economic outlook 
Speech by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 17th Annual 
Credit Suisse Asian Investment Conference, Hong Kong, 26 March 2014. 
 I thank Alexandra Rush for assistance in compiling these remarks. 
When I last spoke at this conference two years ago, the United States had just avoided a 
feared  “double-dip”  recession.  Europe  was  in  the  news,  with  acute  concerns  over  the 
feedback loop between weak economies, bank asset quality and sovereign finances. China’s 
growth had moderated, and many feared it would decline sharply. 
Since then, the world economy has continued its expansion. Growth in global GDP was a bit 
below  trend  in  2013,  with  reasonable  prospects  of  some  pick  up  this  year.  None  of  the 
downside scenarios that have exercised minds over the past couple of years have, as yet, 
come to pass. That doesn’t mean they won’t, only that the world economy has been climbing 
the “wall of worry” for a few years now. 
Overall,  in  2014  economic  global  growth  is  thought  likely  by  major  forecasters  to  be  a  bit 
higher  than  in  2013,  and  at  about  average  pace.  More  of  the  growth  is  coming  from  the 
advanced countries, and proportionately not quite so much from the emerging ones. That is 
probably  a  welcome  re-balancing  in  some  respects,  after  the  weakness  of  the  advanced 
countries in recent years. 
The United States continues its recovery led by private demand and over the second half of 
last  year  the  economy  expanded  at  an  annualised  rate  of  just  over  3  per  cent.  With  the 
current  agreement  over  the  US  Federal  budget,  one  headwind  from  last  year  will  abate 
somewhat. Of course there have been effects of the recent severe weather and it will still be 
a little while yet before US policymakers get a clear reading on the pace of expansion. But 
there is no obvious reason to expect that the expansion will be de-railed. 
The  euro  area  has  resumed  growth,  albeit  in  a  somewhat  hesitant  fashion  and  with 
noticeable  differences  in  performance  by  country.  Some  quite  pronounced  adjustments  to 
cost  structures  are  occurring  in  some  of  the  so-called  “peripheral”  countries,  as  needed 
under  the  single  currency  area  arrangement.  In  Japan,  the  initial  results  of  the  policy 
measures over the past 18 months have been quite positive, though of course the proposed 
“third arrow” reforms are yet to be fully delivered. 
The  much  anticipated  “tapering”  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve’s  monthly  asset  purchases 
commenced in December. The initial expectation of tapering in the middle of 2013 caused 
more market ructions than the event itself. That said, as often occurs when the Fed changes 
course, investors have taken the opportunity over this period to re-assess their positions and 
their appetite for risk. 
So  far,  investors  have  not  fled  from  risk  indiscriminately.  They  have  drawn  distinctions 
between alternative classes of investment and the differing outlook across countries. Long-
term sovereign yields for the core advanced countries remain low and, with compressed risk 
spreads, borrowing costs for many private-sector borrowers also remain low. 
A few emerging economies have lately come under pressure, with bond yields spiking and 
exchange  rates  depreciating.  In  most  of  these  instances,  country-specific  issues  can  be 
identified as sources of legitimate concern for investors. It is notable that the number of such 
countries under pressure is smaller than in the middle of last year, because some have made 
credibility-enhancing policy adjustments in the intervening period. 
So far, so good, then for tapering. In my opinion, we should welcome it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
There  is  a  tendency,  though,  to  talk  about  “normalisation”  of  monetary  policy  in  major 
advanced countries as though it is happening in all of them. It isn’t: it is really only happening 
in the United States. Even there it is at a very early stage but the United States is actually on 
a path that neither the euro area nor Japan is even contemplating yet. In those jurisdictions, 
so far as I can tell, the discussion is about whether further easing may be in order. In fact 
were the Bank of Japan (BoJ) to step up its current program of quantitative and qualitative 
easing, it would soon be adding more cash to the global financial system, in absolute terms, 
than the Federal Reserve. 
Intriguingly,  the  BoJ’s  actions  attract  rather  less  attention  than  the  Fed’s.  I  am  not  in  a 
position to opine about whether or not such further easing might occur, but the point is simply 
that  the  monetary  policy  trajectories  of  the  major  currency  areas  could  diverge,  and 
increasingly  so,  over  the  next  couple  of  years.  One  interesting  question  is  how  fully  this 
possibility is reflected in major exchange rates. 
Turning to the Asian region, China’s economy grew close to, and in fact a little faster than, 
the government’s target last year. Strong and about equal contributions to growth were made 
by household consumption and investment. Consumer price inflation continues to be stable. 
Recent  indicators  have  shown  possible  signs  of  slower  growth  in  the  early  part  of  2014: 
growth of industrial production slowed; retail sales and passenger vehicle sales moderated; 
and fixed asset investment growth was a little lower in January and February, though quite 
stable in year-ended terms. Given that the growth target was more than met last year, and 
given that the Chinese New Year holiday period makes it more difficult to assess trends in 
the data, it may be a little too early to draw strong conclusions. Spot prices for steel and iron 
ore have fallen lately though, on movements to date, seem within the range seen in recent 
years. 
In fact, people may be too inclined to fret over what are still relatively small movements in 
monthly PMIs, and the like, in China. Sometimes they fret even more than they do over small 
bumps in the US economic data. The greater concern is the risks involved with the build-up 
of credit in so-called “shadow banking” over the past five or so years. 
To a considerable extent this growth in financial activity surely reflects the natural tendency 
to avoid the effects of price and quantity constraints imposed on the core banking sector, in 
an environment of strong demand for credit. 
In  certain  respects,  it  arguably  provides  genuine  services  to  the  economy.  The  potential 
problems, on the other hand, are all too familiar and well understood, at least in a qualitative 
sense.  They  include  excessive  maturity  mismatches,  where  long-term  loans  are  funded 
essentially  by  short-term  borrowings;  less-than-ideal  transparency  about  asset  quality; 
distorted incentives for provincial government entities; assumptions on the part of investors in 
wealth management products about major bank or government support – and so on. 
Recent credit events in China have increased focus on the possibility of failure of entities with 
non-viable  business  models.  There  has  been  a  widening  of  risk  spreads  for  lower  quality 
credits.  To  some  extent  this  could  be  seen  as  a  positive  development,  as  a  clear-eyed 
assessment  and  pricing  of  underlying  economic  risks  is  critical  for  sound  longer-run 
development in China no less than in any other nation. But of course we cannot know how 
much further this re-assessment of risk may have to run, nor how disruptive it could turn out 
to be for the Chinese financial system and the economy. 
It is clear that the Chinese authorities are across the issue, and in all likelihood they have the 
ability  and  resources  to  manage  the  situation.  Some  reforms  have  already  been 
implemented, which will help to manage such risks in future, while steps taken to moderate 
the flows of total social financing seem, so far, to have had some success. 
In the meantime, a broader set of other recent reforms represent further incremental steps 
towards  greater  financial  market  liberalisation:  the  removal  of  restrictions  on  most  lending 
rates and some liabilities, with those on deposit rates expected to follow; the recent widening 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of the renminbi’s trading band, as part of the central bank’s commitment to let markets play a 
greater  role  in  the  economy;  and  the  introduction  of  the  Shanghai  Free  Trade  Zone  with 
some  associated  easing  of  capital  account  restrictions. These  are  all  welcome  moves  and 
are in China’s long-run interests. 
Around  the  Asian  region  generally,  at  this  stage,  our  sense  is  that  economic  growth  is 
continuing at about its trend pace. All countries will be watching closely both developments in 
China and the impacts on capital flows and risk-pricing as the Fed tapers and other major 
central banks implement their own chosen policies. 
Turning to the Australian economy, I continue to find a fascinating divergence between the 
views of foreign observers, especially in Asia, many of whom say to me “Australia is doing 
very well” and the tone of the commentary at home, which is typically a lot more pessimistic. 
My reading of the actual data is that they suggest that the economy has been doing a bit 
better than much of our domestic commentary over the past couple of years would have you 
believe, but not quite as well as many foreign investors seem to have thought. 
Australia certainly weathered the financial crisis well, and with a real GDP some 13 per cent 
larger  than  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  2009,  compares  well  with  many  other  advanced 
countries. It is the case, though, that growth while positive, has been running at a pace a bit 
below its trend pace for about 18 months now. The rate of unemployment has increased by 
something like a percentage point over the same period. 
Most  people  are  familiar  with  the  fact  that  there  have  been  very  strong  conditions  in  the 
natural  resources  sector.  The  biggest  positive  terms  of  trade  shock  in  at  least  a  century 
drove a mining investment boom of truly epic proportions, and that added a major impetus to 
demand in the economy. But the terms of trade peaked about two and a half years ago; the 
capital spending by the  resources sector has also now peaked and is expected to decline 
significantly over the next couple of years. 
In  the  rest  of  the  economy,  households  have  spent  most  of  the  past  five  years  behaving 
more conservatively, or rather more normally, than they did over a long period up to the mid 
2000s  when  they  had  been  in  a  very  expansive  mood.  Both  consumption  and  residential 
construction have been soft for a while. I have spoken at length about these trends before 
and  explained  why  they  were  to  be  expected.  Nonetheless,  many  businesses  exposed  to 
those  sectors,  including  retailers,  builders  and  banks,  have  found  the  going  harder.  In 
addition,  because  the  mining  boom  was  associated  with  a  very  high  exchange  rate,  other 
trade exposed sectors have also faced more challenging conditions. 
Looking  ahead,  as  the  resources  sector’s  capital  spending  continues  to  fall,  it  will  be 
desirable  to  see  some  other  sources  of  growth  strengthen.  One  is  export  volumes  for 
resources, which are already growing strongly, as the additional capacity put in place over 
recent years becomes utilised. For example, iron ore shipments have risen by about 85 per 
cent from their levels of five years ago, to around 1.5 million tonnes per day. Exports will rise 
further over the coming year or two, as additional resource projects are completed and, at 
the margin, some other areas face slightly less of a headwind from the exchange rate. 
It is unlikely, though, that a pick-up in resources exports, as important as that will be, will be 
enough to keep overall growth on the right track. It will be helpful if some of the other areas 
of  domestic  demand  that  have  been  subdued  start  to  grow  faster.  For  that  to  occur, 
households would need to have made progress on their desire to sustain higher saving, and 
to consolidate debt where needed. Businesses outside of mining would need to have made 
some progress in containing costs, and raising efficiency. They would also need a bit more 
confidence about the future than they did before, as a pre-condition to making plans to lift 
their investment and add to their workforces. 
There  are  some  promising  signs  in  this  regard.  Recent  data  shows  stronger  household 
consumption  over  the  summer.  The  latest  surveys  and  our  own  liaison  confirm  this,  and 
suggest that retailers are more optimistic than they were a year ago. That said, we expect 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
consumption  spending to grow  in  line  with  income  or  perhaps  a  little faster,  but  not  at the 
pace seen in the years prior to the financial crisis. 
We certainly see abundant signs of confidence in the housing market. Dwelling prices have 
seen a broad-based rise of 10 per cent in the past year and are now about 5 per cent above 
the previous peak in 2010. Initially this was not associated with very much at all in the way of 
faster housing credit growth. That has now picked up a little, though it remains far below the 
rates seen in the 1990s and 2000s. The pick-up is most noticeable for investors, who need to 
take care with the amount of leverage they take on. 
It is clear that dwelling construction activity will rise strongly over the period ahead. Over the 
past three months, approvals to build private dwellings were at the highest rate for at least 
three  decades.  This  increase  is  welcome,  certainly  at  an  aggregate  level,  since  on  most 
estimates  Australia’s  additions  to  the  dwelling  stock  have  been  running  at  a  rate  below 
population growth over recent years. 
Measures  of  business  confidence  have  improved  over  the  past  six  months.  Businesses 
seem, so far, to be taking a cautious approach to investment, however: they are waiting for 
stronger,  more  persistent  signals  of  improved  conditions  before  committing  to  significant 
increases in capital expenditure. That’s actually pretty normal in a cyclical upswing. In their 
hiring decisions there are some early promising signs of improvement, though it is too soon 
to see much in the way of concrete evidence of stronger gains in employment yet. 
So  there  is  encouraging  early  evidence  that  the  so-called  “handover”  from  mining-led 
demand growth to broader private demand growth is beginning. Putting all this together, we 
think economic growth will continue, and may strengthen a little later this year and pick up 
further during 2015. 
It is important to stress that this outlook is, obviously, a balance between the large negative 
force of declining mining investment and, working the other way, the likely pick up in some 
other areas of demand helped by very low interest rates, improved confidence and so on, as 
well  as  higher  resource  shipments.  The  lower  exchange  rate  since  last  April  and  the 
improved economic conditions overseas also help. 
Because we are trying to assess the balance between very different forces, however, there is 
inevitably  a  very  substantial  range  of  uncertainty  surrounding  this  central  outlook.  That  is 
simply  unavoidable.  The  fact  is  that  no  one  can  say  with  certainty  just  how  smooth  a 
“handover” will occur. Nor can anyone pretend to be able to fine-tune it. 
On inflation, our view is that it will be a little higher than we thought three months ago. This 
takes account of the most recent data, which was higher than expected, and allows that the 
result conveyed at least some genuine information. Nonetheless, we think it unlikely that this 
signifies persistent and serious inflation pressures. Unemployment has been rising, and will 
probably  rise  a  bit  further  yet;  growth  in  labour  costs  have  slowed  noticeably  in  response. 
Indeed,  growth  of  the  wage  price  index  is  around  the  lowest  in  the  15-year  history  of  the 
measure.  Measures  of  unit  labour  cost  growth  are  correspondingly  quite  low.  So,  absent 
continually  rising  profit  margins  on  the  part  of  businesses,  we  don’t  see  the  conditions  for 
persistently higher consumer price inflation, even though tradable goods prices are expected 
to  rise  due  to  the  lower  exchange  rate.  Measures  of  inflation  expectations  remain  well-
anchored  and  are  around  or  below  their  long-run  averages.  Our  view  remains  that  the 
outlook for inflation, while a little higher than before, is still consistent with our medium-term 
target. 
Trends  in  asset  prices  are  an  area  to  watch.  In  particular,  we  need  to  be  alert  to  the 
possibility that the past year of strong rises in dwelling prices leads people to assume that 
this  is  the  norm.  Were  such  an  assumption  to  lead  to  increasing  speculative  activity, 
accompanied by a renewed increase in household leverage with all the associated risks to 
the housing market and the economy more generally, that would be unwelcome. This is a 
theme  discussed  in  some  detail  in  our  latest  Financial  Stability  Review,  released  earlier 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
today. We are watching this closely, and we remind people that house prices can go down as 
well as up. In fact there have been two episodes where prices fell for a year during the past 
decade. The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority will also be emphasising with lenders 
and  their  boards,  as  it  has  been  for  some  time  now,  the  need  to  maintain  high  lending 
standards. 
There  is,  of  course,  the  full  panoply  of  other  “risks”  that  can  be  identified.  As  always,  the 
exchange rate is a source of significant uncertainty. Much of Australia’s outlook also depends 
on developments overseas. Further progress towards the full treatment of banking problems 
and the return to sustainable fiscal budgets in Europe will be important. With greater certainty 
in the United States over their fiscal policies and the path of monetary policy, the risks there 
may  now  be  more  on  the  upside.  On  the  other  hand,  if  some  event  –  like  a  geo-political 
shock – led to a wider retreat from risk taking, this could have a significant dampening impact 
on the global economy. China’s outlook is important for Australia as, for that matter, it is for 
other countries. China is now the largest or second largest trade partner to most significant 
economies.  Not  only  the  way  China  manages  the  current  financial  issues,  but  its 
implementation of structural reforms, so as to maintain robust economic growth in the long 
run, will have an impact on all of us. 
Our  monetary  policy  settings  have  been  unchanged  since  last  August,  at  what  by  any 
standard  is  a  very  accommodative  level.  This  is  playing  its  part  in  supporting  sustainable 
growth in demand, consistent with the inflation target. We have signalled that if the economy 
evolves in line with the present set of forecasts, a period of stability in interest rates could be 
expected. 
Having  said  that,  let  me  return  to  a  more  global  perspective,  to  make  the  point  that 
sustainable growth over the long run has to rely on more than just monetary policy. Strong 
long-run growth won’t be achieved in any country simply by manipulating interest rates (or, 
for that matter, exchange rates). Monetary policy’s main contribution over the long run is to 
provide a stable monetary standard. That is a necessary condition for strong growth but it is 
not  a  sufficient  one.  Nor  will  fiscal  expansion  serve  as  more  than  a  temporary  boost  to 
growth. Indeed the limits to fiscal activism are surely all too clear in many countries now. 
Other  conditions  need to  be  right for growth. These  include  ensuring the  environments for 
competition,  innovation  and  investment,  including  in  human  capital,  are  sound.  In  those 
areas, various other government policies must come to the fore. 
That  is  the  spirit  in  which  the  countries  of  the  G20  recently  committed  to  coming  up  with 
measures  that  could  raise  the  level  of  world  GDP  by  2  per  cent  above  what  it  would 
otherwise have been, over a horizon of five years. This isn’t to be achieved by a program of 
cheap  money  or  debt-financed  spending.  Many  of  the  needed  measures  are  likely  to  be 
politically demanding for governments to introduce. But if signing up to the challenge helps to 
galvanise  efforts  for  the  sorts  of  reforms  that  need  to  be  made,  then  it  will  have  been  a 
worthwhile initiative. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
