  Raghuram Rajan: Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Committee 
Report (FSLRC) – what to do and when? 
Talk by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the First State Bank 
“Banking and Economic Conclave”, Mumbai, 17 June 2014. 
 The  Financial  Sector  Legislative  Reforms  Committee  (FSLRC)  Report  is  one  of  the  most 
important, well researched, as well as well-publicized reports in Indian financial history. It not 
only lays out the functions of the financial sector and how it should be structured, but also 
how legislation and regulation governing it ought to look like. The authors of this report truly 
have to be commended for their national service. The report’s influence will be felt for many 
years to come. 
There  is  much  to  like  and  agree  with  in  the  report.  In  laying  out  the  need  for  consumer 
protection,  raising  the  issue  of  whether  products  sold  are  suitable  for  the  target  customer, 
and putting the onus on the financial institution to determine suitability, the report has forced 
regulators  to  review  their  consumer  protection  frameworks.  We  at  the  RBI  are  indeed 
engaged in such an exercise, informed by the valuable guidelines in the FSLRC report. 
There  is  more  of  great  value.  The  FSLRC’s  emphasis  on  the  need  for  a  clear  monetary 
framework culminated in the Dr. Urjit Patel Committee report, which will guide our thinking in 
the  years  to  come.  Similarly,  its  focus  on  creating  new  institutions  like  the  Financial 
Resolution Authority, which will help us resolve distressed financial institutions at minimum 
cost to the economy, is much needed. 
I could go on. But I come here not to praise the FSLRC Report, but to debate some of it. I will 
argue  that  there  are  two  fundamental  areas  of  tension.  One  is  the  oversight  of  regulators. 
The FSLRC suggests laws that do not micromanage, giving regulators the freedom to fill in 
the details in consonance with the changing needs of the economy. At the same time, the 
FSLRC wants to check and balance the activities of regulators through judicial oversight. Too 
much  of  checks  and  balances  could  completely  vitiate  the  flexibility  afforded  by  rewriting 
laws.  We  need  to  find  a  proper  balance,  and  the  balance  may  vary  with  our  level  of 
development. I worry we have not thought through this fully. 
The second area of tension is the appropriate size and scope of regulators. The FSLRC’s 
recommendations  seem  somewhat  schizophrenic  here.  On  the  one  hand,  it  emphasizes 
synergies in bringing together some regulators into one entity. But in the process it suggests 
breaking up other regulators, with attendant loss of synergies. There is no discussion of the 
empirical  magnitude  of 
the 
recommendations  seem  faddish  and  impressionistic  rather  than  based  on  deep  analysis. 
Indeed,  across  the  world,  we  see  a  variety  of  organizational  structures  in  existence, 
suggesting that there is no one right structure. If so, there should be strong arguments for 
departing from the status quo, which the FSLRC does not provide. 
Let me elaborate on these two issues. 
the  synergies  gained  or  synergies 
lost,  which  makes 
The logic for regulation 
The  logic  for  regulation  according  to  the  FSLRC  is  to  deal  with  market  failure  or,  more 
colloquially,  bad  behaviour.  The  Commission  talks  about  incomplete  information  or  poor 
incentives as a reason for bad behaviour, but one of the most important reasons for the bad 
behaviour necessitating regulation is what economists call incomplete contracts; that is, the 
behaviour of the regulated entity (vis a vis customers, the public at large, the taxpayer, or the 
market) cannot be completely specified in contracts because it is too difficult to observe or 
verify in real time, or it can only be gauged across many contracts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  This means that while courts can enforce specific contracts, the regulator can sometimes do 
better. For instance, a bank may attract a lot of complaints from its credit card customers. 
While no single customer may think the case worth taking to court, and while no customer 
may be able to prove the bank was in the wrong, the large number of complaints will suggest 
to the regulator that the bank needs to shape up. By comparing the nature of the complaints 
it gets from this bank’s customers with the complaints it gets from other banks, the regulator 
can  gauge  whether  something  is  wrong  with  the  bank  and  act.  Similarly,  if  a  particular 
product attracts a lot more complaints than other products, the regulator can ask the industry 
to modify the product appropriately, or even ban it. 
A  regulator  may  also  have  to  prevent  certain  forms  of  contracting  –  such  as  the  CDO 
squared  and  CDO  cubed  that  emerged  before  the  financial  crisis.  If  the  regulator  thinks  a 
certain kind of security will impose undue risks on the system, it can ban the security, even 
though it would have traded amongst consenting adults. While the regulator has no proof that 
the security will behave as it thinks, the regulator cannot wait till the risks occur, for it may be 
too late. 
The broader point is that a lot of regulatory action stems from the regulator exercising sound 
judgment based on years of experience. In doing so, it fills in the gaps in laws, contracts, and 
even regulations. Not everything the regulator does can be proven in a court of law. Courts 
do not interfere in the specific decisions of a corporate board – using the business judgment 
rule, they do not second guess business decisions, and only pull up boards when there is a 
violation of the legal process of arriving at a decision. In the same way, there are a range of 
regulatory decisions where regulatory judgment should not be second guessed. 
The danger of excessive legal oversight 
Yet  one  reading  of  the  FSLRC  is  that  almost  everything  the  regulator  does,  not  just  the 
framing of regulation or the process by which decisions are reached but also the exercise of 
regulatory judgment as well as policy decisions, is to be subject to legal appeal. For that, it 
wants to create a Financial Sector Appellate Tribunal. The intent is to place more checks and 
balances  on  regulatory  actions.  Note  that  the  process  by  which  the  regulator  reached  a 
decision,  as  well  as  the  conformity  of  the  decision  with  basic  principles  such  as  natural 
justice,  can  already  be  challenged  through  a  writ  petition  in  High  Court.  Even  now,  some 
regulatory  decisions  can  be  appealed  to  the  central  government.  But  how  much  checking 
and balancing is enough? Do  we  want even  policy decisions to be appealable? Can legal 
oversight become excessive? 
There  are  three  dangers  we  have  to  guard  against.  The  first  is  to  ask  tribunals  to  make 
judgments that they simply do not have the capability, experience, or information to make, 
and where precise evidence may be lacking. If we attempt to do this, we will undermine the 
very  purpose  of  a  regulator.  Of  course,  one  could  trust  the  good  sense  of  the  tribunal  to 
follow a “regulatory judgment” rule and not intervene in a broad array of matters, but does 
this  not  imply  a  double  standard  –  we  trust  the  tribunal’s  judgment  but  not  that  of  the 
regulator.  More  likely,  though,  past  experience  suggests  that  entities  like  to  justify  their 
existence, and if set up, a tribunal will intervene more than necessary. 
The  second  danger  is  that  easing  the  appellate  process  will  invite  appeal.  In  a  developed 
country with well-established regulations, a case history of judgments, and speedy delivery of 
justice, this would not be a problem. In India, where the financial system is developing and 
many new regulations have to be framed (more so if we move to a principle based approach 
for legislation), and where the tribunals will have a significant amount of learning to do, the 
encouragement  to  appeal  could  paralyze  the  system  and  create  distortions,  as  needed 
regulations are held up and participants exploit loopholes. 
Finally, in every country, a healthy respect for the regulator serves to keep participants on 
the straight and narrow. In a developing country, where private behaviour is less constrained 
by norms or institutions, this is especially important. But to the extent that private parties with 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  their high priced lawyers can check the regulator, that healthy respect dissipates. So the final 
danger  is  that  the  regulator  could  become  a  paper  tiger,  and  lose  its  power  of  influencing 
good behaviour, even in areas that are not subject to judicial review. 
Am I arguing that no checks and balances are needed? Certainly not! But there are already 
checks  and  balances  in  place,  including  review  by  constitutional  courts  like  high  courts 
through writ petitions. Senior officers of the regulator are appointed, and can be removed, by 
the government. The FSLRC recommends an annual report to parliament, as well as regular 
discussions  with  parliamentarians.  These  are  good  suggestions,  which  would  add  to 
oversight. 
Some could argue that SEBI is already under the Securities Appellate Tribunal, so why not 
bring other regulators under a tribunal? So long as the Tribunal only questions administrative 
decisions such as the size and proportionality of penalties, I do not see a problem. But if it 
goes  beyond,  and  starts  entertaining  questions  about  policy,  the  functioning  of  a  regulator 
like the RBI, which has to constantly make judgments intended to minimize systemic risk, will 
be greatly impaired. Indeed, because of the tendency of any new organization to overreach 
to justify its existence, one should be careful about tying the financial regulator with further 
judicial oversight. Better to revisit these issues a few years from now when both regulation 
and oversight mechanisms are better developed. 
Finally,  we  do  understand  that  if  the  regulator  wants  to  be  trusted,  it  has  to  display  the 
greatest competence and integrity. The RBI, despite the general deterioration in the probity 
of  public  institutions,  has  maintained  a  reputation  for  integrity.  We  cannot  be  complacent 
about  this  and  have  to  work  on  maintaining  a  culture,  as  well  as  service  conditions,  that 
encourage integrity. We also have to work continuously on upgrading our capabilities so we 
match the fast pace of change in the financial sector. 
Regulatory architecture 
Another  area  where  there  are  tensions  in  the  FSLRC’s  reasoning  is  on  regulatory 
architecture.  Let  us  take  the  suggestion  to  merge  all  regulation  of  trading  under  a  new 
Unified  Financial  Agency.  So  the  Forward  Markets  Commission,  as  well  as  the  bond 
regulation activities currently undertaken by the RBI, would move under a new roof, as would 
SEBI. But this assumes that the central synergy is the fact that the instrument is traded. But 
could other synergies exist? And how important are they? 
For  instance,  in  forward  trading  where  a  real  commodity  is  delivered,  regulatory  oversight 
over  the  real  markets  for  the  commodity  where  price  is  discovered,  as  well  as  over 
warehouses  where  the  commodity  is  delivered,  may  be  important  sources  of  regulatory 
synergy. Should the FMC be subsumed under the Unified Financial Agency or would it be 
better off having stronger links to the ministries overseeing the real commodities? I think the 
answer needs more investigation. 
Similarly, is the regulation of bond trading more synergistic with the regulation of other debt 
products such as bank loans and with the operation of monetary policy (which requires bond 
trading) than with other forms of trading? Once again, I am not sure we have a compelling 
answer in the FSLRC report. My personal view is that moving the regulation of bond trading 
at  this  time  would  severely  hamper  the  development  of  the  government  bond  market, 
including the process of making bonds more liquid across the spectrum, a process which the 
RBI is engaged in. 
The  FSLRC  also  seems  to  be  inconsistent  in  its  emphasis  on  synergies  and  regulatory 
uniformity. It proposes all regulation of trading should move under one roof, all regulation of 
consumer protection should move under another roof, but the regulation of credit should be 
balkanized  –  banks  should  continue  to  be  regulated  by  the  RBI  but  the  regulation  of  the 
quasi-bank NBFCs should move to the Unified Financial Agency, a regulatory behemoth that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  would  combine  supervision  of  trading  as  well  as  credit.  This  balkanization  would  hamper 
regulatory uniformity, the supervision of credit growth, and the conduct of monetary policy. 
More  broadly,  the  FSLRC  seems  to  have  a  somewhat  idealistic  view  of  the  benefits  of 
reorganization.  It  seems  to  believe  that  once  activities  are  combined  in  an  organization, 
synergies can be fully exploited while if they exist in separate organizations, synergies will 
not be exploited. I too shared such a view, but I now believe it is too extreme. Silos within a 
large bureaucratic regulator may prevent synergies from being exploited, while frequent inter-
regulatory  meetings  can  allow  regulators  to  capture  many  of  available  synergies  between 
their activities. Indeed, one particularly useful proposal by the FSLRC is to put the Financial 
Sector  Development  Council  on  a  firmer  footing.  It  is  a  good  venue  for  inter-regulatory 
cooperation, and its benefits are further augmented by personal interactions. For instance, 
Chairman SEBI and I try to get together once every month to note and resolve issues. 
At  the  same  time,  while  negotiations  and  cooperation  between  regulators  can  overcome 
organizational barriers, it is not wise to give a regulator a responsibility and leave the tools for 
exercising  that  responsibility  in  other  hands.  The  RBI  has  responsibility  for  managing  the 
internal and external value of the rupee, and more broadly, for macroeconomic stability. As a 
number of multilateral agencies and academics have recognized, the ability to shape capital 
inflows is now a recognized part of the macro-prudential tool kit. But by taking away control 
over internal capital inflows from the RBI, isn’t the FSLRC taking away an important tool from 
the RBI? 
If it ain’t broke… 
Lest  all  this  sound  like  an  unthinking  defence  of  regulatory  turf,  let  me  add  that  there  are 
places  where  the  RBI  could  give  up  powers.  For  instance,  if  the  government  wants  to 
manage its own debt, there is no reason for the RBI to stand in the way. I don’t believe the 
government suffers any less from conflicts of interest in debt management (unlike the views 
of the FSLRC), but the RBI could well carry out the government’s instructions without any 
loss in welfare. I imagine, however, that the government will depend on deputations from the 
RBI for a while for advice. 
Instead, think of my remarks as an attempt to draw out the important and undoubted benefits 
of  the  FSLRC  report,  while  eschewing  grand  schemes  with  dubious  chances  of  success. 
Undoubtedly our laws need reform, but that is no reason to try entirely new approaches to 
legislation,  overlaid  on  entirely  new  regulatory  structures,  complemented  by  entirely  new 
oversight over regulation. Undoubtedly, we have had, and will have, periods when regulators 
have not gotten along with each other. But is that a reason to merge some organizations and 
break up others, perhaps ensuring dysfunctionality along many other dimensions? After all, 
there  is  no  single  regulatory  architecture  that  has  emerged  with  distinction  from  the  crisis. 
Instead,  different  regulatory  architectures  have  succeeded  or 
the 
circumstances of the country and the quality of the regulator. 
Undoubtedly,  we  have  also  had  occasions  when  regulators  have  exceeded  their  remit  or 
been  high-handed.  But  is  that  a  reason  to  subject  their  every  action  to  judicial  second-
guessing? Is there a reason we need more checks and balances, or are we trying to solve a 
problem that does not exist. 
As the Chinese would say, let us recognize the value of crossing the river by feeling each 
stone before we put our weight on it. Let us not take a blind jump hoping that a stone will be 
there to support us when we land. Or in American, if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it! 
failed  based  on 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
