  Mario Draghi: Memorial lecture in honour of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
inaugural event to honour the late Mr Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, London, 9 July 2014. 
 Summary 
The  governance  of  structural reforms  deserves as  much  attention  as  enforcing fiscal  rules 
and should be done at the euro area level, ECB President Mario Draghi said in a speech in 
London on Wednesday. 
Structural  reforms  need  strong  domestic  ownership  since  they  reach  deeply  into  societal 
arrangements. But at the same time, the example of the International Monetary Fund shows 
that there is a convincing case to be made for a supranational body that makes it easier to 
frame  national  debates  on  reform.  This  can  shift  the  debate  from  whether  to  how  to 
implement reforms, Mr Draghi argues. 
The outcome of structural reforms – a higher level of productivity and competitiveness – is 
not merely in a country’s own interest, but in the interest of the monetary union as a whole. 
In the euro area, there is therefore a case for establishing rules on structural reform at the 
EU-level. While a lack of reform can threaten cohesion of the union, the recovery shows us 
how decisive reform can strengthen it. 
*** 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  belief  that  there  are  interests  of  the  people  that  cannot  be  safeguarded  by  purely 
national authorities, and that require the establishment of supra-national institutions, was a 
constant motivation through the life and work of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa. 
It  is  also  this  belief  that  motivated  the  involvement  of  Tommaso  in  your  work  to  develop 
global accounting standards. More than 100 countries speak the same accounting language 
today, whereas a decade ago, no major economy used the International Financial Reporting 
Standards  (IFRS).  I  trust  that  the  momentum  will  be  kept,  and  in  particular  that  European 
policy-makers will progress swiftly in the adoption of IFRS 9. 
their  most 
But  where  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa’s  deep-rooted  convictions 
pronounced expression was in his constant support for European integration and his seminal 
contribution to the creation of the euro. 
At the end of a recent press conference, I said that the crisis would not have been as severe 
if  we  had  had  more,  not  less,  integration  in  Europe;  and  that  our  future  lies  with  more 
integration,  not  the  renationalisation  of  our  economies.  I  suspect  Tommaso  would  have 
agreed. 
found 
Sovereignty as a positive concept 
Sovereignty  in  the  European  Union  is  not  only  a  normative  concept  linked  to  the  rights  of 
states.  It  is  also  a  positive  concept.  A  sovereign  that  cannot  effectively  deliver  the 
expectations  of  its  citizens  is  only  sovereign  in  name.  Genuine  sovereignty  exists  only  if 
policy-making is effective. 
This  notion  of  the  efficacy  of  public  powers  is  reflected  in  the  principle  of  subsidiarity 
embedded  in  the  EU  Treaties  –  or  what  is  known  as  the  federalist  principle  in  the  United 
States – the logic of which was elegantly captured by John Locke in the 1680s: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  from 
improvements 
least  as  much 
technological  developments  and 
“For  all  power  given  with  trust  for  attaining  an  end,  (…)  whenever  that  end  is  manifestly 
neglected (…) that power must devolve in the hands of those that gave it, who may place it 
anew where they shall think best for their safety and security”. 
European integration has, in effect, been a process of progressively applying this principle: 
governments have pooled sovereignty every time it has proved necessary so that they could 
continue to deliver on their duties towards their people. 
At the start of the process, the objective was to prevent continental war. Two world wars had 
demonstrated  the  inability  of  European  governments,  acting  alone,  to  provide  physical 
security for their citizens. Thus, they established common institutions, such as the Coal and 
Steel Authority, that could guarantee peace more effectively. 
In  parallel,  and  quite  independent  of  policy  actions,  economic  integration  has  also 
progressed,  in  a  more gradual  but  also  more  continuous  process.  Such integration  results 
indeed  at 
in 
transportation  and  communication  as  it  does  from  policy  choices.  It  is,  in  large  parts, 
inescapable.  But  because  it  creates  far-reaching  interdependencies,  it  has  required 
governments to respond. They have had to proactively choose to pool sovereignty to regain 
control of their economies. 
With the establishment of the Single Market, in particular, the pace and reach of integration 
accelerated markedly. This was of course its purpose – and it remains the most significant 
and successful achievement of the European Union. But a free market does not only assume 
the freedom to take part. It also assumes the means to protect that freedom, by which I refer 
to  the  protection  of  property  rights,  the  enforcement  of  contracts,  the  conditions  of  fair 
competition  and  the  avoidance  of  moral  hazard.  Economic  integration  therefore  required 
integration of some economic policies. 
The euro itself emerged in fact as a corollary of the Single Market. It was conceived, as early 
as the late 1950s, as a response to the costs associated with exchange rate frictions within a 
single market, which at the beginning was only for agricultural products. 
Already  in 1944, in an influential study commissioned by the League of Nations, the great 
economist  Ragnar  Nurkse  had  warned  convincingly  of  the  economic  losses  resulting  from 
currency volatility. Tommaso himself later argued in his “inconsistent quartet” that free trade, 
free  capital  movement,  fixed  exchange  rates  and  independent  monetary  policies  were 
ultimately incompatible. 
And the euro itself has had consequences. Some of these were identified early, in particular 
with  respect  to  fiscal  governance.  Some  were  fully  acknowledged  only  later,  such  as  the 
pervasive effects of macroeconomic imbalances. 
But  in  both  cases,  the  crisis  showed  that  the  cohesion  of  the  Union  in  fact  relied  on  the 
behaviour  of  each  of  its  members. This  is  why  I  believe  that the  case for  community-level 
governance does not apply only to fiscal policy, or to the banking union, but also to structural 
reforms, as I will endeavour to explain. 
Fiscal policies within a monetary union 
The case for fiscal governance at the community level is well understood, and stems from 
the negative externalities that unsound public finances in a Member State can generate for 
its  neighbours.  The  crisis  not  only  validated  this  concern;  it  reinforced  it,  by  showing  that 
externalities could be even more pervasive than initially thought. 
The fiscal soundness of a government is obviously first and foremost in the interest of its own 
country. Countries with excessively stretched public finances can lose the ability to use fiscal 
policy  as  a  counter-cyclical  stabilisation  tool.  Indeed,  this  ability  relies  on  the  government 
being able to access markets under favourable conditions at the time when it needs to, at the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  trough of the cycle. As we have seen during the crisis, this cannot be taken for granted when 
doubts arise about the sustainability of the debt. 
This would be problematic anywhere but it is more so in a monetary union, as the common 
monetary policy can only aim at price stability for the euro area as a whole. It cannot cater 
specifically  for  asymmetric  shocks.  In  the  absence  of  a  federal  budget,  like  we  see  in  the 
United States, the soundness of government credit everywhere is of paramount importance 
to counteract regional slumps. 
If some governments retain the ability to stabilise their economies but others do not, then it 
becomes more plausible that economic divergence will occur. This is one channel through 
which the cohesion of the Union can be affected. This ability depends on keeping debt low 
and  budget  deficits  close  to  zero  when  output  grows  at  potential,  not  on  having  more 
flexibility in the existing rules. 
Keeping one’s own house in order also has a further benefit: it helps mitigate the effects of 
contagion. As we have seen during the crisis, those governments that had more robust fiscal 
positions were much less affected by contagion – at the extreme they even benefited from 
safe-haven status. 
This  protection,  however,  is  not  absolute,  because  it  relies  on  the  ability  of  markets  to 
discriminate between sound and unsound debtors. Yet bubbles and panic happen. A bubble 
is a situation where markets ignore fundamentals, even if debtors are unsound. For too long, 
markets failed to raise funding costs for countries with unsustainable policies. And a panic is 
a situation where markets also ignore fundamentals, but this time to the detriment of sound 
debtors. 
In  fact,  the  main  channel  of  contagion  within  a  monetary  union  is  not  direct  exposures 
between one country and another. It is the fact that if a precedent set in one country is seen 
to  be  replicable  elsewhere,  it  can  affect  the  conditions  of  market  access  for  all.  Put 
differently, the main channel of financial contagion is not the asset side of balance sheets, 
but the liability side. 
We perhaps saw this effect most clearly with the fragmentation of the banking sector three 
years ago. Fears that one country could leave the euro resulted not just in that country being 
cut off financially, but in fragmentation everywhere. 
This fragmentation created considerable damage. The renationalisation of finance hindered 
the  homogenous  transmission  of  monetary  policy  across  borders.  And  it  resulted  in  a 
divergence  of  financial  conditions  across  the  euro  area.  This  initiated  an  economic 
divergence process, which, in turn, could have challenged the sustainability of the euro area. 
The ECB therefore had to act and we did – through the creation of the Outright Monetary 
Transactions (OMT) programme – to nip in the bud unwarranted fears of a euro area break-
up, and prevent an adverse equilibrium from becoming entrenched through prophecies that 
were  as  much  false  as  they  were  self-fulfilling.  It  was  necessary  to  protect  the  monetary 
transmission process. And it was necessary to protect price stability, which is essential for 
the cohesion of the Union. 
The threats to price stability today do not come from unfounded fears of a break-up of the 
euro,  but  from  the  consequences  of  changes  in  other  factors,  such  as  energy  and  food 
prices,  relative  price  adjustment  in  stressed  countries,  exchange  rate  behaviour,  weak 
demand and high unemployment. Nonetheless, those threats are real and to cope with them 
the Governing Council is determined to keep the monetary policy stance accommodative for 
an extended period of time. 
Moreover, 
to  also  using 
unconventional  instruments  within  its  mandate,  should  it  become  necessary  to  further 
address  risks  of  too  prolonged  a  period  of  low  inflation.  We  are  strongly  determined  to 
safeguard the firm anchoring of inflation expectations over the medium to long term. 
the  Governing  Council 
its  commitment 
is  unanimous 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The lesson I draw from the fragmentation we have experienced is that the cohesion of the 
Union is in the fundamental interest of all of its members. If it is called into question, as we 
have experienced first-hand, the consequences cannot be anticipated with total certainty, but 
they are detrimental to all. 
It  is  therefore  of  considerable  relevance  and  importance  that  Europe  has  already  made 
extensive progress in strengthening its rules, for example through the fiscal compact. What is 
essential  now  is  that  these  rules  are  enforced. To  unwind  the  consolidation  that  has  been 
achieved,  and  in  doing  so  to  divest  the  rules  of  credibility,  would  be  self-defeating  for  all 
countries, for three reasons. 
First,  the  high  level  of  indebtedness  in  almost  all  euro  area  countries  implies  a  higher 
vulnerability  to  market  pressure  and  contagion,  if  the  euro  area  faces  further  economic  or 
financial shocks. The higher the level of debt, the greater the probability of falling into a bad 
equilibrium, where high rates lead to defaults. 
Second, if fiscal rules are applied by national governments to achieve not only stability but 
also sustainable growth, they do not in my view clash with national ownership of the budget. 
Fiscal  rules  should  be  viewed  in  the  national  debate  as  promoting  growth-friendly  fiscal 
consolidation and not simply as a painful accounting exercise. 
Third,  respecting  the  rules  matters  because  it  is  a  prerequisite  for  any  other  form  of 
integration. It is only by demonstrating a willingness to fulfil their commitments that Member 
States can achieve the degree of mutual trust that is a pre-requisite of integration in other 
areas. Indeed, any pooling of sovereignty requires a great amount of mutual confidence, in 
particular  in  the  fiscal  area,  which  is  traditionally  seen  as  a  prerogative  of  national 
parliaments. 
Structural policies within a monetary union 
This  same reasoning  that  I  am  applying  to  the fiscal  framework  can,  to  a  large  extent,  be 
extended  to  other  areas  of  economic  policy.  In  particular, I  think  there  is  a  case for  some 
form  of  common  governance  over  structural  reforms.  This  is  because  the  outcome  of 
structural  reforms  –  a  continuously  high  level  of  productivity  and  competitiveness  –  is  not 
merely in a country’s own interest. It is in the interest of the Union as a whole. 
The  Single  Market  and  the  single  currency  were  conceived  as  a  sort  of “Ricardian”  union, 
meaning  a  union  in  which  each  country,  each  sector  and  each  firm  can  exploit  its 
comparative advantages. I do not think there is any disagreement that the Single Market was 
a success. 
But  it  is  not  enough  for  the  cohesion  of  the  Union  that  the  Single  Market  and  the  single 
currency constitute a positive-sum game, in the sense that their existence raises aggregate 
welfare. The cohesion of the euro area relies on the fact that it is Pareto-improving: it must 
be the case that all the countries are better off inside the Union than they would be outside. 
And it is obviously not enough that this is true only at the moment when they join. It has to be 
true continuously. 
There are many instances around the world of political unions whose cohesion is maintained 
because the weaker regions or states benefit from recurrent fiscal transfers from their peers, 
typically  through  the  operations  of  a  central  budget.  It  is  then  possible  for  those  weaker 
regions  to  maintain  recurrent  external  deficits,  while  the  stronger  regions  post  permanent 
surpluses. This is the case in the United States, for instance, but it is also true within most 
individual countries in Europe. 
In  the  euro  area,  however,  while  there  are  cohesion  funds  for  catching-up  countries,  and 
private  credit flows  can  finance  temporary  imbalances,  permanent fiscal  transfers  between 
Member States are not envisaged. So, in the medium term, each economy has to stand on 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  its own feet. It has to be productive and competitive enough to benefit from the opportunities 
afforded by the Single Market. 
We can do and have done much to reduce imbalances that are generated by factors other 
than  lack  of  competitiveness  and  structural  weaknesses.  External  imbalances  have  been 
decreasing  since  the  announcement  of  OMTs.  Persisting  imbalances,  however,  could 
eventually  undermine  the  economic  and  political  cohesion  of  our  Union.  And,  as  I  have 
already discussed, any threat to the cohesion and sustainability of the Union has pervasive 
effects for all, in the form of contagion, and uncertainty which weighs on investment. 
This is where structural reforms play a crucial role – and perhaps an even more important 
role in the euro area than in other unions. Markets can be opened through EU legislation. But 
it  is  only  through  structural  reforms  that  firms  and  individuals  can  be  enabled  to  take  full 
advantage of that openness. 
Indeed, the intention of the Single Market was to free individuals and firms, within a market 
where no distinction would be made on account of nationality or place of establishment. This 
is  why  competition  policy  is  enforced  at  the  EU  level,  so  that  no  firm  is  protected  by  its 
nationality. 
By the same token, no firm or individual should be penalised by its country of residence. Yet, 
firms  face  very  different  operating  environments  across  the  euro  area,  which  can  prevent 
them from exploiting the advantages of the market. For example, the World Economic Forum 
ranks Finland third in the world in terms of global competitiveness, whereas Greece is ranked 
91st. The World  Bank ranks Ireland  15th  in  the  world  in  terms  of  ease  of  doing  business, 
whereas Malta is ranked 103rd. 
The persistence of such differences creates the risk of permanent imbalances. With this in 
mind, I believe that structural reforms in each country are enough of a common interest to 
justify that they are made subject to discipline at the community level. 
I see two reasons why this approach could be favourable to national governments today. 
The  first  is  that,  over  the  past  few  years,  we  have  seen  both  the  risks  associated  with 
insufficient competitiveness in some Member States and the benefit of structural reforms. We 
have witnessed the accumulation of external imbalances in peripheral economies prior to the 
crisis, and how that left them vulnerable to “sudden stop” dynamics. 
And more recently, we have seen the improvement that has taken place when governments 
implemented reform. The change in current account positions in stressed countries ranges 
from  an  almost  11  percentage  point  correction  of  GDP  in  Spain  to  a  16  percentage  point 
improvement  in  GDP  in  Greece,  only  part  of  which  is  explained  by  lower  imports  in  the 
context of a recession. 
In  fact,  the  return  of  market  confidence  in  the  euro  area  results  mainly  from  the 
acknowledgement  that  individual  governments,  in  particular  in  some  of  the  most  stressed 
countries, have taken significant corrective action and will continue to do so where needed. 
So  while  lack  of  reform  can  threaten  the  cohesion  of  the  Union,  we  can  already  see  how 
decisive reform can strengthen it. 
But we are only at the beginning. The final judgment now rests on our being able to show 
that cohesion also produces growth and jobs. 
The second reason why a stronger role for the Union could be beneficial is that, similar to 
fiscal policies, establishing rules at the level of the Union may in fact help national authorities 
implement reform. 
Structural reforms reach deep enough into societal arrangements and practices that they can 
only succeed if they are made the object of strong domestic ownership. At the same time, 
those  reforms require  substantial  political  capital.  Historical  experience,  for  example  of the 
IMF, makes a convincing case that the discipline imposed by supranational bodies can make 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  it easier to frame the debate on reforms at the national level. In particular, the debate can be 
framed not in terms of whether, but in terms of how reform needs to take place. 
In other words, I am not convinced by the argument that, in terms of structural reforms, there 
is  an  opposition  between  rules  and  ownership.  On  the  contrary,  they  can  be  mutually 
reinforcing. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, there is a strong case for us to apply the same principles to the governance of 
structural  reforms  as  we  do  to  fiscal  governance.  The  essential  cohesion  of  the  Union 
depends on it. 
With the benefit of hindsight, it would have been useful to establish, alongside the existing 
convergence criteria, a set of structural criteria that had to be met to enter the euro area, and 
then  respected  once  inside.  But  we  have  to  start  from  where  we  are.  Thus,  I  would  see 
merits  in  initiating,  as  a  one-off,  a  new  convergence  process  within  the  euro  area  –  one 
which ensures that all countries are truly in a position to benefit from membership, and that 
none cause harm to another. 
Today, national governments are not able to fully exercise their sovereignty alone, whether 
sovereignty is defined normatively, à la Jean Bodin, in terms of inalienable rights, such as to 
declare war and treat the conditions of the peace, to judge in last resort, to raise taxes and to 
mint money; or whether it is defined positively, à la John Locke, in terms of a fiduciary power 
to act for certain ends. 
Individually, national governments are simply not powerful enough. To serve their purpose, 
they have to learn to govern together; they have to learn to be sovereign together so as to 
respond to their citizens’ needs. Those needs today are growth and job creation. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
