  Seppo Honkapohja: International spillovers from unconventional 
monetary policy easing and exit – what do we know? 
Remarks  by  Mr  Seppo  Honkapohja,  Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  in  the 
panel session “Unconventional Monetary Policy and Its Reversal: Policy Options for Growth 
and Stability”, Asian Economic Panel, Helsinki, 9 June 2014.  
 Introduction: the global financial crisis and the crisis in Europe 
The start of the global financial crisis can be dated in different ways. One plausible date is 
almost  seven  years  ago  in  August  9  in  2007  when  significant  turmoil  in  financial  markets 
appeared. This unrest continued and in September 2008 a financial panic brought financial 
markets  to  a  halt  and  the  resulting  economic  downturn  in  2008–2009  which  for  a  while 
resembled the pace of developments in the Great Depression.1 In Europe, a further stage of 
the crisis appeared in 2010 when a sovereign debt crisis hit some euro area countries. Some 
of the roots in the Euro crisis were due to specific features of construction of the European 
Monetary Union, but the crisis was also triggered by the second-wave shocks from the global 
financial crisis. 
The first-round effect of the 2007–2008 panic was a vast deterioration of balance sheets of 
banks and other financial institutions. Growing uncertainty about asset and collateral quality 
squeezed credit and dried up liquidity. The downward spiral of the financial system, unseen 
in developed countries for eight decades, called for prompt and extraordinary policy actions. 
Monetary policy responses 
Management of short-term interest rates became the key policy tool and the stabilization of 
inflation the central policy objective during the Great Moderation period. This standard policy 
framework turned out insufficient to contain the panic. The Federal Funds Rate in the United 
States hit the zero lower bound in December 2008 and has remained at this level ever since. 
The  European  Central  Bank  also  started  a  series  of  reductions  of  its  Main  Refinancing 
Operations (MRO) rate. 
With  little  or  no  room  for  further  interest  rate  reductions,  the  central  banks  in  developed 
countries  turned  their  attention  to  highly  unconventional  measures,  previously  regarded  as 
inconsistent  with  the  inflation  targeting  paradigm.  The  objective  of  these  measures  was  to 
maintain financial  liquidity  and  stability.  However,  the  move  towards  longer-term  maturities 
was also designed to flatten the yield curve and stimulate real investment. In November 2008 
the Federal Reserve started the first round of quantitative easing and began to buy a wide 
class of assets, including mortgage-backed securities, long-term government debt and bank 
debt. By mid-2010 the stock of these assets at the FED reached 2.1 trillion dollars. In the 
second  round,  it  bought  another  600  bln  USD.  Similar  non-standard  measures  have  been 
taken by the Bank of England and Bank of Japan. 
The  unconventional  measures  of  the  ECB  in  response  to  the  crisis  have  been  somewhat 
different. ECB’s tools focused on supporting liquidity and funding for the banking system. The 
ECB  introduced  the  fixed  rate  and  full  allotment  principle  to  all  refinancing  operations  in 
October 2008. It extended collateral eligibility to less liquid assets. Between 2009 and 2011, 
the  Longer-Term  Refinancing  Operations  (LTROs)  were  extended  to  maturities  of  up  to 
                                                
1  Rajan,  R.  (2013),  A  step  in  the  dark:  unconventional  monetary  policy  after  the  crisis.  Andrew  Crockett 
Memorial Lecture, BIS, 23 June 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  3 years. The ECB also started a purchase program of covered bonds which are a key source 
of funding credit for private banks in many Euro area countries.2 
Most  importantly,  the  ECB  did  not  initiate  purchases  of  government  bonds.  However,  in 
2010–2012 the ECB operated the Securities Market Programme (SMP), which amounted to 
sterilized interventions on public and private bond markets (in practice only public). This was 
done  to  to  facilitate  monetary  policy  transmission  in  countries  that  faced  severe  sovereign 
debt problems. 
The culmination of the Eurozone crisis in mid-2012 was tamed by the creation of the ECB’s 
OMT  (Outright  Monetary  Transactions)  program.  I  quote  President  Draghi’s  promise  that 
“Within [its] mandate, the ECB is ready to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro”.3 OMT is 
a  conditional  promise  to  buy  in  the  secondary  market  without  limit  government  bonds  of 
selected Euro area countries. OMT has worked and remarkably, there has so far not been 
any need to activate the program. 
International spillovers 
Liquidity support operations by central banks at different stages, explicit state guarantees to 
banks and expansionary policies succeeded in stopping the recession, which changed the 
course of developments in comparison to the 1930’s. These unconventional policy measures 
were not implemented in a group of economically disconnected islands, but in a globalized 
world with synchronized financial cycles and few borders for capital.4 It is therefore important 
to ask what the consequences of these new forms of monetary policy for other countries are 
and how strong are the potential spillovers. 
One new line of theoretical research points to positive effects of international spillovers.5 If 
country-specific shocks have global repercussions and intermediaries in both countries face 
similar balance sheet constraints (think USA and the Euro area), a policy implemented in one 
county will help the other one as well. However, if these policies are costly, they may lead to 
a  free-rider  problem  in  which  both  countries  wait  for  the  policy  being  implemented  in  the 
other. 
These predictions seem to be confirmed empirically, at least in the US case. The first round 
of  QE  seems  to  have  substantially  reduced  bond  yields  not  only  in  the  US,  but  also  in 
Germany, Japan and the UK.6 It also contributed to the weakening of the US dollar, although 
the impact on net exports is a bit harder to assess.7 
The evidence for ECB policy spillovers is, on the other hand, much weaker. This may in part 
be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  European  Central  Bank  focused  on  reducing  intra-Euro  yields. 
These operations actually lifted German bond yields as the safe heaven effect subsided and 
in fact strengthened the Euro. The net sale of Eurozone bonds (i.e. net inflows) was strongly 
                                                
2  See  e.g.  Cour-Thimann  and  Winkler  (2013),  “The  ECB’s  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures”,  ECB 
Working Paper No. 1528, April 2013. 
3  Speech  by  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  at  the  Global  Investment  Conference  in 
London 26 July 2012 (www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120726.en.html).  
4  Rey Hélène (2013), “Dilemma not Trilemma. The global financial cycle and monetary policy independence”, 
paper presented at the Jackson Hole Symposium, August 2013.  
5  Dedola L., Karadi P., Lombardo G. (2013), “Global implications of national unconventional policies”, Journal of 
Monetary Economics, No.60, 2013.  
6  Neely Ch. (2013), “Unconventional Monetary Policy Had Large International Effects”, Federal Reserve Bank of 
St. Louis Working Paper 2010–018D, August 2013.  
7  Glick  R.,  Leduc  S.  (2013),  “The  Effects  of  Unconventional  and  Conventional  U.S.  Monetary  Policy  on  the 
Dollar”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper, 2013–11, May 2013.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  reflected  in  the  financial  account  dynamics  and  closely  co-moved  with  the  exchange  rate 
since the beginning of the crisis. 
More  generally,  however,  spillovers  seem  to  be  asymmetric,  with  significant  impact  of  the 
FED abroad, but not the other way round. For Japan and the UK, the smaller size of these 
operations may be one explanatory factor.8 
At the very least, therefore, unconventional policies had marked effects on exchange rates. 
In  the  Eurozone,  the  impact  was  in  the  opposite  direction  than  in  economies  which 
implemented QE. Currency depreciations of large economies, in turn, clearly recall thoughts 
about beggar-thy-neighbor policies9 and procyclical waves of capital flows going abroad.10 
This leads me to discuss the impact of unconventional policies on emerging economies. It 
has been widely acknowledged that the low returns on assets in the developed world have 
substantially increased capital inflows to emerging economies, which offer higher yields. For 
example, a substantial increase of non-financial corporate debt was observed.11 Equity prices 
went  up  and  sovereign  yields  subsided.12  The  side  effect  of  this  demand  was  real 
appreciation  of  these  currencies.  In  fact,  the  international  spillovers  of  FED’s  QE  seem  to 
affect emerging economies more strongly than advanced ones, or even for the US itself.13 
The  implications  of  currency  depreciation  in  one  country  may  theoretically  have  some 
positive effects as well. In an integrated world negative demand shocks spill over and can 
create a liquidity trap in both countries.14 The solution to escape it is to inflate the economy. 
Done in isolation, this leads to currency depreciation and beggar-thy-neighbor effects. But if 
both countries inflate, then depreciations cancel out and both economies can get out from 
the trap. 
Appreciation may be a problem for a small open economy facing its own zero lower bound, 
because the bound makes its own monetary policy less effective.15 But if the goods that the 
economy  produces  are  complements  of  those  produced  in  the  U.S.  (think  of  commodities 
used as input in production), the net effects might be positive. 
Tapering 
Since  September  2012,  the  FED  has  been  purchasing  MBS  and  treasuries  at  85  bln  per 
month.  In  May  2013  it  announced  a  gradual  unwinding  of  QE3,  which  was  then  put 
off/postponed  in  September.  Eventually,  the  tapering  started  in  January  2014,  and  it  is 
currently 45 bln USD per month. 
                                                
8  Rogers J., Scotti Ch., Wright J. (2014), “Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A 
Cross-Country  Comparison”,  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, No. 1101, March 2014.  
9  Eichengreen B. (2013), “Currency War or International Policy Coordination?”, mimeo, January 2013.  
10  Reinhart C. and Reinhart V. (2008), “Capital Flow Bonanzas”, NBER Working Paper No. 14321, September 
2008.  
11  Lo  Duca  M.,  Nicoletti  G.,  Vidal  Martinez  A.  (2014),  “Global  Corporate  Bond  Issuance.  What  Role  for  US 
Quantitative Easing”, ECB Working Paper No. 1649, March 2014.  
12  Fratzscher M., Lo Duca M., Straub R. (2013), “On the International Spillovers of US Quantitative Easing”, ECB 
Working Paper No. 1557, June 2013.  
13  Chen Q., Filardo A., He D., Zhu F. (2012), “International spillovers of central bank balance sheet policies”, BIS 
Papers No.66, October 2012.  
14  Jeanne O. (2009), “The Global Liquidity Trap”, mimeo, October 2009.  
15  Haberis  A.,  Lipinska  A.  (2012),  “International  Policy  Spillovers  at  the  Zero  Lower  Bound”,  Federal  Reserve 
Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2012–23, April 2012.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The announcement and postponement episode stirred some unease internationally, not least 
in emerging economies. The economic debate has then focused on whether the tapering will 
trigger  a  pull-out  of  capital  from  the  emerging  world  and  potentially  trigger  a  new  wave  of 
turbulence, akin to those from 1990s and 1980s.16 
Preliminary research suggests that news about tapering did have indeed an impact abroad. 
Announcements by chairman Bernanke were are associated with larger nominal exchange 
rate depreciations, stock market contractions as well as increases of credit default swaps.17 
Although the initial impact of these announcements has not been necessarily correlated with 
the strength of the country’s fundamentals, over time the attention of financial markets has 
turned  towards  more  fragile  countries.  This  includes  mainly  economies  which  initially 
witnessed sharp inflows and real appreciations reflected in large current account deficits.18 
India, South Africa, Turkey, Argentina had to increase interest rates early this year to contain 
exchange rate slump. 
Nevertheless,  the  currency  depreciations  have  not  been  a  unifying  story  in  the  developing 
world.  In  fact,  according  to  the  January  2014  World  Bank  report,  over  60%  of  developing 
countries  witnessed  appreciation  throughout  the  taper-talk  period  (April–August  2013).19  In 
many  emerging  countries,  e.g.  Chile,  Malaysia,  and  Mexico,  the  depreciations  were  much 
more pronounced. 
The diversity of responses to tapering across different countries, even those within the same 
geographic  region,  suggests  that  domestic  factors  are  the  key  in  amplifying  or  absorbing 
these foreign shocks. One clear aspect is the degree of leverage in the banking sector, which 
has been on the rise in many Asian countries since early 2000s.20 
It remains a valid question whether and to what extent can the potential negative effects of 
tapering be spared. The way of implementing the tapering may play a role per se. There are 
two  aspects  of 
to  policy 
announcements.21 The second is the potential for policy synchronization and cooperation. 
The  mandate  of  all  major  central  banks  is  focused  solely  on  domestic  policy  objectives. 
Nevertheless, the interconnectedness of global financial markets means that domestic policy 
decisions which are harmful abroad may ultimately backfire at home. The financial crisis has 
proved  that  the  interpretation  of  the  legal  mandate  can  be  subject  to  some  interpretation, 
depending  on  the  severity  of  circumstances.  It  can  also  be  noted  that  international 
coordination of monetary policies is not without precedent. One example is the Plaza Accord 
in 1985, a joint intervention to weaken the US dollar. Also, in October 2008 four major central 
banks cut their key policy rates in a coordinated fashion. 
At this junction it is not clear if tapering is going to have clear negative effects in emerging 
economies.  The  World  Bank  documents  made  negative  forecast  revisions  of  GDP  growth 
internationally after May 2013. On the other hand, for financially stable economies, moderate 
the  degree  of  commitment 
this  problem.  The 
first 
is 
                                                
16  Calvo G., Leiderman L., Reinhart C. (1993), “Capital Inflows and Real Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin 
America”, International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 40:1, March 1993.  
17  Aizenman  J.,  Binici  M.,  Hutchison  M.  (2014),  “The  Transmission  of  Federal  Reserve  Tapering  News  to 
Emerging Financial Markets”, NBER Working Paper No. 19980, March 2014.  
18  Eichengreen B., Gupta P. (2013), “Tapering Talk. The Impact of Expectations of Reduced Federal Reserve 
Security Purchases on Emerging Markets”, mimeo, December 2013.  
19  World Bank Global Economic Prospects, January 2014.  
20  Forbes K. (2014), “Capital Flow Volatility and Contagion: A Focus on Asia”, Reserve Bank of India – Asian 
Development Bank volume on Managing Capital Flows, forthcoming.  
21  Woodford M., “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound”, paper presented at the 
Jackson Hole Symposium, August 2012.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
depreciations may turn expansionary.22 Finally, unwinding unconventional monetary policy is 
ultimately a signal of US recovery and should therefore be interpreted as good news. 
Another piece of good news might be that, at the end, the spillover effects of policies like QE 
seem  to  work  through  standard,  well  understood  channels,  i.e.  through  exchange  rate 
movements and interest rate differentials. From this perspective it is hard to say what makes 
these unconventional policies distinct.23 
                                                
22  Céspedes L., Chang R., Velasco A. (2004), “Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate Policy”, American Economic 
Review, Vol.94, No.4, September 2004.  
23  Chinn  M.  (2014),  “Global  Spillovers  and  Domestic  Monetary  Policy.  The  Effects  of  Conventional  and 
Unconventional  Measures”,  paper  prepared  for  the  12th  BIS  annual  conference  “Navigating  the  great 
recession: what role for monetary policy?”, 20–21 June 2013, Luzern, Switzerland.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
