Christian Noyer: Monetary policy and banks, and the rise of global 
protectionism 
Introduction  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  GIC  (Global 
Interdependence Center) central banking series “Monetary policy and banks, and the rise of 
global protectionism”, Paris, 10 March 2014. 
 These  are  challenging  times  for  economic  policy  making.  As  was  apparent  at  the  G20 
meeting  in  Sydney,  the  performance  of  the  world  economy  is  contrasted  and  uncertain.  A 
central question is whether monetary policy has a role to play to improve the situation. 
To me, the answer is unambiguously “yes”. Monetary policy should remain active because 
persistently low inflation threatens the achievement of price stability as commonly defined by 
all major central banks today. Not all central banks are the same and there is some diversity 
in  their  objectives,  mandates  and,  of  course,  the  situations  they  are  facing.  Remarkably, 
however,  all  advanced  economies  have  converged  –  in  recent  years  –  towards  the  same 
definition of price stability, first adopted by the Eurosystem in 2003: an inflation rate “close to 
2%” (and in our case: below but close to 2%). 
I will focus my introductory remarks on two issues related to this challenging objective: the 
low inflation level and the forward guidance strategies. 
I’ll start with low inflation. 
Inflation  has  been  falling  recently  in  all  advanced  (although  not  emerging)  economies.  Its 
behavior  has  been  atypical  compared  to  previous  episodes following  a  recession. This fall 
was  especially  marked  in  the  euro  area,  from  2.7%  in  2011  to  0.8%  in  December  2013. 
Recently, developments in the euro area have started to diverge downward from some other 
advanced economies such as United States and Canada. 
The sources and reasons for such a low inflation are complex and multiple. There are many 
uncertainties.  Temporary  and  global  factors  may  be  at  play  in  the  euro  area  with  import 
prices going down. I also think there are more permanent and deep forces pushing inflation 
down both at the euro area and global level. 
Besides there is still an important unused capacity – commonly labeled as “slack” -in most 
advanced  economies,  as  demand  has  not  yet  caught  up  with  its  pre-recession  levels  and 
firms, as a consequence, have not recovered their pricing power. 
Commodity price inflation has been trending down recently. This is true both for energy and 
food prices. Commodity prices have a global impact and react very amply to small changes 
in supply and demand equilibrium. They act as amplifiers and transmitters of disinflationary 
pressures. 
Powerful headwinds – and disinflationary forces- are coming from the deleveraging process 
especially in the euro area, due to the importance of the banking sector and the amplitude of 
its balance sheet adjustment. We are working very hard to repair the bank-lending channel in 
the euro area. We have achieved a lot by creating the banking union and the SSM in less 
than two years – which is unprecedented in European history. Also, the process of balance 
sheet  repair  for  banks  is  well  underway  in  the  euro  area  And  we  will  make  sure  that  the 
forthcoming  asset  quality  review  removes  any  doubt  as  to  the  sustainability  of  the  euro 
banking sector. 
Furthermore, for the euro area, there is the exchange rate question. As you all know, from a 
monetary policy perspective, the exchange rate is not a policy variable, let alone a target. But 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
it  is  obviously  a  very  important  input  when  considering  overall  monetary  and  financial 
conditions. The recent appreciation of the euro has had a strong disinflationary impact. 
We could discuss further the different causes of low inflation in the debate, but let me make 
some remarks on this crucial matter for us central bankers. 
First, low inflation is not deflation. As many analysts and observers are today alarmed about 
deflation in the euro area, it is useful to understand the difference. Deflation is a permanent 
and  cumulative  process  of  decrease  in  the  overall  price  index,  fuelled  by  negative 
expectations. Deflation is a pernicious spiral. Because consumers expect prices to decrease 
continuously, they tend to defer purchases, thereby further fuelling the deflation process.  
Deflation  increases  the  real  burden  of  debt  and  creates  an  incentive  to  defer  investment. 
Deflation is especially dangerous because, as the experience of Japan has shown, once it 
becomes entrenched, it is very difficult to stop. From this perspective, there is no deflation 
today in the euro area. Prices are still increasing and, most important, so are nominal wages. 
And, as I said, inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in positive territory, even in the 
short run. 
Second, low inflation provides economic stimulus by boosting real income. In most parts of 
the  euro  area,  nominal  wages  are  downward  rigid.  Every  time  inflation  “surprises”  on  the 
downside, it creates an unexpected increase in real wages and purchasing power. I believe 
this  mechanism  is  playing  some  role  by  improving  economic  sentiment  and  supporting 
consumption as we have seen in the euro area over the past months. 
That said, when inflation is too low, it carries very significant dangers and risks. 
First, it makes real adjustment more complicated. With low inflation, there is smaller scope 
for  downward  adjustment  in  relative  prices  and  real  wages.  As  you  know,  the  euro  area 
strongly  needs  such  adjustments  in  order  for  some  countries,  including  France,  to  regain 
competitiveness. This would no doubt be made easier if the overall euro inflation rate stays 
closer to our definition of price stability. 
Second, low inflation makes it difficult to attain low, or negative, real interest rates, that are 
necessary in all advanced economies at the current juncture. 
Finally, low inflation increases the risk that the economy could fall into outright deflation if and 
when it is hit by a negative shock. The 2% target is meant to act as a cushion against that 
risk. That cushion is not available at the moment in the euro area. If this situation persists, it 
could prove dangerous in a very uncertain economic environment. 
To sum up, the situation today calls for a very careful assessment in the balance of risks. 
Precisely  because  deflation  is  hard  to  reverse,  even  small  probabilities  should  not  be 
neglected and they should be fully factored into policymaking. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  one  of  the  tools  recently  used  by  many  central  banks  in  the  world  to 
respond to very low inflation: forward guidance. 
Central banks have been communicating for a long time about their vision for the future as 
well as their concerns and intentions. Forward guidance, however, brings something more. 
First, it implies some degree of commitment on the course of future actions. And, second, it 
broadens the scope of communication. Central banks try and specify how they will behave in 
the future, – what is called in the jargon their “reaction function”. The presumption is that this 
reaction  will  be  different  from  that  which  could  be  expected  when  looking  at  their  past 
behaviour or commonly accepted (Taylor) rules. 
Forward guidance raises several questions. 
First,  how  specific  should  it  be?  There  is  an  obvious  dilemma.  If  the  commitment  is 
unconditional, it will be very efficient in influencing short-term future expected rates, hence 
the shape of the yield curve, and, ultimately, long-term rates. But this carries risks to central 
bank credibility if circumstances change and no longer warrant sticking to the commitment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
On the other hand, if guidance is conditional, it will have less impact and introduce volatility 
as markets permanently reassess the economic situation and assess the probability that the 
central bank will change its policy. 
Second, if central banks opt for conditional forward guidance, should it be “time contingent” – 
with time or dates references for future actions – or “state contingent” – dependent on the 
situation of the economy? 
Time  contingent  forward  guidance  runs  the  risk  of  being  undermined  by  changes  in  the 
economic  situation.  “State  contingent”  forward  guidance  may  appear  better.  Experience 
shows,  however,  that  it  is  also  more  complex  to  manage  especially  when  choosing  the 
“triggers”  or  “thresholds”  attached  to  commitments  for  the  future.  Partly  as  a  result  of  the 
crisis, major structural changes are taking place in most advanced economies. Overall, the 
relationship between major macroeconomic variables are becoming unstable which makes it 
difficult to calibrate monetary policy on a limited number of parameters, such as, for instance, 
the unemployment rate. Nowhere are these changes more profound than in the euro area, 
where structural change is taking place at an accelerated pace as a result of the crisis and 
adjustment policies undertaken in Member States. 
We  have  taken  stock  of  all  these  experiences  and  lessons  in  devising  our  approach  to 
forward  guidance  in  the  euro  area.  The  Governing  Council  has  made  explicit  in  its 
communication that we expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at current or lower levels 
for an extended period of time. We have chosen not to be specific either about the date or 
the  conditions.  The  euro  area  is  composed  of  diverse  and  somewhat  heterogeneous 
economies,  as  shown  by  the  very  different  unemployment  rates.  And  as  I  said,  it  is 
undergoing a phase of rapid structural change. The relationships between major economic 
variables are therefore very complex and uncertain and it may have been very confusing to 
tie  monetary  policy  moves  to  any  set  of  pre-specified  dates  or  parameters.  As  it  stands, 
forward  guidance  has  been  quite  successful  in  stabilising  the  short-term  part  of  the  yield 
curve, thus bringing significant monetary accommodation. 
Some concluding remarks 
Let me end with two general remarks on the future and limitations of monetary policy. 
In the future, after many years of implementing non-conventional policies, one may wonder 
whether central banks will ever return to their pre-crisis framework. Is inflation targeting dead 
and non-conventional the “new normal”? I can only offer some conjectures. 
While  the  pre-crisis  framework  has  been  transformed,  maybe  irreversibly  it  has,  in  some 
aspects, also been strengthened: all central banks have now adopted a quantification of their 
price stability objective; everyone is aware that symmetry in implementing their mandate is 
crucial; everyone is putting increased emphasis on communication to impact monetary and 
financial conditions. 
What may have changed forever is the way monetary policy operates through a diversity of 
tools.  It  is  very  unlikely  that  central  banks  will,  in  the  future,  rely  solely  upon  one  single 
instrument: the short-term interest rate. Financial frictions will have to be taken into account, 
especially when looking at the transmission mechanism. Furthermore, we now know that the 
zero lower bound is not simply an intellectual curiosity and may effectively constrain policy 
making.  That  means  that  several  instruments,  including  in  the  macroprudential  field  may 
have  to  be  used  simultaneously.  Liquidity  provision  will  likely  play  a  central  role  in 
policymaking in the Eurosystem for some time to come. 
Second,  I  have  made  the  case  for  an  active  monetary  policy  when  inflation  has  reached 
dangerously low levels. But there is always a risk of expecting too much and “overburdening” 
monetary policy. It should be recalled that monetary policy cannot by itself increase growth. It 
also, faces “diminishing returns”. The longer interest rates are kept at low levels, the greater 
the risks for financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Current easy monetary conditions should be used to create environment conducive to long-
term  growth.  There  is  a  clear  message  coming  out  from  the  last  G20  meeting.  Economic 
policy  should  aim  at  raising  the  equilibrium  interest  rate  by  fostering  opportunities  for 
productive  investment,  modernising  infrastructures  and  improving  the  quality  of  public 
spending. That can only be achieved through broad-based reform in both goods and labour 
markets.  Ultimately,  only  strong  and  determined  action  can  restore  durable  growth.  The 
opportunity is there and should not be missed. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
