Benoît Cœuré: Is eurozone governance fit for purpose? 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB,  at  a 
dinner organised by the Centre for European Reform, London, 30 January 2014. 
 I would like to thank Jean-Francois Jamet and Marion Salines for their contributions. I remain solely responsible 
for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like first to thank the Centre for European Reform for inviting me here to speak today. 
The  Centre  is  an  influential  think  thank  both  in  the  UK  and  elsewhere  in  Europe,  and  its 
views certainly contribute to shaping the debate on the future of Europe. 
Let  me  start  by  linking  the  focus  of  my  speech  tonight  with  a  topic  which  is  high  on  the 
agenda  here  in  London  –  as  recently  underlined  by  Mr  Osborne.  It  is  the  allocation  of 
competences between the national and the European level. What should Europe be in 
charge of? In which areas should Member States remain fully competent? Such questions 
are intensely debated on this side of the Channel. 
Tonight I would like to look at this issue from a euro area perspective, and more precisely, 
from the perspective of the euro area’s central bank, the ECB. How has the balance of 
competences between the national and the euro area level evolved during the crisis? Have 
we now found a more optimal balance which will support the stability of the single currency? I 
think this will provide a useful lens through which we can examine tonight’s question, namely 
“Is eurozone governance fit for purpose?”. 
A “fitness test” of the euro area governance 
The euro area is a unique project – unique because it binds together sovereign and diverse 
states; unique because it is trying to foster an ambitious process of economic and political 
convergence; and unique because it is the expression of a wider political project. 
These  specificities  mean  that  there  is  no  ready-made  governance  model  to  draw  on. 
Making the governance of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) “fit for purpose” is part 
of an evolving “learning by doing” process. 
Clearly,  the  Maastricht  model  –  or  at  least  its  implementation  by  Member  States  – 
proved inadequate to pass the economic “fitness test” when the crisis erupted. Having 
monetary policy fully integrated while economic policies, still decentralised, were carried out 
with an insufficient European perspective, was lopsided. The past years have shown to what 
extent  euro  area  economies  and  financial  systems  are  interconnected;  how  decisions  by 
individual countries can affect the entire currency union; and why national economic policies 
need  to  be  seen  as  “a  matter  of  common  concern”.  In  other  words,  the  balance  of 
competences between the national and the European level was not commensurate with the 
requirements of a currency union. 
At the same time, I believe that replicating the model of fully-fledged federations in the euro 
area would not pass the “fitness test” either, mainly for political reasons. At this stage, a full 
integration  of  economic  policies  is  neither  desirable  nor  feasible.  The  wide  range  of 
preferences among euro area Member States means that progress on economic and fiscal 
union  can  only  be  gradual.  There  will  be  no  sudden  leap  towards  a  fully-fledged  political 
union. And you will never convince the people of Europe that further sovereignty sharing is 
needed without first showing them in a convincing way that Europe delivers jobs and stability. 
How  can  we  steer  clear  of  the  minimalist  and  maximalist  scenarios  and  be  pragmatic  in 
making the governance framework “fit for purpose”? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In my view, the European level should be allowed to intervene in national policies – or even 
be  granted  new  competences  –  only  to  the  extent  that  is  necessary  to  account  for 
interdependencies  (economists  would  say:  to  internalise  cross-border  spillovers).  Equally, 
national  economic  policies  should  take  into  account  the  existence  of  potential  spillovers  to 
other members of the currency union. 
The  approach  followed  so  far  implies  that  the  competence  for  economic  policy-making  is 
increasingly  being  shared  between  the  European  and  the  national  level.  This  brings 
challenges of its own, both in terms of the effectiveness and legitimacy of decision-making. 
Despite the inter-linkages, each level should be in a position to deliver on its own mandate. 
Correspondingly,  citizens  should  be  able  to  identify  who  is  responsible  for  what.  Here  I 
believe that EMU still has some way to go before passing the “fitness test”. 
Let me now review in turn the economic and political dimensions of the “fitness test” of euro 
area governance. 
Crisis resolution and crisis prevention 
During  the crisis, the  ECB  has  fully  played  its  role  in  line  with  its  mandate. The  ECB  was 
faced  with  interrelated  key  challenges,  namely  extreme  risk  aversion  and  non-linear 
dynamics, deleveraging, fragmentation and a weak economic environment. Like other central 
banks  around  the  globe,  we  have  taken  decisive  measures  to  support  medium-term  price 
stability and improve the transmission of our monetary policy. This is not the focus of my 
talk but I am happy to return to it in the discussion. 
In  addition,  the  governance  framework  for  crisis  resolution  and  prevention  has  been 
significantly  improved.  To  the  surprise  of  some,  the  crisis  has  shown  the  strength  of  the 
political commitment to the integrity of the monetary union. If one compares what exists now 
and what the framework was six years ago, one can notice the quantum leap that has been 
achieved. Let me elaborate. 
Regarding  crisis  resolution,  Member  States  have  put  in  place  mutual  insurance 
mechanisms, most notably the European Stability Mechanism (ESM); sharing financial risks 
among  sovereign  countries  is  undoubtedly  a  major  political  achievement.  The  ESM  was 
created in order to provide financial assistance to euro area countries in financial difficulty. 
ESM  interventions  are  conditional  on  Member  States  first  signing  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding containing a programme for the needed reforms or fiscal consolidation to be 
implemented in order to restore the financial stability. 
The  reform  of  EU  governance  is  also  about  preventing  future  crises  by  remedying  market 
and  government failures.  During the  crisis,  new  safeguards  have  been  established for  this 
purpose: 
• 
The  fiscal  and  economic  governance  framework  of  the  euro  area  has  been 
reinforced  through  the  adoption  of  a  set  of  EU  legal  acts  (the  “six-pack”  and  the 
“two-pack”),  as  well  as  the  Fiscal  Compact. We  have  thereby  achieved  a  twofold 
objective, namely a larger role played by Europe in national policies, as well as an 
internalisation of EMU constraints in the domestic frameworks. 
The  reform  of  EU  governance  also  aims  to  prevent  future  banking  crises  and 
break  the  bank-sovereign  nexus.  The  establishment  of  the  single  supervisory 
mechanism and the adoption of bail-in rules in the Bank Recovery and Resolution 
Directive  mark  significant  progress  towards  preventing  excessive  risk-taking  and 
making sure that the taxpayer is last in line to recapitalise banks. But we also need 
to have robust resolution arrangements at the European level. The single resolution 
mechanism  should  thus  be  able  to  act  swiftly  and  needs  ready  access  to  a 
resolution fund. I’d be pleased to talk more about this in our discussion. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Overall, significant progress has been achieved: 
• 
We  are  now  starting  to  see  the  results  of  these  actions  to  resolve  the  crisis. 
Sovereign and corporate bond spreads are declining – it’s a clear sign that financial 
fragmentation has started to recede. This is confirmed by Target2 balances having 
decreased by nearly 40% from their July 2012 peak. Rebalancing is also on its way. 
Structural budget balances have significantly improved. Crucially, the public debt-to-
GDP  ratio  has  started  to  decrease  at  euro  area  level.  Moreover,  programme 
countries have rebalanced their current accounts, not only via demand compression 
but increasingly through genuine gains in competitiveness. To be sure, we cannot 
afford to  be  complacent.  Debt  levels  and  unemployment  are  high  and  unevenly 
distributed, and the nascent recovery remains weak and uneven. We also need to 
restore trust in the banking sector, which is key to improving lending conditions to 
the real economy. In this regard, the comprehensive assessment of euro area banks 
will be crucial. 
Moreover, with the new governance framework the Member States have taken key 
steps towards internalising economic and financial spillovers within EMU. This has 
entailed  a  shift  of  the  balance  of  competences  upwards:  the  central  level  has 
been substantially strengthened to make the euro area more stable and resilient. 
 Fully enforcing the new rules of the game will however be the crucial test. At this stage, 
the implementation of the new macroeconomic framework has been somewhat disappointing 
in non-programme countries, notably regarding country-specific recommendations. It is more 
satisfactory on the fiscal side, but it will be essential that fiscal discipline is also fully enforced 
in good times, so that countries have enough fiscal space when the next crisis comes. The 
credibility  of  the  new  governance  framework  crucially  hinges  on  the  enforcement  of  our 
commitments, today and tomorrow. 
To this end, we need to improve effectiveness and legitimacy within the euro area. As I 
mentioned  before,  while  economic  policy-making  is  increasingly  shared  between  the 
European  and  the  national  level,  each  level  should  be  in  a  position  to  deliver  on  its  own 
mandate.  And  citizens  should  be  able  to  identify  who  is  responsible  for  what.  Only  with  a 
more  efficient  and  legitimate  decision-making  will  we  be  able  to  properly  enforce  the 
governance framework; only then will EMU be genuinely “fit for purpose”. This brings me to 
the political dimension of the “fitness test”. 
Looking beyond the crisis: a broader political perspective on euro area governance 
The Four Presidents’ Report identified “political union” as one of the four building blocks of 
a genuine EMU. It put forward a number of proposals. Some of the momentum behind the 
discussions on these proposals has been lost. It is not up to the ECB to promote them. But 
we  would  welcome  policy-makers  restarting  the  discussion  and  not  shying  away  from 
ambitious proposals. I see several possible options to enhance effectiveness and legitimacy: 
First,  by  strengthening  the  European  dimension  of  multilateral  surveillance.  A 
• 
full-time Eurogroup President with proper analytical capacity and more autonomous 
decision-making  powers  could  be  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  This  could  be 
accompanied  by  stronger  accountability  towards  the  European  Parliament,  in 
particular for the implementation of the governance framework. Depending on how 
far they are developed, both ideas may require a change to the Treaties. 
Second, it would also be important to strengthen the national ownership of the 
reforms prescribed by European procedures and recommendations. European 
issues and policies could more often be “invited” into the national debate and into 
national  parliaments  in  order  to  bring  them  nearer  to,  and  make  them  better 
understood by national citizens. The Commission’s Opinion on Member States’ draft 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
budgetary plans, as mandated by the “two pack”, is an important instrument in this 
respect. 
By fostering a public debate and bringing political preferences closer together within the euro 
area, the move towards political union may in fact arouse interest in a further deepening 
of  integration.  Policy-makers  and  citizens  may  choose  to  integrate  further  in  the  future, 
going  above  and  beyond  banking  union.  This  shows  that  the  economic  and  political 
dimensions  of  the  “fitness  test”  are  closely  intertwined  and  even  mutually  reinforcing: 
economic integration calls for political integration, and vice versa. Therefore, there is no such 
thing as an institutional steady state; the balance of competences is evolving over time. 
However,  I  believe  this further  sharing  of sovereignty  will  only  happen  if  Europe  is  able to 
deliver tangible progress for its people in terms of stability, growth and job creation. It is the 
only way to cut the Gordian knot and overcome the current vicious circle whereby a lack of 
integration leads to a poor economic performance and a lack of political support for Europe. 
This also applies to the ECB within its price stability mandate: making sure that inflation is 
below  but  close  to  2%  in  the  medium  term  should  be  our  contribution  to  restoring  trust  in 
Europe. 
As a central banker, it is certainly not for me to prescribe what should be the next steps: they 
should  emerge  as  the  result  of  a  political  debate.  What  I  can  say  is  that  there  would  be 
economic  benefits  from  further  integration.  We  learnt  from  the  crisis  that  economic 
risk-sharing mechanisms are needed to making the euro area more resilient. However, there 
are some preconditions to be fulfilled before progress can be made in this direction. Drawing 
on  John  Rawls’  thinking,1  I  would  argue  that  Member  States  will  agree  on  a  new  “social 
contract” only behind the veil of ignorance, not when the house is still on fire. The euro area 
thus needs to achieve a higher degree of economic convergence and to address the issue of 
the legacy arising from past national policy mistakes. In the meantime, a higher degree of 
risk-sharing  can  be  achieved  through  market-based  mechanisms.  The  completion  of  the 
banking  union  and  a  thorough  implementation  of  the  Single  Market  Act  II  as  proposed  by 
Michel Barnier are of utmost importance in this respect. From the ECB’s perspective, further 
risk-sharing should first and foremost focus on what could support a smooth functioning of 
the single currency. 
Further integration within the euro area raises the difficult issue of the relationship with the 
“outs”, in particular those with a permanent opt-out. The UK has made the sovereign choice 
to stay out of the single currency. It has to accept the full implications of this choice when 
euro area Member States need to integrate further. Of course, safeguards have to ensure full 
consistency  with  the  Single  Market,  which  is  the  European  Union’s  most  valuable 
achievement. However, while such safeguards will have a bearing on the design of euro area 
integration, they cannot change its direction. And let’s have our priorities right: the biggest 
threat to the Single Market is not euro area integration: it would be euro area stagnation. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In 1946, Winston Churchill called for the United States of Europe. This did not pass the 
political “fitness test” at the time – and would probably not pass it today either. Subsidiarity 
has been and remains an essential principle of building a common Europe. The debates on 
the future of EMU governance and the debate on this side of the Channel on a competence 
review are not dissimilar in this respect. They boil down to the following crucial questions: 
what do  we need and  want to tackle together, with common policies and a strong centre? 
And what can be done nationally, regionally, locally? 
However,  there  is  one  important  element  we  can  still  learn  from  Churchill.  No  matter  how 
passionately we debate the right allocation of competences, the right governance, the right 
                                                
1  John Rawls, A Theory of Justice, Harvard, 1971 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
tools and methods, it must be clear that at the heart of all these choices, there is a strong 
commitment to building a strong, stable, open and diverse Europe together. I have no 
doubt about this commitment in our debate on the future of EMU. And I hope that the debate 
in  this  country  in  the  coming  years  will  confirm  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  this 
commitment in Britain. 
Many thanks for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
