  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Improving financial literacy in Uganda 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Annual  National  Secondary  Schools’  Performing  Arts  Festival  for  2014  Launch  with  a 
Financial  Literacy  Theme  “Simplify  Money,  Magnify  Life:  Manage  Your Money  wisely  for a 
better future”, Kampala, 1 July 2014. 
 The State Minister for Primary Education; 
Chargé d’affaires, Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany in Uganda; 
Chairperson, Uganda Bankers’ Association; 
Senior Management and Staff of the Bank of Uganda present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
On behalf of the Board of Directors, Management and Staff of the Bank of Uganda, I would 
like  to thank  everyone who  has  come  here today  for  this  innovative  2014  Annual  National 
Secondary  Schools’  Performing  Arts  Festival  launch.  The  focus  of  this  event  is  Financial 
Literacy  which  refers  to  the  individual’s  ability  to  make  informed  judgements  and  effective 
decisions about the use and management of their money. 
Financial  Literacy  is  part  of  the  broader  concept  of  Financial  Inclusion,  which  entails 
expanding  access  to  financial  services.  We  want  the  benefits  of  financial  services  spread 
more  widely  throughout  the  population  to  support  broad  based  economic  growth,  reduce 
inequality and poverty. 
Through the activities of the Financial Sector Reform Programme (FSRP), much has been 
achieved to strengthen the supply side of the financial market. Indicators of financial depth 
point  to  the  great  strides  that  have  been  made  in  as  far  as  financial  sector  deepening  is 
concerned.  For  example,  domestic  credit  to  the  private  sector  as  a  proportion  of 
GDP increased to 10.2 percent in 2013/14 from 6.4 percent in 2012/13. However, with the 
exception  of  the  remarkable  growth  of  mobile  money  services,  access  to  formal  financial 
services remains relatively low in Uganda; with about 46 percent of the population having no 
access to Bank of Uganda supervised financial institutions. Financial exclusion is partly the 
result of the high costs of serving low income customers, especially in rural areas, and partly 
because demand from potentially bankable customers is also low. 
Consumer  education  can  help  to  attract  more  economically  active  people  into  the  formal 
banking  system.  The  use  of  an  infotainment  programme  like  a  Music,  Dance  and  Drama 
festival  is  ingenious  as  it  delivers  the  message  subliminally  which  allows  for  a  deeper 
internalization  by  the  recipient.  The  theme  “Simply  Money,  Magnify  Life:  Manage  Your 
Money  wisely  for  a  better  future”  is  a  well  thought  out  theme  as  many  people  live  a  life 
worrying about money. 
Financial  literacy  skills  such  as  managing  personal  finances  are  essential  life  skills  in  the 
modern  world.  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  thank  all  the  organizers  of  this  festival.  In  a 
special way, I thank the Ministry of Education and Sports who agreed that this year’s Annual 
Festival  should  focus  on  Financial  Literacy.  I  also  would  like  extend  our  gratitude  to  the 
commercial  banks,  the  German  Society  for  International  Cooperation  (GIZ)  and  other 
stakeholders for the efforts invested in this project. 
The Financial Literacy Strategy launched in August 2013 recommended the incorporation of 
Financial Literacy into the secondary school curriculum as part of the overall reform of the 
curriculum. Curriculum reform is currently underway at the National Curriculum Development 
Centre  and  this  process  involves  consultations  with  stakeholders  such  as  GIZ  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  commercial  banks.  One  of  the  teaching  tools  that  has  been  developed  in  the  Financial 
Literacy Strategy’s short term life span of eleven months is the “Simplify Money Magnify Life” 
website. The website is a teaching aid targeted at financial services and products consumers 
as  well  as  suppliers  by  providing  factual  data  that  can  be  a  basis  of  financial  decision 
making. 
I  thank  you  all  and  wish  you  a  pleasant  2014  Annual  National  Secondary  Schools’ 
Performing Arts Festival. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
