Andrew G Haldane: Unfair shares 
Remarks by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, 
at the Bristol Festival of Ideas event, Bristol, 21 May 2014. 
 These  are  not  necessarily  the  views  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Financial  Policy  Committee  or  Monetary  Policy 
Committee.  I  am  grateful  to  Edd  Denbee,  Priya  Kothari,  Varun  Paul  and  Fiona  Robinson  for  comments  and 
contributions 
Inequality  has  become  the  issue  du  jour  –  especially,  it  seems,  when  it  is  expressed  in 
French. Yet until recently, inequality was a deeply unfashionable topic among academics and 
policymakers.  Until  the  crisis,  it  is  difficult  to  identify  a  period  in  the  past  50  years  when 
inequality was close to the top of the public policy or academic agenda (Stiglitz (2012)). 
The past few years have changed all that. Key milestones include: 
 
The emerging facts. As ever, dispute rages about the precise statistics. But the long-
term patterns are clear enough – and remarkable. Almost half of the growth in US 
national income between 1975 and 2007 accrued to the top 1% (OECD (2014)). In 
the UK and US, the top 1%’s share of the income pie has more than doubled since 
1980 to around 15% and their share of the wealth pie has been estimated at up to a 
third – more than the whole bottom half of the population put together (ONS (2014), 
Wolff (2012)). The five richest households in the UK have greater wealth than the 
bottom fifth of the population (Oxfam (2014)). Even among the 1% there has been a 
striking polarisation. In 1990, a similarly-skilled banker, lawyer and accountant were 
paid  roughly  the  same.  By  2006,  the  banker  was  earning  between  three  and  four 
times as much (Philippon and Reshef (2009)). 
The global financial crisis. On standard metrics, the crisis probably reduced wealth 
inequalities because the collapse of asset values hit hardest existing asset-owners. 
But the global financial crisis also shrunk the global income and wealth pie, in some 
countries materially so. This added momentum to the squeeze on real incomes at 
the  very  bottom  end  of  the  income  scale  experienced  in  a  number  of  Western 
countries (Economic Policy Institute (2012), Joyce et al (2010)). Financial crises are 
known to disadvantage disproportionately the poor because they are least able to 
absorb  income  shocks  (Honohan  (2005)).  This  crisis  appears  to  have  been  no 
different. Meanwhile, the crisis-induced narrowing of wealth inequalities has been at 
least partially reversed as asset prices have reflated rapidly over recent years. 
The Occupy movement. They took up the baton for the 99% in 2011. At least at first, 
Occupy were treated with all of the seriousness of a local student protest. But rather 
remarkably Occupy became a global outfit, albeit a rather loosely-fitting one. Occupy 
touched a moral nerve among the many. The 1%ers in Davos had inequality as their 
main theme this year. In the words I used when addressing Occupy in 2012, there is 
now a broader acceptance that “they were right” in their diagnosis (Haldane (2012)). 
Criticism of Occupy today tends to focus not on their diagnosis, but on their lack of 
prescription for curing the ills of inequality. 
Bill de Blasio. He was elected Mayor of New York in November 2013 on a signature 
theme of tackling widening inequality in the city. His campaign slogan was “a tale of 
two cities”. And this was no ordinary victory. Bill de Blasio won with a remarkable 
73% of the popular vote. 
And finally, Thomas Piketty. Enough has already been said and written about a book 
bought by many, read by few and understood by even fewer (Piketty (2014)). I am 
guilty on all three charges. I suspect never, in the field of human endeavour, has so 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
simple a line chart done so much to fuel the debate among so many, not just in the 
salons of Paris but in the Starbucks of London and New York. 
Suffice to say, the inequality issue seems unlikely to be a French fashion. It is a global public 
policy trend and a rising one. Inequality is emerging after a half-century in the wilderness. 
The surprise may be that it has taken so long. It is well-known, from survey and experimental 
evidence, that a sense of “fairness” is a deeply-held and richly-valued psychological trait in 
humans  (Bowles  (2012)).  And  if  Piketty  is  right,  inequality  trends  are  self-perpetuating  as 
wealth begets wealth. 
Economic and financial stability 
That naturally begs the question of whether anything should be done. On the face of it, this is 
not  the  business  of  a  central  banker.  There  is  considerable  truth  in  that.  The  tools  at  the 
disposal of a central bank – interest rates, the money supply, regulation – have an impact on 
inequality which is, at best, indirect, inadvertent and transient. Central banks can do nothing, 
durably, to reshape long-term structural trends in the economy, much less in broader society. 
Yet  inequality  has  appeared  on  central  banks’  radar  during  the  course  of  the  crisis, 
sometimes flashing red. That is because, at least over the shorter-term, central bank policies 
can and probably have reshaped patterns of inequality. Some have gone further, arguing that 
central  bank  policies  of  extra-ordinary  monetary  accommodation  have,  by  boosting  asset 
prices and wealth, exacerbated inequalities (Saiki and Frost (2014)). In effect, central banks 
stand accused of having provided an extra spin to the Piketty cycle. It is worth viewing this 
claim in context. 
In  response  to  the  Great  Recession,  monetary  policy  globally  went  into  overdrive.  Interest 
rates  fell  to  the  floor  and  central  bank  money  supply  rose  to  the  ceiling  –  so-called 
quantitative easing or QE. Interest rates have never been so low, nor central bank money 
supply  so  high  (relative  to  money  spending),  in  the  Bank  of  England’s  320-year  history. 
Extraordinary times heralded truly extraordinary measures. 
This action was taken with the best of intentions: to cushion the economy from the sharpest 
downturn in economic activity since the Great Depression. Monetary policy aimed to do so by 
lowering  borrowing  costs  for  debtors  whose  income  and  employment  prospects  were 
squeezed and by boosting risk-taking, and hence asset prices, otherwise held back by fearful 
investors. 
It is impossible to know for sure how the economy would have performed in the absence of 
this  monetary  action.  But  it  seems  near-certain  the  economy  would  have  been  materially 
smaller, and asset prices materially lower, had this action not been taken. On the Bank’s own 
estimates,  the  UK  economy  today  would  have  been  at  least  6  percentage  points  smaller 
today  without  the  combined  effects  of  lower  interest  rates  and  large  doses  of  QE.  Or,  in 
money terms, we as a nation would have been perhaps £80–100 billion poorer. The income 
pie would have been materially smaller. 
It is harder still to gauge the impact of monetary policy measures on asset prices. But the 
facts are striking. Equity prices are almost 90% higher than in 2009 when QE commenced in 
the  UK.  Corporate  bond  prices  are  over  40%  higher  and  government  bond  prices  15% 
higher.  In  the  US,  the  numbers  are  120%,  30%  and  12%  respectively.  In  other  words  the 
wealth, as well as the income, pie would most probably have been materially smaller absent 
extra-ordinary monetary stimulus. 
During  this  reflationary  process,  shares  of  the  income  and  wealth  pie  have  not  remained 
constant. All public policy is re-distributional and monetary  policy is no exception.  Relative 
winners have included debtors, whose borrowing costs have collapsed. Relative losers are 
likely to have included savers reliant on bank deposits for income, due to falling bank deposit 
rates.  Studies  have  tended  to  confirm  that  distributional  pattern  (McKinsey  Global  Institute 
(2013)). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But these relativities need to be seen against the backcloth of a rising, not retreating, income 
and wealth tide. The majority of people – savers and borrowers, old and young – appear to 
have been made better off absolutely as a result of extraordinary monetary measures. For 
what  it  is  worth,  the  Bank’s  own  research  points  firmly  in  that  direction  (Bank  of  England 
(2012)). 
Of course, some of the losses may be more visible than the gains and some of the relative 
losers more audible than the gainers. For example, low yields have reduced annuity rates for 
some pensioners, lowering income streams. But those same low yields have boosted asset 
prices, raising the value of pension pots. The net effect appears on average to have been 
positive.  And  extra-ordinary  monetary  measures  will  of  course  not  last  forever.  When  they 
unwind,  so  too  will  any  distributional  effects.  In  others  words,  central  banks’  influence  on 
income and wealth shares is likely to be temporary. 
Yet  even  if,  over  the  medium-term,  central  banks  cannot  influence  inequality,  the  reverse 
may not be true. There is rising evidence that inequality can have an important bearing on 
the objectives central banks hold dear – the stability of the financial system and growth in the 
economy. Were inequality to jeopardise these public goods, it could make the everyday job 
of central banks somewhat harder. This means that, even if they cannot influence it, central 
banks have a strong vested interest in inequality issues too. 
In his book Fault Lines, Raghu Rajan – now Governor of the Reserve Bank of India – dug up 
the  deep  roots  of  America’s  sub-prime  crisis  (Rajan  (2010)).  Many  conventional  crisis 
explanations have focussed on the combined effects of venal bankers, Byzantine risk models 
and  somnambulating  regulators.  Rajan  suggested  these  missed  the  deeper  cause  –  rising 
US  inequality.  Facing  this  fault-line,  US  policymakers  had  chosen  a  policy  of  cheap  and 
plentiful credit, expanded home-ownership and rising asset prices – a “let them eat credit” 
policy. Bank balance sheets grew to distribute this rapidly expanding credit cake, with banks 
taking their own healthy slice en route. 
Interestingly, this would not be the first time rising inequality has preceded crisis. The self-
same  pattern  preceded  the  financial  crash  of  1929  and  the  resulting  Great  Depression 
(Kumhoff and Ranciere (2010)). Between 1920 and 1928, the income share of the top 5% 
rose  from  little  more  than  a  quarter  to  more  than  a  third.  Household  debt  relative  to  GDP 
doubled. Inequalities widened and balance sheets fattened. And the upshot was the same: a 
huge economic contraction when the credit bubble popped. 
If this is a fair reading of history, then inequality may have a direct bearing on the fragility of 
the  financial  system.  And  while  of  historical  interest  when  describing  the  past,  its  greater 
significance may be in highlighting risks for the future. As in the 1920s and the 2000s, rising 
inequality could build pressure for a credit balm to sooth the symptoms. Yet temporary pain 
relief, through a credit boom, would risk sowing the seeds of tomorrow’s crisis. 
The  good  news  is  that  central  banks  may,  in  future,  be  better  placed  to  head-off  these 
pressures  by  taking  pre-emptive  regulatory  policy  action.  This  is  the  essence  of  so-called 
macro-prudential policy. In the UK, it is the responsibility of the Bank of England’s Financial 
Policy Committee (FPC). The FPC aims to curb excess credit at source. A large and growing 
number  of  other  countries  are  putting  macro-prudential  frameworks  in  place,  and  taking 
macro-prudential actions, to serve similar ends (Haldane (2014)). 
There is a second way in which inequality could affect central bank policy objectives. Based 
on  a  detailed  cross-country  study,  IMF  research  has  found  that  lower  income  inequality 
delivers faster and more durable growth (Ostry et al (2014)). Moreover redistributive policies, 
provided  they  are  not  excessive,  have  benign  direct  growth  effects  –  and  positive  indirect 
effects by lowering inequality. Or, put differently, the IMF’s research suggests that increasing 
inequality shrinks the pie.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
loss  of  cognitive  power, 
Unfair shares 
This link between growth and inequality is, at present, no more than an empirical regularity. 
The IMF’s research does not tell us the channels through which inequality may have dented 
growth.  And  without  an  appreciation  of  those  channels,  it  is  difficult  to  know  where  public 
policy  could  make  inroads  into  the  problem.  Nonetheless,  it  is  useful  to  piece  together 
evidence on possible channels of causation. 
Growth is rooted in investment, specifically the accumulation of human capital by individuals 
(education,  skills,  experience)  and  physical  capital  by  firms  (research  and  development). 
Both boost productivity, the elixir of economic life. And both require inter-temporal sacrifice – 
patience, a willingness to defer gratification. This is a topic I have researched in recent years 
(Haldane (2010), Davies et al (2014)). 
Individuals’ patience, and hence human capital accumulation, is a complex process. But it is 
affected importantly by their financial environment. An important new book by psychologists 
Mullainathan  and  Shafir  (MS)  illustrates  the  impact  of  financial  circumstances  on decision-
making  (Mullainathan  and  Shafir  (2013)).  Solving  everyday  problems  of  scarcity  –  of  time, 
money,  friendship  –  absorbs  huge  amounts  of  the  mind’s  energy.  It  taxes  cognitive 
bandwidth. And this can have dramatic effects on behaviour. 
In  one  experiment,  two  groups  –  one  wealthy,  one  poor  –  are  IQ-tested,  asked  to 
contemplate suffering a significant monetary loss and then re-tested. The remarkable finding 
is that merely contemplating monetary loss is sufficient to reduce significantly the measured 
IQs of the poor, lowering scores from “average” to “seriously deficient”. This is a dramatic, 
environmentally-induced, 
the  direct  result  of  minds  being 
impoverished by financial insecurity concerns. Being poor taxes the mind every bit as much 
as the wallet. 
It  does  not  end  there.  Financial  scarcity  is  also  shown  by  MS  to  damage  decision-making 
over time. The mind-absorbing effects of making ends meet can lead to an excessive focus 
on the present at the expense of the future – that is, financial insecurity generates impatience 
or myopia. This, too, can have damaging implications for life choices. As MS demonstrate, it 
may lead people to under-invest in education and skills and to over-borrow at high interest 
rates and short maturities. 
MS  call  this  a  scarcity  or  myopia  trap.  It  is  a  trap  because  it  is  self-fulfilling.  Scarcity 
generates myopia and myopia is the enemy of human capital accumulation. For individuals, 
this  means  that  scarcity  traps  may,  over  time,  create  poverty  (lack  of  income)  or 
unemployment (lack of skills) traps. And at the level of the aggregate economy, it means that 
scarcity  traps,  by  taxing  human  capital  accumulation,  may  generate  lower  growth  and 
productivity. 
Physical  capital  accumulation,  such  as  research  and  development,  also  relies  on  patient 
decision-making. It requires a willingness to defer gratification, either on the part of managers 
of firms (for example, through lower salaries and bonuses) and/or shareholders in those firms 
(for  example,  through  lower  dividends  and  share  buybacks).  Unfortunately,  the  evidence 
suggests neither have found it easy to do so. Public companies suffer from “short-termism” 
(Kay (2012)). 
One  example  is  found  in  the  high  and  smoothed  payout  ratios  to  both  executives  and 
shareholders  of  public  companies  even  when  underlying  company  profitability  is  low, 
perhaps even negative. Another is that longer-term cashflows from company projects appear 
to be “excessively” discounted (Davies et al (2014)). This can lead to projects which boost 
the long-run value of the company being wrongly rejected. Consistent with that hypothesis, 
privately-owned companies seem to invest more than otherwise-identical public companies 
(Davies et al (2014)). 
There is some debate about where the blames for this corporate myopia problem may lie. 
Some  place  it  at  the  door  of  shareholders,  driven  to  demand  short-term  returns  by  short 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
holding periods. Others blame management for seeking short-term financial gain given their 
short  tenure.  This  distinction  may  anyway  be  artificial.  In  a  world  where  executive 
compensation  is  largely  in  stock,  the  two  are  one  and  the  same,  their  incentives  largely 
indistinguishable. 
So how does all of this link to inequality? If impatient (money-scarce) individuals are failing to 
invest  sufficiently  in  skills,  and  impatient  (short-termist)  companies  are  failing  to  invest 
sufficiently  in  capital,  this  is  a  recipe  for  weak  (human  and  physical)  capital  accumulation. 
This will show up in weak long-term investment and skills deficits. The most likely casualties 
from this are productivity and growth. 
If  there  are  legs  to  this  story,  then  one  important  element  is  corporate  governance.  This 
defines decision-making within firms – how much to invest, how much to distribute, and to 
whom.  Company  Law  in  a  number  of  countries,  such  as  the  UK,  gives  primacy  to  the 
interests of shareholders when defining the objectives of a company and its decision-making. 
The objectives and rights of a broader set of stakeholders, including workers, suppliers and 
wider society, tend to be secondary (Mayer (2013)). 
This  governance  structure  has  stood  the  test  of  time.  But  it  is  not  without  distributional 
consequences. If power resides in the hands of one set of stakeholders, and they are short-
termist,  then  we  might  expect  high  distribution  of  profits  to  this  cohort,  at  the  expense  of 
ploughing  back  these  profits  (as  increased  investment)  or  distributing  them  to  workers  (as 
increased real wages). To some extent, this matches the stylised facts on rising inequality – 
rising  executive  and  shareholder  compensation  and  faltering  real  wage  growth.  The 
shareholder model may, ironically, have contributed to unfair shares. 
If  so,  this  suggests  that  one  avenue  worth  considering  further  is  corporate  governance 
reform. A set of corporate incentives which had as its fulcrum long-term company value and 
which more fully reflected the interests of a wider set of stakeholders might help rebalance 
the  scales  –  for  example,  towards  investing  rather  than  distributing.  Such  an  alternative 
model is certainly not without precedent. It is found in a number of countries around the world 
(Mayer (2013)). 
Inequality and corporate governance are deep, structural issues. Central banks do not have 
many,  perhaps  any,  of  the  solutions  to  these  problems.  But  the  stakes  –  a  more  stable, 
faster-growing, fairer society – could not be higher. There is a collective public policy interest 
in getting them right.  
References 
Alvaredo, F., Atkinson, A.B., Saez, E. and Piketty, T., “The world top incomes database”. 
Bank of England (2012), “The Distributional Effects of Asset Purchases”, July. Available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/nr073.pdf. 
Bowles,  S  (2012),  “The  New  Economics  of  Inequality  and  Redistribution”,  Cambridge 
University Press. 
Cribb,  J.,  Hood,  A.,  Joyce,  R.  and  Phillips,  D.  (2013),  “Living  standards,  poverty  and 
inequality in the UK: 2013”, IFS Report R81. 
Davies, R., Haldane, A., Nielsen, M. and Pezzini, S. (2014), “Measuring the costs of short-
termism”, Journal of Financial Stability, 12 (2014) 16–25. 
Economic  Policy  Institute  (2012),  “The  State  of  Working  America,  12th  Edition”,  Cornell 
University Press, November. 
the  
Haldane,  A.  G. 
(2010), 
Oxford 
at: 
China 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2010/speech445.pdf. 
“Patience  and  Finance”,  speech  delivered  at 
Available 
Business 
Beijing. 
Forum, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
in 
and 
May. 
Available 
Finance?, 
Paradigms 
Financières 
Recherches 
Européenne 
de 
Money 
Haldane,  A.  G.  and  Davies,  R.  (2011),  “The  short  long”,  speech  to  29th  Société  
Colloquium:  
Universitaire 
New 
at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2011/speech495.pdf. 
Haldane, A. G. (2012), “A leaf being turned”, speech to Occupy Economics, “Socially useful 
banking”,  October.  Available  at:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/ 
speeches/2012/speech616.pdf. 
Haldane,  A.  G.  (2014),  “Ambidexterity”,  speech  delivered  at  the  American  Economic 
Association  Annual  Meeting,  Philadelphia  on  3  January  2014.  Available  at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech713.pdf. 
Honohan,  P.  (2005),  “Banking  sector  crises  and  inequality”,  World  Bank  Policy  Research 
Working Paper 3659, July. 
Kay,  J.  (2012),  “The  Kay  Review  of  UK  Equity  Markets  and  Long-Term  Decision  Making”, 
Department for Investment, Business and Skills, July. 
Kumhoff, M. and Ranciere, R. (2010), “Inequality, Leverage and Crises”, IMF Working Paper 
WP/10/268, November. 
Joyce, R., Muriel, A., Phillips, D. and Sibieta, L. (2010), “Poverty and inequality in the UK: 
2010”, IFS Commentary C116. 
Mayer,  C. (2013), “Firm Commitment: why the corporation is failing us and how to restore 
trust in it”, Oxford University Press. 
McKinsey Global Institute (2013), “QE and ultra-low interest rates: distributional effects and 
risks”, Discussion paper, November. 
Mullainathan,  S  and  Shafir,  E  (2013),  “Scarcity:  Why  Having  Too  Little  Means  So  Much”, 
Times Books. 
OECD (2014). “Focus on Top Incomes and Taxation in OECD Countries: Was the crisis a 
game changer?”, May.  
ONS (2013), “Wealth in Great Britain Wave 3, 2010–2012”, May. 
Ostry, J. D., Berg, A. and Tsangarides, C. G. (2014), “Redistribution, Inequality, and Growth”, 
IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/14/02, February. 
Oxfam (2014), “A Tale of Two Britains: Inequality in the UK”, March. 
Philippon,  T  and  Reshef,  A  (2009),  “Wages  and  Human  Capital  in  the  U.S.  Financial 
Industry: 1909–2006”, NBER Working Paper 14644, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Inc. 
Piketty, T. (2014), “Capital in the Twenty-First Century”, Harvard University Press. 
Rajan,  R.  G.  (2010),  “Fault  Lines:  how  hidden  fractures  still  threaten  the  world  economy”, 
Princeton University Press. 
Saiki, A. and Frost J. (2014), “How Does Unconventional Monetary Policy Affect Inequality? 
Evidence from Japan”, DNB Working Paper No. 423, May. 
Stiglitz, J. E., (2012), “The Price of Inequality”, W.W. Norton and Company. 
Wolff,  E.  N.  (2012),  “The  Asset  Price  Meltdown  and  the  Wealth  of  the  Middle  Class”, 
New York University. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
