  Jean-Pierre Danthine: Situation at Swiss banks from a financial stability 
perspective 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the Swiss National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 
19 June 2014.  
 As my colleague Thomas Jordan has explained, economic and financial conditions continue 
to  be  challenging.  Against  this  background,  I  would  like  to  examine  the  situation  at  Swiss 
banks from a financial stability perspective, looking first at the big banks and then moving on 
to a discussion of domestically focused banks. 
Big banks: strengthening resilience 
Over the past year, the Swiss big banks have further improved their capital situation. In terms 
of  loss-absorbing  capital  –  defined  as  Common  Equity  Tier  1  capital  plus  high-trigger 
contingent capital instruments – their risk-weighted capital ratio either already exceeds or is 
close to the 13% requirement that will apply from 2019. They also meet or are very close to 
meeting the corresponding leverage ratio requirement of 3.1%. In terms of total capital, both 
big banks have also substantially improved their ratios. However, they have yet to meet the 
corresponding requirements applicable from 2019.1 
The SNB welcomes the significant progress made by the big banks in improving their capital 
situation and their compliance with some of the requirements applicable from 2019. The SNB 
recommends that they continue to improve their resilience and, in particular, their leverage 
ratios. This is important for two reasons. 
First,  the  loss  potential  for  the  Swiss  big  banks  –  estimated  under  the  different  adverse 
scenarios  considered  –  continues  to  be  substantial  relative  to  their  capitalisation.  These 
adverse  scenarios  are  not  forecasts.  They  represent  unlikely,  highly  unfavourable  but 
coherent  developments  in  economic  and  financial  conditions.  For  financial  stability  in 
Switzerland, it is important that the big banks remain adequately capitalised in the event of 
such  scenarios  occurring.  In  addition,  irrespective  of  the  scenario  considered,  substantial 
losses can also result from operational and legal risks, as recent experience has shown. 
Second,  an  international  comparison  reveals  an  uneven  picture  of  the  Swiss  big  banks’ 
capitalisation,  depending  on  which  capital  measure  one  examines.  Although  their  risk-
weighted ratios are above average for large globally active banks, the same cannot be said 
for  their  leverage  ratios,  as  calculated  according  to  various  common  definitions.  Leverage 
ratios are gaining in importance as a measure of banks’ resilience. Experience shows that 
these  ratios  quickly  become  the  focus  of  market  attention  during  a  crisis.  Moreover,  the 
international  requirement,  effective  from  the  beginning  of  2015,  to  disclose  the  Basel III 
leverage  ratio  will  enable  a  direct  comparison  between  large globally  active  banks. This  is 
why it is essential for banks to have a solid leverage ratio. 
                                                
1  Total capital comprises going-concern loss-absorbing capital (Common Equity Tier 1 capital plus high-trigger 
contingent capital instruments) and low-trigger contingent capital instruments. The latter are primarily aimed at 
ensuring the maintenance of systemically important functions and the orderly resolution of the residual bank, 
and are therefore important in a “gone concern” perspective.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Increasing the credibility of model-based risk-weighted assets 
Increasing  the  credibility  of  risk-weighted  assets  (RWA)  based  on  banks’  internal  models 
remains an important goal. As discussed in the 2013 Financial Stability Report, model-based 
RWA  are  being  called  into  question  by  market  participants,  analysts  and  authorities 
worldwide. This is particularly significant as RWA are at the heart of the capital regulations 
for  banks.  It  is  widely  accepted  that  a  bank’s  risks  can,  in  principle,  be  more  accurately 
quantified  using  the  model-based  approach  than  using  the  standardised  approach.  Yet 
banks’  internal  models  are  highly  complex  and  can  vary  widely  between  institutions,  thus 
making  it  difficult  to  accurately  assess  a  bank’s  resilience  and  compare  one  bank  with 
another. 
The SNB welcomes the efforts by the Swiss big banks to increase transparency with regard 
to  their  risks.  For  example,  both  institutions  recently  started  to  disclose  changes  in  their 
RWA, broken down by cause. Of particular interest is the proportion of the reduction in RWA 
which is attributable to model adjustments. In addition, Credit Suisse has been publishing a 
statistical  measure  of  total  loss  potential  for  some  time  now,  and  UBS  recently  started  to 
publish  a  statistical  measure  of  loss  potential  by  business  division  and  a  scenario-based 
post-stress capital ratio. 
The  SNB  encourages  the  big  banks  to  further  increase  transparency  with  regard  to  their 
risks.  It  continues  to  recommend  that  the  big  banks  disclose  RWA  according  to  both  the 
model-based  approach  and 
the  model-independent  standardised  approach.  This 
recommendation is in line with increasing efforts being made at international level. Disclosing 
RWA  according  to  the  standardised  approach  would  provide  market  participants  with 
additional information for assessing the level of, and changes in, model-based RWA. 
In this context, the analysis of RWA being carried out by FINMA with the support of the SNB 
will  play  an  important  role.  The  big  banks  have  already  provided  the  necessary  data  by 
calculating  RWA  based  on  the  standardised  approach.  Now  the  analysis  will  focus  on  the 
question of whether, and why, RWA based on the banks’ internal models differ from those 
based on the model-independent standardised approach. Differences must be well explained 
and  have  a  sound  economic  rationale. If the  analysis  does  not  reveal  any  substantial  and 
inexplicable differences, this would strengthen the credibility of the model-based approach. 
Conversely, if substantial differences cannot be explained, corrective measures would need 
to be considered. 
Domestically focused commercial banks 
I would now like to turn to the domestically focused commercial banks. In 2013, these banks 
further increased their already high exposure to mortgage and real estate market risk. First, 
growth  in  domestically  focused  banks’  mortgage  lending  was  almost  unchanged  from  the 
previous  year.  By  contrast,  the  big  banks’  lending  growth  decreased  significantly  in  2013. 
Second,  domestically  focused  banks’  risk  appetite  in  mortgage  lending  remained  high 
overall. While there has been a decline in the share of new mortgage loans with a high loan-
to-value  (LTV)  ratio  since  the  last  Financial  Stability  Report,  no  trend  towards  lower 
affordability  risks  is  discernible.  Third,  they  continued  to  carry  a  historically  high  level  of 
interest rate risk in the banking book. As a result, these banks are particularly vulnerable to 
adverse  scenarios  which  assume  a  significant  interest  rate  increase  coupled  with  a  price 
correction on the residential real estate market. 
While  domestically  focused  banks’  exposure  to  risk  is  high,  their  current  capital  ratios  are 
also  significantly  above  the  regulatory  minimum.  As  a  consequence,  substantial  capital 
buffers  are  available  in  the  system  to  absorb  losses  from  negative  developments  in  the 
economic and financial environment. Nonetheless, from a financial stability perspective, the 
banks’ high exposure to risk, coupled with the imbalances on the mortgage and real estate 
markets, is a source of concern. The situation calls for a prudent lending policy, both to limit 
banks’ future loss potential and to help prevent a further build-up of imbalances. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Regarding the latter, the different measures taken thus far by the authorities appear to have 
had some positive impact. Measures such as the revision of the self-regulation rules in July 
2012  and  the  activation  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  (CCB)  in  early  2013,  which 
contributed to strengthening banking sector resilience, seem to have helped contain market 
momentum. Nonetheless, imbalances built up further in 2013, thereby justifying the increase 
in the level of the CCB, decided by the Federal Council in January 2014. 
Since then, imbalances have remained almost unchanged. On the one hand, momentum on 
the mortgage market slowed somewhat during the first quarter of 2014. On the other, during 
the same period, the rate of real estate price growth remained similar to that observed over 
the  last  few  quarters,  only  slightly  exceeding  the  growth  of  fundamental  factors.  From  a 
financial stability perspective, these are welcome developments. 
Experience shows, however, that short-term changes in momentum do not necessarily imply 
a  change  in  trend.  Given  the  persistence  of  the  low  interest  rate  environment,  banks  and 
authorities  should  remain  alert  and  take  the  necessary  steps  to  keep  risks  for  financial 
stability in check. 
First,  measures  giving  banks  stronger  incentives  to  pursue  a  more  cautious  mortgage 
lending policy should be considered. Such measures should target both the owner-occupied 
residential property and the residential investment property segments. Efforts should now be 
directed  towards  preparing  regulatory  measures  that  could  be  implemented  swiftly  should 
momentum pick up again on the mortgage and residential real estate markets. 
Second, interest rate risk exposure in the banking book should be appropriately backed with 
capital.  Under  the  aegis  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  international 
standards on capital requirements for interest rate risk are currently being developed. Given 
the significance of this risk factor, domestically focused banks should ensure they adopt a 
prudent  stance  towards  measuring  and  managing  this  risk.  In  this  context,  the  SNB  fully 
supports FINMA’s efforts to ensure that risk-taking by individual banks is reduced or backed 
by  specific  capital  charges  whenever  the  risk  exposure  is  deemed  exceptionally  large  by 
historical or industry standards. 
In  parallel  with  these  measures,  the  SNB  will  continue  to  monitor  developments  on  the 
mortgage and real estate markets closely, and will reassess the need for an adjustment to 
the CCB on a regular basis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
