K C Chakrabarty: Indian banking – the new landscape 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Mint’s Annual Banking Conference 2014, Mumbai, 30 January 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Dr. Mridul Saggar is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Sukumar and Tamal, thank you very much, for this invite. I am happy to note that 
you and your paper – the Mint, have been focussing on the process of change for the Indian 
banking  that  is  presently  underway.  I  see  that  in  many  of  its  writings.  By  organizing  this 
discussion  on  “Indian  Banking:  The  New  Landscape”,  it  will  further  spur  thoughts  and 
debates in this area. That this discussion has drawn several doyens of the Indian banking, is 
a testimony to the importance of the issues we face as a banking community. I welcome all 
the  listed  speakers,  Smt.  Arundhati  Bhattacharya,  Chairman,  State  Bank  of  India;  Smt. 
Chanda  Kocchar,  MD  and  CEO,  ICICI  Bank  Limited;  Shri  Aditya  Puri,  MD,  HDFC  Bank 
Limited; Shri S.S. Mundra, CMD, Bank of Baroda; Shri Pramit Jhaveri, CEO, Citibank-India; 
Shri Sunil Kaushal, Regional Chief Executive, India & South Asia, Standard Chartered Bank 
as  also  exclusive  audience  here  comprising  of  senior  members  of  the  financial  services 
industry, members of the print and electronic media; ladies and gentlemen! Let me begin by 
stating that an “exclusive” audience cannot be a substitute for inclusive banking. Through this 
process of change, we have to move on faster to serve all in our society. The customer has 
to  be  the  king  and  the  banks  have  to  shift  their  attention  away  from  the  exclusive  club  of 
corporates and High Networth Individuals (HNIs) to those who still fear to tread through the 
bank’s glass  doors  and feel  hesitant  to  sit  on  its  sofas  or  approach  the counters.  Bankers 
should serve them with a smile and leave them with a feeling that they are as welcome and 
exclusive as any other and also that the banks can understand their needs and offer them 
“structured products” as per their requirements. More of this would come later. Suffice to say 
that “Inclusion” agenda will dominate the new landscape of the Indian banking in the coming 
days. 
Five questions on processes amidst changing business environment 
2. 
I know that you all will be keen to debate issues of emerging new banking structure 
with its building blocks in the form of new bank licenses, more liberal entry of foreign banks, 
mergers and acquisitions, required capital infusion to meet Basel III requirements, etc. Yes, 
these are important issues. But I intend to start my keynote address on the theme of “new 
landscape  for  Indian  banking”  with  a  little  broader  sweep.  There  is  a  need  to  bring  about 
significant changes in the banking processes in this country so that the banks of today can 
remain relevant in the days ahead. In my talk today, I intend to focus on the key challenges 
in  the  business  environment facing the Indian banking  industry  and five  important  process 
changes that would be needed to meet these impending challenges. 
First,  with  bringing  down  of  the  barriers  to  entry  in  the  banking  industry,  are  we 
3. 
geared for a more competitive banking industry that is likely to emerge? Second, a paradigm 
shift  is  taking  place  in  global  banking  activity  and  its  regulation  with  greater  emphasis  on 
managing financial risks. Are we adapting to it in right measure, without getting carried away 
by being overzealous in copying the regulatory changes, importing them in a CKD form or 
are we going to the other extreme of being obstinate and refusing to accept global norms and 
standards?  A  corollary  to  this  is  the  penchant  for  financial  innovations  and  financial 
engineering. Are we captive to it or are we using this for the benefit of the real sector that 
produces goods and services, consumes them, saves some and invests the surplus. Third, 
fear  is  the  worst  substitute  for  courage,  though  some  dose  of  it  may  be  necessary  to 
stimulate  defences.  A  question  I  would  like  to  ask  is,  in  view  of  the  current  asset  quality 
concerns,  are  we  making  efforts  to  improve  our  credit  appraisal  systems?  An  important 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
consideration  in  this  regard  would  be  to  appreciate  the  need  for  sustainable  development 
and hence, incorporating assessment of impact that the projects financed by the banks may 
have on the environment and the society. Fourth, technological change is affecting banks as 
well as other industries. In fact, technology has entered all facets of our lives. It can pose 
threat as well as throws opportunities for banks. The key point is whether we doing enough 
to  leverage  technology  to  our  advantage.  Fifth,  with  increasing  competitiveness  and 
information,  the  customer  is  becoming  more  demanding  than  before.  So  how  are  banks 
gearing  up  to  improve  customer  service,  commoditize  products  amidst  more  diversified 
demand for banking services and consequently, to offer wider menu choices. 
Gearing up for competition 
4. 
One inevitable outcome of the changing banking structure will be that the industry 
would have more players but simply bringing in more players would not make the banking 
industry more competitive. It is not as if there is lot of concentration in our banking industry. 
In fact, India scores over many of its peers as well as several advanced countries when it 
comes to concentration within the industry. Concentration measured by top three banks in 
total  banking  assets  is  just  under  30%.  This  compares  well  with  other  countries.  For 
Germany and Japan, it exceeds 75%, while that for China, Brazil, UK and France it exceeds 
50%  and  for  the  United  States  it  is  just  over  35%.  Herfindahl  index,  a  measure  of 
concentration ratio, shows that concentration is low and the index normalized to a range of 
zero  to  unity  reads  0.040  for  March  2013,  down  from  0.065  in  March  2000.  Apart  from 
concentration,  on  several  other  parameters  the  sector  appears  fairly  competitive.  Interest 
rates,  both  on  deposit  and  lending  side  are  essentially  deregulated.  Branch  licensing  has 
now  been  freed  subject  to  certain  well-founded  interventions  to  ensure  that  under-banked 
rural areas are not neglected. Foreign banks can seek licenses on tap. We plan to move in 
similar direction for private sector banks with passage of time after seeing the outcomes of 
the current initiative. 
5. 
However, even with these developments, the banking industry cannot be considered 
truly competitive. The reason for that is the major players have not really started competing 
with  each  other.  It  is  only  when  the  dominant  players  in  any  business  segment  start  to 
compete against each other that the consumer truly benefits in terms of prices and quality of 
service.  This  sadly  is  not  the  case  in  our  banking  sector.  In  my  opinion,  the  bigger  and 
stronger  players  would  not  be  averse  to  competition  as  the  new  banks  are  not  likely  to 
threaten their position at least in the medium term. The stronger players would rather use this 
opportunity  to  further  consolidate  their  position  by  innovating  and  improving  their  internal 
systems and processes. As I said before, if the customer experience in terms of quality of 
service and charges has to improve in this country, it can only happen through competition 
amongst  the  bigger  banks.  Therefore,  I  would  request  the  doyens  of  the  industry  present 
here, who represent the top public, private and foreign sector banks in the country, to begin a 
healthy competition amongst them. 
6. 
It  is  not  that  the  regulators  support  monopolistic  tendencies  in  the  Indian  banking 
system. It must be remembered that banking is a tightly regulated sector across the globe 
and  there  are  stiff  entry  barriers  for  obvious  reasons.  Banks  do  their  business  by  using 
depositors’ money and it is incumbent upon the regulators and supervisors to ensure their 
safety.  But,  we  do  need  more  banks  in  the  country  for  more  than  one  reason.  The  Net 
Interest Margins (NIMs) in India have not suffered much despite the pronounced downturn. 
At  around  2.8  per  cent  at  the  system  level,  they  suggest  that  banks  can  withstand  more 
competition.  At  the  system  level,  NIMs  are  closer  to  1  per  cent  for  banks  in  Japan,  UK, 
France and they are even lower in the case of Germany. At the same time, NIMs in India are 
less than those in Brazil and Russia. Our primary motive for allowing new banks, however, is 
to increase banking penetration in the country. More banks are needed because we need to 
take banking across the geography and to all income classes of the population. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Deploying financial innovations to support growth 
7. 
A stark trend in banking leading up to the global financial crisis was rapid financial 
innovation  and  financial  engineering.  The  pre-crisis  period  witnessed  efforts  by  financial 
engineers to find solutions to real sector problems in the financial sector. A very key reality 
was lost sight of which is, financial sector exists to subserve the real sector and it should not 
be  allowed  to  run  ahead  of  the  real  sector.  A  number  of  regulatory  reforms  have  been 
ushered in since, which has slowed down the pace of financial innovations and the extent of 
financial  engineering.  The  Dodd-Frank  Act  in  the  US  and  other  regulatory  changes  in  the 
euro zone and the UK have changed the face of banking. Through the crisis and after the 
crisis,  Indian  banking  industry  faced  a  more  stable  regulatory  environment  that  allowed 
changes and transformation to occur with due cognisance of the international standards and 
codes,  but  India  neither  retracted  on  the  financial  deregulation  nor  did  it  discourage  new 
innovations  within  the  ambit  of  its  regulatory  system  and  genuine  market  needs. 
Consequently, we have seen introduction of several new financial products that include credit 
default swaps, new cash-settled interest rate futures, inflation indexed bonds and certificates, 
etc. 
8. 
Once  the  global  financial  crisis  is  behind  us  and  banking  reforms  in  its  aftermath 
completed, the pace of financial innovations can pick-up again. But we need to ponder if our 
financial  innovations  are  growth-supportive  or  create  mere  notional  financial  gains  and 
losses.  Financial  innovations  bridge  the  missing  markets  to  provide  complete  markets, 
reduce  agency  costs,  facilitate  risk  sharing  and  improve  efficiency  and  economic  growth. 
However, they can lead to weaker financial and credit discipline, encourage excessive risk-
taking, add to market volatility and fuel asset price-led or credit-led boom-bust cycles risks. 
All  these  evils  will  mitigate  if  we,  as  bankers,  focus  on  financial  innovations  to  support 
economic growth. The innovations must lead to affordability. The innovation has to be what 
Dr. R. A. Mashelkar calls “inclusive.” Innovations must be aimed at serving the needs of the 
society. The benefits of innovations must reach the masses in form of cheaper prices and 
accessibility.  Where  do  we  stand  on  this  today?  Have  there  been  any  efforts  to  provide 
suitable banking products to those whose access to finance is restricted? Are there products 
that can meet the needs of a street hawker or the seasonal needs of an agrarian labourer? 
Why have our efforts at financial inclusion been so supply-driven and not demand-led? As I 
mentioned  earlier,  eliminating financial  exclusion  in  all  its  manifestations  would  have  to  be 
one of the underlying missions for the banks. 
Globalisation of regulation 
9. 
An  important  fallout  of  the  Financial  Crisis  has  been  internationalization  of  bank 
regulations.  More  and  more  bank  regulations  are  emerging  out  of  shared  understanding 
amongst  the  members  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Bank  Supervision,  Financial  Stability 
Board, the IMF, the World Bank etc., primarily with the objective of ensuring financial stability 
in a highly interconnected global financial system. As a member of the BCBS and FSB, India 
too  is  committed  to  implementing  the  regulatory,  supervisory  and  other  financial  sector 
policies which these global standard-setting bodies decide upon. In fact, the implementation 
of the regulations would be reviewed by peer regulators. Therefore, the Indian banks have to 
be  ready  to  “expect  the  unexpected”  and  prepare  to  live  with  more  and  more  stringent 
regulations. It is high time our banks start adopting the international best practices in their 
operations and stopped seeking regulatory forbearance at the earliest sign of distress. 
Strengthening credit appraisal system to address asset quality issues 
10. 
With  each  quarterly  corporate  results  season,  we  see  some  market  nervousness 
surrounding asset quality for the banks. Some of the concerns are genuine responses to the 
deterioration  in  the  asset quality.  However,  there  also  needs  to be  a  recognition that  NPA 
cycles  do  take  a  turn  with  changing  business  cycle  conditions. With  the  economy  slowing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
down,  gross  NPAs  of  the  public  sector  banks  have  increased  from  2.3  per  cent  in  March 
2011 to 4.8 per cent in September 2013. In net term, their ratio went up from 1.0 per cent to 
2.8 per cent over the same period. 
Moreover  restructured  standard  advances  to  gross  advances  rose  to  6.6  per  cent  by 
September  2013.  Undeniably,  these  are  signs  of  deterioration.  Yet  one  needs  to  consider 
that restructuring is a legitimate banking activity so long as it is practiced with due diligence 
and does not become a conduit to financial indiscipline. There are silver linings too. Slippage 
ratio of public sector banks has improved, coming down from 3.1 per cent at end-March 2013 
to 2.1 per cent at end-September 2013. There is some hope that the NPA cycle might bottom 
out ahead, especially if economic recovery sets in and investment activity picks up. 
11. 
However,  the  question  we  need  to  ask  ourselves  is  whether  the  fall  in  slippages 
comes  out  of  good  luck  or  good  policies  by  the  bank  boards.  Have  banks  learned  some 
lessons  from  this  cycle  of  asset  quality  deterioration?  The  cycle  has  certain  distinctive 
features  in  that  apart  from  cyclical  slowdown,  structural  and  sector-specific  issues  have 
worsened  the  asset  quality  of  the  banks.  Several  investment  projects,  especially  in 
infrastructure space, have got stuck for want of environmental or forest clearances or due to 
constraints  on  the  resources  front.  Banks  clearly  lacked  expertise  in  evaluating  these 
projects. There was no contingency planning. No exit route was thought of. Going forward, a 
key consideration for the banks and more specifically for public sector banks, would be to 
make a demonstrable improvement in their credit appraisal system. Some of you might have 
gone through my presentation in BANCON 2013 titled “Two Decades of Credit Management 
in Indian Banks: Looking Back and Moving Ahead”. A very disturbing fact which hits us is the 
quality of equity that has been brought in by the promoters. The banks, to put it mildly, have 
been very lackadaisical in the credit appraisals. Most of the time it is debt raised elsewhere 
by  the  promoter,  either  in  the  holding  company  or  in  a  SPV,  which  is  used  to  fund  their 
portion of the equity. Effectively, promoters do not have any “skin” in the game and they are 
least bothered whether or not the projects see the light of the day. The “source” and “quality” 
of  equity  brought  in  by  the  promoters  is  a  major  element  which  the  banks  would  have  to 
carefully examine in their credit appraisal going forward. 
12. 
Let me now come to another common lacuna in the banks’ credit appraisal process. 
We  know  that  banks  and  financial  institutions  are  leveraged  entities  but  the  leverage 
witnessed  in  some  of  the  corporate  groups  dramatically  overshadow  the  leverage  of  the 
banks. Evidence suggests that the banks were not taking adequate cognisance of the build-
up of leverage while sanctioning or renewing limits. In fact, banks’ credit appraisal processes 
failed to differentiate between promoter’s debt and equity and over time, promoters’ equity 
contribution  significantly  declined  and  leverage  increased.  In  particular,  there  has  been  a 
significant increase in the indebtedness of large business groups in recent years. A study of 
ten  large  corporate  groups  has  revealed  that  the  share  of  these  groups  in  total  banking 
sector  credit  more  than  doubled  between  2007  and  2013  even  while,  the  overall  debt  of 
these groups rose six times (from under Rs. one trillion to over Rs. six trillion). Hence, this is 
an area where the banks need to focus more closely in future. 
13. 
At the same time, banks cannot ignore their own capital requirement for supporting 
the  projected  growth  of  their  balance  sheet.  They  must  closely  look  at  the  state  of  the 
economy,  expected  credit  expansion,  requirements  of  provision  for  loan  losses  and  other 
present and future liabilities and model them into their capital requirement. 
As I mentioned earlier, another area where the banks need to be sensitive about in 
14. 
their  appraisal  is  the  environment.  Banks  as  the  financing  agent  of  the  economic  and 
developmental  activities  have  an 
in  promoting  overall  sustainable 
development.  It  is  in  this  respect  that  the  concept  of  green  banking  has  emerged  and  is 
recognized  as  an  important  strategy  to  address  sustainable  development  concerns  and 
creating  awareness  among  people  about  environmental  responsibility.  Promoting  Green 
banking has to be the way forward for banks across the globe. Green Banking entails banks 
important 
role 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to encourage environment friendly investments and give lending priority to those industries 
which have already turned green or are trying to go green and, thereby, help to restore the 
natural environment. 
15. 
As  a  part  of  the  Corporate  Social  Responsibility,  the  companies  are  required  to 
integrate  social  and  environmental  concerns  in  their  business  operations  and  in  their 
interactions  with  their  stakeholders  on  a  voluntary  basis.  The  banks  /financial  institutions 
would also need to keep themselves abreast of the latest developments in this area and help 
build  a  sustainable  environment  through  good  banking  practices.  This  is  important  for 
ensuring that the banks remain socially relevant. 
16. 
The banks need to beef up their market intelligence and economic analysis, so that 
they  can  catch  demand-supply  gaps,  such  as  those  in  minerals  and  mining  space,  better 
than they have. Only then can the deterioration in asset quality be turned around. Have the 
banks  sufficiently  moved  in  this  direction?  I  would  rather  wait  for  your  introspection  rather 
than the answer. 
Know your customer, his business and business risks 
17. 
Let me now turn to a related issue, which is KYC. This is to my mind one of the most 
misunderstood concepts in banking parlance. KYC to a certain extent can be considered as 
a necessary evil. But, KYC goes much more beyond a simple proof of identify and proof of 
address for the banks. KYC is a critical component of a bank’s risk management framework. 
A customer-centric business needs to know its customer, the nature of his business and the 
inflows/  outflows  into  the  accounts,  if  it  is  to  provide  customised  business  products  and 
solutions. This, I call as KYC-B. The banks further need to understand the risks associated 
with  customer’s  business  to  manage  risks  arising  from  potential  delinquency,  fraud  and 
consequent losses as also legal and reputational risks arising from exposure to customers 
having links to Multi level Marketing (MLM) business/terrorist activities/ hawala transactions, 
etc., which is another manifestation of KYC and may be termed as KYC BR. The Know Your 
Customer  (KYC),  Know  Your  Customers’  Business  (KYC-B)  and  Know  Your  Customers’ 
Business Risks (KYC-BR) should be ingrained in the DNA of the bank’s business. It should 
be  understood  that  it  is  not  just  procedural  compliance,  but  that  good  KYC  and  KYC-BR 
compliance are important for the bank’s business. 
Leveraging technology and making technical progress 
18. 
A wave of technology change has already occurred as banks adopted core baking 
technology to enhance customer relationships and expand the market for banking services. 
These technologies could enable banks to “go-to-customers” and enable door-step banking 
through virtual banking. For instance, cloud computing and big data technologies can reap 
both scale and scope economies. What is important is not the name of the technologies, but 
what they do eventually. Banking technology is poised to make a big leap in the near term 
towards  integrating  customer  data  across  banking  platforms,  facilitating  trading  in  a  more 
secure  manner,  developing  virtual  desktops  and  private  clouds  to  centralize  information 
across  desktops  by  making  them  available  to  different  employees  on  need-basis,  enable 
speedier transaction processing and faster settlements. 
19. 
Technology  should  not,  however,  be  acquired  for  the  sake  of  it.  Unless,  it  is 
employed gainfully and helps enhance procedural and cost efficiency, technology adoption 
cannot  be  considered  meaningful.  The  technology  ought  to  help  the  banks  achieve  cost-
effective  scalability  in  the  services  they  render.  Such  technology  should  contribute  to 
enhancing  productivity,  especially  through  total  factor  productivity  growth  in  the  banking 
industry.  I,  however,  see  statements  suggesting  that  the  cost  of  service  delivery  has 
escalated  post  adoption  of  technology  and  bankers  are  contemplating  levying  charges  on 
their own customers for using their ATMs. I find the position quite amusing actually. Have we 
made a comparative assessment of the expenses of delivering services at the branch and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
the  ATM?  I  urge  my  banker  friends  to  take  a  holistic  view  of  things  and  harness  the 
technology to its optimum rather than blaming the technology itself. 
Commoditizing banking products amidst wider menu choices 
20. 
Two  emerging  trends  in  the  banking  space  are  greater  competition  and  a  more 
discerning customer, who is aided by less information asymmetry and more knowledge in the 
world  where  ICT  revolution  has  occurred  and  where  media  and  internet  penetration  has 
empowered  him.  In  this  world,  what  strategy  could  work  best for the  banks?  Actually  they 
need to realize that customer wants wider menu choice and more tailored products to meet 
their needs. At a time when banks are facing increasing competition amongst themselves, as 
also from non-banking intermediaries, they are left with little choice but to adapt themselves 
to  meeting  the  customer  needs  or  else  risk  losing  their  clients.  At  the  same  time,  more 
competition also means that they need to reap economies of scale and scope more fully. For 
reaping these, banks need to commoditize their products and produce them in large scale so 
as to bring down the average and the marginal cost of producing them. The banking in that 
sense has to traverse from being “class” to “mass”. This is quite a challenging job. 
21. 
The solution perhaps lies in banks turning themselves into mega stores, with a wide 
array of services that it can offer, leveraging on technology. They can then offer customized 
web pages for individuals based on their profile and the need. This alone can ensure cost-
effective delivery of products and services right at customers’ door steps. 
22. 
Talking  of  customers  let  me  remind  you  that  consumer  protection  and  fair  market 
conduct are two themes which are at the forefront of regulators’ agenda and would continue 
to  engage  their  attention  going  forward.  The  growing  regularly  activism  is  evident  in  the 
frequency  and  quantum  of  penalties  being  levied  on  banks  worldwide.  Whether,  it  is  the 
European  Commission  slapping  record  fines  on  major  banks  and  financial  institutions  for 
making undue profits or masking their problems by fraudulently rigging the rates or whether it 
is  the  US  Fed  putting  fines  on  the  banks  in  America  for  selling  bad  loans  to  government-
controlled companies Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the trend of activism has emerged. An 
outcome  of  these  developments  has  been  creation  of  new  regulatory  bodies  to  focus 
exclusively on consumer protection and financial market conduct. We are also witnessing a 
lot  of  mis-selling  by  the  banks,  not  only  of  the  banking  products  but  also  the  non-banking 
financial  products  that  they  sell  at  their  braches,  especially  insurance.  The  purpose  of 
allowing banks to sell the non-financial products is not to create an avenue for generating 
non-interest income and to facilitate customers’ diverse needs. So the banks must not aim 
only  at  the  former  and  they  should,  in  fact,  link  their  sales  to  the  needs  of  their  banking 
customers. The insurance products that the banks sell must be low premium with the income 
for banks staggered over the entire life of the product. Believe me, unless we mend our ways 
quickly,  we  must  be  prepared  for  more  intrusive  regulation  in  this  area  with  a  significant 
bearing on your compliance cost. 
23. 
I would conclude by saying that rather than worrying about the new landscape that 
the banks would have to encounter, the brilliant minds assembled here must deliberate on 
the  actions  that  they  need  to  take  to  prepare  the  banking  sector  to  face  the  upcoming 
challenges. I believe that the panel discussion would throw up some actionable ideas. These 
are some of my thoughts that I want to leave with you in the twilight of my career as a banker 
and  bank  regulator.  However,  as  I  see  the  tectonic  shifts  occurring  in  the  banking  space 
ahead, I cannot afford to rest. As they say, age wrinkles the body, quitting wrinkles the soul. 
So I can go on and on, but in the interest of time, let me close by wishing you all a fruitful 
deliberation. 
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
