  Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Practical, not conventional, wisdom has driven Sri 
Lanka’s rebuilding and reconciliation 
Article by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 3 April 2014. 
 About  five  years  ago,  Sri  Lanka  faced  three  daunting  economic  challenges.  To  deal  with 
those  challenges,  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  implemented  certain  pragmatic  strategies  that 
challenged conventional wisdom. 
At the time of defeating terrorism in May 2009, a massive investment was required to restore 
normalcy  in  the  terror-torn  Northern  Province.  Conventional  wisdom  suggested  that  the 
rebuilding, rehabilitation and restoration should be carried out at a moderate pace, without 
burdening the economy unduly, and without placing government expenditure under stress. 
However, even at the risk of experiencing a spike in the fiscal deficit in the years 2009 and 
2010, Sri Lanka executed a rapid action plan to de-mine land, re-settle IDPs, and upgrade 
infrastructure in the war-affected areas. That investment brought quick relief to the hundreds 
of thousands of people who had suffered during the 30 year war. 
The  cost?  A  staggering  US$  3.2  billion  over  4  years,  or  nearly  6%  of  GDP!  The  direct 
benefit?  Rapid  clearance  of  over  a  million  landmines  from  the  Northern  Province:  speedy 
resettlement  of  nearly  300,000  IDPs;  early  restoration  of  the  infrastructure:  considerable 
progress  in  agriculture,  fisheries  and  SME  activity:  significant  increase  in  industrial 
production and domestic tourism: major transformation in the financial sector; and creation of 
new entrepreneurs and job opportunities;  
The  overall  outcome?  A  peaceful  country  without  a  single  terrorist  incident;  significant 
country-wide  economic  growth;  and  sharp  reduction  in  poverty  levels.  These  incredible 
outcomes  vividly  reflected  the  extraordinary  benefits  that  had  been  reaped  via  practical 
wisdom! 
Around 2008, the country was trapped in a “vicious cycle” that had hampered growth since 
independence:  high  fiscal  deficits  leading  to  high  inflation;  high  inflation  leading  to  high 
interest rates; high interest rates leading to low investor confidence; low investor confidence 
leading to sluggish investment; sluggish investment leading to lower growth than potential; 
lower  growth  and  high  fiscal  deficits  leading  to  unfavorable  debt  dynamics  which  in  turn, 
impacted fiscal deficits adversely. This vicious cycle was deep rooted, and many Sri Lanka’s 
economists who subscribed to conventional wisdom used to lament that this cycle was the 
country’s “karma” (fate), and that it would be impossible to break free from that grip! 
To  escape,  a  radical  change  in  policies  and  perspectives  was  needed,  and  Sri  Lanka 
responded  by  introducing  several  bold  policy  initiatives  across  several  fronts:  excessive 
monetary expansion was contained through unconventional monetary policies such as tight 
quantitative  tightening;  recurrent  fiscal  expenditure  was  curtailed  while  preserving  public 
investment for infrastructure development; monetary and fiscal policies were-coordinated to 
bring about overall macroeconomic stability; new foreign investment was targeted through a 
steady  pipeline  of  major  projects  and  investments  in  government  bonds.  These  new 
measures led to an average annual growth of 7.5% over the four years, 2010 to 2013 and 
thus, the vicious cycle was converted into a new virtuous cycle, with inflation in single digits, 
shrinking debt to GDP ratios, and low interest rates. 
In 2009, Sri Lanka also faced another major challenge: the threat to its external account. The 
effect  of  Global  Financial  Crisis  had  impacted  Sri  Lanka,  and  large  scale  overseas  bond 
redemptions had resulted. 
It was soon clear that some external support was required to stave off this challenge, and Sri 
Lanka decided to avail itself of the IMF facilities via a stand-by arrangement (SBA). The key 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  objective of the SBA was for Sri Lanka to build up its foreign reserves to more comfortable 
levels to meet the uncertain global environment. 
The issue however was that the IMF, in its conventional wisdom, was insisting that Sri Lanka 
sharply depreciates its currency in order to curb its trade and current account deficits which, 
in their view, would help the country to build up reserves. The IMF also held the view that Sri 
Lanka must significantly increase government revenue by raising taxes. 
In theory and normal circumstances, IMF’s suggestions may have had merit. However, the 
Sri  Lankan  authorities  who  had  a  deep  practical  understanding  of  the  socio-economic 
challenges facing Sri Lanka, held a different view. 
The  authorities’  view  was  that  since  the  conflict  had  ended,  there  was  an  urgent  need  to 
reconstruct  the  terror-affected  areas,  which  covered  almost  one  third  of  the  country’s  land 
mass, and two thirds of its coastal belt. New economic activities had to be promoted for the 
peace  dividend  to  be  realized.  Such  new  activities  would  necessitate  a  high  import 
expenditure, which in turn, would create new capacity for economic growth. 
In such circumstances, if the Sri Lankan Rupee were to depreciate I sharply, it would lead to 
a significant reduction in the imports necessary for reconstruction and a slow-down of new 
economic  activities.  Those  outcomes,  together  with  the  resulting  higher  levels  of  inflation 
would have kept Sri Lanka trapped in the vicious cycle. 
Accordingly, through negotiations, the Sri Lankan authorities were able to convince the IMF 
that Sri Lanka would commit itself to building its reserves, but would do so, while allowing the 
exchange rate to adjust according to economic fundamentals and market conditions, instead 
of  forcing  an  artificial,  sharp  depreciation  of  the  currency.  The  Sri  Lankan  authorities  also 
took the view that lower tax rates would spur growth and ultimately increase revenues, and 
based on such view, they were able to convince the IMF that it would be better to lower tax 
rates  and  encourage  economic  activity.  Subsequent  economic  outcomes  have  since 
confirmed the wisdom of both these moves by the Sri Lankan authorities! 
Although  this  trio  of  major  challenges  have  now  been  effectively  addressed  through  the 
application of unconventional wisdom, Sri Lankan authorities realize that they must continue 
to practice innovation in order to reach their long term goals. At the same time, Sri Lanka 
must also preserve the country’s peaceful environment and political stability, in order to make 
these outcomes sustainable.  
In this regard, Sri Lanka is now facing a fresh challenge, where human rights advocates of 
the  US  and  the  West,  are  focusing  on  the  last  phases  of  the  30  year  war  on  terror,  and 
raising  certain  human  rights  issues  and  prescribing  various  “foreign”  solutions  to  those 
perceived issues. In this situation too, just as conventional economists did not appreciate the 
practical  benefits  of  the  innovative  economic  strategies,  theoretical  human  rights  activists 
also  do  not  seem  to  appreciate  Sri  Lanka’s  strategy  of  ushering  long  lasting  peace  to  its 
communities in a practical and effective manner, without inflicting further anxiety, pain and 
anguish on the people. 
Sri  Lanka  is  a  vibrant,  practising  democracy  and  a  country  with  a  2500  year  history, 
emerging  out  of  a  long  and  bloody  conflict.  It  has  the  maturity  and  the  ability  to  deal  with 
issues confronting the country, in accordance with its own systems, culture and democratic 
traditions. 
So  far,  all  Sri  Lankans  have  been  able  to  enjoy  peace,  by  practising  a  hybrid  system  of 
restorative  justice  and  rapid  economic  and  political  development.  In  that  background,  it  is 
vital  that  the  country  is  not  pushed  into  “foreign-grown”  solutions  of  international  agencies 
and others, who unfortunately, sometimes appear to be influenced by certain human rights 
crusaders, who have been well- known terror activists in the past. 
It is also worthy to recall that, in its commitment to the principle of restorative justice following 
the conflict, the Sri Lankan government has already granted amnesty to more than 11,000 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  former  Tamil  Tiger  terrorists,  some  of  whom  have  even  committed  grave  crimes.  In  such 
circumstances, if the government were to open new investigations as proposed by some, it 
could  turn  the  clock  back  and  cause  great  anxiety  to  those  offenders  who  have  been 
forgiven, and may even lead to some of them reverting back to violence. At the same time, 
some  of  the  proposed  “foreign”  interventions  that  seem  to  be  narrowly  focused  on  the 
conduct  of  the  Sri  Lankan  armed  forces  only,  could  also  be  construed  as  unfair  and/or 
selective treatment towards the Sri Lankan armed forces who defeated terrorism, and could 
lead to a consequent de-stabilization of the country. 
Practical wisdom would therefore suggest that reconciliation between communities must be 
allowed to follow a “home-grown” path in keeping with the time and space as set out by those 
who suffered the agony of terror, and those who are today responsible for maintaining the 
peace in the country. Needless to say, such reconciliation cannot and must not be “imposed” 
by foreigners who do not carry the burden of being responsible to the Sri Lankan people. 
As  every  Sri  Lankan  living  in  the  country  would  readily  acknowledge,  Sri  Lanka’s  overall 
objective in defeating terrorism was not only to win the military battle, but also to place the 
country firmly on a sustainable path of peace, prosperity and growth for all of its people. For 
that objective to be achieved, Sri Lanka must follow its own time frames and priorities, and if 
need  be,  challenge  conventional  wisdom  as  proposed  by  outside  parties,  however  well-
meaning their intentions may appear to be. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
