  Ravi Menon: Budget carefully, borrow responsibly, invest wisely 
Remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the Launch of the Tamil Financial Literacy Guide, Singapore, 16 November 2014. 
 Mr Kumaran Barathan, CEO of SINDA 
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
 Value of patience and prudence 
In the 1960s and 1970s, a psychology professor at Stanford University in the US conducted 
a study on children’s behaviour. 
 
He offered each child a choice: get a marshmallow immediately or, if they waited a 
little longer, get two marshmallows. 
Some children did not want to wait, or perhaps they had doubts about the professor 
keeping his word. So, they chose to have their sweet there and then. 
Others were more patient and received two marshmallows, as promised. 
 
Fast forward 20 years. Follow-up studies were done on the same group of children. 
 
Those  children  who  had  chosen  to  delay  getting  their  marshmallow  generally 
performed better in their lives. 
They achieved better test results in school, for example. 
And yes, they kept themselves in better shape too! 
 
 
The results have intrigued psychologists, social scientists, and educators ever since. Many 
more  studies  are  being  conducted  and  more  elaborate  theories  are  being  proposed  to 
explain them. 
But maybe our forefathers knew the answer all along: the value of patience and prudence; in 
other words, delay rewards today so that we can reap greater rewards tomorrow. Does that 
not offer a recipe for success in so many areas of our lives? 
 
We  tell  our  children  to  play  less  and  study  more,  so  that  they  can  acquire  the 
education necessary to lead productive and comfortable lives in future. 
We tell ourselves to eat less and exercise more, so that we can keep in good health 
for a longer time and continue to enjoy good food. 
Should it be any different in matters financial? 
Budget carefully 
Borrow responsibly 
Invest wisely 
 
What does it mean to be patient and prudent in finance? Three things. 
 
 
 
These  are  the  three  areas  that  MoneySENSE  –  our  national  financial  education 
programme  –  will  focus  on  increasingly.  MoneySENSE  –  spearheaded  by  MAS  and 
involving  a  number  of  government  agencies  –  has  been  working  in  partnership  with  the 
financial industry, education institutes, and professional and consumer associations to help 
empower Singaporeans to manage their finances well. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Budget carefully 
Let me start with budgeting – the first area of focus. 
The financial questions we face in our lives are quite similar to the dilemma the children had 
with their marshmallows. If anything, they are more complicated. For one, marshmallows or 
the good things in life are usually not free. We have to pay for them with money we receive 
from working or from our savings. Or from borrowing. 
In our lives, there are many marshmallows to tempt us: 
 
 
 
 
Budgeting is critical to making financial decisions that work for us. One does not need to be a 
financial expert to do effective budgeting. Many regular people do this very well, on a weekly 
or monthly basis. 
 
Do I buy that expensive pair of shoes? 
How much should I spend on my wedding? 
Can I afford to upgrade my HDB flat? 
Should I take a holiday in Penang or Perth? 
They look at how much they have, what they want to set aside, and what they need 
to buy. 
They compare prices for the best deals, look out for bargains and sales, and stretch 
their dollar. 
Most important, they set a target for how much they want to save and stick to the 
discipline, buying only what they need and postponing the rest. 
  Building  up  our  savings  puts  us  in  a  stronger  position  to  plan  for  big  ticket  items  such  as 
buying a home as well as to meet emergency expenditures. Saving is key to funding long-
term commitments such as our children’s education and our own retirement needs. 
Borrow responsibly 
Second, borrowing. Even with savings, most of us have to borrow at some point in our lives: 
to buy a house, pay for education, or meet an emergency. It is not wrong to have debt. But 
good financial planning is about keeping debt low and managing it well. 
Most  Singaporeans  manage  their  debt  well.  The  consumer  credit  situation  in  Singapore  is 
healthy, with strong household balance sheets, especially compared to many other countries. 
But a small minority of people have problems related to excessive borrowing. 
According  to  Credit  Counselling  Singapore,  overspending  is  one  of  the  top  reasons  why 
people fall into debt. This brings us back to the importance of budgeting and not spending 
beyond our means. 
MAS  has  in  place  safeguards  to  discourage  excessive  borrowing  on  credit  cards  and 
unsecured credit. We are one of the few countries in the world that have such extensive rules 
on the use of credit cards. These rules have generally helped to keep us out of trouble. Even 
so,  some  3%  of  those  who  have  borrowed  on  credit  cards  and  unsecured  credit  have 
accumulated debt that exceeds their annual income. 
And  this  does  not  mean  that  secured  borrowing  –  to  buy  a  house  or  car  –  is  free  of  risk. 
When we borrow, we have to make sure that we can service our debt even if interest rates 
rise  or  our  income  falls.  Households  who  have  over-extended  themselves  often  get  into 
deeper debt when they cannot service their existing debts and end up borrowing even more. 
And once they are in a debt spiral, it becomes very difficult to get out. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In recent years, MAS has tightened loan-to-value ratios for housing loans, and introduced the 
Total  Debt  Servicing  Ratio  (TDSR)  framework  to  prevent  households  from  over-stretching 
themselves. 
Invest wisely 
As we build up our savings, some of us may wish to invest part of it to obtain higher returns. 
Investments  in  bonds,  equities,  mutual  funds  (or  unit  trusts)  and  other  financial  products 
typically yield higher returns than bank deposit rates over the medium to long term. But they 
also carry higher risks. 

For the majority of financial investments, neither the returns nor the principal amount
invested  are  guaranteed.  This  means  we  could  potentially  get  less  than  what  we
have put in.
MAS has set stringent disclosure requirements for financial products. We also require that 
information be provided in a clear and concise manner, through the use of Product Highlight 
Sheets, for example. 
But  the  responsibility  ultimately  lies  with  the  investor.  Every  month,  MAS  receives,  on 
average, about 10 complaints from the public involving the sale of investment products. To 
be sure, some of them involve mis-selling or poor disclosure, for which the financial adviser 
or institution is responsible. But there many others – sad stories of people who have lost their 
money because they did not exercise basic due diligence: 

people  who  were  attracted  by  the  lure  of  high  returns  and  purchased  investment
products without realising their risks;
people who listened to tips about “sure-to-win” investments and invested large sums
of money in them without reading the product documentation;
people  who  signed  blank  sheets  of  product  assessment 
understanding what they were buying.
forms  without
  It is very difficult to help in cases like these. 
Helping Singaporeans invest wisely is a major thrust of our financial education efforts. The 
lessons are simple. 




High returns come with high risks.
Do not put money into investments you do not understand.
Do not put all your eggs in the same basket; diversify your investments:.
Keep your investments simple and for the long-term.
Bringing financial education to the community 
If people can manage their finances well, it will help to minimise many other social problems. 
Community organisations like SINDA and the media have been playing an important role in 
bringing  financial  education  to  the  community  and  encouraging  prudent  financial  habits 
among  the  community.  Individual  members  of  the  community  have  also  contributed  to 
making financial education more accessible to the public. 
Ponnaana  Ethirkaalam  (“Golden  Future”),  written  by  MP  Sellvem  and  Jaafar  Ghany,  is  a 
shining example of such an initiative. 

The  book  explains  key  concepts  in  personal  financial  management  in  easy-to-
understand Tamil.
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3
  But more interestingly, it provides useful financial advice relating to each of the key 
milestones  in  our  lives:  buying  a  home,  starting  a  family,  funding  children’s 
education, looking after aged parents, planning for retirement. 
 In  fact,  the  book  starts  with  the  premise  of  life  as  a  journey  that  requires  careful  financial 
planning. And such planning is based on the values of patience and prudence. 
அதாவது,  நமது  வாழக்ைகப்  பயணத்திற்கு  நிதித்  திட்டமிடுதல்  அவசியம். 
இவ்வாறு  திட்டமிடுவதற்கு,  ெபாறுைமயும்  முன்மதியும்  அடிப்பைடப் 
பண்புகளாகும். 
The practical insights in Ponnaana Ethirkaalam are relevant not only for the Tamil or Indian 
community but for all Singaporeans. I understand the authors have plans to translate their 
book into English to reach out to more people. 
I  congratulate  MP  Sellvem  and  Jaafar  Ghany  on  their  achievement  and  wish  them  every 
success in the launch of Ponnaana Ethirkaalam. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
