  
 
Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Unleash prosperity through regional connectivity 
Address  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
“AEC+3 Summit  and  Expo”,  jointly  sponsored  by  Kasikornbank,  the  International  Trade 
Promotion  Department,  the  Board  of  Investment  and  The  Economist  magazine,  Bangkok, 
2 November 2014. 
 Chairman Banthoon, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
2. 
3. 
5. 
6. 
First of all, I would like to thank Kasikornbank for inviting me to speak here at the 
AEC+3 Summit. This event comes at an opportune time in light of the excitement 
surrounding the ASEAN Economic Community. 
As  single  entities,  the  countries  of  ASEAN  are  characterized  by  their  diverse  size 
and  development.  As  a  unified  bloc,  however,  the  picture  changes  dramatically: 
ASEAN  is  the  world’s  third  in  terms  of  population  and  the  world’s fifth  in  terms of 
trade and investment flows. Being the world’s most diverse economic region is also 
a key strength which has hurled ASEAN into an important player in the global supply 
chain. 
Much has been achieved already, yet much more is still within our reaches. But to 
reach our potentials, we need to enhance on connectivity, not only  within ASEAN 
but also with our Plus Three partner countries. It is on this theme of connectivity that 
I will focus this evening: I will first provide a snapshot of what has been achieved 
under ASEAN financial connectivity. I will then use this as a platform to link with the 
Plus Three partners and will conclude with ways to unleash mutual prosperity from 
these connectivity initiatives. 
Key areas in ASEAN financial connectivity 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
4. 
Integration under the AEC, be it in trade or investment flows, has naturally called for 
a robust financial integration framework to support such flows. We central bankers in 
ASEAN  have  begun  working  on  our  ASEAN  Financial  Integration  Framework 
since 2011, which aims to create a semi-integrated financial market by 2020. Work 
on  this  initiative  is  driven  by  various  areas  that  currently  define  ASEAN  financial 
connectivity. Let me highlight two prominent ones: 
The first is our work on banking integration through the establishment of “Qualified 
ASEAN  Banks”  or  QABs.  While  there  are  ASEAN  banks  currently  operating  in 
other  ASEAN  countries,  this  has  been  the  result  of  unilateral  liberalization.  The 
increasing trade and investment flows in the region call for a more transparent and 
open system. Our ASEAN banking integration will have a multilateral framework as 
a  broad  basis.  This  will  underpin  bilateral  agreements  between  home  and  host 
countries  as  to  which  banks  will  become  QABs.  We  have  had  a  long  discussion 
among central banks of all ten countries on this framework, and I am glad to inform 
you  that  the  framework  of  the  QAB  is  being  finalized  and  bilateral  discussions 
should start once this is done. 
The second one is on the linking of ASEAN capital markets: We have linked up 
stock  markets  of  Bangkok,  Kuala  Lumpur  and  Singapore  since  2012,  and  more 
exchanges  are  joining  up.  Right  now,  an  investor  in  Bangkok  can  buy  shares  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  listed companies in these two bourses and vice versa. While a front-office platform 
has been established, we still need to integrate their back offices to create seamless 
trading, clearing, custody and settlement of shares. We are currently developing this 
framework  under  the  “ASEAN  Capital  Market  Infrastructure  Blueprint”,  which  has 
already received approval from our Finance Ministers earlier this year. 
ASEAN as a platform to ASEAN+3 connectivity 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
7. 
ASEAN does not see itself as an exclusive club but rather as a platform to increase 
ties with our Plus Three partners in the region: China, Japan and Korea, which also 
represent  important  global  economic  powerhouses.  Let  me  now  draw  attention  to 
two key developments in this front. 
First  is  the  development  under  the  ASEAN+3’s Asian Bond Market Initiative or 
ABMI. Recently, the ABMI has created a Credit Guarantee and Investment Facility 
or  CGIF  which  has  supported  the  issuance  of  corporate  bonds  in  ASEAN+3  by 
providing credit enhancement to allow eligible issuers to access local currency bond 
markets.  Since  its  inception  in  2010,  the  CGIF  has  guaranteed  bond  issuances 
including a recent one that allowed a Singapore-listed and Hong Kong- based firm to 
issue Thai baht bonds in the Thai market. 
Work  under  ABMI  has  also  focused  on  establishing  the  Asian  Bond  Online  to 
provide  comprehensive  information  on  sovereign  and  corporate  bonds  to  both 
regional and international investors. 
Second,  is  on  infrastructure  financing:  We  have  recently  created  the  ASEAN 
Infrastructure Fund or AIF with an initial endowment of almost half a billion dollars 
and will be issuing bonds to finance its operations. It has already begun lending with 
a $ 25 million loan to finance power links in Indonesia last year and is expected to 
carry out about six projects each year throughout 2015 totaling $ 1 billion. 
The AIF should be complementary to the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. 
With initial groundwork laid in Beijing two weeks ago, it aims to give project loans for 
infrastructure  development.  Thailand  and  20  other  countries  in  the  region  are 
founding  members  of  this  bank,  which  will  have  an  initial  capital  of  $  100  billion. 
Once  it  begins  operations  in  2015,  we  hope  to  see  a  new  wave  of  infrastructure 
financing that will enhance connectivity in the whole region. 
How can we unleash prosperity from regional connectivity? 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
12. 
What I have just highlighted are some examples of region-wide initiatives by ASEAN 
governments  and  central  banks  along  with  those  of  the  Plus  Three  to  spur 
connectivity.  Opportunities  are  already  in  store for  ASEAN  as  the  world’s  seventh 
largest economy. Combined with the Plus Three countries will turn the whole region 
to  be  the  world’s  largest  economy  and  market.  However,  trade  flows  among  the 
13 countries,  only  amount  to  10%  of  global  trade,  hence  there’s  much  room  for 
further growth especially as our countries are increasingly inter-connected. 
We from the public sector have created financial highways to link up our vibrant 
economies  and  have  found  ways  to  finance  physical  roads  and  highways.  To 
recapitulate my message: 
• 
Financial integration within ASEAN is targeted to support the large markets 
of  goods,  services  and  financial  products  in  the  region.  Financing  economic 
activities  of  ASEAN  needs  not  only  strong  but  also  interlinked  banks  and 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
13. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 14. 
15. 
  financial 
institutions.  Financing  opportunities  grow  significantly  when 
expanding  these  linkages  to  the  Plus  Three  countries.  Firms  can  tap  on  to 
various  modes  of  financing  in  equities  and  bond  markets  to  expand  their 
businesses to match the growing trade and investment flows. 
The other area is on infrastructure development: While the barriers of tariffs 
have  fallen,  trade  among  us  cannot  flourish  if  we  are  constantly  facing 
infrastructural bottlenecks. The ADB has estimated that Asia has a demand for 
infrastructure to the tune of $ 8 trillion over ten years. This is where the Asian 
Infrastructure  Fund  and  the  Asian  Infrastructure  Investment  Bank  come  into 
play 
for 
development and trade beyond the AEC to Plus Three. Through this, a new 
regional logistics-based sector is about to take shape. 
these  bottlenecks  and  open  up  vast  potentials 
to  address 
But, in the end, our region’s economic dynamism is essentially driven by the 
private sector, and this is why the key to unleashing mutual prosperity is in your 
hands. 
Whether  you  are  a  banker,  an  investor,  or  an  entrepreneur,  it  is  you  who  will  be 
using these financial and infrastructure linkages. I would therefore urge you all to tap 
onto this tremendous opportunity that is arising by, for example, 
• 
• 
• 
Venturing abroad to invest in new markets in ASEAN; 
Expanding your businesses through our linked capital markets; and 
Taking part in the new regional logistics based sector. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
16. 
I am very pleased to learn that tomorrow you as representatives of 36 banks from 
ASEAN+3 countries will be signing the “Bangkok Declaration” to bolster your mutual 
cooperation.  This  demonstrates  that  the  private  sector  has  already  taken  the  cue 
from us in the public sector to tap on opportunities in the region. I congratulate you 
all in advance and hope that other industries would follow suit. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
