  R Gandhi: Structure of foreign banks for emerging nations – Indian case 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
ASIFMA  (Asia  Securities  Industry  and  Financial  Markets)  Annual  Conference  2014 
“Developing Asia’s Capital Market”, Singapore, 6 November 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Shri S. Venkata Raman is gratefully acknowledged. 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
1. 
It  is  a  pleasure  and  privilege  to  be  among  the  banking  and  finance  industry 
participants and fellow regulators in this ASIFMA Annual Conference on Developing Asia’s 
Capital  Market.  The  theme  of  the  Conference  is  very  contemporary.  Though  the  theme 
relates  to  Capital  Market,  I  also  find  that  you  had  included  credit  and  banking  in  the 
discussions. And I find that one of the panel sessions was specific to India, besides many 
other sessions which also have direct relevance to the Indian context. That panel discussed 
opening up Indian capital market. I intend to talk about opening up foreign banking in India. 
2.  
The  foreign  banks  play  a  transformational  role  in  influencing  the  host  country 
economies. On the one hand they act as a key vehicle in channelizing foreign investments; 
on the other hand they bring in efficiencies and boost competitive spirit amongst the financial 
sector entities, thereby, raising the efficiency bar of the domestic players. Structure of foreign 
banks  in  a  geography,  which  is  a  sub-set  of  banking  structure,  will  be  influenced  by  the 
desirable form of financial architecture in an economy. The extent to which foreign banks are 
allowed to play a role in the domestic sector depends upon the unique market needs of each 
economy. The important consideration will be the confidence of the host regulator to maintain 
resilience  in  the  wake  of  destabilizing  cross  border  capital  flows.  In  the  process,  it  always 
remains  a  challenge  to  marry  the  expectations  of  international  banks  entering  into  a 
developing economy and the expectations of the host country authorities on the role of and 
deliverables from the foreign banks, while maintaining financial resilience. To an extent, this 
challenge  could  be  partly  met  by  the  authorities  by  devising  an  appropriate  structure  for 
foreign banks and review the same at each stage of economic development to ensure that 
opportunities  are  not  lost  for  either  side.  Equally  important  is  to  put  in  place  appropriate 
policy responses to insulate the domestic economy from destabilizing capital flows. 
3.  
India  has  a  real  long  history  of  banking.  According  to  the  Indian  Central  Banking 
Enquiry Committee (1931), money lending activity in India could be traced back to the Vedic 
period, i.e., 2000 to 1400 BC. The existence of professional banking in India could be traced 
to  the  500  BC.  Kautilya’s  Arthashastra,  dating  back  to  400  BC  contained  references  to 
creditors, lenders and lending rates. After the independence of the country in 1947, keeping 
in tune with the then economic policy, banking sector was highly regulated. In the aftermath 
of  a  balance  of  payment  crisis  situation  in  1991  and  with  the  advent  of  economic  reforms 
India  embarked  upon  financial  sector  liberalization  in  a  phased  manner.  Banking  industry 
was deregulated by way of allowing entry of new private sector banks; ten new private Indian 
banks were set up in 1993, followed by two banks in 2003. Other notable features towards 
deregulation  of  banking  sector  included  allowing  74%  foreign  investment  in  private  sector 
banks, doing away with licensing of branches of domestic scheduled commercial banks in a 
phased manner, deregulation of interest rates, widening and deepening of financial markets, 
etc. 
4.  
Indian  banking  sector  comprises  of  different  types  of  institutions  to  cater  to  the 
divergent  banking  needs  of  various  sectors  of  the  economy.  There  are  typical  commercial 
banks which operate on all India basis. There are government owned banks, privately owned 
banks and foreign owned banks. There are also small banks with limited areas of operation. 
Credit cooperatives were created to cater to the credit, processing and marketing needs of 
small and marginal farmers organised on cooperative lines. Cooperatives expanded also in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  urban and semi-urban areas in the form of urban cooperative banks to meet the banking and 
credit  requirements  of  people  with  smaller  means.  Regional  Rural  Banks  were  created  to 
bring  together  the  positive  features  of  credit  cooperatives  and  commercial  banks  and 
specifically address credit needs of backward sections in rural areas. Further, there was an 
experiment of establishing Local Area Banks, albeit on a smaller scale, to bridge the gap in 
credit availability and strengthen the institutional credit framework in the rural and semi-urban 
areas. Notwithstanding the development of various types of banks, Indian banking sector is 
yet to meet the desired banking penetration and inclusion as witnessed in most advanced 
and some of the emerging economies. 
5.  
A cross-country comparison using the World Bank Financial Sector Database with 
several  other  economies,  which  have  bank-dominated  financial  systems,  reveals  that 
banking  sector  in  India  is  yet  to  match  the  size  and  outreach  of  the  banking  sector  as 
prevailing  in  various  other  comparable  economies.  According  to  this  World  Bank  report,1 
India has around 11 ATMs and nearly 11 bank branches per 100,000 people as compared to 
119 and 47 in Brazil; 182 and 38 in Russia; 38 and 8 in China; 60 and 10 in South Africa; 58 
and  10  in  Singapore;  124  and  24  in  UK  as  against  the  world  average  of  34  ATMs  and 
12 branches per 100,000 people. But by other matrices such as ATMs/GDP, we are probably 
better. 
6.  
Structural  changes  in  the  banking  sector  have  been  periodically  examined  by 
various  expert  committees  in  India.  The  committees  favoured  consolidation  in  the  Indian 
banking  structure  to  create  well-capitalised,  automated  and  technology-oriented  banks 
through  mergers  and  acquisitions;  fostering  competition  in  the  banking  structure  through 
permitting more private sector banks; setting up of small banks with local character to cater 
to the requirements of rural and unorganised sectors; more active foreign banks participation; 
strengthening  of  the  existing  structure  through  enhancing  appropriate  risk  management 
capabilities;  and  putting  in  place  legal,  insurance,  resolution  and  prudential  measures  to 
enable  the  banking  structure  to  discharge  its  core  functions  in  an  efficient  and  inclusive 
manner. 
7.  
In  India,  the  universal  banking  model  is  followed.  As  regards  the  structure  of 
universal banks, the conglomerate structure is bank-led, i.e., banks themselves are holding 
companies  which  operate  certain  businesses  through  Subsidiaries,  Joint  Ventures  and 
Affiliates. The general principle in this regard is that para-banking activities, such as credit 
cards, primary dealer, leasing, hire purchase, factoring etc., can be conducted either inside 
the  bank  departmentally  or  outside  the  bank  through  subsidiary/  joint  venture  /associate. 
Activities such as insurance, stock broking, asset management, asset reconstruction, venture 
capital funding and infrastructure financing can be undertaken only outside the bank. Lending 
activities must be conducted from inside the bank. Investment banking services are provided 
by the banks as an in-house departmental activity or through subsidiary. However, limits on 
equity  investments,  by  a  bank  in  a  subsidiary  company,  or  a  financial  services  company 
including financial institutions, stock and other exchanges, depositories, etc., which is not a 
subsidiary restrict expansion of investment banking services and insurance business by the 
universal banks. Consequently, India does not have large investment banking and insurance 
activity within the banking groups. 
8.  
Some  countries  have  a  differentiated  bank  licensing  regime  where  differentiated 
licenses are issued specifically outlining the activities that the licensed entity can undertake. 
The criterion for differentiation for the purposes of issuing differentiated licenses could be on 
account of capital conditions, as is practiced in Indonesia or to the activity as is the case in 
Australia, Singapore and Hong Kong. 
                                                 
1   World Development Indicators: Financial access, stability and efficiency – World Bank Report (2014). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  With  the  broadening  and  deepening  of  financial  sector,  a  need  is  felt  that  banks 
9.  
move from the situation where all banks provide all the services to a situation where banks 
find their specific realm and mainly provide services in their chosen areas. As the economy 
grows  and  becomes  more  integrated  with  the  global  economy,  need  would  be  felt  for 
sophisticated  financial  services  and  products  which  will  require  the  presence  of  different 
types  of  banks.  Accordingly,  differentiated  banks  serving  niche 
interests  are  also 
contemplated for India. 
10.  
Much of the Indian population is still outside the purview of formal financial sector 
and there is need to spruce up the institutional mechanism in this regard. Reserve Bank had, 
accordingly, issued draft guidelines on small banks and payment banks in June 2014. Both, 
payments  banks  and  small  banks  are  “niche”  or  “differentiated”  banks;  with  the  common 
objective  of  furthering  financial  inclusion.  While  small  banks  will  provide  a  whole  suite  of 
basic banking products, such as, deposits and supply of credit, but in limited size, payments 
banks will provide limited range of products, such as, acceptance of demand deposits and 
remittances  of  funds,  but  will  have  a  widespread  network  of  access  points  particularly  in 
remote areas, either through their own branch network or through Business Correspondents 
or through networks provided by others. The final guidelines on small and payment banks will 
be released shortly. 
11.  
The presence of foreign banks in India is seen to be one of the drivers to increase 
competition,  promote  efficiency  of  the  local  banking  system  and  also  for  bringing  in 
sophisticated financial services and risk management methodologies which can be adopted 
by  the  domestic  banks.  Based  on  cross-country  experience,  some  of  the  main  drivers  of 
foreign  banks  would  be  the  desire  of  banks  to  follow  their  home  customers  abroad, 
opportunities  in  the  host  countries,  the  attractiveness  of  local  profit,  the  absence  or 
elimination of barriers to foreign bank entry etc. 
12.  
The share of foreign banks in total assets of the banking sector in India is 6.5 per 
cent.  The  operations  of  foreign  banks  are  skewed  and  mainly  concentrated  in  urban  and 
metropolitan  areas.  Out  of  the  total  of  318  foreign  bank  branches,  315  are  in  urban  and 
metropolitan  areas.  Foreign  banks account  for  less  than  one  per  cent  of  total  branches  of 
commercial banks in India. 
13.  
Currently,  foreign  banks  presence  in  India  is  in  the  form  of  branches  or 
representative offices. For the branch form, Reserve Bank of India issues a single class of 
banking licence for conducting all type of banking business, ranging from retail, wholesale, 
forex  and  derivative  products,  credit  cards,  etc.  There  is  no  restriction  as  to  the  type  of 
business to be conducted through branches unlike in some other countries where restrictions 
are placed on acceptance of retail deposits, conducting business in local currency, types of 
clientele, region, availability of deposit insurance, access to clearing and settlement systems 
etc. As on October 31, 2014, there are 44 foreign banks in India operating through a network 
of 318 branches. Also, 45 foreign banks have presence in India in the form of representative 
offices. 
14.  
Foreign banks are present in India in the branch mode since mid-nineteenth century. 
Also,  foreign  banks  were  allowed  to  set  up  a wholly  owned  subsidiary  (WOS)  in  India.  To 
operationalise the FDI guidelines, the Reserve Bank released the roadmap for presence of 
foreign banks in India on February 28, 2005. The roadmap was divided into two phases – the 
first phase spanning the period March 2005 to March 2009 and the second phase beginning 
after a review of experience gained in the first phase. 
15.  
In the first phase, foreign banks already operating in India were allowed to convert 
their  existing  branches  to  WOS  while  following  the  ‘one-mode  presence’  criterion  and  the 
WOS  was  to  be  treated  at  par  with  the  existing  branches  of  foreign  banks  for  branch 
expansion in India. During the first phase no foreign bank came forward to set up or convert 
their branches into WOS in the absence of adequate incentives. As the time came to review 
the experience gained in the first phase, global financial markets were in turmoil and there 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  were uncertainties surrounding the financial strength of banks around the world. At that time 
it was considered advisable to continue with the current policy and procedures governing the 
presence of foreign banks in India. 
16.  
Building on the lessons from the financial crisis, Reserve Bank issued a Discussion 
Paper  in  January  2011  on  the  mode  of  presence  of  foreign  banks  in  India.  Taking  into 
account  the  feedback  received  on  the  Discussion  Paper,  the  framework  for  setting  up  of 
wholly owned subsidiary (WOS) by foreign banks in India was released in November 2013. 
Those  foreign  banks  which  have  commenced  banking  business  in  India  through  a  branch 
mode  after  August  2010  shall  convert  into  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  if  they  meet  the  set 
conditions and prescribed regulatory thresholds. The conditions would be, such as, foreign 
banks incorporated in a jurisdiction having legislation giving a preferential claim to deposits of 
home  country  in  a  winding  up  proceedings;  foreign  banks  that  do  not  have  adequate 
disclosure  requirements  in  their  home  jurisdiction;  foreign  banks  with  complex  structures; 
foreign banks which are not widely held could have maiden presence only by way of WOS. 
Also,  if  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  is  not  satisfied  with  the  adequacy  of  supervisory 
arrangements  (including  disclosure  arrangements)  and  market  discipline  in  the  country  of 
their  incorporation  or  Reserve  Bank  of  India  considers  necessary  for  subsidiary  form  of 
presence  of  the  bank  or  if  a  foreign  bank,  which  has  set  up  its  presence  in  India  through 
branch  mode  after  August  2010,  is  considered  by  RBI  as  being  systemically  important  by 
virtue  of  the  size  of  its  business,  such  banks  would  have  to  operate  through  a  WOS. 
However,  in  case  of  foreign  banks  which  are  operating  in  India  before  August  2010  shall 
have  the  option  either  to  continue  their  banking  business  through  the  branch  mode  or  to 
convert those branches into a WOS. 
17.  
Foreign banks have evinced interest on WOS structure in India and are deliberating 
internally  their  strategy  on  form  of  banking  presence.  The  initial  minimum  paid-up  voting 
equity  capital  for  a  WOS  shall  be  INR  5  billion  (nearly  USD  82  million).  In  the  case  of  an 
existing foreign bank having branch presence in India, which desires or is required to convert 
into  a  WOS  shall  have  a  net  worth  of  INR  5  billion.  WOS  would  be  permitted  to  open 
branches in any centre, except at certain sensitive locations from the perspective of national 
security, without having the need to take prior permission from Reserve Bank of India in each 
case, subject to their opening 25% of branches in a year in unbanked centres. In the case of 
foreign  bank  branches,  they  may  have  to  seek  prior  approval  of  Reserve  Bank  for  branch 
expansion in India. 
18.  
Financial  intermediation  in  India  mainly  happens  through  banks.  With  a  view  to 
improve  upon  the  credit  disbursement  to  certain  sectors  of  the  economy  which  requires 
stimulus through support from formal financial sector, priority sector lending was introduced 
in  1970s.  The  objective  was  to  achieve  a  wider  spread  of bank  credit,  prevent  its  misuse, 
direct a larger volume of credit flow to priority sectors and to make it an effective instrument 
of economic development. The definition of priority sector has evolved over a period of time. 
Priority sector includes those sectors of the economy which in the absence of inclusion in the 
priority sector categories would not get timely and adequate finance, such as, small loans to 
small  and  marginal  farmers  for  agriculture  and  allied  activities,  loans  to  micro  and  small 
enterprises,  loans  for  small  housing  projects,  education  loans  and  other  small  loans  to 
people with low income levels. Currently, the definition is under a review. 
Foreign banks’ operations in India – Issues flagged often and RBI’s take 
Priority sector lending 
19.  
Presently, the domestic scheduled commercial banks are required to achieve priority 
sector lending target of 40 per cent of the aggregate bank advances. The same would be 
applicable for new WOS of foreign banks. Foreign banks with 20 or more branches in the 
country are being brought on par with domestic banks for priority sector targets in a phased 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  manner over a five year period starting from April 1, 2013. For foreign banks with less than 
20 branches the overall target is fixed at 32 per cent. 
20.  
Foreign banks have from time to time raised the issue of fully or partially exempting 
them  from  the  need  to  undertake  priority  sector  lending  on  account  of  their  limited 
geographical presence and expertise in areas like agro / small scale lending. These are the 
sectors where formal flow of credit is necessary to create equitable development. Reserve 
Bank has tried to facilitate bank lending to these sectors by ensuring that the pricing of credit 
is made free. Foreign banks on their part are expected to bring in innovation and develop 
new models through their global experience to deliver credit to needy sectors of the economy 
in  a  cost  effective  manner.  Foreign  banks  had  to  a  large  extent  pioneered  in  the  areas  of 
technology  banking,  ATMs  in  India  which  was  followed  by  the  domestic  players  and  has 
today changed the landscape of banking in India. As regards foreign banks with 20 and more 
branches  required  to  undertake  priority  sector  lending  at  par  with  domestic  scheduled 
commercial banks, it may be noted that many of these banks are present in India for more 
than  100  years  and  are  present  even  before  some  of  the  public  sector  banks  were  born. 
These  foreign  banks,  therefore,  not  only  know  the  Indian  economy  well  but  are  also  well 
versed  with  the  culture  and  psyche  of  the  local  populace.  Therefore,  it  should  not  be  an 
insurmountable problem for them to comply with the priority sector requirements. 
21.  
It is to be appreciated that different jurisdictions, including advanced countries, have 
been  requiring  the  concept  of  mandated  lending  for  identified  sectors,  communities  and 
programmes. 
Opening of branches in unbanked and underbanked centres 
22.  
WOS  of  foreign  banks  are  freely  allowed  to  open  branches  in  any  centre  with  a 
stipulation  that  at  least  25  percent  of  the  total  number  of  branches  opened  during  the 
financial year must be in unbanked rural (Tier 5 and Tier 6) centres, i.e. centres which do not 
have  a  brick  and  mortar  structure  of  any  scheduled  commercial  bank  for  customer  based 
banking  transactions.  Tier  1  comprises  metropolitan  and  urban  centres,  Tiers  2,  3,  and  4 
comprise semi-urban centres and Tiers 5 and 6 comprise rural centres. 
23.  
Incidentally,  foreign  banks  operating  as  branches  are  not  governed  by  these 
stipulations, although, for opening a branch they need to seek prior approval from Reserve 
Bank  on  case  to  case  basis.  However,  keeping  in  view  the  concentration  of  foreign  bank 
branches in urban and metropolitan areas, it is expected that foreign banks when desiring to 
expand  presence  may  also  like  to  open  branches  in  underbanked  centres,  measured  in 
terms of average population per branch office in a district / state. I understand that there are 
similar  stipulations  in  other  jurisdictions  which  have  been  laid  down  after  factoring  the 
specific needs of their economy and the extent of banking penetration. 
Currently,  foreign  banks  have  around  99%  of  their  branches  in  urban  and 
24.  
metropolitan  centres  of  the  country.  For  increasing  banking  penetration  and  financial 
inclusion,  there  is  a  need  to  open  branches  in  centres  that  are  unbanked.  With  a  liberal 
branch expansion policy, WOS would have access to the hinterland, which hitherto remained 
unexplored  by  foreign  banks  in  India.  Thus,  there  is  ample  growth  opportunity  for  foreign 
banks under the WOS set up. In the case of foreign bank branches, there are again plenty of 
prospects  by  way  of  opening  branches  in  underbanked  centres.  Incidentally,  underbanked 
centres do not necessarily constitute rural areas and many of the centres are located in the 
fringes  of  metropolitan  and  urban  areas.  Further,  with  the  Government  of  India’s  plans  to 
develop hundred smart cities across India, there is ample opportunity to open branches in 
these centres and in fact I believe many existing foreign banks in India would by now have 
started to strategize to foray into such centres so as to have the first mover advantage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Niche banking vs. universal banking 
25.  
Foreign  banks  have  often  sought  to  do  niche  banking  like  corporate  /  wholesale 
banking,  investment  banking  rather  than  undertaking  a  bouquet  of  activities  as  would  be 
required  of  a  commercial  bank.  The  rationale  for  such  request  stems  from  the  limited 
geographical reach, stymied business model for foreign branch operations, lack of expertise 
in local market, etc. 
26.  
Reserve  Bank  of  India  issues  universal  banking  licence  to  foreign  banks  for 
conducting all type of banking business. There is no restriction as to the type of business to 
be conducted through branches unlike in some other countries where restrictions are placed 
on  foreign  bank  branches  on  acceptance  of  retail  deposits,  conducting  business  in  local 
currency,  types  of  clientele,  availability  of  deposit  insurance,  access  to  clearing  and 
settlement  systems  etc.  Once  established,  the  regulation  is  non-discriminatory  in  India,  as 
foreign  banks  enjoy  near  national  treatment  in  the  matter  of  conduct  of  business.  As 
indicated earlier, on account of the typical requirements of the economy, it is our desire and 
expectation  that  the  foreign  banks  offer  commercial  banking  with  a  view  to  ensure  further 
penetration of banking activities. Needless to indicate that in the process foreign banks could 
diversify their risks and also it helps to tap the available latent opportunities. 
Growing the inorganic way 
27.  
There have been requests on whether Reserve Bank would allow foreign banks to 
expand inorganically to explore possibilities for acquisition of banks operating in India. In this 
regard, the stance of Reserve Bank has already been conveyed in the framework of WOS of 
foreign banks in India. To repeat, it has been stated that once WOS are in operation for a 
while  and  after  a  review  is  made  with  regard  to  the  extent  of  penetration  of  foreign 
investment  in  Indian  banks  and  functioning  of  foreign  banks,  WOSs  may  be  permitted  to 
enter into mergers and acquisitions with private sector banks in India, subject to the overall 
foreign  investment  limit  of  74  per  cent.  Since  mergers  and  inorganic  growth  are  natural 
phenomena, it is likely that over a period of time a number of small institutions may look in for 
such  possibilities  to  reap  benefits  of  economies  of  scale  and  the  attendant  gains.  At  the 
same  time,  as  the  population  needing  basic  financial  services  increases  and  more 
opportunities unfold, more entities would like to establish presence within the gamut of policy 
on entry of new banks and the existing foreign banks would be making exploratory inroads 
into hinterland to seize the opportunities. However, depending upon the developments in the 
banking system and the needs of the economy, Reserve Bank would review the policy on the 
presence of foreign banks in India at an appropriate point of time. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, India has a long history of welcoming foreign banks, while cautiously 
28.  
allowing its expansion, keeping the country’s needs in perspective. India offers ample scope 
for  growth  for  the  foreign  banks  in  universal  banking,  more  specifically  in  the  highly 
sophisticated and profitable markets of trade finance, investment banking, treasury banking 
and personal banking. The permitted and desired structure of foreign banks is in effect as per 
the current international ethos. The regulatory and supervisory approaches are, by and large, 
common and non-discriminatory. Welcome to India. 
29.  
 
Thank you all for patient listening. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
