  Karnit Flug: Challenges in the field of pension savings 
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Pensions, Insurance and 
Financial Literacy Research Center, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, 20 November 2014. 
 Good morning, 
The  festive  opening  of  this  institute  is  a  very  important  event,  and  its  work  plan  seems 
promising.  There  is  tremendous  importance  to  raising  awareness  and  research  on  the 
matter,  and  action  in  this  direction  is  to  be  welcomed.  It  is  also  important  to  improve  the 
public’s ability to make an informed decision in this field as this is one of the most important 
financial decisions a household makes. I therefore see tremendous importance in working on 
financial literacy. 
I would like to briefly touch upon a number of facts and trends that point to the challenges in 
the  field  of  pension  savings,  and  then  to  present  a  series  of  questions  that  I  believe  are 
proper to deal with in an institute such as this. 
Projected demographic trends 
As  we  know,  life  expectancy  is  increasing,  and  if  we  look  at  the  past  40  years,  the  life 
expectancy of those reaching age 65 increased from 80 years to 86 years for women, and 
from 79 years to 84 years for men. This fact, together with the fact that the retirement age 
increased by only two years, means that men are expected to live an average of 17 years 
after retirement and women are expected to live 24 years after retirement. This leads to the 
question  of  whether,  during  the  working  period,  the  public  is  saving  enough  to  ensure  a 
proper income at retirement age. 
Another way of looking at the demographic change is to look at what is happening to the ratio 
between the working-age population and the retirement-age population. The trend in Israel is 
similar to the trend in other countries in the world, although with some lag. As of today, there 
are 5 working-age people for each person over age 65 in Israel, while the ratio in 2050 is 
expected  to  narrow  to  3:1.  This  change  obviously  has  serious  implications  for  the  labor 
market, the dependency ratio, and various aspects of policy. 
An international comparison of retirement arrangements shows that in Israel, the retirement 
age for women is relatively low, and even after it is raised to 64, as is supposed to happen in 
2017, it will be significantly lower than in most European countries, some of which are also in 
a gradual process of raising it. The retirement age for men in Israel was raised to 67, and is 
similar to the retirement age among European countries that have already raised it, and is at 
the  upper  threshold.  The  large  gap  between  men  and  women  in  Israel  is  prominent,  and 
raises a question regarding the ability of women to save enough for retirement. The more the 
decision on an additional increase in the retirement age for women is delayed, the more it will 
be necessary later on to do so more rapidly, which will be more problematic. 
And what is happening to long-term savings? 
There has been a significant increase in the volume of assets under management by long-
term savings plans in the past 14 years, from about 57 percent of GDP to about 90 percent 
of  GDP.  One  of  the  significant  processes  behind  this  increase  is  the  enactment  of  the 
Mandatory  Pension  Law  in  2008,  which  requires  workers  and  employers  to  set  aside  a 
significant percentage of their income for pension. In addition, during this period, there was a 
gradual transition in the public sector from defined benefit pensions to defined contribution 
pensions,  with  all  employees  who  began  working  in  the  public  sector  from  2004  onwards 
contributing to defined contribution pensions. The volume of assets increased, although it is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  volatile: for instance, the decline during the financial crisis, such that someone who retired at 
that time saw lower accumulated savings that he had expected. 
Looking  at  the  distribution  of  main  assets  in  the  investment  portfolios  of  the  long-term 
savings  plans,  we  can  see  a  gradual  and  continuing  decline  in  the  share  of  designated 
bonds, together with an increase in the weight of stocks, corporate bonds and investments 
abroad  in  the  portfolio,  so  that  the  share  of  the  components  that  are  more  sensitive  to 
developments in the financial markets is expanding over time. In terms of the composition of 
investment  portfolios  by  type  of  plan,  we  see  that  the  in  plans  in  which  more  veteran 
members save (old pension plans and plans that ensure a yield), the weight of designated 
bonds  is  relatively  high,  and  the  weight  of  the  assets  that  are  sensitive  to  the  financial 
markets is relatively low. In contrast, in the investment portfolios of the plans in which new 
members are saving (new pension funds, and profit-sharing funds), there is a much higher 
weight  given  to  investments  abroad,  stocks,  and  corporate  bonds,  which  leads  to  higher 
exposure  to  developments  in  the  financial  markets.  These  investments  finance  economic 
activity and development, but are also exposed to higher volatility. 
The impact of the trends on the replacement ratio 
In  view  of  the  trends  I  have  presented  to  this  point,  the  interesting  question  is  what  will 
happen  to  the  level  of  the  pension  payout  at  retirement  age.  The  commonly  accepted 
variable to look at in this context is the replacement rate – what will the retiree’s income be 
compared to his pre-retirement salary. In a simulation of the net replacement rates including 
defined benefit pensions and old-age pensions, we focus first on women with a relatively low 
income  of  NIS  7500  a  month. Women  who  retire  at  age  62,  whose  pension  savings  have 
generated an average real yield of 2 percent per year, and whose pension contributions are 
17.5 percent of their monthly salary, will have a replacement rate of 54 percent. In contrast, if 
the yield is 4 percent per year and pension contributions are 19.5 percent of monthly salary, 
the  replacement  rate  will  be  76  percent.  Men  who  retire  at  age  67  and  earn  NIS  7500  a 
month  at retirement  age,  whose  pension  savings  have  generated  an  average  real  yield  of 
4 percent  per  year  and  whose  pension  contributions  are  19.5  percent,  will  have  a 
replacement of almost 100 percent. In contrast, if the average real yield is 2 percent and the 
contributions are 17.5 percent, the replacement rate will be just 66 percent. The replacement 
rate will be significantly impacted by both the retirement age and the amount of contributions 
to savings. This situation, which is similar among those with higher salaries, raises questions 
on both the individual level and the policy level. These are the issues that the institute being 
launched now should deal with. 
I will also present a number of questions, on the individual level, on the policy level, and a 
number of questions for research: 
Size of the payout: 
– 
– 
– 
What is a reasonable replacement rate? 
How do we deal with the increase in life expectancy? 
How do we deal with the ramifications of the low interest rate environment on the 
yields of pension savings? 
How  do  we  deal  with  the  ramifications  of  high  volatility  on  the  yields  of  pension 
savings? 
What  are  far  management  fees  that  also  allow  for  the  quality  management  of 
pension savings? 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     The efficient allocation of public resources: 
– 
How  do  we  use  and  allocate  the  designated  bonds  among  the  various  long-term 
savings plans and instruments in the best possible manner? 
What is a fair and efficient allocation of tax benefits? 
What is the proper way to handle the population that will be retiring in the next few 
years without sufficient pension savings? 
Questions relating to the investment portfolio of the institutional investors? 
– 
What  is  the  optimal  composition  of  the  investment  portfolio  in  the  context  of  the 
transition  from  classic  investment  channels  to  other  channels  (direct  credit,  real 
estate), and in the context of the diversification of investments abroad? 
What effect does the tension between the short-term measurement method of the 
plans’  achievements  and  the  need  to  create  long-term  yields  and  repayment 
abilities,  which  is  what  is  relevant  to  the  saver,  have?  Does  the  method  of 
measurement not create short-term competition, which is not necessarily optimal? 
What  is  the  proper  extent  of  the  investment  portfolio’s  exposure  to  investments 
abroad and to foreign currency? 
  Financial education: 
– 
What is the proper balance between the decisions of the individual and regulatory 
intervention? 
What are the tools that need to be provided to the public in order for them to make 
informed decisions about their pension savings? 
Questions for research: 
– 
Can we estimate the effect of savings enforced by the Mandatory Pension Law on 
developments in various markets (household credit, and so forth)? 
How does mandatory pension affect total savings? 
How can we balance the need to direct long-term savings to support for business 
sector growth and the maintenance of a reasonable level of certainty for retirement 
age? 
In summation, the institute currently being launched has a great deal to do, both in the field 
of broad empirical research and in the field of research on questions of policy. The activity to 
increase the public’s financial literacy will help all of us make informed decisions regarding 
the question that is perhaps the most important in the area of household financial decisions. I 
wish  the  people  of  this  institute  success  in  your  important  endeavors,  and  I  await  the 
opportunity to learn from the fruits of your labor. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
