  William C Dudley: Restoring confidence in reference rates 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Salomon  Center  for  the  Study  of  Financial  Institutions, 
New York University Stern School of Business, New York City, 2 October 2014. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.1  
In my remarks today, I will focus on the development and use of reference rates for financial 
market  contracts.  This  is  a  story  of  both  spectacular  success,  and  at  the  same  time, 
spectacular failure. 
To borrow from Charles Dickens:2  
“It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of 
foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity.…” 
While Dickens was writing about events leading up to a political crisis, his words also are apt 
with respect to our recent financial crisis. 
Over a period of just a few decades, reference rates grew greatly in terms of their role and 
importance in financial markets. For example, the use of one of the best known reference 
rates  –  the  London  Interbank  Offered  Rate,  or  LIBOR  –  has  soared,  so  that  it  is  now 
referenced by approximately $300 trillion dollars of financial contracts. Reference rates have 
become a ubiquitous but largely hidden fiber in the fabric of financial markets. They play a 
critical  role  in  making  financial  markets  more  efficient  by  reducing  information  frictions, 
lowering transactions costs and mitigating the moral hazard. 
At the same time, as recent enforcement actions and criminal investigations have made all 
too clear, some of these reference rates have been systematically manipulated by individuals 
at  key  financial  institutions.  The  assumption  that  the  design  in  how  these  rates  are 
constructed would be resistant to attempts at manipulation has turned out to be wrong, and 
the belief in the integrity of these rates has turned out to be misplaced. 
What  this  means  should  be  obvious  to  all  of  us.  Reform  is  required  if  we  are  to  restore 
confidence in the financial system. In my remarks today, I will discuss the outlines of such a 
reform including those important steps that are already underway, and those steps that still 
must be taken. As always, my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the 
Federal Reserve System. 
The most recognized and prevalent of the reference interest rates is the London Interbank 
Offered  Rate,  typically  referred  to  as  LIBOR,  which  measures  the  cost  of  unsecured, 
interbank borrowing across different currencies and tenors. The development of LIBOR goes 
back to the rapid expansion of the Eurodollar market in London beginning in the 1970s. This 
was a market that developed, in part, as a means of circumventing the Regulation Q deposit 
interest  rate  ceilings  in  the  United  States.  This  market  provided  a  source  of  funds  for 
international  banks,  and  securities  that  referenced  Eurodollars  were  issued  and  became 
actively  traded.  This  growing  market  gave  birth  to  a  new  financial  market  product  –  the 
interest rate swap – to help investors and borrowers to better manage the interest rate risks 
associated with their financial exposures. 
                                                 
1   Lorie Logan, William Riordan, Kevin Stiroh, Joseph Tracy and Nathaniel Wuerffel assisted in preparing this 
speech. 
2   Charles Dickens. A Tale of Two Cities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  In 1984, as part of the “Big Bang” in U.K. financial markets, the British Bankers Association 
(BBA) assumed responsibility for developing a set of standards for these interest rate swaps. 
One of these standards was for the reference rates used to fix the settlement of the contracts 
– this led to the birth of LIBOR.3 Additional standardization followed, including establishing a 
fixed schedule of settlement dates for these contracts. This further increased the liquidity in 
these  contracts,  but  also  significantly  concentrated  the  timing  of  settlement  activity.  At  the 
same time, new reference rates were developed that extended the LIBOR-style methodology 
to many different currencies. 
How LIBOR was designed to work 
LIBOR  is  a  set  of  reference  rates  that  measure  large  banks’  funding  costs  in  different 
currencies  and  at  different  maturities.  For  example,  U.S.  dollar  LIBOR  measures  how 
expensive it is for a large bank to borrow U.S. dollars in the unsecured interbank market at 
different maturities. For each currency, there is a designated panel of contributing banks that 
each submit an estimate of its own borrowing costs for each maturity. For each panel, these 
estimates  are  aggregated  to  form  LIBOR.  The  LIBOR  rates  are  then  used  as  a  basis  for 
financial contracts ranging from adjustable rate mortgages to interest rate swaps and futures. 
To make sure that the submitting banks have sufficient expertise in the funding trends in a 
particular  currency,  it  is  important  that  they  be  actively  involved  in  that  market.  For  this 
reason,  the  contributing  banks  are  the  large  banks  that  have  been  active  in  the  London 
market  and  the  panel  of  submitting  banks  varies  across  currencies.  The  LIBOR  reference 
rates were intended to capture on a daily basis borrowing costs along each currency-maturity 
combination based on the experience of the submitting banks. 
The  actual  process  for  fixing  LIBOR  each  day  is  quite  straightforward.  Each  morning  the 
submitters from each contributing bank answer the following hypothetical question: “At what 
rate could you borrow funds, were you to do so by asking for and then accepting interbank 
offers at a reasonable market size just prior to 11 a.m.?” The transmitted submissions are 
ordered by rate for each currency and maturity pair. The ordered rates for U.S. dollar LIBOR, 
for  example,  are  then  trimmed  by  generally  dropping  the  top  and  bottom  25  percent  of 
submissions  to  remove  any  influence  of  outliers.  The  average  of  the  remaining  individual 
submissions is calculated and then posted. Prior to the recent reforms, all submissions were 
immediately made public. 
The aim of the LIBOR-setting process has been to create a set of reference rates that would 
be credible and would generate robust measures of bank funding costs across a wide range 
of  market  conditions.  The  credibility  was  based  on  the  borrowing  experience  from  the 
submitting  banks  represented  through  their  submitters  –  those  individuals  responsible  for 
actually submitting an answer each day to the administrator. The potential conflicts of interest 
between the submitters and traders within the bank were typically handled through internal 
policies such as the presence of information barriers that were intended to prevent sensitive 
information  from  flowing  between  the  traders  and  LIBOR  submitters.  The  robustness  to 
market  conditions  would  be  maintained  even  in  periods  of  market  stress  or  a  lack  of 
transactions  by  the  reliance  on  the  hypothetical  question  instead  of  the  use  of  actual 
transaction data. That is, even if during stressed times when trading became sporadic in a 
particular  currency-maturity  pair,  all  submitters  could  still answer  the  question  even  if  their 
bank did not happen to engage in any trades on that particular day in that particular pairing. 
This ensured a large sample size even during stressed market conditions. The trimming of 
the sample helped to minimize the influence of any outlier submission, but also limited the 
ability for any one submitting bank to influence the posted rate. 
                                                 
3   See McConnell, “Systemic Operational Risk: The LIBOR Manipulation Scandal.” Journal of Operational Risk, 
8(3):59–99. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  As  is  clear  from  the  hypothetical  question,  LIBOR  is  meant  to  capture  a  bank’s  cost  of 
unsecured  borrowing.  This  means  that  the  reference  rate  will  reflect  not  only  a  risk-free 
component, but also counterparty credit risk related to the specific borrower. This turns out to 
be important for two reasons. 
First, the growing popularity and liquidity of LIBOR indexed contracts led to an expanded use 
of LIBOR to circumstances in which the credit risk of large banks was not clearly relevant. 
For  example,  a  speculative  position  about  the  future  of  short-term  rates  is  predominately 
based  on  one’s  view  about  the  path  of  short-term  interest  rates,  rather  than  how  bank 
counterparty risk might change and affect borrowing costs. Despite this shortcoming, LIBOR 
remained  popular  because  the  benefit  of  its  deeper  market  liquidity  was  viewed  as  more 
important than the added complication that LIBOR included an element of counterparty risk.4  
Second, variations in LIBOR submissions across the submitting banks at a point in time for a 
given maturity should mainly reflect differences in the counterparty credit risk, since the risk-
free  component  is  common  to  all  submitters.  This  is  important  because  it  means  that 
variations  in  submissions  may  be  interpreted  as  reflecting  variations  in  underlying 
counterparty  risk.  This  is  particularly  important  when  the  LIBOR  submissions  process  is 
transparent and the market is under stress, which was the case during the financial crisis. 
How LIBOR worked in practice 
Now that I have described how LIBOR was intended to work in concept, how did it work in 
practice?  It  turns  out  that  unappreciated  design  weaknesses  and  incentive  structures  at 
certain  large  submitting  banks,  in  combination  with  the  phenomenal  success  of  reference 
rates, undermined the system. Conflicts and problems emerged both at the bank level and at 
the  individual  submitter  level.  Investigations  are  on-going  to  determine  the  scale  and  full 
extent of these problems, but I would like to discuss a few of the well-documented problems. 
Let’s  start  at  the  level  of  banks  that  submit  estimates.  The  enforcement  actions  and 
investigations  into  potential  LIBOR  manipulation  have  shown  that,  at  times,  individual 
institutions faced incentives to understate their hypothetical borrowing rates in order to avoid 
the  perception  that  they  might  have  higher  counterparty  credit  risk.  Some  of  the  reported 
misdeeds  occurred  during  the  heart  of  the  financial  crisis  when  market  participants  faced 
considerable  uncertainty  about  the  health  of  particular  institutions.  This  uncertainty  was 
manifest in a wide range of financial market prices for financial institutions – low and volatile 
equity prices, record CDS spreads and greater variation in borrowing costs across different 
LIBOR-submitting banks. At that time, the BBA was publishing firm-specific contributions to 
LIBOR from submitting banks. Given this publication process, some of the submitting banks 
reportedly became concerned about reporting a rate that would suggest that they were being 
treated  by  the  market  as  a  greater  counterparty  credit  risk  than  their  peers.  Accordingly, 
some banks were alleged to have lowered their LIBOR submission below their actual likely 
borrowing rate to avoid the stigma associated with posting a higher borrowing rate and the 
possibility that their funding costs could increase as a result. 
Conflicts  also  reportedly  abounded  at  the  level  of  the  individual  submitters.  Again,  these 
highlighted  profound  compliance  problems  at  some  of  the  submitting  banks.  As  I  noted 
earlier, the intent was that the expertise of the submitter would be insulated from any internal 
pressures by the informational barriers within the submitting banks. The hope was that these 
informational  barriers  separating 
thick  and 
impenetrable. The investigations into LIBOR manipulation found that the reality was that they 
were often paper thin and porous. 
the  submitters 
traders  were 
from 
the 
                                                 
4   See Darrell Duffie and Jeremy Stein. “Reforming LIBOR and Other Financial-Market Benchmarks.” September 
19, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  We have learned that false reporting and manipulative behavior was pervasive across firms 
and over time, took many forms and was often conducted in a nonchalant manner. This has 
been  well-documented  by  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  in  their  published 
findings. For example, interest rate swap traders routinely asked colleagues to submit rates 
with an explicit goal to have the adjusted submission benefit the value of specific derivatives 
positions they held. As an illustration, investigations discovered that one “Senior Yen Trader” 
directly or indirectly made at least 800 requests in writing on UBS’s email and chat systems 
to their submitter.5 Requests often had a casual matter of fact nature to them. To illustrate, 
an exchange in September 2007 from a trader at UBS to the submitter went as follows.6  
“Hi  …  could  really  do  with  a  low  1M  [one  month]  over  the  next  few  days  as  have  17.5m 
[million] fixings if ok with you?” 
Submitting banks often facilitated this type of behavior – in some cases derivatives traders 
and  submitters  sat  on  the  same  desk,  while  in  others  the  submitters  were  themselves 
traders, both circumstances obviously representing conflicts of interest. Other investigations 
documented  that  traders  at  one  bank  would  often  shout  across  the  trading  desk  to  fellow 
traders to confirm that there were no conflicting requests before they sent their requests to 
their submitter.7  
The investigations also found that not only were there conflicts within the submitting banks, 
but  there  were  also  active  efforts  by  traders  to  collude  across  banks  to  affect  the  posted 
rates. At times, the traders at the different banks might have similar positions and therefore a 
common interest to push the posted rate in particular direction. In other times, cooperation 
could be incentivized through the use of “wash” trades that generated no profit or loss, but 
allowed the trader to generate commissions. 
Why did this go so wrong? 
As I discussed earlier, LIBOR setting involves a group of banks answering a hypothetical 
question.  This  seemingly  straightforward  question  actually  embeds  a  good  deal  of 
ambiguity and room for potentially manipulative actions. First, it is a hypothetical question 
–  not  what  rate  did  you  borrow  at  that  morning,  but  what  rate  do  you  think  you  could 
borrow  at.  This  potential  disconnect  from  actual  borrowing  activity  builds  in  from  the 
beginning a certain amount of judgment and room for manipulation. Second, some of the 
parameters – “reasonable market size” or “just prior to 11 a.m.” – also allow for subjective 
interpretation. This type of judgment is not inherently a problem, but it does open the door for 
improper behavior and also makes transgressions more difficult to identify. 
At the same time, and partly in response to the lessons learned during the financial crisis, 
patterns  of  bank  funding  began  to  shift  away  from  unsecured  funding  to  secured  funding 
markets.  Investors  and  other  market  participants  grew  to  prefer  holding  specific  collateral 
against their loans – even very short-term loans – than just trusting in the ongoing viability of 
the borrower. This shift had substantive implications for money markets and the LIBOR fixing 
model,  which  was  based  on  the  assumption  that  there  would  always  be  regular  activity  in 
unsecured interbank funding markets. As those markets dried up – in some cases there were 
essentially no transactions for longer-dated tenors – it became harder for banks to ground 
their LIBOR submissions in actual, observable transactions. This put a greater premium on a 
submitter’s judgment, which increased the risk of further abuse and manipulation. 
                                                 
5   CFTC UBS, 2012, page 12. 
6   CFTC UBS, 2012, page 13. 
7   CFTC Barclays, 2012, page 13. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  We have learned as well that compensation and hiring practices also helped to undermine 
the  integrity  of  the  reporting  regime.  For  example,  we  have  seen  that  compensation  and 
promotion within a bank are often tied to a trader’s market share and profitability. In addition, 
traders often move between firms so having a network of external contacts and being viewed 
as  a  team  player  could  help  to  support  job  mobility.  Consequently,  one  can  conclude  that 
even the loss of a job is not necessarily a permanent setback, and that market participants 
with  allegations  of  improper  behavior  could  potentially  move  on  to  other  firms  with  the 
expectation that they would generate revenue and profits for their new employer. 
These incentives were amplified by the structure of the markets that underlie the setting of 
LIBOR  and  those  that  use  LIBOR.  The  interbank  cash  borrowing  market  that  LIBOR 
references  is  very  small  relative  to  the  enormous  markets  that  use  LIBOR,  for  example 
interest rate derivatives. The standardization of settlement dates further concentrated trading 
activity. In this type of environment, relatively small changes in LIBOR submissions – either 
because the actual borrowing costs fluctuate or a submitting bank intentionally misreports its 
submissions – can have substantive effects on a trader’s profitability because the trader can 
hold  large  derivatives  or  futures  positions  that  reference  the  cash  LIBOR  rate  at  the  time 
these contracts settle. 
Finally,  and  I  think  perhaps  most  importantly,  the  questionable  behavioral  norms  in  the 
industry – along with the weak control environments and compliance processes – that were 
uncovered  during  the  investigations,  exacerbated  and  facilitated  the  misalignment  of 
incentives  that  are  specific  to  LIBOR.  It  is  a  sad  state  of  affairs  if  unethical  behavior  is 
socialized  among  new  traders  with  the  explanation  that  this  is  business  as  usual,  and,  if 
compliance and risk management are inadequate as a counterweight to prevent or identify 
wrong-doing. It is untenable if people working in compliance and risk are treated as second-
class citizens relative to the firms’ revenue generators. 
The official sector response 
The  international  regulatory  community  began  to  address  these  issues  when  the  U.K. 
government published the Wheatley Review8 in September 2012. The Review recommended 
a ten-point plan, subsequently accepted in full by the U.K. government, for comprehensive 
reform  of  LIBOR.  This  led  to  many  changes  including  the  statutory  regulation  of  the 
administration  and  submission  process  with  respect  to  LIBOR,  the  selection  of  a  new 
administrator  for  LIBOR,  new  governance  and  oversight  regimes  for  the  administrator  and 
submission  guidelines  as  well  as  a  code  of  conduct  for  submitters.  The  BBA,  the  former 
administrator  for  LIBOR,  for  example,  eliminated  publication  of  certain  currency  and  tenor 
rates  and  delayed  the  publication of  bank-specific  submissions.  Perhaps  most  importantly, 
LIBOR-related activities are now subject to formal regulation and supervision in the U.K. 
I support the changes initiated by the U.K. government and believe they have substantially 
strengthened LIBOR. That said, I also believe that more work remains to be done to broaden 
the definition of LIBOR so that it represents the reality of new funding patterns for banks, and 
to also tie submissions more closely and systematically to observable transactions. 
A  second  notable  development  was  the  publication  of  an  international  set  of  principles  for 
financial  benchmarks  developed  by 
International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions9  (IOSCO)  in  2013.  These  principles  include  a  set  of  19  specific  standards 
across governance, benchmark quality, methodology and accountability that have emerged 
as the international standard. IOSCO has rightly focused on tying benchmarks more closely 
the 
                                                 
8   The Wheatley Review of LIBOR: Final Report. 
9   Principles 
Commissions. 
for  Financial  Benchmarks:  Consultation  Report, 
International  Organization  of  Securities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  to observable, arms-length transactions. While a pure transactions-based rate will not solve 
all  problems  for  all  benchmarks,  this  is  an  important  step  toward  eliminating  excessive 
reliance on expert judgment. 
As part of the international reform efforts, the Federal Reserve played a lead role in a set of 
recommendations  for  the  reform  of  reference  interest  rates  produced  by  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB).  Former  Governor  Jeremy  Stein,  followed  by  Governor  Jay  Powell, 
co-chaired  a  working  group  with  Martin  Wheatley  of  the  U.K.  Financial  Conduct  Authority 
(FCA).  This  working  group  was  charged  with  reviewing  existing  interest  rate  benchmarks, 
and for establishing and guiding a group of market participants to identify the feasibility and 
viability of adopting alternative reference rates. 
The  FSB  report10  was  released  in  July  and  Governor  Powell11  has  recently  described  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  plans  to  support  the  two  primary  components  of  the  reform  of  LIBOR. 
First, we are considering, in cooperation with the LIBOR administrator and other members of 
the  official  sector,  ways  to  broaden  the  definition  of  LIBOR  to  more  adequately  represent 
current  patterns  of  bank  funding  and  to  anchor  it  more  firmly  in  observable  transactions. 
Second,  we  believe  it  is  important  for  market  participants  to  have  access  to  a  range  of 
appropriately  created  and  governed  reference  rates  that  best  suit  their  particular  business 
needs. For example, some activities such as interest rate derivatives might be better served 
with a risk-free or near risk-free reference rate, rather than one that embeds a bank credit 
risk component. 
I would like to emphasize three points in support of the FSB recommendations and our own 
efforts. First, the FSB recommendations make clear that there is not one single path for all 
jurisdictions to achieve the common objective of more robust and resilient reference rates. 
Rather,  each  jurisdiction  must  take  into  account  its  own  specific  institutional,  legal  and 
market practices and arrive at its own best solution. In the U.S., I believe it is important to 
identify alternative reference rates that are grounded in a strong governance framework as 
laid out in the IOSCO principles and that are supported by market transactions. This brings 
me to my second point – given a set of robust reference rates that meet IOSCO standards, 
the choice among these reference rates should be left to market participants who can best 
identify  the  specific  rate  that  is  most  appropriate  for  a  specific  business  need.  Third,  the 
Federal Reserve is committed to working with market participants of all kinds – dealers, end 
users, legal and accounting experts – to help develop robust reference rates that meet the 
needs of all types of market participants. 
In addition to these specific efforts around improving and finding alternative benchmarks, the 
New  York  Fed  is  sponsoring  other  efforts  related  to  the  reform  of  market  practices  and 
benchmark rates. The Foreign Exchange Committee (FXC) and Treasury Market Practices 
Group (TMPG), for example, are two groups of senior market practitioners sponsored by the 
New York Fed that are working within their markets to identify best practices for trading and 
behavior related to benchmark rates. Both groups also have published broader sets of best 
practices for the foreign exchange markets, and for Treasury, agency debt and agency MBS 
markets.  I  would  ask  all  market  participants  to  ensure  that  these  and  other  best  practices 
guide the behavior that we should expect from participants in financial markets. 
This will not be easy, but I believe restoring confidence in reference rates is achievable and 
will  greatly  enhance  the  robustness  and  resilience  of  our  financial  system.  I  have  focused 
here on the reform efforts around LIBOR, which is only one reference rate, albeit one that is 
widely used and a core part of our financial system. But, the need for stronger governance 
and more accountability spreads much further within the set of benchmark rates, and further 
                                                 
10   Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks, Financial Stability Board. 
11   Reforming U.S. Dollar LIBOR: The Path Forward, Remarks by Jerome H. Powell at the Money Marketeers of 
New York University, September 4, 2014. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  to  encompass  a  wide  range  of  practices  within  the  financial  system.  For  example, 
accusations  have  recently  surfaced  related  to  business  practices  within  foreign  exchange 
markets.  While  the  concerns  are  technically  very  different  than  the  practices  uncovered 
around  LIBOR  submissions,  the  common  theme  is  the  willingness  of  a  small  number  of 
market  participants  to  behave  improperly  and  contribute  to  a  decline  in  confidence  in  the 
integrity of benchmark rates specifically and of major financial institutions more generally. 
Next steps 
I  have  discussed  some  of  the  observed  problems  in  major  reference  rates  that  reflect 
egregious personal behavior. Some individuals responded to poorly-designed incentives and 
weak  controls  at  some  of  the  largest  financial  institutions.  The  regulatory  community  has 
already taken important steps to mitigate those concerns and real progress has been made. 
While this has helped to restore some of the integrity of particular reference rates, such as 
LIBOR, more work needs to be done before confidence in these rates are put on a firmer 
foundation. 
I’ll  conclude  by  emphasizing  two  of  the  next  steps  that  I  think  are  most  essential  for  the 
successful  reform  of  LIBOR.  First,  the  definition  of  LIBOR  should  be  broadened  so  that  it 
more accurately reflects the observed funding patterns of large banks and puts the rate on a 
broader, more stable base of observable transactions. The LIBOR administrator is actively 
considering ways to do this while remaining true to the spirit of LIBOR and how it is used in 
financial  contracts.  Accomplishing  this  will  make  markets  that  need  a  reference  rate  that 
embodies bank credit risk more robust and resilient and will strengthen the financial system. 
Second,  we  still  face  the  problem  that  the  reference  rate  for  a  large  stock  of  derivatives 
contracts is based on a relatively small, underlying cash market. This means there still is a 
powerful incentive for individuals to attempt to manipulate the rate for their own gains. One 
promising  solution,  outlined  in  Governor  Powell’s  recent  speech  on  reference  rates,  is  to 
work with market participants to find an alternative reference rate that is based on a deeper 
underlying cash market and that meets the needs of all market participants. Of course, any 
rate  that  serves  as  a  critical  financial  benchmark  must  meet  the  principles  for  good 
governance and production outlined by IOSCO. 
This  combination  –  a  more  robust  and  resilient  LIBOR  for  transactions  that  require  a 
reference  rate  with  a  bank  credit  risk  component  and  the  development  of  an  alternative 
reference  rate  for  transactions  like  interest  rate  derivatives  that  don’t  –  will  strengthen  our 
financial system and help undo some of the damage caused by earlier transgressions. But 
this  is  only  a  necessary  and  not  a  sufficient  set  of  conditions.  To  achieve  the  outcome 
desired,  financial  institutions  also  need  to  have  in  place  the  appropriate  incentives  and 
controls. 
Thank you for your attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
