  Benoît Cœuré: Central counterparty recovery and resolution 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at Exchange of Ideas #2 “Central clearing – guarantee of stability or new moral 
hazard?”, organised by Eurex Clearing, London, 24 November 2014. 
 Summary 
The  mandatory  use  of  central  clearing  is  a  relatively  new  regulatory  tool  for  mitigating 
systemic risk in the OTC derivatives space. It has brought the central counterparties (CCPs) 
to  the  forefront  of  financial  market  regulation.  It  is  therefore  crucial  for  CCPs  to  have 
comprehensive  and  effective  recovery  plans,  relying  on  a  wide  range  of  recovery  tools,  to 
continue providing their critical services also in a very severe crisis without requiring the use 
of resolution powers by authorities. Obviously the stability of CCPs primarily depends on the 
establishment and implementation of robust risk management framework. But CCPs are also 
in a unique position to set up efficient and comprehensive recovery plans as they can base 
them  on  contractual  arrangements  with  members.  But  CCPs  need  to  have  appropriate 
procedures for managing conflicts of interest between stakeholders – it is vital to involve all 
those who would bear losses in the design of the recovery plan. And on the regulatory side, 
we  need  to  make  sure  our  approach  is  cautious  and  non-prescriptive  at  this  stage.  I  am 
confident that CCPs, authorities and stakeholders will work together constructively to meet 
the ambitious objectives set out in the recent CPMI-IOSCO report. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today,  I  want  to  share  some  thoughts  with  you  on  the  recovery  and  resolution  of  central 
counterparties (CCPs). 
The mandatory use of central clearing as a regulatory tool for mitigating systemic risk in the 
OTC derivatives space is a rather new feature in the history of financial market regulation. It 
has brought CCPs to the forefront of financial markets and financial market regulation hence 
it is crucial for CCPs to have comprehensive and effective recovery plans. 
When we talk about “recovery” in relation to CCPs, we refer to the ability of a CCP to recover 
from a threat to its viability and financial strength so that it can continue to provide its critical 
services  without  requiring  the  use  of  resolution  powers  by  authorities.  Resolution,  on  the 
other  hand  refers  to  the  orderly  winding-down  of  an  FMI,  and  would  take  place  only  if 
recovery fails or is not desirable. 
Last  month,  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  (CPMI)  and  the 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO),  published  a  report  on 
“Recovery of financial market infrastructures”. Also last month, the Financial Stability Board 
published  a  report  on  the  Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial 
Institutions,  which  includes  an  annex  dedicated  to  resolution  regimes  for  FMIs.  Together, 
these two reports are important milestones in strengthening the resilience of FMIs, and of the 
financial system more broadly. 
Today,  I  will  focus  on  the  importance  of  CCP  recovery  and  resolution,  and  the  challenges 
faced by CCPs in designing appropriate recovery tools. I will also describe the specific role 
played by authorities during recovery situations, and mention the work that still needs to be 
done in the field of CCP recovery. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Recovery as a part of CCP risk management 
Before I explain why it is important for CCPs to have recovery and resolution tools, I would 
like to make it clear that these tools should only be seen as a way to complement regular risk 
management. In fact, recovery is the last step of a CCP’s risk management. 
The  regulatory  requirements  relating  to  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  Financial  Market 
Infrastructures defined under the CPMI-IOSCO Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures 
(PFMIs) (and national laws) are already fairly strict and conservative. Their aim, inter alia, is 
to ensure that recovery procedures will not need to be activated. In other words, if a CCP 
respects  the  requirements  for  risk  management  set  out  in  the  PFMIs  (and  national 
regulations) – which I should add that overseers and regulators are closely monitoring – this 
should, in principle, be enough to preserve the CCP and its functioning. 
To ensure the PFMIs are properly and comprehensively applied, CPMI and IOSCO have set 
up  an  implementation  monitoring  procedure  covering  28  jurisdictions.  Two  reports  on  the 
timeliness of the implementation have already been published and another work-stream will 
start shortly to assess whether jurisdictions have adopted legislation or policies to implement 
the  PFMI  (Level  1).  The  first  assessments  of  the  consistency  and  completeness  of  the 
Principles’  implementation  (Level  2)  for  CCPs  and  TRs  in  the  EU,  Japan  and  US  will  be 
released in early 2015. Further L2 assessments will start at the end of the first quarter next 
year.  In  parallel,  we  have  just  initiated  in  all  28  jurisdictions  an  assessment  of  the 
implementation  and  application  of  authorities’  Responsibilities,  with  reports  scheduled  for 
autumn  2015.  Moreover,  preparatory  work  is  now  starting  for  a  Level  3  assessment.  It  is 
anticipated that an assessment of the consistency of the outcomes of the application of the 
PFMIs to CCPs will start in autumn 2015. All these measures demonstrate that the regulatory 
community  is  extremely  serious  –  and  transparent  –  about  the  proper  and  equal 
implementation of the PFMI. 
However, even if the safety rules under the PFMI are properly implemented, the unthinkable 
may still happen. Central banks and regulators have learned from the recent financial crisis 
that focussing only on “normal” risk management is not enough. In the event of a default of a 
major  clearing  member,  a  CCP  might  not  be  able  to  allocate  all  the  losses  and  liquidity 
shortfalls that may occur. Therefore, each CCP needs to have a recovery plan for allocating 
any  residual  losses  and  liquidity  shortfalls  so  that  it  can  ensure  continuity  of  its  clearing 
services even when normal defences have failed. Without a robust recovery plan, the CCP 
might have to be resolved. 
CCP recovery is therefore a crucial issue. One could even argue that continued provision of 
services  is  more  important  for  CCPs  than  for  other  financial  institutions.  This  is  because 
CCPs,  as for  FMIs  in general,  are  different  to  other financial  institutions from  a  number of 
perspectives: 
1. 
The  use  of  a  CCP  is  mandatory  for  certain  products.  So  the  relevant  clearing 
services must be preserved under any and all circumstances. 
CCPs are systemic risk managers at the core of the financial system. Their smooth 
operation is a necessary condition for many other types of financial services. 
In  most  cases,  CCPs  have  only  very  few  –  if  any  –  substitutes  or  alternative 
providers. 
The  size  and  composition  of  CCP  balance  sheets  is  different  –  for  instance,  their 
balance sheets rarely include subordinated debt instruments. This makes bail in as 
a recovery or resolution tool difficult. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Designing recovery tools 
Although setting up recovery plans will be a challenge for CCPs, they are in a unique and 
perhaps better situation to do so than other financial institutions such as banks. Banks also 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  need  such  recovery  arrangements.  A  key  difference  between  banks  and  CCPs  is  that  a 
CCP’s  recovery  plan  can  be  based  on  contractual  agreements  with  its  members.  Unlike 
banks’  protected  depositors,  they  can  be  assumed  to  understand  and  manage  their  risk 
exposures. CCPs must have rules and procedures that allocate losses and liquidity shortfalls 
that are not covered by prefunded resources. From that perspective, CCPs are in a unique 
position in drawing on additional resources from members if and when needed. 
Simply  having  a  recovery  plan  is  not  enough:  CCPs  also  need  to  think  about  the  optimal 
design and number of recovery tools. 
As stated in the CPMI report I mentioned earlier, recovery tools should be comprehensive, 
effective,  controllable,  create  appropriate  incentives  for  risk  management,  and  minimise 
negative impact. 
The  challenge  is  that  no  individual  tool  can  equally  meet  all  of  these  criteria  because  of 
trade-offs.  For  example,  uncapped  cash  calls  are  comprehensive,  but  may  create 
disincentives for central clearing. Variation margin haircutting can be effective, as it reduces 
pay-outs  rather  than  requiring  additional  pay  ins,  but  its  systemic  effects  can  be  uncertain 
due  to  the  way  losses  are  allocated.  Initial  margin  haircutting  may  also  be  considered  as 
comprehensive, but on the other hand, it could increase the potential for contagion risk. 
The CPMI-IOSCO report on the recovery of FMIs offers a thorough description and analysis 
of the various pros and cons of different recovery tools, as well as the trade-offs that exist 
between them. It is probably not possible at this point to identify a single specific recovery 
plan that is optimal and superior to any other plan. CCPs have a range of options to choose 
from. It will be important not to rule out, a priori, the use of some of these tools. Rather, it 
might be advisable for CCPs to have many different tools potentially available. This way, they 
will be able to choose the appropriate tools in a specific recovery situation. 
One  of  the  main  challenges  in  drawing  up  recovery  plans  will  be  addressing  the  potential 
conflicts of interest between stakeholders. 
Indeed, different loss allocation tools will have different effects on the distribution of losses. 
For example, rules on variation margin haircutting might be designed in a way that losses are 
passed on to clients, while cash calls might only have an effect on direct clearing members. 
Similarly,  participants  might  not  be  willing  to  contribute  to  sharing  losses  which  arise  as  a 
result of management failures. 
It  is  therefore  vital  to  involve  those  who  would  bear  losses  or  liquidity  shortfalls  in  the 
formation  of  the  recovery  plan.  Mechanisms  should  be  foreseen  for  involving  all  relevant 
stakeholders in the CCP’s decision-making process: this could mean establishing procedures 
whereby  the  CCP  board  formally  consults  direct  participants,  indirect  participants  and/or 
linked CCPs, as relevant, or having such relevant entities directly represented on the board, 
on the risk committee, or on other relevant committees. As opinions among stakeholders are 
likely  to  differ,  the  CCP  should  have  clear  processes  for  identifying  the  diversity  of 
stakeholders’ views, and for managing any conflicts of interest between them. 
In the field of recovery of FMIs, we are entering new territory. Therefore, authorities have so 
far  taken  a  cautious  approach  to  developing  standards  and  regulation.  The  recently 
published CPMI-IOSCO report on the recovery of FMIs is not intended to create additional 
standards for CCPs or authorities beyond those set out in the PFMIs. Rather, the regulatory 
approach  is  non-prescriptive,  and  is  aimed  at  providing  guidance  that  should  help  FMIs  to 
choose  the  appropriate  mix  of  recovery  tools.  Over  time,  we  may  very  well  see  the 
development of more prescriptive rules and regulations. A more prescriptive approach will in 
my  view  become  inevitable  if  the  current  approach  fails  to  prevent  a  race  to  the  bottom 
between CCPs or across jurisdictions. The ongoing CPMI-IOSCO implementation monitoring 
process will be crucial to identify gaps and draw the lessons as needed. 
Authorities are also aware of the need to ensure consistency between regulations affecting 
FMIs and those affecting banks. On one hand, FMI overseers and banking supervisors need 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  to  work  closely  together  to  ensure  CCP  recovery  tools  are  consistent  and  not  rendered 
ineffective by regulations affecting banks, or by the intervention of supervisors. On the other 
hand, overseers and supervisors need to make sure CCP recovery tools do not threaten the 
stability  and  soundness  of  financial  institutions,  and  do  not  contradict  the  objectives  of 
banking  regulations.  In  this  regard,  CPMI  and  IOSCO  have  been  working  closely  with  the 
BCBS  to  ensure  rules  regarding  FMI  recovery  and  resolution  are  fully  consistent  with  the 
preservation  of  the  stability  of  participants.  At  the  ECB,  while  respecting  the  separation 
between bank supervision and CCP oversight, we will strive to ensure consistent approaches 
and a common understanding of risks. 
Managing a recovery situation 
The main responsibility for designing, setting up and implementing recovery plans is with the 
CCPs  themselves,  in  close  co-operation  with  their  members  and  other  stakeholders  who 
could  potentially  be  affected.  However,  this  does  not  discharge  authorities  from  their  own 
responsibilities, including in particular the review and assessment of CCP recovery plans, as 
well as the oversight of their implementation. 
It is very difficult to predict the conditions that would require a recovery plan to be activated. 
There are many unknowns and uncertainties. It cannot be ruled out that a given crisis would 
be different from anything that has been experienced so far. So it is not clear if the recovery 
plan  will  work  as  intended.  Some  discretion  is  therefore  needed  both  for  the  CCPs 
themselves and perhaps more importantly for the authorities, which cannot take a “hands off” 
approach during a crisis situation. 
Authorities have a particular responsibility to do what is systemically needed in a crisis, and 
are  better-placed  to  do  this  than  CCPs  given  their  broader  perspective.  For  instance, 
authorities could be faced with a situation where the application of resolution procedures is 
preferable to the activation of a recovery plan. This means, of course, that much will depend 
on the willingness of authorities to do the right thing in the moment of crisis. 
The recovery of CCPs is absolutely vital and hence it is of utmost importance that CCPs set 
up  comprehensive  and  efficient  recovery  plans.  However,  there  could  still  be  a  need  to 
resolve a CCP if its recovery plan is not enough to address the particular crisis situation it is 
going through. 
First  of  all,  the  attempt  to  recover  may  simply  fail:  ex-ante  recovery  plans  may  prove 
inadequate ex-post. Recovery plans have, fortunately, not yet needed to be implemented in 
real life, so it remains to be seen how they work in practice. 
Most  importantly,  however,  recovery  is  not  a  purpose  in  itself,  but  a  means  to  preserve 
financial stability. From that perspective, resolution could be preferable over recovery if the 
application of a recovery plan is deemed to lead to undesirable results. For example, loss 
allocation tools could end up over-exposing certain groups of participants, such as buy side 
institutions  or  individual  banks,  depending  on  the  scenario  involved.  Moreover,  resolution 
may  also  become  necessary  if  participants  do  not  want  to  use  the  CCP  any  longer,  and 
prefer instead to wind it down. 
Designing effective resolution plans for CCPs is therefore also a key issue. The FSB’s report 
on Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions is an important 
milestone in this regard. 
Further steps 
The last point I wish to make today is to acknowledge that important work still needs to be 
done in the field of CCP recovery. The work on recovery has not come to an end with the 
publication of the CPMI-IOSCO report. Some further steps will be needed. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First of all, we need to make sure that the CPMI-IOSCO guidance on recovery is effectively 
and consistently implemented internationally. The CPMI-IOSCO report leaves a wide range 
of options for CCPs to meet the requirements put forward. We need to make sure that their 
implementation does not give rise to regulatory arbitrage and competitive distortions. In this 
regard,  I  mentioned  earlier  that  CPMI  and  IOSCO  are  currently  carrying  out  an 
implementation  monitoring  exercise  for  the  PFMI:  monitoring  the  implementation  of  the 
guidance on recovery and resolution will also be a priority. 
We  also  need  to  better  understand  the  systemic  implications  of  pushing  risk  back  to 
participants through allocation of uncovered losses and liquidity shortfalls. How will stress be 
transmitted through the system once a CCP’s pre-funded resources have been exhausted? 
An  understanding  of  interdependencies,  such  as  common  participation,  is  particularly 
important. We also need to make sure we consider scenarios in which multiple CCPs enter 
recovery simultaneously. For instance, some clearing participants may be unable to fulfil all 
their  obligations  if  multiple  CCPs  simultaneously  ask  for  emergency  cash  calls  and 
replenishments. 
In this context, more thinking on CCP crisis scenarios could give us a somewhat clearer idea 
of  the  specific  problems  CCPs  might  have  to  face  in  a  recovery  situation,  including  the 
potential size of losses and liquidity shortfalls. To that end, deeper analysis of reverse stress 
testing to cover hypothetical portfolios and market conditions which go beyond ‘extreme but 
plausible’ would also be helpful. This is why CPMI-IOSCO have identified stress testing as a 
policy priority, and will soon launch a work stream to develop potential guidance regarding 
best  practices  and  methodologies.  The  objective  would  be  to  ensure  that  all  CCPs  apply 
reliable and comparably robust stress testing frameworks. 
Conclusion 
Despite the work that still needs to be done to ensure the full effectiveness of CCP recovery 
and  resolution,  it  is  important  to  understand  that  CCPs  are  truly  beneficial  for  the 
preservation of financial stability. Since the financial crisis, the systemic importance of CCPs 
has greatly increased, and there may be concerns within the market about their safety and 
soundness. Some of these concerns are legitimate, and regulators are taking them serious 
and  aim  at  addressing  them.  However,  it  should  be  recalled  that  the  alternative  to  central 
clearing  is  far  more  risky:  the  non-cleared  world,  which  existed  before  the  crisis,  was 
dangerously  opaque,  did  not  allow  for  pooling  of  risks,  and  was  inefficient  in  terms  of 
collateral mobilisation. Risk management frameworks of CCPs shall be designed to provide 
the right incentives to all stakeholders to manage theirs risks and positions prudently. 
Regulators  are  fully  aware  of  the  need  to  ensure  the  robustness  of  CCPs,  and  are 
determined to apply international standards such as the PFMI and the guidance on recovery 
and resolution in a consistent and rigorous way, consistent with bank supervision and leaving 
no room for regulatory arbitrage. 
I  am  confident  that  CCPs,  authorities  and  stakeholders  will  work together  constructively  to 
meet the ambitious objectives set out in the CPMI-IOSCO report. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
