  Stefan Ingves: Monetary policy in an uncertain economic policy 
landscape 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the West Sweden Chamber of Commerce, Göteborg, 
14 October 2014. 
 Accompanying  slides  can  be  found  on  the  Sveriges  Riksbank’s  website:  http://www.riksbank.se/en/Press-and-
published/Speeches/2014/Ingves-Monetary-policy-in-an-uncertain-economic-policy-landscape. 
Continued low repo rate so growth and inflation can rise 
At the beginning of September, we members of the Executive Board of the Riksbank decided 
to allow the repo rate to remain at 0.25 per cent so that the currently low inflation will rise 
towards  our  target  of  2  per  cent.  The  low  inflation  we  have  today  reflects  the  weak 
developments  in  economic  activity  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad.  In  this  weak  economic 
situation,  companies  have  found  it  difficult  to  pass  on  their  increased  costs  to  higher 
consumer prices. However, as economic activity strengthens and demand rises, companies 
will have greater opportunity to raise their prices, which will contribute to higher inflation. 
We  are  expecting  this  to  happen  as  economic  activity  abroad  strengthens  in  the  coming 
years. However, the world is somewhat out of step. While the signals from the United States 
are  strong,  developments  in  the  euro  area  are  surrounded  by  storm  clouds,  which  can  be 
seen in confidence indicators such as the purchasing managers’ index for the manufacturing 
industry. 
The  subdued  confidence  in  the  euro  area  is  probably  because  uncertainty  over  what 
direction events will take is unusually great. This is partly because of the conflict in Ukraine 
and the remaining questions regarding European banks’ balance sheets. The public finance 
situation  is  not  entirely  clear  in  all  of  the  countries  either.  But  once  this  uncertainty  has 
calmed, developments in the euro area may also pick up, as we are expecting that monetary 
policy will remain very expansionary, fiscal policy will ease and credit granting will function 
better. 
The currently weak development in the euro area is of course also leaving its mark on the 
Swedish  economy.  The  development  of  exports  is  weak,  which  is  in  turn  holding  back 
investment. Exports will not pick up again until economic activity abroad strengthens and it 
may take a year or so before export growth returns to a normal rate. But then investment is 
also likely to pick up as interest rates are low and the funding opportunities are good. 
Demand from our most important trading partners is currently fairly weak, therefore, and this 
has contributed to dampening growth in Sweden. On the other hand, demand from Swedish 
households has developed positively. In recent years, household incomes have increased at 
a  good  pace  and  consumption  and  housing  investment  have  shown  strong  development. 
Since our previous forecast at the beginning of September, new revised GDP statistics for 
the second quarter showed a somewhat higher GDP and a somewhat stronger development 
in  consumption  and  investment  than  we  had  reason  to  expect,  given  the  preliminary 
statistics. 
Employment  has  also  risen  somewhat  since  the  start  of  the  year,  and  if  economic  activity 
strengthens as we are expecting, the demand for labour will rise. Then unemployment will fall 
and  the  employment  rate,  that  is,  employed  as  a  percentage  of  the  population,  will  attain 
roughly  the  same  level  as  before  the  financial  crisis.  When  the  labour  market  situation 
improves, we will also see gradually higher wage increases. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Even  if  the  situation  is  currently  uncertain,  we  thus  see  signs  that  economic  activity  will 
gradually  strengthen,  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad,  and  thus  companies  will  have  greater 
scope to raise their prices. 
However,  we  believe  that  one  condition  for  growth,  employment  and  inflation  to  rise  in 
accordance with the forecasts is that we continue to hold the repo rate at a very low level. 
This  forecast  for  the  repo  rate  –  what  we  call  the  repo-rate  path  –  is,  however,  a  highly 
uncertain  forecast,  at  least  with  regard  to  the  end  of  the  forecast  period.  This  relates  to 
something as self-evident as the fact that we live in a world full of uncertainty, not least with 
regard  to  the  preconditions  for  monetary  policy  –  for  example,  developments  abroad, 
inflationary  pressures,  the  level  of  unutilised  resources  in  the  economy  and  coming 
measures in the field of economic policy. 
Here there are many factors contributing to making our forecasts uncertain and our repo-rate 
decisions difficult, and I shall touch on some of these problems. 
Unclear international developments – unclear conditions for monetary policy 
There is greater geopolitical uncertainty in our immediate area than there has been for a long 
time. The ongoing conflict in Ukraine could escalate, trigger more far-reaching sanctions, put 
further  downward  pressure  on  demand  in  parts  of  Europe  and  push  energy  prices  up  or 
down. We are monitoring developments closely, taking note of other analysts’ assessments 
and working with different scenarios, but it is of course difficult to assess the probability of an 
escalating conflict and to quantify what potential effects it might have. 
Another  uncertainty  factor  concerns  the  situation  in  the  euro-area  banking  sector.  The 
European Central Bank’s review of banks’ assets (Asset Quality Review) and accompanying 
stress  tests,  which  will  be  published  soon,  can  strengthen  confidence  in  the  banks  and 
thereby hopefully give new vitality to the banking sector, which has so far hampered a much-
needed recovery through restrained credit granting and high interest rates on bank loans. But 
the problems in the Portuguese, Bulgarian and Austrian banks that have surfaced over the 
summer imply that some problems remain and there is a risk that the review will either point 
to extensive problems or be perceived as insufficient. 
Another  extremely  important  condition  for  monetary  policy  in  Sweden  is  the  shape  that 
monetary  policy  abroad  will  take  and  what  effects  it  will  have  on  growth,  inflation  and 
exchange rates. In many parts of the world, and not least in the euro area, low inflation over 
a  long  period  of  time  has  come  as  a  surprise  to  central  banks  and  others.  The  European 
Central Bank (ECB) has expressed concern over falling inflation expectations and recently 
cut  its  policy  rate  to  0.05  per  cent,  at  the  same  time  as  declaring  that  this  is  the  lowest 
possible policy rate for them. 
Moreover,  they  have  announced  several  measures  aimed  at  stimulating  lending  to 
households  and  companies.  But  it  is  still  uncertain  exactly  what  the  measures  will  be  and 
how  extensive  they  will  be.  Moreover,  there  is  little  or  no  previous  experience  of  these 
interest  rate  levels  and  measures  in  the  euro  area.  It  is  therefore  difficult  to  assess  what 
effects  the  ECB’s  measures  will  have  on  GDP  and  inflation  in  the  euro  area  and  thus, 
ultimately, what they will mean for inflationary pressures here in Sweden. 
One  complicating  factor  is  that  the  central  banks  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United 
States appear to be taking a different direction with their monetary policy than the ECB. Their 
monetary policies are diverging. One reason why we are interested in expectations of policy 
rates and supplementary measures in other countries is that they influence interest in assets 
denominated  in  Swedish  krona  and  therefore  ultimately  the  development  of  the  krona 
exchange rate. 
Interpreting  exchange  rate  fluctuations  is  often  very  difficult,  but  the  changes  in  the 
expectations  of  the  European  and  US  central  banks  probably  contribute  to  explaining  the 
recent weakening of the krona in relation to the dollar and the strengthening against the euro. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It is difficult to foresee the net result for inflation in Sweden, as that is dependent on both how 
much  the  various  exchange  rates  alter  and  what  effects  this  in  turn  has  on  import  prices, 
competitiveness and purchasing power. 
Factors at home also lead to uncertain conditions for monetary policy 
International  events  thus  account  for  many  of  the  sources  of  uncertainty  monetary  policy 
needs  to  deal  with.  However,  there  are  also  developments  at  home  contributing  to  the 
uncertainty over the conditions for monetary policy. 
One question that we have long been seeking an answer to is why inflation has been lower 
than we and many other analysts have forecast. The answer is, of course, an important piece 
of the jigsaw puzzle when putting together the picture of future inflationary pressures. At the 
Riksbank  we  have  therefore  put  a  lot  of  energy  into  analysing  the  available  statistics,  and 
also into interviewing companies about the development of their costs and pricing. The other 
day  we  published  an  Economic  Commentary  on  the  subject  of  company  pricing.1  The 
responses from 895 companies in the retail trade, construction and various service industries 
imply  that  companies  have  experienced  difficulties  in  passing  on  their  increased  costs  to 
consumers. A natural explanation is that demand has been weak and uncertain. Our ordinary 
Business  Survey,  which  was  published  last  week,  confirmed  the  picture  that  many 
companies  currently  perceive  the  situation  as  relatively  uncertain  and  that  they  are  so  far 
cautious  in  implementing  price  rises.2  Although  there  are  some  signs  that  price  increases 
have been held back by an increase in competition, it is nevertheless reasonable to expect 
faster  price  increases  and  higher  inflation  when  economic  activity  strengthens  again  and 
demand increases. 
In addition to inflationary pressures, developments in housing prices and household debt – 
and  not  least  the  counter-measures  needed  and  their  consequences  –  comprise  an 
important, but difficult to assess, domestic condition for monetary policy. 
One should bear in mind the fact that experiences from other countries point to a high and 
growing  indebtedness  sooner  or  later  having  serious  socio-economic  consequences,  but 
there is no clear limit as to when the situation becomes unsustainable. If one looks at the 
information  available  on  indebtedness  among  the  households  taking  on  new  mortgages, 
which  thus  in  many  respects  comprise  the  purchaser  side  of  the  housing  market  today,  I 
think there is reason for concern. On average, these households take mortgages equivalent 
to more than 350 per cent of their disposable incomes. The interest rates they pay on these 
mortgages are very low in an historical and an international perspective. This is partly due to 
the fact that a very high percentage of new Swedish mortgages are taken at variable interest 
rates. Many of the mortgages are also interest-only loans. This means that there is a risk that 
housing prices and indebtedness will now be driven up to unsustainable levels. 
For those of us making the monetary-policy decisions, the key issue is what measures will be 
taken  to  slow  down  the  build-up  of  debt  and,  not  least,  what  effects  these  might  have  on 
household  consumption  and  ultimately  on  inflationary  pressures  in  the  Swedish  economy 
while our monetary policy is taking effect. This is an important source of the uncertainty we 
have to deal with. 
Unfortunately, there is so far little experience to learn from with regard to the effects of so-
called  macroprudential  policy  measures.  This  makes  it  difficult  for  those  making  decisions 
and for those of us assessing what the decisions will be and what effects they may have. 
                                                 
1 
2  The Riksbank’s Business Survey, September 2014. 
“Results from a survey on company pricing”, Economic Commentary No. 4, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  One trade-off concerns “dosage”. What one wants to achieve is that the growth in debt and 
housing prices slows down, but at the same time one wants to avoid a heavy fall in housing 
prices. This is a delicate task. 
Another  question  concerns  the  fact  that  macroprudential  policy  involves  getting  banks  and 
borrowers  to  behave  in  ways  that  they  would  not  otherwise,  for  instance,  amortising  their 
loans quicker than they do now. Before one has managed to gain experience of the effects of 
a particular package of measures within the framework of the Swedish financial system, it is 
difficult to assess to what extent it affects monetary policy. 
Managing uncertainty in monetary-policy decision-making 
My impression is that we are now in a situation where the conditions for monetary policy are 
perhaps  even  more  uncertain  than  usual.  However,  monetary  policy  decisions  must 
nevertheless  be  made,  and  I  therefore  want  to  discuss  my  views  on  how  this  uncertainty 
should be managed and how it has affected by own stance recently. 
An obvious measure that I have already mentioned is to try to acquire more knowledge of the 
sources of uncertainty and in this way reduce the uncertainty we are facing. We of course 
follow  international  developments  closely  and  rely  on  both  our  own  and  other  analysts’ 
assessments of what they may entail. With regard to inflationary pressures in Sweden, as I 
mentioned earlier, we have put a good deal of energy into analysing the available statistics 
and into gathering new information from companies regarding their pricing behaviour. On the 
question  of  household 
indebtedness,  we  are  currently  calculating  what  effects  an 
amortisation requirement would have. At the same time, we are developing our analysis of 
how monetary policy and indebtedness will affect the risks in the Swedish economy in the 
coming period. 
I  think  that  when  making  the  actual  decision,  one  must  be  sensitive  to  the  difficulty  of 
quantifying  everything  that  needs  to  be  taken  into  account.  Models  cannot  capture 
everything. One often sees forecasts as mean forecasts. This means in principle that the risk 
that the economy will develop less well is as great as the chance that it will develop better. A 
mean forecast for GDP growth abroad, for instance, balances everything that could give rise 
to  lower  growth  against  everything  that  could  give  rise  to  higher  growth.  Another  way  of 
expressing  the  same  thing  is  that  the  forecast  is  a  form  of  middle  way  of  all  the  different 
roads the economy could take in the coming period. 
This  way  of  working  with  forecasts  means  that  one  acts  as  though  one  has  succeeded  in 
quantifying the possibilities and effects of all of the different potential courses of events. A 
year or so ago there were frequent discussions of the risk of a split or disintegration of the 
euro system – what was the probability that this would happen and what effects would it have 
for Sweden? Today there may be reason to ask these questions with regard to an escalation 
of the Ukraine conflict or to a substantial fall in housing prices in Sweden. 
If  one  considers  these  difficulties  in  quantifying  various  possible  sequences  of  events  and 
probabilities  that  they  will  occur,  it  may  not  be  as  simple  a  matter  to  make  decisions  on 
monetary policy and make forecasts for future interest rates as it is sometimes made out to 
be. It is not necessarily a case of assuming that one has succeeded in capturing all possible 
sequences  of  events  in  a  balanced  manner  and  then  choosing  the  repo-rate  path  that 
provides  the  smallest  deviations  from  the  inflation  target  and  a  long-term  sustainable 
development of employment during the forecast period. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As my colleague Stephen Poloz at the Bank of Canada recently pointed out, the shaping of 
monetary policy is more a question of risk management than a precise feat of engineering.3 
If one takes the uncertainty seriously, and I think we have to do that, my assessment is that 
one should put particular emphasis on the really serious negative scenarios that we have the 
capacity  to  influence  with  monetary  policy.  One  such  risk  that  we  have  tried  to  take  into 
account is that in a situation where macroprudential policy measures cannot manage all of 
the risks linked to household indebtedness, a low repo rate over a long period of time could 
aggravate  and  increase  the  probability  of  a  domestic  crisis  caused  by  household 
indebtedness.  Another  risk  that  requires  particular  consideration  is  that  a  low  inflation  rate 
over  a  long  period  of  time  could  make  inflation  expectations  lose  their  connection  to  the 
inflation target. 
When I entered a reservation against the monetary policy decision in July this year, all of us 
Executive Board members agreed that the repo rate needed to be cut for inflation to rise. The 
difference concerned how much it should be cut. My stance was based on the assessment 
that we could have given a slightly smaller impulse to further indebtedness and at the same 
time contributed to bringing inflation and inflation expectations back on target by limiting the 
cut  to  0.25 percentage points  and at  the  same  time  signalling  a  willingness  to  wait  before 
increasing the rate again until 2016, even if this looked as though it might mean that inflation 
would overshoot the target. 
Economic  activity  in  Sweden  is  now  beginning  to  improve,  supported  by  very  low  interest 
rates  charged  to  households  and  companies  and  by  stronger  developments  abroad. 
However, our forecasts are, as I have argued, quite uncertain, especially a couple of years 
ahead. Anyone wanting to know more definitely what will happen needs a crystal ball that 
can  describe  all  the  situations  that  will  arise  here  in  Sweden  and  abroad  over  the  coming 
years.  However,  there  is  no  such  crystal  ball,  so  as  always  when  making  decisions  in  an 
uncertain situation we will have to deal with what happens as it comes. 
                                                 
3  Poloz, Stephen S., “Monetary Policy as Risk Management”, speech on 12 December 2013. Several central 
bank governors have expressed this opinion, including Alan Greenspan in the speech ”Monetary Policy under 
Uncertainty” on 29 August 2003. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
      6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
      12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
