  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 4 December 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to the first 
press conference in our new premises. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting 
of  the  Governing  Council,  which  was  also  attended  by  the  Commission  Vice-President, 
Mr Dombrovskis. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  and  in  line  with  our  forward 
guidance, we decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. As regards our non-
standard  monetary  policy  measures,  we  have  started  purchasing  covered  bonds  and 
asset-backed securities. These purchase programmes will last for at least two years. Next 
week, we will conduct the second targeted longer-term refinancing operation, to be followed 
by six further operations until June 2016. Taken together, our measures will have a sizeable 
impact on our balance sheet, which is intended to move towards the dimensions it had at the 
beginning of 2012. 
In  the  coming  months,  our  measures  will  further  ease  the  monetary  policy  stance  more 
broadly, support our forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates and reinforce the fact 
that  there  are  significant  and  increasing  differences  in  the  monetary  policy  cycle  between 
major  advanced  economies.  However,  the  latest  euro  area  macroeconomic  projections 
indicate  lower  inflation,  accompanied  by  weaker  real  GDP  growth  and  subdued  monetary 
dynamics. 
In  this  context,  early  next  year  the  Governing  Council  will  reassess  the monetary  stimulus 
achieved, the expansion of the balance sheet and the outlook for price developments. We 
will  also  evaluate  the  broader  impact  of  recent  oil  price  developments  on  medium-term 
inflation trends in the euro area. Should it become necessary to further address risks of too 
prolonged  a  period  of  low  inflation,  the  Governing  Council  remains  unanimous  in  its 
commitment  to  using  additional  unconventional  instruments  within  its  mandate. This  would 
imply altering early next year the size, pace and composition of our measures. In response to 
the  request  of  the  Governing  Council,  ECB  staff  and  the  relevant  Eurosystem  committees 
have stepped up the technical preparations for further measures, which could, if needed, be 
implemented  in  a timely  manner.  All  of  our monetary  policy  measures  are geared  towards 
underpinning the firm anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations, in line with our 
aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2%, and contribute to a return of inflation 
rates towards that level. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real GDP in the euro area rose by 0.2%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of this year. 
This was in line with earlier indications of a weakening in the euro area’s growth momentum, 
leading  to  a  downward  revision  of  the  outlook  for  euro  area  real  GDP  growth  in  the  most 
recent forecasts. The latest data and survey evidence up to November confirm this picture of 
a  weaker  growth  profile  in  the  period  ahead.  At  the  same  time,  the  outlook  for  a  modest 
economic  recovery  remains  in  place.  On  the  one  hand,  domestic  demand  should  be 
supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  ongoing  improvements  in  financial 
conditions, the progress made in fiscal consolidation and structural reforms, and significantly 
lower  energy  prices  supporting  real  disposable  income.  Furthermore,  demand  for  exports 
should benefit from the global recovery. On the other hand, the recovery is likely to continue 
to  be  dampened  by  high  unemployment,  sizeable  unutilised  capacity,  and  the  necessary 
balance sheet adjustments in the public and private sectors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  These  elements  are  reflected  in  the  December  2014  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 0.8% in 2014, 
1.0%  in  2015  and  1.5%  in  2016.  Compared  with  the  September  2014  ECB  staff 
macroeconomic  projections,  the  projections  for  real  GDP  growth  have  been  revised 
substantially  downwards.  Downward  revisions  were  made  to  the  projections  for  both 
domestic demand and net exports. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  are  on  the  downside.  In 
particular, the weak euro area growth momentum, alongside high geopolitical risks, has the 
potential  to  dampen  confidence  and  especially  private  investment.  In  addition,  insufficient 
progress in structural reforms in euro area countries constitutes a key downward risk to the 
economic outlook. 
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  0.3%  in 
November  2014,  after  0.4%  in  October.  Compared  with  the  previous  month,  this  mainly 
reflects  a  stronger  fall  in  energy  price  inflation  and  a  somewhat  lower  annual  increase  in 
services prices. Taking into account the current environment of very low rates of inflation, it 
will be important to assess the broader impact of recent oil price developments on medium-
term inflation trends and to avoid spillovers to inflation expectations and wage formation. 
Against the background of recent oil price developments, it is crucial to recall that forecasts 
and projections are based on technical assumptions, especially for oil prices and exchange 
rates. On the basis of information available in mid-November, at the time the December 2014 
Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area were finalised, annual HICP 
inflation was foreseen to reach 0.5% in 2014, 0.7% in 2015 and 1.3% in 2016. In comparison 
with  the  September  2014  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  they  have  been  revised 
significantly downwards. These revisions reflect mainly lower oil prices in euro terms and the 
impact of the downwardly revised outlook for growth, but they do not yet incorporate the fall 
in oil prices over the past few weeks following the cut-off date for the projections. Over the 
coming  months,  annual  HICP 
inflation  rates  could  experience  renewed  downward 
movements, given the recent further decline in oil prices. 
The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments  over  the  medium  term.  In  this  context,  we  will  focus  in  particular  on  the 
possible repercussions of dampened growth dynamics, geopolitical developments, exchange 
rate and energy price developments, and the pass-through of our monetary policy measures. 
We will be particularly vigilant as regards the broader impact of recent oil price developments 
on medium-term inflation trends in the euro area. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  data  for  October  2014  support  the  assessment  of 
subdued  underlying  growth  in  broad  money  (M3),  with  the  annual  growth  rate  standing  at 
2.5%  in  October,  unchanged  from  September.  Annual  growth  in  M3  continues  to  be 
supported by its most liquid components, with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at 
an annual rate of 6.2% in October. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) was –1.6% in October, after –1.8% in September, showing a gradual recovery 
from a trough of –3.2% in February. On average over recent months, net redemptions have 
moderated  from  the  historically  high  levels  recorded  a  year  ago.  Lending  to  non-financial 
corporations continues to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit risk, 
credit  supply  factors  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector 
balance sheets. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation)  was  0.6%  in  October,  after  0.5%  in  September.  The  monetary  policy 
measures  in  place  and  the  completion  of  the  ECB’s  comprehensive  assessment  should 
support a further stabilisation of credit flows. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis confirms the need to closely monitor the risks to the outlook for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  price developments over the medium term and to be prepared to provide further monetary 
policy accommodation, if needed. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative  stance  contributes  to  supporting  economic  activity.  However,  in  order  to 
strengthen investment activity, boost job creation and raise productivity growth, other policy 
areas need to contribute decisively. In particular, the determined implementation of product 
and  labour  market  reforms  as  well  as  actions  to  improve  the  business  environment  for 
firms  need  to  gain  momentum  in  several  countries.  It  is  crucial  that  structural  reforms  be 
implemented  credibly  and  effectively  as  this  will  raise  expectations  of  higher  incomes  and 
encourage  firms  to  increase  investment  today  and  bring  forward  the  economic  recovery. 
Fiscal policies should support the economic recovery, while ensuring debt sustainability in 
compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact, which remains the anchor for confidence. All 
countries  should  use  the  available  scope  for  a  more  growth-friendly  composition  of  fiscal 
policies.  The  Investment  Plan  for  Europe  which  the  European  Commission  announced  on 
26 November 2014 will also support the recovery. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
