  
 
Lesetja  Kganyago:  South  African  monetary  policy  and  the  path  to 
normalisation 
Address by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at 
the  RMB  Morgan  Stanley  2014  Big  Five  Investor  Conference,  Cape  Town,  30  September 
2014. 
 Introduction and context 
1. 
Global  economic  rhythms  remain  disturbed  and  economic  policies  of  major  advanced 
economies  are  moving  in  different  directions.  Much  of  the  emerging  market  universe  is 
experiencing  weak  economic  growth  and  higher  than  comfortable  inflation.  US  policy  is 
slowly  normalising,  while  Europe  is taking  strong remedial  action  in  an attempt  to  address 
extremely  low  inflation  and  a  protracted  recession.  These  developments,  and  others,  will 
continue to affect South Africa and test our policies. 
This has already been a challenging year for the Reserve Bank. We have seen a sustained 
breach of the inflation target. We have raised policy rates for the first time since 2008. Output 
contracted  for  the  first  time  since  the  crisis.  In  August,  African  Bank  was  placed  under 
curatorship. 
Confidence  in  the  economy  is  currently  weak,  and  all  else  equal,  will  tend  to  put  upward 
pressure on inflation rates as households and firms seek price increases as a way to improve 
their finances. Stubborn inflation persists in South Africa in part because of this, and we need 
to be clear as a society that a spiral of wage-price inflation cannot substitute for productivity 
growth as a way to improve our incomes. We need low inflation, as a protection of the living 
standards of the poorest among us, to support access to finance, for financial stability – and 
as  a  means  of  safeguarding  our  competitiveness  and  encouraging  investment  and  job 
creation. 
At  present  it  is  important  to  conserve  and  move  to  rebuild  policy  space,  and  facilitate 
macroeconomic adjustment away from our persistent and large current account deficit. This 
should  be  achieved  by  increasing  exports,  investment  and  saving,  and  more  moderate 
consumption of imported goods as spending rises. Higher inflation and large twin deficits are 
undesirable  and  unsustainable.  A  moderation  in  imbalances  will  support  sustainable  long-
term investment by reducing long-term costs of capital and improving confidence, enabling 
the economy to grow and create the jobs we need. 
Policy normalisation in the US will occur in a global environment that is slowly improving and 
which will require higher global interest rates. Our monetary policy stance will need to evolve 
in line with domestic priorities and take into account pressures exerted by international policy 
normalisation. A normalisation cycle will support the moderation in inflation that we seek to 
achieve  and  to  assist  in  correcting  macroeconomic  imbalances.  We  can  also  expect, 
however,  that  normalisation  will  generate  volatility  in  the  short-term.  Our  policy  framework 
allows for most of the volatility to remain in the foreign currency market, thereby enhancing 
stability in the real economy. 
Further dampening of volatility can be achieved by ensuring effective policy communication 
across monetary and fiscal domains. 
We  have  in  place  the  right  kind  of  macroeconomic  policy  framework  to  facilitate  the 
adjustment  to  external  and  internal  shocks,  both  those  hitting  us  now  and  those  we  will 
experience  in  future.  This  policy  framework  enables  policy  makers  and  investors  to  see 
through near term volatility, keeping policy rates and adjustments minimal and efficient, and 
economic  fundamentals  more  stable.  This  is  critical  to  enabling  public  and  private  sector 
actors  to  keep  their  eyes  on  the  real  economy  backdrop  –  the  improvement  in  global 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  conditions – and seek ways to strengthen our ability to take advantage of it through rising 
investment. 
Before  I  discuss  SA  policy  normalisation,  let  me  first  say  a  few  words  about  the  global 
economy and its effects on South African conditions.  
US policy normalisation 
2. 
The US economy has achieved critically important gains over the past year. Unemployment 
has fallen faster than expected and is now approaching its natural level. The budget deficit 
has fallen steeply since the crisis and fiscal policy has also become more predictable. New 
estimates  of  future  health  care  costs  from  the  CBO  (US  Congressional  Budget  Office) 
suggest long run fiscal prospects are much rosier than previously thought. Technology and 
resources,  particularly  the  shale  boom,  have  provided  new  sources  of  economic  growth, 
perhaps  enabling  a further  permanent  improvement  in  the  US  trade  deficit  and  balance of 
payments. 
Inflation to accelerate 
Certainly,  we  stand  at  the  beginning  of  a  long  path  to  normalisation  of  US  policy.  But  the 
pace of normalisation is less certain and will depend on data and how the Federal Reserve 
interprets inflationary pressures and the economic recovery. 
The productivity enhancing effects of shale oil developments will tend to weigh against rising 
inflation  in  the  US.  But  this  structural  downward  force  on  inflation  may  be  offset  by  the 
decline  in  the  US  labour  force  participation  rate.  So  far,  we  have  seen  unemployment  fall 
sharply without generating sustained inflationary pressures. If the decline in the labour force 
participation rate is permanent, then, as GDP rises, there will be greater pressure on wages 
and prices – with falling participation the labour market tightens more quickly. Other longer 
term factors, like less immigration and the on-going re-pricing of labour costs in China, will 
also tend to give impetus to global and US inflation. 
It is also possible however that substantial slack remains in the US labour market. As GDP 
rises  many  discouraged  workers  will  return  to  work,  and  part-time  workers  will  get  more 
hours,  before  we  see  wages  and  inflation  rise.  This  is  one  crucial  problem  for  the  US 
policymakers. Another is how much inflation to accept before feeling secure enough in the 
recovery  to  raise  rates.  Understandably,  the  Fed  will  be  reluctant  to  throttle  an  infant 
recovery with premature tightening.  
The US policy response 
We  might  conclude  that  it  seems  unlikely  that  the  US  Fed  will  allow  inflation  to  rise  too 
strongly  as  the  real  economy  recovers.  After  all,  the  success  of  counter-cyclical  fiscal  and 
monetary  efforts  has  depended  in  large  part  on  the  willingness  of  domestic  and  foreign 
economic agents to finance the US deficit and rise in public debt. Allowing inflation to erode 
the  value  of  the  debt  and  the  income  payments  associated  with  it  would  undermine  the 
effectiveness of future counter-cyclical policy efforts. 
These  thoughts  suggest  that  a  reasonable  baseline  view  is  that  as  the  US  recovery 
continues,  on  balance  inflationary  pressures  should  creep  up.  Policy  will  respond,  via  a 
commensurate tightening from the zero lower bound over the medium term, and also through 
sustained  fiscal  deficit  reduction.  Smaller  fiscal  deficits,  higher  interest  rates,  and  strong 
economic growth should generate a sustained rise in the US dollar against other currencies – 
including the rand. All things equal, US normalisation will require corresponding policy shifts 
in South Africa, including higher local interest rates. 
These predictions are reliable, but specifying just when they will be validated is harder. Will 
the first rate increase in the US come in mid-2015? A few months later? Will policy tighten at 
every  meeting,  and  in  what  increments?  Will  markets  understand  the  signals  sent  by  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Fed?  These  uncertainties  will  probably  generate  bouts  of  volatility,  which  in  turn  might  be 
misread  as  a  trend  reversal  or  strengthening.  One  possibility  is  of  a  further  gradual 
weakening  in  the  rand  as  clarity  about  US  normalisation  emerges  incrementally.  Another 
possibility is of step changes, in which markets react most strongly to occasional clear policy 
signals  and  adjust  expectations  of  forward  values  for  the  rand  and  interest  rates  in  larger 
discrete movements. 
Baseline complexities 
3. 
This  baseline  for  the  US  economy,  which  promises  economic  recovery  and  policy 
normalisation, is clouded by developments in Europe, Japan, China and much of the rest of 
the emerging market universe. 
Japan 
In Japan, the sustainability of the effort to push up inflation and re-ignite growth seems to be 
in question, in large part because of the futility of trying to use macroeconomic policy alone to 
address  structural  features  of  a  complicated  socio-economy.  The  three  arrows  strategy  is 
currently a one arrow strategy, with structural reforms still missing and the second quarter tax 
hike  lowering growth. The  pre-tax  consumption boom  was  more than  cancelled  out  by  the 
post-tax slump, leaving the Japanese economy at mid-year smaller than it was at the end of 
2013.  The  world’s  third  largest  economy  continues  to  struggle  for  the  kind  of  sustained 
growth rates that have eluded it for almost a generation. 
Emerging markets 
Emerging  market  economies  bounced  back  quickly  from  the  Great  Recession,  prompting 
much  talk  of  decoupling  from  the  advanced  economies.  Since  2010,  however,  growth  has 
trended persistently lower, to the point where we now sit with a generalised EM slowdown. 
Meanwhile,  China  aside,  the  average  large  EM  has  experienced  rising  inflation  and  an 
expanding current account deficit, with monetary policy moving in the direction of tightening. 
The lesson is that EMs have not decoupled; instead, many of the biggest emerging markets 
have been contributing to global demand, using up policy space, and slowing for a lack of 
world growth. Now they must rebalance and restructure to ensure economic stability. 
What role will China play in our fortunes? We know that policymakers are trying to find a path 
between  keeping  growth  strong  and  rebalancing  away  from  investments  and  exports.  We 
really don’t know how this process will affect us. South Africa’s terms of trade have softened 
by  just  over  6%  since  2011  as  commodity  prices  have  weakened,  but  they  remain  at 
historically  elevated  levels.1  How  much  further  could  they  fall,  and  what  impact  will  softer 
prices have on volumes demanded? 
Evidence suggests that iron ore, coal and other exporters cannot rely on high prices to keep 
profits up, but this doesn’t mean a collapse in volumes. To take one example, production of 
iron ore increased 114%, in volume terms, between 2005 to 2014.2 It is hard to imagine a 
scenario in which these volumes collapse, although it is easy to see that firms will need to 
restructure  to  remain  profitable  with  lower  prices.  The  price  effects  of  commodity  prices 
falling in USD terms have been offset in rand terms by currency depreciation, but we should 
be careful about extrapolating further when structural factors supporting high volumes remain 
intact. 
                                                
1  Terms of trade, including gold, weakened 6.3% from 2011Q1 to 2014Q2. Excluding gold, the decrease is 7%. 
2  Physical volume production, iron, 2005Q1 to 2014Q2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  It is also worth noting that South Africa’s export markets continue to shift. In particular, the 
African market is becoming much more important for us.3 
institutional  configuration  and  policy  settings.  The  contradictions  are 
Europe 
The  trajectory  of  Europe  remains  an  important  determinant  of  global  macroeconomic 
conditions  and  for  South  African  outcomes.  In  recent  years,  weakness  in  the  European 
economy  has  meant  that  there  have  been  few  real  benefits  to  SA  despite  major  rand 
depreciation against the Euro.4 As with the United States, we appear to be witnessing a sea-
change in European policy – although this could not possibly be described as normalisation. 
The  question  for  South  African  monetary  policy  is  whether  these  changes  will  offset  US 
normalisation, fully, partially, or not at all. 
From a real economy perspective, a sustainably growing Europe is crucial, but this may take 
considerable time to materialise. It is very hard to imagine Europe returning to growth with its 
current 
too 
overwhelming. 
Household consumption and investment across Euro Area has and will remain weak so long 
as  banks  remain  in  financial  distress  and  property  values  and  the  housing  markets  are 
depressed. Europe’s financial sector needs a clearing out of bad debt. 
The  emphasis  on  fiscal  austerity  –  clearly  correct  for  over-indebted  sovereigns  –  would, 
cumulated across Europe, weigh too heavily on growth in the absence of any other demand 
stimulus and an exuberantly strong currency. 
Germany has stood out for its strong growth in the midst of stagnation by its neighbours, but 
its  longer-term  interests  cannot  be  served  by  endless  stagnation  in  the  euro  area.  The 
country  seems  too  integral  to  the  rest  of  Europe,  via  positive  and  negative  spillovers,  to 
continue  indefinitely  on  a  real  depreciation-based  economic  strategy.  It  cannot  declare 
independence from Europe. 
Rather, Europeans probably need to think of themselves less like we do these days – less as 
small open economies subjected to the vagaries of currency fluctuations and capital flows – 
and more like a continental super-economy if the region as a whole is to prosper. 
It is, perhaps, out of recognition that the old “normal” cannot go on that the ECB has moved 
resolutely  in  the  direction  of  encouraging  more  coherence  in  Euro  Area  macroeconomic 
policy. As Europe’s inflation rate has declined, the ECB has begun urging governments to 
consider  some  easing  of  budget  consolidation  while  expanding  its  own  monetary  easing 
programme. And the President of the ECB has emphasised that this must be accompanied 
by  structural  reforms,  which  would  pay  off  now  as  well  as  later  if  they  could  be  locked  in 
alongside policy easing. This may create confidence that European governments understand 
their challenges and have the will to address them. 
The impact of ECB policy easing should be to sustain a depreciation of the Euro against the 
USD, both nominal and real. Cees Bruggemans has reminded us recently that when the US 
dollar and Euro change directions, they do so much more than analysts tend to realise and 
over significant time frames.5 
                                                
3  According to DTI data, the African share as a per cent of SA’s total trade with the world increased from 11.4% 
in 2007 to 19.8% in 2013. 
4  Between 2011 and August 2014, the rand depreciated by 29.7% against the Euro (compared to 32.6%% to 
the USD). 
5  Cees Bruggemans, “Dollar & Euro part ways,” Rex Column, 8 September 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As the Fed’s purchases of mortgage backed securities dwindle to nothing, the ECB will buy 
about 1 trillion Euros, returning its balance sheet to 2012 levels.6 It will also buy asset backed 
securities. The impact of this on the rand will be to encourage depreciation against the US 
dollar  and  some  appreciation  against  the  Euro,  but  the  net  effect  on  the  Rand’s  nominal 
effective exchange rate will also be affected by commodity price trends. We don’t expect that 
the ECB’s easing programme will offset normalisation on a one for one basis. It may delay or 
slow the process, drawing out the global normalisation process. 
South African monetary policy 
4. 
Fortunately, the direct implications of normalisation for South African policy settings at this 
point in time are reasonably straight-forward. Rising global interest rates will put downward 
pressure on the value of the currency, at least in the short term, and push up interest rates. 
The less responsive short term rates are to this upward pressure, and the stronger the build-
up of inflationary pressures in the wake of depreciation, the steeper the yield curve is likely to 
get. Long-term borrowing costs will take the burden of slow policy responses to a widening 
interest differential and currency weakness. 
The real economy effects of being behind the curve with short rates will be relatively small in 
the  near  term,  but  working  against  the  longer  term  direction  I  think  we  want  to  go.  Lower 
short  rates  might  generate  somewhat  more  near  term  consumption  growth  for  less 
investment growth in the longer-run. But this is a poor trade-off for us to make and one we 
cannot exploit. With rising inflation, more policy accommodation would significantly increase 
the risk of a sell-off of rand assets and pre-emptively push market interest rates across the 
yield curve higher than they should be given our fundamentals. 
Economic growth 
Certainly our growth and employment outcomes have been poor. After 3.0% growth in 2011 
and  2.5%  in  2012,  the  outcome  for  2013  was  desultory  and  2014  is  proving  as  bad. 
Protracted  strikes  have  had  serious  economic  consequences;  the  platinum  strike  is 
estimated  to  have  directly  and  indirectly  reduced  annualised  quarterly  GDP  growth  by 
1.6 percentage points. 
Up to 2011, South Africa has benefited from a sustained positive demand shock caused by a 
rising terms of trade. As China’s economy has cooled, the deflating commodity price bubble 
has generated a significant negative demand shock as the terms of trade declined by 6.7% 
since 2011 (and 9.4% since Q4 2010).  
But can we say this has much to do with monetary policy settings? Our real interest rates 
have  averaged  around  –0.5%  since  2009,  reflecting  accommodative  monetary  conditions. 
Meanwhile,  household  spending  has  slowed  amid7  greater  emphasis  on  working  down 
household debt levels. Lower nominal interest rates have increased cash flow to households 
and  this  is  going  in  part  to  debt  service  and  debt  reduction  rather  than  consumption  and 
taking on new debt. This makes sense – future expected real growth in income is low relative 
to future potential interest payments on new debt. Improving household balance sheets will 
create space for future consumption growth.8 But there are limits here too – low rates don’t 
                                                
6  The ECB is expected to auction nearly €400 billion in 2014, with €174 billion in September and €167 billion in 
October.  An  asset  backed  securities  purchase  programme  will  be  articulated  in  October.  With  expected 
repayments, the 1 trillion Euros will end up resulting in roughly a 600 to 650 billion Euro rise in ECB assets. 
The rules of the purchases suggest that this will help to lock in low rates until some time in 2016. 
7  HCE grew by 4.9% in 2011, down to 2.6% in 2013 and about 1.7% average for Q1 and Q2 2014. 
8  Debt service cost to disposable income: 12.5% in 2008; 7.9% in 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  encourage  households  to  reduce  debt  levels  faster  neither  do  they  impose  a  penalty  on 
government borrowing, to speed up the process of shedding excess debt. 
More broadly, this debt constraint continues to have implications for economic growth. With 
the  stock  of  household  and  public  debt  remaining  high  relative  to  historic  norms,  there  is 
insufficient  domestic  investment  or  productivity  growth,  or  exports,  to  offset  the  slower 
consumption  growth  attributable  to  our  weaker  terms  of  trade  and  over  indebted 
households.9 
Low  rates  are  also  not  doing  much  for  investment  in  fixed  capital,  with  gross  fixed  capital 
formation growing by just under half the pace of the 2000s and a third of the rate achieved in 
the six years before the crisis.10 Of course the stronger rise in loans and advances to firms 
seen in 2014 so far is welcome. But we have some distance to go before we move beyond 
the minimal investment in productive capacity we have seen in recent years. This suggests 
that  future  growth  in  the  economy  will  be  handicapped  unless  investment  becomes  much 
stronger. 
For  many  years  we  took  the  view  that  the  economy’s  potential  growth  rate  hovered 
somewhere  around  4  percent.  This  was  optimistic.  Our  current  estimates  suggest  that  it 
could be considerably lower, in part because we overestimated historical growth and in part 
because of the effects of the economic slowdown.  
Negative  supply  shocks  explain  some good  part  of  our  lower  potential growth. One  recent 
shock was the strikes I referred to earlier. Another more distant shock was the sharp rise in 
unit labour costs that occurred in 2008 and 2009 just as the global crisis hit. These factors 
have also dragged down confidence. 
Reversing negative supply shocks will be an important part of achieving better growth rates 
and  reducing  macroeconomic  imbalances.  But  the  role  of  monetary  policy  is  limited  –  for 
instance, having no impact on building additional electricity production capacity. 
However,  inflation  differentials  and  cost  differentials  with  the  rest  of  the  world  continue  to 
weigh heavily on South African competitiveness. The exchange rate has supported domestic 
producers,  with  the  nominal  effective  rate  falling  36%  from  the  end  of  2010  and  the  real 
effective rate falling 20%. But if we measure our competitiveness by unit labour costs, say 
against the US dollar, SA has about 20% more real depreciation to claw back.11 
Monetary policy can – by being credible and focused on the right target – reduce the extent 
to which domestic inflation appreciates the real exchange rate and erodes competitiveness. 
When a domestic real cost shock hits, the currency needs to adjust to offset the real impact, 
but  we  don’t  want  the  currency  reaction  to  set  off  an  inflation  spiral  or  entrench  higher 
inflation  expectations.  With  this  in  mind,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  closely 
monitored the trend rise in core inflation, unit labour costs, and producer prices and how rand 
movements  interact  with  them.  It  is  important  that  real  depreciation  is  not  offset  by  future 
upward spikes in unit labour costs or a sustained upward trend in core and consumer price 
inflation. 
Currency  weakness  has  contributed  to  the  sustained  rise  in  inflation  since  mid-2013. 
Headline consumer price inflation has led this rise, drifting up from 5.0% in 2011 to 6.6% in 
June this year before moderating to 6.3% for July. Core consumer price inflation, excluding 
food,  NAB,  and  petrol, has  risen from  4.0%  in  2011  to  5.3%  in  2013  and  5.7%  as  of  July 
2014.  
                                                
9  Household debt to disposable income: 82.4% peak in 2008; 75.2% in 2013; 73.5% Q2 2014. 
10  Real  growth  rates  have  been  just  over  4%  for  2011–12–13,  after  negative  growth  in  2009  and  2010.  The 
average for the whole of the 2000s is 7.9%. 
11  SA unit labour costs have risen by about 57% since 2008, compared to 4% in the US. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Other  factors  have  weighed  against  the  rise  in  consumer  prices  and  core  inflation,  in 
particular  the  sharp  fall  in  international  food  prices  through  the  latter  half  of  2013  and  the 
renewed deceleration in food prices we are seeing at present. But these exogenously-driven 
movements  in  food  prices  are  only  slowly  impacting  on  core  and  headline  inflation.  We 
expect headline CPI to average 6.2% in the fourth quarter of 2014. The forecast for 2015 is 
5.7%; for 2016 it is 5.8%. This is much higher than our main trading partners. China is 3%, 
the US at 1.4%, the euro area at 0.9%, the UK at 1.9%.12 
This suggests reasons for the buoyancy of our current account deficit despite what appears 
to be significant real exchange rate depreciation since 2011. The deficit, in turn, heightens 
our vulnerability to shocks, as we saw in May 2013 and again this month, when we published 
the  information  that  the  current  account  deficit  for  the  second  quarter  was  6.2%  of  GDP. 
South  Africa  needs  rebalancing,  and  this  will  be  aided  both  by  the  moderation  of  policy 
stimulus,  which  often generates  import-intensive  demand,  and  the  weaker  currency,  which 
makes foreign goods and services less attractive relative to locally-produced ones. 
Financial stability 
Finally,  we  should  consider  the  implications  of  monetary  policy  developments  for  financial 
stability. 
The decision to put African Bank under curatorship was not a signal of concern with a weak 
banking system. It was a specific intervention targeted at idiosyncratic risks emanating from 
a small bank (which accounts for about 1.2% of total banking sector assets) emanating from 
its unique, undiversified and as such unsustainable business model. 
Critically,  the  terms  of  the  curatorship  as  announced  by  the  Governor  on  10  August  are 
designed  to  ensure  that  the  bank  remains  open  for  business,  preventing  an  abrupt  halt  to 
credit extension to the important segment of the market (low income earners) which African 
Bank serves. Such credit extension, however, is now done on much sustainable terms, given 
the need to improve asset quality in the banking book of the “good bank”. 
Given the isolated nature of the intervention, and the uniqueness of African Bank’s previous 
business  model,  the  concern  that  higher  rates  will  impose  an  unbearable  burden  on 
borrowers,  with  dire  consequences  for  lenders  in  general  is  overstated.  Most  clients  of 
African Bank had fixed rate loans. For the rest of South African borrowers, interest rates are 
rising slowly from very low levels, giving borrowers and lenders plenty of warning and space, 
as well as incentives, to improve their balance sheets. 
Conclusion 
5. 
In  2003,  the  Nobel-prize  winning  economist  Robert  Lucas  published  an  article  in  the 
American Economic Review entitled “Macroeconomic Priorities”. It was elegant, compelling, 
and a terrible prophecy. He argued that further attempts to smooth out the business cycle 
weren’t much use, because fluctuations in economic activity just didn’t cost much. Instead, 
the priority should be growth, because over the longer run that meant vastly more wealth. 
Naturally, the Great Recession devastated this argument. Lucas was not entirely right: there 
was still an awful lot to be learnt about depression-fighting and high costs to getting it wrong. 
And yet, we may perhaps have learnt the lesson too well, and focussed too much on demand 
management and smoothing economic fluctuations. Today, there is little policy space left to 
boost demand, and it is surprisingly hard even to specify where we are in the business cycle. 
We should take this as an invitation to shift our focus. The greater problem is not getting the 
                                                
12  These are 2014 averages from the IMF. 2015 is China 3%, US 1.6%, EA 1.2%, UK 1.9%. 2016 is China 3%, 
US 1.8%, EA 1.3%, UK 1.9%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  output gap to zero, it is raising the economy’s growth rate. We used to think potential growth 
was close to 4%, and more with brave reforms. The IMF suggests it is about 2 to 2.5% and 
we  fall  short  of  that.  We  need  to  reorient  households,  firms  and  investors  on  longer-term 
targets, and to be clear about the policy settings needed to achieve them. The contribution 
from monetary policy is threefold: 
First,  sensible  and  sustainable  monetary  policies  (as  well  as  fiscal  policies)  support  the 
availability of capital for growth in South Africa, which is crucial to ameliorate our chronic lack 
of  savings.  Global  financing  conditions  have  remained  benign  since  2010,  but  as  part  of 
normalisation we should expect rising global yields ratcheting up our own borrowing costs. It 
is  important that  we  seek to minimise this  where  possible. The more  money  we  spend  on 
schools and roads, and the less on paying interest, the better. It is also important that we 
avoid taking an overly-mechanical or short-term view of the impact of rising rates. Ultra-low 
world rates were the right policy response to a global economic catastrophe; rising rates are 
a sign of a healthier world economy, which will help to realign investment decisions around 
long-term growth prospects. 
Second,  we  need  the  exchange  rate  to  play  its  part  as  a  dependable  buffer  for  the  real 
economy in the face of international financial and economic shocks. With our terms of trade 
easing, a large current account deficit, and the global recovery firming up only incrementally, 
currency  depreciation  helps  improve  the  balance  of  payments  in  a  market-friendly  way, 
sending  the  right  incentives  to  exporters,  importers  and  import-competing  industries. 
Macroeconomic  adjustment  should  and  needs  to  occur  in  the  direction  of  more  exports, 
investment and saving, and less consumption. Meanwhile, credible monetary policy – moving 
back within the inflation target – will help moderate volatility and facilitate SA’s adjustment to 
US policy normalisation. 
Third, we need to be competitive, which in part means ensuring inflation does not price South 
African goods and services out of world markets. Monetary policy must retain and strengthen 
its  focus  on  inflation.  In  doing  so,  we  will  push  the  envelope  of  transparency  and  clarity 
wherever possible; to help ensure that inflation expectations do not drift from the target. 
My  concluding  message  to  you  is  that  we  must  keep  our  eyes  on  our  goal:  to  get  South 
Africa  growing  again,  to  create  jobs,  to  restore  our  macroeconomic  balances,  and  deliver 
meaningful transformation. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
