Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview in Le Monde 
Interview with Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, in Le Monde, conducted by Ms Marie Charrel on 3 November 2014. 
 On  4  November,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  assumes  responsibility  for  the 
supervision of the 120 largest banks in the euro area, which account for 82% of European 
bank assets. Sabine Lautenschläger, member of the Executive Board of the ECB and Vice-
Chair of the new Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), answers some questions. 
The SSM starts operations on 4 November. What is the mission of this new 
institution? 
Our task is to be an intrusive and independent European supervisor which contributes to the 
safety  and  soundness  of  the  banking  system  and  the  stability  of the financial  system. Our 
aim  is  to  identify  inappropriate  risks  as  well  as  procedures  within  credit  institutions  well  in 
advance and to act in an efficient and timely manner to mitigate them. With the start of the 
SSM, there will be one supervisory approach in the 18 countries of the euro area – thus, for 
the first time, creating a supervisory level playing field for banks in the euro area. In our day-
to-day  business,  we  will  ensure  that  banks  are  sufficiently  capitalised,  that  they  have 
sufficient  liquidity,  and  that  they  have  established  a  governance  structure  as  well  as  risk 
control procedures that are appropriate for their activities. 
The ECB has just published the results of the banking stress tests. Is the sector in 
better shape than it was five years ago? 
Yes. European banks have become considerably more resilient as they have increased their 
capital  stock  and  strengthened  their  governance  and  risk  controls. While  preparing  for  the 
comprehensive  assessment,  they  have  also  consolidated  their  balance  sheets  by  up  to 
€200 billion in recent months, selling off assets or issuing new capital. It is therefore fair to 
say  that  enormous  progress  has  been  made.  But  nevertheless,  there  is  no  reason  to  be 
lenient. Like an athlete who has to train daily to keep in shape, banks – which operate in a 
very  competitive  environment  –  must  permanently  work  on  their  business  models  and 
strategies to take into account macroeconomic conditions, such as very low  interest rates. 
They need to comply with many new regulatory restrictions, some of them still to come, some 
of them in transitional periods and not yet fully applicable. 
Until now supervision was conducted by the national authorities, such as the ACPR 
(the authority for prudential supervision and resolution) in France. Did that not 
suffice? 
Banks are highly interconnected. An independent supervisor at the European level gives rise 
to a number of advantages. First, it reduces the risk of regulatory and supervisory arbitrage 
as  a  European  supervisor  can  create  a  level  playing  field.  Second,  it  provides  a  better 
overview  of  the  activities  of  large  banks,  while  allowing  for  a  cross-country  comparison  of 
their practices and control frameworks with those of other banks. As national supervisors will 
support us in our forward-looking critical assessment, we take the best of both worlds: the 
additional expertise of national authorities combined with an independent, strong horizontal 
view when it comes to the centralised decision-making of the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
at the European level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
How will you work with the ACPR? 
Like  the  other  national  supervisors,  the  ACPR  will  be  actively  involved,  together  with  their 
counterparts  at  the  ECB,  in  the  supervision  of  the  significant  French  banks.  Our  French 
colleagues will familiarise us with the characteristics specific to the French market and legal 
system. They will inform us of national developments that might influence banks’ activities, 
such as tax laws or laws on loans to enterprises. This expertise, combined with that of the 
ECB, will put us in the best position to assess banks’ risk profile and to judge whether the 
differences in banking practices between countries are justified or not. 
The SSM will supervise the 120 largest European banks, but the other 4,000 will 
remain under national supervision. Is this not a flaw in the system? 
The ECB will supervise the European banking system as a whole, the significant banks with 
a market share of 82% of total banking assets directly and the less significant ones indirectly. 
We  will  set  the  key  principles  according  to  which  all  of  the  European  banks  should  be 
supervised,  also  at  the  national  level.  And  we  will  check  that  these  principles  are  being 
followed. What’s more, the national supervisors will continuously carry out centrally steered 
checks to make sure that these institutions, which are often essential to the financing of the 
local economy, do not as a group pose any relevant risk. 
Additionally, we have identified, besides the 120 largest banks, 100 others that we will keep 
a close eye on. We do so because they are either regionally relevant, in bad shape or have 
specific business models. 
Will restoring robustness and transparency in the banking system suffice to start 
credit flowing again in the euro area? 
With a robust and resilient European banking system, we move a big step forward. Although 
such a banking system is a necessary condition for sustainable credit growth, it is not the 
only  condition  for  banks  to  increase  lending  to  the  real  economy.  At  the  national  level, 
structural  reforms  are  required  that  will  help  firms  to  regain  competitiveness  and  become 
sound enough for banks to lend to them. 
Banks  take  credit  risk  when  lending to the  real economy. They  need  to  be  convinced  that 
their  customers,  such  as  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  will  make  enough  profits  to 
repay the loans they receive. The growth prospects for national GDP as well as economic 
and  structural  factors  such  as  labour  market  rules  and  sound  fiscal  budgets  are  therefore 
relevant criteria for banks’ decision to do business. 
The ECB will, from now on, have two missions: steering monetary policy and 
supervising banks. How will a conflict of interests be avoided? 
Monetary  and  banking  supervisory  policies  can  have  the  same  or contradicting  objectives. 
Both  policy  areas,  for  example,  have  a  strong  interest  in  a  sound  banking  system. 
Nevertheless,  there  may  be  future  conflicts  of  interest,  and  in  order  to  deal  correctly  with 
potential  conflicts,  we  strictly  follow  the  separation  principle.  Decision-making  related  to 
monetary  policy  is  kept  strictly  separated  from  decision-making  related  to  our  supervisory 
tasks,  right  up  to  the  level  of  the  Governing  Council,  which  will  have  the  decision-making 
power in both areas. Additionally, the Governing Council will only be able to object to a draft 
decision  proposed  by  the  Supervisory  Board.  This  new  Board  is  the  one  steering  and 
influencing supervisory policies and decisions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Supervision is starting, whereas the second pillar of the banking union, namely the 
rules applicable in case of risk of bank failure, is not yet ready. Is this not dangerous 
for the ECB? 
The Single Resolution Mechanism will be a major step forward in managing the restructuring 
or  resolution  of  a  distressed  institution  at  the  European  level.  And  it  is  true  that  it  will  be 
operational only from January 2016 onwards. But this will not pose a great risk to the ECB as 
transitional procedures are in place. As of January 2015, all Member States need to have a 
national  resolution  authority:  they  will  be  our  counterparts  if  a  bank finds  itself  in  difficulty. 
Similarly,  the  “bail-in”  rules  will  already  be  partly  applied  as  of  January  2015.  These  rules 
establish that it will be the shareholders and investors who will bear, in the first instance, the 
losses of a bank. In 2016 additional rules will come into force, protecting member states and 
taxpayers  from  having  to  pay  for  systemically  relevant  banks  by  establishing  a  resolution 
fund paid for by banks. 
It will take eight years for the fund to reach its target level of 55 billion euro. Is this not 
too little, too late? 
It  will  be  a  quite  significant  amount,  taking  into  account  several  other  safety  buffers.  First, 
banks have considerably increased their own funds in recent years. Second, the resolution 
fund will only be used after contributions have been made from shareholders and creditors. 
These  could  reach  up  to  8%  of  liabilities,  which  is  already  a  significant  amount.  Thus  the 
overall  loss-absorbing  capacity  of  banks  has  increased  considerably.  The  resolution  fund 
comes on top of this. 
The third pillar of banking union, the creation of a European fund to guarantee savings 
deposits, has come to a standstill. Should we be worried? 
Not  unduly,  because  deposits  are  already  guaranteed  up  to  100,000  euro  at  the  national 
level.  But  more  importantly:  if  the  first  two  pillars  of  the  banking  union  work  properly  and 
secure  the  stability  of  individual  banks  and  the  banking  system,  the  need  for  a  joint  fund 
significantly diminishes. 
The stress tests revealed worrying weaknesses in Italian banks. Is Italy the weak link 
in the euro area? 
As supervisors we do not think in terms of countries, but of banks’ business and risk profiles. 
Each  bank  operates  differently  and  therefore  has  to  face  different  problems;  it  would  be 
unwise not to see them individually. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
