Peter Praet: Recent monetary policy measures supporting the euro area 
recovery 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the IIF Annual Membership Meeting, Washington DC, 10 October 2014. 
 I would like to thank S. Andreopoulos and F. Holm-Hadulla for their contribution in the preparation of this speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure to speak to you at this year’s IIF Annual Membership Meeting. Today, I 
will  discuss  the  latest  monetary  policy  measures  by  the  ECB  and  explain  how  they  will 
contribute  to  supporting  the  euro  area  recovery.  I  would  also  like  to  expound  how  our 
measures, as they work their way through to the economy, will contribute to bringing inflation 
in  the  euro  area  back  to  levels  closer  to  2%,  which  is  where  we  want  to  see  it  over  the 
medium term. 
The last twelve months were eventful: we have cut our key policy rates all the way down to 
the lower bound – including by taking the deposit facility rate into negative territory; we have 
launched an important programme of targeted lending operations, the TLTROs; and we have 
announced two distinct purchase programmes, one of which targets asset-backed securities 
whilst the other targets covered bonds. 
In my remarks today, I want to focus in particular on these asset purchase programmes and 
explain a novel element to our communication that came with their announcement – that is, 
our emphasis on the impact of these measures on the ECB’s balance sheet. 
But first I will briefly review the economic situation in the euro area to provide you with some 
context for our decisions. 
Macroeconomic context 
Following a flat reading for real GDP in the second quarter, the euro area economy is likely 
to resume its recovery path in the third quarter, but only at a modest pace. In fact, the latest 
data  point  to  a  loss  in  the  cyclical  growth  momentum,  with  the  outlook  surrounded  by 
elevated uncertainty and downside risks. Geopolitical tensions remain severe and the growth 
drivers  appear  rather  anaemic,  with  macroeconomic  adjustments,  high  unemployment  and 
sluggish investment behaviour acting as a drag on economic dynamism. 
Inflation developments continue to surprise on the downside and recent weakness in wage 
growth casts doubt on the expected strengthening of domestic price pressures. Inflation in 
the euro area has declined from a high of more than 3% at the end of 2011 to a low of 0.3% 
in  September.  And  the  volatility  we  have  seen  recently  in medium-  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations is a cause for extra vigilance. 
In  short,  the  latest  data  on  the  euro  area  economy  point  to  a  continued  but  increasingly 
fragile  recovery  and  the  uncertainties  and  downside  risks  surrounding  the  recovery  have 
intensified. All the while, we are facing continuously sluggish money and credit dynamics – 
even if growth rates of some key aggregates have edged up in recent months. 
Consistent  with  this  subdued  picture,  the  latest  ECB  staff  projections  foresee  growth  and 
inflation  to pick  up  only  gradually.  And,  by  the  end  of  the projection  horizon,  annual  HICP 
inflation is still expected to fall short of our target of a rate of inflation of below, but close to, 
2% over the medium-term. 
It  was  against  this  backdrop  of  a  persistently  weak  inflation  outlook,  a  slowing  growth 
momentum, and subdued monetary and credit dynamics that we decided on a package of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
measures between June and October to provide further monetary policy accommodation and 
support lending to the real economy. 
Impact of June-October policy decisions 
The  policy  announcements  since  June,  together  with  the  rate  cuts,  have  already  led  to  a 
further  considerable  easing  of  the  effective  monetary  policy  stance  –  although  the  liquidity 
injections  via  the  TLTROs  and  purchase  programmes  will  only  gain  pace  in  the  coming 
months. This additional easing is evident from various metrics of the market-based cost of 
financing. 
Since the beginning of June, forward money market rates have shown steep declines across 
the maturity spectrum. Now, the forward curve consistently lies below zero over a two-year 
horizon.  EONIA  is  not  expected  to  exceed  25bps  before  well  into  2018.  The  3-month 
EURIBOR rate, which is an important conduit of monetary policy impulses to lending rates, 
dropped to all-time lows and now stands close to zero. And the policy decisions, in particular 
those  announced  in  September,  triggered  a  compression  of  spreads  across  other  asset 
classes, including ABS, covered bonds and sovereign bonds. 
The recent sharp compression of ABS spreads since June is particularly important. To the 
extent this compression of secondary market spreads is passed-through, this would support 
loan origination and promote credit flows at lower lending rates. 
As indicated, this market response has materialised although the lion’s share of the liquidity 
injection of the measures is yet to come. In September, we conducted only the first out of 
eight  TLTROs.  Notably  in  December,  counterparties  will  have  another  opportunity  to 
participate in the TLTROs drawing on their initial allowance of 7% of their outstanding stock 
of  loans  to  the  non-financial  private  sector,  excluding  loans  to  households  for  house 
purchase.  As  of  next  year,  there  will  be  additional  quarterly  allotments,  in  which 
counterparties will be able to receive additional funding determined by their recent lending 
performance. 
Moreover, starting in the fourth quarter this year, the liquidity injections through the TLTROs 
will be accompanied and reinforced by the ABS and covered bond purchases. The covered 
bond purchases will already start this month. 
Taken together, we expect that the combination of our measures – the TLTRO as well as the 
ABS  and  covered  bond purchase  programme  –  to  have  a sizeable  impact  on our  balance 
sheet, as stressed in the Governing Council’s communication since September. 
This communication on the Eurosystem balance sheet has attracted attention among ECB 
observers and I would like to take a few minutes to explain its underlying rationale. 
initiatives 
to  provide  additional  accommodation. 
Two dimensions of uncertainty 
Let me start by recalling the broader monetary policy environment. The distinctive feature of 
the current situation is that monetary policy interest rates have reached their lower bound. 
Hence, the ECB – like other major central banks before us – must rely on unconventional 
monetary  policy 
these 
unconventional  measures  is  that  they  work  through  channels  that  are  still  under-studied 
compared  to  the  well-known  channels  of  conventional  monetary  policy  measures.  This,  in 
turn, gives rise to various dimensions of uncertainty. 
One dimension of uncertainty relates to the final macroeconomic impact per unit of liquidity 
injected via the measures. Of course, it is always and everywhere difficult to estimate that 
impact – even for standard policy measures. But the connection between the market price 
that  the  central  bank  can  influence  through  its  interventions  and  the  price  of  credit  that 
matters  for  the  macro-economy  is  generally  thought  to  be  more  remote  and  tenuous  than 
under  conventional  policy.  We  manage  this  uncertainty  by  tailoring  our  measures  to  those 
Inherent 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
specific financial market segments that we assess to be at the source of impaired monetary 
policy transmission. But still, some uncertainty remains. 
The second dimension of uncertainty relates to the overall scale of liquidity injected via the 
latest policy initiatives. This source of uncertainty is in some way more pronounced for the 
Eurosystem than for other central banks whose policy measures operate primarily through 
outright interventions in deep and liquid markets. 
Let me explain. 
One key building block of our recent policy initiative, namely the TLTROs, takes the form of 
credit operations. This choice follows the long-standing monetary policy tradition in the euro 
area,  which  in  view  of  our  financial  structure  is  centred  on  lending  to  counterparties.  But, 
inevitably,  this  makes  the  overall  scale  of  the  measures  to  a  large  extent  dependent  on 
banks’ autonomous decision to participate and borrow, which is itself influenced by banks’ 
appraisal of the strength of the recovery and the prospects for a sustained rebound in credit 
demand.  In  conditions  in  which  these  expectations  may  be  re-appraised,  the  force  of  the 
overall monetary policy stimulus that can be expected to be introduced through the TLTRO is 
bound to become more uncertain. 
The  purchase  programmes  do  not  run  into  this  problem.  But  the  capital  market  segments 
they target are not as deep and liquid as their equivalents in other leading economies. This is 
particularly the case for the ABS market, which has yet to recover from a protracted period of 
minimal  issuance  activity  and  disappearing  trading  traffic.  ECB  intervention  will,  in  itself, 
partly  mitigate  this  problem  by  encouraging  issuance  activity  as  well  as  the  unfreezing  of 
ABS  and  covered  bonds  that  are  currently  retained  on  intermediaries’  balance  sheets. 
However, these dynamic effects are difficult to estimate precisely. 
Taken together, these factors mean that not only the efficiency of the measures per euro of 
liquidity injection, but also the overall scale of the measures is difficult to anticipate. 
Balance sheet communication 
These considerations interact with our recent communication as follows: the clarification that 
the  measures  will  have  a  sizeable  impact  on  our  balance  sheet  is  a  way  to  manage  the 
second  dimension  of  uncertainty,  the  scale.  It  underpins  our  commitment  to  ensure  a 
powerful  transmission  of  the  measures  adopted  in  June  and  September.  And  it  gives 
reassurance that the liquidity injections will be scaled appropriately to ensure the intended 
macroeconomic impact, namely to bring inflation rates closer to 2%, materialises. 
This reassurance provides market participants with a broad orientation on our future policy 
conduct  that  will  help  them  navigate  the  uncertainties  inherent  in  the  current  policy 
environment.  This  is  all  the  more  important  since  the  TLTROs  and  the  two  purchase 
programmes are likely to gain pace only gradually. 
All in all, it should thus be clear that the balance sheet communication does not establish an 
additional  target  for  monetary  policy.  Instead,  in  assessing  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy 
measures, the primary metric of success remains their impact on inflation rather than on the 
balance sheet. 
So how will these measures contribute to stimulating higher inflation? 
The purchases of simple and transparent ABS will strengthen the direct pass-through effect 
of the TLTROs, i.e. the extent to which the funding cost relief for banks will be passed along 
to  their  borrowers.  This  is  because  the  ABS  market  remains  severely  impaired.  As  a 
consequence, the potential for interventions to change dynamics in this particular market is 
high. And the link between the spreads at which ABS are traded and the lending rates which 
banks apply on the underlying credits is probably tight. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
CBPP3 will further complement the TLTROs and the ABS purchases. Covered bonds share 
important  features  with  ABS.  The  link  on  the  issuing  bank’s  balance  sheet  between  the 
covered bond on the one side, and the underlying loans on the other is also reasonably tight. 
As  the  prices  for  covered  bonds  are  bid  up,  banks  are  likely  to  respond  to  the  market 
incentives  by  originating  more  saleable  covered  securities,  and  thus  more  loans  to 
collateralise them. 
Furthermore,  outright  interventions  in  this  market  will  complement  ABS  purchases  by 
reinforcing  the  portfolio  rebalancing  channels  of  transmission.  That  is:  the  expansion  in 
liquidity  that  will  result  from  the  combined  outright  operations  promotes  a  diversification  of 
investment patterns in the investor community, and thereby an easing of financing conditions 
more broadly. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Together with the monetary accommodation already in place, the determined implementation 
of  our  new  measures  will  underpin  the  firm  anchoring  of  medium-  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations. 
We  expect  that  the  policy  measures  adopted  in  June  and  September  will  provide  relevant 
support  to  the  euro  area  recovery  and  bring  inflation  in  the  medium  -term  back  to  levels 
consistent with where we want to see it within our price stability range. 
Should  it  become  necessary  to  further  address  risks  of  too  prolonged  a  period  of  low 
inflation,  the  Governing  Council  is  unanimous  in  its  commitment  to  using  additional 
unconventional instruments within its mandate. As the ECB President said at the European 
Parliament,  and  again  yesterday  in Washington,  this  means  that  we  are  ready  to alter  the 
size and/or the composition of our unconventional interventions, and therefore of our balance 
sheet, as required. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
