  Ravi Menon: Emerging Asia – restructuring for sustained growth 
Remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
JP Morgan Singapore’s 50th Anniversary Dinner, Singapore, 31 October 2014. 
 Mr Jamie Dimon, Chairman & CEO, JP Morgan Chase & Co 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to join you this evening to mark JP Morgan’s 50 years in Singapore. 
During these last 50 years, JPM Singapore has grown to become an important node in the 
bank’s global network. 
 
 
 
It is the Asia hub for commodities and treasury services. 
It is the hub for FX and private banking in South and Southeast Asia. 
JPM  Singapore  entities  together  employ  about  2,800  people.  This  is  projected  to 
increase to 3,500 over the next few years. 
JPM has had an even longer presence in Asia – close to a century. 
 
JPM has thus had a front row seat witnessing Asia’s remarkable transformation and 
shift in the global economic centre of gravity to the region. 
And  it  is  now  positioned  to  participate  in  the  next  exciting  chapter  of  the  Asian 
growth story. 
 As we approach 2015, the economies of Emerging Asia are at an inflection point. 
 
Externally, they have to deal with the normalisation of monetary policy and interest 
rates in the United States. 
Domestically,  they  have  to  sustain  growth  and  macro  stability  amidst  ongoing 
structural reforms. 
 The underlying long-term growth dynamics in Emerging Asia are good. 
 
The demographics are favourable, with the proportion of the working age population 
continuing to rise in most Asian economies. 
The emergence of a sizeable middle class and ongoing urbanisation will underpin a 
continued expansion in domestic consumption and investment. 
 These  underlying  factors  alone  should  support  healthy  growth  in  Emerging  Asia,  barring 
serious  policy  mis-steps  or  crises.  But  if  Emerging  Asia  also  undertakes  the  necessary 
structural  reforms  and  achieves  greater  regional  integration,  growth  could  be  even  higher. 
For example, successful reforms and further integration could boost ASEAN’s growth from 
close to 5% currently to 6%. 
Structural reforms will help unlock the productivity gains that Asia needs for its next phase of 
growth. This will be increasingly important as countries move up the economic value chain. 
The  structural  reforms  each  economy  needs  are  different.  But  what  is  encouraging  is  that 
these countries have moved economic restructuring to the top of their agenda. 
 
In China, the goal is to orientate the economy towards domestic consumption and 
strengthen the role of the market in allocating resources. The Third Plenum reforms 
offer a comprehensive blueprint to do this. 
In  India,  the  critical  task  is  to  improve  the  business  environment  and  build  the 
infrastructure necessary for a strong manufacturing sector that will provide jobs and 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
    raise  incomes.  The  new  government  has  signalled  clearly  that  India  is  open  for 
business. 
In  Indonesia,  the  urgent  need  is  to  shift  fiscal  spending  from  costly  food  and  fuel 
subsidies to infrastructure investment and human capital development. The newly-
elected President Jokowi has just announced a “working cabinet” and a resolve to 
deliver on reforms. 
In  Singapore  too,  we  are  in  the  midst  of  economic  restructuring  –  to  reduce  our 
dependence on labour inputs, move into higher value-added activities, and increase 
productivity as the basis for sustained and healthy wage growth. 
Structural  reforms  are  often  painful.  They  take  time  to  bear  fruit  and  entail  significant 
adjustment costs in the interim. Growth may slow temporarily, as margins are squeezed and 
resources flow from declining activities to emerging ones. 
Restructuring is a process of creative destruction, and quite often the destruction of the old 
must  take  place  before  the  creation  of  the  new.  But  if  reforms  are  delayed,  or  worse  still 
reversed, in response to short-term pains, the long-term health of the economy suffers. 
Countries  ranging  from  China  to  Singapore  are  facing  this  trade-off  today,  between  the 
imperative to restructure the economy for more sustainable long-term growth and the need to 
minimise the transitory effects on short-term growth. Governments must get businesses and 
workers  to  understand  these  trade-offs,  and  work  together  to  press  on  with  restructuring 
while smoothening its rougher edges. But avoiding reform or restructuring is not a choice. 
Financial development and integration is an enabler for the broader structural reform effort 
underway  in  Emerging  Asia.  The  financial  sector  is  key  to  mobilising  Asia’s  large  pool  of 
surplus savings more efficiently and channelling it to investment opportunities in the region. 
Situated at the heart of Emerging Asia, Singapore serves to intermediate the flows of savings 
and investments, helping to finance growth, manage risks, and connecting markets. 
Singapore’s financial centre is able to play this role because of four factors: 
 
 
 
 
Let me say a few words about collaboration. Working closely with industry is an important 
part of MAS’ work – be it in formulating regulatory policies or growth strategies. 
Regulation must be appropriate to the risks they are meant to address. We have not flinched 
from imposing high prudential standards – sometimes above international norms – but have 
always consulted industry actively to make sure that the prudential outcomes that we want 
are achieved at minimal compliance cost. 
Likewise, we have worked closely with industry to help create a strong financial ecosystem, 
deepening  and  broadening  our  markets,  building  critical  infrastructure,  and  developing  a 
skilled and competent financial sector workforce. 
JPM  has  been  an  important  partner  in  our  journey  together  to  develop  Singapore  as  a 
dynamic and vibrant financial centre. 
 
the credibility of its financial regulatory framework; 
the competencies of its workforce; 
the connectivity it has with the rest of Asia; and 
the collaboration MAS has with the financial industry. 
JPM  has  made  material  contributions  to  Singapore’s  financial  markets  with 
developments such as the launch of the Singapore Kilobar Gold Contract with the 
SGX in October this year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  JPM  was  one  of  the  lead  managers  in  Singapore’s  first  RMB  corporate  bond 
issuance  earlier  this  year,  which  helped  to  broaden  the  range  of  RMB  product 
offerings in the market. 
 On this note, let me congratulate JP Morgan on 50 years of growth in and with Singapore. 
MAS looks forward to deeper partnership with JP Morgan in further developing Singapore’s 
financial sector. I am confident that your strong presence in Singapore will serve you well as 
you extend your footprint in Asia. 
Thank you for being part of the Singapore growth story. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
