  Ipumbu Shiimi: Currency conversion agreement between Bank of 
Namibia and National Bank of Angola 
Remarks by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the signing ceremony 
“Currency conversion agreement between Bank of Namibia and National Bank of Angola”, 
Santa Clara, 22 September 2014. 
 Director of Ceremonies 
Ms Rosa Pacavia, Minister of Trade 
Dr Jose de Lima Massano, Governor of Banco Nacional de Angola 
Mr Antonio Didalelwa, Governor of the Province of Cunene 
Mr Usko Nghaamwa, Governor of the Ohangwena Region 
Mr António Tiago Gomes, Executive Secretary of the Angolan Chamber of Commerce; 
Mr Tomas Indjii, Chairperson of the Namibia Chamber of Commerce: 
Ongwediva Branch 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
Members of the Media 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Bondia 
It is a pleasure to address you today at this important occasion of the signing of the Currency 
Conversion agreement between the Bank of Namibia and Banco Nacional de Angola. This 
heralds  a  significant  milestone  in  the  creation  of  an  enabling  business  environment  for 
Namibia  and  Angola  and  is  among  the  many  steps  we  need  to  take  towards  winning  the 
economic struggle and achieve prosperity for our two countries. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
To  contextualise  this  signing  ceremony,  we  need  to  reflect  on  our  history.  Namibia  and 
Angola are much more than just mere geographical neighbours. These two nations share a 
long history and common heritage that cannot be severed. 
During  Namibia’s  long  and  stretched  out  liberation  struggle  for  independence,  Angola 
became the refuge for many Namibians and served as the strategic military base from which 
to  fight  the  war.  After  Namibia  gained  independence;  Namibia  in  turn  supported  the 
government  of  Angola  during  their  civil  war  and  provided  a  home  for  Angolans  seeking 
refuge.  This  support  to  each  other  in  times  of  need  has  created  a  strong  bond  that  it  is 
cemented by blood. Since then, both countries have emerged from bitter wars. 
With the return of peace to both countries, we are vigorously pursuing the second phase of 
the  struggle,  the  economic  emancipation  of  our  citizens.  Hence  the  need  to  create  the 
necessary  platforms,  including  payment  system  infrastructures,  that  will  enhance  trade 
among the people of our two countries. 
Against  this  background,  this  Agreement  will  allow  for  the  conversion  of  the  national 
currencies of the Republic of Angola and the Republic of Namibia with the aim to stimulate 
trade between the two countries. This means the Kwanza and the Namibia dollar will now be 
acceptable  on  both  sides  of  the  borders.  The  Agreement  will  thus  further  strengthen  the 
economic relations between our two countries and specifically our two Central Banks. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This is indeed a first step in that the conversion of the currencies under this Agreement will 
be  applicable  only  to  the  border  towns  of  Oshikango  and  Santa  Clara.  The  possibility  of 
extending  the  arrangement  to  other  towns  along  the  border  will  be  investigated  at  a  later 
stage. 
Further,  we  will  continue  to  work  hard  under  the  SADC  agenda  to  enhance  the  region’s 
payment system infrastructures, not only for smaller traders as we have done now under this 
Agreement but also for bigger traders. In this regard, we will endeavour to refine the recently 
developed  SIRESS  payment  system  platform  to  ensure  that  is  meets  the  needs  of  all 
member countries in SADC, including the needs of Angola. Once SIRESS is rolled out to all 
countries in the region it will go a long way in facilitating safer and faster payments among 
the people of SADC. 
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Governor Massano and his team for their pragmatic 
and  responsive  approach  during  the  period  of  our  engagements  on  this  Agreement.  With 
people like Governor Massano and his team Africa will have a brighter future. 
The  Bank  of  Namibia  looks  forward  to  the  continued  co-operation  and  good  working 
relationship between our two Central Banks; as together we can make our countries better, 
together we will be stronger and together our countries will continue to prosper. 
OBRIGADO! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
