  Benoît Cœuré: Structural reforms – learning the right lessons from the 
crisis 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the Bank of Latvia Economic Conference 2014, Riga, 17 October 2014. 
 Summary 
One lesson that we learned after the financial crisis is that achieving sustainable economic 
growth  is  always  about  both  demand  and  supply.  Moreover,  policies  that  support  demand 
empower policies that support supply, and vice versa. 
In the post crisis environment of a large debt overhang, partly structural unemployment and 
weak productivity levels, supply-side policies can increase the effectiveness of demand-side 
policies and help empower demand. By raising potential growth they create more space for 
spending  (governments,  firms  and  households).  Additionally,  by  reactivating/reskilling  the 
workforce, they allow employment to respond faster to higher demand. Finally, they ensure 
that higher demand is channelled towards the right sectors. 
While their long-term positive effects are undisputed, structural reforms, especially in times 
when  monetary  policy  is  at  the  lower  bound,  are  seen  to  have  negative  short-term  effects 
through  increasing  real  interest  rates.  However,  structural  reforms  can  be  effective  in  the 
short  run  as  they  raise  expectations  of  higher  incomes  and  cause  firms  to  increase 
investment today and bring forward the economic recovery. 
Achieving a positive short-term impact from structural reforms depends on both the pace and 
composition of reforms. First, instead of the traditionally gradual approach, reforms need to 
be frontloaded (as e.g. in Latvia). Second, they must focus not only on competitiveness, but 
also on increasing the rate of productivity growth in the economy. 
When thinking about the composition of reforms, one should have in mind innovation (see 
firms’ market entry and turnover), adoption (e.g. information and communication technology) 
and reallocation (labour market reforms). 
But while the full benefits of these efforts are still emerging, aggregate demand should be 
supported  to  counteract  the  potentially  destabilising  effect  of  lower  prices  and  higher  real 
interest rates. This can be done by fiscal policy, when it is available without questioning long-
term  debt  sustainability.  And  it  can  be  done  by  monetary  policy,  even  when  interest  rates 
have  reached  the  lower  bound,  by  expanding  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  and 
channelling liquidity to the real economy. 
*** 
Dear Governor Rimšēvičs, ladies and gentlemen, 
The  early  classical  economist  Jean-Baptiste  Say  argued that the real  purchasing  power  in 
the economy is about real production1. This claim is often summarised, as “supply creates its 
own demand”2, although that phrase does not appear in Say’s writings. While Say’s Law has 
its  limitations,  it  nonetheless  initiated  a  fruitful  academic  discussion  about  how  supply  and 
demand interact in the economy. 
There is a tendency nowadays to ignore this discussion and look for simple answers to what 
is a complex economic problem. Some argue that demand side policies are the only way out 
                                                
1   Jean-Baptiste Say (1834): “A Treatise on Political Economy”. 
2   John Maynard Keynes (1936), “The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  of the current economic malaise. Others claim that the crisis can be solved by supply side 
policies only. 
But  one  lesson  that  we  learned  after  the  financial  crisis  is  that  achieving  sustainable 
economic growth is always about both demand and supply. Moreover, policies that support 
demand empower policies that support supply, and vice versa. 
The ways in which demand side policies can lift supply are relatively well-established from 
previous recessions.3 A period of weak demand creates a shortfall of investment and a risk 
that  workers  are  unemployed  for  too  long,  lose  their  skills  and  becoming  structurally 
unemployed – i.e. hysteresis – both of which then lead to lower potential growth. Thus, the 
quicker  demand  policies  can  return  the  economy  to  potential,  the  lesser  the  risk  that  our 
living standards and employment opportunities will be permanently lower. 
The  relationship  in  the  other  direction,  however,  is  less  well  established.  In  most 
macroeconomic models the effectiveness of demand stimulus does not depend on supply-
side measures. But what is missing from such analyses is our specific context in the euro 
area – namely, the initial conditions we face after the crisis. 
Those conditions include, in several countries, a large debt overhang across all sectors due 
to  the  pre-crisis  credit  boom.  They  include  a  labour  market  with  very  high  unemployment, 
part of which is structural due to the downsizing of previously overblown sectors, especially 
construction.4 They include excessive rent seeking in sectors which have been shielded from 
international competition. And they include weak productivity trends, emanating from the pre-
crisis period and reflecting in part the misallocation of resources into construction and other 
low productivity sectors.5 
In this environment, stabilisation policies become less effective in boosting demand and an 
increase in demand becomes less effective in stimulating economic activity. 
Fiscal  space  is  squeezed  by  high  public  debt,  and  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  on 
investment and consumption is blunted by high private debt. The positive impact of higher 
demand on jobs is constrained by the partially structural nature of unemployment, such as 
the  skill  mismatch  between  job  seekers  and  vacancies,  low  mobility  of  workers  and  the 
priority given to insiders. Moreover, it is also constrained by capital market fragmentation, i.e. 
the inability to channel savings where investment is needed to create jobs. 
And  absent  other  policies,  stimulating  demand  may  in  fact  only  delay  the  necessary 
restructuring of the economy towards higher productivity sectors. 
This is where supply-side policies – by which I mean structural reforms – can help empower 
demand. By raising potential growth and hence future income, structural reforms create more 
space for governments, firms and households to spend today. By reactivating and reskilling 
the workforce, they allow employment respond faster to that higher demand. And by helping 
the economy to restructure, they ensure that higher demand is channelled towards the right 
sectors, and thus accelerates rather than retards the creative destruction process. 
                                                
3   The  seminal  paper  on  this  issue  began  is  Blanchard,  O.,  and  L.  Summers  (1986),  “Hysteresis  and  the 
European unemployment problem”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1986, Volume 1. 
4   For  more  details  see  speech  by  Draghi,  M.  (2014),  “Unemployment  in  the  euro  area”,  annual  central  bank 
symposium in Jackson Hole, 22 August 2014. 
5   For details on pre-crisis productivity developments see European Commission (2013), “Catching-up processes 
in the euro area”, in Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, Vol. 12, Issue 1, March 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  What type of supply? 
This  relationship  between  supply  and  demand,  however,  rests  on  the  assumption  that 
structural  reforms  will  have  mainly  positive  short-term  effects.  But  this  needs  some  more 
qualification.  Though  the  long-term  benefits  of  structural  reforms  are  by  and  large 
undisputed6, there are different views about the short-term effects in the academic literature. 
Reforms  can  be  shown  to  produce  two,  opposing  sets  of  forces  in  the  short-term.  One  is 
contractionary,  as  reforms  lead  to  lower  prices  and  higher  real  interest  rates.  If  monetary 
policy  is  at  the  zero  lower  bound  and  unable  to  respond  and  fiscal  space  has  been 
exhausted,  higher  real  rates  cause  the  private  sector  to  postpone  consumption  and 
investment decisions and GDP to contract.7 
The other set of forces is expansionary. As reforms raise expectations of permanent income, 
firms  bring  forward  investment  and  households  bring  forward  consumption.  Moreover,  for 
households  the  prospect  of  higher  potential  growth  increases  the  likelihood  of  future 
employment, thus reducing  precautionary  savings  and  boosting  consumption  today. These 
effects can be achieved at the zero lower bound8 and in conditions of a debt overhang9. 
The  key  issue  is  therefore  which  set  of  forces  dominates.  And  what  matters  here  is  not 
whether structural reforms are implemented, but how. This is where two further lessons of 
the crisis come in, which relate to our experience in Europe during the crisis: both the pace 
and  the  composition  of  reforms  matter  crucially  for  achieving  positive  effects  in  the  short-
term. 
Why the pace of reforms matters 
Before  the  crisis  there  was  an  active  debate  about  the  appropriate  pace  of  reform 
implementation, which had its origins in the liberalisation of Central and Eastern European 
economies in the 1990s. Some argued that reform was best conducted through a “big bang” 
approach, while others argued for more gradual reform implementation.10 
More  recently,  studies  of  reform  implementation  had  suggested  that  outcomes  might  be 
better  if  reforms  were  sequenced,  with  product  market  reforms  preceding  labour  market 
reforms, so that lower mark-ups can support the purchasing power of households.11 There 
was also a political economy argument in favour of gradualism: as governments have a fixed 
amount  of  political  capital,  they  would  be  most  effective  if  they  allocated  their  scarce 
resources to one set of reforms at a time. 
These  arguments  were  however  not  always  applicable  to  the  euro  area  as,  again,  they 
lacked our specific context. Several euro area economies had experienced a sharp rise in 
                                                
6   See Gomes, S., P. Jacquinot, and M. Pisani (2011), “Structural reforms and macroeconomic performance in 
the  euro  area  countries:  a  model-based  assessment”,  ECB  working  paper  no.  1323;  Berger,  H.  and 
S. Danninger  (2007),  “The  Employment  Effects  of  Labor  and  Product  Market  Deregulation  and  Their 
Implications for Structural Reform”, IMF Staff Papers Vol. 54, No. 3; and Nicoletti, G. and S. Scarpetta (2005), 
“Product Market Reforms and Employment in OECD Countries”, OECD working paper no. 472. 
7   See  Eggertsson,  G.,  A.  Ferrero,  and  A.  Raffo  (2013),  “Can  Structural  Reforms  Help  Europe?”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, forthcoming. 
8  See Gerali, A., A. Notapietro, and M. Pisani (2014), “Structural reforms at the zero lower bound”, mimeo. 
9   See Andrés J., O. Arce, and C. Thomas (2014), “Structural reforms in a debt overhang, Banco de Espana, 
working paper n. 1421. 
10  For  a  discussion  see  Blanchard,  O.,   K.  Froot,  and  J.  Sachs  (1994),  The  Transition  in  Eastern  Europe, 
University of Chicago Press. 
11   See Blanchard, O., and F. Giavazzi (2003), “Macroeconomic Effects of Regulation and Deregulation in Goods 
and Labor Markets”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  unit labour costs (ULC) associated with the pre-crisis credit boom, which required a period of 
internal devaluation to correct. And they were starting out with rigid economic structures. 
In this context, there was a much stronger case to reform fast so that internal devaluation 
could take place more quickly. A one-off price adjustment has distributional effects ex post, 
but it does not affect the perception of real rates going forward – insofar as it boosts future 
income,  it  may  indeed  raise  inflation  expectations  and  lower  real  rates.  By  contrast,  if 
adjustment is gradual, it creates disinflationary expectations and real rates increase. In other 
words, a slower adjustment makes the contractionary effect of reforms more prolonged. 
This seems to have been borne out from our experience with adjustment during the crisis. 
Countries that have enacted a more frontloaded reform strategy have, on the whole, seen 
better  outcomes  than  those  that  have  applied  a  more  staggered  approach.  Today’s  low 
inflation expectations in the region as a whole  may indeed be telling us that the approach 
was on average too staggered, and that it is time to accelerate. 
In  this  country,  Latvia,  for  instance,  a  frontloaded  programme  of  fiscal  consolidation  and 
structural reforms led to a fast adjustment of wages and prices and a fast rebound in growth 
and  job  creation.  The  Latvian  economy  began  growing  again  six  quarters  after  it  entered 
recession,  and  has  been  on  an  upward  path  since.  A  similar,  if  less  dramatic  picture  was 
visible  in  Ireland,  where  the  economy  stabilised  after  eight  quarters,  while  unemployment 
levelled off and then fall from the first quarter of 2012. In both countries, prices took around 
two years to fully adjust and have been rising since. 
By  contrast,  in  Greece, Portugal  and  Spain  reforms  were  less  fast  and  comprehensive.  In 
Spain,  for  instance,  slow  implementation  of  labour  market  reforms  meant  that  wages 
continued to rise until the third quarter of 2011, despite output falling by almost 5% in that 
time. In Greece, labour market reforms were enacted early on but without in parallel opening 
up product markets, meaning that when wages adjusted, prices did not: the price level only 
began falling  in  October  2012. The  result  was  that  these countries  experienced  a quantity 
adjustment  –  higher  unemployment  –  which  triggered  a  protracted  disinflationary  process 
that is still ongoing.12 
In  sum,  while  both  options  have  been  costly  in  terms  of  output  and  employment,  and 
notwithstanding differences in labour market flexibility, in a situation where countries had to 
undertake an internal devaluation, accelerating the pace of reforms seems to have been the 
better approach. It has led more quickly to higher growth prospects and higher current and 
expected inflation – i.e. conditions where the positive income effects of reforms can outweigh 
the negative real interest rate effects. 
This  contrasting  experience  also,  in  my  view,  disproves  the  view  that  reforms  should  be 
staggered because political capital is scarce. We have seen that this type of thinking tends to 
lead to authorities avoiding taking on organised vested interests – such a protected sectors – 
and  instead  prioritising  measures  that  affect  a  more  diffuse  group  –  such  as  lowering 
minimum wages. 
Indeed, this is why, despite the EU-IMF programmes proposing a comprehensive approach 
to  reforms,  product  markets  reforms  have  tended  to  lag  labour  market  reforms.  And  the 
consequence is not only the mismatch between different measures that I just described. It is 
that reforms have often been perceived as unfair, which in turn undermines popular support 
for the reform process. 
So for those that still need to press ahead structural measures, including the large euro area 
economies, there are two key points to take from this. 
                                                
12   For a more in-depth discussion on the link between wage developments and labour market institutions see the 
aforementioned speech by Mario Draghi at Jackson Hole. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First, talking vaguely about structural reforms, but not doing them, is the worst of all worlds. It 
creates uncertainty over the path of real interest rates, without in tandem raising expectations 
of future growth. 
Second, while in “normal” times it might be acceptable to reform one sector at a time, in crisis 
times it is not. Fairness must be a priority. And the best way to align vested interests is to 
reform them all at once. 
Why the composition of reforms matters 
The  aim  of  structural  reforms  should  however  be  more than  internal  devaluation.  It should 
above all be to raise productivity growth. As I said earlier, the key to structural reforms having 
positive short-term effects is firms and households expecting higher permanent income, and 
altering their behaviour today. And to achieve this, productivity growth is essential. 
Remember that in a basic Solow growth model, investment should grow at the growth rate of 
productivity plus the growth rate of hours worked along the steady state path of the economy. 
For many European countries, there is scope to increase labour participation rates over time. 
But  given  demographic  trends,  a  major  part  of  raising  investment  demand  must  be 
engineering an upward shock to productivity. 
Besides, internal devaluation can be the backbone of reform in a small, open economy, but 
not in a larger and more closed one – and even less in the euro area as a whole, where it is 
by and large a zero-sum game. 
This  is  why  the  composition  of  reforms  also  matters  –  we  need  reforms  that  both  boost 
competitiveness and raise productivity. 
The  reforms  undertaken  so  far,  despite  proceeding  at  different  speeds,  have  achieved  a 
significant internal devaluation in some euro area countries. Since 2009 Greece has almost 
entirely reversed the ULC growth it experienced in the pre-crisis period (–19.4% relative to 
the  euro  area),  while  good  progress  has  also  been  made  in  Spain  (–11.3%),  Ireland  
(–12.3%) and to a lesser extent Portugal (–8.2%). 
As  a  result, most  of these  countries  have  been  able  to  improve  their  competitiveness  and 
export.  Spain  and  Portugal,  for  example,  have  persistently  outperformed  the  euro  area 
between  2011  and  2013,  with  both  countries  gaining  more  than  10  percentage  points  of 
export market shares relative to their competitors. This seems to be feeding, with about a two 
years delay from the start of reforms, into a gradual recovery in employment. 
But these achievements are not yet showing any signs of feeding into productivity growth. 
Total factor productivity has actually fallen by 0.8% in the euro area since 2008, whereas in 
the  US  it  has  grown  by  almost  7%  in  the  same  period.  Higher  competitiveness  may  well 
contribute  to  raising  productivity,  but  we  know  that  cheap  labour  alone  will  not  produce 
innovative firms. 
Thus,  I  see  a  need  today  to  rebalance  our  focus:  to  focus  less  on  achieving  internal 
devaluation, and more on raising productivity. And this entails a broader set of reforms than 
countries have adopted thus far. 
Creating a productivity-enhancing environment 
For advanced countries in today’s globalised economy, productivity is increasingly linked to 
investment  in  knowledge-based  capital  and  moving  closer  to  the  technological  frontier, 
especially in high value-added sectors such as the digital economy. While this is ultimately 
about the effort and ideas of individuals, not governments, public policy plays a crucial role in 
creating the right environment. 
That is, an environment where competition increases the supply of new  ideas and pushes 
frontier  firms  to  innovate  and  produce  new  technology;  where  well-functioning  markets 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  diffuse  that  technology,  causing  it  to  be  adopted  more  widely;  and  where  resources  are 
quickly reallocated from failing to growing firms, so that the economy as a whole can reap the 
returns  of  innovation,  and  entrepreneurs  have  the  financial  incentives  to  undertake  risky 
projects. 
So, when thinking about how to raise productivity, it is helpful to think in terms of these three 
categories: innovation, adoption and reallocation. And in each case, our policy frameworks 
are at present not as effective as they could be, especially in comparison with the US. 
In  terms  of  innovation  and  competition,  recent  research  shows  that  size  of  entering  and 
exiting firms tends to be smaller in the US than in Europe, and successful young firms tend to 
expand relatively more quickly in the US than elsewhere. In other words, successful firms in 
the US grow faster and unsuccessful firms shrink faster.13 
These  differences  are  in  a  large  part  due  to  labour  and,  in  particular,  product  market 
regulations that affect firm entry and turnover. Despite recent improvements, according to the 
OECD index of product market regulation the euro area still lags some way behind the US. 
The obstacles in the euro area are in part structural – that is, legally protected professions. 
But  they  also  stem  from  a  generally  onerous  business  environment.  For  example,  if  an 
entrepreneur  wants  to  start  a  new  business  in  Spain,  he  or  she  has  to  go  through 
10 separate  procedures,  while  doing  so  in  Slovenia  requires  only  two.14  In  Latvia, 
incidentally, the figure is 4 procedures. 
Our  economic  structures  in  Europe  also  tend  to  be  less  conducive  to  technology  adoption 
than  in  the  US,  a  channel  which  has  been  found  to  be  highly  favourable  for  productivity 
growth.15 Indeed, an important explanation why, from the 1990s onwards, Europe has lagged 
behind  the  US  in  terms  of  productivity  growth  is  the  slower  adoption  of  information  and 
communication technology, in particular in the services sector.16 
The reasons for this are several, but two themes are worth highlighting for the current policy 
debate. 
One is the relatively closed nature of services markets within Europe, which slows down the 
diffusion  of  new  technologies.  Given  the relative  importance  of  services  in  our  economies, 
this weighs on aggregate productivity growth, as well trickling down to other sectors.17 This 
calls for the completion of the single market in services. 
A second theme is the relative rigidity of national labour markets. Reaping the productivity 
gains 
fundamental  organisational 
restructuring  –  for  instance,  due  to  the  automation  of  certain  tasks.  This  means  that  firms 
need to have the flexibility to reallocate workers to different tasks, which in turn requires them 
from  adopting  new 
to  require 
technology 
tends 
                                                
13   Bartelsman,  E.J.,  J.  Haltiwanger  and  S.  Scarpetta  (2013),  “Cross-Country  Differences  in  Productivity:  The 
Role of Allocation and Selection”, American Economic Review, vol. 103(1). 
14   World  Bank  (2013),  Doing  Business  2014:  Understanding  Regulations  for  Small  and  Medium-Size 
Enterprises. 
15  Foster,  N.,  Poschl,  J.,  Rincon-Aznar,  A.,  Stehrer,  R.,  Vecchi,  M.  and  Venturini,  F.  (2013),  “Reducing 
productivity  and  efficiency  gaps:  The  role  of  knowledge  assets,  absorptive  capacity  and  institutions”,  in 
European Competitiveness Report, DG Enterprise and Industry, European Commission. 
16  See  for  example  Gomez-Salvador,  R.,  A.  Musso,  M.  Stocker  and  J.  Turunen  (2006),  “Labour  productivity 
developments in the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 53, October 2006. 
17   Bourlés,  R.,  Cette  G.,  Lopez  J.,  Mairesse,  J.  and  Nicoletti,  G.  (2012),  “Do  product  market  regulations  in 
upstream sectors curb productivity growth? Panel data evidence for OECD countries”, Review of Economics 
and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 95(5). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to have access to adequate initial and vocational training – something which on the whole 
US firms seem to have been able to do better than European ones.18 
As  part  of  this  process,  reallocation  of  resources  is  both  unavoidable  –  as  firms  need  to 
restructure – and essential – to concentrate resources where they are most productive. 
There  are  however  important  differences  in  the  extent  to  which  capital  and  labour  flow  to 
innovative firms. For example, researchers at the OECD have found that a 10% increase in 
the patent stock is associated with an increase in the typical firm’s capital stock of about 3% 
in Sweden and the United States; 1.5% in the United Kingdom and Germany; and a 0.5% in 
Italy and Spain. Importantly, these cross-country differences tend be driven by younger firms, 
which are those that are most likely to supply radically innovative ideas.19 
The same product and labour market reforms that would spur innovation and adoption would 
also support better reallocation. Employment protection legislation in particular is thought to 
significantly  reduce  the  ability  of  innovative  firms  to  attract  resources.20  This  is  not  an 
argument to lessen workers’ insurance against labour market risks, rather to shift the burden 
of that insurance away from firms and towards society more widely. This is where “flexicurity” 
type  policies  –  active  labour  market  policies,  unemployment  insurances  –  could  play  a 
greater role. 
Reallocation is also linked to several other policies, which cannot be covered in detail now. 
They  include  aligning  insolvency  regimes  with  best  practice  so  that  resources  can  be 
released  more  quickly:  for  a  firm  to  be  resolved  takes  less  than  six  months  in  Ireland,  for 
example, while in Slovakia it takes about four years.21 And they include channelling financing 
more  effectively  to  innovative  firms,  where  we  also  lag  behind  the  US  due  to  the 
fragmentation of venture capital within Europe.22 Indeed, this is now part of the wider agenda 
of the European Commission of building a capital market union.23 
Why reforms are a necessary but not a sufficient condition for growth 
Let me finally say a word on the macroeconomic environment needed for structural reform to 
succeed. 
As I explained earlier, reforms produce both expansionary and contractionary forces in the 
short-term.  Designing  reforms  in  the  right  way  and  creating  a  productivity-enhancing 
environment can maximise the former, and let me add: the faster, the better. 
But  while  the  full  benefits  of  these  efforts  are  still  emerging,  aggregate  demand  should 
counteract the  potentially  destabilising  effect  of  lower  prices  and  higher real  interest rates. 
This  can  be  done  by  fiscal  policy,  when  it  is  available  without  questioning  long-term  debt 
sustainability. And it can be done by monetary policy, even when interest rates have reached 
                                                
18   For an explanation of this phenomenon in the US context see Bernanke, B (2005), “Productivity”, remarks at 
the C. Peter McColough Roundtable Series on International Economics, January 2005. 
19   Andrews,  D.,  C.  Criscuolo  and  C.  Menon  (2013),  “Do  Resources  Flow  to  Innovative  Firms?  Cross-Country 
Evidence from Firm-Level Data”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, forthcoming. 
20   Andrews,  D.,  C.  Criscuolo  (2013),  “Knowledge-based  capital,  innovation  and  resource  allocation”,  OECD 
Economics Department Working Papers No. 146. 
21   World Bank (2013). 
22   Veugelers, R. (2011), “Mind Europe’s early-stage equity gap”, Bruegel Policy Contribution 2011/18, December 
2011. 
23   See also speech by Cœuré, B. (2013), “Completing the single market in capital”, ICMA Capital Market Lecture 
Series 2014, Paris, 19 May 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  the lower bound, by expanding the central bank’s balance sheet and channelling liquidity to 
the real economy.24 This is what the ECB has been doing and will continue to do. 
It is sometimes argued that monetary policy can weaken the incentives to reform. I do not 
share this view. Price stability, defined as the inflation rate being below but close to 2%, is 
the anchor of the adjustment process and it is our duty to deliver it within our mandate. 
Very low government bond yields can indeed weaken the incentives for sound fiscal policies, 
and this is why we need strong and credible fiscal rules. But the suffering of young and long-
term unemployed in our countries should suffice as an incentive to reform. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, the main lesson of the crisis is that a major financial shock leaves a set of initial 
conditions that can only be worked through by policies on both the supply and demand sides 
of  the  economy  –  that  is,  structural  reforms  and  monetary  and  fiscal  support.  Key  to  the 
effectiveness  of  those  reforms,  however,  is  that  they  are  fast  –  to  avoid  drawing  out  the 
disinflationary process – and that they focus on productivity as well as competitiveness. 
Today  the  reform  agenda  facing  European  countries  is  largely  about  productivity,  and  this 
means that pursuing reforms aggressively is less likely to have negative short-term effects. 
Many  of  the  reforms  that  lead  to  downward  price  pressures  and  higher  real  interest  rates 
have already been done, and their effects are working their way through the economy now. 
The remaining reforms are more about boosting investment demand and productivity and so 
raising growth today. 
Thus, it makes little sense for European countries to stop reforming now. This would mean 
taking  the  pain  but  missing  out  on  the  gain.  And  it  would  only  make  getting  out  the  crisis 
harder. 
                                                
24   See Eggertsson, G., and P. Krugman (2012), Debt, deleveraging and the liquidity trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo 
approach, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 127, No. 3 (August), 1469–1513. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
