  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Improving and expanding Malaysia’s cross-border 
financial flows and capital market transactions 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at the Official Launch of the Expansion of SWIFT Office in Kuala Lumpur, Kuala 
Lumpur, 24 November 2014. 
 It is my pleasure to be here today on the occasion of the opening of this expanded SWIFT 
Kuala Lumpur Corporate Services Centre. We are most honoured with the presence of Her 
Royal  Highness  Princess  Astrid  of  Belgium.  Allow  me  to,  first  of  all,  welcome  Her  Royal 
Highness Princess Astrid of Belgium. It is also my pleasure to welcome His Excellency Didier 
Reynders,  Federal  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  European 
Affairs  of  Belgium,  and  His  Excellency  Pieter  De  Crem,  Federal  Secretary  of  State  for 
Foreign Trade of Belgium to Kuala Lumpur. It is my honour to address such a distinguished 
gathering including the practitioners from the financial fraternity. 
We are pleased to welcome the expansion of the SWIFT office in Kuala Lumpur. Malaysia 
has aspired to be an important destination for international corporations and organisations to 
operate  in.  Malaysia  has  well-developed  infrastructure,  a  dynamic  workforce  and  cost-
competitive environment to provide an enabling environment for mutually reinforcing benefits. 
Malaysia is now home to more than 5,000 foreign companies from more than 40 countries. 
Additionally,  it  also  includes  global  and  regional  shared  services  hubs  that  serve  world-
leading financial services providers and international corporations. Malaysia is also the host 
to  a  number  of  the  international  institutions  in  the  area  of  finance  that  include  the  Islamic 
Financial  Services  Board,  and  more  recently,  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion.  We  are 
very  pleased  that  SWIFT,  an  important market  infrastructure  service  provider  to  the global 
financial community, has selected Kuala Lumpur as its Corporate Services Centre. 
Malaysia’s financial sector has in this recent decade made significant strides in facilitating the 
country’s cross-border economic linkages with other economies. Malaysia is part of a vibrant 
region,  comprising  ASEAN  and  of  the  greater  Asia.  The  region  has  prevailing  strong 
foundations  and  significant  growth  prospects  with  strong  inter  regional  connectivity. 
Malaysia’s  volume  of  cross-border  trade  and  foreign  exchange  settlements  with  ASEAN 
economies alone has grown at an average rate of 10% in the recent four years, reflecting 
Malaysia’s  increasing  integration  with  the  regional  markets.  A  vibrant  foreign  exchange 
market  has  supported  this  growth,  where  the  overall  Malaysian  foreign  exchange  market 
volume has increased by more than five-fold in a period of 8 years to USD11.1 billion per 
day,  at  a  ratio  of  about  6  times  of  total  trade.  Like  most  regional  blocs,  the  integration 
process for ASEAN seeks to promote greater regional connectivity which will in turn expand 
and reinforce the region’s growth potential. The aim of reinforcing the regional linkages in the 
payment  and  settlement  systems  is  to  enable  the  establishment  of  risk  mitigation 
mechanisms such as Payment versus Payment (PvP) and Delivery versus Payment (DvP) to 
reduce  the  foreign  exchange  and  securities  settlement  risk.  Since  the  ASEAN  region  is 
largely within the same time zone, the ultimate aim is to achieve same day settlement and 
funds availability. 
In  this  regard,  the  ASEAN Working  Committees  have  been  working  to  create  an  enabling 
environment  to  promote  efficient  and  effective  linkages  for  intermediation  of  cross-border 
financial flows and capital market transactions. A crucial pre-requisite to this is the adoption 
of common messaging standards and platform such as that provided by the SWIFT global 
messaging  standard  to  facilitate  interoperability  and  efficient  processing  of  transactions. 
Market infrastructure service providers, and operators of payment systems, and the banking 
industry, have a significant role in supporting this financial integration process, while ensuring 
safety, reliability and security. I understand SWIFT and the Association of Islamic Banking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Institutions Malaysia and other stakeholders in the Malaysian Islamic financial community are 
also collaborating on the development of a new rulebook for the usage of SWIFT messages 
for Islamic financial transactions. This will provide an efficient platform for the exchange of 
messages for Islamic finance transactions based on such standardised formats and bring us 
a step further at the frontier of Islamic finance. 
Let me now turn to the developments in Malaysia’s payment system. The Malaysian payment 
system  is  undergoing  a  major  transformation.  Like  other  successful  financial  market 
infrastructure globally, concerted efforts are being made to enhance the reliability, security, 
efficiency  and  inter-connectedness  of  the  Malaysian  payment  system  for  the  benefit  of  all 
stakeholders in the payment value chain. 
For large value payment system, RENTAS, the systemically important payment system for 
transfer and settlement of high value interbank funds and scripless securities transactions, is 
continuously  being  enhanced  to  support  cross-border  payments  and  settlements.  In  this 
regard, a Payment versus Payment infrastructure for interbank settlement of USD/RM trade 
transactions was implemented in 2006 in collaboration with Hong Kong Monetary Authority 
and  a  cross-border  link with  Euroclear  was  established  in  2012.  In  addition,  RENTAS  has 
also  been  equipped  with  the  capability  to  support  Renminbi  denominated  funds  and 
securities transactions. 
On  the  retail  payment  front,  measures  are  also  geared  towards  enhancing  the  efficiency, 
accessibility  and  quality  of  retail  payment  infrastructure  and  services.  To  this  end,  Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  has  focused  on  creating  the  enabling  environment  to  accelerate  the 
country’s  migration  to  electronic  payments  (e-payments),  to  enhance  economic  efficiency 
and increase our competitiveness. This has been done by establishing a conducive pricing 
and  incentive  structure,  enhancing  the  e-payment  infrastructure  and  promoting  awareness 
and confidence in the use of e-payments. These initiatives to modernise our financial system 
has already begun to yield results bringing about the desired cost savings. 
In concluding my remarks, let me congratulate SWIFT on this occasion of the expansion of 
their operations here. I also wish the management and staff of the Kuala Lumpur Corporate 
Services Centre every success in your endeavours and look forward to its contribution to our 
economy  as  we  advance  forward  in  this  significantly  challenging  and  rapidly  evolving 
economic environment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
