  Mario Draghi: The economic policy of Federico Caffè in our times 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, to mark the centenary 
of the birth of Federico Caffè at the Lecture room of the School of Economics and Business 
Studies “Federico Caffè”, Rome, 12 November 2014. 
 Knowledge of the real world: institutional, social, behavioural; indignation about what, in this 
reality,  violated  fundamental  ethical  principles,  or  even  economic  rationality,  when  he  saw 
stupidity  inclined  to  serve  greed; an  authoritative  call  to  action to jointly  reprove  a  passive 
acceptance  of  reality;  what  to  do  about  both  inequities  and  inefficiencies:  this  was  the 
economic policy of Federico Caffè and this is now economic policy in its supreme form. 
This is his full and complex personality, which responds to reality with reason, with passion, 
with action, and which feels the need to share all this with his students, and which has made 
him unforgettable. 
We students (I graduated under his guidance in 1970 with a thesis on the Werner Plan, the 
forerunner of the single currency, in which I argued that the conditions for its implementation 
did  not  exist  at  that  time),  we  have  experienced  certainly  different  professional  lives,  also 
because  of  the  different  interpretations  we  have  given  of  his  teachings,  but  united  in  the 
belief that economic policy meant an analysis of reality, a denial of its distortion and use of 
our knowledge to remedy it. 
It is with this legacy of thought that we are confronted. And today I want to share with you the 
action that the ECB has taken to respond to the crisis in which the euro area, and especially 
Italy, has found itself for many years now. 
The current unacceptable level of unemployment – 23% of young people aged between 15 
and 24 years do not have a job – conflicts with any notion of fairness, is the greatest waste of 
resources,  inflicts  damage  on  human  capital,  affects  the  potential  of  economies,  pushing 
down growth for years to come. 
This  unemployment  has  its  origins  first  in  the  great  recession  which  has  touched  all  the 
advanced  economies;  then  in  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  which  has  concentrated  the  job 
losses in those countries where the debt and the public deficit were higher, where the fiscal 
instruments  of  macroeconomic  stabilisation  have  been  paralysed  by  the  need  to  show  to 
investors  that  the  debt,  despite  the  crisis,  was  sustainable;  in  those  countries  where  the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  has  stopped  working,  causing  a  credit  crunch 
that has further aggravated the crisis. 
Cyclical factors have thus played an important role in increasing unemployment. 
The ECB has reacted to the crisis on three fronts. As for “conventional” monetary policy, it 
has cut interest rates from 1.5% in November 2011 to 0.5% today. It has reduced the interest 
rate paid by banks on their deposits at the ECB from 0.75% in November 2011 to –0.20% 
today. It also activated at the end of 2011 credit lines for the banking system amounting to 
€1 trillion  and  with  an  unprecedented maturity  of three  years.  Subsequently,  facing the  re-
emergence of the sovereign debt crisis and a serious crisis of confidence about the survival 
of  the  euro,  it  introduced  the  now  famous  outright  monetary  transaction  programme  which 
has  helped  to  rapidly  reduce  uncertainty  in  the  financial  markets  in  the  euro  area  and  to 
realign  spreads  with  the  credit  rating.  More  recently,  it  has  introduced  a  further  three 
measures  of  unconventional  monetary  policy:  the  TLTROs,  credit  lines of  up  to four  years 
that can be used by banks for loans to households and businesses; two programmes for the 
purchase  of  covered  bonds  and  ABS  with  the  aim  being  to  further  expand  liquidity  via 
operations directed towards the real economy. All these policy actions, accompanied by the 
expected maintenance of interest rates at their current level for a long period of time and an 
ongoing  expansion  of  the  ECB’s  balance  sheet,  together  with  the  commitment  by  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Governing Council to take further unconventional policy actions should medium-term inflation 
expectations worsen or if the measures already decided on prove to be insufficient, has led 
to  an  unprecedented  degree  of  monetary  accommodation.  Today,  all  the  current  and 
expected  market  interest  rates  over  all  horizons  are  lower  than  they  have  ever  been,  and 
lower than they are today in the United States. 
But most of the measures taken may have effects on the real economy only through banks, 
which  in  the  euro  area  intermediate  about  80%  of  the  credit.  Only  if  they  pass  on  to 
households and businesses the extraordinarily accommodative conditions in terms of interest 
rate, the maturity, the quantity that the ECB offers them, will monetary policy be fully effective 
with its stimulus. For that to happen it is not only necessary for there to be demand for credit 
from customers able to repay it, but that they [the banks] themselves are healthy. It is to this 
end that the ECB, on the eve of becoming the single supervisor for the euro area, together 
with  all  the  national  supervisory  authorities,  launched  a  year  ago  the  recently  completed 
comprehensive assessment of the 130 most significant European banks. 
Another obstacle has thus been removed to the contribution that the ECB’s monetary policy 
can make to reviving growth. 
Monetary policy has done and will continue to do its part but it is not enough. On the demand 
side, just bear in mind that since 2007 private investment in the euro area has fallen by 15% 
and public investment by 12%. 
Let’s not forget that in some countries of the euro area unemployment was already high even 
before the crisis. At the same time there is ample evidence that a significant proportion of the 
current unemployment is structural. 
A fiscal  policy  which,  in  compliance  with  the  existing  rules,  may  see more  investment  and 
lower taxes, together with an accommodative monetary policy are not enough to generate a 
revival of strong and sustainable growth without the necessary structural reforms in product 
and labour markets. 
Increased  competition,  the  completion  of  Europe’s  single  market,  measures  which  would 
allow  unemployed  workers  to  quickly  find  a  new  job,  thus  reducing  the  period  of 
unemployment,  measures  which  would  raise  the  level  of  specialisation  and  adapt  it  to  the 
demand have long been on the economic policy agenda of many euro area countries: may 
the thought now make way for action. 
It is clear that both demand and supply side policies are necessary. 
The lesson of 2012 has taught us that the crisis of confidence in the euro was also caused by 
uncertainty about the future of the single currency – which turned out to be unfounded. Amid 
this  uncertainty,  European  leaders  responded  in  June  2012  by  creating  the  banking  union 
which  led  to  the  ECB  becoming the  single  supervisor.  This  was  the  most  important  act  of 
integration that has ever been decided on since the creation of the euro. 
Ties that endure need a solid basis of mutual trust. The euro area countries have in recent 
years  greatly  strengthened  their  ties  and  correspondingly  expanded  the  basis  of  trust  on 
which  they  rest:  the  single  monetary  policy,  with  common fiscal  rules, now  with  a  banking 
union and a single banking supervision and soon with a common capital market. 
Our experience shows that sharing national sovereignty is a precondition for lasting trust in 
planning our shared European journey. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
