  Glenn Stevens: Issues in payments systems 
Remarks by  Mr Glenn  Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Annual 
General Meeting of the Australian Payments Clearing Association, Sydney, 23 October 2014. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  on  the  occasion  of  Australian  Payments  Clearing 
Association’s (APCA) Annual General Meeting. The Reserve Bank and APCA have a long 
history  of  working  constructively  as  they  carry  out  their  respective  responsibilities  in 
Australia’s  payments  system.  We  both  have  an  interest  in  ensuring  a  safe,  efficient  and 
competitive payments system that meets the needs of end-users. 
When I last addressed an APCA gathering in May 2012, we were at a particularly interesting 
juncture for the payments industry. The Bank was approaching the end of a two-year period 
of  public  discussion  and  consultation  about  innovation  in  the  payments  system.  This 
extensive public process, involving all the key industry players, and users of the payments 
system,  had  not  been  done  before.  After  a  roundtable  attended  by  most  members  of  the 
Payments  System  Board,  numerous  meetings  at  staff  and  management  level,  extensive 
feedback  about  published  material  and  so  on,  the  Bank  released  the  conclusions  of  its 
Strategic Review of Innovation in the Payments System in June of that year. The Reserve 
Bank  regards  that  document,  and  the  process  that  led  up  to  it,  as  a  landmark  for  the 
payments system in Australia. 
Interestingly enough, the Innovation Review was not mainly motivated by concerns, on our 
part,  that  innovation  was  not  occurring,  even  though  it  was  sometimes  claimed  that  the 
regulatory regime inhibited it. On the contrary, we were seeing, and continue to see, rapid 
innovation in some elements of the system, as financial institutions, payment schemes and a 
variety  of  other  players  seek  to  deploy  new  technology  to  compete  with  one  another  or to 
draw business away from traditional payment forms like cash and cheques. 
The most obvious recent example is the use of contactless payments. In mid 2012 relatively 
few of us would have made a contactless payment. Now they have become second nature to 
most of us and Australia has become the leading contactless market in the world. While this 
does  not  represent  a  fundamental  change  in  underlying  payment  systems,  it  is  a  quite 
significant change in the way consumers interact with the payments system and changes the 
cost of payments to both merchants and consumers. Our recent diary survey suggests that 
the adoption of contactless has largely reflected a switch from traditional contact-based card 
presentment, but that there has also been some displacement of cash, particularly at smaller 
transaction sizes.1 
We are also now seeing the roll-out by several players of mobile-phone-based point-of-sale 
card  acceptance  facilities,  where  an  intermediary  provides  a  merchant  some  form  of 
attachment  to  a  smartphone  or  tablet,  turning  that  phone  or  tablet  into  a  card-acceptance 
device. This has significant potential to spread further the appeal of electronic payments to 
smaller businesses. 
At the same time, a clear trend towards online commerce and online banking is leading to a 
rapid increase in remote – as opposed to point-of-sale – payments. This is likely to be an 
area  of  increased  competition,  but  is  also  the  focus  of  increased  efforts  to  improve  the 
security of payments. Overlaid on all this is a proliferation of new models for using existing 
payment  methods  and  indeed  some  proposals  to  change  fundamentally  the  way  we  think 
about payments. 
                                                
1  Ossolinski C, T Lam and D Emery (2014), ‘The Changing Way We Pay: Trends in Consumer Payments’, RBA 
Research Discussion Paper, No 2014–05. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The one area where there has been less progress than we might have expected in 2012 is 
“mobile  wallets”  for  point-of-sale  payments,  i.e.  where  a  consumer’s  card  or  account 
information is incorporated into a phone application and the phone becomes the consumer’s 
payment device. Of course, this may well change quickly at some point. 
So  innovation  is  proceeding.  It  would  seem  premature  to  expect  that  we  have  seen  the 
apogee of technological development in the payments space. More likely it will continue, in 
ways that are impossible to predict, but are likely to be “disruptive” – the adjective of choice 
these days. 
But  there  is  a  key  caveat  here.  Innovation  in  the  payments  system  is  not  just  a  matter  of 
technology – as remarkable as the extent of technological advance has been. We have had 
rapid  innovation  in  areas  where  individual  entities  can  innovate  on  their  own,  or  where  a 
central scheme has the capacity to push innovation out to its members and/or users. These 
innovations can provide significant benefits, but by themselves are not enough, in the Bank’s 
view,  to  deliver  the  policy  goals  set  for  the  Payments  System  Board  in  its  mandate.  The 
setting within which innovation occurs also matters. The Innovation Review recognised that, 
in networks, where the ability of one institution to deliver value to its customer is dependent 
upon  how  well  it  can  connect  with  all  the  other  institutions  and  their  customers,  the  full 
flowering  of  innovation  depends  to  no  small  extent  on  system  architecture,  as  well  as 
governance. 
The technical architecture – for example, hub-and-spoke architecture versus bilateral links – 
can make it easier for new or established players to take advantage of technological change 
to  bring  new  services  to  customers,  or  harder.  Governance  around  processes  can  be 
accommodating to change or resistant to it. 
Overall, the record in Australia in instances where innovation requires cooperation between 
established  players,  especially  where  one  or  more  of  them  feels  the  need  to  protect  an 
existing line of business, is mixed. We are all aware of important cases where things have 
run into the sand. 
This isn’t just a problem for the industry. It’s a problem for the users of the system as well. 
Innovation  in  the  “cooperative  space”  –  where  no  single  entity  has  control  –  is  critical 
because  it  is  this  space  that  determines  the  limits  on  the  services  that  the  rest  of  the 
payments system can provide. 
These issues have been a matter of concern for the Payments System Board for quite a long 
time.  The  Board  has  always  seen  fostering  innovation  as  part  of  its  “efficiency”  mandate 
under the Payment Systems (Regulation) Act 1998. An important speech by Philip Lowe as 
long ago as 2005 focused on payments system architecture (in particular the bilateral nature 
of a number of important payment systems), the limitations of governance arrangements and 
the  challenges  for  the  industry  in  making  cooperative  investment  decisions.  His  overall 
observation was that the then-existing arrangements were hindering innovation.2 
Of course the technical architecture of systems is largely a legacy of decisions taken in an 
earlier era, probably for good reason at the time. Changing that architecture is difficult and 
costly, though that is not a reason not to try and certainly not a reason not to adopt better 
architecture  for  new  systems.  The  establishment  of  EPAL,  for  example,  has  provided  an 
opportunity  to  improve  the  network  architecture  of  the  eftpos  system  to  allow  it  to  better 
adapt to the demands of the modern economy. 
There  have  also  been  some  important  developments  in  industry  governance.  First,  APCA 
itself has this year implemented some significant reforms to its governance. The new board 
structure includes representatives of the major banks, the mid-sized and foreign banks and 
                                                
2  Lowe  P  (2005),  ‘Innovation  and  Governance  of  Payment  Systems’,  address  to  Banktech.05  Conference, 
Sydney, September. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the credit unions and building societies. It also includes an independent chair and two other 
independent directors. New types of players are also represented at other levels within the 
APCA  structure,  better  reflecting  the  make-up  of  the  modern  payments  system.  APCA’s 
willingness to make these changes is to be commended. 
Second, APCA and the Reserve Bank have also worked jointly towards the formation of a 
new body that is intended to take a higher-level, more strategic view of the payments system. 
This is a direct response to one of the important conclusions of the Innovation Review – that 
some of the difficulties that institutions faced in undertaking collaborative innovation might be 
alleviated by the creation of a body that would have senior-level representation from a wider 
range of organisations than have traditionally been members of APCA. 
The resulting body is the Australian Payments Council. The Council, which will have its first 
meeting next week, comprises 14 members, including from institutions typically represented 
on  APCA’s  Board,  plus  representatives  of  payment  schemes,  retailers  with  their  own 
payments  infrastructure  and  other  payment  services  providers.  The  Council  will  have  an 
independent chair and representatives from APCA and the Reserve Bank. 
The formation of the Council is a very important development. The Payments System Board 
expects it to take an industry-wide view as to how the payments system can better meet the 
needs of end-users. On that basis, the Board looks forward to active engagement with the 
Council. 
That in no way indicates that we see a lesser role for APCA. On the contrary, APCA’s role 
continues to be very important, including in some aspects of self-regulation and facilitating 
industry  collaboration  in  determining  rules  and  standards  for  the  five  different  clearing 
streams  that  APCA  oversees.  APCA  has  also  been  active  in  thought  leadership  and 
advocacy  for  the  payments  industry.  For  example,  APCA  is  currently  playing  a  role  in 
thinking  about  transitioning  payments  to  the  digital  economy.  It  has  published  a  series  of 
“Milestones”  reports  –  the  most  recent  in  July  –  looking  at  developments  in  the  use  of 
payments, and in particular the decline of cheques and the transition away from cheques and 
cash  towards  electronic  payments.  Not  surprisingly,  the  reports  highlight  that  use  of 
electronic payments is continuing to grow strongly, while use of the traditional “paper-based” 
payments is falling. 
This, I might add, is consistent with the findings in the Bank’s recent consumer use survey. 
Our  study  –  the  third  of  its  type  –  provides  transaction-level  data  from  a  survey  of  over 
1,000 consumers. It found that cash remained the most frequently used means of payment in 
2013, though its use had declined noticeably over the previous three years. Cash accounted 
for 47 per cent of the number and 18 per cent of the value of all payments in 2013, down 
from 62 per cent and 29 per cent respectively in 2010. Cash was used particularly intensively 
for  low-value  transactions,  with  consumers  using  cash  for  around  two-thirds  of  payments 
under $20. 
While the use of cash is declining relative to other payment mechanisms, it will continue to 
have a role in the economy. Indeed, as the Bank has noted previously, banknotes on issue 
have for a long period grown broadly in line with the nominal growth in the overall economy. 
And  the  consumer  use  survey  suggests  the  amount  of  cash  in  respondents’  wallets  grew 
between  2010  and  2013.  Together,  this  evidence  suggests  that  cash  continues  to  have  a 
significant role – not just for small-value transactions, but also both as a store of value and 
for  precautionary  use  when  other  means  of  payment  are  not  available.  This  is  one  of  the 
reasons that the Reserve Bank is undertaking its Next Generation Banknote program, which 
will ensure that Australians can continue to have confidence in the nation’s banknotes as an 
effective means of payment and secure store of wealth. But this is not inconsistent with the 
Bank’s desire to encourage the efficient use of electronic payments. 
A more marked decline is evident in the use of cheques. The number of cheques written in 
Australia  peaked  around  1995.  Since  then,  the  number  of  cheques  written  each  year  per 
capita has fallen by more than 80 per cent (from 45 to 8). Over the same period, the number 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  of  electronic  payments  per  capita  has  risen  by  more  than  400  per  cent.  As  the  use  of 
cheques  has  fallen,  the  per-cheque  cost  to  financial  institutions  and  businesses  has 
generally risen. The market has, and continues to, respond to these pressures by looking for 
more  efficient  ways  to  process  cheques,  but  they  are  clearly  the  highest  cost  payment 
instrument, as will be confirmed when the Bank releases its payments cost study later this 
year. 
This  decline  in  the  use  of  cheques,  a  very  expensive  payment  instrument,  is  one  that  the 
private  and  public  sector  will  have  to  manage.  Part  of  that  will  involve  the  introduction  of 
effective and readily available substitutes for users, and initiatives such as Superstream and 
eConveyancing are likely to be part of this. 
Central to the industry’s efforts to develop new  payment products and services  will be the 
New  Payments  Platform  (NPP).  I  would  like  to  use  my  remaining  time  to  make  some 
comments about this important project. 
A  key  point  in  the  Innovation  Review  process  was  the  industry  roundtable  held  in  2012, 
focusing on the familiar themes of payments system gaps, governance and architecture. My 
recollection  of  the  discussion  was  that  there  was  fairly  widespread  acceptance  that  the 
industry  would  need  to  find  a  way  to  make  some  bold  decisions  about  cooperative 
investments  in  payments  system  infrastructure  not  too  far  down  the  track.  This  has  been 
echoed in subsequent views expressed by some of the key players. 
The Reserve Bank agreed. The Payments System Board has seen its own role as acting as 
a catalyst for that cooperative investment. In the Conclusions to the Innovation Review, the 
Board announced its intention periodically to set some strategic objectives or general goals 
in terms of the services that the payments system should be able to provide to end users. 
The five strategic objectives that the Board set in 2012, after lengthy consultation and with, I 
think it can be said, a wide consensus within the industry, were as follows: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
all direct entry payments to be settled on a “same day” basis 
the ability to make retail payments in real-time 
the ability to make and receive payments outside of normal banking hours 
the ability for payments to carry more complete remittance information 
the  ability  for  payments  to  be  addressed  in  a  simpler  way  than  using  a  BSB  and 
account number. 
The first of these, the same-day settlement of direct entry payments, was achieved in 2013. It 
is therefore now possible for recipient financial institutions to make funds available to their 
customers sooner, without incurring credit risk. The Bank worked closely with the industry to 
facilitate  same-day  settlement,  including  the  introduction  of  new  liquidity  arrangements  for 
exchange settlement accounts at the Reserve Bank. 
These new liquidity arrangements will also be important as the industry moves to meet the 
other four objectives from the Innovation Review. On those other objectives, the Payments 
System Board set out a proposed timeframe. It also offered one piece of guidance, namely 
the  suggestion  that  it  would  be  desirable  to  have  all  payments  system  participants 
connecting to a central hub or hub-like arrangement in any new payments infrastructure, as 
opposed  to  continuing  with  the  numerous  bilateral  linkages  that  have  proved  to  be  not 
particularly  conducive  to  either  innovation  or  competition.  Beyond  that,  the  Board  did  not 
seek  to  dictate  particular  technical  details  of  the  solution,  accepting  that  the  industry  itself 
should provide the roadmap to the agreed destination. 
One initial concern was that industry participants might respond with a number of separate 
solutions,  but  no  clear  path  forward.  APCA  has  played  a  constructive  role  in  helping  the 
industry  to  come  together  to  form  a  project  that  will  meet  these  four  strategic  objectives. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Initially, a small committee developed a proposal for new payments infrastructure that is now 
being called the New Payments Platform. After this proposal was welcomed by the Payments 
System Board in February 2013, a broader group of 17 institutions came together to fund the 
initial development of the project. The participating institutions have been going through the 
final  stages  of  vendor  selection  in  the  recent  period.  This  has  been  an  industry-driven 
process,  in  pursuit  of  the  goals  articulated  by  the  Board,  and  to  which  the  industry  has 
committed. 
We have detected considerable interest internationally in this approach – not just the design 
features being proposed for the NPP, but also the way the central bank and the payments 
industry are seeking to work collaboratively to achieve major change. 
This approach, however, is not without its challenges. It requires that industry leadership and 
collaborative  spirit  to  be  maintained  over  a  sustained  period.  At  various  key  moments  the 
project faces the risk of that spirit breaking down. 
The Reserve Bank is fully aware of how complex and far-reaching this project is, and how 
costly. Our own contribution to the settlements architecture is a major project for us as well. 
Having  said  that,  let  me  also  say,  very  clearly,  how  important  the  Bank  sees  it  that  the 
industry deliver on its collective commitment to deliver real-time, accessible payments to the 
community. 
The Bank is also aware that there could be a temptation along the way to seek to constrain 
the system, so as to conform to existing boundaries and business models. This is where the 
broader governance  arrangements  now  in  place  need to take  into  account the  interests of 
users  and  the  need for the  system to  be  open  to  competition,  not just  the  interests  of the 
existing players. 
We  –  the  industry  and  the  Reserve  Bank  itself  –  are  building  a  piece  of  national 
infrastructure. We should take every opportunity to increase its potential value to the nation, 
rather than limiting it for fear of where it might take us. The biggest risk with this project is 
probably not a technical one. It is the risk that, in 10 or 15 years’ time, we will look back and 
see  that  we  missed  an  important  opportunity  to  provide  something  that  will  fully  and 
efficiently  support  the  payments  needs  of  our  economy.  We  owe  our  citizens  a  better 
outcome than that. We have to deliver, one way or another, the architecture and products 
that they will need into the future. 
It  is  not  as  though  things  are  standing  still  in  other  jurisdictions.  In  the  area  of  real-time 
payments, we have seen major initiatives launched in Sweden and Singapore – countries we 
would often view as comparators in terms of their income levels and market structures. The 
Swedish  system  was  launched  in  December  2012  with  a  service  known  as  Swish,  which 
enables  households  to  send  real-time  payments  via  their  mobile  phones  on  a  24/7  basis, 
365 days  a  year.  Singapore’s  system,  known  as  FAST,  was  launched  in  March  this  year. 
These  two  initiatives  have  wide  participation,  including  by  all  the  larger  banks  in  those 
countries  and many  of the  smaller  institutions. There  are  some  other  countries,  with  lower 
income  levels,  lower  penetration  of  electronic  payments  and  without  universally  “banked” 
populations, that have also made the leap to fast retail payments. These include Mexico with 
its  SPEI  system,  South  Africa  with  Real-Time  Clearing  and  India  with  its  Immediate 
Payments Service. Is there a plausible reason to accept Australia falling behind? 
Delivering  the  NPP  is  also,  in  my  opinion,  in  the  interests  of  the  Australian  financial 
institutions, which are at the heart of payments today. It can be expected to lead to further 
growth in electronic payments and a reduction in costs. It will maintain the ongoing relevance 
of the current players. If those players do not provide Australian end-users with the services 
they want, surely others will seek to do so. Alternatively, the Reserve Bank would be duty 
bound to consider a regulatory approach. 
So  our  message  to  the  industry  is:  stay  the  course.  Continue  the  goodwill  and  prodigious 
effort that has brought you to this point. Deliver on the commitments you have collectively 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  made. Let us together build a payments infrastructure that is efficient, open to competition 
and that will support innovation into the future. 
I thank  APCA  and  its  officers  in  particular for  the  efforts they  have  made,  and  continue to 
make,  in  the  NPP  and  across  the  payments  landscape.  And  I  wish  the  broader  payments 
industry  success  in  its  efforts to  improve  Australia’s  payments  system  and  look forward  to 
ongoing cooperation between the Bank and the industry. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
