Haruhiko Kuroda: Japan’s economy – responding to cautious views 
Speech by  Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Economic Club of 
New York, New York, 8 October September 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for your kind introduction. I am greatly honored to have the opportunity today to 
speak at the Economic Club of New York. 
In April last year, the Bank of Japan introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, 
dubbed QQE. One and a half years have passed since then, and QQE has been producing 
its intended effects. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index, or the CPI, 
excluding volatile food, which was minus 0.4 percent in April last year, has recently become 
around  1¼  percent  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.  Japan’s 
economy has been on a path suggesting the 2 percent price stability target will be achieved 
as expected. 
Meanwhile,  cautious  views  concerning  Japan’s  economy  seem  to  be  spreading,  with  the 
consecutive releases of somewhat weak economic indicators after the consumption tax hike 
in  April.  That  being  said,  the  Bank’s  assessment  is  that  with  the  mechanism  of  economic 
recovery  operating  steadily,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue  its  recovery, 
weathering the temporary slowdown in economic growth due to the consumption tax hike. 
Today,  I  will  talk  about  the  current  situation  of  Japan’s  economy  under  QQE  and  future 
challenges. 
QQE and the recovery of Japan’s economy 
I. 
The mechanism of QQE 
Let me start by discussing briefly the mechanism of QQE. 
QQE  consists  of  two  pillars.  One  is  a  strong  and  clear  commitment  to  achieve  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  at  the  earliest  possible  time  and  the  other  is  a  large-scale 
monetary  easing  to  underpin  the  commitment.  Specifically,  inflation  expectations  will  be 
raised through a strong and clear commitment to achieve the price stability target and at the 
same  time,  downward  pressure  will  be  put  on  the  entire  yield  curve  through  massive 
purchases  of  government  bonds.  As  a  result,  real  interest  rates  will  decline,  thereby 
stimulating  private  demand  such  as  business  fixed  investment,  private  consumption,  and 
housing  investment.  There  will  be  upward  pressure  on  prices  if  private  demand  increases 
and the output gap, in other words the slack of the economy as a whole, narrows. If actual 
inflation rates accelerate, expected inflation rates will rise and the aforementioned series of 
processes will be reinforced. 
The mechanism of QQE has so far been operating as anticipated. 10-year government bond 
yields have been in the range of 0.5–0.6 percent in recent months. An average commercial 
bank lending rate on new loans has declined to a historic low level of around 0.8 percent. At 
the  same  time,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  gauged  from  the  Consensus 
Forecasts have climbed to 1.6 percent. Thus real interest rates have clearly been negative 
up to long-term ones. 
In  a  nutshell,  with  QQE  producing  its  intended  effects,  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to 
spending has been operating steadily as a high level of confidence is maintained in both the 
household and corporate sectors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Effects of the consumption tax hike 
In contrast to the view that I just mentioned, there has recently been concern that Japan’s 
economic recovery might have been losing momentum, reflecting the recent weak economic 
indicators  due  partly  to  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.  In  particular,  the  GDP 
statistics released last month showed that real GDP in the April-June quarter fell substantially 
at  a  rate  of  7.1  percent  on  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  garnering  people’s 
attention. 
The  substantial  decline  in  the  April-June  quarter  followed  the  front-loaded  demand  in  the 
January-March quarter, in which real GDP had grown significantly at a rate of 6.0 percent, 
and thus was expected in advance. Excluding such fluctuation of the front-loaded increase 
and  the  subsequent  decline  in  demand  prior  to  and  after  the  consumption  tax  hike,  the 
annualized  growth  rate  of  real  GDP  in  the  January-June  period  this  year  over  the  July-
December  period  last  year  is  1.0  percent.  It  is  not  necessarily  a  high  growth  rate,  but 
exceeds Japan’s potential growth rate, which is estimated to be around 0.5 percent. As I will 
discuss in the following, since the virtuous cycle of economic recovery has been operating 
steadily, the growth rate of real GDP in the July-September quarter is expected to return to 
the clearly positive one. 
The virtuous cycle in both the household and corporate sectors 
Next,  let  me  explain  the  mechanism  of  economic  recovery  in  both  the  household  and 
corporate sectors. 
In  the  household  sector,  with  QQE  producing  its  intended  effects,  the  output  gap  has 
improved substantially, and the economic slack has almost been absorbed. The labor market 
has been tight, and the unemployment rate was 3.5 percent, declining to roughly the same 
level as the structural unemployment rate. If I borrow the terminology used by the Federal 
Reserve  Board  and  the  Bank  of  England,  in  Japan,  there  is  almost  no  slack  in  the  labor 
market and spare capacity in firms and the labor market is zero. Those developments have 
also  been  putting  upward  pressure  on  wages.  On  wages’  front,  the  practice  of  increasing 
base pay annually,  which had been lost during the period of deflation, was revived for the 
first time in more than a decade in wage negotiations between management and labor this 
spring. An increase in nominal wages has been evident since this spring, and along with a 
steady increase in the number of the employees, employee income has increased above 2 
percent  year  on  year.  The  recent  decline  in  private  consumption  is  due  to  the  temporary 
decline  in  demand  following  the  consumption  tax  hike,  and  as  the  effects  of  such  decline 
wane,  private  consumption  is  likely  to  remain  resilient  with  the  employment  and  income 
situation improving steadily. In fact, the latest economic indicators show that the effects of 
the decline following the consumption tax hike have been waning, except for durable goods 
including automobiles. 
Some people view a statistical negative growth in real wages as a problem, but it is due to a 
one-time  increase  in  the  inflation  rate  resulting  from  the  consumption  tax  hike.  The 
consumption  tax  hike  was  scheduled  in  advance,  and  it  is  not  an  additional  factor  putting 
downward pressure on economic activity and prices. 
While the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI has been around 1¼ percent excluding the 
direct effects of the consumption tax hike, that in nominal wages has been in the range of  
1–2  percent  and  that  in  employee  income  has  been  above  2  percent  recently.  The  recent 
developments in nominal wages have been mostly consistent with those suggested by the 
wage Phillips curve, which shows the historical relationship between the wage growth rate 
and  the  unemployment  rate.  Unlike  in  the  United  States,  we  don’t  see  a  phenomenon  in 
Japan  that  the  wage  increase  falls  short  of  what  has  been  suggested  by  the  level  of  the 
unemployment rate. With those in mind, there is no reason to believe that developments in 
wages will adversely affect Japan’s economic activity. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Let me move on to the corporate sector. Corporate profits have continued to improve, with 
the  ratio  of  current  profits  to  sales  for  major  firms  exceeding  the  level  prior  to  the  global 
financial crisis. In the current economic recovery, some people point to the sluggishness in 
exports. It is affected partly by the structural changes including relocation of production sites 
overseas.  Corporate  profits  on  a  global  basis  have  been  favorable.  As  shown  in  the 
September  Tankan  survey  released  last  week,  business  sentiment  as  a  whole  has 
maintained its favorable level, despite being affected by the decline in demand following the 
consumption  tax  hike.  It  suggests  that  many  firms  basically  regard  the  decline  in  demand 
following the consumption tax hike as a temporary one. Reflecting the favorable corporate 
performance, stock prices have remained resilient. 
In that situation, firms have been taking a positive stance in their business fixed investment 
plans, and it has remained unchanged in the latest Tankan survey. The increase in business 
fixed  investment  might  be  attributable  to  several  factors.  Corporate  profits  have  been 
favorable  and  financial  conditions  have  been  accommodative.  As  a  result  of  restrained 
investment  for  some  years,  capital  stock  has  become  outdated,  prompting  increasing 
demand  for  renewal  investment.  There  is  also  increased  demand  for  investment  in  labor-
saving machinery and equipment due to the labor shortage I mentioned before. 
Therefore, Japan’s economy is expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential as 
a trend since the virtuous cycle from income to spending has been operating steadily in both 
the household and corporate sectors. 
Price developments 
Next, I will talk about the price developments in Japan. Trend inflation is considered to be 
determined by the output gap of the economy as a whole and inflation expectations. As for 
the output gap, with the labor market tightening as I mentioned before, the slack has been 
almost  absorbed.  Looking  at  the  developments  since  the  introduction  of  QQE,  inflation 
expectations have been rising on the whole, albeit with monthly fluctuations. Against such a 
backdrop,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI,  excluding  volatile  food,  which  was 
minus  0.4  percent  in  April  last  year,  has  recently  become  1.1  percent  excluding  the  direct 
effects of the consumption tax hike. 
The CPI inflation has more or less leveled off in a narrow range of around 1¼ percent for 
eight  months  since  the  beginning  of  this  year.  Looking  at  such  leveling-off  inflation  rates, 
some view that increasing momentum for the CPI inflation has been lost after accelerating 
strongly last year. 
The  leveling-off  CPI  inflation  is  due  to  the  dissipating  base  effect.  The  effects  of  yen 
depreciation and the energy price increase that exerted upward pressure on consumer prices 
in the previous year have been falling off, compared with a year earlier. By contrast, trend 
inflation rates have continued to increase steadily. In fact, the developments in the inflation 
rates so far have been mostly in line with the Bank’s projection. The fact that the inflation rate 
has not declined too much but remained resilient despite the dissipating base effect suggests 
that  the  improvement  in  the  output  gap  and  the  rise  in  inflation  expectations  have  been 
working as trend inflationary pressure. 
Looking ahead, the output gap and inflation expectations are expected to continue improving. 
Since  the  dissipating  base  effect  is  expected  to  run  its  course,  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the CPI is expected to follow an uptrend again from the second half of this fiscal 
year and reach about 2 percent, that is, the price stability target, in or around fiscal 2015. 
Bank’s monetary policy management and Japan’s growth potential 
II. 
In this way, Japan’s economy has been on a path suggesting that the 2 percent price stability 
target  will  be  achieved  as  expected.  Yet,  we  need  to  raise  inflation  rates  and  inflation 
expectations  further  toward  2  percent  and  thus  we  are  only  halfway  there.  The  Bank  will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is 
necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. If the outlook changes due to the 
manifestation of risk factors and it is judged necessary for achieving the price stability target, 
the Bank will make adjustments without hesitation. Let me emphasize that our commitment is 
result-oriented. It means that the Bank will continue with QQE to achieve the target, and the 
Bank will make adjustments if necessary so that the target will be achieved. 
In closing, let me talk about Japan’s growth potential. As I have mentioned earlier, Japan’s 
potential growth rate is estimated to be around 0.5 percent. 
Japan’s potential growth rate in the late 1990s that is estimated to be about 2 percent has 
thereafter  been  declining  gradually  due  to  such  factors  as  aging,  the  declining  population, 
and  the  slowdown  in  capital  stock  accumulation  during  the  period  of  protracted  deflation. 
Those facts are well recognized, and both government and private entities are making efforts 
to raise the potential growth rate. As a growth strategy to stimulate private investment, the 
government formulated the Japan Revitalization  Strategy and revised it in June. The Bank 
strongly  expects  that  the  measure  will  be  steadily  carried  out,  and  thereby  firms  will 
aggressively undertake initiatives. 
Raising medium- to long-term economic growth potential is basically an issue of the supply 
side of the economy and thus monetary policy does not play a main role in that regard, but it 
can make important contributions. That is, by dispelling the deflationary mindset. When the 
deflationary  mindset  is  widespread,  cash  hoarding  and  maintaining  the  status  quo  are 
considered rational. Proactive behaviors by taking risks do not result in rewarding a sufficient 
return. In fact, under the period of protracted deflation, firms have become reluctant to take 
risks,  such  as  investing  in  capital  stock  and  in  research  and  development,  resulting  in  a 
decline in the potential growth rate.  
Dispelling the deflationary mindset and creating an economy, in which private entities can act 
based on an assumption of 2 percent inflation, will lead to reviving the animal spirits of firms 
that were lost in the prolonged deflationary period and thereby enhancing growth potential. 
That  is  evident  if  you  recall  that  positive  developments  have  become  widespread  among 
firms  since  last  year  as  prices  started  to  rise.  The  Bank  will  firmly  support  such  positive 
developments through achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible 
time. 
While some question whether it will be desirable to increase prices when the potential growth 
rate  is  low,  my  answer  will  be  a  clear  “yes.”  Overcoming  deflation  and  raising  growth 
potential  is  not  an  issue  of  which  comes  first.  Overcoming  deflation  is  an  important 
prerequisite for raising growth potential. The Bank will achieve the price stability target of 2 
percent.  In  that  situation,  I  am  convinced  that  Japan’s  economy  will  achieve  a  higher 
potential growth rate. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
