  Manuel Sánchez: Emerging markets amid heightened uncertainty 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  Crédit 
Agricole Central Bank Seminar, Rome, 23 October 2014. 
 I  am  honored  to join  you  here  today  in  the  magnificent  city  of  Rome,  a  cradle  of Western 
civilization,  one  of  Europe’s  great  cultural  centers,  and  a  muse  for  poets  and  artists 
throughout the centuries. Thank you for the invitation to share a few words with you on the 
topic of emerging markets. 
Emerging  economies  now  confront  a  new  reality,  one  in  which  some  apparent  certainties 
have  disappeared,  and  different  challenges  have  arisen.  I  would  like  to  touch  on  three 
subjects in this context, starting with the performance of emerging economies, moving on to 
financial market conditions, and concluding with a brief overview of Mexico in particular. As 
always,  my  views  are  entirely  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Bank of 
Mexico or its Governing Board. 
Developments and the outlook for emerging economies 
Two distinctive trends characterize developments in emerging economies during the last few 
years. The first is higher growth since the beginning of this century, relative to the previous 
decade.  Economic  expansion  has  surpassed  that  of  developed  nations  substantially,  with 
China and India playing prominent roles. 
What forces have driven this phenomenon? Although emerging economies are not all alike, 
as a group they seem to have benefited from generally sound policies implemented in the 
1980s  and  1990s.  These  include  the  strengthening  of  macroeconomic  and  financial 
frameworks and the liberalization of markets, reduced regulations, and greater openness to 
international  trade.  Additionally,  high  and  rising  commodity  prices  and  ample  access  to 
external credit during the 2000s have helped. 
By and large, better policy and institutional settings seem to be responsible for the fact that 
emerging economies were relatively resilient to the shocks of the Great Recession. Indeed, 
in  2009,  while  the  advanced  economies  contracted  more  than  3  percent,  the  emerging 
economies grew slightly above 1 percent.1 
Nonetheless,  since  2011,  growth  in  emerging  economies  has  been  declining,  the  second 
notable  trend  for  the  group  as  a  whole.  Although  still  above  that  of  advanced  nations, 
average output change in the last four years has been less than that observed prior to the 
crisis in this century. 
Several  factors  may  contribute  toward  an  explanation  of  the  slowdown.  One  possibility  is 
structural. Some emerging economies such as China may be reaching the production frontier 
derived  from  their  reforms.  They  cannot  grow  at  constant  extraordinarily  high  rates 
indefinitely. 
Another  possibility,  which  could  be  complementary  to  the  first,  is  that  cyclical  factors  may 
also be playing a role. Activity in advanced economies has remained below trend since 2009. 
Additional drags include the tightening of fiscal and monetary policies in certain countries to 
control  inflation  and  counteract  disequilibria  from  expansionary  stances  undertaken  in  the 
 1  Own  calculations  based  on  PPP-adjusted  data  for  32  advanced  and  29  emerging-market  countries,  from 
Feenstra,  et  al.  (2013),  “The  Next  Generation  of  the  Penn  World  Table”  available  for  download  at 
www.ggdc.net/pwt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  wake  of  the  crisis.  This,  in  turn,  has  implied  stricter  banking  measures  and  slower  credit 
growth in some cases. Lower commodity prices have also recently hit some nations. 
In short, emerging economies find themselves facing a new environment, where some of the 
factors they had counted on to buoy growth may no longer be available. To the extent that 
both  structural  and  cyclical  factors  may  not  support  exceptional  expansion,  emerging 
economies face new challenges if they desire to enhance sustainable economic growth. 
The U.S. economic recovery, on the other hand, appears to have gained traction and seems 
relatively  more  robust  in  the face  of  possibly  adverse  external  conditions,  as  the  upturn  is 
backed  by  solid  domestic  demand.  Labor  markets  have  improved  significantly,  with  the 
unemployment  rate  crossing  the  threshold  that  had  previously  been  cited  by  the  Federal 
Reserve as a reference for eventual monetary normalization. Drops in unemployment have 
repeatedly surpassed Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) forecasts. 
Strong  for  some  time,  the  United  Kingdom  is  another  economy  that  has  been  doing  well. 
However,  the  incipient  recovery  in  the  Eurozone  has  recently  stalled.  Additionally,  Japan’s 
economy appears to have stumbled, largely due to a hike in the consumption tax. 
The consensus among analysts is that the world economy will see a moderate pickup during 
the  rest  of  this  year  and  the  next,  with  the  United  States  taking  the  lead.  Emerging 
economies  are  expected  to  gradually  improve,  with  growth  remaining  above  those  of 
advanced economies but below rates enjoyed a decade ago. Given more optimism on U.S. 
prospects,  the  most  favored  countries  would  appear  to  be  those  closely  linked  to  that 
economy.2 
Downside  risks  to  this  scenario  for  the  emerging  economies  include  first,  lower-than-
expected advanced-nation recoveries. Second, further significant drops in commodity prices 
could pose difficulties for export income and the public finances of some countries. During 
the last few weeks, oil prices, for example, have fallen to levels not seen in four years. A third 
risk  comes  from  heightened  geopolitical  tensions,  which  could  hit  emerging  European 
economies especially hard. 
Financial market conditions 
Since 2010 the world economy has faced unusually benign international financial conditions 
stemming from the expansionary monetary stances of advanced countries, most notably the 
United States. Record low interest rates coupled with relatively more attractive prospects in 
emerging markets resulted in a financial bonanza for these economies. The search for yield 
fueled significant capital flows into emerging economies and appreciation of financial assets, 
including currencies and bonds.3 
Governments  and  corporations  profited,  issuing  debt  abroad  under  attractive  conditions. 
Some  countries  may  have  experienced  increased  productivity  derived  from  capital  flows, 
especially when these took the form of foreign direct investment.4 
Talk of the eventual tapering of asset purchases by the Federal Reserve in May 2013 and 
FOMC  communications  since  then  have  resulted  in  unstable  market  sentiment,  affecting 
 2  See,  for  example,  Consensus  Economics  (2014),  Consensus  Forecasts,  October;  and  IIF  (2014),  Capital 
Flows Data, October. 
3  For  a  review  of  international  spillover  effects  of  monetary  policies  in  advanced  countries,  see  Edwards, 
Monetary Policy Transmission.” BIS Papers No 78. 
4  See Cubeddu, L., et al. (2014), “Emerging Markets in Transition: Growth Prospects and Challenges.” IMF Staff 
Discussion Note, June. 
S. (2012),  “The  Federal  Reserve,  the  Emerging  Markets,  and  Capital  Controls:  A  High-frequency  Empirical 
Investigation.” Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 44(2); and Takáts, E. and A. Vela (2014), “International 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  emerging  nations  through  intermittent  volatility  and  some  loss  of  the  appreciation  of  their 
financial assets. 
Calm returned in the first half of 2014 as tapering proceeded at a foreseen, measured pace. 
Volatility has revived, however, since the third quarter, reflecting swings in the pendulum for 
expectations of monetary tightening in the United States, accentuated by the approach of the 
final stage of tapering, and more recently, worries about the health of the global economy. 
The Fed has stated many times that tightening will be gradual, and its start and pace, data-
dependent. These reassurances, however, have not removed uncertainty from the markets. 
The stronger the economic recovery in the United States, the more sense it makes to begin 
hiking rates sooner rather than later. Also, the longer the Fed waits, the sharper eventual rate 
increases may have to be. 
Monetary normalization will obviously be a welcome development, for at least two reasons. 
First,  it  would  reflect  improved  performance  and  expectations  for  the  world’s  largest 
economy.  Second,  it  would  reduce  the  possibility  that  excessive  risk-taking  puts  the  world 
financial system in danger of disarray. 
Furthermore,  monetary  policy  has  its  limits.  Expansionary  monetary  policy  cannot  be 
sustained  forever.  Distortions  can  build  up,  and  over  time,  the  seeds  can  be  sown  for 
difficulties in the future for preserving price stability. Also, lax monetary policy can feed into a 
self-perpetuating lack of confidence in the drivers of economic growth. 
Eventual adjustment in advanced countries could be significant. For example, given the fact 
many asset prices are above long-term averages, and bond yields are close to their all-time 
lows, including historically minimum high-yield spreads, substantial corrections may occur. 
As  for  emerging-market  financial  authorities,  their  task  in  previous  years  was  to  watch  for 
possible bubbles and overheating amid abundant capital inflows, a phenomenon that actually 
occurred to different degrees in some countries, fueled also by domestic policies. Concern 
now focusses on the converse, the possibilities of and consequences from a sudden stop or 
even a reversal of capital flows. 
Many emerging economies, indeed, are now more linked to advanced countries than before 
the crisis through larger foreign positions in domestic assets. A surprise change in speed or 
direction on the road to tighter monetary conditions could lead to disorderly market reactions. 
In addition, lower economic growth in emerging economies could amplify any spillover effects 
from U.S. monetary tightening. Another complication is that many of them are struggling to 
control inflation. It is noteworthy that in the last two years, the inflation gap between emerging 
and advanced economies has widened significantly. This situation confronts the two groups 
of nations with contrasting challenges.5 
A  further  reason  to  give  market  participants  pause  is  that,  in  the  short  term  at  least,  the 
expected direction of monetary policy in the Eurozone and Japan diverges from that of the 
United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom.  While  central  banks  have  moved  in  opposite 
directions before, what is different this time around is the unprecedented widespread use of 
unconventional monetary tools, putting them in unchartered waters.6 
More  solid  policy  frameworks  in  emerging  economies  could  shield  them  somewhat  from 
financial shocks. However, this does not mean that they face no risk of instability. While the 
stronger a country’s fundamentals are, the more resilient it could be to external disturbances, 
 5  Own calculations based on the International Financial Statistics database, IMF. 
6  Dudley,  W.  (2014),  “U.S.  Monetary  Policy  and  Emerging  Market  Economies.”  Remarks  at  the  Roundtable 
Reserve Bank of New York , New York City, March. 
Discussion  in  Honor  of  Terrence  Checki:  Three  Decades  of  Crises:  What  Have  We  Learned?,  Federal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  empirical  evidence  to  support  this  hypothesis  is  inconclusive.  Thus,  the  authorities  should 
continue to watch the financial risks carefully.7 
The Mexican economy 
During  the  last  decade,  Mexico’s  economic  growth  was,  on  average,  lower  than  that 
observed  in  other  emerging  markets.  Several  factors  may  help  explain  this.  One  is  high 
integration  with  the  U.S.,  where  GDP  has  remained  below  the  long-term  trend  since  the 
crisis. Another is that Mexico is mainly a manufacturing exporter, and thus it did not overly 
benefit  from  previously  booming  commodity  prices.  Third,  long-stagnant  total  factor 
productivity reveals pervasive inefficiencies in the economy. 
Furthermore, since the middle of 2012, Mexico was hit by a succession of domestic shocks, 
including the bankruptcy of major housing developers and a contraction in public investment. 
In 2014, the economy started to pick up, driven first by more dynamic exports of goods and 
services,  and  more  recently,  by  stronger  private  domestic  demand.  Third-quarter  data  on 
industrial  production  and  retail  sales  suggest  that  momentum  continues.  The  broad-based 
outlook is one of gradual recovery during the rest of this year and in 2015.8 
Both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  growth  scenario  are  present,  with  upside  risks 
prevalent. These include the possibility of faster-than-expected U.S. economic recovery and 
positive  effects  from  structural  reforms  implemented  during  the  last  couple  of  years  to 
enhance  productivity  in  many  sectors  of  the  economy.  On  the  downside,  less  favorable 
international conditions could dampen activity. 
Market reactions in Mexico to external financial volatility in the last year and a half have been 
relatively  manageable.  The  peso  has  depreciated  less  than  many  other  emerging-market 
currencies, a noteworthy fact given the absence of intervention in the foreign exchange (FX) 
market.  Also,  both  the  FX  and  bond  markets  have  been  orderly,  with  traded  volumes  and 
bid-ask spreads tight. 
Furthermore,  peso-denominated  bond  holdings  by  nonresidents  have  remained  relatively 
stable for the last two years, despite being at high levels, suggesting that investors are taking 
a long view for their Mexican portfolios. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  add  just  a  few  words  on  monetary  policy  and  inflation.  Since  July, 
inflation  has  breached  the  upper  limit  of  the  variability  interval  around  the  permanent  3 
percent  target.  Pressures  explaining  this  trend  arise  from  both  the  core  and  noncore 
components  of  the  National  Consumer  Price  Index.  They  are  expected  to  continue  to 
influence price behavior during the rest of the year. 
Nevertheless,  some  factors  point  toward  a  possible  decline  in  annual  inflation  next  year, 
including favorable base effects from 2014 tax hikes, a reduction in gasoline price rises, and 
some probable drops in telecommunications charges stemming from new regulations. 
Despite  these  positives,  some  upside  risks  bear  watching,  such  as  possible  pass-through 
from  peso  depreciation  and  unexpected  agricultural  price  increases.  These  considerations 
are all the more important as convergence to the permanent inflation target has been taking 
years, and analysts’ expectations remain above the permanent target. 
 7  See, for example, the studies reviewed by Mishra, et al. (2014), “Impact of Fed Tapering Announcements on 
Emerging Markets.” IMF Working Paper WP/14/109. 
8  See Blue Chip Economic Indicators, October 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Concluding remarks 
Emerging  markets  face  a  new  chapter  opening  on  the  world  economic  stage.  Certain 
beneficial conditions no longer in place or likely to fade include, first, the financial bonanza 
that occurred in the wake of the global crisis. Second, high commodity prices have already 
seen a reversal. Third, prospects for widespread healthy economic conditions appear to be 
somewhat slimmer. 
Although a moderate rebound is expected for emerging economies, the less favorable global 
scenario requires them to think anew about how to position themselves. The most obvious 
challenge comes from possible consequences related to the unwinding of lax U.S. monetary 
policy.  The  best  response  is  to  consolidate  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  including 
improving  fiscal  positions,  controlling  inflation,  and  strengthening  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory frameworks for financial institutions. 
A longer-term task is how to raise potential growth. Here the key role is played by structural 
reform. And that is a requirement that each country must tailor to its own individual needs 
and realities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
