Deepali Pant Joshi: Enabling urban microfinance 
Keynote address by Dr Deepali Pant Joshi, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at  the  Conference  on  “The  challenges  of  enabling  urban  finance”,  organised  by  Minorities 
Development  Department,  Government  of  Maharashtra  and  MAVIM  the  State  Womens’ 
Development Corporation, Mumbai, 16 September 2013. 
 the 
from 
Income  Tax, 
the  economy 
fiscal  base  of 
At  the  outset,  let  me  congratulate  Additional  Secretary  for  the  theme  of  this  conference 
“Enabling  Urban  Microfinance”  which  is  truly  appropriate  as  it  chooses  to  bring  to  centre 
stage  issues  of  urban  poverty.  The  scale  of  urban  poverty  in  India  is  staggering.  Current 
estimates suggest that 100 million poor people live in urban settlements comprising 40% of 
the urban poor. These numbers are expected to rise. The prediction is that the total urban 
population of India will increase from 26% of total population to over 36%–50% over the next 
twenty-five  years. The  number  of  urban  poor  would  increase to  200–300  million.  Until  and 
unless  cities  are  able  to  meet  the  growing  needs  of  the  expanding  population,  any 
advantages  that  economic  opportunities  might  present  the  urban  poor  are  likely  to  be 
outweighed by these factors for policy makers. Therefore it means that the characteristics of 
urban development must be understood and included in initiatives to reduce overall poverty 
in India. The general consensus is that poverty can be most effectively addressed through 
economic  development  for  which  rapid  urban  development  is  a  key  driver.  The  National 
Institute of Urban Affairs estimates that urban India currently contributes more than 50% of 
the  country’s  GDP  whilst  accommodating  less  than  a  third  of  its  population  and  this 
contribution is likely to increase to 60%. The manufacturing and services sectors that are the 
most dynamic constituents of the Indian economy are predominantly urban. In addition, with 
agriculture  exempt 
is  also 
disproportionately reliant on the urban economy as the proportion of people thronging urban 
areas  continues  to  rise.  The  opportunities  for  poorer  people  to  tap  this  growing  economic 
base are enormous. In the wake of the often unplanned and unregulated urbanization, the 
urban poor face physical, environmental, social and psychological problems. These impose a 
heavy  burden  of  disease  and  inequity  on  the  urban  poor.  They  are  compelled  to  live  in 
squalid  and  untenable  settlements  and  suffer 
the  consequence  of  environmental 
degradation, resulting in ill-health, disability and loss of earnings. As cities grow, the pressure 
on  existing  services  and  associated  infrastructure  increases  with  resultant  increase  in  the 
number  of  people  without  access  to  these  services.  The  poor  and  therefore  the  most 
vulnerable are excluded and end up paying higher prices for lower quality products via the 
informal sector. Ironically, it is the poor who provide the essential services which keep cities 
functioning.  The  problem  of  service  provision  for  the  poor  is  compounded  by  the  fact  that 
decision  makers  do  not  necessarily  know  their  needs  or  recognize  their  civic  rights. 
Employment opportunities are severely restricted in urban areas. The main asset of the poor 
is the capacity to sell their labour. They have few other assets to build on. Their home may 
be rented or unfit for habitation, they may not own land or capital or cattle in towns and the 
social  networks  built  by  households  over  generations  in  the  village  are  less  strong  in  a 
dynamic  urban  context  where  people  come  and  go.  There  is  always  lack  of  employment 
opportunities;  the  poor  are  not  necessarily  equipped  with  the  skills  and  training  to  take 
advantage of newer opportunities in modern industry and in the nascent services sector. The 
formal wage sector has been unable to absorb the expanding labour force. As a result, there 
has been a massive growth in the informal sector and in the casualization of employment, 
wages are forced downward, working conditions are not protected and unregulated access to 
opportunities  is  mediated  by  the  capacity  of  individuals.  A  way  of  strengthening  the 
bargaining  power  of  the  poor  in  urban  contexts is  through the formation  of  neighbourhood 
groups  federated  as  Community  Development  Societies  at  the  state  level  in  addition  to 
engaging in self-help schemes, as micro planning credit extension or directly operating and 
maintaining  infrastructure.  The  CDS  can  create  the  infrastructure  for  receiving  benefits  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Government  programs  like  the  SJSRY.  Access  to  financial  services  is  a  critical  aspect  of 
both, social development and social protection measures for the poor. These services create 
an opportunity for access to low interest credit which can be used for skill enhancement or 
micro  enterprise  growth.  This  also  creates  an  opportunity  to  use  savings  and  loans  as  a 
buffer  against  crisis.  The  poorer  the  household,  the  greater  the  desire  to  save  financial 
services provide a critical safety net as well as a spring-board to advancement. 
We need financial inclusion for the urban areas to link people to mainstream financial service 
providers so that they can access the entire suite of financial products and services from the 
mainstream  financial  institutions.  Till  this  happens,  I  do  see  an  important  role  for 
microfinance. Conventional wisdom has it that access to microfinance services can enable 
the  poor  to  smoothen  their  consumption,  manage  their  risks  better,  build  their  assets, 
develop  their  microenterprises,  enhance  their  income-earning  capacity  and  enjoy  an 
improved quality of life. The primary clientele of MFIs consists, almost by definition, of those 
who face severe barriers to access financial products from conventional financial institutions. 
These barriers comprise mainly high operational costs and risk factors. MFI clientele in urban 
areas  may  possess  few  negotiable  assets  and  live  in  hostile  environments  where 
enforcement of property rights and other contracts is expensive and uncertain. MFIs can help 
in  providing  handholding  support  and  markets  typically  for  encouraging  small  service 
enterprises and cottage and small industries. Cottage industries have traditionally played an 
important  role  in  the  Indian  economy.  The  bustling  urban  enclave  of  Dharavi  is  a  case  in 
point. It generates large volume employment and provides subsidiary services. The cottage 
and  small  industry’s  need  for  capital  is  not  very  large  and  they  help  in  ensuring  equitable 
income distribution. There are several artisan based clusters in India, these are skill-based 
and  use  simple  manufacturing  processes  and  technology.  These  clusters  consist  of 
unorganized sector, tiny units, with little access to market information. If credit and the entire 
range  of  banking  products  and  services  from  mainstream  financial  institutions  is  made 
available, it will enable the small units to scale up and grow. The problems of urban poverty 
can  only  be  addressed  by  encouraging  the  small  scale  service/manufacturing  enterprises 
which  generate  employment.  Much  has  been  written  about  the  benefits  and  positive 
externalities of agglomeration. The cluster based approach to lending is intended to provide 
a full-service approach to cater to the diverse needs of the MSE sector. This can easily be 
achieved through extending banking services to recognized MSE clusters. A cluster based 
approach is beneficial (a) in dealing with well-defined and recognized groups (b) in ensuring 
the availability of appropriate information for risk assessment (c) in monitoring by the lending 
institutions and (d) achieving reduction in costs. 
United  Nations  Industrial  Development  Organisation  (UNIDO)  has  identified  388  clusters 
spread over 21 states across various parts of the country. The Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium  Enterprises  has  also  approved  a  list  of  clusters  under  the  Scheme  of  Fund  for 
Regeneration of Traditional Industries (SFURTI) and the Micro and Small Enterprises Cluster 
Development  Program  (MSE-CDP) 
in  121  Minority  Concentration  Districts. 
Accordingly, banks have been advised to take appropriate measures to improve the credit 
flow to the identified clusters of micro and small entrepreneurs from the minority communities 
residing in the minority concentrated districts of the country. 
The  RBI  has  advised  banks  to  open  more  MSE  focused  branch  offices  at  different  MSE 
clusters which can also act as counselling centres for MSEs. Each lead bank of the district 
may adopt at least one cluster. 
A Microfinance model which has been relatively successful is the SHG Bank linkage model 
which leverages the penetrative reach of the NGOs and civil society organizations and the 
financial strength and managerial expertise of the commercial banks. Starting from a modest 
scale as a pilot in the year 1992, the SHG-Bank linkage program linked 79.60 lakh savings-
linked Self Help Groups (SHGs) covering over 10.3 crore poor households as on 31 March 
2012.  As  per  the  NABARD  Annual  Report,  however,  the  concentration  of  the  SHG  Bank 
linkage  model  continues  to  be  to  the  southern  states  and  is  not  evenly  spread  over  the 
located 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIMARU (Bihar, Madhya Pradesh Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh) states. The second model is 
that  of  the  registered  NBFCs.  These  work  as  profit  companies  and  extend  loans  to  the 
entrepreneurial  poor  at  the  middle  of  the  pyramid.  This  is  an  important  distinction  which  I 
want  to  emphasize  as  this  brings  into  salience  the  continuing  need  and  relevance  of  this 
model. There is an important role which both models of microfinance fulfill in the critical areas 
of training and capacity building of the poor. This enables them to graduate to larger loans 
and  to  setting  up  sustainable,  scalable,  self-sustaining  enterprises  and  income-generating 
projects  which  pay  for  themselves.  The  most  serious  limitation  of  microfinance  is  that  it 
does not address all needs holistically. There is a problem of scaling up, and in this lies the 
promise of inclusive finance which links the poor to the formal financial system. There is a 
clear  comparative  competitive  advantage  which  commercial  banks  enjoy  in  extending 
microfinance.  As  financial  inclusion  and  basic  bank  deposit  accounts  are  in  place,  banks 
should  now  move  to  the  next  step  of  crafting  products  and  services  for  the  poor.  The 
advantages  of  banks  over  MFIs  stem  from  their  being  regulated  institutions  fulfilling  the 
necessary  preconditions  of  ownership,  financial  disclosure  and  capital  adequacy  that  help 
ensure  prudent  management.  They  have  the  physical  infrastructure,  large  networked 
branches  on  CBS from which  to  expand  access  and  reach  out to  a  substantial  number of 
poorer  clients.  They  have  well  established  internal  controls  and  administrative  and 
accounting systems to keep track of a large number of high volume, small value transactions. 
As they are well capitalized, they are not dependent on scarce and volatile donor resources 
unlike NGOs and MFIs. Banks offer savings, remittance, loans and other financial products 
that  are  prima  facie  attractive  to  the  hitherto  unserved  micro  finance  clients.  On  the 
downside, however, banks lack key ingredients, most of all, the financial methodologies to 
reach the low income population. There are several issues trammeling banks. The issue of 
commitment is fairly significant. The commitment of commercial banks (particularly the larger 
banks)  to  micro  enterprise  lending  is  often  fragile  and  generally  vests  on  the  direction 
provided  by  one  or  two  Board  Members  rather  than  it  being  rooted  in  their  institutional 
mandate. Secondly, they are hampered by their organizational structures. Programs for the 
poor  or  microfinance  programs  need  to  be  inserted  into  the  larger  bank  structure  while 
retaining  flexibility,  operational  independence  and  autonomy.  Banks  need  an  appropriate 
financial  methodology  to  work  with  efficiency.  For  gains  in  the  penny  economy,  they  need 
suitable  financial  methodology  to  service  the  micro  enterprise  sector  and  financial 
innovations  that  enable  cost  effective  analysis  of  credit  worthiness,  the  monitoring  of 
relatively poor clients and acceptance of effective collateral substitutes. Human Resources 
also  need  attention  given  that  microfinance  programs  differ  so  radically  from  traditional 
banking.  Banks  need  to  recruit  and  retain  specialized  staff  to  manage  these  programs. 
Issues  of  recruitment,  training  and  performance  linked  incentives  for  bank  personnel  need 
special consideration. Cost effectiveness is a critical issue. Micro finance programs are costly 
to  administer  given  the  overheads  of  banks.  Despite  these  apparent  disabilities,  if  banks 
work on this, they are ideally suited to microfinance provision. The targeted interventions of 
the  Swarn  Jayanti  Shahri  Rozgar  Yojana  and  the  District  Industries  centres  which  are 
designed to impart vocational training to the target group of this program as also the Prime 
Minister Rozgar Yojana have enjoyed only limited success ratios attributable not so much to 
infirmities in policy design issues as to faulty implementation and poor targeting, lack of pre- 
disbursement  credit  assessment,  coupled  with  poor  post-disbursement  credit  supervision 
and no space for capacity building and handholding in between. The clear winner is financial 
inclusion. Savings credit extended to the urban poor by the banks can help grow the micro 
enterprises  and  power  economic  growth.  Let  me  begin  with  a  simple  example.  Micro 
enterprises  like  the  ubiquitous  street-corner  paan  wallah  who  runs  a  small  self-sustaining 
enterprise,  if  extended  credit  by  banks,  can  expand  his  business,  can  employ  two  other 
helpers. Such micro enterprises have tremendous potential to create employment and put in 
place  virtuous  cycles  of  economic  growth.  How  do  we  enable  micro  finance  in  the  urban 
areas well to be facile? It is not an easy task. First, we need to build a suitable framework. 
The framework will need to be localized, customized and contextualized to suit the differing 
needs  of  different  localities,  and  addressing  issues  such  as  the  development  of  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the  margins. 
overarching  macro  policy  environment,  long-term  financial  sustainability  of  microfinance 
institutions,  increasing  outreach  by  capacity  building  and  effective  governance,  and  broad-
based  research  and  monitoring/evaluation.  Its  linking  top  other  developmental  priorities, 
particularly  those  related  to  environmental  issues  at  the  local  level  will  be  an  important 
justification in its adoption. There is need to recognize the importance of bringing people from 
the margins to the mainstream of economic activity as producers of goods and services. The 
challenge  of financial  exclusion  is  widespread  in  metropolitan  areas,  especially  among the 
disadvantaged  and  low-income  groups.  To  facilitate  doorstep  banking  to  the  excluded 
segment of the urban poor and provide an institutional mechanism for co-ordination between 
the  government  and  banks,  lead  bank  responsibility  has  been  assigned  to  16  districts  in 
metropolitan areas, thus bringing the entire country under the fold of the lead bank scheme 
and covering a total of 659 districts under the lead bank scheme. The Peruvian economist 
Hernando de Soto showcased the unreported unrecorded activity of a vibrant informal sector 
whose  participants  remained  at 
It  successfully  created  many  small 
entrepreneurs  but  could  not  secure  credit  from  mainstream  financial  institutions  as  they 
lacked legal ownership of their property, making it difficult for them not only to obtain credit, 
but sell the business, or expand. They cannot seek legal remedies to business conflicts in 
court,  since  they  do  not  have  legal  ownership.  Lack  of  information  on  income  prevents 
governments from collecting taxes and acting for the public welfare. "The existence of such 
massive exclusion generates two parallel economies, legal and extra-legal. An elite minority 
enjoys the economic benefits of the mainstream financial institutions, law and globalization, 
while  the  majority  of  entrepreneurs  are  stuck  in  poverty."  He  terms  them  extra-legal.  To 
survive,  to  protect  their  assets,  and  to  do  as  much  business  as  possible,  the  extra-legal 
create their own rules. But because these local arrangements are full of shortcomings and 
are not easily enforceable, the extra-legal also create their own social, political and economic 
problems  that  affect  the  society  at  large.  It  is  essential  that  these  issues  are  given  due 
attention of policy makers to encourage and promote the growth of micro enterprises. The 
Prime  Minister’s  task  force  (TKA  Nair  2010)  laid  emphasis  on  the  micro  enterprise  sector 
which  generates  opportunities for  self-employment  and  stipulated that 60  per  cent  of  MSE 
advances should go to the micro enterprises. MSMEs make a significant contribution in the 
country’s  GDP,  manufacturing  output,  exports  and  employment  generation.  MSMEs 
contribute  8  per  cent  of  the  country’s  GDP,  45  per  cent  of  the  manufactured  output  and 
40 per cent of our exports. The labour and capital ratio in MSMEs and the overall growth in 
the MSMEs is much higher than in the larger industries. MSMEs are better dispersed. In view 
of these factors, MSMEs are important for achieving national objectives of growth with equity 
and inclusion. As per the quick estimates of 4th All-India Census of MSMEs, the number of 
enterprises  is  estimated  to  be  about  26  million  and  these  provide  employment  to  an 
estimated 60 million persons. Of the 26 million MSMEs, only 1.5 million are in the registered 
segment while the remaining 24.5 million (94%) are in the unregistered segment. The state-
wise distribution of MSMEs shows that more than 55% of these enterprises are in 6 states, 
namely,  Uttar  Pradesh,  Maharashtra,  Tamil  Nadu,  West  Bengal,  Andhra  Pradesh  and 
Karnataka.  Fewer  MSMEs  are  owned  by  women,  the  unorganized  sector,  in  which 
enterprises  are  typically  established  through  own  funds  or  funds  obtained  through  non-
institutional sources, they lack managerial bandwidth, do not have established channels for 
marketing and are centred around a single traditional technology. More than 94 per cent of 
MSMEs  are  unregistered,  with  a  large  number  established  in  the  informal  or  unorganized 
sector.  The  National  Commission  for  Enterprises  in  the  Unorganised  Sector  (NCEUS) 
defines unorganized sector as enterprise employing less than 10 workers. It has estimated 
such enterprises at 58 million with employment generated of 104 million persons. Shortage 
of capital, particularly working capital, is the major problem faced by the enterprises in the 
unorganized sector. Further, the field studies undertaken by NCEUS indicate that seasonality 
of markets is another hassle. In addition to the growth potential of the sector and its critical 
role in the manufacturing and value chains, the heterogeneity and the unorganized nature of 
the  Indian  MSMEs  are  important  aspects  that  need  to  be  factored  into  policy  making  and 
program implementation. The policies and programs for the micro and small enterprises in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the unorganized sector would need to address their survival strategies and should be in the 
direction of providing livelihood alternatives such as social security, skill formation and credit. 
On  the  other  hand,  policies/programs  for  the  larger  sized  MSMEs  need  to  address  issues 
relating to growth marketing, access to raw material, credit, skill development and technology 
upgradation. 
 
The million development goals is halving poverty by 2015. If this is to be attained, it is central 
to  address  the  concerns  around  urban  poverty  through  strategies  of  increasing  income  to 
make  basic  needs more  affordable. If  our  cities are  not  to  become  centres  of squalor  and 
crime, these issues will require urgent redress. 
Thank You for your patient listening. I wish the deliberations all success. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
