Daniel K Tarullo: Dodd-Frank Act 
Speech by Mr Daniel K Tarullo, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  US  Senate, 
Washington DC, 14 February 2013. 
 Chairman  Johnson,  Ranking  Member  Crapo,  and  other  members  of  the  committee,  thank 
you  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  on  implementation  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall  Street  Reform 
and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act). In today’s testimony, I will provide 
an  update  on  the  Federal  Reserve’s  recent  activities  pertinent  to  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  and 
describe our regulatory and supervisory priorities for 2013. 
The Federal Reserve, in many cases jointly with other regulatory agencies, has made steady 
and considerable progress in implementing the Congressional mandates in the Dodd-Frank 
Act, though obviously some work remains. Throughout this effort, the Federal Reserve has 
maintained a focus on financial stability. In the process of rule development, we have placed 
particular  emphasis  on  mitigating  systemic  risks.  Thus,  among  other  things,  we  have 
proposed varying the application of the Dodd-Frank Act’s special prudential rules based on 
the  relative size  and  complexity  of  regulated financial  firms.  This  focus  on  systemic  risk is 
also reflected in our increasingly systematic supervision of the largest banking firms. 
that 
taxpayers.  The 
financial  crisis  revealed,  however, 
Recent regulatory reform milestones 
Strong  bank  capital  requirements,  while  not  alone  sufficient  to  guarantee  the  safety  and 
soundness of  our  banking  system,  are  central  to  promoting  the  resiliency  of  banking  firms 
and the financial sector as a whole. Capital provides a cushion to absorb a firm’s expected 
and unexpected losses, helping to ensure that those losses are borne by shareholders rather 
than 
the  regulatory  capital 
requirements for banking firms were not sufficiently robust. It also confirmed that no single 
capital  measure  adequately  captures  a  banking  firm’s  risks  of  credit  and  trading  losses.  A 
good  bit  of  progress  has  now  been  made  in  strengthening  and  updating  traditional  capital 
requirements, as well as devising some complementary measures for larger firms. 
As  you  know,  in  December  2010  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (Basel 
Committee)  issued  the  Basel III  package  of  reforms  to  its  framework  for  minimum  capital 
requirements,  supplementing  an  earlier  set  of  changes  that  increased  requirements  for 
important  classes  of  traded  assets.  Last  summer,  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Office  of  the 
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
issued  for  comment  a  set  of  proposals  to  implement  the  Basel  III  capital  standards  for  all 
large,  internationally  active  U.S.  banking  firms.  In  addition,  the  proposals  would  apply 
risk-based and leverage capital requirements to savings and loan holding companies for the 
first time. The proposals also would modernize and harmonize the existing regulatory capital 
standards  for  all  U.S.  banking  firms,  which  have  not  been  comprehensively  updated  since 
their  introduction  twenty-five  years  ago,  and  incorporate  certain  new  legislative  provisions, 
including elements of sections 171 and 939A of the Dodd-Frank Act. 
To  help  ensure  that  all  U.S.  banking  firms  maintain  strong  capital  positions,  the  Basel  III 
proposals  would  introduce  a  new  common  equity  capital  requirement,  raise  the  existing 
tier 1 capital  minimum  requirement,  implement  a  capital  conservation  buffer  on  top  of  the 
regulatory  minimums,  and  introduce  a  more  risk-sensitive  standardized  approach  for 
calculating  risk-weighted  assets.  Large,  internationally  active  banking  firms  also  would  be 
subject to a supplementary leverage ratio and a countercyclical capital buffer and would face 
higher capital requirements for derivatives and certain other capital markets exposures they 
hold. Taken together, these proposals should materially reduce the probability of failure of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
finalized  rules 
implementing  stress 
the  Federal  Reserve 
U.S.  banking  firms  –  particularly  the  probability  of  failure  of  the  largest,  most  complex 
U.S. banking firms. 
In  October  2012, 
testing 
requirements under section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act. Consistent with the statute, the rules 
require annual supervisory stress tests for bank holding companies with $50 billion or more 
in  assets  and  any  nonbank  financial  companies  designated  by  the  Financial  Stability 
Oversight Council (Council). The rules also require company-run stress tests for a broader 
set of regulated financial firms that have $10 billion or more in assets. The new Dodd-Frank 
Act  supervisory  stress  test  requirements  are  generally  consistent  with the  stress  tests  that 
the Federal Reserve has been conducting on the largest U.S. bank holding companies since 
the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program in the spring of 2009. The stress tests allow 
supervisors  to  assess  whether  firms  have  enough  capital  to  weather  a  severe  economic 
downturn  and  contribute  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  ability  to  make  assessments  of  the 
resilience of the U.S. banking system under adverse economic scenarios. The stress tests 
are an integral part of our capital plan requirement, which provides a structured way to make 
horizontal evaluations of the capital planning abilities of large banking firms. 
The  Federal  Reserve  also  issued  in  December  of  last  year  a  proposal  to  implement 
enhanced prudential standards and early remediation requirements for foreign banks under 
sections 165 and 166 of the Dodd-Frank Act. The proposal is generally consistent with the 
set of standards previously proposed for large U.S. bank holding companies. The proposal 
generally  would  require  foreign  banks  with  a  large  U.S.  presence  to  organize  their  U.S. 
subsidiaries under a single intermediate holding company that would serve as a platform for 
consistent  supervision  and  regulation.  The  U.S.  intermediate  holding  companies  of  foreign 
banks would be subject to the same risk-based capital and leverage requirements as U.S. 
bank  holding  companies.  In  addition,  U.S.  intermediate  holding  companies  and  the  U.S. 
branches  and  agencies  of  foreign  banks  with  a  large  U.S.  presence  would  be  required  to 
meet liquidity requirements similar to those applicable to large U.S. bank holding companies. 
The  proposals  respond  to  fundamental  changes  in  the  scope  and  scale  of  foreign  bank 
activities in the United States in the last fifteen years. They would increase the resiliency and 
resolvability of the U.S. operations of foreign banks, help protect U.S. financial stability, and 
promote  competitive  equity  for  all  large  banking  firms  operating  in  the  United  States.  The 
comment period for this proposal closes at the end of March. 
Priorities for 2013 
The Federal Reserve’s supervisory and regulatory program in 2013 will concentrate on four 
tasks:  (1) continuing  key  Dodd-Frank  Act  and  Basel  III  regulatory  implementation  work; 
(2) further  developing  systematic  supervision  of  large  banking  firms;  (3) improving  the 
resolvability  of  large  banking  firms;  and  (4) reducing  systemic  risk  in  the  shadow  banking 
system. 
Carrying forward the key Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III regulatory implementation work 
Capital,  Liquidity,  and  Other  Prudential  Requirements  for  Large  Banking  Firms.  Given  the 
centrality  of  strong  capital  standards,  a  top  priority  this  year  will  be  to  update  the  bank 
regulatory capital framework with a final rule implementing Basel III and the updated rules for 
standardized risk-weighted capital requirements. The banking agencies have received more 
than 2,000 comments on the Basel III capital proposal. Many of the comments have been 
directed  at  certain  features  of  the  proposed  rule  considered  especially  troubling  by 
community  and  smaller  regional  banks,  such  as  the  new  standardized  risk  weights  for 
mortgages  and  the  treatment  of  unrealized  gains  and  losses  on  certain  debt  securities. 
These criticisms underscore the difficulty in fashioning standardized requirements applicable 
to all banks that balance risk sensitivity with the need to avoid excessive complexity. Here, 
though,  I  think  there  is a  widespread  view  that  the  proposed  rule  erred  on  the  side  of  too 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
much  complexity.  The  three  banking  agencies  are  carefully  considering  these  and  all 
comments received on the proposal and hope to finalize the rulemaking this spring. 
The  Federal  Reserve  also  intends  to  work  this  year  toward  finalization  of  its  proposals  to 
implement the enhanced prudential standards and early remediation requirements for large 
banking firms under sections 165 and 166 of the Dodd-Frank Act. As part of this process, we 
intend to conduct shortly a quantitative impact study of the single-counterparty credit limits 
element  of  the  proposal.  Once  finalized,  these  comprehensive  standards  will  represent  a 
core  part  of  the  new  regulatory  framework  that  mitigates  risks  posed  by  systemically 
important  financial  firms  and  offsets  any  benefits  that  these  firms  may  gain  from  being 
perceived as “too big to fail.” 
We also anticipate issuing notices of some important proposed rulemakings this year. The 
Federal  Reserve  will  be  working  to  propose  a  risk-based  capital  surcharge  applicable  to 
systemically  important  banking  firms.  This  rulemaking  will  implement  for  U.S.  firms  the 
approach  to  a  systemic  surcharge  developed  by  the  Basel  Committee,  which  varies  in 
magnitude based on the measure of each firm’s systemic footprint. Following the passage of 
the Dodd-Frank Act, which called for enhanced capital standards for systemically important 
firms, the Federal Reserve joined with some other key regulators from around the world in 
successfully urging the Basel Committee to adopt a requirement of this sort for all firms of 
global systemic importance. 
Another  proposed  rulemaking  will  cover  implementation  by  the  three  federal  banking 
agencies  of  the  recently  completed  Basel  III  quantitative  liquidity  requirements  for  large 
global banks. The financial crisis exposed defects in the liquidity risk management of large 
financial firms, especially those which relied heavily on short-term wholesale funding. These 
new requirements include the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR), which is designed to ensure that 
a firm has a sufficient amount of high quality liquid assets to withstand a severe standardized 
liquidity  shock  over  a  30-day  period.  The  Federal  Reserve  expects  that  the  U.S.  banking 
agencies will issue a proposal in 2013 to implement the LCR for large U.S. banking firms. 
The  Basel  III  liquidity  standards  should  materially  improve  the  liquidity  risk  profiles  of 
internationally  active  banks  and  will  serve  as  a  key  element  of  the  enhanced  liquidity 
standards required under the Dodd-Frank Act. 
Volcker  Rule,  Swaps  Push-out,  and  Risk  Retention.  Section  619  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act, 
known as the “Volcker rule,” generally prohibits a banking entity from engaging in proprietary 
trading or acquiring an ownership interest in, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with 
a hedge fund or private equity fund. In October 2011, the federal banking agencies and the 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  sought  public  comment  on  a  proposal  to implement 
the  Volcker  rule.  The  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  subsequently  issued  a 
substantially  similar  proposal.  The  rulemaking  agencies  have  spent  the  past  year  carefully 
analyzing  the  nearly  19,000  public  comments  on  the  proposal  and  have  made  significant 
progress in crafting a final rule that is faithful to the language of the statute and maximizes 
bank  safety  and  soundness  and  financial  stability  at  the  least  cost  to  the  liquidity  of  the 
financial markets, credit availability, and economic growth. 
Section  716  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  generally  prohibits  the  provision  of  federal  assistance, 
such as FDIC deposit insurance or Federal Reserve discount window credit, to swap dealers 
and major swap participants. The Federal Reserve is currently working with the OCC and the 
FDIC  to  develop  a  proposed  rule  that  would  provide  clarity  on  how  and  when  the 
section 716 requirements  would  apply  to  U.S.  insured  depository  institutions  and  their 
affiliates  and  to  U.S.  branches  of  foreign  banks.  We  expect  to  issue  guidance  on  the 
implementation of section 716 before the July 21, 2013, effective date of the provision. 
To  implement  the  risk  retention  requirements  in  section 941  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  the 
Federal  Reserve,  along  with  other  federal  regulatory  agencies,  issued  in  March  2011  a 
proposal that generally would force securitization sponsors to retain at least 5 percent of the 
credit  risk  of  the  assets  underlying  a  securitization.  The  agencies  have  reviewed  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
substantial volume of comments on the proposal and the definition of a qualified mortgage in 
the recent final “ability-to-pay” rule of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). As 
you know, the CFPB’s definition of qualified mortgage serves as the floor for the definition of 
exempt  qualified  residential  mortgages  in  the  risk  retention  framework.  The  agencies  are 
working  closely  together  to  determine  next  steps  in  the  risk  retention  rulemaking  process, 
with a view toward crafting a definition of a qualified residential mortgage that is consistent 
with  the  language  and  purposes  of  the  statute  and  helps  ensure  a  resilient  market  for 
private-label mortgage-backed securities. 
Improving systematic supervision of large banking firms 
Given the risks to financial stability exposed by the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has 
reoriented its supervisory focus to look more broadly at systemic risks and has strengthened 
its micro-prudential supervision of large, complex banking firms. Within the Federal Reserve, 
the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) was set up to centralize 
the supervision of large banking firms and to facilitate the execution of horizontal, cross-firm 
analysis of such firms on a consistent basis. The LISCC includes senior staff from various 
divisions of the Board and from the Reserve Banks. It fosters interdisciplinary coordination, 
using  quantitative  methods  to  evaluate  each  firm  individually,  relative  to  other  large  firms, 
and as part of the financial system as a whole. 
One  major  supervisory  exercise  conducted  by  the  LISCC  each  year  is  a  Comprehensive 
Capital  Analysis  and  Review  (CCAR)  of  the  largest  U.S.  banking  firms.1  Building  on 
supervisory work coming out of the crisis, CCAR was established to ensure that each of the 
largest  U.S.  bank  holding  companies  (1) has  rigorous,  forward-looking  capital  planning 
processes that effectively account for the unique risks of the firm and (2) maintains sufficient 
capital  to  continue  operations  throughout  times  of  economic  and  financial  stress.  CCAR, 
which uses the annual stress test as a key input, enables the Federal Reserve to make a 
coordinated,  horizontal  assessment  of  the  resilience  and  capital  planning  abilities  of  the 
largest banking firms and, in doing so, creates closer linkage between micro-prudential and 
macro-prudential  supervision.  Large  bank  supervision  at  the  Federal  Reserve  will  include 
more of these systematic, horizontal exercises. 
Improving the resolvability of large banking firms 
One  important  goal  of  post-crisis  financial  reform  has  been  to  counter  too-big-to-fail 
perceptions by reducing the anticipated damage to the financial system and economy from 
the  failure  of  a  major  financial  firm.  To  this  end,  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  created  the  Orderly 
Liquidation Authority (OLA), a mechanism designed to improve the prospects for an orderly 
resolution  of  a  systemic  financial  firm,  and  required  all  large  bank  holding  companies  to 
develop, and submit to supervisors, resolution plans. Certain other countries that are home 
to  large,  globally  active  banking  firms  are  working  along  roughly  parallel  lines.  The  Basel 
Committee  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  have  devoted  considerable  attention  to  the 
orderly resolution objective by developing new standards for statutory resolution frameworks, 
firm-specific resolution planning, and cross-border cooperation. Although much work remains 
to be done by all countries, the Dodd-Frank Act reforms have generally put the United States 
ahead of its global peers on the resolution front. 
Since the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, the FDIC has been developing a single-point-of-
entry  strategy  for  resolving  systemic  financial  firms  under  the  OLA.  As  explained  by  the 
FDIC, this strategy is intended to effect a creditor-funded holding company recapitalization of 
the failed financial firm, in which the critical operations of the firm continue, but shareholders 
                                                 
1   For more information, see www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/ccar.htm. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and  unsecured  creditors  absorb  the  losses,  culpable  management  is  removed,  and 
taxpayers  are  protected.  Key  to  the  ability  of  the  FDIC  to  execute  this  approach  is  the 
availability  of  sufficient  amounts  of  unsecured  long-term  debt  to  supplement  equity  in 
providing loss absorption in a failed firm. In consultation with the FDIC, the Federal Reserve 
is  considering  the  merits  of  a  regulatory  requirement  that  the  largest,  most  complex  U.S. 
banking  firms  maintain  a  minimum  amount  of  long-term  unsecured  debt.  A  minimum 
long-term  debt  requirement  could  lend  greater  confidence  that  the  combination  of  equity 
owners and long-term debt holders would be sufficient to bear all losses at the consolidated 
firm, thereby counteracting the moral hazard associated with taxpayer bailouts while avoiding 
disorderly failures. 
Reducing systemic risk in the shadow banking system 
Most  of  the  reforms  I  have  discussed  are  aimed  at  addressing  systemic  risk  posed  by 
regulated banking organizations, and all involve action the Federal Reserve can take under 
its current authorities. Important as these measures are, however, it is worth recalling that 
the  trigger  for  the  acute  phase  of  the  financial  crisis  was  the  rapid  unwinding  of  large 
amounts  of  short-term  funding  that  had  been  made  available  to  firms  not  subject  to 
consolidated  prudential  supervision.  Today,  although  some  of  the  most  fragile  investment 
vehicles and instruments that were involved in the pre-crisis shadow banking system have 
disappeared,  non-deposit  short-term  funding  remains  significant.  In  some  instances  it 
involves  prudentially  regulated  firms,  directly  or  indirectly.  In  others  it  does  not.  The  key 
condition of the so-called “shadow banking system” that makes it of systemic concern is its 
susceptibility to destabilizing funding runs, something that is more likely when the recipients 
of the short-term funding are highly leveraged, engage in substantial maturity transformation, 
or both. 
Many of the key issues related to shadow banking and their potential solutions are still being 
debated  domestically  and  internationally.  U.S.  and  global  regulators  need  to  take  a  hard, 
comprehensive look at the systemic risks present in wholesale short-term funding markets. 
Analysis of the appropriate ways to address these vulnerabilities continues as a priority this 
year  for  the  Federal  Reserve.  In  the  short  term,  though,  there  are  several  key  steps  that 
should  be  taken  with  respect  to  shadow  banking  to  improve  the  resilience  of  our  financial 
system. 
First,  the  regulatory  and  public  transparency  of  shadow  banking  markets,  especially 
securities financing transactions, should be increased. Second, additional measures should 
be  taken  to  reduce  the  risk  of  runs  on  money  market  mutual  funds.  The  Council  recently 
proposed a set of serious reform options to address the structural vulnerabilities in money 
market mutual funds. 
Third,  we  should  continue  to  push  the  private  sector  to  reduce  the  risks  in  the  settlement 
process for tri-party repurchase agreements. Although an industry-led task force made some 
progress on these issues, the Federal Reserve concluded that important problems were not 
likely to be successfully addressed in this process and has been using supervisory authority 
over the past year to press for further and faster action by the clearing banks and the dealer 
affiliates of bank holding companies.2  The amount of intraday credit being provided by the 
clearing banks in the tri-party repo market has been reduced and is scheduled to be reduced 
much further in the coming years as a result of these efforts. But vulnerabilities in this market 
remain  a  concern,  and  addressing  these  vulnerabilities  will  require  the  cooperation  of  the 
broad array of participants in this market and their federal regulators. The Federal Reserve 
will continue to report to Congress and publicly on progress made to address the risks in the 
tri-party repo market. 
                                                 
2   For additional information, see www.newyorkfed.org/banking/tpr_infr_reform.html 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In addition to these concrete steps to address concrete problems, regulators must continue 
to closely monitor the shadow banking sector and be wary of signs that excessive leverage 
and maturity transformation are developing outside of the banking system. 
Conclusion 
The financial regulatory architecture is stronger today than it was in the years leading up to 
the crisis, but considerable work remains to complete implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act 
and  the  post-crisis  global  financial  reform  program.  Over  the  coming  year,  the  Federal 
Reserve will be working with other U.S. financial regulatory agencies, and with foreign central 
banks  and  regulators,  to  propose  and  finalize  a  number  of  ongoing  initiatives.  In  this 
endeavor, our goal is to preserve financial stability at the least cost to credit availability and 
economic  growth.  We  are  focused  on  the  monitoring  of  emerging  systemic  risks, reducing 
the  probability  of  failure  of  systemic  financial  firms,  improving  the  resolvability  of  systemic 
financial firms, and building up buffers throughout the financial system to enable the system 
to absorb shocks. 
As we take this work forward, it is important to remember that preventing a financial crisis is 
not an end in itself. Financial crises are profoundly debilitating to the economic well-being of 
the nation. 
Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
