Barry Whiteside: Business confidence and resilience in Fiji’s economy 
Address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the re-opening of 
BSP Bank, Nadi, 21 February 2013. 
 Mr. Ian Clyne, Bank South Pacific Group Chief Executive Officer 
Mr. Kevin McCarthy, Bank South Pacific Fiji Country Manager 
Management and Staff of Bank South Pacific Fiji 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory Comments 
Bula vinaka, a very good evening and a belated happy new year to you all! 
Let me first thank Kevin for his kind invitation to this “reopening” ceremony. 
I am pleased to be officiating at yet another unveiling of a BSP premises. 
While this change may have been out of necessity, we see many other financial institutions 
and businesses throughout the country have also been refurbishing and upgrading premises 
and systems in recent times. This is testament to a great turnaround in business confidence 
across  Fiji.  These  events  are  investments  and  therefore  a  great  vote  of  confidence  in  the 
locality, the industry and the economy. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  evening’s  event  bears  a  special  significance.  We  stand  in 
premises that were underwater not so long ago. The whole country has always marveled at 
the  resilience  and  tenacity  of  the  people  of  the  West,  having  faced  the  brunt  of  three 
devastating  floods  in  four  years.  And  only  just  recently  you  were  hit  by  the  devastating 
Cyclone Evan. 
So  many  individuals  and  businesses  have  had  to  expend  time,  energy  and  resources  in 
rebuilding their livelihoods. They could have easily said “enough” at some stage and pulled 
up their “roots” and moved on. However, their roots have proven to be very deep. There is 
strong  faith  in  this  town  of  Nadi  to  bounce  back  and  today  we  are  witnessing  BSP’s  own 
efforts  at  this.  No  doubt  there  are  many  others  in  this  town  and  across  the  West.  My 
admiration goes out to all of you. 
Natural disasters always present some of the greatest risks to our country and economy. Our 
“smallness”  further  accentuates  this  threat.  The  resilience,  therefore,  of  “weathering  the 
storm” and getting up again quickly after being knocked down, is something so natural to us. 
Today we all applaud BSP’s efforts in returning to Nadi, might I add, even better than before. 
The BSP Group 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Bank South Pacific is no longer a newcomer in Fiji, and no longer the 
“new kid on the block”. That title belongs to another bank now. You have adjusted well and in 
line with the economic conditions faced here. You continue to make significant contributions 
to Fiji’s financial landscape in partnership with a wide group of stakeholders. 
I  read  recently  that  BSP  won  the  Connected  World  Forum  Award  for  the  Best  Bank-led 
Mobile  Money  Programme  at  the  Mobile  Money  Global  Summit  and  Expo  in  Dubai.  The 
Connected World Awards celebrate the very best in Mobile Money with specific emphasis on 
innovation & service. Congratulations are definitely in order. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Innovation is definitely a hallmark of Bank South Pacific’s services being provided across Fiji 
and we are fully appreciative of your new technology rollouts. You were the first bank in Fiji 
to introduce SMS Banking and you rightly boast the largest network of ATMs and wireless 
EFTPOS machines across the country. 
I note that this refurbished branch has revamped its customer service areas. Understandably 
there has been a migration to the second floor, but also there is a new Foreign Exchange 
Bureau  accessible  to  the  street.  This  is  no  doubt  a  natural  response  to  the  tourist  traffic 
through Nadi on a daily basis. 
You have all now had an opportunity to look at our new flora and fauna series of notes and 
coins, which have been in circulation since the 2nd January. We hope that the Fiji public will 
be proud of their new currency and that it will continue to be a source of pride for all Fijians 
for a long time. We at the Reserve Bank trust that the images on our currency will quickly 
become household names and provide instant recognition of our heritage and of the beauty 
that  surrounds  us  here  in  Fiji.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  continue  to  roll  out  its  awareness 
campaigns over the next several months, including to schools. 
Logistically, in terms of issuance of our new currency, all the coins and the $10, $20, $50 and 
$100 notes commenced issuing on the 2nd January. However there will be a co-circulation 
period  with  most  of  the  old  design currency  notes  up  to  December  of  this  year  as  we  run 
down  stocks.  This  co-circulation  will  not  apply  to  the  old  $2  and  $5  notes.  The  old  design 
coins will remain in circulation, so for those who are already missing the Queen you may take 
some comfort in this. 
The  new  $5  polymer  or  “plastic”  note  will  be  issued  once  we  have  withdrawn  the  existing 
$2 notes from circulation. This is because both notes are green and we do not want to create 
undue confusion. The $2 note withdrawal exercise is expected to take up to three months so 
we should see the first new $5 notes in circulation in April. 
Economic update 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Reserve  Bank  remains  bullish  on  our  economic  prospects  and 
supports the notion underpinning the 2013 National Budget that the fundamentals are being 
laid and the best is yet to come. Throughout 2012 domestic demand had been buoyant and 
investment continued to pick up. As a result, our labour market is finding some traction. 
However we are always prone to the threat of natural disasters and Cyclone Evan showed 
that we must not be complacent. There also continue to be risks on the external front with the 
recent downward revisions in global growth. 
Despite  the  downside  risks  the  Reserve  Bank’s  twin  objectives  of  low  inflation  and  a 
comfortable level of foreign reserves presently remain intact. Inflation fell to 1.5 percent in 
December then blipped upwards to 3.2 percent in January following Cyclone Evan. Our end 
year  expectation  is  around  3  percent.  Foreign  reserves  are  currently  at  $1.6  billion  or 
sufficient to pay for just under 5 months of imports of goods and services. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I reiterate that I enjoy being a part of these functions as they come 
on the back of increased investment and confidence in the country and its future. 
Thank you again Kevin for the invitation to be here this evening and I take this opportunity to 
wish you and your families a Prosperous New Year. 
Official opening 
I  now  have  much  pleasure  in  declaring  the  refurbished  Bank  South  Pacific,  Nadi  Branch, 
open. 
Vinaka vaka levu. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
