Mario Draghi: Unveiling of the 5 euro banknote of the new Europa series 
Short  address  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Archaeological Museum, Frankfurt am Main, 10 January 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I too would like to warmly welcome you to today’s event and thank you for having accepted 
our invitation. In particular, I would like to thank you, Mr Wamers, for your kind words. I am 
very pleased that you have made available this special setting of the Archaeological Museum 
for  the  unveiling  of  the new  5  euro  banknote  and  for  the  hosting  of  the  “New  Face  of  the 
Euro” exhibition. 
Frankfurt is one of the European Union’s financial capitals, a very international city and an 
important one for trade and finance in Germany. This is one of many reasons why Frankfurt 
has become the City of the Euro and the seat of the European Central Bank. 
This  museum,  among  its  many  treasures,  displays  items  from  classical  antiquity.  So  it  is 
quite appropriate for Europa, a figure from Greek mythology, to be on show here and for us 
to unveil the new banknote that includes her portrait. The 5 euro will be the first banknote of 
the second series of euro banknotes, the so-called “Europa” series. 
It will gradually replace the first series of euro banknotes, which was introduced on 1 January 
2002. That’s the date most people remember – it was when the euro finally became “real” for 
300 million citizens in the then 12 euro area countries. And it was one of the milestones laid 
down by the founding fathers of Economic and Monetary Union in the Treaty of Maastricht 
more than 20 years ago. 
Over  the  years,  euro  banknotes  have  become  the  most  visible  symbol  of  European 
integration. The single currency, the euro, was conceived as a key step towards that goal. 
Despite the challenges facing the euro area, progress was made in 2012 and I am confident 
that  2013  will  bring  a  deepening  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  and  will  strengthen 
European integration. 
The ECB plays a key role in bringing the countries of Europe closer together. Besides our 
core function and mandate to guarantee price stability in the euro area as a whole, one of our 
tasks is to develop what we could call “ our product”, the euro banknotes. The new series of 
banknotes will continue to reflect the unity and diversity of our continent. The word “euro” is 
now  written  in  the  Cyrillic  as  well  as  in  the  Latin  and  Greek  alphabets. Today,  332 million 
people  in  17  countries  use  euro  banknotes  every  day.  And  worldwide,  the  value  of  euro 
banknotes  circulating  is roughly  the  same  as that  of  US  dollar  bills.  Last month  that  value 
was almost 913 billion euro, with around one-quarter of that value circulating outside the euro 
area,  notably  in  its  neighbouring  regions.  The  euro  is  in  fact  being  increasingly  used  as  a 
global  currency  and  its  banknotes  have  been  circulating  inside  and  outside  Europe  with 
ease. 
With 15.7 billion of them in circulation, euro banknotes are a success story. However, we do 
not rest on our laurels. The ECB strives to ensure that the banknotes are steadily developed 
and  enhanced,  and  are  “state  of  the  art”  in  terms  of  security  and  technology.  The  Europa 
series will be “smarter” and even more secure than the current series. 
The new 5 euro banknote will be issued throughout the euro area as of 2 May this year. For 
the  next  two  months  it  will  be  on  display  here  as  part  of  the  “New  Face  of  the  Euro” 
exhibition. The exhibition also includes the vase from which the portrait of Europa was taken. 
I  would  like  to  thank  very  much  the  Louvre  museum  in  Paris  for  the  loan  of  this  ancient 
artefact, which is over 2,000 years old. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Let me also express on this occasion our thanks to Mr Gerstetter, the designer of the Europa 
series, who is with us today. 
Without further ado, let me now sign the first 5 euro note of the Europa series.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
