Duvvuri Subbarao: Central banking in emerging economies – emerging 
challenges 
Speech by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the European 
Economics and Financial Centre, London, 17 July 2013. 
 First  of  all,  my  thanks  to  the  European  Economics  and  Financial  Centre  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  the 
Distinguished Speakers Seminar. It is an honour to which attach a lot of value. 
Central banks – triumph and tribulation 
2. 
In  the  years  before  the  crisis,  central  bankers  were  a  triumphant  lot.  The  Great 
Moderation  that  they  took  credit  for  brought  steady  growth  and  low  inflation  in  advanced 
economies,  and  rapid  growth  and  stable  inflation  in  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs). 
This benign macroeconomic environment generated a consensus around the view that the 
best practice in central banking was the pursuit of a single objective (price stability) by means 
of a single instrument (the short-term policy interest rate). Central bankers thought they had 
discovered the holy grail. 
3. 
It turns out they had declared victory too soon. In the event, the crisis challenged the 
old theology of single target central banking. It also showed up the failure of central banks to 
correct for the rapidly growing global imbalances and to keep regulation in pace with financial 
innovation.  Indeed,  some  even  argue  that  the  extended  period  of  steady  growth  and  low 
inflation blindsided central banks from seeing the festering financial instability brewing in the 
underbelly of the global financial system. 
4. 
The crisis has unleashed a vigorous debate on what lessons central banks should 
take away from the crisis, and how they should respond to them. This debate has thrown up 
some important questions: (i) Should central banks persist with pure inflation targeting? (ii) If 
not, should their objective function also include real sector variables? (iii) What is the role of 
central banks in preventing asset price bubbles? (iv) What should be their responsibility in 
regard  to  financial  stability?  (v)  Are  there  synergies  in  the  central  bank  being  also  the 
regulator  and  supervisor  of  banks? (vi) Will  responsibility  for financial  stability  compromise 
their  autonomy?  (vii) What  should  be  the  institutional  arrangement for  coordination  among 
regulators and the government? 
5. 
That indeed is a long list of questions. Even as there are no definitive answers yet, 
several advanced economy governments have gone ahead with redesigning their regulatory 
architectures, in the process redefining the mandates of their central banks. 
Central banking in EMEs 
6. 
Are central banks in EMEs struggling with the same questions? In a broad sense 
yes,  although  both  the  questions  and  answers  are  slightly  different  in  their  case.  To 
understand why, a bit of context is necessary. 
7. 
Central banks in EMEs have historically differed from the advanced economy central 
bank  model  in  an  important  way.  Their  mandates  have  typically  extended  beyond  price 
stability  to  supporting  growth  and  to  external  sector  management.  They  also  have 
responsibility, in varying forms and degrees, for financial stability. In addition, many of them 
have  a  development  mandate  –  of  building  institutions,  deepening  financial  markets, 
modernizing financial sector infrastructures and furthering financial inclusion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Think global, act local 
8. 
Given  this  difference,  there  was  no  settled  view  in  EMEs  about  the  optimal 
institutional design for their central banks. In the years before the crisis, there was a growing 
view that the way forward for EME central banks lay in embracing the minimalist model of the 
advanced economy central bank. Now, with that minimalist model itself unravelling, there is a 
rethink among EMEs on whether that is the best way forward. They are sensitive to the fact 
that the issues in the global debate are relevant to them; but they also realize that they have 
to adapt the lessons of the crisis to their specific macroeconomic and institutional contexts. 
9. 
What  are  the  challenges  confronting  EME  central  banks  as  they  embark  on  this 
task?  What  are  the  emerging  issues?  This  is  what  I  want  to  focus  on.  In  particular,  I  will 
address five specific issues. 
Treading the growth-inflation knife-edge 
I. 
10. 
Managing the growth-inflation balance is a particularly complex challenge in EMEs 
for a number of reasons. By far the most important is the fact that in EMEs, supply shocks, 
especially in the food and fuel sectors, have historically been important drivers of inflation. 
How should monetary policy respond to such supply shock driven episodes of inflation? 
11. 
Text book economics tells us that if the supply shock is temporary, monetary policy 
need not react to it; on the other hand, if the supply shock is structural in nature, it can lead 
to generalized inflation – in the first round by the higher input costs, and in the second round 
through its impact on inflation expectations and wage bargaining. In the presence of excess 
demand  relative  to  supply,  the  generalization  of  inflation  could  be  rapid  unless  prevented 
through  a  forward  looking  anti-inflationary  monetary  policy  stance.  In  short,  when  supply 
shocks impact the core component of inflation, monetary policy should respond. Determining 
whether the supply shock is temporary or structural is a frequent challenge that EME central 
banks confront. There is a possibility here of both type I and type II errors1, and either type of 
error can be costly in terms of foregone growth and loss of welfare. 
12. 
Another important reason why managing the growth-inflation balance in EMEs is a 
bigger challenge is because of their relatively higher poverty levels. Inflation, as we all know, 
is a regressive tax, and it hurts the poor the most. On the other hand, the most effective way 
of  reducing  poverty  is  through  higher  growth.  But  higher  growth  is  sustainable  only  in  an 
environment  of  price  stability.  Drawing  the  right  balance  between  combating  inflation  and 
supporting growth is a complex challenge that EME central banks face. 
13. 
Estimating the potential output is another factor that complicates the management of 
the growth-inflation  balance  in  EMEs.  This  is  a difficult task  everywhere,  but  is  particularly 
difficult in EMEs because of large under-utilized capacity coexisting with supply constraints. 
Consequently, it is difficult to get an accurate estimate of the output gap and of the excess 
demand embodied in it, making the challenge of monetary policy calibration that much more 
complex. 
14. 
I  could  go  on  with  several  other  examples  to  illustrate  how  the  growth-inflation 
dynamics  in  EMEs  are  structurally  and  analytically  different  from  those  in  advanced 
economies. The short point is that EME central banks have to tread the growth-inflation knife 
edge  with  much  greater  judgement  and  caution  than  advanced  economy  central  banks 
because of the several known unknowns and many unknown unknowns. 
                                                
1   Type 1: No monetary policy response to a shock that turns out to be structural. Type 2: Aggressive monetary 
policy response to a shock that turns out to be temporary. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Central banking in a globalizing world managing the impossible trinity 
Let  me  move  on  to  the  second  issue,  about  how  globalization  has  complicated 
II. 
15. 
macroeconomic management for EME central banks, as indeed demonstrated by the crisis. 
As  the  crisis  erupted,  it  spread  ferociously  from  the  sub-prime  US  markets  to 
16. 
financial  markets  around  the  world,  demonstrating  the  interconnectedness  of  national 
financial  systems  and  the  spillover  impact  of  external  developments  on  domestic  policy 
actions.  Importantly,  central  banks  found  that  sentiment  and  confidence  were  remarkably 
correlated across countries. 
17. 
In a globalizing world, external developments interact with the domestic economy in 
complex,  uncertain,  and  even  capricious  ways.  EME  central  banks  have  to  deepen  their 
understanding  of  these  interactions.  Some  of  the  channels  through  which  cross-border 
transmission occurs are quite familiar – global prices, including commodity price movements; 
synchronization  of  business  cycles;  capital  flows;  strong  comovement  of  asset  prices; 
exchange  rates  of  key  international  currencies;  and  interest  rate  policies  of  central  banks. 
Some of the transmission channels are less familiar. For example, the crisis has shown that 
even  differences  in  regulatory  regimes  can  trigger  arbitrage-based  action  and  dilute  the 
efficacy of domestic policies. 
Impossible trinity 
18. 
The  best  way  to  understand  the  challenge  of  monetary  policy  formulation  in  a 
globalizing  world  is  through  the  “impossible  trinity”  trilemma.  This  trilemma  asserts  that  a 
country  cannot  simultaneously  maintain  all  three  policy  goals  of  free  capital  flows,  a  fixed 
exchange rate and an independent monetary policy. 
19. 
Given the “impossible trinity” trilemma, countries have made different choices. The 
most common choice, typical across advanced economies, is to give up on a fixed exchange 
rate so as to run an open economy with an independent monetary policy. On the other hand, 
economies that adopt a hard peg give up on the independence of monetary policy. Examples 
include the currency boards set up by Hong Kong and, for a time, Argentina. 
20. 
In  contrast  to  advanced  economies  which  opt  for  corner  solutions,  emerging 
economies here typically opted for middle solutions, giving up on some flexibility on each of 
the variables to maximize overall macroeconomic advantage. 
India’s approach to the impossible trinity 
21. 
In India too, we have opted for a middle solution on the “impossible trinity” whose 
contours are the following: (i) We let our exchange rate be largely market determined, but 
intervene  in  the  market  to  smooth  excess  volatility  and/or  to  prevent  disruptions  to 
macroeconomic stability; (ii) Our capital account is only partly open; while foreigners enjoy 
mostly unfettered access to our equity markets, access to debt markets is restricted; there 
are  limits  to  the  quantum  of  funds  resident  corporates  and  individuals  can  take  out  for 
investment abroad, but the limits are quite liberal; and (iii) Because of the liberalization on the 
exchange rate and capital account fronts, some monetary policy independence is forfeited. 
What the middle solution also implies is that we have to guard on all the three fronts with the 
relative emphasis across the three pillars shifting according to our macroeconomic situation. 
Managing capital flows 
22. 
What  does  the  impossible  trinity  mean  in  practical  terms?  Let  us  examine  this  in 
terms  of  capital  flows.  EMEs,  especially  those  with  current  account  deficits  (CAD),  need 
capital flows. In an ideal world, they will want capital flows just about sufficient to finance their 
CADs;  also  they  will  typically  prefer  equity flows  over  debt flows  and  long term flows  over 
short  term  flows.  But  in  the  real  world,  countries  seldom  find  themselves  in  such  a  sweet 
spot; capital flows are either too much or too little. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
23. 
Not only are capital flows too much or too little, they are also volatile. They respond 
to  both  push  and  pull  factors.  The  important  push  factors  are  the  monetary  stance  of 
advanced economy central banks which determines the liquidity in the global system and the 
need of investors for asset diversification. The pull factors that have influenced capital flows 
are  the  promise  of  growth  in  EMEs,  their  stable  and  credible  policy  environments  and 
improved governance. 
24. 
Over  the  last  decade,  EMEs  have  had  to  contend  with  both  volatile  inflows  and 
outflows,  with  the  problem  often  reversing  direction  rather  abruptly.  Let me  sketch  this  out 
briefly  to  give  you  a  flavor  of  the  challenge  that  EMEs  confront  in  managing  their  capital 
accounts. 
25. 
The  years  before  the  crisis  –  the  period  of  the  Great  Moderation  –  saw  EMEs 
receiving large capital inflows, much more than they needed. This was driven by both push 
and pull factors. EME currencies appreciated sharply, out of line with fundamentals, denting 
their competitiveness and pressuring asset prices. EMEs responded to this surge either by 
capital controls or intervention in the forex market or both. Experience shows that no matter 
how EMEs responded, no option was totally benign. 
26. 
The capital inflow problem turned abruptly into an outflow problem with the outbreak 
of  the  financial  crisis  in  September  2008.  Unnerved  by  the  extreme  uncertainty,  global 
investors  fled  from  emerging  economies  to  return  to  safe  havens.  The  sudden  exit  put 
downward  pressure  on  their  currencies,  and  this  time  round  they  had  to  intervene  in  the 
foreign exchange market to contain the depreciation of the exchange rates. 
27. 
The  capital  flow  problem  has  become  more  complex  in  recent  years  not  only 
because of its intensity but also because of its increased volatility. The quantitative easing 
policies of advanced economy central banks have left the global system awash with liquidity. 
Much of it has flown into EMEs, posing the familiar problem of capital surges. But because 
the  global  system  has  switched  between  risk-on  and  risk-off  rather  frequently  and  swiftly, 
EMEs have also become vulnerable to sudden stops and reversal of capital flows. 
28. 
I have gone at length to describe the developments over the last nearly ten years to 
give  a  flavour  of  the  problem  EME  central  banks  face  on  account  of  global  uncertainties. 
What  this  demonstrates  is  that  globalization  is  a  powerful  phenomenon.  It  offers  immense 
opportunities, but also poses formidable challenges. The challenge for EMEs is to learn to 
maximize  the  benefits  and  minimize  the  costs  of  globalization.  In  particular,  EME  central 
banks have to learn to factor in global spillovers into their domestic policies. 
Are EMEs seeing a return of fiscal dominance of monetary policy? 
The third issue I want to address in the context of emerging economy central banks 
III. 
29. 
is whether they are seeing a return of fiscal dominance of monetary policy. 
30. 
This question has surfaced with vigour in the context of the euro zone crisis. The 
ECB claims that its bond purchase programme is aimed at restoring liquidity and improving 
monetary transmission. But many analysts believe that this is a thinly veiled attempt to shore 
up  sovereign  borrowing  and  that  the  ECB  is  actually  acquiescing  in  fiscal  dominance. 
Although this tension between the central bank mandate and sovereign debt sustainability is 
playing out in Europe, it is not new; nor is it unique to Europe. 
The  eighty  odd  years  since  the  Great  Depression  saw  a  famous  rivalry  between 
31. 
monetary  and  fiscal  policy  for  dominance.  For  at  least  three  decades  after  the  Great 
Depression,  Keynes’  intellectual  legacy  ruled;  governments  borrowed  as  much  as  they 
wanted and at the price they wanted without worrying about the implications of debt build-up, 
and central banks had willy-nilly acquiesced in this profligacy. 
32. 
This trend began to reverse as a result of very influential work during the 1960s by 
Milton  Friedman  and  others  arguing  that  inflation  is  a  monetary  phenomenon  always  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
everywhere,  and  that  output  gains  from  debt  financed  public  expenditure  will  not  only  be 
temporary,  but  also  eventually  inflationary.  Supportive  evidence  for  this  came  from  the 
repeated  episodes  of  stagflation  during  the  1970s,  which  saw  a  baffling  combination  of 
unemployment  and  inflation.  The  belief  that  continued  fiscal  deficits  are  clearly  not 
sustainable gained ground during the 1980s especially as countries integrated into the global 
system,  and  fiscally  irresponsible  economies  realized  that  the  world  capital  markets 
penalized them by demanding higher premia. 
33. 
The trend since the mid-1990s has been for a growing number of countries to adopt 
fiscal  rules  placing  limits  on  deficits  and/or  debt,  and  also  prohibiting  primary  financing  of 
debt  by  the  central  banks.  One  of  the  broad  outcomes  of  this  effort  has  been  that  central 
banks found themselves able to conduct monetary policy free of fiscal compulsions and in a 
predictable fiscal framework. 
34. 
dominance of monetary policy have resurfaced. 
That happy state of affairs ended in the aftermath of the crisis, and fears about fiscal 
Monetary and fiscal policies in India 
35. 
As  in  many  economies,  in  India  too,  monetary  policy  was  dominated  by  fiscal 
considerations during the 1970s and the 1980s. Large and growing fiscal deficits ended up 
being  financed  by  the  Reserve  Bank  which  ultimately  resulted  in  inflation.  Following  the 
global trend, we too put in place a fiscal responsibility legislation – the Fiscal Responsibility 
and  Budget  Management  (FRBM)  Act,  2003  –  with  ceilings  on  deficit  and  debt  ratios  and 
provisions  prohibiting  primary  financing  of  government  debt  by  the  central  bank.  The 
Government’s  commitment  to  the  FRBM  mandate  during  2003–08  afforded  the  Reserve 
Bank the necessary space to implement monetary policy aimed at low and stable inflation. 
36. 
Like elsewhere in the world, both monetary and fiscal policies were eased in India 
too  in  response  to  the  crisis.  In  particular,  this  meant  interrupting  the  fiscal  consolidation 
process  enjoined  by  the  FRBM  Act.  However,  even  as  the  crisis  started  unwinding  and 
inflation rose sharply to double-digits, the government persisted with an expansionary fiscal 
stance. 
By far the biggest concern stemming from the large fiscal deficit, especially from the 
37. 
Reserve  Bank’s  perspective,  is  that  it  adds  to  aggregate  demand  and  thereby  to  inflation 
pressures. By crowding out the private sector, the fiscal deficit could also inhibit, if not impair, 
monetary policy transmission to the private sector. Credible fiscal consolidation is, therefore, 
a necessary pre-condition for stabilizing inflation and securing non-inflationary growth. 
38. 
Over  the  last  one  year,  the  Government  embraced  fiscal  consolidation  with 
commendable resolve. The fiscal deficit for the last fiscal year (2012/13), at 4.9 per cent of 
GDP,  was  better  than  earlier  projected  and  it  clearly  enhanced  the  credibility  of  the 
Government’s current year (2013/14) fiscal deficit target of 4.8 per cent of GDP. 
39. 
Economies  will  be  best  served  if governments  ensure  that  their  central banks  are 
able  to  conduct  monetary  policy  independently  and  free  of  fiscal  compulsions.  This  will 
require, among other things, responsible and credible fiscal consolidation. 
The role of central banks in safeguarding financial stability 
Let me now move to the next issue – financial stability. Indeed, some of the most 
IV. 
40. 
forceful lessons of the crisis are in this area of financial stability. 
41. 
Note  that  the  crisis  erupted  during  a  period  of  extraordinary  price  stability  and 
macroeconomic stability. What this told us is that price stability and macroeconomic stability 
do not guarantee financial stability. We also learnt that no country is an island. Although the 
crisis originated in advanced economies, emerging economies too were affected, indeed by 
much more than they had thought possible. The contagion brought home a simple message. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In a rapidly globalizing world, national and international financial stability are interlinked. They 
are really two sides of the same coin. 
42. 
Another important lesson we learnt is that financial markets are not self correcting. 
Indeed in the pre-crisis years, a consensus was building around the view that modern risk 
management has increased the resilience of the financial sector, and that any excess would 
self correct in good time. The crisis proved that to be wrong. As we unlearnt that, we also 
learnt  some  new  lessons  –  that  it  is  difficult  to  detect  signs  of  pressure  building  up  in  the 
system in real time, that the financial sector can contain pressure for a longer time than we 
think possible, and as a consequence, when the inevitable implosion takes place, it can be 
quite disastrous, or even catastrophic. We learnt that it is difficult to predict the precise nature 
of  the  implosion.  For  example,  in  the  pre-crisis  years,  even  the  few  who  sensed  stress 
building up in the system, thought there would be a currency crisis; in the event the implosion 
took the form of a financial sector crisis. 
43. 
There were other lessons too. That a collection of rational financial institutions does 
not  necessarily  make  a  rational  financial  sector.  In  other  words,  rational  behaviour  at  the 
individual institutional level does not aggregate to collective rationality because of the fallacy 
of composition. Financial institutions are notoriously prone to herd behaviour. They have a 
strong  collective  tendency  to  over  expose  themselves  to  the  same  type  of  risk  during  an 
upturn, and become overly risk averse during a downturn which can lead the whole system 
on a downward spiral of risk aversion, market seizure and instability. 
44. 
These lessons from the crisis have triggered a vigorous debate on whether financial 
stability should be made an explicit mandate of central banks. There are powerful arguments 
for why central banks should be at the centre of safeguarding financial stability. Let me list a 
few important ones. 
(i) 
Generally, monetary policy and financial stability are mutually supportive. This inter-
dependency  between  the  two  dimensions  suggests  that  the  central  bank,  with 
inherent  responsibility 
the 
responsibility for financial stability so that it can take a holistic view of policy options 
by factoring in costs and benefits in both dimensions. 
That  the  central  bank  should  have  the  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  is 
unquestioned.  Because  banks  are  the  conduits  through  which  monetary  policy 
decisions  are  transmitted  to  the  real  economy,  it  is  synergistic  to  entrust  the 
responsibility for microprudential supervision of banks also to the central bank. And 
if the central bank is the microprudential supervisor, there is a strong case for it to 
have responsibility for regulation of systemic risk at the macro level. 
By  far  the  strongest  argument  in  favour  of  entrusting  the  financial  stability 
responsibility to the central bank is that it is unquestionably the lender of last resort 
(LoLR) for the financial system. A central bank can discharge its LoLR function more 
efficiently  if  its  mandate  extends  beyond  merely  monitoring financial  institutions  to 
taking preventive action. This becomes possible if the central bank is also in charge 
of financial stability. 
45. 
On  the  issue  of  financial  stability,  even  as  the  lessons  of  the  crisis  are  clear,  the 
policy  responses  to  those  lessons  are  not  yet  clear.  There  are  some  common  trends,  but 
there  are  also  variations  across  countries  on  the  precise  manner  in  which  they  are 
redesigning their regulatory architectures, the additional responsibilities they are assigning to 
their central banks and the coordination bodies that they are setting up. 
46. 
Are the concerns of EMEs in regard to financial stability any different from those of 
advanced  economies?  Admittedly,  financial  instability  is  costly  everywhere,  including  in 
EMEs.  Indeed,  financial  stability  is  a  necessary  pre-condition  for  securing  growth. 
Nevertheless, the cost-benefit calculus for EMEs of tighter regulation in order to safeguard 
financial  stability  can  be  quite  different from  that  of  advanced  economies. This  is  because 
for  monetary  policy,  should  also  be  entrusted 
(iii) 
(ii) 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
EMEs  are  in  a  higher  growth  phase  with  higher  credit  elasticity  of  GDP  than  advanced 
economies.  Increase  in  the  cost  of  credit  on  account  of  tighter  regulation  can  inhibit  their 
pace of growth. EMEs therefore need to strike the right balance between preventing financial 
instability and supporting growth. Experience shows that managing this challenge is more a 
question of good judgement than analytical skill. 
Both 
the  above  are  emphatic  examples  of 
Communication as a central bank policy tool opportunities and risks 
V. 
Hours after the September 2001 terrorist attacks, the US Federal Reserve put out a 
47. 
two sentence statement: “The Federal Reserve System is open and operating. The discount 
window is open to meet liquidity needs.” 
48. 
Those two seemingly banal sentences had a remarkable calming effect on the US, 
and  by  extension,  on  the  global  financial  markets.  The  “announcement  effect”  was  simply 
stunning. 
49. 
Again Mario Draghi’s famous words that the ECB will do “whatever it takes” to save 
the euro prevented, more than anything else, what many thought was an imminent collapse 
of the euro. 
50. 
the  potency  of  central  bank 
communication.  Given  this  power,  one  would  have  thought  that  central  banks  would  have 
more actively resorted to communication as a vehicle to further their policy objectives. On the 
contrary,  they  used  to  be  quite  reticent,  believing  that  their  policies  must  speak  for 
themselves, and that any overt attempt to communicate could be misleading or distortionary. 
51. 
Over the last two decades, however, this overly rigid attitude has gradually yielded 
to open and transparent communication as central banks have come to realize its positive 
impact. This shift in central bank theology from deliberate obscurity to greater transparency 
actually reflects a shift in the theory of monetary policy. Up until the early 1990s, monetary 
policy  was  strongly  influenced  by  Nobel  Laureate  Robert  Lucas’  argument  that  monetary 
policy affected real variables, like growth, only if the policy changes were unanticipated. This 
encouraged  obscurity  over  openness  and  clarity.  However,  lost  in  the  message  was  that 
monetary policy always affected nominal variables like inflation even if fully anticipated. In the 
1980s, two economists, also Nobel winners, Finn Kydland and Ed Prescott, argued that fully 
transparent rules rather than discretionary policy changes were more efficient and credible. 
This was the beginning of the push towards rules over discretion and greater central bank 
transparency. 
52. 
The most eloquent illustration of this shift towards transparency is the change in the 
communication  strategy  of  the  US  Fed.  Hard  as  it  might  be  to  imagine  from  today’s 
perspective, prior to 1994, the US Fed was not even announcing the target Fed Funds Rate; 
the market was expected to infer the rate from the timing, sequencing and magnitude of its 
open market operations. In sharp contrast, today the Fed not only announces the rate but 
also  gives  a  clear  indication  of  future  policy  trajectory.  Indeed,  it  is  standard  practice  for 
central banks these days to indicate the policy rates, the rationale behind the policy action, 
the expected outcomes, and oftentimes forward guidance on future policy actions. 
53. 
Sometimes, instead of being a vehicle for policy, communication can be the policy 
itself.  This  issue  came  into  sharp  focus  in  the  debate  surrounding  the  quantitative  easing 
(QE) policies of the US Federal Reserve. Against the QE policies, there is an influential view 
that  after  the  policy  interest  rate  has  been  brought  to  the  zero  lower  bound,  nothing  else 
needs to be done except for the central bank to say that it will keep interest rates low in the 
future  too.  It  is  argued  that  this  communication,  just  by  itself,  would  encourage  people  to 
borrow more and spend, bailing the economy out of recession. 
54. 
But  this  idea  of  topping  up  monetary  easing  with  communication  may  not  always 
work. People may not believe that the central bank will keep its promise of low interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
In  the  post-crisis  period,  the  major  way  in  which  EME  central  banks  have  used 
Even if they believe the central bank, they may not still borrow since what they may be trying 
to do is to get out of debt rather than get into further debt as is the case today. 
55. 
So,  how  do  central  banks  improve  their  credibility?  By  tying  their  promise  of  low 
interest  rates  to  specific  quantitative  real  sector  variables?  The  US  Federal  Reserve  has 
recently led the way in this direction by saying that it will keep interest rates low as long as 
the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 per cent, and in the process, is willing to tolerate 
inflation  slightly  above  its  long-run  target.  Another  way  of  reinforcing  this  promise  of  low 
interest rates is the idea of shifting from targeting inflation to targeting nominal GDP. 
56. 
Is  communication  an  equally  potent  policy  tool  for  EME  central  banks?  How 
effectively  are  they  using  communication  as  a  policy  tool?  Although  I  have  not  made  an 
exhaustive  study,  it  would  be  fairly  accurate  to  say  that  they  too  are  learning  to  use 
communication constructively, both as a vehicle for policy and sometimes as the policy itself. 
Let me give an illustration from the crisis period. 
57. 
In  the  pre-crisis  years,  it  was  intellectually  fashionable  to  subscribe  to  the 
“decoupling” hypothesis which held that even if advanced economies went into a downturn, 
EMEs  would  not  be  affected  because  of  their  improved  policy  framework,  robust  external 
reserves and resilient banking systems. Yet the crisis affected virtually all EMEs, denting the 
credibility  of  the  decoupling  hypothesis.  EME  central  banks  found  that  transparently 
communicating why and how they were affected by the crisis, notwithstanding the decoupling 
hypothesis, actually helped assuage concerns and revive market confidence. 
58. 
communication is in giving forward guidance on monetary policy. 
59. 
In the Reserve Bank too, we have started the practice of giving forward guidance on 
monetary  policy.  Because  of  its  potential  impact,  we  pay  much  more  attention  to  the 
language  and  nuancing  of  the  “forward  guidance”  paragraphs  than  other  parts  of  the 
statement.  Our  experience  in  this  regard  has  been  quite  positive.  Nevertheless,  we  face 
some challenges. Let me give you a flavor of that. 
60. 
Forward  guidance  is  always  conditional.  The  dilemma  then  is  how  precisely  the 
conditionality is to be communicated, and how to ensure that the market does not ignore the 
conditionality  and  interpret  the  guidance  as  an  irrevocable  commitment.  Conversely,  how 
does the central bank ensure that it does not become hostage to its guidance? 
61. 
Also, the more uncertain the situation, the greater the need for guidance. But also, 
the  more  uncertain  the  situation,  the  more  difficult  it  is  to  give  definitive  guidance.  For 
example,  when  the  forward  outlook  is  uncertain,  we  are  not  able  to  precisely  define  the 
conditions under which the guidance holds and the conditions under which we may have to 
deviate from it. When we are not forthcoming on specifying the conditions, the market starts 
speculating on them, thereby raising the “noise” to message ratio. 
62. 
Despite  these  challenges,  in  the  Reserve  Bank,  our  experience  with  greater 
openness has been quite positive. We found that effective communication can be a powerful 
tool provided the central bank has credibility. 
63. 
As their financial sectors get deeper and more sophisticated, EME central banks can 
usefully leverage on communication to enhance their policy effectiveness. To do so however, 
they have to improve their policy credibility as well as capacity levels. 
Conclusion 
64. 
Central  banks  and  central  bankers  have  been  at  the  heart  of  the  global  financial 
crisis. They have been blamed for policies and actions that got the world into the crisis; they 
have  also  been  praised  for  leading  from  the  front  in  getting  the  world  out  of  the  crisis.  I 
believe this is fair critique – central banks have been a part of the problem and a part of the 
solution. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
65. 
As  we emerge out of the crisis, central banks have their task cut out for them: to 
distil the lessons of the crisis, translate them into concrete reform measures and get cracking 
on implementing them. I believe this involves central banks changing in important ways both 
in terms of what they do and how they do it. 
66. 
The challenge of post-crisis transformation is not only different but also sharper for 
EME central banks because of their different macroeconomic and institutional contexts. EME 
central banks need also to learn to manage policy making in a globalizing environment. They 
need to learn from the best in the world, but adapt that learning to the demands and context 
of their economies. They need to be constantly pushing the envelope, be at the frontiers of 
domain  knowledge,  oftentimes  reinvent  it,  but  all  the  time  remain  sensitive  to  their  core 
concerns. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
