Thomas Jordan: Challenging economic and financial conditions for the 
Swiss banking sector 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 20 June 
2013. 
 The Swiss National Bank (SNB) is maintaining its minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per 
euro.  The  Swiss  franc  is  still  high.  An  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  would  compromise 
price stability and would have serious consequences for the Swiss economy. In the current 
environment, the minimum exchange rate remains important in order to avoid an undesirable 
tightening of monetary conditions for Switzerland in the event of sudden upward pressure on 
the  Swiss  franc.  We  stand  ready  to  enforce  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  if  necessary,  by 
buying  foreign  currency  in  unlimited  quantities,  and  to  take  further  measures,  as  required. 
The target range for the three-month Libor will be left unchanged at 0.0–0.25%. 
Since March, the SNB’s conditional inflation forecast has remained almost unchanged, apart 
from inflation for the current year, which is slightly lower due to a reduction in the oil price. 
The forecast is again based on an unchanged three-month Libor of 0.0% over the next three 
years. For 2013, we now anticipate slightly lower inflation of –0.3%. For 2014, the inflation 
forecast is unchanged at 0.2% and for 2015 at 0.7%. Consequently, inflation in Switzerland 
will remain very low in the foreseeable future. 
In the first quarter of 2013, the global economy was weaker than expected. The recession 
continued  in  the  euro  area.  In  the  US,  the  recovery  remained  hesitant  and  in  China, 
economic activity lost strength. In Switzerland, real GDP rose significantly in the first quarter. 
However, we expect a perceptible weakening in growth for the second quarter. Overall, we 
still anticipate growth of 1.0–1.5% for 2013.  
The risks for the Swiss economy remain high. They continue to originate, for the most part, 
from the international environment. A weakening in global economic momentum cannot be 
excluded. Further developments in the euro area financial and sovereign debt crisis remain 
uncertain. Tensions can reappear at any moment on global financial markets. Domestically, 
there is a risk that the imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets will grow, given 
the sustained period of exceptionally low interest rates.  
Global economic outlook 
I would now like to outline the outlook for the global economy and Switzerland in more detail. 
I will then look at monetary and financial conditions and the SNB’s monetary policy.  
In the first quarter, the growth of the global economy was weaker than expected, across the 
board. In many emerging markets, particularly China, economic activity lost strength. In the 
euro area, the recession continued, and in the US, the recovery remained hesitant. The only 
advanced economy to gain significant momentum was Japan. 
However, in the quarters ahead, global growth is likely to firm up gradually. In the US, the 
recovery will be supported by the labour market and rising asset prices. In Japan, the very 
expansionary  economic  policy  is  having  an  invigorating  effect.  Due  to  the  upturn  in  world 
trade  and  the  improvement  in  financing  conditions,  the  euro  area  is  also  likely  to  emerge 
gradually  from  recession.  In  addition,  the  burden  imposed  by  budget  consolidation  will  be 
lower next year.  
Overall,  however,  the  outlook  remains  uncertain.  The  risk  of  a  deterioration  in  the  global 
economy continues to be high. As before, the biggest risk remains a renewed deterioration in 
the  euro  area  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis.  Even  though  our  baseline  scenario 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
assumes  a  gradual  solution  of  the  crisis,  it  is  possible  that  tensions  could  re-emerge  on 
financial markets at any time.  
Swiss economic outlook 
In  Switzerland,  the  economy  experienced  a  temporary  revival  in  the  first  quarter,  as 
expected,  and  real  GDP  rose  by  2.3%,  in  annualised  terms.  Thus,  we  experienced  more 
favourable growth than our neighbouring countries. 
The difference is primarily attributable to domestic demand. Once again, growth was mainly 
driven  by  private  consumption  and  investment  in  residential  construction.  These  demand 
components benefited from the relatively robust labour market, a continued strong inflow of 
immigrants  and  the  favourable  financing  conditions.  In  particular,  the  supply  of  credit  in 
Switzerland  is  currently  having  a  much  stronger  effect  on  the  real  economy  than  in  most 
European countries.  
In  the  case  of  exports,  however,  there  are  no  indications  of  a  lasting  revival.  Since  the 
beginning of 2011, real exports have been moving sideways. They are being held back not 
only by the high value of the Swiss franc, but also by the subdued momentum in world trade. 
Moreover,  investment  by  Swiss  companies  is  hesitant.  One  reason  for  this  is  uncertainty 
about  further  developments  in  the  global  economy.  However,  further  factors  dampening 
investment activity are pressure on profit margins and the continued overcapacity in parts of 
the  manufacturing  industry.  According  to  information  derived  from  the  quarterly  survey 
carried out by SNB regional delegates, this cautious approach will persist in the near future. 
This means that domestic equipment investment in 2013 will probably stagnate. 
On the output side, too, developments were mixed in the first quarter. Construction, banking, 
insurance  and  health  recorded  clearly  positive  growth  figures.  In  manufacturing,  business 
activity  merely  stabilised.  In  this  area,  the  situation  in  the  metal  processing  and  machine 
industries,  in  particular,  remains  difficult.  Both  of  these  industries  are  suffering  from  weak 
industrial  activity  and  the  lack  of  investment  demand  on  the  part  of  companies  in  many 
European countries. 
Most  recently,  growth  in  employment  has  slowed,  and  unemployment  has  risen  again 
somewhat, in seasonally-adjusted terms. We expect that unemployment figures will increase 
again marginally to the end of the year. 
For  the  second  quarter,  we  forecast  a  perceptible  weakening  in  growth  compared  to  the 
strong  first  quarter.  In  the  following  quarters,  if  the  recovery  of  the  global  economy 
strengthens,  economic  momentum  is  likely  to  increase  gradually  again.  We  continue  to 
expect growth of 1.0–1.5% for the year 2013 as a whole. Consequently, we do not expect 
that the Swiss economy will return to full utilisation of production capacity in the near future. 
Monetary and financial conditions  
I will now turn to monetary and financial conditions.  
In recent weeks, volatility in financial markets has again increased. Since the last monetary 
policy  assessment,  however,  the  export-weighted  external  value  of  the  Swiss  franc  has 
remained largely unchanged. Recent developments suggest that safe-haven considerations 
continue to play an important role in the demand for Swiss francs. Overall, the value of the 
Swiss franc remains high and should fall further over the next few quarters.  
The  level  of  interest  rates  in  Switzerland  remained  very  low  in  the  first  quarter.  On  the 
secured Swiss franc money market, interest rates are in negative territory. Yields at issue for 
Confederation money market debt register claims also continue to be negative. By contrast, 
yields  on  ten-year  Confederation  bonds  have  risen  slightly  from  the  lows  reached  last 
December. Movements in long-term interest rates show that demand for secure investments 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
reacts strongly to the international environment. My colleague, Fritz Zurbrügg, will talk about 
developments on financial markets in more detail afterwards. 
Banks’  sight  deposits  at  the  SNB  have  not  increased  any  further  since  September  2012. 
However, growth in the M1, M2 and M3 monetary aggregates, which measure the amount of 
money  held  by  households  and  companies,  remained  strong.  This  growth  in  money  was 
accompanied by robust lending on the part of banks. Although the rate of growth of mortgage 
loans  to  households  has  declined  since  mid-2012,  it  is  still  at  a  high  level.  Most  recently, 
mortgage  lending  to  companies,  in  particular  in  residential  construction,  has  increased 
significantly.  
Overall,  lending  has  been  growing  faster  than nominal  GDP  for  several  years.  In  addition, 
prices  for  owner-occupied  apartments  and  single-family  homes  have  risen  strongly  in  the 
past few years. Given the sustained period of exceptionally low interest rates, there is a risk 
that  the  imbalances  on  the  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets  will  increase  further.  This 
development  jeopardises  financial  stability  and,  in  the  event  of  an  abrupt  correction,  can 
have wide-reaching consequences for the real economy.  
SNB monetary policy 
Ladies and gentlemen, the SNB continues to face major challenges. In particular, the threat 
that  the  Swiss  franc  could  suddenly  come  under  upward  pressure  again  has  not  been 
averted. In the current low interest rate environment, therefore, the minimum exchange rate 
remains the focal instrument for ensuring appropriate monetary conditions.  
The financial crisis has shown that for balanced economic development more than just price 
stability is required; financial stability must also be guaranteed. In Switzerland, the fact that 
the SNB is required to contribute to ensuring financial stability was already laid down in the 
National Bank Act of 2004. Our annual Financial Stability Report is an important instrument 
in this respect. It draws attention to emerging imbalances and the existence of risks which, in 
our  view,  could  jeopardise  the  stability  of  the  banking  industry  as  a  whole  in  the  medium 
term. 
In  addition,  last  year  a  new  instrument  was  created  –  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  – 
based on the lessons drawn from the financial crisis. At the beginning of the year, the SNB 
proposed  that  this  buffer  be  activated,  and  the  Federal  Council  decided  in  favour  of  an 
activation in February. The countercyclical capital buffer will come into effect from the end of 
September 2013 and will strengthen the resilience of the banking industry. Moreover, it will 
help to counter a further build-up of imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets. My 
colleague,  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  will  now  give  you  our  assessment  of  the  risks  in  the 
financial sector. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
