Haruhiko Kuroda: Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and the 
financial system – toward realisation of a vigorous financial system 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 2013 Spring Annual 
Meeting of the Japan Society of Monetary Economics, Tokyo, 26 May 2013. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to be invited to the 2013 Spring Annual Meeting of the Japan Society of 
Monetary Economics. 
The Bank of Japan’s mission is to ensure price stability and financial system stability. 
To  ensure  price  stability,  the  Bank  introduced  the  “quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary 
easing” at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 3 and 4, 2013. This was decided based 
on the Bank’s strong determination to do whatever is necessary to overcome the deflation 
that has persisted for the past 15 years. 
In terms of ensuring financial system stability, no major problems are observed at present in 
the  financial  system.  However,  financial  institutions  face  the  challenge  of  the  continued 
decline  in  their  profitability  in  their  lending  operations,  which  is  the  main  source  of  their 
profits. Over the years, the situation has remained the same, in that the amount of credit risk 
borne  by  financial  institutions  –  a  barometer  of  financial  intermediation  via  lending  –  has 
decreased  and  the  amount  of  interest  rate  risk  associated  with  bondholdings  has 
accumulated. 
The  Bank  expects  its  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  to  effect  a  major 
change  in  the  current  situation  of  the  financial  system.  The  transmission  channels 
assumed in this policy – such as influence on the yield curve and risk premia as well as 
portfolio rebalancing – will work through the financial system. I believe that more vigorous 
financial  intermediation  will  be  necessary  if  the  policy  effect  permeates  through  Japan’s 
economy  and  thereby  increases  positive  economic  activity.  The  process  to  overcome 
deflation is also the process for the financial system to recover its vigor. 
Today, bearing these points in mind, I will talk about the relationship between the quantitative 
and  qualitative  monetary  easing  and  the  financial  system,  and  the  thinking  on  the  Bank’s 
conduct of prudential policy. 
I. 
Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and the outlook for economic 
activity and prices 
Key features of the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
I will first briefly explain the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing. This policy has the 
following features (Charts 1 and 2). 
First is a strong and clear commitment. 
The  Bank  clearly  announced  that  it would  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  in 
terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) at the earliest 
possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. 
Second  is  introduction  of  a  new  phase  of  monetary  easing  both  in  terms  of  quantity  and 
quality in order to clearly underpin such a commitment. 
The Bank decided to change the main operating target for money market operations from the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate (i.e., interest rates) to the monetary base (i.e., quantity) 
and conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will increase at an annual 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
pace of about 60–70 trillion yen. To this end, the Bank will purchase Japanese government 
bonds  (JGBs)  so  that  its  holding  of  their  amount  outstanding  on  its  balance  sheet  will 
increase  at  an  annual  pace  of  about  50  trillion  yen.  In  terms  of  quality,  in  increasing  the 
purchases of JGBs, those with all maturities including 40-year bonds were made eligible for 
purchase, and the average remaining maturity of the Bank’s JGB purchases was extended 
from slightly less than three years to about seven years. Furthermore, the Bank decided to 
purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) 
so  that  their  amounts  outstanding  on  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet  will  increase  at  an  annual 
pace of about 1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. 
Third is enhancement of the intelligibility of monetary policy. 
For instance, the Bank’s purchases of JGBs had been conducted according to two types of 
operations:  one  under  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  introduced  in  October  2010  and  the 
other for facilitating money market operations, often referred to as  Rinban operations. The 
Bank decided to synthesize the two purchasing methods of JGBs and to express the target 
of  JGB  purchases  as  a  net  increase  in  its  JGB  holdings,  instead  of  the  total  size  of  JGB 
purchases.  We  believe  that  these  changes  facilitate  understanding  of  the  Bank’s  intention 
with  regard  to  monetary  easing  in  a  straightforward  manner.  The  Bank’s  adoption  of  the 
monetary  base  as  an  indicator  for  quantitative  easing  also  reflects  our  judgment  that  the 
monetary  base  will  be  the  most  appropriate  indicator  for  conveying  the  Bank’s  aggressive 
stance on the monetary easing to the public. 
Fourth is explicit indication of the Bank’s thinking on the continuation of monetary easing. 
The  Bank  will  continue  with  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing,  “aiming  to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that 
target  in  a  stable  manner.”  Obviously,  there  will  be  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to 
economic activity and prices going forward. The Bank will examine these risks carefully and 
will not hesitate to make adjustments as appropriate, should circumstances warrant. 
Transmission channels of the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
I will next explain the mechanism of achieving the 2 percent target under the quantitative and 
qualitative monetary easing (Chart 3). The Bank expects that the effects of monetary easing 
will permeate primarily through three channels. 
First, the purchases of JGBs, ETFs, and J-REITs will encourage a further decline in interest 
rates across the yield curve and lower risk premia of asset prices. This will raise firms’ credit 
demand through a decline in funding costs. 
Second, as a result of the Bank’s massive purchases of JGBs, both investors and financial 
institutions investing in JGBs are expected to shift from JGBs to such risk assets as stocks 
and foreign-denominated bonds and/or to increase lending within their portfolios, which can 
be  described  as  a  portfolio  rebalancing  effect.  The  extension  of  the  average  remaining 
maturity of JGB purchases reflects our understanding of such an effect. 
And third, the clear commitment to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible 
time and the continuation of massive purchases of assets underpinning this commitment are 
thought to drastically change the expectations of markets and economic entities. A rise in the 
expected inflation rate will not only influence actual prices but also stimulate private demand 
through a decline in real interest rates. 
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
On  April  26,  2013,  the  Bank  published  the  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  for  economic 
activity and prices for the projection period of three years – from fiscal 2013 to fiscal 2015 – 
in its Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices. I will now talk about the Bank’s outlook for 
economic  activity  and  prices  under  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing 
(Chart 4). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Japan’s  economy  has  started  picking  up.  Looking  ahead,  it  is  expected  to  return  to  a 
moderate  recovery  path  around  mid-2013,  mainly  against  the  background  that  domestic 
demand remains resilient due to the effects of monetary easing as well as various economic 
measures, and that growth rates of overseas economies gradually pick up. 
Thereafter, while the economy will be affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent 
decline in demand prior to and after the two scheduled consumption tax hikes, it is likely to 
continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its  potential,  as  a  trend,  as  a  virtuous  cycle  among 
production,  income,  and  spending  is  maintained.  Specifically,  the  annual  real  GDP  growth 
rate is projected to be around 3.0 percent for fiscal 2013 and around 1.5 percent for fiscal 
2014 and fiscal 2015, above the potential growth rate considered to be around 0.5 percent. 
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI has recently been at around 0 percent or slightly 
negative, but looking to the future, the rate of increase is projected to rise, reflecting factors 
such as the improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance as well as the rise in 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  on  the  back  of  the  change  in  expectations  of 
economic  entities,  and  it  is  likely  to  reach  around  2  percent  –  the  price  stability  target  – 
toward the latter half of the projection period. 
Financial system stability 
II. 
Next,  I  will  talk  about  the  relationship  between  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary 
easing  and  the  financial  system.  I  believe  that,  if  the  effect  of  this  policy  fully  permeates 
through  financial  and  economic  activity,  firms  and  households  are  likely  to  increase  their 
positive demand for funds. In this sense, it is vital for the financial system to maintain stability 
and fundamental strength so that it can adjust to future changes in the situation and respond 
properly to the increased demand for funds. 
The  Bank  regularly  examines  the  conditions  of  the  financial  system.  It  now  judges  that 
Japan’s financial system can properly perform the financial intermediation function to support 
future economic growth. There are two main reasons behind this judgment. 
Soundness of financial institutions: relationship between the amount of risks and 
capital 
The first reason is that financial institutions as a whole hold sufficient capital relative to the 
amount of risks they bear (Chart 5). 
Recently, financial institutions have steadily increased their capital, as they have continued to 
raise equity capital and accumulate retained earnings. The amount of risks has decreased 
moderately,  especially  credit  risk  and  risk  associated  with  stockholdings.  Credit  risk  has 
declined  because  the  growth  in  lending  has  been  slow,  reflecting  prolonged  deflation  and 
sluggish  economic  activity,  and  corporate  bankruptcies  have  remained  at  a  low  level. 
Moreover, the decline in risk associated with stockholdings resulted from steady efforts made 
by the banking sector to reduce strategic stockholdings. The proportion of stockholdings at 
major banks has decreased significantly – from 150 percent of their Tier I capital in around 
2000  to  about  40  percent  of  their  capital  recently.  This  reduction  and  enhancement  of 
financial  institutions’  Tier  I  capital  have  increased  their  capability  to  respond  to  a  possible 
increase in demand for funds. 
Resilience of the financial system: macro stress testing 
The  second  reason  is  that  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  seems  to  possess  sufficient 
resilience  against  such  shocks  as  a  rise  in  interest  rates  and  deterioration  in  economic 
conditions. Since the real economy and the financial system affect each other, a significant 
negative shock can be amplified beyond the first-round effects, as in the case observed in 
the latter half of the 1990s, when a vicious cycle occurred as the result of a more cautious 
lending stance, deterioration in economic activity, a subsequent increase in nonperforming 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
loans (NPLs), and a further cautious lending stance. The Bank examines the resilience of the 
financial  system  by  conducting  stress  tests  with  various  adverse  shocks,  using  a  financial 
macro-econometric model that takes account of such a mechanism. The examination of the 
resilience against an interest rate rise is an important issue especially during the process of 
overcoming  deflation  and  achieving  the  price  stability  target  under  the  quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary easing. 
In the April 2013 Financial System Report, the Bank estimated the effects on the financial 
system of a scenario in which interest rates rose by around 1–3 percentage points (Chart 6). 
Of  course,  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  such  a  quantitative  analysis  comes  with  many 
reservations and limitations, and that the estimation should be interpreted with some latitude. 
However, even if interest rates rise by this degree, as long as the rise is accompanied by 
improved developments in economic activity and prices, there are no major concerns over 
possible instability in the financial system, as financial institutions’ profits will be boosted, for 
example, by an increase in lending, improvement in interest rate margins on loans, and a rise 
in stock prices. 
On the other hand, if interest rates rise due to heightened concerns over fiscal conditions in 
the absence of improvement in economic conditions, positive effects such as an increase in 
lending  or  improvement  in  interest  rate  margins  on  loans  are  unlikely  to  occur,  thereby 
inducing strong adverse effects on financial institutions, namely, the occurrence of unrealized 
capital  losses  on  bondholdings.  Although  financial  institutions  have  the  capacity  to  absorb 
such adverse effects, this depends on the degree and pace at which the interest rates rise. 
To  prevent  concerns  over  fiscal  sustainability  from  emerging,  it  is  important  for  the 
government to steadily proceed with its initiatives on fiscal structural reforms. 
III. 
Low profitability of lending and challenges to enhancement of the functioning 
of financial intermediation 
As should be clear, the financial system does not face major problems in terms of stability 
and  fundamental  strength.  Nonetheless,  I  believe  that  the  current  financial  institutions’ 
financial  intermediation  cannot  be  described  as  full  of  vigor  or  dynamism.  This  is  mainly 
because of the low profitability of lending. 
I  will  now  discuss  how  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  will  affect  the  low 
profitability of lending and whether the problem of low profitability hinders the spread of the 
monetary easing effects. 
Low profitability of lending and the background 
Financial institutions’ lending stance used to be restrained due to limited capital when they 
were  suffering  from  the  NPL  problem.  At  present,  however,  they  are  not  under  any 
restrictions in terms of financial strength with a sufficient amount of capital, and have taken 
an aggressive lending stance toward positive demand for funds. In fact, they have recently 
increased  loans  to  large  firms  for  mergers  and  acquisitions  and  acquisition  of  interest  in 
natural resources, as well as real estate-related loans and overseas loans. 
Nevertheless,  such  activity  is  still  limited.  Loans  to  small  and  medium-sized  firms  have 
remained sluggish. Although financial institutions have advanced their initiatives to facilitate 
financing in recent years, improvement in the quality of their loan assets has been slow. The 
profitability  of  lending  and  interest  rate  margins  on  loans  have  remained  on  a  long-term 
downtrend  because  of  intense  competition  among  many  lenders  to  attract  limited  positive 
demand for funds and borrower firms that are top rated (Chart 7). 
Such  a  problem  is  basically  a  reflection  of  prolonged  deflation,  sluggish  economic  activity, 
and  weak  demand  for  funds.  Therefore,  if  the  effects  of  the  quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary  easing  permeate  through  Japan’s  economy  and  stimulate  positive  economic 
activity,  it  is  expected  that  loans  will  increase  and  the  problem  of  low  profitability  and  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
issues  related  to  the  quality  of  loan  assets  will  gradually  be  resolved.  However,  given  the 
intense lending competition, it is unclear to what extent the supply and demand conditions 
should improve and demand for funds should increase for interest rate margins on loans to 
start improving. 
Toward enhancing financial institutions’ financial intermediation 
Financial  institutions  are  expected  to  actively  elicit  positive  activity  from  firms  and 
households,  instead  of  passively  waiting  for  such  activity,  and  to  work  to  enhance  their 
capability  for  financial  intermediation.  This  will  raise  the  added  value  of  their  financial 
intermediation,  and  enable  them  to  secure  borrower  firms  without  competing  to  reduce 
interest rate margins on loans and increase their profits as a result. At the same time, from a 
macroeconomic  perspective,  enhancing  the  capability  for  financial  intermediation  will  bring 
about  favorable  conditions  for  a  virtuous  cycle  to  operate  between  financial  and economic 
activity. 
In this regard, financial institutions have worked to facilitate financing, corporate turnarounds, 
and firms’ business reconstruction. They have also sought to identify firms planning to launch 
operations  in  areas  with  growth  potential  and  help  these  firms  to  increase  their  growth 
through  various  measures  including  the  Bank’s  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support 
strengthening the foundations for economic growth. I believe that such efforts have steadily 
enhanced financial institutions’ capability for financial intermediation. 
Given  the  sluggish  economic  activity  and  deflation,  despite  the  efforts  made  by  financial 
institutions,  it  might  have  been  difficult  to  discern  the  outcome  of  such  efforts  through,  for 
example, an increase in loans or improvement in the quality of financial institutions’ assets. 
However,  I  am  sure  that  these  initiatives  made  by  financial  institutions  to  support  firms  
– formulation and monitoring of corporate turnaround plans, provision of advice on improving 
financial conditions, and support of firms’ projects through corporate tie-ups and exploration 
of  new  markets  –  will  steadily  enhance  the  added  value  of  financial  services.  I  hope  that 
financial  institutions  will  further  strengthen  the  ability  in  order  to  tap  potential  demand  for 
funds and identify firms and business areas with high growth potential. 
The  Bank  will  continue  to  support  the  lending  operations  of  financial  institutions  mainly 
through  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for 
economic  growth  and  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  stimulate  bank  lending.  The  Bank 
has been exchanging views with and advising financial institutions, through its day-to-day off-
site monitoring and on-site examinations, about enhancing credit screening and monitoring 
capabilities that are the basis for financial intermediation as well as increasing the ability to 
assess firms’ projects and improving arrangements for the support of firms. The Bank has 
also continued to conduct research on financial methods that will enhance the added value of 
financial intermediation – such as asset-based lending that uses movable assets or accounts 
receivable  as  collateral,  new  financial  methods  utilizing  electronically  recorded  monetary 
claims, and business reconstruction – and has shared information with financial institutions 
through seminars. 
Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and prudential policy 
IV. 
Next,  I  will  talk  about  the  relationship  between  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary 
easing and the Bank’s prudential policy. 
The  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  is  a  policy  that  encourages  financial 
institutions  and  investors  to  take  on  risks  and  affects  asset  prices  by  influencing  the  yield 
curve and risk premia. On the other hand, prudential policy is a policy under which the Bank 
encourages  financial  institutions  to  strengthen  and  enhance  their  risk  management  and 
closely monitors any signs of financial imbalances in, for example, asset prices. Based on 
these, some people may question whether the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
and prudential policy conflict with each other or whether the Bank’s thinking on the conduct 
of prudential policy will change under the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing. 
However, I would like to emphasize that the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and 
prudential  policy  do  not  conflict  with  each  other  and  are  consistent,  and  that  the  Bank’s 
thinking  on  the  conduct  of  prudential  policy  remains  unchanged.  This  thinking  can  be 
summarized into two points. 
First,  although  the  Bank  expects  financial  institutions  to  actively  take  on  risks  under  the 
quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, its basic stance remains unchanged, in that it 
will urge financial institutions to appropriately manage the amount of risks they bear relative 
to their financial strength. Excessive risk-taking may not immediately cause problems but will 
eventually  lead  to  instability  in  financial  institutions’  business  conditions  and  the  financial 
system, and will not promote improvement in economic conditions in the long term. On the 
contrary, expansion of risk-taking is a favorable action to increase profits as long as risks are 
managed properly. As I mentioned, the Bank has been working to exchange views with and 
advise  financial  institutions  through on-site  examinations,  off-site  monitoring,  and  seminars 
about  risk  management  and  ways  to  enhance  the  institutions’  capabilities  for  financial 
intermediation and business reconstruction. 
And  second,  the  Bank’s  basic  thinking  about  the  overheating  of  asset  prices  and  financial 
imbalances  also  remains  the  same.  It  is  difficult  to  discern  financial  imbalances,  but  if  the 
Bank judges that financial imbalances exist, it is necessary to take appropriate action. On the 
other hand, if a rise in asset prices is a reflection of the policy effects or improved outlook for 
the real economy, it will have positive effects on the real economy by means of the wealth 
effect. As far as is shown by a range of indicators and financial institutions’ behavior, there is 
no sign at this point of excessively bullish expectations in asset markets or in the activities of 
financial institutions. 
The financial system and developments in economic activity and prices affect each other. I 
would  like  to  stress  that  the  stability  of  these  two  should  be  compatible  and  they  do  not 
conflict with each other. 
Concluding remarks 
Today, I have talked about the relationship between the quantitative and qualitative monetary 
easing and the financial system. In the final part of my remarks, I will briefly touch on a topic 
that I have not yet mentioned today. I will raise two points that I consider of importance in 
enhancing the vigor and the functioning of the financial system. 
Diversification of the portfolio selection of households 
First is the importance of diversifying the portfolio selection of households. Much time has 
passed since the issue of a shift “from savings to investment” by households was a topic of 
interest,  but  the  households’  stance  of  preferring  safe  assets  has  not  yet  changed.  In  this 
situation,  the  amount  outstanding  of  deposits  at  financial  institutions  has  continued  to 
increase despite the low interest rates. The preference of Japan’s households can also be 
seen  in  their  composition  of  financial  assets,  which  is  greatly  biased  toward  safe  assets 
compared with other countries. 
As  a  result,  financial  institutions  have  been  facing  the  situation  of  an  increase  in  funds 
available for investment amid the sluggish growth in lending. The gap between the amounts 
outstanding  of  deposits  and  loans  at  financial  institutions  (banks  and  shinkin  banks) 
expanded from about 60 trillion yen at the end of 2000 to about 230 trillion yen at the end of 
2012. The difference has been invested in securities, mainly in JGBs. 
It  is  natural  for  the  proportion  of  JGB  holdings  to  total  assets  to  expand  at  financial 
institutions when the weight of fiscal financing in the overall economy has risen, increasing 
the  amount  outstanding  of  JGB  issuance.  However,  looking  at  the  financial  system  as  a 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
whole, it is desirable for households to diversify their selection of assets other than deposits 
in  terms  of  the  portfolio  rebalancing.  This  will  support  financial  institutions’  business 
conditions, in that it will increase fees and commissions through sales and management of 
risk  assets  held  by  individual  customers.  In  this  regard,  some  financial  institutions  have 
refocused  on  sales  of  financial  products  to  individual  customers,  partly  reflecting  the 
introduction of the Individual Savings Account (ISA). 
Responses to stricter international financial regulations 
Second  is  the  importance  of  appropriately  responding  to  reforms  of  international  financial 
regulations.  Recently,  financial  regulations  have  been  reviewed  widely  around  the  globe, 
given the experience of the Lehman shock and the European debt crisis. A massive amount 
of rulemaking is in progress, such as regulations on financial institutions’ capital adequacy 
ratios  and  leverage  ratios,  regulations  on  derivatives  transactions,  and  establishment  of  a 
framework that enables the resolution of systemically important financial institutions. 
These deliberations on new regulations are based on a lesson from the experience of global 
financial crises, and they show the strong determination of financial authorities worldwide to 
establish a stable financial system to avoid another financial crisis. 
The  global  financial  regulations  will  be  reflected  in  regulations  in  each  country  including 
Japan, and Japan’s financial institutions will be subject to these regulations. Major financial 
institutions in Japan that conduct overseas operations will need to adjust to the local laws 
overseas.  Introduction  of  new  regulations  entails  a  considerable  increase  in  costs  for 
financial  institutions  in  the  short  term  as  they  adjust  to  the  new  regulatory  environments. 
Nevertheless, from a long-term perspective, it will further stabilize their profits by restraining 
their excessive risk-taking, and further strengthen the foundations for sustainable growth of 
the overall economy, thereby underpinning the development of financial institutions. 
The  initiatives  to  establish  global  financial  stability  will  continue  into  the  future.  I  expect 
Japan’s financial institutions to actively take part in such initiatives. The Bank is determined 
to diligently join international discussions such as meetings of the Financial Stability Board 
and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
I  would  like  to  close  my  speech  by  noting  that  the  Bank  will  do  its  utmost  to  overcome 
deflation at the earliest possible time and achieve a vigorous financial system. Thank you. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Introduction of the "Quantitative and 
Qualitative Monetary Easing" (1) 
Chart 1 
     The Bank will achieve the price stability target of 2% at the earliest possible time, 
with a time horizon of about 2 years. 
Strong and Clear Commitment 
 Monetary base: Annual increase of about 60-70 tril. yen (x2 in 2 years). 
Amount  outstanding  of  JGB  holdings:  Annual  increase  of  about  50  tril.  yen  (more 
than x2 in 2 years). 
Average  remaining  maturity  of  the  Bank's  JGB  purchases:  Extended  to  about 
7 years (more than x2 in 2 years). 
Amount outstanding of ETF holdings: Annual increase of about 1 tril. yen (more than 
x2 in 2 years). 
Amount outstanding of J-REIT holdings: Annual increase of about 30 bil. yen. 
Introduction of the "Quantitative and 
Qualitative Monetary Easing" (2) 
Chart 2 
Intelligible Monetary Policy 
      8 
 The Bank has terminated the Asset Purchase Program and synthesized purchasing 
methods of JGBs. 
It has adopted the monetary base as an indicator for quantitative easing. 
 The Bank will continue with the quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, aiming 
to achieve the price stability target of 2%, as long as it is necessary for maintaining 
that target in a stable manner. 
It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and 
make adjustments as appropriate. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Effects of the "Quantitative and  
Qualitative Monetary Easing" 
Chart 3 
 Chart 4 
Forecasts of the Majority of Policy Board Members1 
Note: 1. Figures in brackets indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
Risks and Tier I Capital1,2 
Chart 5 
Effects of a Rise in Interest Rates on Tier I Capital Ratio1,2,3 
 Chart 6 
10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Net Interest Margin 
Chart 7 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
