Peter Praet: The crisis response in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  afternoon  session  “The  challenges  ahead”  at  Pioneer  Investments’  Colloquia  Series 
“Redrawing  the  map:  new  risk,  new  reward”,  organised  by  Unicredit  S.p.A.,  Beijing, 
17 April 2013. 
 I would like to thank P. Hess, L. Stracca, R. Beck, A. Mehl and R. Straub for their contribution. 
A pdf of clearly detailed accompanying slides to this speech can be found on the European Central Bank website. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honour and pleasure for me to speak to this esteemed audience at this esteemed 
place. 
Introduction 
Today,  I  will  provide  you  with  a  central  banker’s  view  on  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in 
overcoming the current crisis in the euro area, but I will also touch on other, equally essential 
elements  of  policy-making  in  the  euro  area.  I  will  structure  my  observations  around  four 
points: 
• 
First,  the  factors  that  have  led  to  the  crisis  and  in  particular  how  the  euro  area 
became  engulfed  first  in  the  global  financial  crisis  and  then  in  the  sovereign  debt 
crisis; 
Second, the crisis response in the euro area, including both monetary policy as well 
as other policies; 
Third, the key lessons we have learned from the global financial crisis in the euro 
area and in particular the institutional weaknesses that were uncovered during the 
crisis; 
Finally,  I  will  touch  on  institutional  reforms  at  the  level  of  the  euro  area  and  the 
European  Union  at  large,  which  have  also  contributed,  in  my  view,  to  an 
improvement of the foundation of our monetary union which is, we hope at least, the 
harbinger for a better performance in future. Work in this area is still in progress, and 
for that reason I will then conclude by sketching the challenges that still lie ahead of 
us. 
   The factors leading to the crisis 
1. 
As I have argued on previous occasions, it might be useful to think about the development of 
the  global  financial  crisis  and  subsequently  the  euro  debt  crisis  in  the  last  five  and  a  half 
years as the gradual discovery of an iceberg. As you probably already  know, because the 
density of ice is lower than the density of sea water, normally only one-ninth of the volume of 
an  iceberg  is  above  water.  Moreover,  the  shape  of  the  underwater  part  can  be  difficult  to 
judge by looking at the section which is visible above the surface. This is in my view a useful 
metaphor, because as the crisis gradually unfolded, a chain of unexpected problems came to 
the surface and vulnerabilities that were previously underestimated became apparent. 
Let  us  consider  first  the  tip  of  the  iceberg,  namely  the  liquidity  crisis.  Tensions  in  money 
markets erupted in August 2007 when the US mortgage market, which was at the epicentre 
of  a  complex  network  of  financial  derivative  products  held  globally,  started  to  un-ravel. 
Liquidity in interbank markets worldwide dried up as market participants became paralysed 
by uncertainty. The key problem was that counterparty risk – which had hitherto remained 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
limited – suddenly increased in great proportions because the distribution of risk exposures 
to US subprime mortgage markets was markedly opaque. This led some market segments to 
partially freeze and others to close completely. 
This is where the second layer of the iceberg comes onto the stage. The collapse of Lehman 
Brothers in the autumn of 2008 triggered an exceptionally abrupt re-pricing of risks globally. It 
led to a very significant intensification of the financial crisis; to a temporary freeze in trade 
financing and a global trade decline; to a curtailment of credit and domestic demand; and, 
ultimately, to a severe decline in global demand and output. 
The main channels through which the crisis was transmitted internationally are now relatively 
well  understood,  although  the  extent  and  strength  of  the  interconnectedness  was  quite 
surprising in real time. Activity corrected most in countries where credit was booming prior to 
the  crisis,  with  large  current  account  deficits,  high  external  debt  and  highly  leveraged 
financial sectors, in particular.1 
In the euro area, a channel of particular importance was the fact that some banks had tapped 
US  wholesale  funding markets  in  large  amounts  to finance  their activities.2  Some  of these 
banks were in addition as heavily involved as US banks in the production of allegedly risk-
free securities, such as asset-backed commercial paper, that aimed to meet the needs of US 
money  markets  funds.3  They  were  severely  hit  when  these  markets  froze.  Moreover, 
although the euro area’s current account was broadly balanced, it still had significant gross 
external assets and liabilities vis-à-vis the US, which acted as a powerful conduit of the crisis. 
Challenges  became  more  intricate still  when  the  third  layer  of the  iceberg  – the  sovereign 
debt  crisis  –  surfaced  towards  the  end  of  2009.  Risk  re-pricing  intensified,  spreading from 
banks  to  sovereigns  and  back  to  banks  in  an  adverse  feedback  loop,  and  interacted  with 
existing  –  but  previously  hidden  –  vulnerabilities  in  several  euro  area  countries.  This 
feedback  loop  included  three  separate  ingredients.  First, the  solvency  of  some  banks  was 
strained by significant exposures to domestic sovereign debt and write-offs or declines in the 
market value of government bonds that eroded their capital. Second, declines in the market 
value of government bonds led to liquidity strains, insofar as these bonds are widely used as 
collateral in interbank markets. And third, in some instances, governments had to step in to 
recapitalise vulnerable domestic banks, thereby increasing their own debt in turn. 
This  “tale  of  two  debt  overhangs”,  as  some  have  called  this  twin  crisis  of  banks  and 
sovereigns, had uneven effects across euro area countries.4 Some countries were markedly 
more affected than others, which contributed to increased financial fragmentation in the euro 
area. This also laid bare further fragilities that had been accumulated in the past, including 
the fact that some euro area countries had neglected structural reforms and as a result faced 
competitiveness  losses  and  the  built-up  of  external  deficits. While  these  fragilities  had  not 
gone  completely  unnoticed,  and  had  been  pointed  out  early  on  by  the  ECB,  they  had  not 
received  the  attention  they  deserved  until  the  crisis  struck.  This  bears  similarities  with  the 
Asian financial crisis, which is well remembered in this part of the world. Some experts saw it 
coming and warned at an early stage against the causes that led to it, such as short-term 
                                                
1  See e.g. Berkmen, P., G. Gelos, R. Rennhack and J. Walsh (2009), “The global financial crisis: Explaining 
cross-country differences in the output impact”, IMF Working Paper, No. 280; Berglöf, E., Y. Korniyenko, A. 
Plekhanov and J. Zettelmeyer (2009), “Understanding the crisis in emerging Europe”, EBRD Working Paper, 
No. 108; Lane, P.R. and G.M. Milesi-Ferretti (2010), “The cross-country incidence of the global crisis”, CEPR 
Discussion Paper, No. 7954. 
2  See H. S. Shin (2012), “Global banking glut and loan risk premium”, mimeo, Princeton. 
3  See  V.  Acharya  and  P.  Schnabl  (2012),  “Do  global  banks  spread  global  imbalances?  The  case  of  asset-
backed commercial paper during the financial Crisis of 2007-09“, NBER Working Paper, No. 16079. 
4  See  V.  Acharya,  P.  Schnabl  and  I.  Drechsler,  “A  tale  of  two  overhangs:  The  nexus  of  financial  sector  and 
sovereign credit risks”, 15 April 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financing  in  foreign  currency  of  long-term  investments  (maturity  mismatch)  and  insufficient 
prudential  standards  leading  to  excessive  risk  taking  and  rent  seeking  behaviour. 
Unfortunately the warnings were not taken seriously until the issues and risks materialised 
first with the depreciation of the Thai baht in July 1997. Perhaps we have not learnt enough 
from the past! 
As growing financial market tensions made the financing of these deficits ever more difficult, 
the last and most unexpected layer of the iceberg – namely the so-called “redenomination 
risk”, the possibility of a break-up of the euro area – came to the surface in the middle of last 
year. By that time, the sovereign spread of high-yield euro area countries relative to other 
euro area countries had widened to an exceptional extent, hardly justified by fundamentals 
and  fundamentally  incompatible  with  a  well-functioning  monetary  union.  This  led  to  the 
announcement  by  the  ECB  of  the  modalities  for  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT), 
which helped to remove redenomination risk. 
The monetary policy response to the crisis 
2. 
Let me now outline in more detail how the ECB has responded to this multi-layered crisis. 
Before I delve into this, however, let me also first emphasise upfront that monetary policy can 
buy  time  for  reforms  that  become  effective  with  some  time  lag,  but  ultimately  cannot 
substitute for reforms and decisions in the political sphere. Monetary policy is therefore only 
a crisis mitigation tool, and it is important to keep this fact in mind and not to expect too much 
from the central bank in terms of crisis resolution. In addition, monetary policy is surrounded 
by  two  goalposts:  the  overarching  objective  of  price  stability  and  the  independence  of  the 
central bank. 
The ECB’s response included two types of measures, standard and non-standard measures. 
The  standard  reaction  of  monetary  policy  was  to  adjust  our  key  interest  rates  downwards 
owing to a less benign macroeconomic outlook and downward risks to price stability. Short 
term interest rates are now close to zero in the euro area, and overall financing conditions 
are very favourable in the euro area as a whole. 
At the same time, the standard monetary policy action was judged as insufficient because, 
during the crisis and especially from 2010 the interest rate channel of the monetary policy 
impaired,  initially  because  the  interbank  market  was 
transmission  mechanism  was 
dysfunctional, 
the  banking  sector 
then  because 
itself 
dysfunctional  and  was  unwilling  or  unable  to  perform  its  normal  intermediation  role.  In 
response to this challenge, the ECB engaged in a sequence of non-standard measures to 
restore a proper transmission of the monetary policy impulses, including lending operations 
through a fixed rate tender procedure with full allotment, the provision of liquidity with longer 
maturity  and  an  expansion  of  the  set  of  assets  that  could  serve  as  collateral  for  receiving 
central bank liquidity. As financial integration in the euro area was being severely eroded and 
banks  largely  retrenched  within  their  national  borders,  the  Eurosystem  remained  ready  to 
provide liquidity at consistent and uniform conditions over the entire euro area, as it should 
be in any monetary union. 
As a further step to address the banks’ funding problems and financial fragmentation within 
the euro area, the Eurosystem started intervening directly in securities  markets in order to 
correct  severe  mal-functioning  of  certain  segments.  The  first  action  of  this  type  was  the 
Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP)  launched  in  May  2010,  followed  by  a  purchase 
programme for bank-issued covered bonds started in October 2011, and finally the Outright 
Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  programme  announced  in  September  2012  but  so  far  not 
activated. Let me now spend a few words on the OMT programme in particular. 
It  is  important  to  emphasise  that  the  design  of  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions 
programme creates the right incentives for governments to improve their performance with 
respect  to  fiscal  prudence  and  structural  reforms.  In  fact,  OMTs  will  only  be  activated  in 
cases  where  the  beneficiary  country  has  signed  up  to  strict  and  effective  conditionality 
in  some  countries  became 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
attached  to  an  appropriate  EU/IMF  lending  programme.  They  can  also  be  considered  for 
Member States currently under a macroeconomic adjustment programme, but only once they 
have regained bond market access. Moreover, the design of OMTs entails interventions only 
in  the  relatively  short  end  of  the  government  bond  market  –  up  to  three  years’  time  to 
maturity  –  and  they  will  be  fully  sterilised,  meaning  that  the  Eurosystem  would  absorb  all 
amounts of liquidity injected by OMTs. 
Since  the  announcement  of  the  OMT  programme,  financial  market  conditions  in  the  euro 
area  have  improved  significantly,  sovereign  spreads  have  declined  substantially  and  there 
are some signs that the process of financial fragmentation in the euro area is being reversed. 
It  is  important  to  recognise  that  the  role  of  policies  other  than  monetary  policy  being 
implemented  in  the  meanwhile,  at  both  national  and  euro  area  or  EU  level,  have  also 
materially contributed to restoring confidence in the euro area. 
How the crisis revealed institutional weaknesses in the euro area 
3. 
As I already noted, the monetary policy response to the crisis has been mainly aimed to buy 
time for reforms that become effective with some time lag, but it cannot substitute for reforms 
as time goes by. In this respect, the crisis has unveiled the incompleteness of the euro area’s 
institutional  design  which  currently  policy  makers  are  addressing  both  at  the  national  level 
and  at  the  euro  area/EU  level.  Let  me  first  outline  these  main  weaknesses  and  then  go 
through the progress that has been made so far and the road ahead. 
The  euro  area  was  missing  an  effective  framework  for  (i)  crisis  prevention  (ii)  and  crisis 
management  and  resolution,  which  are,  as  I  will  argue,  essential  ingredients  for  effective 
policy-making in a monetary union. Let me elaborate. 
The lack of effective crisis prevention framework before the crisis was indeed evident. 
First, too complacent regulatory policies in the financial sector still allowed excessive risk to 
build  up.  The  establishment  of  the  monetary  union  made  is  easier  for  deficit  countries  to 
finance  macroeconomic  imbalances  through  cross-border  capital  inflows  for  too  long, 
resulting in the accumulation of risk. When these flows turned into outflows as the economic 
environment  deteriorated  after  2008,  these  imbalances  not  only  led  to  problems  for  the 
countries  concerned  but  also  produced  contagion  to  other  parts  of  the  euro  area.  These 
externalities  led  to  the  emergence  of  a  twin  crisis,  where  private  sector  debt  (often  by 
financial  intermediaries)  was  rapidly  converted  into  public  liabilities,  resulting  into  the 
self-reinforcing negative feedback loop between sovereigns and banks I alluded to before. 
A  single  mechanism for  banking  supervision  and  a  common  authority  with  strong tools for 
bank  resolution  could  have  mitigated  the  emergence  of  these  negative  externalities.  The 
crisis  clearly  highlighted  that  financial  stability  is  a  common  good  and  as  such  requires 
shared responsibility for its preservation. We have learned the hard way that high financial 
integration  without  a  commensurate  deeper  integration  of  financial  stability  policies  is 
intrinsically unstable. 
Second,  sustained  divergences  in  competitiveness  and  macroeconomic  imbalances  were 
largely  ignored.  Persistent  current  account  imbalances  within  the  euro  area,  signalling 
vulnerabilities  of  some  Member  States,  were  long  considered  as  irrelevant  in  a  monetary 
union.  Besides  fiscal  surveillance,  the  working  assumption  was  that  there  is  no  need  to 
closely monitor macroeconomic imbalances. Disequilibria originating from the private sector 
were supposed to be only short-lived and eliminated by market forces. The crisis has taught 
us that imbalances in individual countries may have powerful negative externalities on other 
countries within a monetary union. This recognition led to the belief that the governance of 
economic policies at the EU level has to be reformed: more effective macroeconomic policy 
coordination at euro area level is an essential building block of a monetary union. 
Third, the euro area availed of a fiscal policy coordination and surveillance framework. The 
existence of fiscal rules at the EU level, codified in the Stability and Growth Pact and in the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Treaty Excessive Deficit Procedure, was motivated by the need to ensure fiscal discipline, 
preserve  fiscal  space  and  hence  allow  automatic  stabilisers  to  play  out  in  full  during 
downturns.  More  fundamentally,  the  fiscal  rules  were  supposed  to  prevent  countries  from 
pursuing irresponsible fiscal policies with negative externalities on the rest of the monetary 
union.  However,  the  previously  existing  framework  did  not  have  sufficient  “teeth”  and  its 
implementation  by  Member  States  within  the  Eurogroup  remain  insufficiently  strict.  As  a 
result, EU fiscal rules did not constrain budgetary policies sufficiently.5 
At the beginning of the crisis, it became painfully evident that the euro area was also lacking 
effective crisis management tools. 
First, the design of the euro area assumed that stabilisation would take place at the national 
level  and  to  a  large  extent  automatically.  The  crisis  has  shown  us,  however,  that  shock 
absorbers  at  the  national  level  are  insufficient  in  case  of  a  major  financial  and  economic 
crisis. Indeed, the scale of the shock after the 2008 financial crisis was unprecedented in a 
number of countries and it far exceeded their national shock absorption capacity. The euro 
area  had  no  mechanisms  to  provide  financial  support  for  countries  in  difficulty,  ensure 
efficient risk sharing and prevent cross-border contagion; notably, there were no area-level 
institutions to prevent fiscal sustainability from being jeopardised by severe problems in their 
domestic banking systems. This underscored the pitfalls of a design that relied too much on 
the national level to fulfil the stabilisation function. 
Second,  the  financial  crisis  demonstrated  that  financial  contagion  is  the  unintended 
consequence of financial market integration. The euro area, however, was lacking effective 
instruments to mitigate contagion. Policy instruments that can act as circuit breaker, limiting 
thereby  negative  feedback  loops,  are  an  essential  crisis  management  tool  in  a  monetary 
union. 
To summarize, one of the key lessons that we have learned from the crisis is that the design 
of the euro area was incomplete. Indeed, the euro area lacked certain institutional elements 
which  are  associated  with  federations  and  which  act  as  crisis  prevention  mechanisms 
ex ante  as  well  as  shock  absorbers  ex  post.  The  logical  corollary  is  that  we  need  to 
compensate  for  these  “missing  institutions”  by  establishing  a  much  stronger  financial  and 
economic union. I will now outline the main elements of that endeavour. I will first discuss 
reforms implemented at the national level – though sometimes also decided in the context of 
EU-IMF lending programs – and then move to the reforms at the EU or euro area level. 
4. 
The road ahead towards deepening the union 
Reforms at the national level 
4.1 
Almost six years down the road since the start of the financial turmoil that turned into a crisis, 
many  euro  area  countries  have  experienced  a  significant,  although  to  date  still  partial, 
correction of external and domestic imbalances. This is positive news, before reform action 
at the national level is ultimately the most important for getting the crisis behind us. 
Substantial  progress  can  be  seen  most  clearly  in  the  development  of  current  account 
balances. Much of this was driven by an inevitable drop in domestic demand, but we have 
also  seen  strengthening  exports  in  a  global  environment  that  is  not  really  buoyant.  This 
indicates that the countries’ efforts to rebalance their economies are starting to bear fruits. 
Part of this picture is also the partial reversal of previous losses of competitiveness, but here 
the pace of progress varies across countries. 
                                                
5  See  D.  Ioannou  and  L.  Stracca  (2013):  “Have  euro  area  and  EU  economic  governance  worked?  Just  the 
facts”, European Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Fiscal  balances  have  also  shown  strong  improvements.  For  example,  Greece’s  structural 
primary  balance  has  improved  considerably,  though  the  fiscal  situation  is  still  facing  big 
challenges.  At  the  same  time  it  is  positive  to  see  that  the  general  upward  trend  in  private 
sector  indebtedness  has  been  halted  in  most  countries,  both  in  the  household  and  the 
corporate sector, including the financial sector. 
Last but not least, structural reforms have gathered pace. The countries under an adjustment 
programme have taken many initiatives to make their economies more flexible and market-
oriented, thus sowing the seeds for better performance and increased competitiveness in the 
future. 
All  of  these  developments  give  reasons  to  be  cautiously  optimistic  about  the  prospect  for 
crisis-ridden  countries’  return  to  a  path  of  sustainable  growth,  productive  investments  and 
creation of new jobs. 
However, historical experience suggests that the combination of an economic downturn and 
a  financial  crisis  is  usually  associated  with  a  prolonged  recession  and  losses  of  jobs  and 
welfare.  Most  structural  reforms  take  time  to  generate  positive  effects,  and  some  of  the 
countries  in  distress  are  still  saddled  with  rigidities  in  the  markets  for  goods,  services  and 
labour. 
In  order  to  prevent  –  and  indeed  reverse  –  job  losses,  the  downward  adjustment  of  both 
prices and wages need to be stronger in those areas where unemployment is still high, and 
where  this  adjustment  has  not  taken  place  to  a  full  extent  due  to  structural  or  institutional 
factors.  If  this  goes  hand  in  hand  with  a  continued  consolidation  of  public  sector  budgets, 
then  the  cautious  optimists  will  see  their  views  confirmed  through  a  chain  of  reduced 
uncertainty,  renewed  investor  and  consumer  confidence,  better  access  to  funding  and  a 
return to robust and sustainable growth. 
Reforms at the European level 
4.2 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  last  and  arguably  most  important  topic  of  my  intervention  today, 
namely the reforms which have been introduced in order to make the euro area and the EU 
stronger in the long haul. To an external observer, especially from Asia, the reform process 
may  seem  slow  and  haphazard,  but  one  has to  keep  in mind  that  institutional  evolution  is 
almost  never  a  formal  optimization  exercise  starting  from  a  “clean  slate”,  but  rather 
something  that  builds  on  the  existing  institutional  setting  and  adds  additional  layers  and 
structures,  and  the  institutional  evolution  of  EMU  is  no  exception,  as  pointed  out  in recent 
ECB research.6 The need to agree on reforms at both the domestic and the European level 
also introduces an additional element of complexity, which is perhaps difficult to understand 
from the outside. But it is important to point out that if one looks back it is impressive how 
much has been achieved in a matter of a couple of years. Let me just briefly describe what 
has changed in the institutional setting of EMU – and indeed also in the EU more generally – 
in just a few years. I will start with innovations in the crisis prevention toolkit, and will then 
move to crisis resolution tools. 
Fiscal  governance  reforms.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  one  of  the  major  weaknesses  of  the 
original institutional setting of EMU was that EU fiscal rules were not sufficiently binding and 
in particular that sanctions were not credible. This has been addressed in a series of reforms, 
starting with what we call “six pack”, a group of six Regulations which entered into force in 
December 2011. Without going into the details of the Regulations, let me only mention that 
their  effect  is  to  strengthen  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  to  make  sanctions  a  more 
credible threat. 
                                                
6  See M. Salines, G. Glöckler, Z. Truchlewski and P. Del Favero (2011): “Beyond the economics of the euro. 
Analysing the institutional evolution of EMU 1999–2010”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 127. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Another important innovation has been the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance 
in the Economic and Monetary Union, known as “fiscal compact”, which entered into force in 
January  2013.  This  is  an  intergovernmental  treaty  which  establishes,  among  other  things, 
that  Member  States  must  enact  laws  (preferably  at  Constitutional  level)  requiring  their 
national budgets to be in balance or in surplus within the treaty’s definition. The laws must 
also  contain  a  self-correcting  mechanism  to  prevent  any  breach.  The  treaty  defines  a 
balanced budget as a general budget deficit less than 3.0% of the gross domestic product 
(GDP),  and  a  structural  deficit  of  less  than  1.0%  of  GDP  if  the  debt  level  is  below  60%  –
otherwise it shall be below 0.5% of GDP. 
Finally,  the  so-called  “two-pack”  Regulations  entered  only  very  recently  into  force,  subject 
euro  area  countries  to  the  obligation  of  ex  ante  notification  of  budgetary  plans  to  the 
European Commission. Should countries be subject to an excessive deficit procedure (EDP) 
or be involved in a financial assistance program by the European Stabilisation  Mechanism 
(on which I will touch on shortly), they will also be subject to an enhanced monitoring by the 
European Commission. 
Overall,  the  cumulative  effect  of  these  reforms  will  be  a  significant  enhancement  of  fiscal 
governance in the euro area and it is important that the reforms are now implemented fully. 
Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure.  Another  important  innovation  of  the  “six  pack” 
Regulations is the introduction of the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure (MIP), which is 
designed  to  prevent  and  correct  phenomena  such  as  high  current  account  deficits, 
unsustainable  external  indebtedness,  abrupt  or  prolonged  loss  of  competitiveness  and 
housing and credit booms and busts. Unlike reforms in fiscal governance, which were mainly 
aimed  at  strengthening  what  was  already  in  place,  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalances 
Procedure  is  something  which  was  completely  absent  in  the  initial  design  of  the  founding 
fathers of EMU. The procedure starts from a scoreboard of indicators, whereby the European 
Commission  identifies  the  countries  and  issues  which  require  in-depth  reviews.  Based  on 
these  in-depth  reviews  and  depending  on  the  severity  of  the  imbalances  the  Commission 
proposes a policy recommendation under either the “preventive arm” or the “corrective arm” 
of  the  MIP.  In  particular,  if  the  Commission  identifies  an  excessive  imbalance  that  may 
jeopardise the proper functioning of EMU, it will propose a follow-up under the corrective arm 
of the MIP, the Excessive Imbalance Procedure. The Member State concerned will have to 
prepare  a  corrective  action  plan  with  a  roadmap  and  the  deadlines  for  implementing 
adequate measures. Note that this process may end up in sanctions up to 0.1% of GDP, in 
case of non-compliance by the affected Member State. 
The  procedure  for  identifying  and  correcting  macroeconomic  imbalances  is  very  important 
and addresses a concern that the ECB has voiced repeatedly in the European context. Also 
in  this  case  it  will  be  important to  implement  it fully,  while  being  aware  of the  unavoidable 
difficulties, also of an analytical nature, of identifying relevant imbalances ex ante. 
Macro-prudential policies. Turning to macro-prudential policies, in line with other jurisdictions 
the  EU  has  equipped  itself  with  a  body  whose  task  is  to  recommend  actions  to  reduce 
systemic risk in the EU financial sector, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which is 
closely associated with the ECB. While the ESRB cannot take direct action, its advice and 
recommendations carry great weight. In addition, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 
– which I am about to describe in a moment – will assign micro-prudential powers to the ECB 
for the banking sector of those countries which adhere to the SSM. The ESRB will remain 
responsible  for  macro-prudential  issues  in  the  EU  as  a  whole  and  for  the  whole  financial 
sector (i.e. beyond banks). 
Financial market union. Let me now turn to plans to establish a financial market union in the 
euro area. The nexus between banks and sovereigns and financial fragmentation in the euro 
area are phenomena that contradict the very essence of a monetary union, where monetary 
and financial conditions should in principle be uniform in the whole union. Plans to establish 
a financial market union in the euro area are very important, I would say decisive, in breaking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
the  link  between  financial  conditions  and  countries.  An  important  and  very  well  advanced 
element of the financial market union is the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), whereby 
the  ECB  shall  assume  ultimate  responsibility  for  specific  supervisory  tasks  related  to  the 
financial stability of all euro area banks as foreseen in the EU Treaty. While I will not go into 
the details of the proposals currently on the table, which establish direct ECB supervision of 
the largest euro area banks and delegate the supervision of the other banks to the national 
authorities (with the possibility for the ECB to claim direct supervisory powers also for these 
banks if necessary), let me mention that the ECB considers them an appropriate basis for 
taking  on  supervisory  responsibilities,  while  being  aware  of  the  many  practical  challenges 
associated to them. 
It is important that the SSM does not remain the only staple of the financial market union. It is 
essential  that  the  SSM  is  accompanied  by  a  euro  area  (and  even  better  EU)  Single 
Resolution Mechanism. 
Economic  union.  In concluding my  remarks  on reforms  aimed  at making future crises  less 
likely,  let  me  also  mention  proposals  currently  on  the  table  for  the  establishment  of  a 
Convergence and Competitiveness Instrument, also known as “reform contracts”, within the 
EU  budget.  The  proposal  is  essentially  to  create  a  special  EU  budget  account  supporting 
timely  implementation  of  needed  (and  possibly  unpopular)  structural  reforms  following 
contractual  arrangements  between  Member  States  and  the  Commission.  A  review  of  the 
compatibility  of  product  and  labour  market  structures  in  euro  area  countries  with  the 
requirements  of  EMU  is  also  underway,  which  might  provide  further  impetus  to  structural 
reforms in the euro area and make countries less vulnerable to future shocks. 
After  describing  reforms  aimed  at  crisis  prevention,  let  me  now  turn  to  crisis  resolution 
mechanisms. Like fire safety restrictions and fire-fighters, the two elements are individually 
imperfect but should reinforce each other and work in symbiosis. 
The  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  was  created  in  order  to  provide  financial 
assistance to euro area countries in financial difficulty. The ESM will function as a permanent 
firewall for the euro area with a maximum lending capacity of €500 billion. Euro area Member 
States can apply for ESM financing if they are in financial difficulty or their financial sector is 
a  stability  threat  in  need  of  recapitalization.  ESM  interventions  are  conditional  on  Member 
States first signing a Memorandum of Understanding containing a programme for the needed 
reforms  or fiscal  consolidation  to  be  implemented  in  order  to  restore the  financial  stability. 
Note that a precondition for receiving financing from the ESM is to have fully ratified the fiscal 
compact,  which  creates  a  link  between  crisis  prevention  and  resolution  schemes.  The 
involvement  of  the  IMF  in  the  financing  schemes  is  not  strictly  required  but  is  still  highly 
desirable, also in view of the Fund’s analytical expertise in crisis resolution. 
I  would  also  like  to  emphasise  that  the  range  of  tools  available  to  the  ESM  compares 
favourably  with  those  available  to  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  Hence  with  the 
ESM the euro area has equipped itself with a state of the art and permanent crisis resolution 
scheme, a key missing piece in the initial design of EMU. 
the  same 
Conclusions 
As Asia knows very well from its own crisis in 1997/1998, a crisis can be an opportunity for 
reform and renewed growth. This is embodied by the character ji, which in Classical Chinese 
means  at 
language),  as  well  as 
“chance/opportunity” (jihui to use today’s term). In this sense the Asian crisis experience is a 
useful lesson for the euro area, which – I am convinced – will emerge more integrated and 
stronger from the current challenge. 
Perhaps the greatest challenge at this point in time is to keep up the reform momentum even 
if  hopefully  the  most  severe  manifestations  of  the  crisis  abate  and  financial  market 
conditions,  including  financial  integration  within  the  euro  area,  come  back  to  more  normal 
time  “danger/crisis”  (weiji 
today’s 
in 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
conditions. While the ECB will continue to play its part and maintain price stability in the euro 
area, as noted the role of the central bank is limited. Keeping up reforms at the national level 
is particularly important, as is providing a better foundation for a stronger monetary union and 
hence fully implement the institutional changes that have been agreed or are currently on the 
table.  Among  the  latter,  I  would  single  out  an  ambitious  and  full  realisation  of  a  financial 
market  union  comprising  three  legs  (single  supervisory  mechanism,  single  resolution 
mechanism and possibly common deposit insurance as decisive for the long term viability of 
the euro area. Also in this case, the ECB will play its part in full. 
Thank you very much for your attention! 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 