Mugur Isărescu: Christine Lagarde’s visit to Romania 
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, on the 
occasion  of  the  IMF  Managing  Director  Christine  Lagarde’s  visit  to  Romania,  Bucharest, 
16 July 2013. 
 Madame Christine Lagarde, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Today I have the pleasure to welcome again here, at the National Bank of Romania Madame 
Christine  Lagarde,  Managing  Director  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  It’s  good  to 
mention  from  the  beginning  that  she  is  the  first  woman  to  ever  lead  the  IMF.  Timothy 
Geithner, the U.S. Treasury Secretary at the time, said upon her appointment, on July 5th, 
2011: “Lagarde’s exceptional talent and broad experience will provide invaluable leadership 
for this institution at a critical time for the global economy.” 
Allow me to briefly introduce Madame Lagarde to you. 
She was born in Paris. Her father was an English professor. She spent her childhood in Le 
Havre  and  after  graduating  high  school  she  went  on  a  scholarship  to  Maryland,  USA, 
attending  Holton  Arms  School  in  Bethesda.  Madame  Lagarde  got  her  law  degree  at 
University Paris X (dix), and holds a Master’s degree from the Political Science Institute in 
Aix-en-Provence. 
Already  a  member  of  the  Paris  Bar  Association,  Christine  Lagarde  joined  the  international 
law firm of Baker & McKenzie, becoming its Chairman of the Global Executive Committee in 
1999. Subsequently, she acted as Chairman of the Global Strategic Committee in 2004. 
Christine Lagarde joined the French government in June 2005 as Minister for Foreign Trade. 
In June 2007 she became Minister of Economy and Finance, being the first woman to hold 
the  position  of  Finance  Minister  of  a  G-7  country.  From  July  to  December  2008,  she  also 
chaired  the  ECOFIN  Council.  In  2009,  Financial  Times  ranked  her  as  the  best  Minister  of 
Finance in the Eurozone, considering both her excellent work within the French government 
and her involvement in the management of the financial crisis. Madame Lagarde acted with 
diplomacy as Chairman of the G-20 when France took over its presidency for the year 2011. 
All  these  achievements  in  her  current  position  led  Forbes  Magazine  this  year  to  rank  her 
among the most powerful and influential women in the world. 
Besides  her  contribution  to  official  matters,  Madame  Lagarde  has  broader  interests  and  is 
involved in various fields of expertise as well as global issues. For example, she has signaled 
the major risk in not addressing climate change saying with humor: “Our kids will be grilled, 
fried, toasted and roasted.” She also militates for encouraging women to seek education and 
enabling them to be more independent and provide for themselves and for their children. 
Christine Lagarde is Chevalier de la Légion d’honneur since July 2000, and Commander of 
the  Order  of  Mérite  agricole.  She  has  an  Honorary  doctorate  from  Katholieke  Universiteit 
Leuven (Belgium). 
Madame Lagarde will address you today on a thought-provoking topic: Eastern Europe and 
Romania: The Path to Prosperity. The format will be the following: after her presentation we 
will allow three questions from the media and three from our guests. 
Madame Lagarde, s’il vous plait…the floor is yours.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
