Anita Angelovska-Bezoska: Macedonia – current macroeconomic 
developments, medium term outlook and challenges ahead 
Speech  by  Ms  Anita  Angelovska-Bezoska,  Vice-Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the 
Republic of Macedonia, at the Ministerial Dialogue on the Preaccession Economic Programs 
on EU Candidate Countries, European Commission, Brussels, 9 July 2013. 
 Dear Ministers, 
Dear representatives of the European Commission, European Central Bank and Eurostat, 
At  the  beginning,  let  me  express  our  gratitude  to  the  European  Central  Bank,  European 
Commission  and  Eurostat  for  their  contribution  in  assessing  our  Preaccession  Economic 
Program for the period 2013–2015. Within the PEP we already presented the proactive role 
of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  in  dealing  with  the  global  crisis 
consequences, by undertaking a mix of conventional and unconventional measures, aimed 
at  maintenance  of  the  price  stability,  financial  stability,  as  well  as  stimulating  economic 
activity. 
I will use this opportunity to point out several issues regarding the current macroeconomic 
developments, medium term outlook and challenges ahead. 
The latest available data on Macedonian economy for the first quarter of 2013 indicated a 
gradual revival of the economy with real annual GDP growth of 2.9%, slightly higher than our 
expectations, being mainly driven by the investment and net export. Generally, Macedonian 
economy  has  been  relatively  successful  in  offsetting  the  crisis  consequences  which  was 
mainly due to the solid initial conditions prior to the crisis without massive macroeconomic 
imbalances, the establishment of few new production capacities based on foreign capital that 
largely  contributed  to  the  export  diversification,  stable  and  sound  financial  system  and 
adequate macroeconomic policy mix. 
The environment for monetary policy implementation in 2013 is quite favorable, considering 
relatively stable inflation developments and comfortable foreign reserves level. In the first half 
of 2013, the average inflation was 3.6%, mainly due to higher food and energy prices. Our 
latest forecast for the average inflation rate in 2013 is 2.8%, with expected further slowdown 
to 2.3% (close to our historical level) in 2014, until when no pressures of higher significance 
by  the  demand  side  are  being  expected.  However,  there  are risks  related  to  this forecast, 
reflecting the uncertainty about energy prices as well as the world and domestic food prices 
dynamics and their direct and indirect pass-through to inflation. 
The  performances  in the  external  sector  in the first  several  months  of  2013  and  the  latest 
estimates  indicate  quite  favorable  position  in  the  balance  of  payments  for  this  year.  The 
reduced trade deficit is neutralizing the lower net inflows through private transfers. Therefore, 
the current account deficit in 2013 is expected to remain moderate at 4.2% of GDP, which is 
similar  to  the  previous  year. The financial flows  (FDIs  and  borrowing  of private  and  public 
sector)  are  projected  to  be  sufficient  to  cover  current  account  deficit  and  to  provide  some 
further  accumulation  of  reserves.  Thus  the  foreign  reserves  are  expected  to  remain  at 
comfortable  level  during  2013,  indicating  adequate  capacity  for  maintaining  the  fixed 
exchange rate. In a medium run, we expect more positive effects of the FDI’s in the tradable 
sector  on  the  exports,  thus  lowering  the  trade  deficit,  which  is  one  of  the  main  structural 
problems. 
The Macedonian banking sector has remained stable and sound despite the global financial 
and  economic  turbulences  in  the  last  few  years  reflecting  orientation  towards  traditional 
banking activities at domestic market and stable domestic sources of financing. In May 2013, 
the total banks’ deposits were higher by 3.3% on annual basis, and what is very important, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the trend of more pronounced growth in the Denar deposits relative to the foreign currency 
deposits  from  the  previous  three  years  continued.  In  May  2013,  the  Denar  deposits  were 
higher  by  9.3%,  while  foreign  currency  deposits  declined  by  3.4%,  on  annual  basis. 
Therefore, the level of euroization, measured through the share of foreign currency deposits 
in the total deposits went down from almost 55% in mid-2009 to 44% in May 2013, which is a 
positive indication for the confidence in the national currency and monetary policy credibility 
(providing more space for accommodative monetary policy). 
The  financial  support  through  the  banks’  credit  market  during  the  crisis  years  has  been 
moderate,  but  permanent,  therefore  supporting  the  economic  recovery  of  the  economy. 
Anyway,  in  May  2013,  the  annual  credit  growth  was  3.7%,  pointing  to a  gradually  slowing 
pace during 2012 and first half of 2013. Possible reasons for such trends in the credit market 
are: effects of financial deleverage process of foreign parent banks, banks’ deteriorating risk 
perceptions against the backdrop of still anemic economic activity and uncertainty regarding 
the  global  environment,  and  the  present  (though  moderate)  increase  of  credit  risk  in  the 
system, as well as the potential. The NPL ratio reached 11.4% in the first quarter of 2013 
being  one  the  main  challenges  for  the  banking  system  that  is  closely  monitored  by  the 
NBRM. Still, it is among the lowest in the group of the EU candidate countries. Regarding the 
future  prospects  for  credit  flows  it  can  be  noted  that  stable  funding  sources  (loan-deposit 
coverage  ratio  of  around  90%),  strong  liquidity  position,  and  capital  adequacy  ratio 
continuously  being  twice  as  high  than  the  minimum  required,  point  to  room  for  further 
increase  of  lending  in  the  domestic  economy.  The  improvement  of  the  banking  sector 
regulation in view of further implementation of the Basle and EU standards will remain being 
a high priority on the agenda in this field. 
In  general,  the  current  macroeconomic  developments  and  the  expected  future  outlook 
indicate a moderate recovery of domestic economy (considering expected developments for 
the  economies  of  the  most  important  trading  partners  and  domestic  drivers  of  growth), 
inflation  rate  in  line  with  the  expectations,  a  balance  of  payments  position  that  ensures  a 
comfortable level of foreign reserves and still slow credit flows. These assessments created 
an environment for monetary relaxation, as a contribution to higher credit growth and thus, 
support to the domestic economy. On that basis, in January, we reduced the key interest rate 
on CB bills from 3.75% to 3.5%, which is the historically lowest level. Since January 2013, 
the changes in the reserve requirement instrument came into force, through reduction of the 
base  of  banks’  reserve  requirements  by  the  amount  of  newly  approved  loans,  but  only for 
credits  to  sectors  whose  growth  reduces  the  external  vulnerability  of  the  economy  (net 
exporters  and  energy  sector).  This  non-standard  measure  will  be  in  effect  until  the  end  of 
2014,  when  the  need  for  further  application  will  be  examined.  These  changes  in  reserve 
requirements  have  already  started  to  contribute  to  higher  lending  to  previously  mentioned 
sectors  in  the  economy.  Just  last  week,  we  have  done  yet  another  change  in  the  reserve 
requirement by reducing the reserve requirement ratio on Denar deposits from 10% to 8% 
and  simultaneous  increase  of  the  reserve  requirement  ratio  on  foreign  currency  deposits 
from 13% to 15%, as well as introducing 0% reserve requirement ratio on banks’ long term 
liabilities  to  nonresidents.  By  this  measure,  we  are  aiming  to:  support  the  process  of  de-
euroization  in  the  economy,  inject  liquidity  in  support  of  lending  to  the  private  sector  and 
stimulate higher inflows from nonresidents especially from financial institutions. 
Last, but not least, I would like to point out our efforts in strengthening our statistics in the last 
few  years.  In  March  2013,  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  started 
transmitting  the  quarterly  balance  of  payments  and  annual  international  trade  in  services 
data  to  Eurostat,  while  in  May  2013  additional  data  series  on  FDI  flows  and  stocks 
disaggregated by partner countries and activities were submitted. Currently we are working 
on the establishment of new data warehouse system in the central bank that will contribute 
for  improved  data  management  in  general,  as  well  as  enable  the  transmission  of  more 
demanding and detailed datasets in the future. In July 2012 we started with submission of a 
more detailed set of the external debt data to the World Bank within the Quarterly External 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Debt  Statistics  Database  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  for  SDDS  countries,  thus 
being  among  the  first  countries  in  the  region  fulfilling  the  overall  data  requirements  in  this 
field. In addition, just recently, we have received the first Annual Report by the IMF on data 
submission under SDDS, that we joined in November 2011, with positive annotations of the 
overall data submission under this system. Further improvement of our statistics, bringing it 
closer to the EU requirements, remains one of the key priorities of the central bank. 
Just  to  summarize,  in  view  of  the  global  environment,  the  current  macroeconomic 
performances of the Macedonian economy are relatively favorable. Anyway, just like in the 
previous years, the risks are still present and they are related to the expected recovery of the 
external  demand,  the  sentiment  on  the  global  financial  markets  and  the  world  prices 
development.  Continuation  with  the  structural  reforms  is  a  key  in  eliminating  structural 
bottlenecks and paving a way for sustainable growth and faster EU integration process. The 
NBRM  will  continue  with  regular  monitoring  and  analysis  of  the  developments  in  the 
economy and remain prepared, if necessary, to undertake appropriate measures to preserve 
macroeconomic stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
