William C Dudley: The economic outlook and the role of monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS), at the Economic Club of New York, New York City, 25 March 2013. 
 Krishna  Guha,  Simon  Potter,  Jamie  McAndrews,  Lorie  Logan,  Kevin  Stiroh,  Paolo  Pesenti,  Richard  Peach, 
Jonathan McCarthy and others on my staff helped with the preparation of these remarks. 
Clearly detailed accompanying charts to this speech can be found in the pdf document on 
the US Federal Reserve website. [For clarification, exhibits 8 and 14 have been revised to 
indicate that the charts show fiscal years]. 
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak to the Economic Club of New York again. 
Today, I will focus on the economic outlook and the role of monetary policy. I will argue that 
the  fundamentals  underpinning  the  U.S.  economy  are  improving  and  monetary  policy  is 
gaining additional traction. But this may not immediately lead to stronger growth because of 
the recent increase in fiscal restraint. As a result, I expect that labor market conditions will 
improve only slowly and that inflation will remain muted. Consequently, it will be appropriate 
for monetary policy to remain very accommodative. As always, my  views are my own  and 
may  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  the 
Federal Reserve System. 
Economic outlook: tug of war between improving fundamentals and fiscal restraint 
The U.S. economy remains on the slow growth track that has persisted since the recession 
ended in mid-2009. In fact, in 2012 real GDP grew just 1.6 percent, below the 2.2 percent 
rate  of  the  preceding  two  years.  This  lackluster  and  disappointing  performance  masks  the 
fact that the underlying conditions that support growth are gradually improving. However, in 
the near-term, this improvement in fundamentals is being offset by increased fiscal drag. 
Let’s  first  examine  the  fundamentals,  which  have  improved  in  at  least  six  ways.  First, 
household  deleveraging  is  now  well  advanced.  Household  debt  has  declined  significantly 
relative to income (Exhibit 1). In the same vein, the household financial obligations ratio has 
fallen to levels last seen in the early 1980s (Exhibit 2).1  
Second, the structural adjustment in housing has largely run its course. Activity and prices 
are firming, supported by low interest rates. Over the past four quarters, housing starts rose 
by 33 percent, existing home sales climbed by 12 percent (Exhibit 3), and home prices, as 
measured by the CoreLogic national home price index, were up over 7 percent (Exhibit 4). 
Although the pace of recovery varies regionally, the U.S. housing sector as a whole is now 
clearly rebounding. 
I  see  the  recovery  in  home  prices  as  particularly  important.  Houses  are  a  significant 
component of household wealth. In addition, as home prices begin to rise we are likely to see 
more  transactions  and  more  building  activity.  Moreover,  rising  house  prices  are  likely  to 
encourage a further loosening of credit and appraisal standards that remain unduly tight. 
Third,  the  international  economic  outlook  has  improved  somewhat.  Global  financial  market 
strains  relating  to  concerns  about  the  euro-area  have  receded  since  last  summer,  though 
                                                
1  The household obligation ratio is the sum of payments on mortgage and nonmortgage debt, automobile lease 
payments, rental payments on tenant-occupied property, homeowners’ insurance, and property tax payments 
divided by disposable after-tax income. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
recent developments in Cyprus highlight the challenges that remain. Chinese growth appears 
to be climbing after a slowdown in 2012 and Japan is making renewed efforts to grow faster 
and exit from a long period of deflation. 
Fourth, U.S. corporate profits relative to national income are at an all-time record (Exhibit 5) 
and cash balances are very high. As uncertainty recedes and the outlook improves, I expect 
business will increasingly shift towards real investment from mainly buying back shares and 
hoarding cash. 
Fifth,  the  U.S.  is  in  the  middle  of  an  energy  revolution  marked  by  a  steady  rise  in  oil  and 
natural gas production (Exhibit 6). Just as significant, the sharp fall in natural gas prices in 
the U.S. has created a huge impetus to investment in energy-intensive manufacturing, such 
as in petrochemicals. Because the lead times on such investment are long, this impulse will 
likely persist for many years. 
Sixth,  financial  conditions  have  become  increasingly  accommodative,  as  monetary  easing 
has passed through to a broad range of financial asset prices. Credit spreads have narrowed 
and the U.S. equity market has risen sharply (Exhibit 7). The price and availability of some 
types of consumer loans, notably auto loans, has also improved. 
So why isn’t the U.S. economy growing more quickly? The fact that fiscal policy has turned 
significantly more restrictive is the most important reason. The impulse from state and local 
governments that subtracted from growth earlier in the recovery has gone from negative to 
close  to  neutral.  But  this  has  been  overwhelmed  by  the  sharp  shift  in  federal  fiscal  policy 
from  mild  restraint  in  2012  to  much  greater  restraint  in  2013  (Exhibit  8).  The  increase  in 
payroll tax rates, the rise in high income tax rates, the increase in taxes associated with the 
Affordable Care Act, and now the sequester – if sustained – will result in fiscal drag of about 
1 3/4 percentage points of GDP in 2013.2  
I  view  this  as  an  unfortunate  outcome.  While  the  U.S.  must  put  its  public  finances  on  a 
sustainable footing, this should be done in a manner that best achieves both our near-term 
and long-term objectives. In my opinion, a U.S. fiscal policy well-suited for the current set of 
circumstances  would  start  with  a  very  mild  degree  of  restraint  in  the  near-term  that  would 
credibly build to substantial consolidation over the next several decades. Of course, it is for 
Congress  to  judge  what  combination  of  tax  increases  and  spending  cuts  should  be 
undertaken  to  achieve  this.  Nevertheless,  the  aging  of  our  population  and  simple  math 
suggest that entitlement reform would need to be part of such a plan. Also, in an ideal world, 
fiscal policy would have broad-based bipartisan support. That would reduce uncertainty and 
reassure households and businesses that the U.S. was on a sustainable long-term path. 
Instead,  we  have  nearly  the  opposite:  significant  retrenchment  in  the  near-term,  but  no 
credible  action  over  the long-term,  with  partisan  divisions  and  significant  uncertainty  about 
what will happen next. Will the sequester, for example, be sustained or not? 
Economic outlook 
Looking at the outlook for 2013, I believe that growth in the first half will be sluggish as the 
fiscal contraction blunts the economy’s forward advance. While first quarter GDP growth will 
likely rebound to a 2 to 3 percent annualized rate following the dip in the fourth quarter, this 
will be due in large part to temporary factors.3  
                                                
2  Before taking into account fiscal multipliers. 
3  This includes a modest boost from inventory investment following the substantial drag of the prior quarter, a 
recovery in farm output following last year’s drought, and less drag from defense outlays following the steep 
plunge of the fourth quarter. Rebuilding following the devastation from Superstorm Sandy may also provide 
some temporary lift this quarter. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I’d  also  emphasize  that  there  remains  considerable  uncertainty  about  the  outlook.  In 
particular,  we  can’t  be  confident  about  how  much  fiscal  drag  will  blunt  growth.  Ultimately, 
though,  the  drag  should  abate.  When  that  happens  –  presumably  later  this  year,  the 
economy should strengthen. 
Inflation, as measured by the personal consumption expenditure deflator, is currently below 
the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent objective (Exhibit 9). Substantial slack remains in labor and 
product  markets,  and  underlying  measures  of  inflation  are  subdued.  With  weak  labor 
compensation growth, the trend growth of unit labor costs is less than 1 percent annualized, 
which is well below price inflation. Moreover, inflation expectations remain well anchored at 
levels consistent with our 2 percent longer-run objective. Thus, I conclude that the risk that 
inflation  could  significantly  exceed  our  2  percent  objective  is  quite  low  over  the  next  few 
years, even if the recovery were to strengthen considerably. 
U.S. monetary policy initiatives 
Beginning in September, the FOMC made a number of important changes to monetary policy 
in  order  to  promote  a  stronger  recovery  in  the  context  of  price  stability.  First,  the  FOMC 
began  purchasing  an  additional  $40  billion  of  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS) 
each  month.4  Second,  the  FOMC  stated,  for  the  first  time,  that  it  would  continue  buying 
assets  and  employ  its  other  policy  tools  as  appropriate  until  there  was  a  substantial 
improvement in the labor market outlook5. Third, the FOMC stated its intention to maintain a 
highly accommodative stance of monetary policy for a considerable time after the recovery 
strengthens. 
Two  additional  initiatives  followed  in  December.  First,  consistent  with  the  September 
statement, the FOMC began a new purchase program of $45 billion long-dated Treasuries 
per  month.  Second,  the  FOMC  shifted  to  economic  thresholds  from  calendar-based  rate 
guidance. 
The FOMC committed to keep the federal funds rate at its current level of zero to 25 basis 
points at least as long as unemployment remains above 6.5 percent, projected inflation on a 
one to two year horizon is below 2.5 percent and inflation expectations stay well anchored. 
Both elements of the policy stance were reaffirmed at last week’s FOMC meeting. 
So  why  did  we  make  these  changes?  The  additional  asset  purchases  provide  further 
monetary stimulus. This is appropriate given that we were falling short of our objectives.6  
Moving  to  an  outcome-based  purchase  program  also  has  other  advantages.  In  particular, 
expectations  of the  ultimate amount  of  purchases  should  change  as  the  economic  outlook 
evolves.  This  acts  as  an  automatic  stabilizing  mechanism.  In  particular,  the  FOMC’s 
statement that purchases will continue until the labor market outlook improves substantially 
provides additional support for the recovery by reducing downside tail risk. 
The  shift  to  rate  guidance  based  on  economic  thresholds  was  not  intended  to  provide 
additional accommodation at the time it was implemented.7 But, the adoption of thresholds 
does  support  the  recovery  by  changing  the  risk  profile  in  a  different  way.  The  thresholds 
                                                
4 
5  At the time the FOMC was purchasing an additional $45 billion a month of longer-dated Treasury securities 
In addition to reinvestment of maturing MBS. 
while selling an equivalent amount of shorter-dated securities under the Maturity Extension Program. 
6  While  we  specified  a  current  monthly  pace  of  purchases  the  degree  of  stimulus  depends  mainly  on 
expectations for the ultimate size of purchases and how long we are expected to hold the assets that we have 
acquired. 
7  This was made clear in the FOMC statement that the Committee expected to reach the unemployment rate 
threshold at the same time as the earlier date guidance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
make  it  clear  that  short-term  rates  will  not  be  raised  at  the  first  sign  of  economic 
improvement, before a sustainable recovery has been secured. As a result, households and 
businesses  should  be  more  confident  in  undertaking  additional  spending  and  investment 
today. 
The shift to thresholds-based rate guidance has other benefits. Relative to calendar-based 
guidance, it provides more information about the economic conditions the Fed would need to 
see before raising rates.8 Importantly, the shift to thresholds should also make the eventual 
normalization of monetary policy smoother, a subject I will return to later. 
But  this  raises  an  obvious  question.  If  quantitative  thresholds  are  good  for  interest  rate 
guidance, why not also have such thresholds for the asset purchase program? There are two 
reasons. There is somewhat more uncertainty about the efficacy and costs associated with 
asset purchases than rate guidance and we are likely to learn more about the efficacy and 
costs as the program unfolds. 
So what is this likely to mean in practice? In my view, we should calibrate the total amount of 
purchases to that needed to deliver a substantial improvement in labor market conditions, by 
allowing  the  flow  rate  of  purchases  to  respond  to  material  changes  in  the  labor  market 
outlook. This makes sense because the benefits9 of additional accommodation will gradually 
diminish as we get closer to our full employment and price stability objectives and become 
more confident that we will reach them in a timely manner.10 At some point, I expect that I will 
see sufficient evidence of economic momentum to cause me to favor gradually dialing back 
the pace of asset purchases.11  
Of course, any subsequent bad news could lead me to favor dialing them back up again. As 
the  Chairman  Bernanke  said  in  his  press  conference  last  Wednesday  “when  we  see  that 
the…situation  has  changed  in  a  meaningful  way,  then  we  may  well  adjust  the  pace  of 
purchases in order to keep the level of accommodation consistent with the outlook.” 
The labor market outlook 
So  how  are  we  doing  relative  to  our  objective  of  a  substantial  improvement  in  the  labor 
market outlook? 
Since  we provided additional stimulus in September there has been some improvement in 
labor  market  conditions.  The  unemployment  rate  is  modestly  lower  and  private  non-farm 
payroll growth a bit higher than earlier in 2012, which is certainly welcome. However, other 
important  indicators  including  the  employment-to-population  ratio  and  job-finding  rates  are 
essentially unchanged (Exhibit 10). This suggests that the labor market is far from healthy. 
Moreover,  our  policy  is  based  on  the  outlook  for  the  labor  market,  not  the  level  of 
employment  or  unemployment  today.  In this  context  I  note that  the recent  improvement  in 
payroll  employment  growth,  which  gets  much  of  the  attention,  is  out-sized  relative  to  the 
growth rate of economic activity that supports it. We have seen this movie before. When this 
happened  in  2011  and  2012,  employment  growth  subsequently  slowed  (see  Exhibit  11). 
                                                
8 
It avoids the ambiguity of what a change in the forward rate guidance would signal. Is the date being moved 
out, for example, because the FOMC wants to provide additional accommodation or is the move just due to 
deterioration in the economic forecast? 
I draw a distinction here between efficacy and benefit. In my view, the benefit of additional accommodation 
would diminish as we get closer to our dual mandate objectives and become more confident in the forecast of 
a strengthening recovery, even if the assessment of the efficacy and cost of the tool were unchanged. 
9 
10  Of course, this expectation assumes no new information on efficacy and costs emerges that fundamentally 
changes my assessment of the merits of the program. 
11  Assuming that the improvement in the outlook is not endogenous to the chosen policy setting to the extent that 
it would disappear if purchases were slowed. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Because growth this year will be constrained by fiscal consolidation, there is a risk that this 
could  happen  again.  As  a  result,  it  is  premature  to  conclude  that  we  will  soon  see  a 
substantial improvement in the labor market outlook. 
Efficacy of the asset purchase program exceeds the costs 
Our asset purchases are also conditional on our ongoing evaluation that the efficacy of the 
program exceeds the costs. That clearly has been the case to date – affirmed by our policy 
decisions. Since we put the outcome-based approach in place in September, my assessment 
is that efficacy has been as high or higher than I expected at the onset of the program, and 
costs the same or lower. 
Efficacy  has  two  components:  the  effect  of  the  purchases  on  financial  conditions  and  the 
effect  of  financial  conditions  on  the  economy.  Our  latest  purchase  program  has  been 
associated  with  a  substantial  easing  in  financial  conditions,  higher  equity  prices,  and 
narrower credit spreads. The resumption of additional agency MBS purchases in September 
pushed  down  MBS  yields.  With  some  lag,  much  of  the  drop  in  yields  has  been  passed 
through to primary mortgage rates. 
Meanwhile, the impact of the improvement in financial conditions on the real economy has 
been somewhat stronger than I had expected. Since September we have seen considerable 
strength  in  the  interest-sensitive  sectors  of  the  economy,  including  housing,  autos  and 
durable goods, in spite of the uncertainty and drag from fiscal policy. Improvement in these 
sectors suggests that monetary policy may be gaining additional traction. This is important 
because it suggests that the benefit from a given amount of asset purchases has increased. 
On the cost side, I conclude that costs specific to balance sheet expansion have turned out 
to be no greater than I had anticipated and, because we have less uncertainty about those 
costs, they are lower than I would have expected in a risk-adjusted sense. Let me start with 
three commonly cited potential costs – impairment of market functioning, the unanchoring of 
inflation expectations, and threats to financial stability. 
We carefully monitor financial markets for signs that market functioning has been impaired, 
looking  at  metrics  such  as  trading  volumes,  bid-offer  spreads,  failures  to  deliver  securities 
and our own ability to execute transactions. On some of these metrics, market functioning 
has actually improved in recent months. Of course, we will need to continue to monitor this, 
particularly if a rise in interest rates leads to less MBS issuance. But so far, so good. 
In  terms  of  inflation  expectations,  a  wide  range  of  measures  remain  well  anchored.  For 
example,  the  5-year,  5-year  forward  measure  of  inflation  expectations  calculated  from 
Treasury  TIPs  versus  nominal  yields  is  well  within  the  historical  range  of  recent  years 
(Exhibit 12). 
In  contrast,  assessing  the  potential  costs  in  terms  of  financial  stability  is  more  difficult. 
Indeed, it is not clear to me which way the sign goes. Do asset purchases increase or reduce 
financial stability risks? 
On  the  one  hand,  information  received  since  September  suggests  there  is  slightly  greater 
reason for  concern  about  potential  excesses  in  certain  corners  of the financial  markets.  In 
particular, some areas of fixed income – notably high-yield bonds and leveraged loans – do 
seem  somewhat  frothy.  However,  I  view  the  expected  cost  to  society  from  bad  outcomes 
here  as  relatively  low.  The  broad  and  rapid  credit  creation  associated  with  the  most 
dangerous  types  of  asset  bubbles  has  been  absent  (Exhibit  13).  The  size  of  the  asset 
classes  in  question  is  relatively  modest  and  most  of  the  investors  in  these  assets  are  not 
highly  leveraged.  So  if  asset  valuations  were  to  adjust  sharply  and  some  investors 
experienced  painful  losses,  I  do  not  expect  that  such  a  shock  would  threaten  financial 
stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Nevertheless, we will need to keep a close eye on financial asset prices. As I noted in my 
first speech to the Economic Club of New York 3 years ago: “Despite the fact that it is hard to 
discern bubbles, especially in their early stages, I conclude that uncertainty is not grounds for 
inaction. Instead, the decision whether to act depends on whether appropriate tools can be 
deployed to limit the size of a bubble and whether the benefits of acting and deploying such 
tools are likely to exceed the costs.”12  
On the other hand, there is a financial stability case for doing more purchases in the current 
context. To the extent that risky behaviors and incipient asset price bubbles are fueled by an 
expectation  that  interest  rates  will  be  “low  for  long,”  asset  purchases  that  strengthen  the 
economic  recovery  and  bring  forward  the  date  of  liftoff  should  promote  financial  stability. 
Also, to the extent that asset purchases increase the likelihood of a sustainable recovery, this 
reduces  the  financial  stability  risks  associated  with  a  Japanese-style  outcome  of  chronic 
deflation. 
Although the costs specific to the asset purchase program appear well-contained, it is also 
true that the costs increase as the program gets larger. In part, this is due to fact that as the 
balance sheet increases in size, the risk of a period of low or zero remittances to Treasury 
also increases. As we acquire more longer-dated assets funded with reserves, the Fed takes 
on more interest rate risk. This is how the policy works. A byproduct is that our net income 
and remittances will be unusually elevated for a while, then are likely to fall substantially for a 
period,  before  returning  to  more  normal  levels.  This  is  because  our  interest  expense  will 
increase substantially when we begin normalizing rates. Also, if we were to sell assets in a 
rising  rate  environment,  we  could  also  experience  some  capital  losses  on  these  sales.  In 
combination,  depending  on  the  future  trajectory  of  short  and  long  rates,  remittances  could 
even fall to zero for a period.13  
There are several important points to make here. First, the potential impact of the purchase 
program  on future  Fed remittances  was known  at the  onset  of the  program  –  we  have  no 
new information here. The outcome depends on how the economy evolves, how we respond, 
and whether we decide to sell long-dated assets in the portfolio or not. 
Second,  it  is  important  not  to  put  excessive  weight  on  the  possibility  of  a  period  of  zero 
remittances. Our mandate is economic not fiscal – our job is to return the economy to full 
employment  and  price  stability.  Moreover,  in  considering  the  fiscal  consequences  of  our 
actions,  what  matters  is  not  what  happens  to  our  remittances  –  that  is  far  too  narrow  a 
perspective – but how our actions affect the federal debt-to-GDP ratio over time. This is the 
metric  we  should  be  focusing  on  in  assessing  the  potential  fiscal  consequences  of  our 
actions. 
In this respect, it is important to note that the narrow impact of Fed remittances on the federal 
debt-to-GDP  ratio  depends  on  the  cumulative  amount,  not  the  timing  of  remittances. 
Cumulative  remittances  to  date  have  been  hundreds  of  billions  of  dollars  higher,  all  else 
equal,  compared  to  if  the  Federal  Reserve  had  not  expanded  its  balance  sheet.  And, 
according  to  Congressional  Budget  Office  projections,  even  if  remittances  drop  sharply  in 
future  years,  cumulative  remittances  would  still 
likely  be  higher  compared  to  the 
counterfactual regime in which the Fed had not expanded its balance sheet (Exhibit 14). In 
addition,  because  Fed  purchases  put  downward  pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates,  this 
                                                
12  Asset Bubbles and the Implications for Central Bank Policy, Economic Club of New York, April 7, 2010. 
13  If the Fed’s net income fell below zero in a year it would record a deferred asset that it would redeem with 
future net income. Paid in capital and surplus would remain positive in a very wide range of scenarios. See 
The  Federal  Reserve’s  Balance  Sheet  and  Earnings:  A  primer  and  projections  ,  Seth  B.  Carpenter,  Jane 
E. Ihrig,  Elizabeth  C.  Klee,  Daniel W.  Quinn,  and  Alexander  H.  Boote,  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion 
Series,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  2013-01.  See  also  SOMA  annual  report 
(forthcoming). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
generates interest savings for the Treasury, and this benefit should be included in the fiscal 
cost calculations. 
Finally, and most importantly, to the extent that asset purchases are effective in pushing the 
trajectory of economic growth above what would otherwise have been the case, this will lead 
to higher federal government tax revenue and lower safety net spending outlays during the 
recovery period. This means that across a broad range of scenarios, our large-scale asset 
purchase program is likely to result in a lower federal debt-to-GDP ratio. 
To  sum  up,  the  better  choice  is  for  the  Fed  to  pursue  the  policy  that  best  achieves  its 
mandated objectives and puts the U.S. government in a better fiscal position. This dominates 
a  policy  of  fewer  purchases  simply  so  we  can  avoid  potentially  having  to  explain  why  our 
remittances may have fallen to zero for a short period. 
Issues associated with the normalization of monetary policy 
Finally, I’d like to talk about some of the other issues associated with the normalization of 
monetary policy. In general, I think it is premature to spend much time focusing on exit when 
we have not yet secured a sustainable economic recovery. That’s putting the cart before the 
horse  in  my  opinion.  That  said,  we  nevertheless  do  need  to  understand  the  issues 
surrounding  exit  so  that  we  can  design  the  best  monetary  policy  regime  to  achieve  our 
objectives. 
On this topic, let me ease three concerns I hear frequently expressed. The first is that the 
large amount of excess reserves in the banking system will be “dry tinder” and fuel a rise in 
inflation. As I have mentioned repeatedly, the ability of the Federal Reserve to pay interest 
on excess reserves ensures that we can control the credit creation process and prevent an 
upsurge in inflation. 
The second is that when the Fed ultimately raises the rate it pays on excess reserves, it will 
be  providing  a  subsidy  to  the  banks.  IOER  is  not  a  subsidy  to  the  banks.14  In  attracting 
deposits  or  other  liabilities,  competition  among  banks15  will  ensure  that  higher  interest 
payments to banks on their reserves will be passed through to bank liability holders. 
I look forward to the day when the economy is strong enough for us to raise the interest rate 
on excess reserves. When that happens, deposit rates will also rise. That will be important 
because ultra-low rates have been a burden for many seniors and others heavily reliant on 
this kind of income. When we raise the IOER, it will be my mother and my mother-in-law and 
others like them, not bankers, who will mainly benefit. 
The  third  concern  is  the  notion  that  the  Federal  Reserve  will  be  slow  to  tighten  monetary 
policy because this will reduce the amount of our remittances to the Treasury. This does not 
add up. The Fed is a central bank, not an asset management company – our commitment is 
to  our  dual  mandate  economic  objectives  –  not  maximizing  net  income  or  remittances. 
                                                
14  When the Fed creates reserve balances, banks are forced to either add deposits or other liabilities to match 
the increase in their assets, or reduce other assets, by selling off securities, for example. In either of these 
responses, banks experience a cost of managing their reserves. 
15  Among many other changes, the Dodd-Frank Act allowed banks to pay interest on corporate deposits, and 
those  depositors,  because  they  deposit  large  amounts,  are  likely  more  interest-sensitive,  than  individual 
depositors. Furthermore, the wholesale money market is intensely competitive, and, as evidence that reserves 
are distributed across banks in a way that reflects competitive considerations, note that currently, reserves are 
held in disproportionately large amounts by Foreign Banking Organizations. The reason I think this happens is 
that  those  FBOs  do  not  have  to  pay  the  FDIC  assessment  fee  on  their  liabilities  (as  they  hold  no  U.S. 
deposits). That suggests that all banks face competition in attracting liabilities to match their reserve holdings, 
and that the FBOs, because they face a lower cost in doing so, have managed to attract those deposits at a 
faster clip than domestic banks. This is the sort of competition that I expect to see that will result in the interest 
on reserves being passed through by banks to their customers and to the broader economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Moreover,  even  if  we  were  to  put  any  weight  on  this  consideration,  the  incentives  go  the 
other  way  –  our  enlarged  balance  sheet  creates  an  additional  reason  to  tighten  monetary 
policy in a timely way. If the Fed were to delay in raising short-term rates to protect its current 
earnings,  inflation  would  rise  and  this  would  push  long-term  rates  higher.  This  would  just 
necessitate a bigger rise in short-term interest rates and a greater loss of earnings later. 
A much more important issue with respect to policy normalization is moderating the risk of a 
sharp  snapback  in  longer-term  yields.  But  this  has  less  to  do  with  the  size  of  the  balance 
sheet specifically than the challenge of normalizing the current stance of monetary policy in 
all its dimensions. There is always a risk that market participants will foreshorten the Fed’s 
actions. Market participants could collapse an extended sequence of steps back to the date 
of  the  first  move  towards  normalization  resulting  in  an  abrupt  tightening  of  financial 
conditions. 
The move to economic thresholds-based guidance for the fed funds rate should help in this 
regard. While the thresholds are certainly not triggers, they should help market participants 
adjust  expectations  about  the  likely  timing  of  liftoff  in  a  relatively  continuous  manner  and 
guard against these expectations being pulled further forward  in time than is warranted by 
changes in the economic outlook. 
Nevertheless, we will need to communicate our broader intentions very clearly. Even when 
purchases cease, the enlarged balance sheet will provide substantial ongoing stimulus. It is 
important to recognize that the Fed could remain in this posture with policy “on hold” for a 
significant  period.  As  the  threshold  framework  should  make  clear,  there  is  no  fixed  time-
frame between completing purchases and raising short term rates. 
Long-term yields rose sharply in 1994 and 2004 when economic recoveries got underway in 
earnest  after  sustained  periods  of  unusually  low  short-term  rates.  Compared  to  those 
episodes, the risk of a spike in long-dated yields this time around may be somewhat lower for 
two  reasons.  First,  this  risk  is  receiving  much  attention.  Big  market  moves  are  typically 
associated with surprises. For the market to reprice suddenly, I presume there would need to 
be some new information that led investors to significantly revise their view of the outlook or 
the Fed's reaction function. 
Second,  the  Fed's  expansion  of  its  own  balance  sheet  may  be  a  stabilizing  influence.  For 
example,  the  rise  in  interest  rates  during  the  prior  episodes  was  amplified  by  convexity-
related hedging generated by the lengthening of expected mortgage duration. This should be 
a  less  powerful  force  this  time  around  because  the  Fed  holds  a  substantial  portion  of  the 
agency MBS market. 
However,  we  should  keep  up  our  guard.  The  regulatory  community  must  continue  to  take 
steps  to  mitigate  the  vulnerability  of  the  economy  to  a  sharp  rise  in  long-term  rates.  This 
includes monitoring banks’ exposure to duration risk and the quality of their risk management 
and capital planning, while also looking outside of the banking system because some risks 
may reside elsewhere. In this regard, agency mortgage REITs and the risk of large outflows 
from bond mutual funds are issues that deserve ongoing attention. 
Conclusion 
The FOMC is committed to the dual objectives of maximum sustainable employment in the 
context of price stability. Currently we are falling well short of our employment objective and 
the restrictive stance of federal fiscal policy is a factor. On inflation, we are also falling short, 
but by a considerably smaller margin. As a consequence, we need to keep monetary policy 
very accommodative. 
I do not claim that there are no costs or risks associated with our unconventional monetary 
policy regime. But I see greater cost and risk in moving prematurely to a policy setting that 
might not prove sufficiently accommodative to ensure a sustainable, strengthening recovery. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I remain confident that the benefits of a stronger and earlier economic recovery will trump the 
costs associated with our unconventional monetary policy measures. 
Thanks for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
