Yandraduth Googoolye: Corporate governance 
Address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the 
workshop  on  “Corporate  governance”,  organised  by  the  Mauritius  Institute  of  Directors, 
Port-Louis, 11 January 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen  
A very good morning to you.  
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Mauritius  Institute  of  Directors  –  the  MIOD  –  for  organizing  this 
Workshop on Corporate Governance and inviting me to speak before such a distinguished 
audience.  
I  understand  that  this  is  the  second  Workshop  in  this  series  –  the  first  one  was  held  in 
November last year at this very same venue and due to the vast interest expressed by its 
members, the MIOD had to organize this second workshop.  
Corporate Governance is turning out to be a very topical issue indeed! Not only in Mauritius, 
but worldwide. International standard setters like the Bank for International Settlements and 
the  OECD,  among  others,  have  recommended  that  bolder  initiatives  be  taken  to  promote 
higher corporate governance standards in organisations. These initiatives, as you all know, 
were driven mainly by the corporate governance failures and lapses noted during the global 
financial crisis.  
The  crisis  has  shown  that  there  is  not  only  the  need  for  banks  to  improve  their  corporate 
governance  practices,  but  that  supervisors  also  must  ensure  that  sound  corporate 
governance principles are thoroughly and consistently implemented.  
But why should banks be subject to more stringent rules than other companies? One would 
be tempted to ask.  
Well, simply because banks play a critical role in the economy. They are highly leveraged 
institutions and most of their funds come from depositors – regulators cannot condone that a 
customer  loses  his  money  on  account  of  lax  corporate  governance  standards  being 
maintained  in  institutions  they  regulate.  Regulators  have  the  ultimate  responsibility  of 
ensuring  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system  while  at  the  same  time 
safeguarding the interests of the depositors and the public at large.  
Hence,  it  is  vital  that  this  special  position  of  trust  that  banks  have  in  the  economy  is 
maintained through principles of good corporate governance. And it is within the remit of the 
regulators  to  make  sure  that  these  principles  are  effectively  adhered  to  by  banks. 
Predictably,  the  best  option  available  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  to  ensure  that  these  best 
practices  are  being  adhered  to  in  the  banking  sector  is  to  prescribe  them  in  the  form  of 
Guidelines.  
In fact, as far back as 2001, the Bank of Mauritius issued the first Guideline on Corporate 
Governance,  which  shows  that  corporate  governance  has  always  ranked  high  on  our 
agenda.  The  first  Guideline,  however,  provided  only  a  broad  framework  of  corporate 
governance whereby banks were advised to put in place a set of parameters without being 
prescriptive enough.  
The  growth  and  increasing  complexity  of  banks  domestically  coupled  with  the  sad 
experiences which unfolded during the financial crisis, however, heightened the need for the 
Bank  of  Mauritius  to  revisit  the  codes  and  principles  of  corporate  governance  governing 
banks.  
As you all know, the history of banking contains many examples of banking crises. You may 
recall the high profile failures such as Enron and Parmalat and nearer to us, the failure of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
banks in the global financial crisis largely attributed to failures in corporate governance and 
risk management practices and the underpinning poor corporate culture and ethics.  
In response, many standard setting bodies and banking supervisors around the world have 
revamped  their  corporate  governance  standards  requirements  and  reassessed  their 
adequacy.  Whilst  these  changes  may  have  increased  the  burden  of  regulated  financial 
institutions, they provide a safeguard for the financial system as a whole.  
The Bank of Mauritius has also kept pace with the evolving best practices set by international 
standard setters and issued a new Guideline on Corporate Governance in August 2012.  
This  Guideline,  I  must  say,  was  released  to  the  industry  after  rather  lengthy  consultations 
with  the  banking  community  and  the  public  at  large.  The  Guideline  was  issued  for  public 
consultation  in  November  2010  and  it  was  finalized  after  nearly  two  years.  The  Bank  of 
Mauritius adopted a collaborative approach on this front and discussion groups were set up 
with banks. We even received comments from the MIOD for which we are very thankful and 
we  thank  everyone  who  participated  in  this  initiative.  I  must  emphasize  here  that  the  new 
Guideline has been finalized taking into account the specificities of the local context.  
Let me now run you through the broad principles underpinning the Guideline.  
The financial crisis has shown that in certain instances, the Board – which plays a significant 
role  in  safeguarding  the  corporate  governance  principles  and  is  ultimately  responsible  for 
overseeing  the  organization  and  management  of  the  company’s  affairs  as  well  as  the 
individual board directors were simply unaware of and did not understand the risks taken by 
the businesses which they were supposed to oversee. Other factors in corporate governance 
breakdown were attributed to conflicts of interest, lack of board director independence, weak 
internal  and  external  audit  practices  and  deficient  internal  control  systems.  Moreover,  the 
complexity of the organisational structure of some financial firms impeded transparency and 
disclosure  so  that  the  firms’  true  conditions  were  not  visible  to  external  parties  such  as 
regulators and market participants.  
The  new  Guideline  on  Corporate  Governance  has  thus,  attempted  to  circumvent  these 
shortcomings  and  uphold  the  three  principles  underpinning  good  corporate  governance, 
namely integrity, transparency and accountability.  
The Guideline emphasizes the responsibility of boards, their accountability as well as that of 
the  Chairperson  who  leads  the  Board.  The  quality  of  the  people  sitting  on  boards  and 
comprising senior management of financial companies has a direct bearing on the way these 
institutions are managed. The Guideline, therefore, whilst ensuring that directors meet the fit 
and proper person criteria, further prescribes for the leadership skills enhancement of board 
directors.  Poor  leadership  has  undermined  public  confidence  in financial  institutions  during 
the crisis and has provided many painful but precious leadership lessons to one and all. The 
Orientation Program for Directors outlined in the Guideline addresses the issue of leadership 
by  ensuring  that  directors  are  fully  conversant  with  the  principles  of  leadership,  and  the 
leadership training programme has to be approved by the Bank of Mauritius. I am pleased to 
announce that this Workshop has been duly approved by the Bank.  
The  crisis  also  brought  to  light  the  importance  of  inculcating  a  corporate  culture  which 
promotes ethical principles. Culture has been described as “the way human beings behave 
together  –  what  they  value  and  what  they  celebrate.”  The  banking  crisis  revealed  a 
breakdown of the values that promote trust and led to a crisis of confidence in banks.  
Regulation  can  propel  a  change  in  culture  when  it  is  otherwise  not  feasible,  as  rightly 
expressed by the Chief Executive of the UK, Financial Services Authority who stated that the 
regulator can influence culture by “influencing the composition of management, influencing 
incentives  for  good  behaviour,  influencing  training  and  competence  regime  and  deterring 
poor behaviour.”  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  Guideline  on  Corporate  Governance,  thus  imposes  the  responsibility  on  directors  and 
senior management to lead by example in an environment that emphasizes trust, integrity, 
honesty,  judgment,  respect,  responsibility  and  accountability.  Culture  can  only  be  effective 
when  combined  with  strong  leadership.  For  corporate  governance  principles  to  be  really 
effective,  the  tone  must  be  set  from  the  very  top  of  the  organization  in  order  that  these 
principles  trickle  down  to  the  lowest  level  of  the  organization  to  ensure  compliance.  The 
board  should  actively  sustain  an  ethical  corporate  culture  in  the  organization.  Further, 
strategic plans and procedures have to promote ethical balance, fair dealing practices must 
be applied, and a code of ethics must be laid down and communicated to all the members of 
the organisation.  
The Guideline on Corporate Governance not only draws from lessons learnt from the crisis, 
but  also  aims  at  addressing  corporate  governance  weaknesses  identified  in  financial 
institutions during on-site examinations conducted by the Bank of Mauritius and which have 
not been remedied in line with the recommendations of the Bank of Mauritius. While the 2001 
Guideline  recommended  for  a  rotation  of  directors,  it  was  noted  that  this  recommendation 
has  not  been  implemented  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  It  was  found  that 
some boards remained “Pale, Male and Stale” as Governor Bheenick remarked during the 
first Workshop. To remedy that, we had no other alternative than to limit the term of office of 
non-executive directors of local banks to 6 years with a cooling-off period of two years before 
a possible re-appointment. This would allow for more fresh blood in the Boardroom with new 
ideas, new mindset and, why not, bolder initiatives. Renewal of board members allows new 
thinking on the board. Nevertheless, we are alive of the need to maintain continuity at the 
Board level and banks have been granted a transitional period to comply with that provision.  
In  addition,  on  the  issue  of  directorship,  it  needs  to  be  highlighted  that  while  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius is mandated under the Banking Act 2004 to allow a director to sit on the Board of 
more than one financial institution, we have taken the view that there is a potential risk of 
conflict of interest, if we were to allow this. We also believe that all directors should allocate 
sufficient time to perform their board responsibilities effectively. 
The  Chairperson  of  the  Board  must  be  an  independent  director  under  the  Guideline.  This 
requirement  is  based  on  the  principle  that  effective  board  debate  and  discussion  require 
independent  board  leadership.  A  strong  presence  of  independent  directors  implies 
independent judgment, free of any external influence.  
The  board  is  further  encouraged  to  appoint  a  lead  independent  director.  The  lead 
independent  director  has  a  potentially  major  role  to  play  within  the  board,  if  there  is  a 
potential  or  actual  tension  between  the  Chairman  and  CEO  or,  alternatively,  where  the 
closeness  of 
the  ability  of  non-
executive/independent directors to challenge and to contribute effectively to the works of the 
board.  
As regards the various sub-committees of the boards, the Guideline makes it mandatory for 
financial institutions to have an Audit Committee, a Conduct Review Committee for related 
party transactions and a Risk Management Committee. Board sub-committees represent the 
arm  of  the  board  for  those  issues  that  require  special  competencies.  The  sub-committees 
should report regularly and formally to the board which should stand ready to challenge any 
key issues as the board bears the ultimate responsibility.  
Corporate governance principles also require the bottom-up flow of information to the board 
through  independent  control  functions  such  as  the  internal  audit,  compliance  and  risk 
management  functions.  However,  the  onus  remains  on  the  board  to  ensure  receipt  of 
management information as appropriate for the exercise of its oversight responsibilities. We 
may  recall  that  the  global  financial  crisis  revealed  weaknesses  in  corporate  governance 
practices of failed banks where information on the real risks being taken by the institution did 
not reach the board or even senior levels of management. Even if risk management systems 
are  functioning,  the  absence  of  transmission  of  information  to  the  board  and  senior 
the  Chairman  and 
the  CEO  might 
inhibit 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
management  would  constitute  a  breakdown  of  corporate  governance  principles.  Approving 
strategy  is  not  sufficient,  suitable  metrics  must  be  set  to  monitor  the  implementation  of 
strategy and the responsibility for such monitoring falls on the board.  
Internal Audit and Compliance are two independent assurance functions which constitute the 
eyes  of  the  board  in  matters  of  internal  control  as  well  as  legislative  and  regulatory 
compliance. Whilst the Banking Act 2004 already elevated the Internal Audit function in the 
organization  by  giving  it  a  direct  reporting  line  to  the  Audit  Committee,  the  Guideline  on 
Corporate  Governance  has  now  enhanced  the  value  and  importance  of  the  Compliance 
function by prescribing that it has a direct reporting line to the board or a board committee. 
This  function  has  the  responsibility  of  ensuring  compliance  with  legislative  and  regulatory 
requirements as well as policies and procedures. Moreover, a compliance certificate has to 
be delivered by the board to the central bank on an annual basis as we want to ensure that 
the  board  is  assuming  its  compliance  oversight  responsibilities  over  the  activities  of  the 
institution.  
It would be remiss of me, if, in a talk on corporate governance, I did not mention the role of 
external  auditors.  The  latter  provide  an  independent  opinion  on  whether  the  financial 
statements of the bank are complete, fair and properly drawn up with a true and fair view of 
its affairs. They will also draw attention on any significant matters identified during the course 
of  their  audit  work.  We  view  auditors  as  partners  in  our  quest  to  have  safe  and  sound 
institutions and expect the highest standards from them.  
Excessive risk taking by employees and compensation based on short term profitability have 
often been a serious hit to the banks. Weaknesses in these areas contributed to the failures 
of financial institutions during the crisis where remuneration systems were not related to the 
strategy and risk appetite of companies and served more the self-interest of bankers rather 
than the long term interest of the financial companies. To address this issue, the guideline 
recommends that incentives be designed to discourage such practices and remuneration for 
executives, directors and key personnel be fair and reasonable.  
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  will  ensure  that  the  provisions  of  this Guideline  are  being  complied 
with. In fact, compliance thereto will be factored in the computation of the CAMEL Ratings of 
banks which are published on the Bank’s website since 2011. The CAMEL Ratings comprise 
an assessment of the following components: Capital, Asset quality, Management, Earnings 
and Liquidity. Four of the five components, namely the Capital, Asset Quality, Earnings and 
Liquidity, are based on objective criteria, i.e. data submitted by banks in their returns to the 
Bank of Mauritius, whereas the Management component is based on subjective criteria many 
of  which  are  contained  in  the  Guideline  on  Corporate  Governance.  The  Bank  therefore, 
expects  financial  institutions  to  comply  with  the  provisions  of  the  Guidelines,  as  non-
compliance thereto will have a bearing on the Management component in the CAMEL rating 
of banks.  
On  this  note,  may  I  conclude  by  commending  the  initiative  of  the  MIOD  to  organize  this 
workshop and assist stakeholders to better understand the Bank’s Guideline on Corporate 
Governance. I am confident that participants will benefit from it. May I also congratulate the 
Institute  for  its  relentless  efforts  to  improve  professionalism  and  ethics  in  our  corporate 
entities.  
I thank you very much for your kind attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
