Barbro Wickman-Parak: Independence, inflation targeting and the 
importance of not being dead certain 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a 
breakfast meeting at Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB (SEB), Stockholm, 14 May 2013. 
 I would like to thank Mikael Apel, Advisor in the Monetary Policy Department for his help with this speech. 
An important lesson 
When one is, as I am, at the end of one’s professional career, it is natural to reflect on what 
is  the  most  important  lesson  one  has  learnt.  If  one  were  to  try  to  pass  on  one  important 
insight  to  someone  who  is  just  beginning  their  career,  what  would  it  be?  Of  course,  it  is 
difficult to give a simple answer to this question, but one insight that would probably come 
pretty high up on my list is that it is so easy to fasten in what one might scientifically term the 
“prevailing paradigm”. By this I mean that it is so easy to believe that the means of regarding 
the world that is currently dominant is the best one and will apply, if not for ever, at least for 
the foreseeable future. 
I have come across this phenomenon numerous times during my professional life – and have 
of course been part of it myself. What is perceived as true and correct has varied from one 
time to another and sometimes the pendulum has swung violently. During the course of, say, 
four decades, we have gone from regarding strictly-regulated financial markets as the norm, 
to regarding the financial markets as needing to have free rein to be able to benefit society, 
to then swing back towards the idea of more regulation. Another example is that we, at least 
here in Sweden, have moved from only twenty or so years ago finding it difficult to imagine 
anything other than a fixed exchange-rate regime to now regarding this as completely out of 
date and off the agenda. 
A slightly less formal way of expressing this insight would perhaps be to say that one should 
never be too confident. What seems obvious now may not seem so tomorrow. Economics 
does not have any rigid conformity to particular principles; it involves trying to understand the 
effects of the actions and interactions of a large number of people in a constantly changing 
world. This presupposes a willingness to reconsider. There is otherwise a risk that the field of 
vision  will  narrow  too  much  and  that  one  will  not  observe  phenomena  that  should  lead  to 
questions  and  analysis,  as  they  are  not  considered  to  belong  in  the  intellectual  reasoning 
currently applied. Perhaps it was this type of “blinkers” that prevented us from noticing the 
build-up of risk prior to the crisis. In my speech today I intend to discuss this from a central 
bank perspective and to focus on two important areas that are central parts of central banks’ 
monetary policy frameworks, namely independence and inflation targeting. 
Major differences from when I last worked at the Riksbank 
I have worked at the Riksbank twice, during two entirely different regimes – or paradigms, if 
you wish. The first time was during a period of around fifteen years from the early 1970s to 
the mid-1980s.  At  that time,  the  credit  and foreign  exchange markets  were  regulated. The 
Riksbank determined both the price and size of the credit on offer and had access to tools 
such as liquidity ratios and lending caps. The Riksbank also had regular meetings with the 
commercial  banks,  to  closely  monitor  that they  were  observing  the regulations. The  banks 
were told in no uncertain terms if they had failed on some point. The Riksbank was able to 
conduct a policy that stabilised economic activity to some extent, but monetary policy – to the 
extent  that  one  can  call  it  such  –  was  largely  subordinate  to  other  economic  policy.  One 
important  task for  the  Riksbank  during  this  period  was  to  secure  the funding  needs  of  the 
government and the housing sector. This was of course only possible because the markets 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
were  so  strictly  regulated  and  separate  from  the  surrounding  world.  In  other  words,  the 
situation  was  completely  different  then  –  although  some  of  the  regulation  tools  used  then 
have begun to come back into fashion, albeit in another form and context. 
But much has changed in just the past six years as well 
The fact that the Riksbank and its activities looked quite different the second time I started 
work there, in 2007 as newly-appointed member of the Executive Board, is not particularly 
strange. After all, more than twenty years had passed. What is perhaps more surprising is 
that so much has changed during the past six years. The changes this time do not concern 
how the work at the Riksbank is conducted, but rather how monetary policy and the role of 
central  banks  are  viewed  in  the  international  debate.  Many  of  the  questions  to  which  we 
previously  assumed  we  had  fairly  obvious  answers  have  once  again  appeared  on  the 
agenda and are now being keenly discussed. This was not something I had expected and is 
a pretty good example of how easy it is to take the prevailing situation for granted. The main 
catalyst for the discussion has, of course, been the global financial crisis that broke out in 
autumn 2008 and its consequences, which we are in many ways still dealing with. 
Put  simply,  one  might  describe  the  predominant  view  prior  to  the  crisis  as  follows. 
International economic developments had been favourable over a fairly long period of time. 
Following the crisis that hit Sweden and some other countries at the beginning of the 1990s, 
inflation had on the whole been low and stable, while growth had been good and there had 
been only minor cyclical fluctuations. This was considered so remarkable that it was given its 
own name – The Great Moderation. The reasons for the Great Moderation have never been 
made entirely clear, but many people felt that one important explanation was that policy, and 
perhaps in particular monetary policy, had begun to be conducted in a better way.1 
Compared  with  the  economically  much  more  volatile  1970s  and  1980s,  there  was  much 
greater  focus  on  keeping  inflation  in  check.  To  make  this  easier,  many  countries  had 
transferred  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  to  independent  central  banks.  Moreover,  an 
increasing  number  of  countries  had  introduced  something  that  was  a  monetary  policy 
innovation in the early 1990s – inflation targeting. It appeared as though one had not only 
succeeded in checking inflation, but also managed the cyclical fluctuations reasonably well 
and  laid  the  foundations  for  a  good  development  in  the  economy  in  general.  It  was  so 
successful that it may have led to a blind faith in the precision of monetary policy and what it 
can achieve. 
It  was  assumed  that  the  financial  markets  were,  on  the  whole,  efficient  and  functioning 
smoothly, at least in the industrial nations. Of course, financial crises were still considered 
possible, but as isolated events, often caused by individual economies being mismanaged. 
The contagion effects were assumed to be limited and the prevalent opinion was that wise 
crisis management could relatively quickly get the economies concerned back on track. The 
successful  management  of  the  so-called  IT  bubble  at  the  beginning  of  the  2000s  was 
regarded as an example of financial crises not needing to be particularly troublesome. 
What is clear today, but was not clear as recently as six years ago, is that this picture was far 
too optimistic. But then the crisis came along and turned most things upside down. 
Reassessment of the financial markets 
One  obvious  lesson  from  the  crisis  was  that  the  financial  markets  were  not functioning  as 
well and as efficiently as we had believed. Instead of contributing to growth and stability in 
the economy through efficient risk spreading and credit allocation, they became a cause of 
                                                
1  See for example Taylor (1998) and Bernanke (2004). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
macroeconomic fluctuations. It became clear that the models on which policy decisions were 
based needed to be adjusted so that the financial markets no longer played the obscure role 
they had played prior to this. In recent years, there has been a dramatic increase in research 
on what are usually referred to as “financial frictions”, that is, mechanisms through which the 
financial system affects fluctuations in the economy (see Figure 1).2 
One might wonder why this interest in the role of the financial markets did not arise earlier. 
The  crisis  that  we  in  Sweden  and  some  other  countries  suffered  in  the  early  1990s  also 
revolved to a great extent around credit booms and property market crashes. However, this 
crisis  was  apparently  not  significant  enough  in  an  international  perspective  to  budge  the 
paradigm  that  the  financial  markets  were  functioning  smoothly  and  could  manage 
themselves.  This  required  a  much  larger  shock,  like  the  global  financial  crisis  that  came 
fifteen years later. 
The crisis has also led to discussions of the role of central banks 
An  obvious  conclusion  from  the  crisis  is  that  we  need  to  learn  more  about  the  financial 
markets, how they are linked together and how they interact with and influence the economy 
as a whole. The crisis has also led to the discussion of other questions, where it is much less 
obvious what conclusions should be drawn – and perhaps even which questions should be 
asked. As I mentioned earlier, one such debate concerns monetary policy and the role of the 
central  banks. There  is a  striking  contrast  with  the  previous  occasion  that  monetary  policy 
was  debated  on  such  a  fundamental  level.  Then,  one  quickly  reached  the  conclusion  that 
monetary  policy  should  focus  on  price  stability  and  be  delegated  to  independent  central 
banks. Today, the debate on monetary policy could be said to have arisen from the opinion 
that “something should be done”, but that it is as yet unclear what should be done and how. 
I would like to discuss two areas that were not really on the agenda at all prior to the crisis, 
but have cropped up again. The first is the central banks’ independence and the second is 
inflation targeting. Developments in both of these areas are of course very important for both 
the central banks and the economy as a whole. There are clear points of contact between 
these areas, but I nevertheless intend to discuss them separately. 
The central banks’ independence 
Let  me  begin  with  the  central  banks’  independence. The  idea  behind  delegating  monetary 
policy to an independent central bank is, as I have already mentioned, that it makes it easier 
to hold inflation in check. Experience has shown that it is easier for a central bank that is able 
to act independently with regard to price stability, than for a government, to provide monetary 
policy with the long-term perspective required to keep inflation low and stable and to maintain 
the  general  public’s  confidence  that  it  will  remain  so.  The  decision-making  processes  for 
monetary  policy  are  also  shorter  and  quicker  than  those  for  fiscal  policy,  which  makes  it 
better suited to deal with shocks to the economy. 
A government, which needs to worry about re-election, may be tempted to conduct an overly 
expansionary  policy  to  attain  short-term  gains.  The  knowledge  that  this  temptation  exists 
means that the economic agents will adjust their inflation expectations accordingly. The end 
result will be higher inflation without any gain in return. Thus, the fundamental idea is to build 
a system that will better guarantee price stability. The independence has no inherent value, it 
is not an end in itself. 
                                                
2  For a review of the current research situation with regard to financial frictions, see for instance Brunnermeier, 
Eisenbach and Sannikov (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
With regard to the Riksbank, one usually says that it became formally independent when the 
law was amended in 1999, but one can probably say that it was able to conduct monetary 
policy without any tangible political influence for some years prior to that. 
Threat to independence from various sides 
There has recently been much debate on whether the independence of the central banks is 
under threat. The debate has not focussed on any individual explanation as to why this is the 
case; slightly different arguments have been put forward. 
Generally, it is reasonable to say that what might threaten the central banks’ independence is 
if  those  who  have  delegated  monetary  policy  –  governments  and  parliaments  –  do  not 
consider that the central banks are “delivering” as intended, or alternatively that there have 
been such major changes in the economy that the system of independent central banks is no 
longer perceived to function well enough. Something that has been delegated can always be 
taken back, although this cannot be done from one day to the next – which is the point of the 
independence. 
It is no surprise that it is the financial crisis that has been the main catalyst for the debate on 
central bank independence. One type of argument concerns the fact that many central banks 
cut their rates as far as possible in connection with the crisis and were forced to go on to 
more unorthodox and untried means of conducting monetary policy. When monetary policy 
was  delegated  to  independent  central  banks,  this  was  during  a  period  when  there  was  in 
principle  only  one  instrument  –  the  policy  rate  –  at  the  central  bank’s  disposal.  Unlike, for 
instance,  taxes,  the  policy  rate  was  regarded  as  something  that  could  be  delegated  to 
“technocrats” who have not been popularly elected. But with the monetary policy conducted 
by  a  number  of  central  banks  after  having  cut  their  policy  rates  as  far  as  possible,  the 
situation  has  become  much  more  complicated.  Many  of  the  measures  implemented  are 
considered to border on fiscal policy and then it is less evident that the central bank can act 
entirely independently of the political system. Some people say that the financial crisis led to 
a “creeping politicization” of monetary policy.3 
Another type of argument focuses on the expanded role that many people assume central 
banks will gain in future, and in some areas have already gained, with regard to attempting to 
prevent  future  crises  –  in  the  new  policy  area  known  as  macroprudential  supervision. 
According to law, the Riksbank is to “promote an efficient payments system”, but this very 
general wording is not linked to any specific instrument that can be used for this purpose. 
When  monetary  policy  was  delegated  to  independent  central  banks  it  was  not  just  the 
instrument, the policy rate, that was well-defined. This applied in many ways to the objective, 
too,  which  was  primarily  to  maintain  price  stability.  When  the  role  of  the  central  banks  is 
expanded to include areas beyond traditional monetary policy, independence also becomes 
more difficult to define. One can say that the transition from a situation with one instrument 
and  one  well-defined  objective  to  a  situation  with  several  instruments  and  a  more 
complicated objective means that the independence is viewed in a different light.4 
In some areas, the discussion of independence is not primarily concerned with the crisis, but 
linked to a disappointment over developments and what the central bank has achieved in the 
slightly longer run. Recent events in Japan could perhaps be said to be an example of this. 
The  newly-appointed  government  there  has  launched  a  powerful  new  monetary  easing 
programme as an attempt to break the long-term deflationary trend. Part of the new policy 
entails bringing inflation up to 2 per cent, a doubling of the inflation target set earlier by the 
                                                
3  Bullard  (2013)  takes  as  an  example  the  ECB’s  OMT  programme,  where  the  bank  undertakes  to  buy  a 
country’s government securities if the country in question meets the fiscal policy targets set. 
4  See, for example, King (2013).  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Bank of Japan, but which it has found difficulty attaining. It remains to be seen how well they 
will  succeed  and  how  confidence  in  the  central  bank  as  an  independent  institution  will  be 
affected, as well as what consequences this might have. 
Independence not a given – the central bank may also need to adapt 
I think that it is important that the central bank never takes its independence for granted. It 
should always ask the question of whether the policy it conducts can be expected to result in 
the  economic  development  that  was  aimed  at  when  the  central  bank  was  granted  its 
independence. An important part of this is, of course, that the central bank does its best to 
attain the objectives it has been allocated. But another part, which has perhaps not received 
as much attention, is that the central bank must also take into account fundamental changes 
in  the  economy  that  may  make  it  necessary  to  adapt  its  behaviour.  There  could  be  many 
examples  of  changes  in  the  functioning  of  the  economy  that  could  trigger  such  a  need  to 
adapt.  But  let  me  illustrate  what  I  mean  with  an  example  that  has  been  highlighted,  for 
instance, in the IMF’s most recent World Economic Outlook. 
A  slightly  surprising  observation  in  recent  years  is  that  inflation  has  not  fallen  very  much 
during the recession connected to the financial crisis, despite a dramatic fall in demand in 
many  countries  and  a  sharp  rise  in  unemployment.  The  contrast  in  relation  to  earlier 
economic  downturns,  when  inflation  fell  much  more,  is  fairly  surprising.  This  development 
has caused some analysts to talk about “the missing deflation”.5 The so-called Phillips curve, 
which shows the relationship between the rate of inflation and economic activity, appears to 
have flattened compared with before.6 
One  possible  explanation  for  this  development  is  that  the  monetary  policy  conducted  in 
recent decades around the world – where independent central banks have primarily focussed 
on  attaining  low  and  stable  inflation  –  has  gradually  succeeded  in  anchoring  inflation  and 
inflation expectations. This has meant that the Phillips curve has stabilised in a situation with 
low average inflation. It is not entirely clear why this would also have contributed to reducing 
the slope of the Phillips curve, but we cannot rule out the possibility that if expectations are 
anchored  better,  price-setting  and  wage  formation  will  be  less  sensitive  to  changes  in 
economic  activity.  So,  even  if  a  monetary  policy  aimed  at keeping  inflation  low  and  stable 
was perhaps not the main explanation for the Great Moderation, it is possible that it made an 
enduring impression in the form of a flatter Phillips curve. 
We cannot know whether this phenomenon is temporary or permanent. But if it is the case 
that we have had a fundamental change in the way the economy functions, it is also possible 
that  this  should  lead  to  the  central  bank  adapting,  at  least  to  some  extent,  the  policy  it 
conducts.  A  flatter  Phillips  curve  implies  that  inflation  has  become  less  sensitive  to  the 
domestic demand situation – that it varies less with cyclical phases. Other shocks, such as 
changes  in  energy  prices  and  other  so-called  supply  shocks  have  thus  reasonably  been 
relatively more important for developments in inflation. The flatter Phillips curve also means 
that the central bank must influence demand more than previously to achieve a given change 
in inflation. This means that if the central bank reacts in the same way as before to supply 
shocks that cause inflation to deviate from the target, the fluctuations in economic activity will 
be greater. Say, for instance, that the central bank has been used to subduing a particular 
part of an upturn in energy prices. A flatter Phillips curve would mean that demand has to be 
dampened  more  than  before to  prevent  inflation  rising.  Over  time  this  would  entail  greater 
fluctuations in economic activity. 
This  could  be  perceived  as  an  undesirable  effect  and  gradually  give  rise  to  dissatisfaction 
with  the  central  bank’s  policy.  Ultimately,  this  could  also  mean  that  the  independence  is 
                                                
5  See, for example, Krugman (2013). 
6  See, for example, IMF (2013) or Wolf (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
brought  into question.  One  possibility  would  thus  be  for  the  central  bank  to try  to  become 
slightly more “flexible” than before in this situation and to react somewhat less aggressively 
to supply shocks – and thereby try to find an economically more acceptable combination of 
fluctuations  in  inflation  and  fluctuations  in  economic  activity.  If  inflation  expectations  are 
securely anchored, there should be scope for this. 
But adaptation requires reflection and caution 
However,  this  would  not  be  an  easy  task.  Firstly,  the  central  bank  is  of  course  unable  to 
change its behaviour so much that doubts arise as to whether it is actually trying to maintain 
low and stable inflation. What is known as the nominal anchor, that is the landmark for price-
setting  and  wage  formation,  may  then  be  loosened.  This  would  mean  losing  all  we  have 
achieved over the past two or three decades. 
But even if nothing this dramatic happened, sufficiently large changes in the central bank’s 
behaviour might nevertheless have undesired consequences. The flatter Phillips curve could 
reasonably  be  due  to  economic  agents,  such  as  the  social  partners,  having  adjusted  their 
behaviour  to  how  they  believe  the  central  bank  will  act.  If  the  central  bank  changes  its 
behaviour  too  much,  this  may  have  the  consequence  that  economic  agents  begin  to  act 
differently, too. We will then once again have a new playing field, where the Phillips curve 
may once again have become steeper.7 
Even  with  these  reservations,  I  believe  that  it  is  generally  valuable  for  the  central  bank  to 
constantly ask itself how it can best ensure that it deserves its independence. What I mean 
by  this,  of  course,  is  not  that  it  should  anxiously  ask  its  principal  what  to  do  –  that  would 
mean  its  independence  was  lost.  I  mean  that  the  central  bank  must  be  aware  of  general 
changes in the functioning of the economy that may justify adapting its behaviour to be able 
to carry out the task it has been given in the best possible way – even if this is a very delicate 
task. 
It  is  as  yet  still  fairly  uncertain  what  will  be  decided  regarding  the  question  of  the  central 
banks’ independence. Perhaps the main complicating factor is the broadening of the central 
banks’ tasks  and toolboxes,  which  many  people  are  saying  is  on  the  cards. While  a  large 
degree of independence is relatively easy to justify with regard to maintaining price stability, 
the independence is somewhat less self-evident with regard to the central bank’s role in the 
fields of macroprudential policy and crisis management. 
Some  analysts  say  that  one  solution  may  be  that  the  central  bank  is  allocated  different 
degrees of independence in different roles. The independence should be considerable when 
it comes to the task of maintaining price stability, but perhaps less when it comes to tasks 
connected with macroprudential supervision and crisis management. Opinions are divided as 
to how easy it is to attain this kind of division. There is scarcely any doubt that the problems 
in drawing up boundaries can be difficult at times. The Governor of the Israeli central bank, 
Stanley Fischer, is one of the optimists and has recently likened central bank independence 
to  marriage;  like  in  a  marriage,  there  are  things  you  do  together  and  things  you  do 
separately.8  However,  regardless  of  which  solutions  gradually  crystallize,  I  believe  it  is 
essential  not  to  withdraw  the  central  banks’  independence  with  regard  to  the  task  of  price 
stability. The central bank should be able to decide independently over the means allocated 
for this purpose, such as the policy rate and other potential means. 
                                                
7  This is one example of the so-called Lucas critique, which says that empirical relationships can change if the 
economic policy changes as the economic policy affect agents’ expectations.  
8  See Da Costa (2013). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Inflation targeting 
Let me go on to the other area I intend to discuss today – inflation targeting. As I mentioned 
earlier,  the  central  banks’  independence  and  inflation  targeting  can  be  regarded  as 
inseparable. They are both central parts of the monetary policy framework that was regarded 
as very successful, at least up until the crisis. 
Independence and inflation targeting can reinforce one another in both good and bad ways. 
Increased independence can contribute to greater credibility, which in turn can make it easier 
to  attain  the  inflation  target.  A  period  of  low  and  stable  inflation  creates  confidence  and 
legitimacy for inflation targeting and increases the political support for independence, and so 
on.  And  vice  versa,  a  reduction  in  confidence  in  the  inflation  target  may  make  inflation 
expectations, and thereby actual inflation, more difficult to control. Inflation targeting is then 
perceived  as  unsuccessful,  the  political  support  for  this  policy  and  for  central  bank 
independence thus declines, credibility is further undermined, and so on. 
Criticism: Inflation targeting could not prevent the crisis and has difficulty getting us 
out of it 
Inflation  targeting  has  also  been  questioned  after  the  crisis  and  also  from  slightly  different 
starting points.9 Two main types of criticism have been expressed.10 Firstly, some say that 
inflation targeting prior to the crisis focussed too heavily on its traditional targets, particularly 
price  stability  and  therefore  missed  –  or  perhaps  even  contributed  to  –  the  credit-driven 
property  bubbles  that  arose  in  a  number  of  countries.  Secondly,  some  say  that  inflation 
targeting does not appear particularly suited to helping countries out of a crisis and may even 
make  it  more  difficult  to  conduct  a  sufficiently  expansionary  policy.  It  should  therefore  be 
replaced with something else. 
I think that this criticism is rather unfair. As I see it, there was, perhaps, a hope that inflation 
targeting could prevent financial crises, but one can hardly say that it was part of the deal. 
The main purpose of inflation targeting has been to supply a credible nominal anchor for the 
economy.11 It has succeeded in this purpose. Looking at Sweden, I think it is quite clear that 
the introduction of inflation targeting in connection with the crisis in the early 1990s was one 
of the most important reasons why the Swedish economy has developed so well since then. 
However, financial crises can also arise in environments with low and stable inflation. 
Nominal GDP target scarcely better 
Can one say that inflation targeting has been an obstacle to the recovery, and in that case 
are there other ways of conducting monetary policy that might succeed better? Here one can 
begin  by  noting  that,  in  general,  inflation-targeting  countries  appear  to  have  managed  the 
crisis better than countries without inflation targets.12 The central banks with inflation targets 
acted  more  powerfully,  inflation  expectations  in  inflation-targeting  countries  were  better 
anchored and the risk of deflation was lower. 
Nevertheless,  the  slow  recovery  in  countries  such  as  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United 
States  has  started  a  discussion  as  to  whether  alternatives  to  inflation  targeting  would  be 
better.  One  suggestion  that  has  gained  supporters  is  to  replace  the  inflation  target  with  a 
target for nominal GDP.13 The main discussion recently has concerned introducing a policy 
                                                
9  See Reichlin and Baldwin (2013) for a compilation of a number of economists’ views on inflation targeting and 
its future. 
10  See, for example, Bini Smaghi (2013). 
11  See Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999). 
12  See De Carvalho Filho (2011). 
13  See, for example, Frankel (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
that entails holding nominal GDP close to a given path over which nominal GDP increases by 
a certain percentage. 
The idea is roughly as follows. If nominal GDP falls below this intended path – which it did 
during  the  crisis  –  the  central  bank  must  compensate  by  stimulating  the  economy  so  that 
nominal GDP grows faster for a few years to get back onto the target path. So, bygones are 
not bygones in this way of thinking. Some of the increase in nominal GDP comes from higher 
inflation. If economic agents expect this type of compensating policy from the central bank, 
their inflation expectations will rise. Thus, the expected real interest rate will fall, which is an 
advantage  in  countries  where  the  nominal  interest  rate  has  fallen  as  far  as  possible  and 
where unorthodox monetary policy measures may not really work as well as we would wish. 
The introduction of a target for nominal GDP could in this way be seen as attempt to “kick 
start” the economy. 
As  I  have  said  today,  it  is  not  good  to  have  a  cocksure  attitude.  But  I  am  nevertheless 
inclined to agree with those who are sceptical to the idea of replacing the inflation target with 
a target for nominal GDP.14 The fact that nominal GDP increases can be either due to real 
GDP  increasing,  to  prices  –  measured  using  the  GDP  deflator  –  increasing,  or  to  a 
combination of the two. Its advocates say that one of the advantages of a target for nominal 
GDP  is  that  it  forces  the  central  banks  to  give  consideration  to  developments  in  the  real 
economy and not just to inflation. In general terms, a nominal GDP target would appear a 
fairly unnecessary complication in this context, particularly if one already conducts a policy 
that means there is scope, or even an obligation, to give consideration to the real economy – 
through a flexible inflation-targeting policy, such as the one conducted by the Riksbank and 
the  Bank  of  England,  or  that  conducted  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  with  a  dual  mandate  to 
strive for both price stability and a good development in employment.15 
A  counterargument  of  a  more  practical  nature  is  that  inflation  targeting  can  be  based  on 
better  data.  While  the  CPI  and  other  relevant  price  measures  are  published  every  month, 
GDP and the GDP deflator are only published quarterly, and with a relatively long time lag. 
Moreover, the CPI is only revised in exceptional cases, while GDP data are revised almost 
routinely, and sometimes substantially. 
One  argument  that  I  think  also  weighs  heavily,  from  a  practician’s  point  of  view,  is  the 
difficulties I foresee with regard to communicating a nominal GDP target. The inflation target 
is now fairly well accepted and the general public appears to understand it. It would probably 
be  a  different  matter  with  a  nominal  GDP  target.  As  Adam  Posen  said:  “People  cannot 
observe nominal GDP when they go to the store”.16 Of course they cannot observe inflation 
either, but they nevertheless often have an idea of how prices are developing and can base 
their expectations on that. The product of real GDP and the GDP deflator will reasonably be 
somewhat more abstract to relate to. I think that this also sows doubt regarding the possibility 
to  get  a  target  for  nominal  GDP  to  really  work  as  a  nominal  anchor  in  the  way  that  the 
inflation target undoubtedly has. 
It may also be worth bearing in mind that the global financial crisis entailed a shock of a size 
and  dimension  that  has rarely  been  seen.  Rather  than  interpreting the  slow  recovery  as  a 
failure for monetary policy, perhaps one should see it as a situation where the shock was so 
powerful that it would have been difficult for monetary policy to manage it in a different and 
better way, regardless of what forms the policy had been conducted under and what it had 
                                                
14  See,  for  example,  Goodhart,  Baker  and  Ashworth  (2013),  Gerlach  (2013)  and  Posen  (2013)  for  a  more 
detailed description of the arguments against introducing a target for nominal GDP. 
15  See also, for example, Bean (2013) and Posen (2013). 
16  Posen (2013), p. 62.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
been called.17 This type of “disappointment” regarding the shortcomings of monetary policy 
may  also  be  due  to  the  optimism  regarding  the  abilities  of  monetary  policy  that  I  earlier 
implied may have followed in the wake of the Great Moderation. 
But inflation targeting may need to be modified 
But  even  if  inflation  targeting  has  not  become  obsolete  and  does  not  need  replacing  with 
something new, there may be cause to consider whether it should perhaps be modified, and 
likewise the tasks of the central banks in general. Many people think that this is the case.18 
One relationship that became obvious in connection with  the crisis  was, as I have already 
noted, that financial stability was not something that automatically followed on from a policy 
aimed at keeping inflation low and stable. It also became clear that the central banks could 
find themselves in situations where the traditional instrument, the policy rate, could no longer 
be  used,  but  where  they  must  use  new  and  so  far  untried  methods  to  provide  further 
stimulation. 
The conclusion that many people have drawn from this is that the central banks’ tasks should 
be modified and extended. In addition to the traditional monetary policy, they should more 
clearly have the task of trying to prevent financial imbalances from arising to avoid the sort of 
development we have seen in recent years. Personally, I think this is quite natural, as it is 
clearly difficult for a central bank to even attain its traditional objectives of price stability and 
macroeconomic stability under such circumstances. Trying to uphold financial stability then 
becomes a way of attaining the traditional monetary policy objectives. Many people believe 
that  to  achieve  this  it  is  necessary  for  the  central  banks  to  play  an  important  role  in  the 
emerging  macroprudential  policy  field.  Another  conclusion  is  that  the  central  banks’ 
toolboxes should be expanded to include tools that can be used once a crisis has occurred 
and the policy rate has been cut as far as it can, that is, tools of the type used in the crisis 
should be made into a more permanent part of the monetary policy toolbox, although they 
hopefully will not need to be used too often. 
If this is done, it will mean that the central banks’ operational frameworks after the crisis will 
become  both  slightly  more  flexible  and  slightly  more  complex  than  they  were  before.  One 
might  say  that  we  are  going  from  a  situation  with  one  instrument  and  a  relatively 
straightforward  and  clear  objective,  to  a  situation  with  several  instruments  and  a  more 
multifaceted  objective.  This  sounds  quite  logical  and  natural  to  my  ears,  given  what  has 
happened in recent years, and I believe that this is the direction in which we are headed. 
But as I mentioned in my discussion of independence, there are some problems that need to 
be resolved along the way. The central banks became independent during a period that one 
might be able to call the “golden age” of inflation targeting, when everything looked relatively 
straightforward – when the policy rate was in principle set to attain price stability and when 
one  took  financial  stability  more  or  less  for  granted.  The  world  that  now  appears  to  be 
emerging is more complicated. It is necessary to reconsider where the boundary lines should 
be drawn between what should be delegated to independent central banks and what should 
be managed by the political system. Finding the best way of doing this is one of the major 
challenges ahead of us. 
                                                
17  See Gerlach (2013). Results from a study by Bech, Gambacorta and Kharroubi (2012) indicate that monetary 
policy  is  less  efficient  when  it  comes  to  counteracting  a  recession  and  contributing  to  a  recovery  after  a 
financial crisis. Posen (2013) says that more powerful quantitative easing would have facilitated the recovery 
in the United Kingdom, but that the fact that this was not implemented has nothing to do with inflation targeting 
and it would not have been easier with a different type of monetary policy. 
18  See, for example, Banerjee, Cecchetti and Hofmann (2013). Whelan (2013) says that inflation targeting should 
actually be abandoned in favour of a solution where the central banks are given a broader mandate and more 
instruments at their disposal. For discussions of how the crisis has affected views on monetary policy and the 
work of the central banks, see for instance Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia and Mauro (2013).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
I began by noting how easy it is to get caught in what I called the prevailing paradigm. But if 
we had fastened in a monetary policy paradigm prior to the crisis, where we believed that we 
had  found  the  right  solutions,  I  think  that  we  are  now  in  a  situation  where  there  is  an 
unusually large sense of caution when looking ahead. We have all been thoroughly shaken 
up. The crisis had not been predicted, and inflation targeting alone could not prevent it. We 
now  need  to  learn  lessons  from  this  and  to  analyse  in-depth  the  relationship  between 
monetary policy and financial stability and how it can best be taken into account in monetary 
policy. At the same time, it is of course important to ensure that we don’t, as they say, throw 
the baby out with the bathwater, and that inflation targeting and all the good it has done are 
abandoned.  It  is  without  doubt  a  rather  revolutionary  period  we  are  in  and  it  will  be  very 
interesting to follow how central banks and their activities develop over the next ten years – 
even if I myself will be watching from the side-lines. 
Figure 1. 
Number of hits for “financial frictions” in EconLit 
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
References 
Banerjee, R., S. Cecchetti and B. Hofmann, (2013), “Flexible inflation targeting: Performance 
and challenges”, in Reichlin, L. and R. Baldwin, (ed.), “Is Inflation Targeting Dead? Central 
Banking After the Crisis”, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Bean,  C.,  (2013),  “Nominal  income  targets:  an  old  wine  in  a  new  bottle”,  speech  at  the 
Institute for Economic Affairs Conference on the State of the Economy, London, 27 February. 
Bech,  M.L.,  L. Gambacorta  and  E.  Kharroubi,  (2012), “Monetary  policy  in  a  downturn:  Are 
financial crises special?”, BIS Working Papers No. 388. 
Bernanke,  B.S.,T.  Laubach,  F.S.  Mishkin  and  A.S.  Posen  (1999),  Inflation  Targeting  – 
Lessons from the International Experience, Princeton University Press. 
Bernanke,  B.S.,  (2004),  “The  Great  Moderation”,  speech  at  the  Eastern  Economic 
Association, Washington, 20 February. 
Bini Smaghi, L., (2013) “Who killed the inflation target?”, in Reichlin, L. and R. Baldwin, (ed.), 
“Is Inflation Targeting Dead? Central Banking After the Crisis”, Centre for Economic Policy 
Research. 
Brunnermeier,  M.K.,  T.M.  Eisenbach  and  Y.  Sannikov,  (2012),  “Macroeconomics  with 
Financial Frictions: A Survey”, NBER Working Paper 18102. 
Bullard, J., (2013), “The Global Battle Over Central Bank Independence”, presentation at the 
NABE Panel Discussion: “Federal Reserve Independence in the Aftermath of the Financial 
Crisis:  Should  We  Be  Worried?”,  AEA/ASSA  Annual  Meeting,  San  Diego,  California, 
4 January. 
Da  Costa,  P.,  (2013),  “Central  bank  independence  is  a  bit  like  marriage:  Israel’s  Fischer”, 
blog  post,  MacroScope  Reuters,  18  April,  2013,  http://blogs.reuters.com/macroscope/ 
2013/04/18/central-bank-independence-is-a-bit-like-marriage-israels-fischer/ 
De  Carvalho  Filho,  I.E.,  (2011),  “28  Months  Later:  How  Inflation  Targeters  Outperformed 
Their Peers in the Great Recession”, The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 11(1). 
Frankel.  J.,  (2012),  “The  death  of 
http://www.voxeu.org/article/inflation-targeting-dead-long-live-nominal-gdp-targeting 
Gerlach,  S.,  (2013)  “Is  inflation  targeting  passé?”  in  Reichlin,  L.  and  R.  Baldwin,  (ed.),  “Is 
Inflation  Targeting  Dead?  Central  Banking  After  the  Crisis”,  Centre  for  Economic  Policy 
Research. 
Goodhart, C.A.E., M. Baker and J. Ashworth, (2013), “Monetary targetry: Might Carney make 
a  difference?”,  in  Reichlin,  L.  and  R.  Baldwin,  (ed.),  “Is  Inflation  Targeting  Dead?  Central 
Banking After the Crisis”, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
IMF (2013), “The dog that didn’t bark: Has inflation been muzzled or was it just sleeping?” 
Chapter 3, in the IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2013. 
King, M., (2013), “Monetary policy: Many targets, many instruments. Where do we stand?” 
speech at the IMF conference “Rethinking Macro Policy II: First Steps and Early Lessons”, 
Washington DC, 16 April. 
Krugman,  P.,  (2013),  “Missing  Deflation”,  blog  post  in  the  New  York  Times,  13  April, 
http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/04/13/missing-deflation/ 
Posen, A.S., (2013), “Cheap talk is no alternative to inflation targeting” in Reichlin, L. and R. 
Baldwin,  (ed.),  “Is  Inflation  Targeting  Dead?  Central  Banking  After  the  Crisis”,  Centre  for 
Economic Policy Research. 
Reichlin, L. and R. Baldwin, (ed.), (2013), “Is Inflation Targeting Dead? Central Banking After 
the Crisis”, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
in  Vox,  19  June, 
targeting”,  column 
inflation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Taylor,  J.B.,  (1998),  “Monetary  Policy  and  The  Long  Boom”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
St Louis Review, November/December. 
Whelan, K., (2013), “A broader mandate: Why inflation targeting is inadequate”, in L. and R. 
Baldwin,  (ed.),  “Is  Inflation  Targeting  Dead?  Central  Banking  After  the  Crisis”,  Centre  for 
Economic Policy Research. 
Wolf, M., (2013), “How central banks beat deflation”, Financial Times, 16 April.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
