Vítor Constâncio: Establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism – 
the first pillar of the Banking Union 
Opening  keynote  presentation  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  11th  Annual  European  Financial  Services  Conference  “Reshaping 
Europe’s financial markets”, organised by Forum Europe Ltd., Brussels, 31 January 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here today. 
The  crisis  has  made  it  clear  that  a  highly  interconnected  and  integrated  area  such  as  the 
euro  area,  and  a  genuine  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  needed  a  stronger  institutional 
framework.  An  important  element  to  strengthen  the  financial  institutional  framework  is  the 
creation of the Banking Union with the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) representing its 
first pillar. 
During my intervention today I will touch upon the different elements of the Banking Union 
and  the  underlying  rationale  for  its  establishment.  Subsequently,  I  will  review  the  main 
features of the SSM and mention the immediate challenges for the ECB to prepare itself to 
assume its supervisory task. 
The key building blocks of a banking union 
1. 
The Banking Union aims at building an integrated financial framework to safeguard financial 
stability  and  minimise  the  cost  of  bank  failures.  It  consists  of  four  complementary  building 
blocks, of which the SSM forms an integral part. 
The establishment of a European framework for Supervision forms the first pillar of the 
Banking  Union.  As  implied  by  its  name,  the  SSM  will  be  a  mechanism,  composed  of 
national competent authorities and the ECB, with possibility of non-euro area Member States 
to  participate.  The  process  to  establish  the  SSM  is  underway,  with  the  Council  proposal 
forming the basis for the current trialogue with the European Parliament. I am quite pleased 
with the Council’s proposal as it lays down a robust legal framework for the SSM to operate 
in. In order to ensure a timely implementation it is now of the essence that the proposal is 
enacted as soon as possible. 
An  important  element  that  will  be  supportive  to  the  effectiveness  of  the  SSM,  is  the 
completion  of  the  single  rulebook  whose  implementation  is  overseen  by  the  EBA.  The 
completion of the single rulebook will significantly contribute to the single market and towards 
creating  a  level  playing  field  by  harmonising  regulation  at  the  European  Union  level. 
Likewise, the SSM will also contribute to these same goals. 
A second element of the Banking Union is the establishment of a Single Resolution 
Mechanism. The framework for the Single Resolution Mechanism is still to be defined and I 
look  forward  to  the  Commission’s  upcoming  legislative  proposal.  Let  me  nevertheless 
highlight  the  main  features  that  in  my  view  such  a  Mechanism  should  have.  The  Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  would  have  a  Single  Resolution  Authority  at  its  centre  that  would 
govern  the  resolution  namely  of  significant  banks,  coordinate  the  application  of  resolution 
tools and reflect an organisational set-up similar to the SSM. It should have a comprehensive 
set of enforceable tools, powers and authority to resolve all banks in the SSM. 
In  order  for  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  to  be  perceived  as  credible,  it  should  have 
sufficient funding. Let me be very clear I am not talking about bailing-out banks with public 
money.  Resolution  is  about  orderly  resolving  the  situation  of  banks  that  have  attained  the 
point  of  non-viability  and  about  doing  it  in  a  way  that  minimizes  the  involvement  of  public 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
money.  Resolution  is  not  about  bailing-out  banks  it  is  about  bailing-in  shareholders  and 
creditors  and  using  a  Resolution  Fund  based  on  banking  sector  contributions.  Resolution 
activity  may  require  the  temporary  use  of  public  money  if  the  Resolution  Fund  would  not 
have enough resources, for instance, to capitalize a bridge bank that will be sold later on to 
the  private  sector  thus  recovering  the  capital  involved.  In  the  US  this  is  ensured  by  the 
existence of a Treasury credit line that can be drawn upon by the FDIC but that has to be 
later paid back. 
This  implies  then  a  third  element  of  a  complete  banking  union  –  the  existence  of  a 
Financial Backstop that will also be involved in the direct recapitalisation of banks. 
Finally,  the  fourth  element  of  the  Banking  Union  is  the  establishment  of  a  common 
system  of  deposit  protection.  A  first  step  in  this  direction  will  be  the  adoption  of  the 
legislative proposal on deposit guarantee schemes, providing a harmonised framework. This 
framework should ensure depositor confidence and the national deposit guarantee schemes, 
built on common EU standards, could interact with the SRM. A European deposit guarantee 
scheme is therefore not essential in the short term. 
Rationale for a banking union 
2. 
We  see  the  Banking  Union  as  essential  to  sustain  and  strengthen  the  EMU  framework 
primarily  because  by  establishing  a  European  framework for  Supervision, it  addresses 
the  so-called  “financial  trilemma”.1  The  trilemma  states  that  financial  stability,  financial 
integration  and  national  financial  supervision  cannot  really  be  made  fully  compatible. 
Furthermore,  the  Banking  Union  is  instrumental  to  help  break  the  nexus  between 
sovereigns and banks, which was a key feature in the present crisis. 
The process to build a Banking Union is the more far-reaching reform since the creation of 
the euro. 
Main features of the SSM Regulation 
3. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism is to become operational in 2014. Let me briefly highlight 
its main features. 
SSM as one system 
The SSM will operate as a system, catering for all expertise of national supervisors and at 
the same time possessing a strong decision-making centre. This will ensure close proximity 
with  the  supervised  entities  and  cross-border  consistency.  Appropriate  decentralisation 
procedures will be defined while preserving the unity of the supervisory system and avoiding 
duplication. 
As regards the scope of the banks to fall under the SSM, the proposal is very clear. All 
banks established in the euro area will fall under the remit of the SSM. This approximates to 
around  6000  banks.  The  fact  that  all  banks  in  participating  Member  States  fall  under  the 
scope  of  the  proposal,  does  not  imply  that  the  ECB  will  conduct  direct  supervision  of  all 
banks.  Although  the  ECB  will  be  ultimately  responsible  in  the  conduct  of  its  supervisory 
function,  the  ECB  will  be  assisted  by  national  supervisory  authorities  –  the  system  will  be 
very  much  decentralised.  National  supervisors  have  the  knowledge  of  local  and  regional 
markets and have a long-established expertise in supervision. Nevertheless, what ensures 
that the SSM is really one system are the Regulation dispositions that state that the ECB will 
issue  guidelines  and  will  define  the  framework  for  conducting  supervision  by  all  systems' 
                                                
1  D. Schoenmaker, (2011), “The Financial Trilemma”, Economic Letters, No. 111. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
components  and,  most  important,  that  the  ECB  will  have  the  power  to  centralise  the 
supervision of any bank or group of banks when it recognises the need to do so. 
The proposed regulation stipulates the thresholds that will define the significant banks that 
will fall under more direct ECB supervision. In addition, the ECB may also on its own initiative 
consider  an  institution  to  be  of  significant  relevance  and  thus  decide  to  exercise  direct 
supervision. 
Based  on  a  preliminary  assessment, 
approximately 150 banks, representing around 80% of the banking sector in Europe. 
the  ECB  will  conduct  direct  supervision  of 
Extensive powers of the SSM 
A  second  important  feature  of  the  SSM  regards  its  extensive  powers  in  the  conduct  of  its 
supervisory function. The SSM, with the ECB at its centre, is entrusted with an extensive 
set  of  micro-  and  macro  prudential  powers,  covering  all  key  tasks  relating  to  the 
prudential supervision of credit institutions. The inclusion of macro-prudential powers is a key 
element because as shown by the crisis, macro- and micro- risks can actually be mutually 
reinforcing. 
Involvement of non-euro area Member States 
A  third  important feature  in  the  SSM  is  that national competent authorities of non-euro 
area Member States have an option to participate in the SSM. Thus the proposal extends 
to  cover  all  Member  States. They  can  participate  through  establishing  a  close  cooperation 
with the ECB. By establishing a close cooperation they need to adhere to the decisions taken 
by the ECB, if not the cooperation may be suspended or terminated. 
Separation of monetary and supervisory functions, while benefiting from synergies 
Another of the SSM Regulation I would like to highlight relates to the principle of separation 
of the monetary and supervisory functions. The important role given to the Supervisory 
Board  vis-à-vis  the  Governing  Council  is  one  of  the  various  safeguards  ensuring  a  clear 
separation between the monetary and supervisory function of the ECB. 
Finally,  the  concentration  of  these  new  functions  at  the  ECB  implies  a  higher  level  of 
accountability. The Council proposal also addresses the issue by creating a Review Panel 
of  the  SSM  decisions  from  a  legal  point  of  view  and,  in  particular,  by  defining  the 
accountability of the SSM before the European Parliament. 
Main immediate tasks of the SSM 
4. 
One of the main priorities for the ECB during 2013 is ensuring the operationalization of the 
SSM, so that it can assume its responsibilities effectively and efficiently. 
Building a strong centre 
Creating  a  strong  centre  in  a  decentralised  system  such  as  the  SSM,  will  be  crucial  to 
provide the ECB with the necessary means to ensure it will have the resources to effectively 
fulfil  its  functions  without  endangering  its  reputation.  In  this  context,  the  articulation  of 
appropriate  decentralisation  procedures  through  close  cooperation  arrangements  with 
national authorities within the unity of the supervisory system will be essential. 
The knowledge and skills of the system’s human capital will contribute to creating a strong 
centre.  Therefore  the  recruitment  of  skilled  and  experienced  staff,  particularly  banking 
supervisors, will be a priority. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Harmonising risk assessments 
An  immediate  task  of  the  SSM  will  be  a  comprehensive  review  of  the  banks  that  will  fall 
under  direct  supervision  of  the  ECB.  As  foreseen  in  the  Regulation,  this  exercise  should 
include elements of an asset quality review as a basis for a thorough solvency analysis. This 
review should be instrumental in identifying potential legacy problems. 
The  treatment  of  legacy  assets  in  the  overall  Banking  Union  project  is  an  important 
issue in connection with European direct recapitalisation of banks. It has to be ensured 
that in the setting up of a European Resolution Mechanism, the losses of legacy assets, in 
accordance  with  good  resolution  principles,  will  be  borne  first  by  the  banks’  shareholders 
and/or  partly  by  the  countries  where  they  are  domiciled,  so  that  the  use  of  any  European 
funds  do  not  raise  issues  of  moral  hazard  and/or  unjustified  excessive  mutualisation  of 
losses  coming  from  the  past.  As  it  happens  when  a  private  investor  takes  a  stake  in  the 
capital  of  a  troubled  bank,  appropriate  due  diligence  is  conducted  and  will  impact  the 
determination of the price of entry thus diluting previous shareholders. 
The SSM in conducting the initial assessment of the banks’ situation will benefit from 
the  fact  that  the  ECB  is  well  prepared  to  conduct  these  reviews  and  related 
assessments on individual banks, in cooperation with other national and EU authorities and 
possibly  third  parties.  This  is  particularly  the  case  for  forward-looking  analysis  of  banks’ 
solvency through the appropriate analytical tools. The ECB, similarly to other national central 
banks, has over the years strengthened its analytical capacity to support its financial stability 
function, notably the activity of carrying out systemic risk assessments in real time to support 
policy discussions. 
At a larger scale, fundamental work needs to be conducted by the ECB in cooperation with 
the  EBA  is  the  development  of  a  manual  of  supervisory  practices,  implementing  the 
process  and  procedures  for  conducting  supervision  in  the  EU.  This  should  ensure  a 
harmonised approach to the way supervision is conducted and increase comparability across 
supervisory  assessments  –  e.g.  regarding  provisioning  and  risk mitigation  policies  –  under 
the new EU supervisory framework. 
The  establishment  of  the  SSM  requires  also  the  creation  of  some  sort  of  European  Risk 
Analysis System that will analyse and classify the risk profile of the supervised banks. Work 
is thereby also needed on harmonising current national supervisory rating systems and on 
the  use  of  early  warning  indicators  of  bank  distress.  The  ECB  is  also  investing  on  its 
analytical capabilities in this front. 
5. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The agreement reached on the SSM by the Council shows the resolve to reinforce the EMU 
by strengthening the institutional financial framework. The momentum needs to be kept. The 
SSM is a key component, but it is only one component of the Banking Union. In particular, a 
European framework for resolution of banks – with a Single Resolution Mechanism centred 
on a Single Resolution Authority needs to follow. 
Throughout 2013 the ECB will prepare itself for its new supervisory function. I am confident 
that  in  cooperation  with  national  supervisory  authorities  we  will  achieve  the  goal  of 
establishing an effective and robust SSM. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
