George A Provopoulos: The Greek economy and banking system – 
recent developments and the way forward 
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  George  A  Provopoulos,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
conference “The crisis in the euro area”, Athens, 23 May 2013. 
 I would like to warmly welcome you to this conference on “The Crisis in the Euro Area”. 
That  such  a  conference  is  taking  place  here  seems  to  be  especially  appropriate.  After  all, 
Greece is the country where the euro crisis started and which, for much of the past several
years, has been at the epicenter of the crisis. 
What I would like to do is to briefly discuss some developments that led Greece into the crisis
and then take stock of the progress that Greece has made in adjusting its economy. 
Before doing so, let me provide a preview of my main conclusion. 
Although  Greece  has  been  through  some  very  rough  waters,  both  in  terms  of  its  real
economy and its banking system, the situation is turning around. 
Considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  addressing  the  weaknesses  of  the  economy,
making it much more competitive. Importantly, the country is well on the way to building a
strong and competitive banking system. 
As the Governor of the institution responsible for banking supervision and financial stability, I
gain special satisfaction from the fact that, after three years of deep crisis, the stability of the
banking system has not only been preserved but it has strengthened. 
It has not, however, always been easy for the Bank of Greece. 
Let me now turn to the underlying causes, and the policy responses, to Greece’s sovereign 
debt crisis. 
How did this crisis come about? 
The entry of Greece into the euro zone in 2001 was widely seen as marking a transformation 
in the country’s economic performance. 
Entry into the euro area seemed to indeed mark a new regime. 
Between 2001 and 2008, real growth averaged almost 4 per cent a year, inflation fell to the
low single digits, and interest-rate spreads between 10-year Greek and German sovereigns 
dropped to between 10 and 50 basis points, from over 600 basis points in the late 1990s. 
However, these were years when Greece was living dangerously. 
Unsustainable fiscal and external imbalances were building up. 
By 2009, the fiscal deficit had reached 15½ per cent of GDP and the share of government
debt had increased to almost 130 per cent of GDP. Moreover, Greece’s cost competitiveness 
had deteriorated by 30 per cent, and the current account deficit had peaked at 15 per cent of 
GDP in 2008. 
These large and growing imbalances should have sounded warning alarms to the financial
markets, but they did not do so for some time. 
Despite  relatively  low  spreads  on  Greek  sovereigns  following  the  outbreak  of  the  global 
financial  crisis,  as  early  as  in  2008  the  Bank  of  Greece  began  warning  of  the  dangers
inherent in the twin deficits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Fiscal consolidation 
Structural reforms (including privatizations and measures to combat tax evasion) 
Outbreak of the crisis 
These dangers became evident – belatedly – to the financial markets in the fall of 2009 with 
the  news  that  the  fiscal  deficit  for  that  year  would  be  much  higher  than  had  been  earlier
projected. 
Interest-rate spreads began a relentless upward climb and the sovereign became cut off from
the global financial markets. 
In  May  2010,  the  government  agreed  to  an  adjustment  programme  with  the  IMF  and
Greece’s euro-area partners in order to meet its financing needs. 
This adjustment programme was built around two key pillars. 
a. 
b. 
The government placed more emphasis on the first and less emphasis on the second pillar.
Moreover, the fiscal mix relied more on tax increases than on spending cuts. 
The Bank of Greece had advised that the mix should include 1/3 revenue increases (mainly
through broadening the tax base) and 2/3 spending cuts. 
Fiscal  consolidation  led  to  a  recession  that  was  deeper  than  expected,  partly  because  it
relied heavily on increases in tax rates and was not combined with structural reforms to boost
growth prospects. 
What had started out as a sovereign debt crisis spilled over to the banking system. 
Prior to the outbreak of the sovereign crisis, the banking sector had sound fundamentals –
with high CARs, low loan-to-deposit ratios, and essentially no toxic assets of the kind that
set-off the 2007 global financial crisis. 
The  size  of  the  banking  sector  at  the  outset  of  the  crisis  –  at  200%  of  GDP  –  was  much 
smaller than in other countries that experienced crises. 
In contrast to what happened in other countries, in Greece it was the sovereign crisis that led
to a banking crisis, not the other way around. How did that happen? 
First,  in  terms  of  liquidity.  A  series  of  sovereign  downgrades,  and  then  bank  downgrades, 
forced the banks out of the global financial markets. 
Uncertainty led to large deposit outflows. 
Banks  had  to  resort  to  central  bank  funding,  at  first  through  Eurosystem  monetary  policy
operations,  but  gradually,  due  to  the  lack  of  eligible  collateral,  to  emergency  liquidity 
assistance from the Bank of Greece, at a higher cost. 
Following the PSI last year, banks took huge one-off losses on their bond portfolios. 
At the same time, the recession led to a continuous increase in non-performing loans. 
What started out as a liquidity problem threatened to turn into a solvency problem. 
The twin crises generated negative feedback loops, creating a general crisis of confidence,
compounding the problems faced by the banking system, and exacerbating the contraction in 
GDP. 
But a contracting GDP meant a shrinking denominator in the debt-to-GDP ratio. As a result, 
the debt dynamics worsened, and the crisis became self-reinforcing. 
Last year, Greece was said to be on the road to the unthinkable – an exit from the euro! The 
markets even had a name for it; GREXIT. 
So much for the bad news. Is there light at the end of the tunnel? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Adjustment: fiscal 
The  word  “crisis”  originates  from  the  Greek  word  that  means  judgment.  I  believe  that
historians will judge this crisis to be a positive turning point for the Greek economy. 
Why do I believe this? Let me explain. 
Consider, first, fiscal adjustment. 
From 2009 to 2012, the fiscal deficit was reduced by some 9 percentage points of GDP. 
The primary fiscal deficit was 10½ per cent of GDP in 2009. It is projected to swing into a
small surplus this year. 
What  makes  these  achievements  impressive  is  that  they  have  taken  place  despite  a
contracting economy, which creates moving targets for fiscal consolidation. 
Greece’s fiscal consolidation is one of the largest ever achieved by any country at any time. 
Additional  fiscal  measures,  amounting  to  11½  per  cent  of  GDP,  are  being  implemented  in
2013 and 2014. These measures will increase the primary fiscal surplus to 3 per cent of GDP
in two years. 
After  many  delays,  positive  signs  are  also  emerging  with  respect  to  tax  evasion  and
privatizations. 
Further debt-reducing measures were announced by the EuroGroup last November, subject
to Greece reaching a primary surplus, which the government expects to achieve this year. 
Adjustment: external 
Consider, next, external adjustment. 
As I mentioned, Greece had lost about 30 per cent in terms of cost competitiveness against
its major trading partners in the period from 2001 to 2009. Since 2010, about 80 per cent of 
that loss has been recovered. 
By the end of this year, the entire loss will have been recovered. 
Competitiveness  is  also  being  promoted  through  structural  reforms,  which  have  increased
the flexibility of labour and product markets. 
As a result of the improvements in competitiveness, a rebalancing of the economy is taking
place. The share of exports in GDP rose from 18 per cent in 2009 to 25 per cent in 2012. It
will continue to rise. 
The current account deficit, which reached 15 per cent of GDP in 2008, fell to 3 ½ per cent 
last year. It will continue to fall. 
The banking sector strategy 
I now turn to the banking sector. 
As I mentioned, what had started out as a liquidity problem threatened to turn into a solvency
problem. 
We had to step-in to preserve financial system stability. 
The first step was to calculate the amount needed to recapitalize the banking system. 
The  determination  of  the  losses  on  the  bond  portfolios  was  straightforward.  What  was
challenging  was  to  calculate,  in  a  conservative  manner,  all  possible  losses  on  the  loan
portfolios of banks in the coming years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
For this purpose the Bank of Greece worked with BlackRock Solutions. 
Once  this  work  was  finished,  most  pieces  were  in  place  for  the  calculation  of  the  capital
needs of banks. 
The  second  part  of  our  strategy  was  to  assess  which  banks  were  good  candidates  for
recapitalization with programme funds. 
The Bank of Greece, in association with Bain, conducted a “viability assessment”.  
The  result  of  the  “viability  assessment”  was  that  the  four  largest  banks,  now  called  “core 
banks”, were assessed as eligible for recapitalization with public sector funds. These banks
were assessed as the most likely to repay such capital within a reasonable timeframe. 
The  total  amount  set  aside  under  the  adjustment  programme  for  the  restructuring  of  the
banking system is €50 billion. 
When  our  exercise  started  there  were  17  commercial  banks  in  operation:  four  core  banks
and thirteen non-core banks. 
So far, the resolution framework has been used to resolve 8 banks (5 commercial banks and 
3 co-operative banks). 
All core banks have now concluded corporate decision-making processes to increase their 
capital by the amounts required by the Bank of Greece. 
Shortly, we will end up with four well-capitalized core banks and a few non-core banks. 
As a result, the banking system is becoming more compact and efficient, eliminating excess
capacity  and  exploiting  synergies  and  economies  of  scale.  It  is  becoming  stronger  and  is
well-capitalized. 
Other developments 
The  recent  progress  that  Greece  has  made  in  restructuring  its  economy  reflects,  in  large
measure,  the  determination  of  the  government  to  take  ownership  of  the  adjustment
programme. 
The government has made it clear that Greece’s future lies within the euro zone. 
The benefits of the country’s adjustment extend beyond the credibility and competitiveness
effects of the reduced macroeconomic imbalances. 
The  adjustment  means  that  Greece  will  continue  to  receive  financial  support  from  official
lenders,  so  that  it  can  complete  the  process  of  restructuring  its  economy  and  banking
system. 
After its restructuring, the banking system will be in a position to resume its role as the main
source of financial intermediation, supplying funds to support real economic activity. 
The euro area’s response to the crisis 
And what about the euro area as a whole? Here, there are two important factors at work that
will make the euro area a stronger monetary union. 
First, just as the Greek economy is undergoing a major restructuring to make it a stronger, 
competitive economy, similar processes are occurring in other peripheral economies. 
Second, work is also under way to make the euro area a more complete monetary union,
with: 
  4 
 strong economic governance; 
procedures to prevent macroeconomic imbalances from emerging; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 strong  backstops  and  initiatives  –  including  the  ESM  and  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions by the ECB; and 
concrete steps towards the creation of a banking union. 
 
Vitor Constâncio will address banking-union issues in his presentation. 
Conclusions 
I have painted a picture of a Greek economy that is undergoing a major restructuring and I
have argued that Greece has weathered its crisis. 
Consider the following developments. 
Since the peak of the crisis last June, 
    Equity prices have more than doubled. 
Bond spreads have fallen by more than 2,500 basis points. 
Deposits of the private sector have increased by about 12 per cent. 
Hoarded  banknotes  –  a  key  sign  of  uncertainty  in  the  past  –  are  returning  to  the 
banking system. 
Reliance of domestic banks on Eurosystem financing is down by almost 35 per cent.
 
As  the  overhaul  of  the  Greek  economy  continues,  I  expect  economic  growth  to  resume
starting in 2014. 
Let me conclude by saying that, despite predictions to the contrary, there has been no Grexit 
from the euro. 
Instead, I recently saw the word GREXIT had been replaced by the word GRECOVERY. 
As usual, the markets are right, but a little late! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
