Jens Weidmann: Challenges for banking regulation and supervision in 
the monetary union 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Deutscher 
Sparkassentag 2013, Dresden, 24 April 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Mr Fahrenschon 
Mr Genscher 
Mr Steinbrück 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure to speak to you today at the Sparkassentag 2013. 
For more than three years now, the financial, economic and sovereign debt crisis has been 
the dominant topic in the European monetary union and, at the same time, its biggest test. 
Dated from the outbreak of the crisis on the US real estate market in the summer of 2007, 
this is already the fifth year in which we have been in crisis mode. 
That said, Germany is still in relatively good shape – despite undergoing by far its worst post-
war slump in 2009 and despite being one of the first countries to be affected by the spillover 
from the crisis on the US real estate market. 
Germany has had to use considerable financial resources to stabilise the financial system. 
Savings banks, too, felt the effects of the crisis – although they did so directly only in a few 
cases; mostly it was through their investments. 
Even  so,  savings  banks  had  a  stabilising  effect  during  the  crisis.  They  were  a  robust  and 
reliable  source  of  lending.  And  they  strengthened  their  capital  base.  That  is  a  major 
precondition  for  overcoming  the  challenges  that  are  on  the  horizon  –  such  as  sustained 
pressure on margins and increased risk provisioning for the next economic downturn, which 
is bound to come at some time. 
The various aspects of the crisis – first, only a financial crisis, then an economic crisis and, 
finally, the sovereign debt crisis – which is still with us – have prompted a large number of 
discussions,  changes  and  upheavals.  This  applies  to  the  role  of  central  banks  and  to  the 
expectation of what central banks can and should – or cannot and should not – do to help 
resolve the crisis. 
It  also  applies  to  the  financial  system  and  the  way  it  is  perceived  by  the  public  at  large. 
Mr Steinbrück  will  undoubtedly  explain  in  more  detail  soon  how  he  wishes  to  “tame  the 
financial markets”. 
Overcoming the crisis requires considerable efforts in many areas. But, as important as the 
issues of government debt, monetary policy and competitiveness are, I would now like to turn 
my attention to banking regulation and supervision. 
Reform of financial market regulation – objectives and measures 
2. 
Roughly  ten  years  ago,  the  principal  issue  in  banking  regulation  was  Basel  II  and  the 
regulatory changes it brought about. 
At the time, only very few of those involved could have guessed that, just a short while later, 
the  political  agenda  would  be  dominated  by  probably  the  most  all-encompassing  changes 
ever to the regulatory framework of the financial markets in the shape of Basel III and further 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
regulatory initiatives – and all starting off with an awe-inspiring zeal for reform. Basel II took 
five years from the first consultation paper up to a policy agreement on the new principles. 
Basel III only needed one year for that. 
The new regulatory measures, which are designed to have a longer-term impact, are focused 
less on the acute management of the crisis and are geared more to preventing new crises 
from emerging in the future in the first place. 
The changes initiated since the G20 meeting in Washington in November 2008, have the key 
objective  of  making financial  systems  more  stable  and  therefore more resistant  to  shocks. 
Furthermore, the aim is that the taxpayer no longer has to step in to correct difficulties in the 
financial system. And it was also imperative to ensure that the financial system has a clear 
value added for the economy as a whole. 
There  is  good  empirical  evidence  that  growth  in  the  financial  sector  also  strengthens  a 
country’s overall economic growth. On the other hand, studies by the IMF indicate that, along 
with increasing financial sector growth, this effect becomes weaker and might even go into 
reverse. 
It is not necessary to agree with Paul Volcker’s deliberately provocatively worded opinion that 
there hasn’t been a useful innovation in the financial industry since the invention of the ATM, 
and  derivatives  do  not  have  to  be  regarded  as  financial  weapons  of  mass  destruction. 
Nevertheless, if the financial sector is too large, there is evidently an increase in the risks to 
stability and the percentage of less beneficial transactions. 
Cyprus is undoubtedly a telling example and provides an urgent warning that the supervisory 
and regulatory requirements have to keep pace with the size of the financial system relative 
to economic power. 
A stable and efficient financial system that enhances growth and prosperity can be achieved 
only  with  a  whole  package  of  measures.  With  this  in  mind,  the  G20,  at  their  meeting  in 
Washington at the end of 2008, defined various fields in which there was a particular need 
for action. 
Let me outline a few major points. 
• 
Risks  and  mutual  interdependencies  in  the  financial  system  have  to  be  more 
transparent. 
Banks should hold more and higher-quality capital so as to better shoulder losses 
themselves. 
Systemically important financial institutions – the hubs of the financial system – must 
meet  special,  stricter  requirements,  for  example,  with  regard  to  capital  adequacy 
and risk management. 
In the event of difficulties, it must also be possible to resolve or restructure large, 
international and particularly interconnected banks. 
Areas of the financial system which have hitherto been subject to no – or very little – 
regulation, but which perform tasks similar to those of banks and are linked directly 
or indirectly to the banking system, should be better regulated – the shadow banking 
system and derivatives trading are key issues here. 
    At this point, I would like to refer to a fundamental point that is particularly important to me. 
The  connecting  link  between  the  stated  aims  and  the  means  of  achieving  them  is  a 
strengthening of the principle of liability. 
In his Principles of Economic Policy, Walter Eucken declared the principle of liability to be a 
constituent principle of the market economy, referring to the established legal principle that 
“those who benefit should also bear the costs”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Ensuring that players in the financial system have to, and are able to, better bear losses and 
risks themselves in future will make the financial system more stable and more focused on 
transactions that are beneficial to the economy as a whole and make the taxpayer the last 
rather than the first line of defence again in the event of crises. 
Liability is therefore a step towards overcoming the crisis and not a negative concept – quite 
the  opposite!  It  is  the  counterpart  of  the  freedom  to  take  decisions  as  an  entrepreneur  or 
investor  in  a  self-determined  manner.  Freedom  of  choice  and  liability  therefore  belong 
together as a conceptual pair or two sides of the same coin. 
That applies incidentally to the financial system just like it does to the member states within 
the monetary union. Some of the measures taken during the crisis undermine the principle of 
liability rather than strengthening it. It is against that background that we should also assess 
the newly resurfaced debate in Europe on the right course in fiscal policy. 
Of course, a major role is played by the political acceptability of the reform course that has 
been  embarked  on.  At  least  with  regard  to  the  programme  countries,  however,  more  time 
also means greater recourse to European solidarity: more funds are needed from the rescue 
package  or  maybe  even  transfers  that  have  to  be  accepted  politically  by  the  “donor 
countries”. 
The  non-programme  countries,  in  turn,  should  not  repeat  the  mistakes  of  2004  and  not 
interpret the strengthened Stability Pact too flexibly when it is first put to the test. France, in 
particular, has an important role in setting an example in terms of the credibility of the rules 
and confidence in the sustainability of public finances. 
But  back  to  regulation.  At  times,  concerns  are  raised  or  the  criticism  is  made  that  the 
implementation of these noble intentions is not making much headway and that enthusiasm 
for reform has waned significantly. 
I  can  quite  understand  a  certain  amount  of  impatience.  For  example,  with  regard  to  the 
shadow  banking  system,  an  total  integrated  package  with  recommendations  on  regulation 
will not be ready until September and it will be even longer before concrete decisions have 
been made and enshrined in law. 
The  reform  objective  of  clearing  all  standardised  OTC  derivatives  through  central 
counterparties and recording them by the end of 2012 has not been achieved. There are still 
several  sticking  points  –  starting  with  a  lack  of  standards  and  ranging  as  far  as  data 
protection  problems,  and,  in  particular,  the  impasse  in  negotiations  on  cross-border 
coordination between the United States and Europe. 
Progress  has  also  been  mixed  on  the  “too  big  to  fail”  issue  –  more  specifically  the 
implementation of internationally agreed standards for resolution regimes. Here we have to 
contend  with  a  certain  tendency  toward  national  protection  and  the  fragmentation  of  the 
financial  markets.  Otherwise  there  is  the  threat of  competitive  distortions  and  new  risks  to 
stability.  Just  recently,  Börsenzeitung  gave  a  categorical  and  lucid  warning  against  a  new 
nationalism on the part of the supervisors. The US proposals on regulating the capital and 
liquidity of foreign institutions are a prime negative example of this. 
A great deal therefore still needs to be done and we have to maintain political interest in a 
stable financial system. 
Regulation is not an end in itself, however. The costs and benefits of the planned measures, 
including their side-effects and interactions, have to be weighed up against one another. This 
type of analysis is time-consuming and input-intensive, especially since the particular given 
country-specific  aspects  also  have  to  be  taken  into  consideration  when  the  measures  are 
actually  implemented.  And  many  of  the  implications  are  not  immediately  obvious,  but  still 
have the potential to be highly charged. 
One example of this is the planned financial transaction tax and its implications for monetary 
policy. While a fundamental consensus has been achieved on the introduction of the tax, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
unintended side-effects might be considerable. In its currently envisaged form, the tax would 
also cover collateralised money market transactions, known as repo transactions, and would 
cause  considerable  harm  to  the  repo  market.  The  repo  market  plays  a  key  role  in  the 
redistribution of liquidity among commercial banks, however. 
If the market is not able to function properly, the relevant transactions will be shifted to the 
Eurosystem  and  central  banks  will  remain  heavily  involved  in  the  redistribution  of  liquidity 
among banks long after the crisis is over. 
From  a  monetary  policy  standpoint,  therefore,  a  very  critical  view  has  to  be  taken  of  the 
financial transaction tax in its current form, and this shows how important it is to scrutinise 
regulatory measures before they are introduced. But, again, that takes time. 
However, this does not mean that regulatory reform has been a complete failure, because a 
whole  series  of  measures  is  now  in  place  with  which  the  principle  of  liability  is  being 
strengthened. Let me just mention the example of stricter capital requirements in the form of 
Basel II.5 and Basel III. 
At  the  end  of  February  this  year,  political  agreement  was  reached  in  the  European  Union 
concerning the implementation of Basel III through the Capital Requirements Directive IV and 
the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation.  The  European  Parliament  also  gave  the  draft 
legislation its seal of approval just last week. It may seem ambitious, but implementation of 
Basel III will therefore be possible in Europe from the beginning of 2014. Basel III will take full 
effect in 2019. Banks are using the interim period to raise their capital to the required level. 
In  the  case  of  credit  growth,  however,  there  is  the  opposite  fear  is  that  the  reforms  are 
proving  too  successful.  Deleveraging  is  still  urgently  required  to  overcome  the  crisis. 
However, this deleveraging process is also a contributory factor in the low growth rates for 
lending in some European countries. Developments in lending therefore reflect a necessary 
correction  and  are  not  in  themselves  an  indication  of the  need for further  economic  policy 
action. 
Incidentally, the cost-benefit analyses conducted before the adoption of Basel III show that 
these measures will, at most, have a very  limited impact in terms of dampening economic 
growth. Sadly, however, there are still those in the banking industry – especially in the United 
States, but also in Europe – who are campaigning against the introduction of higher capital 
requirements. 
In a recently published book, Bonn-based economist Martin Hellwig examined the arguments 
which are advanced in this context. According to Mr Hellwig and his co-author, there is no 
simpler  and  more  cost-effective  approach  to  crisis  prevention  than  reducing  large  banks’ 
dependency on borrowed money – in other words, increasing their capital requirements. 
At the same time, it is also true that the large number of different regulatory initiatives makes 
it  difficult  to  maintain  an  overview  and  evaluate  the  consequences.  Acting  on the  principle 
that it is better to be thorough than hasty, it would therefore be necessary to estimate the 
overall impact of the regulatory agenda and evaluate it in a cost-benefit analysis. 
Above  and  beyond  all  these  regulatory  reforms,  Europe  has  another  top  priority  on  its 
agenda – the banking union and the organisation of banking supervision. 
Banking supervision – on the road to a European banking union 
3. 
The crisis has highlighted the need for a general overhaul of the financial market architecture 
of monetary union. 
The banking union is closing an open flank that was already identified but not closed when 
the currency union was set up. If done properly, the banking union can actually counteract 
the risks of contagion risks stemming from difficulties in national financial systems. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  concrete  terms,  the  banking  union  must  have  two  pillars  –  a  single  supervision  and  a 
single  resolution  and  restructuring  mechanism.  The  SSM  (single  supervisory  mechanism) 
and SRM (single resolution mechanism) are two more ingredients to the alphabet soup that 
is European crisis policy, but, in my opinion, they are two very important ingredients. 
Creating  a  banking  union  involves  a  large  amount  of  institutional  construction  work. 
Preparation of the relevant legal groundwork is in full swing at EU level for both pillars. In all 
likelihood, the single supervisory mechanism at least will be able to commence operation in 
the second half of 2014. 
Single supervisory mechanism (SSM) under the ECB 
3.1 
The  aim  of  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  (SSM)  is  to  ensure  that  the  same  high 
standard  of  supervision  applies  throughout  Europe,  thus  consistently  containing  excessive 
risks. It aims to make developments and risks in national banking systems more transparent 
and  prevent  domestic  problems  being  glossed  over.  It  will  also  be  better  able  to  monitor 
cross-border interactions than the sum total of national supervisors. 
The  SSM  will  not  only  supervise  the  most  important  banks  directly.  Not  just  the  bank’s 
absolute  size  or  cross-border  activities  are  of  relevance,  but  also  its  significance  for  the 
respective economy. 
The  three  most  important  banks  of  each  member  state  will  therefore  be  among  the 
institutions  which  are  supervised  directly,  irrespective  of  their  absolute  size.  In  total,  some 
130 banks throughout Europe will therefore be under the direct supervision of the SSM. 
The SSM is to be placed under the auspices of the ECB. The Bundesbank is unhappy with 
this  arrangement,  as  it gives  rise  to  potential  conflicts  of  interest  between  monetary  policy 
and supervision on the Governing Council. As Klaas Knot put it, “letting banking supervision 
get started within the ECB so that it at least gets off the ground.” However, I very much hope 
that this solution is not the final stage of development and that, in the medium term at least, 
the  EU  treaties  will  be  amended  to  ensure  a  clear  separation  of  monetary  policy  and 
supervisory responsibilities. 
In  terms  of  the  distribution  of  responsibilities  within  Germany,  it  is  crucial  that  the 
Bundesbank  remain  firmly  involved  in  banking  supervision  so  that  we  can  share  our 
extensive expertise and utilise the findings from supervisory activities for other tasks. This is 
even more important since the Bundesbank recently took on an even more significant role in 
the monitoring of financial stability in Germany through the Financial Stability Committee. 
In this context, we are also keeping a watchful eye on the situation in the real estate market, 
which is no doubt a topic in your discussions, too. 
For  one  thing,  the  crisis  has  once  again  underlined  the  risk  of  exaggerations  on  the  real 
estate  market.  A  recent  Bundesbank  discussion  paper1  even  concludes  that  the  “Great 
Recession” of 2008/2009 and the weak recovery that followed were largely due to problems 
in the real estate sector and, moreover, that negative shocks on the real estate market have 
a more significant impact on the real economy than positive shocks. 
For  another, there  has been  a  marked  rise  in real  estate  prices  in  Germany  recently  –  by 
around  seven  per  cent  in  major  cities  in  the  last  two  years,  for  example.  However,  the 
Bundesbank does not currently perceive any credit-driven bubble.  
                                                
1   Prieto,  Eickmeier,  Marcellino  (2013):  Time  Variation  in  Macro-Financial  Linkages,  Bundesbank  Discussion 
Paper 13/2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Resolution mechanism 
3.2 
To achieve its full potential, the single supervisory mechanism needs to be augmented by a 
single resolution mechanism (SRM). As in the case of the SSM, a solution that satisfies the 
requirements of European law ultimately calls for an amendment of the EU treaties. This has 
been quite rightly been emphasised by Federal Minister of Finance. 
Essentially, the SRM is an important embodiment of the principle of liability. After all, liability 
also means that, in case of doubt, it should be possible to resolve banks without significant 
economic harm to the economy as a whole – and to see this through if the worst comes to 
the worst. 
Resolving and closing a bank is by no means a cure-all and it is certainly not an easy task. 
Where  possible,  things  should  not  be  allowed  to  go  that  far  in  the  first  place.  And  that  is 
where strict capital requirements, effective supervision and deposit business shielded from 
riskier business lines come into play. 
The  banking  union  also  needs  to  be  supported  by  an  appropriate  regulatory  structure.  In 
other words, banks must be required to hold sufficient capital for claims on government and 
not be allowed to accumulate them on too large a scale in future. It would be dishonest to 
assert that all these measures will make it impossible for banks to get into difficulties in the 
future. Therefore, if that actually does happen at some time, having a reliable procedure in 
place that creates planning certainty will be all the more important. 
With this in mind, the main task of the single resolution mechanism that is currently being 
developed is to ensure the correct sequence of liability is applied in such a process. If a bank 
is to be restructured or resolved, equity investors should be the first port of call, followed by 
the  providers  of  debt  capital,  and  only  then  the  depositors,  taking  due  account  of  deposit 
guarantees in the respective member states. National and European taxpayers should only 
be called upon as a very last resort. 
If public funds are used, the question arises as to how liability is to be apportioned between 
the European level and the member states. Joint liability of all member states can only exist 
at EU level for those institutions directly supervised by the SSM. In such a case, it is also 
appropriate, however. 
Having said that, it is unclear whether the member states are to be discharged of all liability 
or whether a certain percentage of the costs is still to be apportioned to them. The latter is 
suggested by fact that, in the current framework of monetary union, member states are still 
able to exert a perceptible influence on financial stability through their national economic and 
financial policies – say, encouraging the emergence of a real estate bubble through special 
tax benefits. 
This should be kept separate from the treatment of balance-sheet burdens that arose while 
the various banking systems were still under national supervision. If the unity of liability and 
control  is  also  taken  seriously  on  this  point,  too,  the  member  states  in  question  should 
themselves also be liable for these burdens as well. As the case of Spain shows, the ESM is 
ready to step in if raising the necessary funds on the capital market proves difficult. 
Ultimately, what to do with legacy debts is a supervisory problem, not a question that has to 
be answered by politicians. If politicians actually do decide to communitise legacy debts, it 
will  be  nothing  other  than  a  financial  transfer.  Transparency  for  members  of  the  general 
public and taxpayers then also requires that this transfer be disclosed as such. 
The  single  resolution  mechanism  reduces  uncertainty  and  mitigates  the  risk  of  contagion 
effects. The discretionary approach taken in the case of Cyprus is therefore not a blueprint 
for similar situations that may arise in other countries. 
Events in Cyprus have shown that a bail-in is possible. But they have also highlighted the 
importance of establishing a clear sequence of liability and an orderly procedure, especially if 
turbulence due to depositor uncertainty is to be avoided. After all, the debate on to the extent 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of depositor involvement has caused major uncertainty – in other countries, too. This was all 
the more the case as there was discussion about the possibility of using deposits that were 
actually protected by the Cypriot deposit guarantee scheme. 
In  connection  with  the  security  of  customer  deposits  at  banks,  the  question  of  whether  a 
banking  union  should  not  include  a  single  Europe-wide  deposit  guarantee  scheme  is  also 
regularly  under  of  discussion.  The  German  Savings  Bank  and  Giro  Association  has 
repeatedly expressed its very critical stance regarding a single European deposit guarantee 
scheme.  And,  indeed,  it  is  important  not  to  put  the  cart  before  the  horse  in  tackling  such 
projects. 
Given the current degree of integration among member states and financial systems, a single 
Europe-wide deposit guarantee scheme would not be practical. Even more than is the case 
for the costs of resolution and restructuring, it is true to say that bank balance sheets reflect 
economic developments in the individual member states that are currently beyond European 
control. 
Otherwise,  taxpayers  who  are  not  involved  would  be  made  liable  for  mistakes  in  other 
countries without being responsible for those mistakes. It is much more important to set up 
the single supervisory mechanism and single resolution mechanism and put them on a firm 
footing. 
Conclusion 
4. 
In  summarising  my  thoughts,  I  would  like  to  stress  that,  yes,  reforming  financial  market 
regulation is still a major task, but it is making headway, both in Europe and internationally. 
This  means  that,  step  by  step,  we  are  approaching  the  goal  of  bringing  about  an  overall 
reduction in the risks to individual economies and the monetary union which stem from the 
financial systems without undermining their efficiency. 
A  key  task  in  designing  specific  reforms  is  to  give  a  more  scope  again  to  the  principle  of 
liability. The Bundesbank is diligently pursuing this aim by bringing its expertise to bear and, 
if it is necessary, is in for the long haul. Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
