John McDermott: The role of forecasting in monetary policy 
Speech by Dr John McDermott, Assistant Governor and Head of Economics of the Reserve 
Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  FINSIA  (Financial  Services  Institute  of  Australasia),  Wellington, 
15 March 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
As is well known, the Reserve Bank Act requires the Bank to seek to maintain price stability, 
an  objective  similar  in  spirit  to  that  of  most  modern  advanced-country  central  banks.  The 
Governor  is  legally  responsible  for  monetary  policy  decisions  and  they  are  made 
independently from the government. Last week he explained in a speech how we make and 
communicate these and other important Reserve Bank decisions.1  
Because  the  economy  is  never  at  rest,  and  monetary  policy  actions  take  time  to  affect 
inflation, forecasting economic conditions is an essential part of making these decisions. The 
forward-looking nature of monetary policy is reflected in the Policy Targets Agreement (PTA) 
between  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  and  the  Minister  of  Finance,  which  specifies  the  price 
stability target as “future CPI inflation outcomes between one percent and three percent on 
average over the medium term, with a focus on keeping future average inflation near the two 
percent target midpoint”. 
There  are  difficulties  and  uncertainties  involved  in  assessing  the  current  state  of  the 
economy  and  its  likely  future  path.  Modern  central  banks  therefore  put  a  huge  amount  of 
energy  into  forecasting.  Events  such  as  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  Canterbury 
earthquakes showed how we must be prepared to pivot, at times very quickly. Reflecting this 
complex policymaking environment, the Bank’s Governing Committee is advised by a team 
of about 40 economists and financial market analysts, including two external monetary policy 
advisers drawn from the private sector. 
This speech explains how forecasting fits into the monetary policy process. I’ll address the 
limitations  and  trade-offs  involved  in  forecasting  and  how  we  manage  these  in  monetary 
policy decision-making, and illustrate by discussing important issues in the current forecast. 
The forecasting process and economic framework 
2. 
Forecasting links the Bank’s policy rate decisions and strategy to the requirements set out in 
the  PTA.  The  forecasting  process  follows  a  quarterly  cycle  with  two  OCR  reviews,  one  of 
which  is  accompanied  by  the  Monetary  Policy  Statement  for  the  quarter.  Through  the 
quarter, we examine the incoming data, update forecast tracks and scenarios, and discuss 
policy risks. 
Inputs  to  the  process  are  many  and  various.  We  draw  on  official  data,  surveys  and  other 
information covering output, sales, employment, consumption, investment, exports, imports, 
wages, prices and so on. We visit businesses and labour organisations representing all the 
country’s  regions  and  economic  sectors  to  gather  up-to-date  perspectives  on  economic 
developments “on the ground”. We analyse other agencies’ forecasts and stay in close touch 
with other central banks. Our market monitoring and prudential supervision activities provide 
financial and credit market intelligence. Finally, our external monetary policy advisers are a 
key source of private sector input to our deliberations. 
                                                 
1   Wheeler, G (2013) “Decision making in the Reserve Bank of New Zealand”, speech delivered to the University 
of Auckland Business School, 7 March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
We  use  all  this  to  form  a  coherent  picture  of  international  and  domestic  conditions  and  a 
macroeconomic  projection.  The  projection  captures  our  view  of  the  most  likely  future 
developments  in  inflation,  output,  employment,  interest  rates,  the  exchange  rate  and  other 
key macroeconomic variables, based on the information to hand and our understanding of 
how the economy works. 
The economic framework 
Forming an assessment that can support policy decisions requires an economic framework 
to boil down the large and complex set of information into something more manageable. The 
framework  includes  some  fundamental  economic  principles  to  anchor  our  analysis  and 
dialogue. These include the big lesson from the 1970s experience, that you can’t sustainably 
get  higher  growth  by  tolerating  a  bit  more  inflation,  and  that  to  try  to  do  so  will  eventually 
cause  high  and  variable  inflation,  and  damage  the  economy.  Long-run  growth  is 
fundamentally determined by growth in the productive base of the economy – that is, labour, 
the capital stock and knowledge. 
The  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  long-run  growth  is  to  keep  aggregate 
inflation predictably low, so that it can form a useful benchmark for pricing behaviour. This 
involves counteracting, where possible, the inflation effects of emerging economic pressures 
(sometimes referred to as shocks). 
In understanding the macroeconomic consequences of shocks, the main effects to account 
for are as follows. Firstly, inflation tends to fall when demand is weak enough for there to be 
slack in the labour and goods markets (technically, a “negative output gap”), and rise when 
the  opposite  is  true.  This  relationship  is  most  obvious  in  the  case  of  non-tradable  inflation 
(see  Figure  1).  Secondly,  investment  and  consumption  demand  tend  to  rise  when  interest 
rates  fall.  Thirdly,  the  exchange  rate  tends  to  be  high  when  relative  prospective  returns 
available  in  New  Zealand  are  above  those  offshore.  Finally,  short  term  interest  rates, 
reflecting the price stability objective of monetary policy, tend to rise in response to increases 
in future inflation pressure. 
All  of  these  key  macroeconomic  variables  are  therefore  linked  together  by  economic 
behavioural  tendencies.  We  say  “tendencies”  because  other  things  than  those  mentioned 
matter too, and may at times be substantial drivers of the patterns we see in the data. For 
example, a major source of exchange rate fluctuations in New Zealand is the outlook for the 
world  prices  of  our  commodity  exports  and  the terms  of  trade.  Housing  investment  moves 
quite substantially with the ebbs and flows of net migration. Government spending and other 
fiscal policy changes are a further source of demand shock. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The role of models and the need for judgement 
The overall variation in the data can therefore be viewed as a combination of the sequence 
of  shocks  and  the  responses  of  the  economy  to  those  shocks.  One  major  task  of  the 
economic analyst is to disentangle the two, at least conceptually. 
One tool we use to help with the task is a structural forecasting model, which continues our 
long tradition of using such models in forecasting and policy analysis. The model is calibrated 
to the “typical” economic behaviour observed over the past two decades of price stability in 
New Zealand, and embeds the fairly standard views of economic behaviour outlined above. 
Its  key  features  include  intuitive  economic  mechanisms,  a  relatively  simple  structure,  and 
adaptability to accommodate a range of economic circumstances. 
Using  a  model  provides  a  number  of  benefits. It  enables  us  to  link  policy  decisions  to  our 
objectives  and  to  the  economic  outlook,  to  consider  simultaneous  shocks  and  interactions 
among economic variables systematically and consistently, and to ensure that there is some 
consistency in interpreting the flow of data between forecast updates and policy decisions. 
But  even  the  most  advanced  models  can  only  be  very  abstract  representations  of  the 
economy,  and  our  forecasting  model  is  deliberately  designed  to  be  relatively  simple  and 
adaptable.  Too  much  complexity  would  make  it  difficult  to  understand  the  transmission 
mechanisms  and  dynamics  in  the  model,  and  would  be  unlikely  to  improve  forecasting 
accuracy materially. 
Judgemental  input  to  any  model  and  adjustment  to  the  model’s  outputs  are  therefore  a 
necessary  part  of  building  up  the  forecast  –  and  indeed  the  process  of  adding  judgement 
itself helps us form views about the outlook in a systematic manner. 
There are three main motivations for adding judgement currently. Firstly, responses to rare 
events such as the global financial crisis and the Canterbury earthquakes will, by design, not 
be picked up in the forecasts of a model that is calibrated to the “average” experience over 
the last 20 years. Secondly, like most macroeconomic models, our model does not explicitly 
model  the  financial  sector,  which  is  a  key  feature  of  modern  economies.  The  modelling 
framework does include an interest rate spread between the floating mortgage rates and the 
90-day bank bill rate, and this is the point where we typically add judgement to account for 
financial factors in the model. Finally, judgement is needed to account for how the economy 
responds at different points in the business cycle, since models generally only generate the 
average response seen across the cycle. 
Judgemental  adjustment  in  the  framework  often  is  motivated  by  the  qualitative  information 
we receive from business visits, as well as from the knowledge of experienced forecasters 
gained over many business cycles. 
As noted, our forecasts are updated regularly. As new data comes in each quarter, we are 
able to learn from our errors, get a sense of which bits of the model to trust and which to 
keep adjusting, and revise our forecasts accordingly. 
Monetary policy, risk management and trade-offs 
3. 
Monetary policy operates in a complex environment. In developing our central projection, we 
must consider multiple risks and trade-offs. 
Monetary policy and risk management 
The  likelihoods  of  various  economic  outcomes  affect  markedly  the  costs  and  benefits  of 
alternative policy actions. Forming a view on these likelihoods is, furthermore, subject to a 
range of uncertainties. Firstly, the information on the economy’s current state and direction 
and rate of movement can be difficult to read, conflicting and sometimes revised. Secondly, 
some  important  economic  concepts  cannot  even  be  directly  observed,  including  the 
“potential” level of output consistent with stable inflation, or the “neutral” rate of interest that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
has neither a stimulatory nor a contractionary effect on spending. Thirdly, our understanding 
of economic behaviour is imperfect, and behaviour itself can shift over time as the economy’s 
structure and opportunities available to firms and households change. 
Because of these uncertainties, monetary policy can often  appear “cautious”, in the sense 
that,  under  normal  circumstances,  we  tend  to  adjust  interest  rates  quite  smoothly  to 
economic developments, at least compared to the observed volatility in the data. This reflects 
a desire not to jerk the economy around in response to bumps in the data that may turn out 
to be quite temporary. 
But now and then the economy is hit by a big and unusual shock quite outside the range of 
possibilities  one  might  reasonably  anticipate,  for  the  purposes  of  monetary  policy  at  least. 
The series of Canterbury earthquakes, or the events of the global financial crisis, are obvious 
examples.  When  such  big  events  hit,  the  monetary  response  instead  may  be  very  rapid, 
reflecting that we can be sure that the outlook has markedly changed. 
These uncertainties explain the limited predictive power of economic forecasts. Our analysis 
generally suggests that our forecasting track record is somewhat better than the average of 
other forecasters.2 But what is also clear is that all forecasters face difficulties in predicting 
future  economic  outcomes  beyond  the  next  few  quarters.  Quite  simply,  much  can  happen 
over that timeframe. 
The central projection in our Monetary Policy Statement therefore represents just one path of 
the many possible. 
Monetary policy and trade-offs 
Even if we knew the future perfectly, we would face important choices about how quickly and 
strongly  to  react  to  economic  pressures  and  to  seek  to  restore  future  inflation  to  target. 
These choices have impacts on the economic volatility during the adjustment period. 
The  PTA  recognises  this  trade-off.  It  requires  the  Bank  to  seek  to  avoid  unnecessary 
instability in interest rates, output and the exchange rate in its pursuit of the price stability 
target. This is known as flexible inflation targeting and all inflation-targeting countries take the 
same basic approach. 
The  forecasting  framework  enables  these  trade-offs  to  be  systematically  addressed  and 
balanced. There’s often concern, for example, that increases to the policy interest rate will 
adversely  affect  growth  by  causing  exchange  rate  appreciation.  But  we  do  not  hike  the 
interest rate for no reason. While higher interest rates are normally associated with a higher 
exchange  rate,  this  usually  reflects  strengthening  of  the  economy  due  to  other  forces  on 
spending,  such  as  a  pickup  in  foreign  demand,  rising  terms  of  trade,  or  an  increase  in 
government spending. 
It  therefore  does  not  follow  that  keeping  interest  rates  lower  than  otherwise  in  order  to 
prevent exchange rate appreciation would necessarily be successful. Assuming the inflation 
target is credible, strength in the domestic economy will generally cause the exchange rate to 
appreciate  even  without  immediate  policy  tightening,  as  people  will  anticipate  eventual 
monetary  tightening  in  order  to  limit  rising  inflation  pressure.  This  kind  of  response  is 
consistent with the principles of economic behaviour outlined above. 
The  sustained  economic  expansion  in  New  Zealand  prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis 
illustrates these trade-offs well. The OCR was steadily raised 200 basis points from 2003 to 
2006 and the New Zealand dollar exchange rate moved from 55 US cents to 75 US cents. 
Even a tightening of monetary conditions of this magnitude was not sufficient to prevent CPI 
                                                 
2   The latest assessment of our forecasting accuracy is Labbé and Pepper (2009). McCaw and Ranchhod (2002) 
is also useful for more detailed discussion of the reasons for the historical pattern of forecasting errors. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inflation  from  reaching  more  than  three  percent  by  the  end  of  2006  (Figure  2).  We  could 
perhaps have leaned harder against this expansion at the time, but this would probably have 
exaggerated the exchange rate cycle on both the upswing and the downswing. 
We draw several lessons from this experience. One is that when there are strong forces on 
the  New  Zealand  economy,  policy  settings  may  need  to  lean  quite  hard  against  them.  A 
second is that financial cycles can be surprisingly large and long-lasting. A third is that such 
forces in a small open economy can cause large exchange rate swings. Difficult judgements 
must be made about the balance across the trade-offs. 
 for 
forces,  recognising 
the  uncertainties,  and  accounting 
Issues in our current forecasts 
Our current forecasts also show the current challenges in predicting the balance of opposing 
economic 
trade-offs.  The 
combination of the global financial crisis and the Canterbury earthquakes has left a legacy of 
tough economic issues to resolve. The persistently elevated exchange rate, high household 
debt overhang, and substantial fiscal consolidation will weigh on the economy, but acting in 
the opposite direction are rising house prices and the large construction spending surge from 
the Canterbury rebuild. 
Our  central  projection  indicates  low  inflation  in  the  near-term  but  strengthening  over  the 
medium-term.  Mindful  of  our  requirement  to  focus  on  future  average  inflation  over  the 
medium term, our policy strategy is to “smooth through” these near-term variations in inflation 
in a forward-looking manner. 
The  “net”  of  all  these  effects  and  their  timing  are  quite  sensitive  to  assumptions.  Our  task 
with  our  quarterly  forecast  updates  is  to  keep  up  to  speed  with  the  incoming  evidence  on 
whether our assumptions are accurate. 
Judgement is particularly important in respect of future movements in the exchange rate. The 
exchange rate can move sharply and suddenly, for reasons that cannot be foreseen even if 
in  hindsight  the  connections  seem  quite  obvious.  Often,  sudden  and  large  downward 
movements (depreciations) result from large and sudden shocks from offshore, such as seen 
at the onset of the Asian crisis in mid-1997 or the sudden intensification of global financial 
disruptions in 2008 (Figure 3). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 At  other  times,  an  unexpectedly  long  period  of  strong  or  weak  relative  economic 
performance,  or  strong  forces  such  as  commodity  price  swings  or  domestic  demand 
pressures, can generate substantial and prolonged departures of the exchange rate from its 
long-run average levels. 
A  second  key  judgement  in  our  forecasts  is  the  extent  to  which  household  spending  is 
constrained  by  high  debt  levels  and  the  GFC  experience,  which  has  implications  for  the 
degree to which the strengthening housing market will feed into private consumption. Finally, 
the  profile  and  wider  spillover  effects  into  construction  costs  of  the  Canterbury  rebuild  will 
depend  upon  how  capacity  pressures  are  resolved.  Our  current  judgements  are  that  the 
household debt position means consumption is likely to follow less of a pronounced upswing 
as  a  result of  the  housing  market  upturn  than has  historically  been  the  case,  and  that  the 
concentrated  character of  the  rebuild  means  its  spillover  effects  to  housing  markets  in  the 
rest  of  the  country  will  be  muted.  However,  since  there  is  little  recent  experience  against 
which to benchmark these events, we will have to monitor the evidence carefully to ensure 
that our judgements in this area remain reasonable. 
The current environment also confronts us with trade-offs across policy objectives. Near-term 
inflation is low and is forecast to gradually increase back to the midpoint of the target range. 
An  interest rate  cut  might  help  inflation  return  to  target  sooner.  But  such  a  cut  would  also 
probably exacerbate the current strength in house prices, risking further increases in private 
debt  levels,  potentially  raising  financial  stability  issues.  Indeed,  the  PTA  specifies  that,  in 
setting monetary policy, we must monitor asset prices and have regard to the soundness and 
efficiency of the financial system.3 On the other hand, while an interest rate hike might limit 
housing market risks, it could also place further upward pressure on the exchange rate. 
In  the  near  future,  macro-prudential  measures  will  be  part  of  the  toolkit  for  responding  to 
financial stability risks. These measures will generally support and complement our efforts to 
stabilise inflation with monetary policy, as upswings in the macroeconomy often coincide with 
increasing asset prices and leverage. We’re currently engaged in consultation regarding the 
use of macro-prudential instruments and will say more about this in our upcoming Financial 
Stability Report. 
                                                 
3   A box in the December 2012 Monetary Policy Statement explains the new PTA. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Forecasting supports accountability and communication activities 
4. 
Forecasts,  risk  assessment  and  management  of  trade-offs  are  a  critical  element  of  our 
communication of policy strategy and accountability for our actions. We aim to be as clear as 
possible in the Monetary Policy Statement about both the economic outlook and the strategy 
framing monetary policy decisions and plans.4 Shortly after the Statement is published, the 
Governor holds a press conference and the Statement is reviewed by Parliament’s Finance 
and Expenditure Select Committee. The Bank’s Board of Directors, who are appointed by the 
Minister of Finance, formally review each Statement and OCR decision as part of their duty 
to monitor constantly the Reserve Bank’s performance of its obligations under the Act. 
These  various  examinations  and  question  and  answer  sessions  are  very  thorough.  In 
addition,  senior  Bank  staff  travel  around  New  Zealand  and  give  talks  explaining  the  main 
considerations supporting the latest decision. By explaining the rationale for policy decisions, 
we enable our views to be discussed and challenged. 
The Statement thus acts as a record of our monetary policy deliberations. Some other central 
banks instead publish minutes of their monetary policy meetings, which amounts to much the 
same thing. 
Our communications activities are also intended to assist the economy by stabilising inflation 
expectations.  Published  forecasts  help  markets  assess  the  economic  environment  and 
understand our policy strategy.5 We have published policy outlooks since 1997 in the form of 
a future path for short term interest rates. A number of other central banks, including those of 
Sweden and Norway, have subsequently followed this practice. 
The future interest rate track in any projection represents the Bank’s best view of the outlook 
for  monetary  policy  settings  given  the  information  to  hand  at  the  time,  and  is  not  a 
commitment to the particular path shown. Our analysis shows that as long as the markets do 
not  regard  our  published  interest  rate  path  as  a  commitment,  there  are  benefits  for  the 
economy from the publication of the numbers.6  
There are various ways of communicating the policy outlook. We present our projection as a 
single narrow line. Of course, around this line is a range of possibilities that widens markedly 
the  further  ahead  one  looks.  We  find  that  projecting  a  single  central  projection,  though, 
simplifies the discussion considerably, and makes the forecast numbers easier to connect to 
the forecast story. 
There are obvious risks of oversimplification or inadvertently conveying unrealistic precision 
in  such  an  approach.  But  on  the  other  hand,  showing  an  unhelpfully  wide  range  can 
undermine the central message. Different central banks handle this issue in different ways. 
Some use “fan charts” showing distributions of possible outcomes, while others use explicit 
or implicit statements of policy “bias” rather than a projected path for interest rates. In our 
case we’ve placed emphasis on the clarity of the basis for our policy decisions and outlook, 
which  we  think  large  fans  could  obscure  to  the  extent  that  they  hide  the  relationships 
between the different macroeconomic variables in the forecast story. 
As another means to show these relationships and how they inform policy, we now and then 
make use of “alternative scenarios”, where we work through quantitatively the implications for 
the forecast numbers of different settings for the key assumptions, to show how outcomes 
might  differ  from  our  central  projections.  For  example,  the  Monetary  Policy  Statement 
released yesterday features an alternative scenario and discussion of the (distinct) possibility 
                                                 
4   Blinder et al. (2008) discuss these aspects of monetary policy communications in detail. 
5   Svensson (2006) and Woodford (2005) offer useful discussions of this principle. 
6   Bergstrom and Karagedikli (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
that the exchange rate might follow a different path, higher or lower, to that in our current 
central projection. 
forecasting 
transparent 
Conclusion 
framework  also 
5. 
Forecasting is a difficult but essential part of modern monetary policy. This reflects that the 
economy is never in a state of rest, and that there are lags between changes in the OCR and 
their effects on the economy. Forecasting provides value by explaining the economic story 
and  framing  the  risks  underpinning  the  policy  strategy.  If  done  well,  this  process  helps 
policymakers, firms and households to plan for and adapt to changing circumstances. 
As  well  as  enforcing  internal  discipline  and  structure  on  policymakers’  deliberations,  an 
explicit,  coherent  and 
facilitates  external 
accountability.  Forecasting,  central  bank 
independence  and  a  strong  accountability 
framework are now all part of the orthodox, “full” framework for inflation targeting adopted by 
more than 20 developed countries.7  
The models and processes we use to support our forecasting are carefully designed. As in 
the design of any process there are trade-offs that must be managed. We want to capture 
complex  economic  relationships  and  phenomena,  while  preserving  the  flexibility  to 
accommodate unusual circumstances and a grasp of the essentials. 
No  one  in  the  forecasting  business  is  under  any  illusions  that  what  they  do  is  a  perfect 
science. Moreover, the economy is not a collection of mechanical equations, but a growing, 
changing system of interacting human choices. With experience comes improvement. 
Currently,  monetary  policy  faces  some  big  forecasting  issues.  One  is  the  treatment  of  the 
exchange rate and its likely future path, which will have substantial effects on the economy. 
Another is the reconstruction in Canterbury and the effects flowing from that. 
The outcomes in practice could, and probably will, turn out quite differently to our projections 
at any particular time. But the important thing is that we’ve done the best we can to anticipate 
the different possibilities and how we might have to react to them. In our quarterly forecast 
cycle  we  do  our  best  to  update,  test,  revise  and  communicate  our  views  thoroughly.  This 
enables  us  to  keep  the  OCR  as  well-positioned  as  we  can,  and  our  policy  strategy  well-
understood,  so  that  our  efforts  to  maintain  stable  inflation  do  not  cause  more  economic 
volatility than necessary. 
References 
Bergstrom,  K  and  O  Karagedikli  (2013)  “The  interest  rate  conditioning  assumption: 
investigating the effects of central bank communication in New Zealand”, RBNZ Discussion 
Paper, forthcoming. 
Blinder,  A,  M  Ehrmann,  M  Fratzscher,  J  De  Haan  &  D  Jansen  (2008)  “Central  bank 
communication and monetary policy: a survey of theory and evidence”, Journal of Economic 
Literature 46(4), 910–945. 
Hampton,  T,  D  Stephens  and  R  Philip  (2003)  “Monetary  policy  communication  and 
uncertainty”, RBNZ Bulletin 66(2), 29–34. 
Labbé, F and H Pepper (2009) “Assessing recent external forecasts”, RBNZ Bulletin 72(4), 
19–25. 
                                                 
7   Roger (2009)  provides a review of the two  decades of inflation targeting experience around the  world, that 
began  with  New  Zealand’s  introduction  of  inflation  targeting  with  the  Reserve  Bank  Act  of  1989  and 
subsequently spread. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
McCaw,  S  and  S  Ranchhod  (2002)  “The  Reserve  Bank’s  forecasting performance”,  RBNZ 
Bulletin 65(4), 5–23. 
Roger, S (2009) “Inflation targeting at 20: achievements and challenges”, IMF Working Paper 
WP/09/236. 
Svensson, L (2006) “Social value of public information: Morris and Shin (2002) is actually pro 
transparency, not con”, American Economic Review 96(1), 448–451. 
Woodford, M (2005) “Central bank communication and policy effectiveness”, NBER Working 
Paper 11898. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
