François Groepe: Structural reform to promote economic growth 
Address  by  Mr  François  Groepe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at 
the Economics and Beyond Seminar, University of South Africa, Pretoria, 5 August 2013. 
 Introduction 
The  Bank  for  International  Settlements’  2013  Annual  Report  released  in  June  this  year 
argues  that  monetary  policy  has  provided  space  and  time  for  governments  to  undertake 
structural  reforms  to  raise  growth  and  productivity.  The  key  structural  reforms,  they  argue, 
relate to enhancing labour and product market flexibility and reforming the financial sector. 
Both  the  IMF,  in  the  2012  Article IV  report  on  South  Africa  and  the  OECD,  in  their  2013 
Report on South Africa raised labour and product market rigidities as the main constraints to 
faster economic growth and employment creation. 
When talking about structural economic reforms, there is generally universal agreement that 
we  require  deep  structural  reforms  to  improve  our  economic  performance  but  there  are  a 
myriad  of  different  interpretations  of  what  is  needed.  There  is  however  little consensus  on 
which  reforms  are  needed  and  should  be  implemented  and  how  these  should  be 
implemented.  There  is  furthermore  a  robust  debate  about  what  the  key  structural 
impediments are to higher growth and employment. This is not just the case in South Africa 
where the debate takes on a distinctly ideological tone, but globally too. 
Global economic developments 
Before I expand on the structural constraints to higher growth, allow me to present a short 
overview of the issues facing the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) and the South African 
Reserve Bank (the Bank) in general. The global economic environment remains weak, with 
most  of  the  major  advanced  economies  growing  below  potential.  While  there  are  signs  of 
positive  economic  growth  and  rising  employment  in  the  US,  this  growth  is  still  too  low  to 
significantly close their output gap. Furthermore, a number of downside risk to their growth 
outlook remain, particularly in the form of further fiscal consolidation, the debt ceiling levels, 
and  the  impact  of  rising  long-term  bond  and  mortgage  interest  rates  in  response  to 
expectations of a tapering of asset purchases by the US Federal Reserve. 
The Eurozone continues to experience recessionary conditions, with real output contracting 
by 1,1 per cent in the first quarter of 2013. The IMF has reduced its forecast for Eurozone 
growth  by  0,2 percentage  points  to  –0,6 per  cent,  with  a  weaker  recovery  than  previously 
forecast in 2014. 
The  Japanese  economy  recorded  strong  growth  in  the  first  quarter  of  4,1 per  cent,  but  it 
remains too soon to assess the efficacy of the various stimulus measures that were adopted. 
Furthermore,  growth  in  developing  countries,  for  some  time  the  mainstay  of  the  world 
economy, is also slowing and contributing to the recent downward revision of global growth 
by the IMF in the order of 0,2 per cent to 3,1 per cent and 3,8 per cent for 2013 and 2014, 
respectively. 
South Africa is affected by these international developments in three ways. Firstly, our ability 
to export to our major trading partners is weakened. For example, our major manufactured 
export  sector  is  the  motor  vehicle  sector  and  most  of  our  car  exports  go  to  Europe.  The 
Eurozone  has  just  had  its  worst  quarter  for  car  sales  in  17 years.  Secondly,  lower  global 
growth lowers commodity prices. This has the benefit for lowering global inflation, but as a 
major  commodity  exporter,  it  affects  our  terms  of  trade  and  our  ability  to  earn  foreign 
exchange. Finally, monetary policy and changes in monetary policy in advanced economies 
is  causing  excessive  volatility  in  the  rand  exchange  rate.  During  the  early  periods  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
quantitative easing, the country was able to attract significant capital inflows. This assisted 
the  financing  of  the  current  account  deficit  but  it  also  led  to  a  period  of  strength  for  the 
currency  which  impacted  on  exporting  sectors.  The  anticipated  reversal  of  quantitative 
easing have contributed to a slowdown in capital inflows and a depreciation in the exchange 
rate, which is likely to add further upward pressure on inflation due to pass through effects. 
Domestic economic developments 
On  the  domestic  front,  lower  output  from  the  mining  sector  and  electricity  constraints  are 
limiting growth and contributed to the widening of the current account deficit. The Bank has 
recently lowered its growth projection for 2013 to 2 per cent. The official unemployment rate 
increased  from  25,2 per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2013  to  25,6 per  cent  in  the  second 
quarter of 2013. Of some concern is the increase in the youth unemployment rate to 52,9 per 
cent during the first quarter of 2013. 
The inflation outlook continues to deteriorate and is expected to be higher on average by 0,1 
and 0,3 percentage points at 5,9 per cent and 5,5 per cent in 2013 and 2014, respectively. 
Inflation is projected to temporarily breach the target range in the third quarter of 2013, at a 
slightly higher average level of 6,3 per cent. This results in conflicting policy choices relating 
to rising inflation against the back drop of weak growth. 
It  is  however  important  to  note  that  South  Africa’s  growth  performance  has  lagged  that  of 
Asia  and  more  recently  a  number  of  countries  on  the  continent.  It  is  imperative  that  the 
question  of  growth  is  addressed  satisfactorily  if  we  wish  to  tackle  the  triple  challenges  of 
unemployment,  poverty  and  inequality  in  a  cohesive  and  sustainable  manner.  This  will 
require deep and courageous structural reform. 
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  is  mindful  of  these  challenges  and  at  the  previous  MPC 
meeting decided to keep interest rates unchanged. Our primary mandate is to keep inflation 
within  the  target  band.  The  forecast  for  inflation  at  the  previous  MPC  meeting  was  for 
targeted inflation to return to the target band in the 4th quarter, following a temporary breach 
in  the  third  quarter  of  2013.  If,  however,  inflation  remains  sticky  and  evidence  emerge  of 
second  round  effects,  the  Bank  would  take  appropriate  measures  in  keeping  with  our 
mandate. At present, we are however confident that inflation expectations remain anchored, 
albeit  at  the  upper  end  of  the  inflation  target  range,  thus  allowing  for  a  continuation  of 
accommodative monetary policy at this time. 
Structural reform 
Returning  to  the  topic  of  structural  reform,  I  shall  attempt  to  summarise  the  key  debates 
around which structural reforms are most pressing for South Africa and I shall be drawing on 
a theoretical framework provided by Dani Rodrik in a recent paper entitled “The past, present 
and future of economic growth”. 
Rodrik argues that for countries to raise incomes and living standards, they need to do two 
broad  things,  namely  to  build  fundamental  capabilities  and  to  undertake  structural 
transformation.  Fundamental  capabilities  cover  a  range  of  issues  such  as  macroeconomic 
stability, the credibility of economic and other institutions, the rule of law, quality of education, 
sound  infrastructure  and  a  competent  bureaucracy.  Investing  in  these  fundamental 
capabilities often have long lags in impacting on economic growth, for example improving the 
quality  of  the  education  system  takes  a  long  time  to  feed  into  the  performance  of  the 
economy. 
Structural transformation refers to the process of change in the pattern of what an economy 
produces, and in particular, what it exports. In order for a country to progress, it has to move 
up the value chain and consistently increase the complexity of its products. For example, an 
economy  producing  just  apples  is  likely  to  grow  by  a  limited  amount  unless  there  is 
diversification into producing processed foods from those apples. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The process of structural transformation is more complex. It requires investment in capital to 
move  up  the  value  chain;  research  and  development;  functional  financial  markets;  and  a 
state capable of playing a coordinating role to address market failures to assist the progress 
of an economy into higher value added goods and services. 
Rodrik  further  argues  that  while  fundamental  capabilities  are  important,  countries  can 
achieve  structural  transformation  in  a  relatively  short  period  of  time  even  without  strong 
fundamental capabilities. China is a good example of structural economic change without a 
number of the elements that we often associate with fundamental capabilities. Despite these 
weaknesses in fundamental capabilities, they have been able to achieve a noteworthy level 
of  structural  transformation  over  the  past  two  decades.  In  order  to  sustain  the  pace  of 
development, they would have to invest in fundamental capabilities but these requirements 
are not mutually exclusive or sequential and the skills and attributes required to invest in one 
is not necessarily the same as those required to invest in others. 
There have also been several cases where countries have sound fundamental capabilities 
but have not been able to engineer structural change associated with rising incomes. New 
Zealand is such an example. 
The structure of the economy in general, in the literature, refers mainly to the pattern of what 
is  produced.  How  big  is  the  primary  sector  in  relation  to  the  manufacturing  sector?  What 
manufactured goods are being produced? How complex are these products? How diverse is 
the  economy?  What  is  the  productivity  level  of  various  sectors?  What  are  the  principle 
exports? These are critical questions. 
In  South  Africa,  the  phrase  ‘structure  of  the  economy’  also  has  a  broader  distributional 
connotation.  The  question,  ‘Who  benefits  from  what  is  produced?’  is  frequently  asked. 
Debates  often  revolve  around  who  owns  what  and  how  this  has  changed.  It  also revolves 
around the share of labour remuneration in GDP relative to the gross operating surplus and 
therefore  the  relative  returns  from  growth  to  labour  and  capital.  The  skewed  income 
distribution frequently features in debates about the structure of the economy. 
Apart  from  sectoral  patterns  of  growth  and  the  distribution  of  benefits  that  accrue  from 
growth, there is a third area of focus when discussing structural reform in South Africa. This 
area relates to the efficiency or lack thereof of various markets. High unemployment is clearly 
the  most  glaring  example  of  a  mismatch  in  supply  and  demand.  There  are  other  types  of 
market  inefficiencies.  Monopoly  pricing,  cartel-like  behaviour  and  high  cost  structures,  all 
impact on the structure of the economy and indeed all warrant attention from economic policy 
makers. For example, high prices in the telecoms sector impacts on costs in other sectors, 
thereby reducing their size and productivity. 
Market  inefficiency  impacts  on  the  structure  of  the  economy,  for  example  a  lack  of 
competition often translates into higher prices and higher profits and the latter may lead to 
greater complacency and hence a slower pace of new product development and innovation. 
Profitable  firms  also  tend  to  attract  capital  from  the  capital  markets  resulting  in  a  situation 
where capital is not necessarily flowing to the most efficient or innovative firm but to the one 
making the biggest profits. 
Often, the presence of large and persistent profits is a sign of market inefficiency, and not of 
the  quality  of  the  entrepreneurs  running  the  firms.  According  to  Fedderke,  Kularatne  and 
Mariotti (2007), manufacturers in South Africa enjoy relatively high mark-ups, yet investment 
levels are fairly low. This pattern is evident in other sectors too, with high mark-up and large 
profits not necessarily translated into higher rates of fixed investment. 
There are of course several proposed approaches to prioritising economic reforms and these 
are  often  underpinned  by  ideology.  Some  would  argue  that  markets  are  best  at  allocating 
resources and that state intervention and regulation should be removed to enable markets to 
allocate  resources  to  the  most  efficient  sector or  firm  within  a  sector. Except  from  general 
redistribution  through  taxation  and  fiscal  policy;  it  is  argued  that  subsidies,  incentives,  tax 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
breaks or special taxes are distorting and reduce economic efficiency. This group can largely 
be categorised into what had become known in the 1980s as the Washington Consensus. 
Their prescription was privatise, liberalise, deregulate and shrink the state. 
Others argue that the market often fails to allocate resources efficiently and that left to their 
own  devices,  markets  often  end  up  highly  concentrated  and  uncompetitive,  with  distorting 
effects on the economy. A classic example of this globally, is a situation before the financial 
crisis  where  the  financial  sector  made  large  profits,  taking  on  undue  risks  and  attracted  a 
disproportionate  amount  of  graduates;  arguably  at  the  expense  of  other  sectors  in  the 
economy. This group argues that there should be more state intervention and regulation to 
curb anti-competitive abuses by market players. 
A  middle  ground  approach  is  to look  empirically  at  which constraints are  the  most  binding 
and to address these one at a time. If the problem is concentration, then the implementation 
of  anti-trust  legislation  may  assist  in  solving  the  problem.  If  however,  the  problem  is 
government regulations that limit access to the market, such as telecoms or broadcasting for 
example, then a relaxation of the regulations may be deemed appropriate. 
In general, South Africa has not made sufficient progress in tackling our many constraints, 
which  include  a  shortage  of  skills,  infrastructure  blockages,  the  structure  of  the  labour 
market,  the  volatility  of  the  currency,  barriers  to  entry  that  limit,  new  entrants  into  product 
markets, the regulatory burden on small business and the capacity of the public service. 
South Africa’s track record in implementing the microeconomic reforms required to achieve 
structural  change  has  been  patchy.  A  key  symptom  of  the  problem  is  South  Africa’s  poor 
export performance. South Africa’s per capita export growth since 1980 has been less than 
1 per  cent  a  year,  compared  with  rates  of  3  to  5 per  cent  a  year  for  countries  such  as 
Malaysia, Chile and Australia. 
South  Africa  continues  to  be  reliant  on  a  relatively  small  number  of  key  export  items – 
platinum, gold, coal and iron ore. Outside of the mining sector, there have only been a few 
export success stories; such as fruit, wine and motor vehicles, with the latter benefiting from 
large indirect subsidies. In general, growth in exports of these items has been insufficient to 
drive much higher aggregate export growth. So in addition to our poor export performance a 
further  concern  is  the  lack  of  diversification  of  the  country’s  exports  despite  significant 
resources flowing into industrial policy. 
We  have  seen  growth  in  the  services  sector,  which  is  positive.  We  have  also  seen  rising 
productivity in the services industry and a rise in the complexity of services produced. This 
has  enabled  some  economic  growth  and  expansion  of  the  employment.  An  increasing 
number of firms in South Africa are benefiting from the export of management services or the 
export of knowledge-based services. This type of exports in telecoms, retail, banking, mining 
and  IT  has  provided  South  Africa  with  a  growing  share  of  service  export  earnings.  This 
positive trend however, has not translated into much higher aggregate export earnings. 
There is considerable conjecture as to why the South African economy has not diversified its 
export basket more since its readmission to the global economy. Reasons forwarded include 
our  distance  from  markets,  inefficient  logistics  systems,  the  volatility  of  the  exchange  rate, 
the cost of labour in the manufacturing sector, skills constraints in the services industry, the 
lack of a venture capital culture and questions of economic policy certainty that detract from 
long-term  investment.  Without  passing  judgement  on  the  validity  of  any  of  these  specific 
claims  this  list  of  possible  reasons  provides  policy  makers  with  a  list  of  structural 
impediments to faster and more inclusive growth. 
A  recently  published  paper  by  David Faulkner  and  Konstantin Makrelov  from  the  National 
Treasury  and  Christopher Loewald  from  the  SA  Reserve  Bank  entitled  “Achieving  higher 
growth and employment: policy options for South Africa” argues that the “core requirements 
for  rapid  and  sustained  growth  are  greater  savings,  investment,  more  productive  use  of 
capital by better skilled workers, reduction in the skill constraint and moderation in unit labour 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
costs”.  They  estimate  that  the  combined  effect  of  reducing  transport  and  communications 
costs, reducing the skills constraints, and increasing foreign direct and domestic investment, 
can increase potential growth to close to 8 per cent and create an additional 1,7 million jobs 
beyond the number that would be created without policy adjustments (by 2025). 
Allow  me  to  illustrate  their  methodology  with  an  example.  “Transport,  logistics  and 
communications  are  network  industries  and  are  important  determinants  of  an  economy’s 
underlying cost structure and competitiveness.” Reducing these costs by 30 per cent pushes 
potential  GDP  growth  up  by  1,2 percentage  points  a  year.  Gross  fixed  capital  formation 
increases to 26 per cent of GDP and 620 000 additional jobs are created by 2025. 
Another area where minor microeconomic reforms could boost growth and employment is in 
immigration  policy.  Allowing  firms  to  hire  skilled  foreigners  has  several  benefits.  Firstly,  it 
enables firms to raise productivity and to use the capital employed more efficiently. Secondly, 
it  reduces  the  premium  on  skilled  labour,  lowering  wages  for  skilled  people  and  thereby 
contributing  to  lower  inequality.  Behar  (2008)  estimates  that  for  every  skilled  worker 
employed, one semi-skilled job and 0,5 low skilled jobs are created. The National Planning 
Commission  estimates  that  this  multiplier  is  even  higher.  While  South  Africa  has  about 
4,7 million unemployed people, it is estimated that there are about half a million vacancies in 
the  economy  in  positions  requiring  skilled  workers.  Naturally,  a  country  must  improve  the 
quality of its education system, but with the best will in the world, this will take time to feed 
into  the  supply  of  skills.  Importing  more  skilled  workers  whilst  addressing  this  constraint, 
would appear to be a sensible economic strategy. 
Except  in  exceptional  circumstances,  structural  economic  reforms  do  not  occur  in  a  neat, 
smooth  and  sequential  manner.  They  are  often  the  result  of  a  laborious  process  of 
experimentation, negotiation and responses to pressure. This pressure can come from lobby 
groups or vested interests that do not necessarily have the interests of the broader society at 
heart. Pressure can also come from crises. When faced with a crisis, countries have to be 
bold and proactive to restore confidence. A now repeated lament from central bankers is that 
economic policy makers across the world have not used the present global financial crisis to 
address the structural reforms required to drive higher growth. 
Many economists ask the question ‘why does the country not introduce seemingly obvious 
structural reforms to boost growth and employment?’ The answer to this question is complex 
and  relates  to  the  power  dynamic  in  a  country.  Structural  reforms  often  have  winners  and 
losers.  The  losers  are  often  diffused  and  dispersed,  and  therefore  not  able  to  mobilise  to 
demand structural change. Conversely, the winners are often easily identifiable, powerful and 
well-organised. The recent debate about tariffs on imported chickens is a good example. This 
is  however  not  a  uniquely  South  African  phenomenon.  The  Common  Agricultural Policy  in 
the EU provides huge benefits to European farmers at the expense of European consumers 
and  producers  from  developing  countries.  This  problem  challenges  economists  and 
economic policy-makers to improve the analysis that they use to support their arguments and 
to  think  more  carefully  about  how  these  are  communicated  to  society.  Many  structural 
reforms are difficult to implement precisely because of the political economy of a society. 
The last theme that I wish to touch on today is to argue that inequality itself is a structural 
impediment  to  faster  and  more  inclusive  growth.  Even  after  adjusting  for  differences  in 
income  per  capita,  unequal  countries  generally  have  the  following  features:  high  levels  of 
crime, poor health outcomes, lower levels of education and low levels of trust between social 
partners. Probably, the single most important problem in unequal societies is that social trust 
is hard to build and maintain. In countries with low levels of trust, investment decisions tend 
to  focus  on short-term  returns  rather  than  on  long-term  rewards.  This skews  the  economy 
away  from  fixed  investment  and  from  investments  in  infrastructure  or  research  and 
development that have long-term payoffs. The simple explanation is that unequal countries 
are  generally  more  unstable  and  therefore  long-term  investment  is  more  risky  and  hence 
impact negatively on capital flows. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
To counter this phenomenon, countries need strong institutions, the consistent application of 
rules and legal frameworks that protect investors over the long-term. They also need policy 
certainty  and  capable  public  services  able  to  collect  taxes  and  spend  it  effectively.  These 
capabilities  are  what  Rodrik  refers  to  as  fundamental  capabilities.  While  these  capabilities 
are  difficult  to  develop  in  highly  unequal  countries,  they  are  even  more  critical  in  unequal 
countries to foster sustained growth and development. 
Conclusion 
South  Africa’s  transition  from  apartheid  to  democracy  is  a  remarkable  success  story.  Our 
challenge today is to develop an economy that is more inclusive. This requires higher levels 
of growth and improved employment creation. Macroeconomic policies are only part of the 
answer to these economic objectives. In order to achieve higher and more inclusive growth 
deep structural reforms are required. 
While  there  are  hundreds  of  potential  economic  problems  that  require  solutions,  the  most 
critical short run issues relate to product and labour market inefficiencies that keep insiders 
happy  and  outsiders  out.  Longer-term  reforms  include  the  need  to  improve  the  supply  of 
skills and raising national savings. 
Implementing structural reforms are never easy. Policy-makers on the one hand need solid 
evidence and research to justify their actions. On the other hand, they need political will and 
political nous to get them through. South Africa has to build on its solid institutions developed 
since 1994 to embark on a new set of reforms aimed at making South Africa work for all its 
people.  The  speedy  implementation  of  some  of  the  key  recommendations  and  proposals 
contained in the National Development Plan would be a good start. 
References  
Behar.  A.  2008.  “Does  training  benefit  those  who  do  not  get  any?  Elasticities  of 
complementarity  and  factor  price  in  South  Africa.”  Economic  Research  Southern  Africa 
Working Paper No. 73.  
Bank for International Settlements, 2013. BIS Annual Report.  
Faulkner D., Loewald L, and Makrelov K., 2013. “Achieving higher growth and employment: 
Policy options for South Africa”. SA Reserve Bank Working Paper.  
Fedderke  J.  W.,  Kularatne  C.,  and  Mariotti  M.,  2007.  “Mark-up  pricing  in  South  African 
Industry.” Journal of African Economics 16(1):28-69.  
National Planning Commission, 2012. National Development Plan: Fixing the Future.  
Organisation  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development,  2013.  Economic  Surveys  of 
South Africa.  
Rodrik D., 2013. “The past, present and future of economic growth.” Working Paper 1, Global 
Citizen Foundation. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
