Mario Draghi: The role of monetary policy in addressing the crisis in the 
euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  “Room  for 
discussion”  of  the  Study  Association  SEFA  and  the  Faculty  of  Economics  and  Business, 
Amsterdam,15 April 2013. 
 Introduction 
There  was  a  time,  not  too  long  ago,  when  central  banking  was  considered  to  be  a  rather 
boring and unexciting occupation. In the era of the “Great Moderation”, mostly seen as the 
period between the mid-1980s and the beginning of the global financial crisis, inflation was 
tamed  and  macroeconomic  volatility  was  contained.  Some  thought  that  monetary  policy 
could effectively be placed on auto-pilot. I can confidently say that this time has passed. 
The ECB’s monetary policy in the crisis 
The global financial crisis has put an end to that period in a way that has been very abrupt 
and certainly lasting for quite some time to come. In this country, the outbreak of a financial 
crisis  brings  back memories  that go  quite far  into  history.  In  1763,  exactly  250  years  ago, 
Amsterdam was the centre of a deep financial crisis. Highly leveraged investors were faced 
with a situation of falling asset prices. The rolling over of existing obligations became very 
difficult  and  the  liquidity  crisis  became  severe.  Investors  could  not  refinance  themselves 
other than through fire sales of distressed assets. Amsterdam bank houses went bankrupt 
and merchants suffered significant losses.1 
The  1763  crisis  has  some  important  resemblances  with  today’s  crisis.  In  the  first  stage  of 
today’s crisis, liquidity  was at the epicentre. Money markets seized up  and several market 
participants found themselves unable to roll-over funding positions. Concerns regarding bank 
solvency rapidly surfaced and the crisis then morphed into a banking crisis. Finally, at the 
beginning of 2010 the latest turn: several euro area countries’ debt and deficit levels were 
found to be unsustainable. It was a sovereign debt crisis. 
But differently from the crisis in 1763, the determined actions of central banks prevented the 
destructive downward spiral of abrupt deleveraging, fire sales and ultimately deflation. The 
ECB, and indeed all major central banks, reduced its policy rates to unprecedented lows. In 
addition,  the  ECB  has  implemented  various  non-standard  measures  to  restore  monetary 
policy transmission, also with a view to supporting credit flows to the real economy. This is a 
necessary pre-condition for fulfilling our ultimate objective of lasting price stability. 
Our  liquidity  support  gives  banks  unlimited  access  to  central  bank  money  at  a  fixed  price 
against adequate collateral. To make it fully flexible and facilitate banks in their attempt to 
liquefy  their  assets  at  times  of  stress,  we  expanded  the  set  of  eligible  assets  that  can  be 
used as collateral. 
Furthermore, in order to give banks sufficient reassurance that access to liquidity will not be 
a problem over a relevant planning horizon we  have extended the maturity of our lending. 
The longest maturity of our long-term refinancing operations (LTROs) has been raised from 
the standard 3 months before the crisis to 6 months after the post-Lehman cataclysm, to one 
year by mid-2009, and to three years at the end of 2011. 
                                                
1  See I. Schnabel and H.S. Shin (2004), “Liquidity and Contagion: The Crisis of 1763”, Journal of the European 
Economic Association, vol. 2(6), pages 929–968, December. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
More recently, we have announced the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs), in order to 
eliminate the pricing of un-warranted tail risks in the bond markets. OMTs entail interventions 
in government bonds with a remaining maturity of up to three years. OMTs have a number of 
characteristics:  they  require  the  government  concerned  to  accept  a  programme  involving 
support by the European Stability Mechanism that entails strong and effective conditionality. 
Such  conditionality  is  important  in  particular  to  preserve  monetary  policy  independence. 
Interventions would be ex ante unlimited, which is essential to ensure their effectiveness. All 
interventions would be sterilised so as to ensure that there is no impact from these measures 
on  the  overall  monetary  policy  stance.  There  would  be  transparency  as  the  stock  of 
securities acquired under the OMT programme would be published regularly, together with 
the average duration. 
Like previous non-standard liquidity operations, OMT cope with extraordinary risk premia that 
markets require when self-fulfilling expectations of catastrophic events prevail. In 2008, the 
dominant fear had originated from the collapse of the payment system following the Lehman 
bankruptcy.  In  the  first  half  of  2012,  the  prevailing  fear  had  been  caused  by  unfounded 
doubts about the continued existence of the euro. 
There  is  another  parallel  between  our  early  liquidity  operations  with  banks  and  OMTs.  In 
providing  liquidity  to  our  banking  counterparties,  we  cannot  and  do  not  want  to  subsidise 
banks that are failing. Our liquidity support is not and should not be equity support. Likewise, 
in  pricing  out  break-up  risk  in  sovereign  debt  securities,  we  cannot  and  do  not  want  to 
subsidise governments. 
Placing the ECB’s monetary policy in the broader context of central bank non-standard 
measures 
Let me briefly digress to put our monetary policy and its impact on borrowing conditions in 
the context of unconventional monetary policies deployed by central banks more generally. 
To begin with, the remuneration that investors demand on a long-dated security should be at 
least as large as the expected return from a strategy of rolling over short-term instruments 
and the risk premia that investors demand over and above the return from the rolling over 
strategy.  Premia,  in  turn,  are  a  composite  object.  They  compensate  investors  for  different 
risks attached to term investments: 
• 
• 
The term risk premium for holding on to an asset for a specific period of time; 
The liquidity risk premium as the compensation for the possibility of incurring losses 
when selling the asset back to the market before maturity and at short notice; and 
Credit  risk  premia  of  various  types  as  compensation  for  the  possibility  of  not 
receiving  at  maturity  repayment  for  the  principal  because,  for  instance,  borrowers 
may renege on their contractual obligations. 
 At the risk of oversimplifying, one can distinguish the main types of unconventional measures 
depending on which component in this decomposition they are aiming to address. 
Forward guidance about the intended path of the central bank’s monetary policy rate in the 
future mainly aims to manage expectations regarding the future evolution of the short-term 
interest  rates.  It  thus  addresses  the  expectations  component  I  was  referring  to  before. 
Changes in the level of the current policy rate always have an intrinsic signalling content with 
respect to possible changes for short-term rates in the future. But during crisis times, when 
short-term nominal rates are at zero or close to zero, they cannot be adjusted further down. 
The  central  bank  may  then  engage  in  active  communication  reassuring  markets  that  the 
future path of policy rates would not deviate from the current low level for a certain period or 
until certain observable conditions are verified. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Large-scale  asset  purchases,  or  quantitative  easing,  instead,  mainly  aim  to  compress  the 
term  premium.2  This  type  of  policy  intervention  works  through  reducing  the  supply  of 
securities with long duration and increasing the supply of reserves or liquidity. With less term 
risk to hold in the aggregate, the market should require a lower premium to hold that risk. 
The  ECB’s  non-standard  measures  I  mentioned  earlier  are  geared  towards  addressing 
primarily  two  types  of  premia:  the  liquidity  risk  and  the  redenomination  risk.  The  ECB’s 
liquidity  operations,  such  as  the  3-year  Long-Term  Refinancing  Operations  (LTROs),  are 
intended to relieve banks of liquidity and funding stress. They, therefore mainly aim to reduce 
liquidity risk in the money market. 
Central banks have adopted different approaches as regards their non-standard measures. 
For instance, the Fed, the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan all engage in Large-Scale 
Asset Purchases. The Fed also uses forward guidance. 
When viewed, however, from the perspective of the framework I just described, most non-
standard measures employed by the major central banks around the globe seem remarkably 
similar. They aim to implement the desired monetary policy stance, in conditions in which the 
stance  may  not  be  smoothly  and  homogeneously  transmitted  to  the  economy,  or  where  a 
further  easing  of  the  stance  through  standard  policy  rate  adjustments  is  hindered  by  the 
lower bound constraint. The unifying overall goal is to improve the effectiveness of monetary 
policy, in ways that can support the attainment of the monetary policy objectives. 
Yet, the varying emphasis on instruments and the approaches used by central banks around 
the  globe  are  tailor-made  to  the  particular  challenges  of  their  economies.  The  particular 
challenge of the ECB is to operate in a multi-country environment: one monetary policy for 
17 countries that constitute our currency union. 
Unlike  economies  with  a  single fiscal  authority or  with  a fully-fledged federal  structure,  the 
euro area comprises multiple sovereign states. The debt of each of these states has different 
liquidity and risk characteristics. In such a set-up there is no uncontroversial way to define 
the  term  structure  of  the  risk-free  rate.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  means  that  there  is  no 
univocal measure of the term premium for the euro area as a whole. 
At  the  same  time,  during  the  crisis,  normal  heterogeneity  has  turned  into  detrimental 
fragmentation: a landscape with natural diverse scenery has turned into a dangerous surface 
with jagged cliffs and stumbling blocks. Liquidity risk, which was a widespread concern for 
banks throughout the euro area at the start of the crisis, has become more concentrated as 
the  crisis  has  progressed.  Fault  lines  between  banking  sectors  with  structural  funding 
surpluses and banking sectors still suffering from a precarious access to credit run across 
national borders. 
The banking sector and the financial market of the euro area has become fragmented. This 
is  harmful  as  the  euro  area  is  a  bank-based  economy.  Around  three  quarters  of  firms’ 
financing  comes  from  banks.  So  if  banks  in  some  countries  will  not  lend  at  reasonable 
interest rates, the consequences for the euro area economy are severe. 
Although we see a decrease in fragmentation on the funding side, our very accommodative 
monetary  policy  stance  is  only  partly  passed  on  to  the financing  conditions faced  by  firms 
and  households  in  some  euro  area  countries.  Companies  headquartered  in  stressed 
countries  face  worse  borrowing  conditions  than  equally  risky  competitors  in  non-stressed 
countries.  And,  within  the  same  stressed  economy,  Small  and  Medium-sized  Enterprises 
(SMEs)  suffer  relatively  more  than  large  companies  that  have  easier  access  to  capital 
                                                
2  This is a stylised account of the intended aim of the various policies. In the empirical literature there is evidence, 
for instance, that a sizeable part of the effect of LSAPs on long-term rates comes from affecting expectations 
regarding future short-term rates (see M. Bauer and G. Rudebusch (2012), The Signalling Channel for Federal 
Reserve Bond Purchases, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper 2011-21). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
markets  and  are  less  dependent  on  the  banking  system.  This  is  especially  disconcerting 
given that SMEs account for about three quarters of euro area employment. 
Our  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  have,  therefore,  the  task  of  removing  these 
stumbling  blocks  to  ensure  that  our  single  monetary  policy  in  fact  reaches  all  parts  of  the 
euro area. This is crucial for fulfilling our mandate. 
Beneath the surface: the root causes of the crisis in the euro area 
Within the limits of our mandate we have acted with determination. Our balance sheet has 
expanded substantially, to almost three times its pre-crisis size. While it has shrunk since its 
peak, the expansion is comparable to the increase in the balance sheet of the Fed during the 
crisis.3 
Tail  risks  have  been  largely  removed  from  the  pricing  of  euro  area  assets.  Financial 
fragmentation has been receding: banks in stressed countries have seen the deposits placed 
with  them  by  euro  area residents  increasing  by  about  130  billion  euro  since  August  2012, 
TARGET2 balances of the National Central Banks in these countries have declined by more 
than  200  billion  euro  or about  20%  since their  peak  and  also  banks’  dependence  on  ECB 
liquidity intermediation is waning to some extent. 
Nevertheless,  problems  in  the  euro  area  economic  landscape  still  loom  large.  This 
understandably triggers calls for more action to be taken by the authorities that shoulder the 
responsibility to navigate the economy through these troubled waters. 
To address these calls, one needs to take a sober look at the root causes of this crisis. 
Most of the stressed euro area economies – and certainly the ones that are finding it most 
difficult  and  painful  to  adjust  –  have  suffered from  a  chronic  loss  of  competitiveness  while 
being members of the monetary union. The erosion of their competitiveness has meant that 
these  economies  started  running  large  current  account  deficits  and  some  of  them  have 
accumulated large external debt positions. 
In  some  cases  the  expanding  external  debt  was  driven  by  increasing  public  sector 
indebtedness. 
lack  of 
competitiveness in an effort to shield and even improve living standards. 
In  other  countries  it  was  the  banking  sector’s  leverage  that  increased  fast.  This  in  turn 
reflected a strong increase in lending to domestic firms and households. In these cases the 
lack  of  competitiveness  was  triggering  a  shift  of  the  economies  towards  domestic 
consumption  and  activities  shielded  from  international  competition,  such  as  the  housing 
sector. 
On top of that, banking supervision and regulation did not always mitigate the destabilising 
tendencies. There were cases when banks were not induced to develop sufficient capital and 
loss buffers in good times. 
The  way  out  is  to  restore  competitiveness.  And  the  way  to  do  this  in  the  context  of  a 
monetary union is to pursue with determination an ambitious structural reform agenda. Such 
an agenda comprises a number of national measures to make sure that the functioning of 
product  and  labour  markets  is  fully  compatible  with  participation  in  monetary  union.  One 
specific aspect is to fight vested interests that hamper competition, structural weaknesses of 
productivity and to allow, where needed, the nominal adjustments to play out. 
fiscal  policies  were  masking 
the  private  sector’s 
Imprudent 
                                                
3  Based on a comparison of central banks’ simplified balance sheets as defined in the article entitled “Recent 
developments in the balance sheets of the Eurosystem, the Federal Reserve System and the Bank of Japan”, 
ECB Monthly Bulletin October 2009, pp. 81–94. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
And such an agenda also comprises a number of European measures to fully complete the 
Single Market especially in the area of services and to allow for higher labour mobility within 
the euro area. 
Since the crisis started considerable progress has been made in making structural reforms in 
euro  area  countries,  particularly  those  under  an  EU/IMF  programme.  And  the  painful 
measures taken are starting to bear fruit. 
In  Greece,  Ireland  and  Portugal  current  account  balances  have  improved  by  more  than 
7 percentage points (relative to GDP) between 2008 and 2012. In Spain the current account 
has improved even more substantially. 
Also, we have seen reductions in unit labour costs. Ireland has seen an 18 percentage point 
improvement  relative  to  the  euro  area  average.  In  Greece,  Portugal  and  Spain  the 
improvement has been about 10 percentage points. As I have recently stressed to the Euro 
Area Heads of State and Governments, narrowing the gap between wage and productivity 
growth is absolutely essential for improving competitiveness in euro area countries.4 
To  conclusively  address  the  root  causes  of  the  crisis  these  efforts  need  to  be  maintained 
and, in some countries, stepped up. In the meantime, however, what I referred to earlier as 
the symptoms of the crisis also need to be tackled. Fiscal positions need to be maintained on 
a sustainable path and balance sheet weaknesses in the banking sector need to be repaired. 
And let me be clear: undertaking structural reforms, budget consolidation and restoring bank 
balance  sheet  health  is  neither  the  responsibility  nor  the  mandate  of  monetary  policy. 
Monetary policy can only avert an abrupt deleveraging that would have been conducted in an 
environment  of  panic  and  fire  sales.  And  this  is  what  we  have  done  in  order  to  avoid 
deflationary downward spirals that would have prevented us from delivering on our mandate 
of preserving price stability in the euro area. 
Monetary  policy  can  support  the  reform  progress  by  safeguarding  price  stability  and 
anchoring  inflation  expectations.  But  it  cannot  substitute  for  actions  that  other  actors, 
including the private sector itself, must take. 
Completing the euro area’s institutional architecture 
In addition to the role of misguided or imprudent national policies, the narrative of the crisis 
that  I  have  just  spelled  out  clearly  points  to  some  serious  shortcomings  in  the  institutional 
architecture of the euro area. 
To begin with, the only policy sphere where some form of supra-national surveillance was in 
place  was  fiscal  policy.  And  even  in  this  domain,  the  mechanisms  that  were  envisaged  to 
prevent  and  correct  unsustainable  fiscal  performance  by  Member  States  proved  to  be 
lacking. No framework was foreseen for monitoring competitiveness and heterogeneity within 
the  euro  area  and  for  enforcing  corrective  action  when  needed.  What’s  more,  in 
interconnected  financial  systems  an  entirely  national  perspective  on  bank  regulation  and 
supervision turned out to be insufficient. Finally, no crisis management framework had been 
set up to complement the national shock absorption capacity of euro area countries. 
The creation of the EFSF and more recently the ESM has addressed this last shortcoming. 
And in our joint work with the Presidents of the European Council, the European Commission 
and the Eurogroup, we have set out a vision and a process for building a genuine Economic 
and Monetary Union. This is designed to cover the other gaps in the institutional architecture 
that I previously referred to. 
                                                
4  See M. Draghi, “Euro area economic situation and the foundations for growth”, slides from the presentation 
made  at  the  Euro  Summit,  Brussels,  14  March  2013  (available  at http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/ 
2013/html/sp130315.en.html). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The genuine Economic and Monetary Union comprises four pillars: a banking union with a 
single  supervisor;  a  fiscal  union  that  can  effectively  prevent  and  correct  unsustainable 
budgets;  an  economic  union  that  can  guarantee  sufficient  competitiveness  to  sustain  high 
employment; and a political union that can deeply engage euro area citizens. 
Progress  is  underway  in  all  these  directions.  As  regards  the  banking  union  in  particular, a 
first and important step has been made with the decision to create the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  (SSM),  the  responsibility  for  which  has  been  assigned  to  the  ECB  in  the  last 
Ecofin.  I  am  confident  that  the  SSM’s  euro  area  perspective  will  make  a  significant 
contribution to safeguarding financial stability in the monetary union. In this sense, it will also 
support the conduct of monetary policy, as a stable financial system is a prerequisite for the 
proper transmission of our policy signals. 
But  I  would  like  to  stress  the  importance  of quickly  complementing  the SSM  with  a  Single 
Resolution Mechanism. This is necessary to guarantee timely and impartial decision-making, 
particularly  in  the  cases  where  cross-border  resolution  is  required.  What’s  more,  a  Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  is  essential  to  ensure  that  the  SSM’s  supervisory  decisions  for 
resolution can be followed up with action, without reinforcing the vicious link between banks 
and  sovereigns.  Finally,  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  will  credibly  pursue  the  least-cost 
resolution  strategy  from  a  euro  area  perspective,  also  taking  into  account  cross-border 
spill-overs. 
Conclusion 
When considering the challenges that euro area economies are still facing, it is important to 
remember the economic hardship that many of our fellow citizens in parts of the euro area 
are experiencing, and in particular the massive unemployment, especially among the youth. 
But there are also reasons for confidence. Most of the elements needed to address the root 
causes of the crisis and to build a genuine Economic and Monetary Union have been set in 
motion. The ECB’s monetary policy will continue to make its contribution to this endeavour, in 
line with its mandate. 
The heavy task of implementing the important decisions already taken lies ahead. All parties 
involved  in this comprehensive reform agenda must persevere. And we must all work with 
conviction  and  determination  towards  our  shared  vision.  If  we  do  so,  I  am  confident  that 
restoring stability and ensuring prosperity in the euro area are within our reach.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
