Ignazio Visco: Islamic finance and the European challenge 
Opening address by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the IFSB Forum “The 
European challenge”, organized by the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) and hosted 
by the Bank of Italy, Rome, 9 April 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  today  to  this  Seminar,  organized  by  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board and hosted by Banca d’Italia on the subject of Islamic finance. As you know, 
the main prescriptions relating to financial transactions in accordance with Islamic religious 
law  are  the  ban  on  paying  interest  and  the  prohibition  of  excessive  uncertainty  and 
speculation  in  contractual  arrangements.  This  is  predicated  on  the  principle  that  profits 
should be generated from fully sharing in the business risk of an investment (the so called 
“profit  and  loss  sharing  principle”).  The  asset-backing  requirement  complements  these 
prescriptions,  providing  for  the  link  between  each  financial  transaction  and  an  identifiable 
underlying asset. 
A few weeks ago I gave a lecture on the financial sector after the crisis. On that occasion, it 
occurred  to  me  that  the  renowned  economist  and  philosopher  –  and  eventually  Nobel 
laureate  –  Amartya  Sen  had  given  in  these  same  rooms  the  first  of  our  scholarly  lectures 
entitled to the memory of our late governor Paolo Baffi. Sen’s lecture was on “Money and 
Value: on the Ethics and Economics of Finance”. It is of course an interesting and good read 
in  these  difficult  days.  But  what  I  was  most  intrigued  by  was  Sen’s  question:  “How  is  it 
possible that an activity that is so useful has been viewed as morally so dubious?” 
There are indeed a good finance and a bad finance. While we may have some differences in 
ideas and perceptions on the goods and the bads, I think that what is most important is really 
to focus on the link between financial transactions and underlying assets, to conclude, with 
Sen,  that  “finance  plays  an  important  part  in  the  prosperity  and  well-being  of  nations”. 
Indeed, it is crucial for sharing and allocating risk, especially for poorer societies and people. 
It is crucial for transferring resources over time and removing liquidity constraints. It is very 
important for fostering innovation and promoting economic growth. 
But it has to be certainly “ethical” and certainly transparent. 
An  accurate  measure  of  Islamic  financial  services  is  difficult,  due  to  the  lack  of  official 
statistics.  However,  some  private  estimates  assess  the  current  size  at  about  1.6  trillion 
dollars, in terms of assets. While Islamic finance still constitutes a small share of the industry, 
roughly 1 per cent of overall global financial assets, it has witnessed a rapid expansion over 
the last decade, with annual growth rates in the range of 10–15 per cent. It has also gained 
further momentum following the financial crisis. 
Islamic banking accounts for about 80% of total Islamic financial assets but the development 
of  Islamic  securities,  notably  the  sukuks,  has  also  contributed  to  increasing  this  sector’s 
activity in international capital markets. 
The industry has seen a wide dissemination across countries, beyond its traditional centres 
of gravity in the Middle East and South East Asia. According to available estimates, Islamic 
financial institutions are currently operating in around 70 countries. 
Europe has also been part of the process, with the opening of Islamic banks in the UK, the 
issuance  of  a  sukuk  bond  by  a  German  Land,  an  increased  activity  in  the  field  of  Islamic 
investment funds, some tax and regulatory changes introduced in France to facilitate the use 
of Islamic financial products. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 for 
the 
funding 
investments; 
increased  need 
This global expansion is expected to continue also in the near future: some market estimates 
foresee  that  by  the  end  of  this  year  Islamic  financial  assets  will  have  reached  1.9  trillion 
dollars. 
Several  factors  underlie  growth  in  this  sector:  the  need  to  invest  the  abundant  liquidity 
acquired  by  oil  exporting  countries;  the  search  for  risk  diversification  and  for  shari’ah 
compliant/ethical 
for  socio-economic 
development  in  Islamic  countries;  and  support from  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities. 
Part of this trend can also be attributed to the growing interest in the industry coming from 
non-traditional markets, like the EU, the US, South Korea, Hong Kong, etc. 
In Banca d’Italia we are interested in deepening our knowledge of this subject, in view of its 
relevance  for  the  Bank’s  institutional  duties,  as  a  member  of  the  Eurosystem  and  as  the 
Authority for  banking  and financial  supervision  in  Italy.  A  Seminar  on Islamic  Finance  was 
organized  here  in  2009  and  a  collection  of  research  papers  on  Islamic  finance  vs. 
conventional  financial  systems,  focusing  on  supervision  and  the  implications  for  central 
banking  activity  was  published  in  2010.  Hosting  this  IFSB  seminar  is  a  fruitful  occasion  to 
further improve our knowledge and to share it with our financial community and academia. 
The opportunity to attract foreign capital to underpin economic progress, on the one hand, 
and  the  intensity  of  the  commercial  and  financial  links  with  the  southern  shores  of  the 
Mediterranean, on the other, make it increasingly important for our country and its financial 
system  to  be  equipped  with  the  knowledge  and  the  operational  instruments  needed  to 
interact with financial systems complying with shari'ah principles. It is interesting to note that 
in the countries where Arab revolts occurred and Islamic-oriented political parties are now in 
charge of government, after the collapse of previous authoritarian regimes, the development 
of Islamic finance is gaining momentum. Very recently the Egyptian Legislative Council has 
adopted a project to issue sukuk. 
Even a cursory look at today’s program shows that Islamic finance and its interactions with 
conventional financial practices are a source of numerous intriguing questions. I am therefore 
confident that the subject will stimulate the interest of participants, and most grateful to the 
speakers who have accepted to join the 4 panels. 
The  overview  of  the  industry,  to  which  Session  1  is  devoted,  will  show  that  the  growth  of 
Islamic finance in recent years is one aspect of the increased role being played in the global 
financial system by a number of emerging economies. This opens up new opportunities for 
channeling financial resources both to these countries and other markets but it also adds to 
the complexity of the system, calling for enhanced international cooperation by policymakers 
and regulators, lest the benefits of a financial system which is dynamic and prone to healthy 
innovation are jeopardized by instability. 
In the European context, some additional drivers can be identified: on the demand side, the 
growing resident Muslim community potentially requesting more retail banking services, and 
on the supply side, an improved know-how on the part of European intermediaries, together 
with  the  already  mentioned  attractiveness  of  some  financial  markets  for  the  investment  of 
Gulf countries’ liquidity, and the potential use of Islamic finance products to broaden funding 
sources to finance public debt. 
The question of public debt financing takes us to the subject of another Session – Session 3 – 
where the issuance of sukuk bonds, whose total outstanding volume reached $230 billions in 
2012, will be discussed, together with their increased role in international capital markets. 
Growing attention is devoted in Europe to the possibility of issuing sovereign and corporate 
sukuk  and  we  are  pleased  to  have  as  Chairperson  of  this  session  Ms.  Maria  Cannata, 
Director General of the Public Debt, Department of the Treasury of our Ministry of Economy 
and Finance. 
Coming to challenges and opportunities in the European framework, which will be discussed 
in Sessions 2 and 4, let me conclude by only mentioning in passing some issues that may 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
inhibit  the  development  of  Islamic  finance.  First,  in  the  field  of  monetary  policy,  the 
Eurosystem  operational  framework  is,  of  course,  relying  on  interest-based  instruments. 
Second, in the area of prudential regulation and supervision, all European banks have the 
obligation  to  join  deposit  insurance  and/or  financial  services  compensation  schemes, 
whereas,  according  to  the  Islamic  jurisprudence  prevailing  in  various  Islamic  countries, 
Islamic  bank  “investment”  deposits  (which  follow  the  “profit  and  loss  sharing  principle”) 
cannot be covered by deposit guarantee schemes. Moreover, there exists a prominent issue 
of corporate governance related to the role of the shari’ah boards. In Italy for instance the 
Board of a bank is required to take full responsibility for the bank’s management decisions, 
which cannot obviously  be “shared” with another body such as the shari’ah  board. Let me 
leave  you  with  these  queries  trusting  that  the  debate  in  this  forum  will  shed  light  on  the 
issues. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
