Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Grow your business – access to financing for SMEs in 
Malaysia 
Opening remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
book  launch  of  “Grow  your  business:  access  to  financing  for  SMEs  in  Malaysia”,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 27 August 2013. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  for  the  launch  of  the  SME  financing  guide  book 
“Grow Your Business: Access to Financing for SMEs in Malaysia”. Significant attention has 
been given to SME development in view of its relative importance in our economy, in terms 
of its role in generating growth and employment. SMEs are an important agent of growth and 
will be a vital component that will support our nation’s aspirations to transition to become a 
high income economy. SMEs have become a formidable force in the economy, accounting 
for 97% of established businesses and employing 57% of the nation’s workforce. The SME 
contribution to GDP is now 33% and is projected to increase to 41% by 2020 as envisaged in 
the SME Master Plan that has been endorsed by National SME Development Council. 
As the economy becomes more sophisticated, so will the requirements of the SMEs. One of 
the major levers of growth for the SME sector is access to financing. Financial  institutions 
therefore  have  an  important  role  in  the  ecosystem  for  financing  to  SMEs.  In  the  current 
environment, financial institutions provide 89% of the total SME financing.  
The SME financing guide book being launched today is initiated by the Institute of Bankers 
Malaysia to provide detailed guidance to assist SMEs in their applications for financing from 
financial  institutions.  It  also  provides  information  on  the  factors  that  are  taken  into 
consideration by financial institutions in approving the applications. In addition, it elaborates 
on the responsibility of borrowers, and the redress mechanisms that are available. 
Irrespective of sectors, SMEs should adopt best practices in financial management to ensure 
their  business  will  remain  sustainable.  Managing  costs  will  also  enhance  the  performance 
and  competitiveness  of  the  business  in  both  domestic  and  global  markets.  SMEs  should 
therefore  actively  draw  on  the  wide  range  of  products  and  services  including  advisory 
services offered for every stage of its business cycle, whether it is a start-up, growing or a 
matured  business.  The  expertise,  extensive  network  and  the  broad  range  of  services  and 
products which are in place should be leveraged upon by the SMEs.  
Recognising  the  importance  of  SMEs  in  contributing to  the  socioeconomic  development  of 
the country, the Government has introduced various programmes to assist SMEs through its 
Ministries  and  agencies.  The  infrastructure  to  support  access  to  SME  financing  has  also 
vastly improved compared to a decade ago. In 2012, a total of RM217.2 billion in financing 
has been disbursed to SMEs through the banking system, compared to only RM87.1 billion 
in 2003. This year, 155 SME development programmes with an allocation of RM18.4 billion 
have been developed and which is being channeled through government agencies and the 
private sector. 
To enhance the enabling infrastructure for SME financing, the Credit Bureau Malaysia was 
established in 2008 to provide comprehensive and credible credit information and ratings for 
SMEs in Malaysia. More than 1.1 million credit reports have now been generated by Credit 
Bureau  Malaysia  to  facilitate  access  to  financing  for  businesses  since  its  inception.  In 
addition,  SMEs  with  limited  collateral  or  track  record  are  able  to  benefit  from  the  credit 
guarantee  facility  provided  by  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  that  extends  its  services  to 
include advisory.  
In efforts to ensure simple, efficient and prompt application process, Bank Negara Malaysia 
and  the  Association  of  Banks  in  Malaysia  (ABM)  introduced  PARTNER  1,  a  simplified 
application form  and  documentation  checklist  which  has  now  been  adopted  by  8  domestic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
banking institutions. This initiative has been enhanced in PARTNER 2, in which reasons are 
provided for loan applications that have not been successful. This is to provide to the SMEs 
the opportunity to address the weaknesses or limitation thereby enhancing their potential to 
gain access for financing. 
In addition, SMEs facing challenges in their business operations, may now seek assistance 
from the various agencies namely the SME Corporation’s One Referral Centre and the Bank 
Negara  Malaysia’s  Small  Debt  Resolution  Scheme  (SDRS)  when  confronted  with  financial 
stress.  Under  the  Small  Debt  Resolution  Scheme,  a  total  of  894  SMEs  have  now  been 
assisted  since  its  establishment  in  2005.  Addressing  the  problems  and  challenges  at  an 
earlier  stage  will  contain  the  deterioration,  and  will  enhance  the  prospect  for  a  positive 
solution. 
As our economy evolves and transitions towards higher value added activities, the financial 
support services that is being provided by the financial institutions also needs to evolve. 
Financial institutions have to recognise that SMEs will increasingly become specialised and 
diversified, and will require a much more customised and differentiated financial services. 
Financial institutions will also need to broaden their dimension to look beyond the traditional 
business activities and be positioned be able to provide financial services to businesses in 
new  areas  of  growth  such  as  green  technology,  medical  sciences,  and  information 
technology. Today, the true value of companies is also not just measured by their tangible 
assets,  but  also  includes  their  intellectual  capital.  The  adoption  of  more  dynamic 
methodologies  to  assess  the  businesses  value  should  therefore  be  beyond  collateral  and 
historical  performance.  For  this,  financial  institutions  have  to  continuously  be  ahead  of 
innovation and the new growth areas to be able to take into consideration the new related 
risks in their assessment. 
Technology  will  also  have  a  vital  role  to  support  efficient  services  and  greater  outreach. 
Financial institutions should also encourage technological enhancements by SMEs through 
the  provision  of  financing,  including  adoption  of  end-to-end  supply  chain  management 
solutions and greater expansion into regional production networks. 
On this note, let me take this opportunity to congratulate Institute of Bankers Malaysia for the 
launch  of this  book.  I  applaud  the  initiative  undertaken.  It  would  definitely  be  an  important 
reference for the SMEs. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
