Charles Bean: Nominal income targets – an old wine in a new bottle 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at  the  Institute  for  Economic  Affairs  Conference  on  the  State  of  the  Economy,  London, 
27 February 2013. 
 Good morning! The UK’s inflation targeting regime came into being just over 20 years ago, in 
the aftermath of sterling’s exit from the Exchange Rate Mechanism. On the surface, the first 
15 years looked pretty successful, with steady growth and inflation close to target. But we 
now know that dangerous financial imbalances were developing below the surface, not only 
here but also in other advanced economies. Those fault-lines have been brutally exposed in 
the past five years, which saw the worst systemic financial crisis in a century, followed by a 
deep  recession  and  a  tepid  recovery  that  has  left  output  still  some  3%  below  its  previous 
peak. 
That experience has fuelled the debate over the extent to which central banks should lean 
against  an  asset-price  and  credit  boom.  Having  discussed  the  issue  elsewhere,1  I  do  not 
intend to dwell on it today, other than to say that I believe the right response to such threats 
is  to  rely  primarily  on  the  more  active  application  of  regulatory  tools.  But  there  will  be 
occasions – when the excesses are building up outside the regulatory perimeter, for instance 
– when a more activist monetary policy leaning against the building financial imbalances will 
also be required. So the central bank’s mandate needs to permit a temporary undershooting 
of its inflation target if it thereby reduces the risk of a subsequent painful bust. 
The  past  few  months  have,  however,  seen  questions  asked  of  our  inflation-targeting 
framework for other reasons. According to some, the framework has constrained the ability of 
monetary  policy  to  support  the  recovery;  an  objective  giving  higher  priority  to  growth  or 
employment might have produced a better outcome. A particular, and increasingly popular, 
variant of this involves combining growth and inflation into a single target for nominal income. 
The  first  thing  to  be  said  is  that  the  MPC’s  mandate  already  incorporates  a  growth  and 
employment  objective.  While  our  primary  objective  is  to  maintain  price  stability,  subject  to 
that we are also expected to support the Government’s policies for growth and employment. 
The Chancellor’s annual remit letter puts flesh on those bones, by specifying not only the 2% 
target  for  CPI  inflation  but  also  the  Government’s  desire  for  high  and  stable  growth  and 
employment. And the letter goes on to note “that the actual inflation rate will on occasions 
depart  from  its  target  as  a  result  of  shocks  and  disturbances  (and  that)  attempts  to  keep 
inflation  at  the  inflation  target  in  these  circumstances  may  cause  undesirable  volatility  in 
output.” If we had tried to offset the impact on consumer prices of, say, sharp movements in 
import  prices,  then  we  would  need  to  engineer  countervailing  movements  in  domestically 
generated  costs,  in  particular  pay.  But,  given  the  stickiness  of  pay  and  prices,  that  would 
necessitate inefficient fluctuations in activity and employment. 
Now during the first decade of the MPC, such shocks were small and generally benign, with 
access  to  cheap  manufactures  from  emerging  economies  providing  steady  downward 
pressure on prices. But the past few years have provided a less felicitous backdrop. Not only 
have we had to deal with the consequences of the financial crisis but we have also had to 
manage  several  major  cost  shocks.  These  include:  a  25%  fall  in  the  sterling  effective 
exchange  rate;  fluctuations  in  the  price  of  oil  between  $35  and  $145  a  barrel;  and 
movements down and up in VAT. Moreover, the impact of these changes has often proved 
hard to predict. For instance, we significantly underestimated the pass-through into inflation 
                                                 
1   See e.g. Bean et al. (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
of the exchange rate depreciation. So it should not be surprising that inflation has been both 
higher and more variable than during the Great Moderation.  
The  question  is:  would  outcomes  have  been  materially  better  under  an  alternative 
framework, such as a nominal income target? The first thing to be said is that the idea of 
directing  macroeconomic  policy  towards  targeting  nominal  income  is  by  no  means  new. 
James Meade advanced the idea in his 1977 Nobel Prize lecture,2 and my MPC colleague, 
Martin Weale, spent much of the early part of his career working with Meade to develop the 
idea.3  Samuel  Brittan,  coming  from  a  slightly  different  perspective,  wrote  an  important  IEA 
pamphlet  in  1981,  which  argued  that  controlling  nominal  spending  was  what  monetarists 
were really seeking to achieve. I even wrote my PhD thesis4 on the topic over thirty years 
ago. 
There is an important distinction between targeting the level or the growth of nominal income. 
The recent revival of academic interest in the issue relates to the scope for a target for the 
level of nominal income to provide additional traction for monetary policy when policy rates 
reach their zero lower bound. Some of the recent public commentary, however, has centred 
on the possible virtues of switching to a target for nominal income growth, so let me deal with 
that case first. 
In  a  normal  environment,  nominal  income  growth  and  inflation  targets  generate  similar 
responses  to  aggregate  demand  shocks.  But  a  nominal  income  target  is  more  “forgiving” 
than  a  narrowly-defined  inflation  target  in  the  case  of  cost  shocks. An  adverse  cost  shock 
simultaneously tends to raise the price level and reduce output. Stabilising nominal income 
requires  a  one-for-one  trade-off  in  the  response,  whereas  stabilising  inflation,  or  the  price 
level, requires that all the burden of the shock is transferred onto output. That is the basic 
case put forward for the superiority of a nominal income target over a strict inflation target. 
This  comparison  involves  something  of  a  straw  man,  however.  As  already  noted,  inflation 
targeting as practised, here and elsewhere, allows for an accommodating response to cost 
shocks, so long as it is consistent with inflation being stabilised in the medium term. Such 
flexible inflation targeting can thus look quite similar to targeting nominal income growth. 
This is illustrated by the red line in Chart 1, which shows the four-quarter rate of growth of 
nominal  income  over  the  lifetime  of  the  MPC.  The  stability  of  nominal  income  growth  is 
notable  –  it  stays  pretty  close  to  5%  with  the  exception  of  two  periods.  First,  the  Great 
Recession of 2008–9, which saw four-quarter nominal GDP growth fall to minus, rather than 
plus, 5%. And, second, the past couple of years, when – at least according to the present 
vintage of data – nominal GDP growth was nearer 2%–3%. 
In neither case, however, was the shortfall by design. The MPC does not presently directly 
generate  an  agreed  forecast  for  nominal  income  growth,  but  we  can  construct  a  proxy  for 
such a forecast by combining the MPC’s central (mean) projection for GDP growth with its 
central  (mean)  projection  for  CPI  inflation.5  The  corresponding  one  and  two  year  ahead 
                                                 
2   See Meade (1978). James Tobin, another Nobel prize-winner, also advocated adopting a target for nominal 
income around the same time (Tobin, 1980). I discuss the relationship between Meade’s ideas and inflation 
targeting in Bean (2009). 
3   See Meade, Vines and Maciejowski (1983) and Weale, Blake, Christodoulakis, Meade and Vines (1989). 
4   See  Bean  (1983).  I  showed  there  that  nominal  GDP  targets  had  good  operating  properties  in  the  face  of 
shocks to total factor productivity, as well as to aggregate demand when the main source of nominal frictions 
lies in the labour market. Bean (2009) explores the connection between Meade’s ideas and modern inflation 
targeting. 
5   There  is  reasonably  close  correspondence  between  four-quarter  nominal  GDP  growth  and  the  sum  of 
four-quarter real GDP growth and CPI inflation (over 1993-2012, the correlation coefficient between the two is 
0.9  and  the  average  absolute  deviation  is  0.8  percentage  points)  which  suggests  that  this  is  a  reasonable 
approach. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
synthetic  forecasts  are  also  shown  in  Chart  1,  denoted  by  the  green  and  blue  lines 
respectively. These forecasts are always in the region 4%–5%, with one notable exception, 
namely  those  made  during  2009,  when  the  Committee  implicitly  expected  nominal  income 
growth  to  recover  more  slowly  than  it  in  practice  did.  That  was  because  our  central 
expectation  was  for  markedly  lower  inflation  during  2010  than  took  place,  in  large  part 
because of unexpected increases in energy prices and VAT, together with an unexpectedly 
large pass-through from the depreciation.6 
So the deviations of nominal income growth from around 5% appear to have been largely 
associated  with  forecast  errors.  In  particular,  the  collapse  in  demand  after  the  demise  of 
Lehman Brothers was so sudden and deep that there was no way that monetary policy could 
in practice have been relaxed early enough, and by a large enough amount, to prevent it. It 
is, though, a moot point whether policy would have been set even more stimulatory during 
the latter part of 2009 if we had been operating under a nominal income growth target, given 
that  we  were  implicitly  expecting  a  rather  slow  recovery  in  nominal  income  growth.  Given 
how stimulatory policy already was, I suspect that we might well have taken the view that it 
was simply not feasible to get nominal income growth back much faster. 
The unexpected weakness of nominal income growth in the past year or so does, however, 
serve  to  highlight  a  more  significant  difference  between  an  inflation  target  and  a  nominal 
income growth target. A remarkable feature of the current cycle has been the juxtaposition of 
a  weak  recovery  in  output  with  robust  growth  in  employment.  One  possible  explanation  is 
that the financial crisis has led to a fall, possibly temporarily, in the underlying rate of growth 
of  supply.  If  that  is  so,  then  a  fixed  nominal  income  growth  target  would  obviously  go 
hand-in-hand with a higher inflation rate, whereas a fixed inflation target would be associated 
with  lower  nominal  income  growth.  But  this  hardly  provides  an  argument  in  favour  of  a 
nominal income growth target. Indeed, in this case one would surely want to set the target 
growth rate for nominal income lower to reflect the lower rate of growth of supply, though by 
how much might be hard to judge.  
To me, the choice between the present flexible inflation target and a nominal income growth 
target – probably also pursued with a degree of flexibility – therefore centres less around any 
differences  in  macroeconomic  outcomes,  which  are  likely  to  be  relatively  minor,  and  more 
around  issues  connected  with  accountability  and  communication.  The  issue  here  is  not 
whether  our  objective  should  include  growth  –  it  already  does  –  but  whether  a  target  for 
nominal income growth provides a better way of describing policy. 
One  advantage  of  a  nominal  income  growth  target  is  that  it  might  lead  to  fewer  instances 
where  we  have  to  resort  to  the  use  of  our  “constrained  discretion”  to  justify  a  temporary 
acceptance of inflation away from the target in order to avoid undue volatility in output and 
employment. Fifteen years ago, when the current arrangements were instituted, I calculated7 
that  inflation  should  be  expected  to  deviate  from  the  target  by  more  than  one  percentage 
point – thus triggering an Open Letter of explanation to the Chancellor – on about 40% of 
occasions. In fact, since 1997, inflation has been more than one percentage point away from 
the target, just 20% of the time. But those instances have been entirely concentrated in the 
past  six  years,  which  has  seen  inflation  varying  between  1.1%  and  5.2%  and  averaging 
3.1%. As I noted earlier, that reflects the preponderance of adverse cost shocks, which we 
have largely accommodated, whether by accident or design. But the concentration of such 
shocks runs the risk that the MPC is no longer seen as taking the target seriously. Having a 
target in which the acceptable deviations from target are in effect hardwired in might reduce 
that risk. 
                                                 
6   See, for instance, the forecast errors box on pp.48–9 of the August 2010 Inflation Report. 
7   See Bean (1998). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Against that, a nominal income growth target has two drawbacks. The first is that the data for 
nominal  income  is  less  timely  than  that  for  inflation  and  subject  to  revision,  sometimes 
significantly so. Chart 2 shows the first estimate of nominal income growth, together with the 
current vintage of data; one should not take comfort from the concordance between the two 
series in the recent past, as the recent data have not yet had much opportunity to be revised! 
The  average  absolute  revision  over  1993–2009  is  a  full  percentage  point.  Now  the 
susceptibility  to  revision  is  hardly  a  knock-out  blow.  After  all,  the  data  on  growth  and 
employment are also subject to revision and recognising that the data are an imperfect guide 
to  reality  is  part  and  parcel  of  setting  policy.  But  the  susceptibility  of  the  data  to  revision 
would make it somewhat harder for the public to understand the MPC’s objectives and for 
Parliament to hold us to account. 
The second drawback is that a nominal income growth target would probably mean less to 
the  average  person  than  does  an  inflation  target.  One  virtue  of  an  inflation  target  is  it 
provides people with a simple heuristic for forming their expectations of how fast prices will 
rise. That would be muddied under a nominal income growth target. 
The bottom line from all this is that I do not believe that a shift to a nominal income growth 
target would represent a major change in the regime. Most of the time, policy settings would 
probably  be  pretty  similar.  The  main  consequences  would  instead  lie  in  how  the  MPC 
explained and justified its decisions. 
The same cannot be said of a shift to a target for the level of nominal income, as recently 
advocated by Michael Woodford.8 As the incoming Governor of the Bank of England, Mark 
Carney, explained in a recent speech,9 such a target would ensure that past control errors 
have to be subsequently corrected. Bygones are not bygones, in other words. In the current 
context,  this  is  usually  taken  to  mean  returning  nominal  income  to  a  continuation  of  its 
pre-crisis trend line. As Chart 3 reveals, the nominal income shortfall in the United Kingdom 
is presently very large – in excess of 15% in fact. 
Such history dependence in policy is potentially of value when private agents are sufficiently 
forward-looking and the regime is fully credible. For instance, suppose that demand depends 
on current and future expected real interest rates, and inflation depends on expected inflation 
and  the  margin  of  spare  capacity  in  the  economy.  Now  suppose  there  is  an  adverse  cost 
shock  that  pushes  inflation  up.  One  can  stabilise  inflation  by  tightening  policy  sharply  but 
temporarily.  Alternatively  one  can  generate  the  same  disinflationary  impact  on  demand  by 
tightening  policy  less  aggressively,  but  maintaining  it  for  longer.  And  under  normal  policy 
objective functions, the latter course turns out to be preferable because it spreads the burden 
of adjustment more evenly over time. 
The problem is that such a policy is not time-consistent. The central bank has the incentive to 
say that it intends to do this. But once tomorrow comes, it makes sense not to go through 
with its promise of holding policy tight, as it suffers a cost in terms of output foregone, while 
the benefit has already been gained in the earlier period. It is better simply to renege on the 
earlier promise to keep policy tight for a while. Knowing that, private agents will not believe 
the central bank’s original promise in the first place. So to exploit this “policy-expectations” 
channel fully, the central bank needs some way of making its promise credible. The issue of 
how such credibility is achieved tends to be ignored in the literature: it is simply assumed that 
policy makers can commit themselves – or more often their successors – to behave in the 
necessary  fashion.  But  that  is  rarely  possible  in  practice,  other  than  perhaps  a  very  short 
distance ahead. 
                                                 
8   See Woodford (2012). 
9   See Carney (2012). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The difficulty of utilising this particular policy channel is probably not a great issue in normal 
times.  But  it  looms  larger  when  policy  is  constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound  on  interest 
rates. In such circumstances – and assuming that alternative policies, such as quantitative 
easing, are unavailable or ineffective – an ability to exploit this policy-expectations channel 
becomes much more valuable, as the commitment to hold policy loose in the future feeds 
back  onto  aggregate  demand  today  by  reducing  expected  future  real  interest  rates.  This 
comes  about  both  through  a  low  future  nominal  interest  rate  and  a  higher  future  rate  of 
inflation because policy is held “loose for long”.  
The intent of such a loose-for-long strategy is in some ways similar to quantitative easing, as 
both reduce interest rates further down the yield curve. But the former does so by changing 
the path of risk-free rates at the near end of the yield curve, while the latter operates mainly 
through  variations  in  the  term  premium  further  out  along  the  yield  curve  brought  about  by 
changes  in  relative  asset  supplies.  Moreover,  the  loose-for-long  approach  partly  works  by 
raising future inflation, which is not an objective of quantitative easing. 
In order to illustrate the mechanism in operation, I have simulated a small macroeconomic 
model of the sort used by Woodford and others to study alternative monetary policies (see 
Annex for details). Real demand depends inversely on the current and expected future path 
of  real  interest  rates,  while  the  central  bank  sets  the  nominal  interest  rate.  Prices  in  this 
economy adjust slowly, with a Phillips-curve relationship linking inflation to the current and 
expected future path of slack in the economy. Private agents understand how the economy 
works and have rational expectations. The key parameters – the interest elasticity of demand 
and  the  responsiveness  of  inflation  to  the  output  gap  –  are  set  to  be  broadly  in  line  with 
empirical evidence for the United Kingdom, but given the extreme simplicity of the model, the 
results should be taken as merely illustrative. 
In this economy, the slow adjustment of prices in the face of shocks to demand or supply 
leads to efficiency losses, which depend on the square of the deviation of inflation from target 
and the square of the output gap. The policy maker wishes to minimise the present value of 
these efficiency losses. Such an objective can be thought of as describing the rationale for 
flexible inflation targeting, namely seeking to stabilise inflation but in a manner that avoids 
excessive variability in output. 
Chart 4 shows what happens in this economy when there is a large and relatively persistent 
drop  in  demand,  but  monetary  policy  is  constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound  on  interest 
rates. I consider three policy scenarios. In the first scenario (the green line), the central bank 
can credibly commit to its future policy settings. I do not regard this as attainable in practice 
over anything other than very short time horizons, as central bankers generally cannot tie the 
hands  of their  successors.  But  it  does  provide  a  useful  benchmark  against  which to  judge 
alternative  policies.  The  nominal  interest  rate  is  cut  straight  to  its  zero  lower  bound  and 
remains there for over six years, far longer than is necessary to bring output back to potential 
and enough to generate subsequent overheating and excess inflation. But it is precisely that 
expectation  of  temporarily  higher  future  inflation  that  reduces  expected  future  real  interest 
rates and boosts demand today.  
In the second scenario (the red line), the central bank cannot commit in this way; the best it 
can do is simply to set policy on a quarter by quarter basis. Interest rates are again cut to 
their zero lower bound but now the monetary stimulus is withdrawn earlier, after about four 
years,  and  there  is  no  overheating  phase.  The  consequence  is  that  expected  real  interest 
rates are higher than under the first scenario, demand is weaker and the output gap larger. 
From a welfare perspective, the first scenario offers a better outcome, because – at least in 
the model – the overheating period is a price worth paying to generate higher activity and 
less deflation in the near term. But this better outcome is not achievable when the central 
bank cannot tie its hands in regards to its future behaviour. 
In the third scenario (the blue line), the government gives the central bank the mandate of 
stabilising  the  level  of  nominal  income  around  a  continuation  of  its  pre-shock  trend.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
central bank then pursues this different objective, but again on a quarter by quarter basis. In 
this case, the output and inflation outcomes lie between the previous two scenarios.10 Giving 
the central bank a mandate to target the level of nominal income is, in effect, a way of getting 
closer to the first, but unattainable, scenario. 
So much for the theory behind a target for the level of nominal income. It is essentially one 
way of trying to hardwire in a commitment to  maintaining a policy that remains loose long 
after conditions have normalised in order to generate the expectation of temporarily higher 
inflation in the future. But what may work in an economist’s model may not be such a good 
idea in the real world. How sensible would it be in practice? And what pitfalls might there be? 
First, the simulations show the impact of a pure demand shock resulting in strong deflation 
and, given the zero lower bound on the policy rate, also a high real interest rate. That hardly 
characterises  the  UK  in  the  past  five  years,  where  inflation  has  averaged  well  above  our 
2% target and the real interest rate has as a consequence been pretty low. Moreover, it is by 
no  means  obvious  that  the  UK’s  economic  problem  is  simply  one  of  deficient  aggregate 
demand.  The  limited  disinflationary  pressures  coupled  with  consistently  weak  productivity 
growth suggest that the financial crisis may have wrought significant damage to the supply 
side of the economy. 
Our November Inflation Report discussed a variety of possible explanations for the weakness 
in productivity, relative to a continuation of its pre-crisis trend. Some of the weakness may 
unwind naturally as the recovery gathers pace, some may require policy intervention to fix, 
and some may persist indefinitely. But it seems unwise to assume that all of it will unwind 
with a recovery. That part of it which is attributable to a supply-side deterioration will instead 
be  absorbed  as  a  higher  price  level  under  a  nominal  income  target.  Of  course,  this  issue 
could be addressed by adjusting the target level of nominal income down for the presumed 
deterioration in supply, but unfortunately we do not presently have a good handle on just how 
big this is. Moreover, it is worth noting that since the MPC’s mandate dictates that we should 
support growth and employment provided that it does not conflict with achieving the inflation 
target,  we  are  in  any  case  charged  with  seeking  to  eliminate  that  part  of  the  shortfall  in 
nominal  demand  that  is  associated  with  an  output  gap,  or  that  can  be  eliminated  without 
generating inflationary pressure.  
Second,  hard-wiring  in  higher  inflation  for  a  while  is  not  without  risk.  In  many  economic 
models – including the one I used earlier – it is only the real interest rate that matters: it is 
irrelevant  whether  a  lower  real  interest  rate  comes  about  through  a  lower  nominal  interest 
rate  or  a  higher  inflation  rate.  In  the  real  world,  inflation  erodes  the  real  value  of  cash, 
nominal bonds and fixed-interest debts. In itself, that may reduce the impact on demand of 
the promise to keep policy loose for long. But it is also apt to breed suspicion of a deliberate 
attempt to inflate away debt burdens, and may thus lead to inflation expectations becoming 
de-anchored. This is a serious risk: we should not forget the high levels of unemployment in 
the 1970s and 1980s associated with bringing inflation expectations back under control. 
Third, maintaining low interest rates even after the economy has recovered carries financial 
stability risks. My baseline simulations suggest that the period of very loose policy is already 
quite  extended.  But  I  think  there  are  good  reasons  for  believing  that  demand  may  be 
presently  somewhat  less  responsive  to  real  interest  rates  than  usual.  Uncertainty  rose 
sharply  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  and  rose  again  during  the  worst  of  the 
euro-area sovereign debt crisis. Banks and highly indebted households and businesses have 
focussed on deleveraging and improving the resilience of their balance sheets. Under these 
circumstances,  it  would  be  hardly  surprising  if  changes  in  the  cost  of  borrowing  have  less 
                                                 
10   The path for the policy rate in this scenario may seem surprisingly close to that under the previous scenario, 
but it needs to be remembered that the real interest rate – which is what matters for demand – is nevertheless 
lower here because inflation is higher. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
traction on demand than is usually the case. Chart 5 shows the implications of assuming the 
interest elasticity is just a third of the size assumed in the earlier experiments. The key point 
is that the policy rate under a nominal income target is now kept at the zero lower bound for 
more than six years, even though the output gap is closed after four. That long period of low 
interest rates is necessary to generate enough of a fall in expected future real interest rates 
to boost demand today. 
But  a  world  where  policy  is  kept  loose  for  so  long  after  the  economy  is  back  to  normal  is 
somewhat troubling. The period of low US policy rates during 2004–5 was in part the result of 
the  FOMC’s  desire  to  make  good  on  its  earlier  promise  during  the  2001–3  downturn  to 
maintain low interest rates for a considerable period in order to head off deflation worries. 
While I do not believe that the evidence supports the view that this was the sole cause of the 
pre-crisis build-up in financial imbalances in the United States, it is plausible that they made 
some  contribution.11  Maintaining  very  low  interest  rates  long  after  the  economy  has 
recovered  must  run  the  risk  of  encouraging  a  new  credit/asset-price  boom  and  the 
reappearance  of  financial  imbalances.  While  macro-prudential  policies,  such  as  the 
application of the counter-cyclical capital buffer in Basel III, are intended to be the primary 
instrument to head off such excesses, it seems unwise to place too great a burden on them. 
For that reason, I believe one should be cautious about committing to monetary policies that 
remain loose for a very long period after the economy has normalised.  
Let me conclude with a few more general remarks about the role of monetary policy at the 
current  juncture.  The  sluggishness  of  the  recovery  has  led  some  to  question  whether  the 
framework  is  flexible  enough  to  allow  for  sufficiently  expansionary  policies  to  support  the 
recovery.  Conversely,  others  suggest  that  the  persistent  overshoot  of  the  inflation  target 
indicates that if anything the MPC has interpreted its mandate too flexibly. Given these fears, 
I think it is sensible to review the framework to assess whether it is fit for purpose or can be 
materially improved, though the hurdle for change should be high. 
But there is a danger of expecting too much from monetary policy. The Great Recession of 
2008–9  was  unlike  earlier  policy-induced  downturns  aimed  at  reining  back  excessive 
inflationary  pressures.  The  period  of  stability  in  the  decade  or  so  preceding  the  crisis 
encouraged  an  increasingly  relaxed  attitude  to  risk  and  an  excessive  build-up  of  debt, 
particularly within the financial system. That was shattered by the cardiac arrest of the global 
financial system in the autumn of 2008, resulting in a large downward shock to demand, here 
and  elsewhere,  and  the  realisation  that  substantial  adjustments  to  balance  sheets  were 
called for. So it should not be surprising that the recovery since the middle of 2009 has been 
so muted. 
Monetary  policy  can  –  up  to  a  point  –  play  a  smoothing  role  in  such  circumstances  by 
encouraging  households  and  businesses  to  bring  forward  spending  from  the  future  to  the 
present.  And  other,  more  targeted,  central  bank  policies  can  help  unblock  dysfunctional 
markets or else, as with the Funding for Lending Scheme, support the supply of credit. We 
stand ready to take further such action should it be warranted. But such policies cannot – 
and should not seek to – prevent the necessary de-leveraging and rebalancing of production 
away  from  non-tradables  towards  tradables.  That  is  a  real  process  that  takes  time  and 
means that the recovery is likely to remain somewhat subdued by historical standards. Thank 
you! 
 
                                                  
11   See Bean et al. (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Annex 
The  model  used  for  the  simulations  is  standard  in  the  monetary  policy  literature  and 
comprises just two equations. The first is the demand for goods and services (a dynamic IS 
curve): 
xt = Etxt+1 – (it – Ett+1 – rt), 
where xt is the output gap, t is the deviation of inflation from target (the inflation gap), it is the 
nominal  policy  rate,  rt  is  the  natural  real  rate  of  interest,  and  Et  denotes  a  rational 
expectation.  This  makes  the  level  of  demand  today  a  decreasing  function  of  present  and 
future expected real interest rates. A fall in demand can then be simulated by reducing the 
natural real rate of interest, rt, which is then allowed to unwind gradually. 
The  second  equation  describes  the  supply  side  and  embeds  within  it  an  assumption  that 
prices are sticky (a New Keynesian Phillips Curve): 
t = Ett+1 + xt. 
This makes inflation an increasing function of present and future expected output gaps. In 
the baseline model,  = 0.6;  = 0.025; and  = .99; in the low interest elasticity variant,  = 
0.2. 
The loss function that the policy maker wants to minimise takes the form: 
2/6. 
Under a nominal GDP target, the above expression for Vt is replaced by: 
Vt + EtVt+1 + 2EtVt+2 +...,  where Vt = t
2 + xt
where yt is nominal income and y*t is the corresponding target level. 
 Vt = (yt – y*t)2, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
References 
Bean,  C.R.  (1983).  “Targeting  nominal  income:  an  appraisal.”  Economic  Journal,  vol.  93, 
(December), pp. 806–19. 
Bean,  C.R.  (1998).  “The  new  UK  monetary  arrangements:  a  view  from  the  literature.” 
Economic Journal, vol. 108, (November), pp. 1795–1809. 
Bean,  C.R.  (2009).  “The  meaning  of  internal  balance  thirty  years  on.”  Economic  Journal, 
vol. 119, (November), pp. F442–460. 
Bean, C.R., Paustian, M., Penalver, A. and Taylor, T. (2011). “Monetary policy after the fall” 
in Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Brittan, S. (1981). “How to end the monetarist controversy.” Hobart Paper no. 90, London: 
IEA. 
Carney,  M.  (2012).  “Guidance.”  Remarks  to  CFA  Society,  Toronto,  11  December,  Bank  of 
Canada. 
Meade,  J.E.  (1978).  “The  meaning  of  internal  balance.”  Economic  Journal,  vol.  88, 
(September), pp. 423–35. 
Meade,  J.E,  Vines,  D.  and  Maciejowski  J.  (1983).  Stagflation:  Demand  Management. 
London: Allen & Unwin. 
Tobin,  J.  (1980).  “Stabilization  policy  ten  years  after.”  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic 
Activity, vol. 11, pp.19–90. 
Weale  M.,  Blake  A.,  Christodoulakis  N.,  Meade,  J.E  and  Vines  D.  (1989).  Macroeconomic 
Policy: Inflation, Wealth and the Exchange Rate. London: Unwin & Hyman. 
Woodford  M.  (2012).  “Methods  of  policy  accommodation  at  the  interest-rate  lower  bound.” 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
   Nominal Income Targets: an Old Wine 
in a New Bottle
The State of the Economy
The Institute of Economic Affairs’ 30th Conference
Charlie Bean, Deputy Governor Monetary Policy
27 February 2013
Chart 1: Nominal GDP growth
Percentage changes on a year earlier
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
Nominal GDP
Nominal GDP expected 1 year earlier
Nominal GDP expected 2 years earlier
(a)
(a)
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
(a) Sums the Monetary Policy Committee’s mean forecasts for real GDP and inflation.  The Committee’s forecast for RPIX inflation is used prior to 
February 2004, adjusted for the difference in the inflation target.
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 2: Revisions to nominal GDP growth
Percentage changes on  a year earlier
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
Initial estimate
Latest
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
Chart 3: Nominal GDP shortfall
Indices: 2008 Q1 = 100
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
Nominal GDP
Trend
Shortfall
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
 Chart 4: Response to a large fall in demand
Output gap
Inflation gap
Policy rate
Percentage points
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
1
6
11
16
21
26
31
36
41
46
Quarters
Per cent (annualised)
Per cent (annualised)
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8
1
6
11
16
21
26
31
Quarters
36
41
46
1
6
11 16 21 26 31 36 41 46
Quarters
Inflation Targeting (with  Commitment)
Inflation Targeting  (Discretion)
Nominal Income Target 
Chart 5: Response to a large fall in demand with a low 
interest rate elasticity
Output gap
Inflation gap
Policy rate
Percentage points
2
Per cent (annualised)
Per cent (annualised)
8.0
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
-12
-14
-16
1
6
11
16
21
26
Quarters
31
36
41
46
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
1
6
11 16 21 26 31 36 41 46
1
6
11 16 21 26 31 36 41 46
Quarters
Quarters
Inflation Targeting (with  Commitment)
Inflation Targeting  (Discretion)
Nominal Income Target 
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
 7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   12 
 