Christian Noyer: The euro area perspectives 
Keynote speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  IIF  (Institute  of 
International Finance) 2013 Spring Membership Meeting, Paris, 26 June 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to have this opportunity to speak to such a distinguished audience and I 
thank the President for his invitation. In the light of the discussion you have just had on “The 
Future of Europe”, I wish to first give you an overview of the current economic and financial 
situation in the euro area and then discuss the major changes currently underway that are 
considerably strengthening our monetary union. 
Overview of the current economic and financial situation in the euro area. 
1. 
Before I start this overview, I would like to quote a famous sentence by Jean Monnet, one of 
the founding fathers of Europe: “what matters is neither to be optimistic nor pessimistic, what 
matters  is  to  be  determined”.  In  other  words,  what  the  euro  area  needs  is  neither  euro-
bashing nor celebration, but awareness and action. 
As you all know, overall growth in the euro area has been very weak for a few years. The 
most  recent  figure  is  a  0.2%  contraction  in  GDP  in  the  first  quarter  of  2013,  following  a 
decline of 0.6% in the fourth quarter of 2012. Output has thus declined for six consecutive 
quarters, with labour market conditions remaining very weak. The euro area economies were 
badly affected by the crisis (first financial, then economic, then sovereign debt), and the fiscal 
adjustment that became necessary to overcome it has had a negative impact on growth as 
well. 
ECB projections see a gradual recovery taking shape later this year. A number of elements 
support this view: 
• 
Our accommodative monetary policy stance – which  will remain so for as long as 
necessary – should contribute to underpinning this recovery; 
Recent  developments  in  economic  sentiment  survey  data  have  shown  some 
improvement from their low levels; 
Looking  ahead  to  later  in  the  year  and  to  2014,  euro  area  export  growth  should 
benefit  from  a  recovery  in  global  demand,  while  domestic  demand  should  be 
supported  by  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  and  by  the  recent  real 
income gains due to lower oil prices and lower overall inflation. 
Furthermore,  the  significant  improvements  in  financial  markets  seen  since  last 
summer  boost  confidence  and  generate  wealth  effects  and  should  work their  way 
through to the real economy, as should the progress made in fiscal consolidation. 
   Nevertheless,  the  Governing  Council  continues  to  see  downside  risks  surrounding  the 
economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area.  They  include  the  possibility  of  weaker-than-expected 
domestic and global demand and the slow or insufficient implementation of structural reforms 
in euro area countries. 
Overall,  the  June  2013  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area 
foresee annual real GDP declining by 0.6% in 2013 and increasing by 1.1% in 2014 thanks 
to three main drivers: export growth, accommodative monetary policy and low inflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
How can we boost growth further in the euro area? 
2. 
A strong fiscal stimulus obviously appears unfeasible, given the necessity to rebalance public 
finances. I want to stress two things here: 
• 
The  euro  area  has  very  rapidly  and  efficiently  set  to  work  to  cure  its  fiscal 
weaknesses  and  can  today  boast  some  of  the  best  results  among  the  major 
developed economic regions: its public deficit has been reduced from 6.3% of GDP 
in 2009 to approximately 3% today; by the end of 2013, the euro area should show a 
positive primary balance; 
While the commitment to progressively achieve sustainable levels of public debt and 
deficit has to be achieved; the measures need to be designed in such a way as to 
limit the negative side-effects on growth. For instance, efforts need to be focused on 
non-productive spending. 
 In fact, there is only one way to durably raise the growth potential of our economies, and that 
is by structural reforms that enhance competitiveness. It is clear that the euro area is well 
equipped  to  confront  the  challenges  of  the  21st  century.  With  370  million  consumers  and 
high  purchasing  power,  it  remains  the  biggest  market  in  the  world.  It  is  also  the  most 
economically integrated area, with highly qualified manpower and very good infrastructures. 
Too  often,  however,  euro  area  countries  are  prevented  from  reaping  the  benefits  of  their 
position by the rigidities that have accumulated over time, during the periods of easy growth. 
Now, the international environment is more challenging: new and powerful competitors have 
emerged and comparative advantages are shifting. There is no alternative to adjustment. 
In this field too, the euro area has made considerable progress over recent years, especially 
in  the  countries  that  had  a  particularly  large  competitiveness  gap  vis-à-vis  the  rest  of  the 
zone and which, as a result, fell deeper into the crisis than their neighbours: 
• 
We have seen a significant improvement in cost competitiveness as measured by 
unit labour costs (ULC). Between 2008 and 2012, in the three programme countries 
(Greece, Portugal and Ireland) cumulated ULC growth stood about 12 percentage 
points below the euro area average. 
The  current  account  balances  clearly  show  a  strong  correction.  In  the  three 
programme  countries,  the  current  account  balances  as  a  percentage  of  GDP 
improved by more than 9 percentage points between 2008 and 2012. In Spain, the 
current account deficit improved by more than 7 percentage points over the same 
period. 
Most  of  the  adjustment  has  been  driven  by  a  contraction  in  domestic  demand. 
However, in Ireland, Spain and Portugal export performance has been very strong 
compared with the pre-crisis period. 
In total, the euro area generated a trade surplus of more than 1% of its GDP in 2012 
compared  with  around  zero  in  previous  years.  We expect  this  surplus  to  continue 
growing in the coming years. 
 The  speed  and  depth  of  the  reforms  underway  in  euro  area  economies is  unprecedented. 
They have undertaken reforms in the areas most important for competitiveness, growth and 
the  sustainability  of  public  finances  such  as  labour  markets,  products  markets,  social 
security, pension systems, etc. These reforms are a prerequisite for dynamic and sustainable 
growth in the future and they must be vigorously pursued. 
In addition to this very clear determination at the different national levels to reduce deficits 
and  introduce  the  necessary  reforms,  Europe  has  equipped  itself  with  a  new  disciplinary 
framework. The Heads of State signed a new fiscal compact over a year ago that fixes very 
strict  rules  and  gives  very  extensive  powers  to  the  European  Commission  to  assess  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
compliance of Member States. This new compact goes hand in hand with the introduction of 
rules for monitoring macroeconomic imbalances. 
It  is  important  to  understand  what  these  institutional  advances  represent:  in  effect,  they 
represent a new Treaty creating very strong commitments for the States via rules that are far 
better calibrated and far more binding than those in place when European monetary union 
began. 
Monetary Union is to be enhanced with a banking union. 
3. 
As well as being a year that saw a considerable strengthening of fiscal and macroeconomic 
discipline in Europe, 2012 also saw significant progress towards a banking union. 
Why  has  a  banking  union  suddenly  become  such  an  indispensable  and  urgent  project? 
Simply because we are now certain that many of the problems we have experienced, could 
have  been  avoided  with  a  banking  union.  A  banking  union  is  necessary  for  the  smooth 
functioning of a monetary union for the following three reasons: 
• 
It  breaks  the  link  between  banks  and  sovereigns  by  bringing  banking  supervision 
and crisis management to the federal level. With the banking union, banks will be 
considered as euro area institutions over and above their nationality; it will ensure 
that credit conditions in the euro area will not depend on where you are but on who 
you are, which is what should be expected of an efficient financial market. 
It allows re-integration of the European banking system. A supra-national supervisor 
is in fact better placed to assess the risks of cross-border activities and therefore to 
protect  and  encourage such  activities;  it  is  not  subject  to  national  biases  that  can 
lead  to  the  temptation  of  economic  introversion.  It  is  therefore  more  credible  and 
strengthens stability and confidence in the area; 
Moreover,  it  restores  the  full  efficacy  of  monetary  policy.  If  our  monetary  policy 
impulses are not transmitted uniformly to all of the area’s countries because of the 
bank-sovereign link, it undermines the very foundation of Europe’s monetary union; 
remember that three quarters of the financing of the euro area’s economy consists 
of  bank  loans.  By  breaking  this  link,  a  banking  union  would  restore  the  federal 
dimension of monetary policy. 
  Today  the  first  pillar  of  the  banking  union  is  being  constructed:  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism. We are currently working on legal issues, on identifying systemically important 
banks within the euro area, on the supervisory model, on the future data reporting and, of 
course,  on  the  asset  quality  review  that  will  be  undertaken  before  we  take  on  the 
responsibility of supervision. The governance structure we have adopted will guarantee that, 
while the Governing Council will keep the decision power, there will be no conflict of interest 
between  monetary  policy  and  banking  supervision.  On  the  contrary,  more  consistent 
supervision across the euro area should allow for the early detection of potential risks and 
imbalances and, ultimately, improve the transmission of monetary policy. 
This is a fundamental first step and its rapid implementation will be a major success for the 
euro area. 
But, alone, it cannot achieve the objectives of a banking union. That is why we must rapidly 
construct its two other pillars: a supranational bank resolution authority and a unified deposit 
insurance system. 
The  banking  union  will  deliver  a  higher  level  of  structural  coherence  to  the  euro  area’s 
financial  system,  which  has  already  been  considerably  strengthened  since  2008:  banks’ 
capital levels have been substantially consolidated, certain activities have been streamlined 
and the most stressed banks have been restructured. Recent numbers show major advances 
for  European  banks  in  their  efforts  to  strengthen  their  capital  base,  in  line  with  Basel  III 
requirements  and,  in  particular  for  big  international  banks,  quite  comparable  to  capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
strengthening in US banks (when differences in accounting standards are neutralised). The 
banks have reimbursed half of the liquidity injected via the two LTRO programmes. 
The Eurosystem 
4. 
From the very first signs of the crisis (remember the Eurosystem injected 90 billion euros in 
August  2007  to  counter  the  impact  of  the  first  freeze  in  the  financial  markets),  the 
Eurosystem has provided constant support to bank funding (and thereby underpinning credit 
to the economy). We have been able to use our collateral framework – with a wide range of 
counterparties accepted – to relieve the liquidity constraints faced by banks. The maximum 
maturity of our operations has increased from three months before the crisis to three years. 
Through these measures, we have addressed the liquidity pressures on banks and avoided a 
genuine  credit  crunch.  Both  our  standard  and  non-standard  monetary  policies  have 
prevented the materialisation of deflation risk. 
The programme we launched a year ago – Outright Monetary Transactions – succeeded in 
countering  speculation  about  a  euro  area  break-up.  Its  basic functioning  is  as  follows:  if  a 
given State suffers unwarranted tensions on its debt, we could decide to intervene as far as 
is necessary, provided that State commits to an agreed recovery programme. 
Undoubtedly,  the  announcement  of  the  creation  of  the  OMTs  had  a  very  strong  impact: 
banks  and  firms  regained  access  to  capital  markets;  the  spreads  between  the  yields  on 
Spanish and German 10-year bonds fell from more than 6pp in July 2012 to just under 3pp in 
May  2013,  while  the  premium  on  Italian  10-year  bond  halved.  This  new  monetary  policy 
instrument has therefore fostered a considerable improvement in financial conditions in the 
euro area and represents a solid shield against further speculative attacks. 
The ECB’s Governing Council has stressed that monetary policy will remain accommodative 
for  as  long  as  necessary.  In  the  period  ahead,  we  will  monitor  very  closely  all  incoming 
information on economic and monetary developments and stand ready to act if necessary. 
 The  euro  area  is  getting  stronger:  it  is  undergoing  major reforms,  building  new  institutions 
and setting up powerful crisis management instruments. These major and in many respects 
historical advances will lay the foundations for the future of our monetary union. 
The effects on financial markets are already very visible: tensions have abated and signs of 
defragmentation  are  starting  to  appear  (TARGET  balances  for  instance  have  declined  by 
almost 300 billion euros or 25% from their peak). 
We  must  now  pursue  the  efforts  already  initiated  and  do  our  utmost  to  ensure  that  these 
improvements  feed  through  to  the  real  economy  so  that  economic  growth  can  return  and 
unemployment can reverse its rising trend. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
