Choongsoo Kim: Rebalancing the macroeconomy for robust growth – 
challenges and resolutions 
Opening  speech  by  Dr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  SED 
Pre-Conference 2013, Seoul, 26 June 2013. 
 Distinguished speakers and participants of the conference, 
I  bid  a  warm  welcome  to  all  those  taking  part  in  the  2013  SED  Pre-Conference.  Let  me 
express  at  once  my  deep  gratitude  to  Professors  Robert  Lucas,  Edward  Prescott,  Nancy 
Stokey, and Hyun Song Shin, who will be making presentations on the main theme of this 
conference. 
The world economy now appears to be recovering from its worst post-war recession but only 
very  slowly  and  at  a  different  pace  across  regions  and  countries.  Uncertainty  as  to  future 
growth prospects remains still high as the legacy of the global financial crisis has cast a long 
shadow. Financial systems of major economies have yet to be repaired in full and will have 
to  adapt  to  new  and  more  complex  regulations.  Fiscal  sustainability  risks  faced  by  many 
advanced economies will fade away only gradually even under a benign scenario, while the 
macro-financial  consequences  of  an  exit  from  unconventional  monetary  policies  by  major 
central banks are at best poorly understood at the current juncture. Without resolving such 
uncertainties  and  challenges,  we  may  find  ourselves  for  considerable  time  in  an 
uncomfortable  zone  where  economic  recovery  continues  to  be  fragile  and  with  insufficient 
traction to reach a sustainable growth path. 
I believe each and every financial crisis is intertwined with real sector fragilities. The global 
financial crisis is well recognized to have had its roots in real imbalances – mostly between 
advanced and emerging-market economies. The euro zone debt crisis was also preceded by 
long-lasting large and unsustainable external imbalances within the euro zone. Indeed, the 
financial  crises  we  have  witnessed  over  the  past  few  decades  were  the  culmination  of 
underlying  real  and  financial  imbalances.  It  follows  that  there  will  be  no  durable  gains  in 
growth  momentum  without  the  proper  rebalancing  of  the  global  demand  and/or  structural 
reforms to boost productivity. 
It is quite obvious that the desired return to a sustainable growth path can be achieved only if 
the  current  economic  recovery  process  is  strong  and  durable  enough  to  lift  the  world 
economy out of the depths of the global financial crisis. In the light of this recognition and 
also from the perspective of a policy maker, I would like to touch upon short- to medium-run 
issues that I believe have a crucial bearing on future growth of the world economy. I hope my 
focus  on  shorter-term  issues  may  be  found  complementary  to  our  invited  speakers’ 
presentations.  And  I  am  lucky  enough  to  be  able  to  put  my  views  straightforwardly  to  this 
gathering of distinguished scholars from around the world that I stand before today. 
Specifically,  the  issues  I  wish  to  cover  fall  broadly  into  three  parts.  The  first  issue  that 
immediately confronts us pertains to the withdrawal of the unconventional monetary stimulus 
undertaken  by  major  central  banks  and  its  financial  and  macroeconomic  implications.  The 
second issue concerns the central bank’s expanded role in the aftermath of the crisis and 
going forward. The final issue I focus on today is related to the tension between the need for 
international policy coordination and the absence of an effective global jurisdiction for it. 
QE and exit strategy 
With regard to the first issue, I should say that the extraordinary monetary easing by major 
central banks was well received by markets, and that it has thus far been beneficial to global 
financial stability and economic recovery despite some negative spillover effects on emerging 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
market economies in the form of higher volatility in cross-border capital flows and exchange 
rates.  By  contrast,  an  orderly  withdrawal  of  monetary  stimulus  –  particularly  after  a  long 
period of monetary easing – would likely be a dangerously difficult task for any central bank. 
Since  2012,  we  have  seen  growing  signs  of  financial  markets  getting  ahead  of  the  real 
economy  in  both  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies.  We  also  know  that  global 
financial markets have been flooded with liquidity for years and will continue to be so at least 
for  a  few  more  years  to  come.  Last  but  not  least,  the  fiscal  sustainability  risks  faced  by 
advanced economies may well be compounded by a rise in the global interest rate. In this 
setting,  forward-looking  financial  markets  are  likely  to  respond  abruptly,  rather  than 
responding incrementally, no matter how transparent and gradual is the exit from the current 
monetary  stimulus.  Indeed,  over  the  past  month  or  so,  we  saw  how  the  U.S.  Fed’s 
statements  related  to  exit  provoked  a  tumble  in  asset  prices  in  advanced  and  emerging 
market economies alike. 
In short, global financial markets will be faced with Knightian uncertainty going forward, and 
the possibility of multiple equilibria will likely be higher than ever. Such uncertainty, together 
with  a  rise  in global  interest rates, may  well  weigh  heavily  on  economic  growth.  Emerging 
market economies with open capital markets will be particularly vulnerable to such negative 
impacts  on growth  of global financial  uncertainty.  Moreover,  they may  be forced to tighten 
monetary policy to fight against capital outflows and associated exchange market pressure 
stemming from the rise in the global interest rate. All these developments, were they to be 
materialized, would surely drag down economic recovery or cause growth to stall out. 
As such, the future challenges are enormous. To meet them, we need to be better prepared 
with  a  greater  understanding  of  the  macro-financial  dynamics  of  an  exit  from  the 
unprecedented monetary easing, even at an abstract level. To this end, it would be useful to 
review past experiences where possible. A good starting point would be to look into the U.S. 
experience  in  moving  out  from  near  zero  interest  rates  during  the  1930s  and  1940s.  Of 
course,  the  dearth  of  precedents  makes  it  difficult  to  tell  at  what  pace  the  unwinding  of 
unconventional  monetary  policies  should  be  carried  out,  and  to  predict  what  form  its 
influences may take. And prediction may well become even trickier since multiple countries 
are  now  simultaneously  engaged  in  quantitative  easing  and  therefore  create  complex 
interactions. 
I  sincerely  hope  that  central  banks,  governments,  and  academia  will  continue  to  work 
together to guide our search for new thinking on monetary policy and an affordable path to 
sustainable growth. 
Role of central banks 
Now allow me to move on to the second issue of the role of the central bank. 
The  global  financial  crisis  came  to  us  as  a  sobering  lesson  concerning  the  operating 
framework of monetary policy and the role of the central bank. Simply put, price stability did 
not ensure macroeconomic or financial stability. Ironically, it was rather the Great Moderation 
period  –  characterized  by  stable  inflation  and  moderate  growth  –  that  spawned  the  global 
financial crisis. In consequence, there have been noticeable  changes in thinking about the 
role of the central bank and the monetary policy framework in the aftermath of the crisis. 
First of all, in terms of its roles, the central bank has now naturally taken on the responsibility, 
not only for price stability but for financial stability. In addition, its roles have been stretched 
to  help  restore  real  economic  activity  and  employment  beyond  what  would  be  normally 
considered as cyclical fine tuning. The Bank of England’s launch of its Funding for Lending 
Scheme (FLS) and the U.S. Fed’s large-scale purchase of mortgage-backed securities may 
be seen as examples of how the central bank has come to take on responsibility for credit 
policy. The ECB also took up some form of credit policy – although to a lesser degree than 
the Bank of England or the U.S. Fed – by way of its Securities Market Program (SMP) and 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  that  purchase  the  government  bonds  of  crisis-hit 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
countries. When constrained by a zero lower bound, these balance sheet operations were an 
effective tool to affect the entire yield curve or longer-term interest rates that matter more for 
the real economy. In retrospect, balance sheet operations by major central banks appear to 
have  been  effective  in  addressing  tail  risks  and  financial  market  volatility.  Preliminary 
evidence also suggests that they have helped economic recovery or at least offered some 
backstop to the real economy. 
But looking back, maintaining financial stability had been at the heart of the central bank’s 
raison d’être, and credit policy has a longer history than monetary policy. As such, the wider 
range  of  roles,  currently  being  undertaken  by  major  central  banks,  may  mark  a  significant 
departure  from  the  central  bank  orthodoxy  established  over  the  past  three  decades  that 
discredits large risk taking or quasi-fiscal operation by central banks. But it is by no means 
new by the older standards formed one or two centuries ago. 
Nevertheless, it is not clear how the framework of monetary policy should look in the future. 
There is no clear answer as to whether it would be better to return to the pre-crisis monetary 
policy  framework  once  the  real  economy  returns  to  a  normal  path,  or  to  establish  a  new 
framework drawing on our learning in the course of crisis resolution. Moreover, we still have 
no  clear  thinking  on  how  best  to  mix  monetary  policy  and  other  policies,  most  notably 
macroprudential  and  regulatory  policies.  How  much  weight  should  be  placed  on  financial 
stability  and  price  stability  respectively  in  the  decision  to  set  the  interest  rate  (Adrian  and 
Shin 2008)? If a dual mandate situation is the case, should we attain each of the objectives 
using the policy proper to it (Blanchard et al. 2010) or an appropriate policy mix? In each of 
these  cases,  what  will  be  the  influence  on  the  consistency  and  credibility  of  the  monetary 
authorities? Should the so-called flexible inflation targeting be further modified or replaced by 
an alternative? 
All these questions are interlinked and, arguably, have by no means trifling implications not 
only for growth over the business cycle but also for long-run growth if we accept the stylized 
fact  that  the  pre-crisis  output  trend  is  never  regained  after  a  major  financial  crisis.  I  look 
forward to enlightening answers to these questions sooner rather than later. 
Global jurisdiction for global coordination 
Now let me turn to the last issue on the need for policy cooperation, and its feasibility, for the 
harmonious growth of the world economy. 
Considering  the  two-way  linkages  running  between  advanced  and  emerging  market 
economies, I think that we now stand at a critical juncture where global policy cooperation is 
vital for the resumption of world economic growth. 
Theory tells us that, in the presence of externalities, a competitive or non-cooperative Nash 
equilibrium will be socially suboptimal. Given that economic policies and their consequences 
for  growth  at  the  national  level  have  important  international  dimensions,  this  theoretical 
prediction makes  a  strong case for  a global jurisdiction  to  coordinate  policies  by  individual 
countries. A flagship example is the international cooperation for financial regulatory reforms 
as taking place under the aegis of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and 
the Financial Stability Board (FSB). 
In  reality,  however,  international  cooperation  falls  short  in  the  area  of  monetary  policy  or 
other  macroeconomic  policies.  Reflecting  on  this  fact,  a  number  of  eminent  scholars 
(Committee  on  International  Economic  Policy  and  Reform  2011),  including  Professor  Shin 
who is with us today, have put forward the case for official agencies such as an International 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  (IMPC),  comprising  the  representatives  of  central  banks.  In 
assessing  the  effects  on  global  liquidity  of  individual  central  banks’  monetary  policy,  the 
IMPC may be seen as a form of global jurisdiction – a mechanism to internalize the external 
effects of individual countries on other countries. Of course, no global conciliation agency like 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the  IMPC  exists  in  reality,  and  instead  international  cooperation  and  policy  coordination  is 
undertaken in a rather loose manner under the umbrella of the G20. 
Then again there are also pundits who are less supportive of the idea of international policy 
cooperation but more confident about the power play of the invisible hand. For example, one 
may  argue  that  international  cooperation  in  monetary  policy  would  be  redundant  or 
unnecessary  if  free  floating  exchange  rates  are  adhered  to  by  all.  To  my  mind,  however, 
reality is far from what is assumed in theory. The international monetary system is made up 
of a mixture of floating and fixed regimes. And not all countries are price takers in the world 
economy  or  global  financial  markets,  and  big  differences  in  influences  exist  among 
constituent members. 
Of course it goes without saying that there is no guarantee that policy cooperation will always 
produce  the  best  outcomes.  In  any  event,  political  considerations,  rather  than  economic 
welfare,  may  well  be  the  dominant  guiding  principle  of  policy  cooperation.  But  the  world 
economy has become and will become increasingly more closely inter-connected and thus 
subject to greater externalities both positive and negative. For this reason, I speculate that 
the  welfare  cost  of  non-cooperation  or  inaction  will  grow  larger  than  the  welfare  cost  of 
politically compromised cooperation. With no effort being made for international cooperation, 
the  world  economy  will  overwhelmingly  be  characterized  by  the  pursuit  of  local  equilibria 
rather than a global equilibrium. In the course of this, if emerging market economies falter in 
their  growth  dynamism,  it  may  entail  negative  consequences  for  advanced  economies  as 
well, and vice versa. 
Again, I am waiting for renewed intellectual discussions in both policy circle and academia on 
how  we  can  best  achieve  strong,  sustainable,  and  harmonized  growth  through  global 
cooperation. 
Concluding remarks 
Distinguished speakers, ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me round out my speech with a few brief remarks. 
For the world economy to return to a sustainable and robust growth track, it is essential that 
individual  countries  carry  out  necessary  structural  reforms  to  tackle  the  fragilities  of  their 
economies  and  set  the  stage  for  a  takeoff.  At  this  juncture,  though,  it  is  also  important  to 
break free of the economic doldrums by ensuring the continuity of the recovery momentum. 
The highly interconnected world economy should be the scene of cooperative policymaking 
for internalizing externalities of increasing importance. 
I eagerly look forward to insightful presentations and discussions of the renowned scholars at 
this global gathering. I am truly honored to be with you here today. 
Thank you.  
References 
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin (2008), “A Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability, 
and Monetary Policy”, FRB of New York Staff Report, No. 346 
Blanchard,  Olivier,  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia,  and  Paolo  Mauro 
Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF Staff Position Note, SPN/10/03. 
Committee  on  International  Economic  Policy  and  Reform  (2011),  “Rethinking  Central 
Banking”, Brookings Institution, Washington. 
“Rethinking 
(2010), 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
