Ardo Hansson: Experience with and preparations for the euro 
Speech by Mr Ardo Hansson, Governor of the Bank of Estonia (Eesti Pank), at the opening of 
the conference on “Experience with and preparations for the euro”, Riga, 22 February 2013. 
 Honourable  Mr.  President,  Honourable  Madame  Speaker,  Honourable  Mr.  Prime  Minister, 
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honor to be here today in Riga at this important conference and to be able to 
express  my  support  for  Latvia’s  euro  area  aspirations.  Looking  to  the  future,  and 
remembering  all  of  the  good  help  which  we  also  got  from  other  countries  in  the  past,  we 
would also like to give that same support other European countries joining the euro area. 
Let me begin by stressing that Latvia’s long track record of fiscal prudence and your recent 
very  difficult  but  ultimately  successful  crisis  management  are  recognized,  welcomed  and 
greatly  respected  in  the  euro  area.  In  fact,  Estonia  and  Latvia  are  good  examples  of  the 
benefits of implementing decisive reforms, demonstrating that the beneficial effects of front-
loaded  fiscal  consolidation,  deep  structural  reforms  and  economic  flexibility  outweigh  the 
initial higher costs, especially by quickly restoring the confidence that is so crucial for ending 
a crisis and getting a country on a path towards recovery and growth. One of the lessons we 
learned from this crisis is the importance of the issue of confidence. It is intangible, it is hard 
to measure, but it is so crucial. 
In order to join euro area, Latvia, like any other potential member, needs to be deemed to 
have fulfilled the “Maastricht criteria”, and to do so in a sustainable fashion. The recent euro 
area crisis has clearly revealed  what can happen  when the agreed rules are not followed, 
especially  how  damaging  this  can  be  for  the  country  concerned.  As  a  corollary,  countries 
which sustainably adhere to these rules, and which have a clear track record of prudence 
and adjustment capacity, act as net providers of stability, bringing benefits to other members 
of  the  euro  area. That  additional  benefit  should  be  remembered.  Also,  the  sheer  signal  of 
countries wanting to join the euro area right now is also another contributor to this confidence 
that we all need. 
This morning, I would like to briefly touch on three themes. First, a bit about the reasons for 
joining the euro area. Second, a bit about the process and making the point that it is more a 
process than an event. And finally, our experience to date as a member of the euro area. 
Starting with the motivating factors, in one sense we do not need a motivating factor because 
when we all joined the European Union in 2004, we made a commitment that the euro would 
be our currency. Thus, the “if” question has already technically been answered and it is only 
a question of timing. For Estonia as a small European economy highly dependent on trade, 
euro  area membership was  a  natural  goal  stemming from  close  economic  ties  and  similar 
cyclical behavior. A common currency with many of our main trading partners would reduce 
the costs of trading and more importantly deepen the economic integration that can drive all 
of  the  productivity  improvements  that  will  ultimately  lie  behind  higher  living  standards.  Our 
main trading partners are in Europe, so it is not an international issue for us but domestically 
important if we want to grow. In any case, our strategic choice two decades ago to tie our 
currency first  to  the  DM,  then  to the  euro,  and  a  clear  determination  to  never  change  this 
peg, meant that our macroeconomic environment was already very similar to that of a euro 
area  member,  and  that  the  extra  step  towards  full  euro  area  membership  would  only  be 
logical and natural. 
Let me now turn to the process. When discussing such currency reforms, we often speak in 
terms of the date on which this takes place, which can leave the impression of a single event 
which suddenly brings great changes. In fact, the process element is crucial. We have been 
on a given path for 20 years, and we will be on this path for another few decades. Therefore, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
it is many small steps that contribute and the actual date of conversion is somewhat less of 
an  event.  It  is  important,  but  especially  if  you  have  been  tied  to  the  euro  for  a  very  long 
period of time. It is of crucial importance that a country’s economic policy mix as a whole is 
credible and consistent. Based on our own experience, we can say that much of the impact 
was already felt even before formal euro accession in terms of the investment flows and in 
terms of the restoration of confidence. 
Finally,  what  have  been  some  of  the  experience  over  the  last  more  than  two  years?  The 
precise impact of the adoption of the euro is very hard to determine as there were so many 
other  things  going  on,  most  notably  the  global  financial  crisis.  Future  generations  of 
economists, with the benefit of hindsight and data will be better placed than us to make a firm 
evaluation  of  costs  and  benefits.  Nevertheless,  we  can  point 
to  several  positive 
developments  which  appear  to  be  related  to  the  broader  agenda  of  reforms  and  policies, 
including euro adoption. Most notably, the Estonian economy has successfully weathered a 
fragile global economy and come through the uncertainties within the euro area. 
Over the last few years, our export sector has led the economy to a path of relatively rapid 
and  well-balanced  growth.  That  has,  in  turn,  created  the  scope  for  a  still  quite  significant 
contribution from  domestic  demand  to growth. Indicators  of  better  balance  include  a  much 
lower current account deficit, better consistency between productivity and wages and lower 
private  sector  indebtedness.  These  improvements,  along  with  sound  fiscal  policy,  have 
increased  trust  in  the  Estonian  economy  and,  furthermore,  made  it  more  resilient  to 
economic shocks than before the crisis. 
Turning  to  some  other  indicators,  the  output  level  in  our  manufacturing  sector  already 
exceeded pre-crisis levels in 2011. Our exports are now at record levels. Compared to the 
third quarter of 2009, they have grown by 67%. Investments have also rebounded, becoming 
the fastest growing component of domestic demand. Over the last two years, our GDP has 
grown robustly and somewhat faster than we had expected, by around 8% in 2011 and about 
3.2% last year. This is lower than the rates we would like to see in more normal times, and 
slower  than  the  rate  which  Latvia  achieved  last  year,  but  still  a  very  respectable  outcome 
given  the  state  of  the  world  economy.  By  now,  we  have  recovered  to  about  95%  of  our 
somewhat  unsustainable  pre-crisis  level.  As  a  result,  our  unemployment  rate  has  fallen 
steadily, most recently to 9.3%, which is lower than the euro area average. Our employment 
has risen to about the same level as it was in the middle of the boom period. 
Clear positive impacts are also evident in the financial sector. Joining the euro area removed 
any  remaining  risk  of  devaluation,  working  to  lower  interest  premia,  which  are  now  near 
Nordic levels. Access to eurosystem liquidity support has decreased the risk of sharp interest 
rate fluctuations and sudden stops in capital inflows. The reduction in costs stemming from 
the  equalized  charges  for  domestic  and  cross-border  settlements  has  brought  measurable 
savings. Homeowners have benefited from the elimination of the financial risks which come 
from  earning  income  in  one  currency  and  repaying  their  mortgage  in  another  currency. 
Consumers  and  businesses  have  benefited from  being  able to  easily  compare  prices,  and 
from the reduction in currency conversion costs. 
Finally, let me make a few remarks about inflation. Fears are regularly expressed about the 
possible inflationary impacts of euro adoption. Our evidence suggests that this was positive 
but very small and one-off, similar to what was seen in older euro area members where euro 
introduction  effects  accounted  for  about  0.2–0.3%  one-off  increase  in  prices,  mostly  in 
services  sectors,  but  no  measurable  effect  on  inflationary  expectations  or  in  terms  of  core 
inflation. Over the past few years, our inflation has indeed been higher but we believe that 
this can be largely explained by a range of other factors not directly related to euro adoption, 
including  the  catching-up  effect,  commodities  prices,  the  specific  timing  of  changes  in  tax 
policy,  and  so  on.  Most  importantly,  the  ECB  has  built  up  a  very  strong  track  record  in 
keeping inflation in the euro area near our targeted level, and our commitment to continue on 
this path is very strong. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In conclusion, Estonia’s two-year euro area experience has affirmed our belief that our place 
is within the euro area, not outside. Our economy, which once was very much out of balance, 
is  now  in  balance  and  developing  about  as  well  as  could  be  expected  in  difficult 
circumstances. Furthermore, and this is very crucial, opinion polls show that public support 
for  the  euro  appears  to  be  rising  and  has  clearly  been  above  50%.  If  one  also  considers 
recent improvements in the outlook for the euro area as compared to 6 or 12 months ago, I 
believe the support will continue rising in the future. Never in our history has Estonia been 
engaged in shaping Europe to such an extent. We have a say in the processes affecting us, 
from monetary policy decisions to the euro area’s future. For us, it is a matter of economic 
security,  future  prosperity  and  international  credibility.  I  wish  Latvia  determination  and 
success in following the same path. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
