Deepak Mohanty: Statistics and the Reserve Bank of India 
Remarks  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Statistics Day Conference, Mumbai, 30 August 2013. 
 Governor  Dr.  Subbarao,  Prof.  Bimal  Roy,  Prof.  Richard  Smith,  Prof.  B.L.S.  Prakasa  Rao, 
Prof.  Subhashis  Ghoshal,  Deputy  Governor  Dr.  Patel,  Deputy  Governors,  colleague 
Executive  Directors,  Shri  A.  B.  Chakraborty,  distinguished  guests  from  the  financial  sector 
and  academia,  members  of  the  press,  colleagues  from  the  Department  of  Statistics  and 
Information Management (DSIM) and friends. I extend a warm welcome to all of you to this 
7th Statistics Day Conference. 
Since 2007, we in the Reserve Bank have been celebrating Statistics Day in the honour of 
Prof. P.C. Mahalanobis. Professor Mahalanobis was not only an outstanding statistician, but 
a  great  visionary.  He  is  regarded  as  the  father  of  the  Indian  statistical  system.  While  we 
honour  the  sterling  contribution  of  Prof.  Mahalnobis,  this  event  has  turned  out  to  be  an 
important occasion for focusing on further development of statistics in the Reserve Bank. 
Prof.  Mahalanobis  was  the  founder  director  of  the  Indian  Statistical  Institute  (ISI).  We  are 
happy that two ISI Directors – Prof. Bimal Roy and Prof. B. L. S. Prakasa Rao – are here with 
us  today.  Prof.  Mahalanobis  studied  and  spent  his  early  years  in  Cambridge.  We  are 
delighted that  Prof.  Smith,  a  leading  econometrician from  Cambridge  is with  us today. We 
also  have  with  us  Prof.  Ghoshal  from  North  Carolina  University  who  represents  the  new 
generation of statisticians. I once again welcome our guest speakers. 
The  year  2013  has  added  significance  for  statistics  as  it  has  been  declared  as  the 
International  Year  of  Statistics.  Primary  objectives  of  this  worldwide  event,  supported  by 
several organizations, are to increase public awareness of the power and impact of statistics 
on  all  aspects  of  society,  to  nurture  statistics  as  a  profession,  especially  among  young 
people,  and  to  promote  creativity  and  development  in  the  sciences  of  probability  and 
statistics. 
In the Reserve Bank, we treat statistics as a public good. It is necessary not only to aid our 
decision making but also for empowerment of citizens. Our statistics department is playing 
an  important  role  by  making  available  macro-financial  statistics  in  the  public  domain, 
conducting forward looking surveys and generating forecasts of macroeconomic variables for 
supporting  monetary  policy  making.  The  department  is  also  providing  statistical  support  to 
other functions of the Bank. 
In the wake of the recent financial crisis, there is renewed focus on availability of information 
and  statistical  gaps  globally.  The  department  is  actively  engaged  with  other  international 
bodies  such  as  the  IMF,  G20,  BIS  and  FSB  in  strengthening  our  financial  statistics  and 
adopting international best practice. 
Notwithstanding various achievements, there are challenges. I take this opportunity to focus 
on three of those: 
• 
• 
• 
First, the requirement of disaggregated granular banking data on a more frequent basis for 
policy and research has increased. For example, we have been compiling account level data 
on  deposit,  credit  and  interest  rates  on  an  annual  basis  through  Basic  Statistical  Returns 
(BSRs).  These  data  are  an  important  source  for  understanding  monetary  transmission. 
Hence, there is a need to obtain these data on a higher frequency, at least on a quarterly 
How to make the best use of granular data from banks? 
How to enhance the scope and coverage of corporate finance statistics? 
How to further develop asset price statistics? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
basis,  electronically  from  the  banks’  source  systems.  Moreover,  data  on  similar  items 
obtained through various statistical returns show significant differences. Hence, there is need 
to harmonise data definition across various returns submitted to different departments of the 
Bank. This will require a close coordination between statisticians and regulatory departments 
to identify, harmonise and mitigate data gaps. 
On the part of the banks, implementation of core banking solution has created the potential 
for  banks  to  provide  granular  data  electronically,  both  for  statistical  and  supervisory 
purposes,  directly  from  their  source  systems.  It  is  important  for  reporting  entities  to  adopt 
straight through processing without manual intervention so as to maintain data integrity. This 
will  also  help  rationalisation  of  various  returns  thereby  reducing  the  reporting  burden  on 
banks. Of course, as granularity increases data size becomes large. I am happy to note that 
today we have two special talks on big data which will have practical relevance for our data 
analysis. 
Second, the Reserve Bank is compiling data on corporate finance such as production, sales 
and profitability. These data are also used to generate corporate saving and investment at 
the national level. From a financial stability perspective, the corporate balance sheet data are 
important  for  assessing  risk  parameters  such  as  leverage  and  unhedged  foreign  currency 
borrowings.  Corporate  performance  data  is  also  important  to  understand  the  micro 
foundation  of  pricing  power  and  hence  inflation  dynamics.  There  is,  therefore,  a  need  to 
expand our sample size and the coverage of financial details. We should also establish links 
with  Ministry  of  Corporate  Affairs  (MCA)  database  to  improve  our  coverage  of  corporate 
statistics. 
Third, asset prices, particularly house prices are assuming greater importance in monetary 
transmission.  While  development  of  housing  finance  in  advanced  countries  has  a  long 
history, the expansion of housing finance by the formal financial sector in India is of relatively 
recent  origin.  Keeping  in  view  the  demand-supply  gap,  our  favourable  demography, 
increasing urbanisation and growth prospects, the demand for housing finance will continue 
to  grow.  At  the  same  time  risks  also  arise  to  household  and  bank  balance  sheets  with 
fluctuation  in  prices  and  changes  in  the  business  cycle.  Hence,  there  is  a  need  for 
developing a data base on housing finance. 
Availability of statistics on housing finance has been limited. We have two publicly available 
house  price  indices  (HPIs):  (i)  NHB-Residex  compiled  on  survey  based  information  for 
20 cities, and (ii) RBI-HPI based on registration prices information for 9 cities. However, to 
assess the impact of house prices on the broader economy such information as loan to value 
(LTV)  ratio,  equated  monthly  instalment  (EMI)  to  income  ratio,  price  to  income  ratio, 
borrowers’  characteristics  and  other  important  attributes  of  the  property  dealings  becomes 
important.  Recently  the  department  has  launched  a  new  statistical  survey  to  capture  such 
information based on housing loan transaction as available with banks and housing finance 
companies  (HFCs).  I  hope  this  survey  can  be  placed  in  public  domain  quickly  after  it  is 
examined by our technical advisory committee on surveys. 
On  this  occasion  of  the  Statistics  Day  I  congratulate  colleagues  from  the  statistics 
department for the good work they are doing. I once again extend a hearty welcome to all our 
speakers and all our invitees, and look forward to the intellectual fare ahead. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
