Luis M Linde: International financial integration and fragmentation. 
Drivers and policy responses 
Opening remarks by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the Conference on 
“International  financial  integration  and  fragmentation.  Drivers  and  policy  responses”, 
organized  by  the  Reinventing  Bretton  Woods  Committee  and  the  Bank  of  Spain,  Madrid, 
12 March 2013. 
 Good morning to all. Buenos dias a todos y bienvenidos a Madrid: 
It  is  for  me  a  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  Banco  de  España  and  to  this  Seminar  on 
international  financial  integration.  I  would  like  to  start  by  thanking  Marc  Uzan  and  the 
Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee for their fruitful cooperation in organizing an agenda 
that is indeed very promising. 
More than five years into the crisis, it is still hard to grasp the real magnitude of the changes 
that our financial systems are undergoing. In fact, we are still trying to restore the financial 
channels to support the growth of internal and external demand. 
While we perform such, so to say, “fire-fighter task”, it is not easy to take a step back and 
look at how the contours of our economic and financial landscape are evolving. But we can 
already distinguish some of the characteristics of the new scenario that is taking shape, and 
that will be our habitat as central bankers, regulators, financial intermediaries or analysts in 
the years to come. 
It  seems  that  one  trend  is  towards  disintermediation  and  a  more  important  role  of  capital 
markets, gaining ground to banks, in a global financial system that will probably end up being 
smaller and more attuned to the size of the global economy. 
Another trend points to a reduction of financial linkages between national financial systems, 
as BIS banking statistics, for example, are starting to show. Here, the role of Central Banks’ 
policies  and  operations,  as  well  as  regulators  is  crucial,  as  they  must  walk  a  fine  line  in 
promoting domestic financial stability without falling into the nets of protectionism, something 
that would be indeed damaging for growth and prosperity. 
As we all know, the risk of fragmentation and re-nationalisation of the financial system has 
materialized at the European level, in the unique institutional context of European Monetary 
Union; and the solutions to overcome this situation are changing the foundations of the euro. 
Each  of  the  three  sessions  which  make  up  the  programme  will  focus  on  a  particular 
perspective on how the new trends are shaping the global financial system. 
The crisis and the policy response – in the areas of financial regulation and monetary policy – 
are  generating  new  patterns  of  funding,  new  players  and  changes  in  capital  flows  across 
global markets. Those issues will be reviewed in the initial session. 
As I mentioned before, the euro area has to deal with a severe crisis which has led to the 
fragmentation of the European financial system. While there are signs of a certain reversal in 
this process, a failure in this respect would be particularly harmful for the European project, 
since integration is at the core of the European Union itself. The policy actions of the ECB 
and other European authorities, including the decisive drive towards a Banking Union, have 
been  able  to  overcome  or  dissipate  the  worst  fears,  but  the  road  ahead  is  still  long  and 
difficult. 
Finally,  the  role  of  central  bankers  should  be  highlighted  in  this  new  context.  We  are  big 
players in the financial arena, both from the regulatory and monetary policy standpoint; and 
the framework for our actions – and reactions – must necessarily change and adapt to the 
new  environment.  The  renewal  of  the  set  of  instruments  to  address  the  price  stability 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
mandate,  be  it  in  a  situation  of  low  growth,  as  happens  to  advanced  economies,  or  in  a 
situation of large capital inflows, as happens to emerging market economies, is one aspect of 
that change. The need to take on board financial stability considerations is another aspect 
widely discussed. You will devote the final part of the day to this quest. 
And I do not want to take more time out of the tight agenda you will follow now. 
Thank you very much for your attendance to this Conference. I wish all of you and excellent 
day and a good discussion.  
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
