Frank Elderson: Payment systems – security, governance and SEPA 
Speech by Mr Frank Elderson, Executive Director of the Netherlands Bank, at the “Future of 
the Payments System” conference, Amsterdam, 18 June 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
As you all know, DNB’s objectives include ensuring secure, reliable and efficient payments. 
That means making sure we can rely on having good and effective payment systems. 
This  is  the  moment  when  speakers  usually  introduce  their  metaphors.  And,  in  the 
Netherlands, these are often metaphors involving water. Water that has to flow, and rivers 
that have to be channelled. And then the dikes that have to be built. But I have decided I am 
no longer going to do that. Instead, it is now time for conferences on water management to 
start  comparing  themselves  to  payment  systems.  In  other  words,  to  systems  that  always 
have to work and that have to be secure, reliable and efficient. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
There are three things I would like to talk to you about today. These are firstly the security of 
the payment system, and I believe there should be an increasing focus on that. Secondly, 
what we refer to as “governance”. In other words, how we manage the payment system. And 
thirdly, which is where I am going to begin today, the near future. In other words, the Single 
European Payments Area, or SEPA. 
I  think  I  am  right  in  assuming  that  everyone  here  today  has  been  very  involved  in  the 
introduction  of  SEPA,  and  so  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  explain  to  you  what  a  complex 
project it is. 
And, as always happens with complex projects, that there have been all sorts of problems 
along  the  way,  and  fortunately  also  some  things  that  have  gone  well.  And  that  we  should 
really count our blessings. 
Internet  banking  systems  are  switching  relatively  easily  to  SEPA.  Many  businesses  have 
already  completed  the  process,  and  consumers  seem  to  be  accepting  IBAN  without  any 
major  difficulties.  The  tax  authorities,  for  example,  are  now  generating  huge  volumes  of 
SEPA payments each month, and believe me when I say that even the Emmer Compascuum 
volleyball club, which has always been very diligent, has also completed the switch. However 
I also know from very reliable sources that others, such as the tennis club around the corner 
here in Amstelveen, are first waiting to see how things develop. 
On a more serious note, we have seen that introducing the European collections system is 
proving quite challenging. Although the system is already working well at many businesses, 
others – particularly some of the larger groups – have had to deal with “bugs”, either in their 
own  systems  or  in  their  communications  with  banks,  or  sometimes  even  at  the  banks 
themselves. Transactions involving large volumes of collections in particular have not always 
gone entirely smoothly. 
I firmly believe, however, that we will be able to resolve all these problems. And my belief 
has so far been backed up by the facts. What does concern me, however, is that we do not 
have much time left before 1 February. To be more exact, there are only 161 working days to 
go. Luckily there are still 228 calendar days to go, and I suspect that, for a few of us, there 
will  not  be  much  difference  between  a  working  day  and  a  calendar  day  over  the  coming 
months.  Even  if  a  company  has  calculated  that  it  still  has  enough  time  to  complete  the 
process, there is always a danger of logjams arising. Many companies and even some banks 
themselves have experienced delays in their projects, and that means more businesses than 
expected will need help over the coming period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
So  what  are  we  going  to  do?  There is  no  need for me  to  say  that  SEPA  should  be  a top 
priority for you all, and I assume it already is. 
But  just  in  case  you  are  here  today  representing  a  company  that  has  not  yet  started  its 
preparations,  I  am  afraid  to  say  you  will  probably  have  to  work  through  most  of  your 
weekends until February next year. 
There is one other thing I would like to add today. I know that people in some countries are 
slightly  less  concerned  about  the  deadline  of  1  February.  That  may  be  because  they  are 
more light-hearted by nature. Personally, however, I think there are two other reasons that 
may explain the differing attitudes. Firstly, the biggest challenge for SEPA is setting up the 
European  collection  system,  and  many  countries  use  collections  far  less  than  in  the 
Netherlands.  Secondly,  certain  other  countries  are  making  far  more  use  of  conversion 
services. These services mean businesses can make far more modest adjustments to their 
systems and then use a conversion service so that the payments they send to their banks 
are SEPA-compliant. 
These  conversion  services  have  never  been  able  to  count  on  much  support  in  the 
Netherlands  as,  ultimately,  they  mean  you  are  not  making  genuine  SEPA  payments. 
However,  they  are  an  interim  solution  that  will  certainly  help  some  parties  to  meet  the 
1 February deadline. 
Please  do  not  understand  me  wrongly.  I  am  certainly  not  suggesting  using  conversion 
services  as  an  alternative  to  switching  over  to  SEPA.  All  I  am  saying  is  that  you  should 
consider whether you need to use these services to meet the deadline. And make sure you 
do  this  in  time  because  conversion  services  also  involve more than just  pressing  a  button 
and suddenly, all at once, you are SEPA-compliant. You also need some preparation time, 
particularly for collections. 
I hope, therefore, that conversion services will be included in banks’ discussions with clients 
who  are  at  risk  of  missing  the  deadline. Whether  they  see  these  services  as  a  temporary 
bridging facility, as an emergency sticking plaster or as a solution. That is entirely up to them. 
There is just one final comment I would like to make on conversion services. What exactly 
are  they?  If  I  enter  a  payment  into  my  payments  engine  in  the  old-style  format,  is  that  a 
conversion service? The answer to that question is “no”. 
A  conversion  service  is  a  separate  service  that  is  independent  of  the  bank’s  payments 
engine.  It  is  a  service  you  can  arrange  for  separately,  either  at  a  bank  or  from  another 
provider. 
You might  expect  to  have  to  pay  a  fee for the service. Indeed, it  was  previously  said  that 
conversion  services  would  have  to  be  provided  by  separate  legal  entities.  But  there  is  no 
need  for  you  to  worry.  That  is  not  necessary,  and  this  is  something  I  am  saying  in  my 
capacity as “overseer” of SEPA. 
And this then brings me to my second topic today: governance of the payment system. I am 
going to dwell for just a while longer on the subject of SEPA as the Ministry of Finance has 
given DNB two hats to wear in this respect: that of overseer and that of catalyst. 
As  far  as  DNB  as  overseer  is  concerned,  this  is  when  I  put  my  strict  hat  on  as  it  is  the 
overseer’s task to make sure the banking sector complies with the law. That means staying 
on top of things, and we will be tightening the reins even more over the coming months. That 
will  sometimes  mean  difficult  discussions  with  some  parties.  And  sanctions  will  follow  if 
things are not satisfactory. Even, however, if we do decide to apply sanctions, we cannot do 
that before 1 February next year. That may sound a bit strange because, by then, it will in 
any event be too late. That is why we will also be looking at how parties are operating now 
when we consider whether to apply sanctions next year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I am sometimes asked “Exactly how strict is DNB going to be next year?” My answer to that 
is quite simple: “Strict”. The next question then is “But are you going to be thorough?” My 
answer to that question, too, is simple: “Of course we are”. 
If I then put on my other hat – that of the catalyst – it means looking at the issue from the 
typical Dutch polder perspective and switching to my role as chairman of the NFS National 
Forum on SEPA migration. 
That role means working with everyone to make sure we take account of all the interests at 
stake and arrive at optimal solutions for us all. Here, too, we regularly have to be strict. The 
overseer’s hat then comes in handy as there are times when we also have to take decisions. 
And not every decision is equally welcomed by everyone. 
The NFS is the SEPA variant of what we are doing on a broader scale in the National Forum 
on  the  Payment  System  (or  MOB,  as  it  is  known  in  Dutch).  I  often  have  to  explain  to 
colleagues  from  abroad  that  this  Forum  works  on  the  basis  of  equal  participation  by 
representatives of providers and users of payment systems. 
And, if you’ll forgive me this reference to water after what I said earlier: before we start work 
on, say, a project to build water defences, we first put up a coffee hut at the site. Setting up 
the coffee hut is not our main task, but we would not want to be without it as that is where we 
agree who is going to do what during the project. This is also a model that could prove useful 
in a European context. As you may know, there is a SEPA Council at a European level, and I 
have  attended  its  meetings  on  various  occasions.  But  the  SEPA  Council  still  has  too  few 
powers  to  make  a  real  impact.  However,  and  despite  all  the  good  aspects  of  the  polder 
model, we also have to admit, in the current climate, that not everything can be done in an 
atmosphere  of  cooperation  and  consultation.  Not  everything  can  be  voluntary.  With  the 
exception  of  our  new  SEPA  task,  DNB’s  oversight  task  is  still  based  on  a  voluntary 
agreement, and that is no longer appropriate for the times we live in. 
The payment system has become far too crucial for society to allow oversight of the relevant 
players  to  remain  entirely  voluntary. We really  need  legislation  in  this  respect,  and  indeed 
some of this legislation is on its way. 
The  Settlement  Organisations  (Financial  Supervision)  Act  [Wet  Financieel  Toezicht  voor 
Afwikkelondernemingen] will come into force next year. 
Although this will certainly provide a legal basis for our oversight activities, it will not plug all 
the gaps. We are still not allowed to impose measures on organisations such as iDeal, for 
example,  and  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  tell  you  how  tolerant  society  is  about  iDeal 
disruptions. 
To  ensure  secure,  reliable  and  efficient  payment  systems  in  a  broad  sense,  DNB  needs 
legislation  covering  every  aspect  involved  in  these  systems.  That  is  something  we  are 
currently  discussing  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  and  I  certainly  hope  we  succeed  as  the 
payment system is simply too important for us to be satisfied with the current patchwork of 
laws. We need a single consistent framework so that we can supervise all the links in the 
horizontal chain of the payment system. We still do not have that single framework, and that 
is something that today’s world demands. 
And now I am coming to my third and final point: the security of the payment system. In April 
this year various Dutch banks in the Netherlands were hit by a series of DDOS attacks, and 
this is a matter of great concern to DNB. 
Fighting cybercrime and dealing with the digital disruption it causes are high priorities for us. 
Last  month  I  attended  discussions  at  the  Dutch  House  of  Representatives  to  explain  my 
views on these subjects. 
Society  has  become  less  tolerant  about  disruptions  to  the  payment  system  as  more  and 
more  people  are  using  on-line  payment  products,  and  consumers  increasingly  expect 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Prevention 
Damage limitation if and when things go wrong, and 
Communications. 
payment  systems  always  to  work.  Those  are  facts  we  have  to  accept.  We  also  have  to 
accept, however, that 100% availability is an illusion. That is just impossible. 
So what can we do? There are three things we have to work on: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
In the case of prevention, I believe that we as a sector are going to have to focus more on 
security  and  availability.  And  yes,  that  may  mean  we  have  to  accept  that  systems  will 
sometimes  be  less  efficient  than  otherwise.  By  harmonising  systems  and  technologies  we 
can certainly boost efficiency. But this also creates SPOFs, or single points of failure, and 
these  make  us  vulnerable  and,  therefore,  a  more  attractive  target  for  cybercriminals.  And 
although I always sleep extremely  well at night, cybercrime does sometimes mean I go to 
bed  later.  A  lot  of  parties  are  working  extremely  hard  to  avoid  becoming  victims  of 
cybercrime. But we can never rest on our laurels. It is a race, and the enemy never sleeps. 
There is one other aspect I would specifically like to draw your attention to, and that is the 
need  for  diversity.  In  other  words,  the  need  for  alternatives.  If  we  cannot  use  iDEAL,  but 
another easy-to-use alternative is available, that is fine. But that means that the alternative 
must not be reliant on the same technology as iDEAL. Diversity in technology is important. 
Also when you make PIN payments in a shop. If the PIN terminal does not work, you need to 
be  able  to  pay  in  another  way,  and  using  a  method  that  is  not  dependent  on  that  PIN 
technology. We are now thinking about these alternatives, and maybe a more mobile society 
will help us in this respect. What I mean here is that technology has become more mobile. 
Mobile  internet  banking,  for  example,  is  becoming  increasingly  popular,  and  mobile 
payments are on the way. In other words, the distinction between point-of-sale and remote 
payments is becoming blurred, and maybe it will ultimately disappear altogether. 
If the various technologies become equally fast, it will soon no longer make any difference 
whether you use your phone to make a mobile payment (a PIN payment, for example) or an 
internet banking payment (in other words, a transfer). 
If I put my security hat back on, I would say that is fine, but we do need to make sure we use 
two  different  technologies. Otherwise,  a single  cause  could  result  in  both  payment  options 
being unavailable at the same time. 
Some of these changes are still in the future. But the issue also applies to the old tried and 
trusted alternative of cash. If the PIN system does not work, you need to be sure you can still 
get cash out of the cash machine. 
And luckily that is not usually a problem because you withdraw cash from your own bank’s 
cash machine system, which is separate from the PIN system. So there, too, technological 
diversity is important. 
And  so,  to  go  back  to  what  I  mentioned  before,  our  resilience  to  cybercrime  relies  on  our 
having good preventive measures in place and also on our having good mitigating measures, 
just in case things go wrong. 
Communications, however, are also important, which is why this topic was discussed at the 
extra meeting held by the National Forum on the Payment System on 15 April. We reached 
various  useful  agreements  during  this  meeting,  and  these  require  us  to  be  able  to 
communicate very quickly. And in this case “very quickly” means that communications may 
often first have to be limited to process-related information. 
We also reached agreements on the need to communicate better. In other words, on who will 
communicate  what  in  which  circumstances.  In  the  first  instance,  the  bank  that  has  been 
affected  will  communicate.  If,  however,  the  problem  is  more  widespread,  the  Netherlands 
Bankers’ Association (NVB) will communicate on behalf of the sector. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
DNB will communicate only if the payment system as a whole is at risk. Or, to put it more 
accurately, the Tripartite Crisis Organisation (TCO) will communicate. DNB chairs the TCO, 
while the AFM and the Ministry of Finance are the other two members. DNB, or rather the 
TCO, will act as “communicator of last resort”. That is a role we are suited to. Will it mean we 
can avoid any form of disruption in the future? No. No-one can give any guarantee of that as 
there is simply no such thing as a risk-free society. 
Lastly I would like to look ahead to the future. We should not see SEPA as being finished by 
1  February  2014.  That  date  is  really  just  the  start.  We  are  going  to  be  seeing  other 
developments,  including  electronic  mandates,  and  probably  more  and  more  mobile 
payments. 
Time and experience will refine and change our payment products. And DNB is looking with 
interest at our neighbours to the east and the shorter transfer times they are achieving on 
SEPA  Direct  Debits.  SEPA’s  arrival  will  also  change  the  playing  field  for  payment  service 
providers  and  banks,  and  innovative  parties  will  grasp  their  opportunities.  One  of  these 
innovations will involve parties wanting access to payment accounts so that they can offer 
new services. 
The Dutch payment sector has issued a position paper on this subject and has sent this to 
Europe. There is one issue in that paper, however, where our view may not get accepted, 
and that is the “dual consent” approach. Just to remind you what that is, it covers situations 
when a third party wants access to a person’s payment account, either to make a payment or 
to check the balance. That involves certain risks. In my view, those risks are acceptable only 
if  both  the  consumer  and  the  bank  agree  to  the  role  of  the  third  party.  One  good  way  of 
arranging  this  is  for  both  parties  to  have  to  agree  to  grant  access.  In  other  words,  dual 
consent. 
Our European colleagues are worried that, in practice, banks will not grant access to those 
third parties, and that this will hold back innovation. That is why there is currently insufficient 
support for the principle of “dual consent”. The Dutch market, however, is in favour of it, and 
so that is the challenge I am issuing to any payment service providers and banks here today. 
Show  that  it  can  be  done.  There  is  nothing  to  stop  us  from  operating  a  “dual  consent” 
approach in the Netherlands. And I for one would welcome it. 
“Dual control” is also secure, and I am sure no-one will blame me for saying that security is 
my top priority. And I think that you and the rest of society will probably all agree. Innovation 
is good, and even very good. But if your bank balance suddenly and innovatively disappears, 
you would wish that security had been the number one priority. People have to be able to 
trust that their payments will arrive in the right place and at the right time. The routes that 
monetary flows take need to be predictable and known. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is now time for some rhetoric. If you have read Quintillianus, you will know that this is when 
I should return to my metaphor. In other words, to the metaphor that I threw overboard at the 
start  of  my  speech.  The  metaphor  of  SEPA  as  a  wonderful  new  waterway,  with  neatly 
finished retaining walls and an efficient system of locks. But I am not going to do that today. 
Instead I am going to tell you that there is a conference on water management being held 
tomorrow in Rotterdam and that you might find it interesting. 
Thank you for listening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
