Andreas Dombret: Five years after Lehman – learning from the past, 
looking to the future 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at 
the  24th  European  Business  School  Symposium,  Oestrich-Winkel, 
19 September 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Most  people  remember  what  they  were  doing  on  September  11,  2001.  On  that  day  the 
towers  of  the  World  Trade  Center  collapsed,  sending  a  shock  wave  throughout  the  world. 
What followed was a war in Afghanistan and a war in Iraq. 
In the financial profession, most people remember September 15, 2008. On that day, the US 
investment bank Lehman Brothers collapsed and sent a shock wave throughout the financial 
system. What followed was a global financial crisis and a worldwide recession. 
I don’t want to stretch the comparison too far, but there are people who compare investment 
banking to a war: A war involving “financial weapons of mass destruction”, as Warren Buffet 
once described financial derivatives. 
I am somewhat sceptical about using that kind of language. After all, the loss of human life is 
very different to the admittedly devastating loss of a vast amount of money and wealth. 
But still, the failure of Lehman Brothers was an event that shaped the course of the world 
and of many peoples’ lives. It wasn’t just a case of a single bank going bankrupt, and it has 
since become a symbol; a symbol of all that is wrong with banking, with the financial system 
and – to some – with capitalism itself. 
Two questions emerge from this: first, “How did it all happen?” and, second, “What can we 
do about it”? Certainly, these two questions are closely interlinked. We have to learn from the 
past in order to shape the future. 
Thus, let us begin by looking into the past and investigating the causes of the events which 
unfolded on September 15, 2008 – pretty much five years ago. 
Learning from the past – what Lehman Brothers taught us 
2. 
The roots of the financial crisis stretch back a long time, far back beyond the day Lehman 
Brothers failed. In a sense, the surprise is not the fact that the crisis occurred, but that it took 
until 2008 for it to happen. 
It would certainly take more than 30 minutes to discuss all aspects of the complex web of 
factors that contributed to the crisis. But we can at least make a quick tour of the causes and 
see what we can learn along the way. 
How it all began 
2.1 
To some extent, the financial crisis had the same origins as many earlier crises: high credit 
growth,  fuelled  by  an  environment  of  low  interest  rates.  There  was,  however,  a  specific 
element  to  this  crisis:  financial  innovation.  In  the  1990s,  new  types  of  securitisation  were 
added  to  the  toolbox  of  financial  engineers.  These  made  it  possible  to  bundle  together  a 
large  portfolio  of  loans  and  to  sell  small  slices,  or  tranches,  of  this  portfolio.  In  essence, 
securitisation is nothing but an instrument to enable the efficient allocation of risks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
However, there were two problems that turned this otherwise beneficial instrument into one 
of Warren Buffet’s “financial weapons of mass destruction”: distorted incentives and a lack of 
transparency. 
During  the  2000s,  many  financial  firms  granted  large  amounts  of  loans,  especially  in  the 
subprime segment of the mortgage market. However, they did not intend to hold these loans 
on  their  own  books  for  long  –  they  were  only  “warehoused”  as  it  was  called.  Instead  the 
banks securitised the loans and eventually sold them on to other investors. 
This originate-to-distribute business model destroyed incentives for prudent behaviour. The 
originators  of  the  loan  knew  they  would  swiftly  shift  the  risk  further  down  the  line;  so  why 
should they bother to take particular care in evaluating the creditworthiness of the borrower? 
Furthermore,  more  often  than  not,  the  securitised  loans  were  rated  by  the  very  same 
agencies  that  helped  to  structure  the  loan  portfolios.  Not  surprisingly,  they  granted  these 
structured portfolios rather favourable ratings. 
Based  on  these  ratings,  many  banks  invested  in  securitised  mortgage  loans,  thereby 
exposing themselves to the US housing market. This process was encouraged by another 
layer  of  distorted  incentives.  Volume-linked  revenue  structures  within  the  banks  created 
incentives to pursue growth rather than to evaluate and monitor risks. 
All these distortions induced lending standards to fall: they led to a flood of cheap mortgage 
loans  to  subprime  borrowers  and  they  promoted  the  distribution  of  the  associated  risks 
throughout the whole financial system. 
And  due  to  a  lack  of  transparency  along  the  securitisation  chain,  no  one  really  knew  on 
whose balance sheets the risks eventually ended up. 
Then, in 2007, housing prices in the US started to falter and US subprime borrowers started 
to default on their loans. 
Banks get into trouble 
2.2 
Once that happened, a crucial asset in financial markets just vanished: trust. Or to use the 
Latin word: credit. Due to the lack of transparency, no one knew the exact extent of banks’ 
exposure to securitised mortgage loans. Consequently, market participants began to mistrust 
one another. 
At the same time, many banks found it difficult to assess their own exposure, and they began 
to prepare for the worst. Princeton University’s Markus Brunnermeier called this “a textbook 
example of precautionary hoarding by individual banks”. 
As a result, money market liquidity dried up fast. Banks were no longer able to tap into the 
interbank market to secure their funding. And such a squeeze of liquidity can even break a 
solvent bank’s neck – especially when it is engaged in maturity transformation and is short 
on liquid assets. 
At  the  same  time,  prices  of  financial  assets  began  to  fall.  This  induced  banks  to  sell  their 
assets as fast as possible to limit their losses; everyone was rushing for the exit. This sent 
the markets into a downward spiral, reducing the sometimes already thin capital cushions of 
banks. 
The system breaks down 
2.3 
As  an  interesting  matter  of  fact,  Dick  Fuld,  then  CEO  of  Lehman  Brothers,  knew  how 
essential capital and liquidity were. ”You always need a lot of cash on hand to ride out the 
storm,” he used to say. 
However, the liquidity Lehman Brothers held was not at all sufficient. And, over the course of 
2008, Lehman got into trouble, hit by the events I have just described. But how to deal with a 
large, international and interconnected bank that runs into difficulties? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In his book “Capitalism 4.0”, the renowned journalist Anatole Kaletsky pinned all of the blame 
for the fallout from the Lehman shock on Hank Paulson, then US Secretary of the Treasury. 
To  me,  this  seems  unfair.  During  the  crisis,  the  authorities  and  market  participants  were 
unsettled by the unprecedented pace of events. Each impact seemed to send policymakers 
in a different direction. 
The  rescue  of  the  investment  bank  Bear  Sterns  in  March  2008  was  the  subject  of  much 
criticism. The US government was accused of practicing “socialism for the rich”. Against this 
backdrop, the government took a harder stance toward Lehman Brothers. 
Moreover,  letting  Lehman  fail  was  consistent  with  the  fundamental  principles  of  a  well-
defined market economy – insolvent firms should leave the market. 
However, no one really knew what needed to happen if a large institution became insolvent. 
The moment Lehman filed for insolvency, everyone in the room knew that chaos threatened. 
First, nobody could reliably assess the interconnections in the financial system – the reason 
being, again, a lack of transparency. Second, it was unclear what the insolvency of Lehman 
Brothers in New York would mean for its subsidiaries in London and Frankfurt. There was no 
international legislation on the resolution of systemically important banks. 
Against  this  backdrop,  it  is  remarkable  fact  that  the  creditors  of  the  German  subsidiary  of 
Lehman eventually may well be fully reimbursed. 
To sum up: in retrospect, Secretary Paulson did the right thing, in principle, but at the wrong 
time and under the wrong conditions. And the lesson from this is that we need mechanisms 
to deal with the failure of systemically important banks. 
Looking to the future – how to make things better 
3. 
My brief overview has most certainly not captured all the details and the entire complexity of 
the crisis. 
But even this brief overview provides some valuable lessons. We learned the hard way about 
distorted incentives, we learned about a lack of transparency, about inadequate capital and 
liquidity buffers and about the problem of “too-big-to-fail”. 
Now, let us look at how far we have come in translating these lessons into a better regulatory 
framework. 
Where to begin 
3.1 
My account of the crisis began with financial innovation. So, would it be the logical step to 
inhibit  such  innovation?  In  my  opinion,  not  at  all.  Just  like  the  real  economy,  the  financial 
system thrives on innovative ideas – and many of those ideas also benefit the real economy. 
Nevertheless, regulators have to ensure that new financial instruments do not pose systemic 
risks. In our case, that means addressing the problems of distorted incentives and the lack of 
transparency with regard to securitisation. 
On  both  accounts,  we  have  made  good  progress.  In  many  jurisdictions,  notably  in  the 
European Union, originators of securitisations have to keep a portion of the risks on their own 
books. This aligns their incentives with those of investors that buy the securitised products. 
Furthermore, originators are expected to make transparent the underlying portfolios of assets 
so as to help investors with their risk management. 
Looking  at  the  incentive  structures  within  banks,  I  mentioned  the  problem  of  inadequate 
compensation schemes. To address this problem, the Financial Stability Board has published 
principles  for  sound  compensation  practices.  In  a  recent  evaluation,  it  found  that  good 
progress has been made in implementing these principles. However, it also states that more 
work needs to be done. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
All these initiatives are important steps to address the specific causes of the financial crisis. 
Even so, we should be aware that no two crises are alike. Against this backdrop, one thing 
seems important: we need to enhance the resilience of the financial system. It will then be 
better able to withstand shocks, no matter from which direction they come. The starting point 
for this exercise should be the individual bank. 
Raising banks resilience 
3.2 
The good news is that, today, banks are much better capitalised than they were five years 
ago.  And  this  is  in  line  with  the  new  international  regulatory  standards.  Basel  III  requires 
banks  to  hold  more  and  better  capital.  This  raises  bank’s  capacity  to  absorb  losses  and 
makes them more resilient against sudden shocks. 
Recently,  both  the  United  States  and  the  European  Union  initiated  their  respective  legal 
frameworks.  With  a  phasing-in  period  up  to  2019,  minimum  total  capital  for  non-systemic 
banks will increase to 10.5% of risk weighted assets. 
Thus, the concept of risk-weighted assets is being maintained – and rightly so. Despite all 
criticism, risk weights set proper incentives for prudent risk management – and these should 
not be foregone. 
I have one major caveat, though. The risk weights assigned to different asset classes need 
to be reassessed. I doubt that the zero risk weight for government bonds is adequate. The 
European sovereign debt crisis clearly suggests otherwise. 
But, during the crisis, it was not only inadequate capital buffers that posed a problem. Many 
banks also had inadequate liquidity buffers. In fact, it was liquidity, or rather the lack of it, that 
dominated the first round of the crisis. 
And  now,  five  years  later,  we  have,  for  the  first  time  ever,  decided  on  an  international 
standard on liquidity. This standard may not be perfect, but it can shield banks to a certain 
extent from a liquidity squeeze in the money market. 
Enhancing the system’s resilience 
3.3 
But, still, individual banks getting into trouble was just the first step toward the brink. What 
really defined the crisis was its systemic aspect of a large bank failing and pulling others with 
it into the abyss, also known as the too big to fail-problem. 
If a too-big-to-fail bank runs into difficulties, the government will have to step in to prevent a 
systemic  crisis.  This  entails  an  unhealthy  asymmetry  to  the  detriment  of  the  taxpayer  – 
heads: banks win, tails: taxpayers lose. 
This asymmetry in turn provides distorted incentives for banks. Knowing that the government 
will have to save them, banks have incentives to engage in risky activities. At the same time, 
the  implicit  guarantee  by  the  government  makes  such  banks  look  less  risky  to  investors. 
Thus, they have a funding advantage over banks that are not systemically important. All this 
makes the too-big-to-fail problem even bigger. 
Against this backdrop, making banks more resilient can only be the first step toward a more 
stable financial system. The next step must be to ensure that even large and interconnected 
banks can fail without causing a systemic crisis. 
Toward  this  end,  a  new  international  standard  on  recovery  and  resolution  of  systemically 
important  banks  has  been  developed.  Having  this  new  standard  is  a  major  step  forward. 
However, at the end of the day, the willingness to let an institution go bankrupt will be crucial. 
And that is a political rather than an economic decision. 
In contrast to 2008, such decisions will at least be better informed today as transparency has 
been  increased.  Banks’  risk  disclosure  rules  have  been  tightened,  and  it  is  now  easier  to 
assess the interconnections in the financial system. It is easier to find out who is dancing with 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
whom – and how closely. However, a necessary precondition is that accounting standards of 
different jurisdictions converge. Otherwise, we would be comparing apples with oranges. 
In over-the-counter derivatives markets, for instance, central counterparties will play a major 
role with regard to transparency. In addition, they mitigate counterparty risk – provided they 
are well-managed. 
In  general,  transparency  will  be  further  enhanced  by  a  new  tool  that  is  currently  under 
development: the legal entity identifier, LEI for short. This tool will allow the risk management 
of  banks  to  aggregate  and  assess  total  exposure  to  individual  counterparties  much  more 
easily.  This  is  a  small  step  with  the  potential  to  have  a  great  effect  both  in  day-to-day 
management and in crises. 
Mission accomplished? 
4. 
All  this  brings  us  to  the  key  question.  To  assess  the  reforms  we  have  undertaken  so  far, 
there  is  one  question  that  needs  to  be  answered:  If  a  major  bank  were  to  fail  tomorrow, 
would we be better prepared for it than we were five years ago? 
Well, there is no doubt that we have come a long way since September 2008. But we have 
not  yet  achieved  our  objective.  What  still  has  to  be  done?  The  first  priority  is  certainly  to 
implement 
it  consistently  across  sectors  and 
jurisdictions. 
the  revised  regulation; 
implement 
to 
Not only banks can be too big to fail 
4.1 
But  there  is  more  on  the  agenda.  In  some  fields,  further  conceptual  work  is  required;  just 
think about the insurance sector. Just one day after Lehman collapsed, the US government 
had to invest more than $180 billion to bail-out the insurer AIG – another institution that was 
deemed too big to fail. 
Five years later, the regulation of systemically relevant insurers is far less advanced than it is 
for banks. A relevant framework is slowly emerging, but some groundwork has been done 
only recently. 
One  of  the  main  issues  is  that  there  is  still  no  international  capital  standard  for  insurers. 
However,  initial  steps  have  been  taken  in  this  regard.  And  taking  a  more  medium-term 
perspective, a comprehensive supervisory and regulatory framework for internationally active 
insurers will be developed, including a quantitative capital standard. 
Out of the shadows – non-bank banking 
4.2 
However, there are other areas of bank-like business that are still outside the perimeter of 
banking regulation. These areas are usually referred to as the shadow banking system. In 
my view, this term is somewhat misleading and unfair as it implies that institutions operating 
in the shadow banking system are somewhat shady in character. I would therefore prefer to 
call them non-bank banks. 
But, still, it is a place where systemic risks can emerge because of unregulated liquidity and 
maturity transformation, because of the build-up of leverage, and because of pro-cyclicality. 
Just  two  weeks  ago,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  provided  the  G20  summit  with  new 
recommendations on how to address these risks. 
In line with these recommendations, regulation for money market funds is being developed in 
the United States and the European Union. The objective is to reduce money market funds’ 
vulnerability to runs by investors. 
There is still further conceptual work required, for instance in the area of banks’ relations with 
the shadow banking system and in the areas of repo and securities financing business. And 
then, as always, international recommendations are only as good as their implementation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
However, in the case of shadow banking, implementation is not the end of the story. Shadow 
banking  is  very  dynamic,  and  whenever  innovations  entail  systemic  risks  we  may  need  to 
rethink regulation. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the failure of Lehman has taught us a number of lessons. And five 
years on, we have translated many of those lessons into new regulatory concepts. 
We have chosen the right way, so to speak, but we have not yet reached our destination: a 
stable financial system that serves the real economy. And to achieve that objective in due 
time, we have to move at a faster pace. 
However, one thing should be clear: we cannot solve all of our problems through regulation. 
Financial stability begins in the hearts and minds of those who work in finance: investment 
bankers,  stock  market  brokers,  hedge  fund  managers  and  everyone  who  invests  other 
people’s money. And financial stability begins at the universities that provide the theoretical 
basis for finance. 
What we need is a change of culture. The times of “greed is good” should have long been 
gone.  We  should  see  the  financial  system  as  what  it  is:  a  service  provider  for  the  real 
economy.  Subscribing  to  this  notion  of  finance  will  probably  be  the  most  important  step 
toward financial stability. 
Thank you very much. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
