François Groepe: The expanded research opportunities for students in 
economics 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the 
Economics Department of the North West University, Potchefstroom, 15 August 2013. 
 Introduction  
Prof. Waldo Krugell, Director of the School of Economics, Staff members of the Faculty of 
Commerce,  Students,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  wish  to  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to 
address you at your seminar series.  
Global economic developments  
Despite some positive developments recently, the global economic crisis continues and the 
recovery is best described as hesitant and fragile. In the past, the Bank has referred to the 
mutating nature of the crisis, with the crisis starting out as a sub-prime crisis which mutated 
into a systemic banking crisis, a liquidity, fiscal deficit and sovereign debt crisis, and more 
recently in some countries a youth unemployment crisis. The altered patterns of capital flows 
and the rising long-term bond and mortgage interest rates that may follow the tapering of the 
asset purchases programme by the US Federal Reserve and the eventual exit of quantitative 
easing by monetary authorities in advanced economies could well result in a further mutation 
of the global financial crisis.  
Six  years  into  the  crisis,  most  of  the  major  advanced  economies  continue  to  grow  below 
potential and unemployment, particularly in the Eurozone area has remained elevated. The 
level  of  youth  unemployment  is  of  particular  concern  with  possibly  significant  long-term 
implications for social stability in the worse affected countries.  
While  there  are  signs  of  positive  economic  growth  and  rising  employment  in  the  US,  this 
growth is still too low to significantly close their output gap. The haphazard fiscal contraction 
and the potential headwinds that may flow from this are likely to pose a risk to the robustness 
and  sustainability  of  the  recovery.  The  anticipated  exiting  of  quantitative  easing  by  the 
advanced  economies  is  likely  to  contribute  to  rising  long-term  bond  and  mortgage  interest 
rates.  This  could  bring  pressure  to  bear  on  the  housing  recovery  in  the  US,  but  will 
furthermore  have  a  pronounced  impact  on  emerging  market  economies,  particularly  their 
financial market asset prices and currencies may prove vulnerable.  
The Eurozone, after six quarters of contraction has finally emerged out of its recession in the 
second quarter of 2013, and recorded a growth rate of 0.3 per cent, which was slightly ahead 
of the median forecast of 0.2 per cent growth. This growth performance appears to be broad 
based on the economic outcome in core countries such as Germany and France, as well as 
certain of the peripheral countries such as Portugal, is positive. The recovery in the Eurozone 
economy  is,  however  frail  overall.  The  most recent  IMF  forecast for  Eurozone  growth  was 
revised  downward  to  –0.6  per  cent,  with  a  weaker  recovery,  than  previously  forecasted  in 
2014.  
The Japanese economy recorded strong growth in the first quarter of 4.1 per cent, which has 
since  been  revised  to  3.8  per  cent.  Growth,  however  moderated  in  the  second  quarter  to 
2.6 per  cent,  (quarter-on-quarter  saar).  The  growth  in  Japan  is  underpinned  by  strong 
consumer spending and exports and although the economic growth is stronger than in the 
more recent past in response to the stimulus measures undertaken, it remains too early to 
conclude on the sustained success and the efficacy of the various stimulus measures that 
were adopted. The July consumer confidence index fell by 0.7 per cent to 43.6 per cent and 
the proposed increase in the sales taxation is expected to act as a drag on growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Growth in developing countries, for some time the mainstay of the world economy, is also 
slowing and contributing to the recent downward revision of global growth by the IMF in the 
order of 0.2 per cent to 3.1 per cent and 3.8 per cent for 2013 and 2014, respectively. In the 
immediate future, emerging market economies will have to balance possible capital outflows 
related  to  tapering  with  weaker  currencies,  rising  inflationary  pressures  and  underlying 
imbalances.  
to 
is  closely  aligned 
Domestic economic developments  
South  Africa’s  economic  performance 
international  economic 
developments due to the openness of our economy. Domestic economic growth has been 
disappointing,  with  the  Bank  recently  lowering  its  growth  projection  for  2013  and  2014  to 
2.0 per cent and 3.3 per cent, respectively. The Bank projects growth to accelerate to 3.6 per 
cent in 2015, but we assess the risk to the growth outlook to be on the down side in the light 
of the further delays in overcoming the electricity supply constraints, relatively weak business 
and consumer confidence levels and possible labour market developments.  
The  low  growth  in  real  gross  fixed  capital  formation,  which  had  moderated  from  an 
annualised  4.3  per  cent  in  the fourth quarter  of  2012  to  2.5  per  cent  in  the first quarter  of 
2013, is seen as one of the factors that underlie the weak economic growth outlook. Growth 
in  capital  outlays  by  private  business  enterprise  slowed  for  the  first  time  since  the  fourth 
quarter  in  2011,  and  was  mostly  evident  in  the  mining  and  manufacturing  sectors.  Gross 
fixed  capital  formation,  expressed  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  remains  low  at  19.3  per  cent, 
compared to the high of 24.6 per cent achieved in the fourth quarter of 2008.  
The official unemployment rate increased from 25.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2013 to 
25.6 per cent in the second quarter. The youth unemployment rate has risen to 52.9 per cent 
during the first quarter of 2013 and is of particular concern.  
The  inflation  outlook  had  worsened  at  the  time  of  our  last  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
meeting and is now expected to be slightly higher at 5.9 per cent and 5.5 per cent in 2013 
and  2014,  respectively.  Inflation  is  projected  to  temporarily  breach  the  target  range  in  the 
third quarter of 2013, at a slightly higher average level of 6.3 per cent.  
The  challenge  that  we  face  is  how  best  to  achieve  our  primary  mandate  of  price  stability 
against the backdrop of rising inflationary pressures and weaker growth. I should add that a 
sustained breach of the inflation target is not the Bank’s central forecast.  
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  whilst  maintaining  the  accommodative  policy  stance  by 
keeping the repurchase rate unchanged at 5 per cent at its last meeting in July, indicated that 
given the upside risk to the inflation outlook, the scope for further monetary accommodation 
is reduced. However, tightening of the monetary policy stance does not automatically follow, 
as a shift will be highly dependent on how we see he inflation trajectory unfolding against the 
backdrop of the prevailing uncertain environment.  
The Global Financial crisis and its impact on financial stability  
I now wish to turn to the impact of the global financial crisis, particularly its impact on South 
Africa  and  other  emerging  markets  and  the  challenges  it  poses  to  financial  regulation.  In 
particular,  I  want  to  underscore  the  need  for  more  research  in  an  area  which  has  gained  
pre-eminence  since  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  namely  the  macro  prudential 
approach to financial regulation.  
There is no doubt that the global financial crisis has permanently changed the course of the 
global economy and has established a new normal. The severity of the 2008 financial crisis 
brought about the most damaging effects to domestic economies of the developed countries 
and possibly the longest lasting negative externalities to the world economy, in history.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Although the emerging market economies performed better than the advanced economies, 
they  were  nonetheless  affected  through  the  trade  and  finance  channels  and  as  a 
consequence their growth rates too had been negatively impacted.  
The  crisis  has  forced  many  central  banks  to  look  more  closely  at  the  build-up  of  financial 
imbalances  in  the  wider  financial  system  and  to  undertake  regulatory  reform  which  has 
expanded central banks’ role with regard to ensuring financial stability. The latter is known as 
the  so-called  macro  prudential  regulation  and  which  concerns  itself  with  more  than  just 
idiosyncratic  risk  and  the  soundness  of  individual  institutions  but  is  concerned  with  the 
soundness and stability of the entire financial system, i.e. systemic soundness.  
Fortunately, South Africa and its financial institutions fared well during the crisis. Our policy 
makers  however  appreciated  that  there  was  no  room  for  complacency  and  decided  to  be 
proactive. Hence in 2007 the National Treasury launched a review of South Africa’s financial 
regulatory  system.  This  work  culminated  in  the  Minister  of  Finance  publishing  a  policy 
document, A Safer Financial Sector to Serve South Africa Better, also known as the “Red 
Book”.  
In terms of the reforms outlined in the “Red Book” the South African Reserve Bank would 
assume  responsibility  as  macro  prudential  regulator,  micro  prudential  regulator  and 
resolution authority for the wider financial system. This means that the Bank’s previous role 
as micro prudential regulator of Banks (since 1990), would be expanded to include prudential 
regulation  responsibility  over  the  insurance  sector  and  all  financial  market  infrastructures, 
including  the  payment  system,  central  clearing  counterparty  and  trade  repositories. 
Moreover,  the  Bank  is  also  becoming  the  Systemic  or  Financial  Stability  Regulator.  It  is 
important to note that the Bank had been pursuing financial stability since 2001. However, it 
was an implicit mandate. Since 2010, the Bank has had an explicit financial stability mandate 
complementing  its  price  stability  objective.  This,  however,  is  in  line  with  the  mandates  of 
most central banks around the globe.  
In pursuit of this expanded role, a Financial Stability Oversight Committee (FSOC), chaired 
by  the  Governor,  will  be  established  which  will  include  representation  from  the  Bank,  the 
market conduct regulator and the National Treasury. The FSOC will have financial stability 
policy  responsibility,  in  the  same  way  as  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  does  for  price 
stability, and will be able to hold to account various authorities or economic agents on actions 
to be taken to mitigate against / reduce systemic risk.  
Research underpinning of the work of the SARB as systemic regulator  
The  immediate  challenge  of  the  FSOC  which  is  the  same  for  other  financial  stability 
regulators  around  the  globe,  would  be  the  further  development  and  refinement  of  macro 
prudential  frameworks.  This  will  include  both  an  analytical  framework  of  looking  at  and 
overseeing systemic risks and a toolbox of measures to be considered to be implemented 
towards  the  achievement  of  the  objective  of  financial  stability.  While  the  interest  rate  and 
inflation targeting are well developed frameworks for the attainment of price stability, it is less 
the case with the financial stability mandate or objective of central banks.  
This is the research challenge I want to pose to you. Charles Goodhart argues that as far as 
he  is  concerned,  central  banks  can  just  focus  on  financial  stability  and  abandon  price 
stability. I wish to differ from him, but it does demonstrate the sheer size of the challenge of 
financial stability for the role of the central bank in the post crisis world.  
To date, international financial institutions like1 the Bank of International Settlements (BIS), 
the  FSB  and  the  IMF  have  been  doing  research  on  macro-prudential  policy  frameworks, 
                                                
1  Borio C, “Towards a macro prudential framework for financial supervision and regulation”, BIS Working papers 
(2008). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  including tools to mitigate the impact of excessive capital flows following the global financial 
crisis. However, a number policy and research questions remain either unanswered or not 
fully answered, including:  
• 
• 
What should be the objectives of a macro prudential policy framework?  
What is the toolkit of instruments – are these micro prudential or macro prudential in 
nature or even macro-economic or other?  
What is the efficacy of such instruments?  
What challenges are posed by macro prudential / financial stability regulation to the 
traditional understanding of central bank independence?  
What  are  the  analytical  tools  necessary  for  the  identification  and  monitoring  of 
systemic risk?  
What is systemic risk?  
• 
These  are  only  a  few  of  the  policy  questions  which  policy  makers  around  the  world  are 
grappling with particularly since the onset of the global financial crisis. Clearly there is a role 
to be played by senior students and post graduate researchers in providing answers to these 
important  research  questions  and  the  Bank  would  eagerly  consider  partnerships  on 
coordinated research on these and other important research endeavours which relate to the 
policy mandate of the Bank.  
Conclusion  
In  conclusion,  although  the  outlook  for  the  South  African  economy  has  weakened  as 
reflected in the lowered forecast for growth, it is important to appreciate that it is against the 
stark backdrop of very sluggish global growth. South Africa continues to have much going in 
its favour and it is important that we capitalise on these not least the role that bright young 
minds like yourselves can play in leveraging your education and helping to change the world. 
Helping us through research to better understand some of the issues I had alluded to earlier 
would  be  such  an  example  and  could  in  a  meaningful  way  contribute  towards  achieving 
greater financial stability, not only in South Africa but indeed across the globe.  
I thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
