Thomas Jordan: Strong Swiss franc and large current account surplus – 
a contradiction? 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the Swiss Institute of International Studies, Zurich, 19 February 2013. 
 The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch) 
For almost 18 months now, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) has been enforcing the minimum 
exchange  rate  of  CHF  1.20  per  euro  with  the  utmost  determination.  The  need  for  this 
measure  is  widely  recognised,  both  domestically  and  abroad,  due  to  the  substantial 
appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  in  summer  2011.  At  the  same  time,  however,  there  are 
isolated voices claiming that given the large current account surplus, the Swiss franc is too 
weak,  and  that  the  SNB  should  allow  the  currency  to  appreciate  in  order  to  contribute 
towards reducing global imbalances. 
This view is based on a lack of knowledge about the situation in Switzerland. Specific factors 
are responsible for the Swiss current account surplus. The balance on the trading account, 
for instance, makes only a modest contribution. The most important elements with regard to 
the  current  account  surplus  are  the  following:  first,  investment  income  from  Switzerland's 
substantial  net  international  investment  position,  second,  financial  sector  earnings  from 
business  with  customers  abroad,  which  is  traditionally  of  significance  for  Switzerland,  and 
third, earnings from merchanting, which have risen sharply over the past decade. The current 
account surplus is also statistically overestimated. 
These three most important elements are dependent on developments abroad, international 
financial markets, and global demand for commodities. The Swiss franc exchange rate, by 
comparison, does not play a decisive role. There is thus no contradiction between having a 
strong Swiss franc and a large current account surplus. Nor is the surplus a suitable measure 
for  assessing  Switzerland's  share  in  global  imbalances.  It  is  much  more  the  case  that 
Switzerland  and  its  extensive  level  of  direct  investment  abroad  contributes  significantly  to 
balanced global economic growth. 
SNB monetary policy is focused on ensuring price stability. In so doing, it takes due account 
of  economic  developments.  To  fulfil  this  mandate,  the  SNB  must  secure  appropriate 
monetary conditions. The current account surplus does not play a role in monetary policy. In 
an  open  economy  like  Switzerland,  however,  sizeable  exchange  rate  fluctuations  have  a 
strong impact on production and prices. In the current environment, and with interest rates 
close  to  zero,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  is  therefore  the  correct  monetary  policy 
instrument. The SNB will continue to enforce it with the utmost determination. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
