   Duvvuri Subbarao: Capital account management 
Remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the “Rethinking 
macro  policy  II,”  a  conference  sponsored  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund, Washington 
DC, 17 April 2013. 
1.  
Capital account management 
 Intellectual shift on capital controls 
• 
The change in our world view on capital account management is by far one of the 
most remarkable intellectual shifts brought on by the crisis. 
In  her  opening  remarks  yesterday,  the  Managing  Director  said  that  the  crisis 
shattered the consensus on many macroeconomic issues and shibboleths. Nowhere 
is this more true than in the broad policy area of capital account management. 
In my view, the three big issues on which the pre-crisis consensus has dissolved are 
the following: 
Three issues where consensus is broken 
(i)  
(ii)  
(iii)  
I want to comment briefly on each of these. 
Movement towards a fully open capital account 
The use of capital controls as short-run stabilization tools 
The desirability of foreign exchange intervention. 
I.  
• 
Movement towards a fully open capital account 
On the first issue, open capital account, before the crisis, the consensus was that 
every  country  should  eventually  move  towards  a  fully  open  capital  account.  The 
debate  was  only  about  the  appropriate  strategy  –  sequencing  and  timing,  in 
particular – for transitioning to full capital account convertibility. 
China and India 
• 
Let me invoke the example of India. Moving towards full capital account convertibility 
has  always  been  our  policy  goal.  The  only  variable  was  the  road  map  for  getting 
there which, it was agreed, should be redefined from time to time, consistent with 
the evolving situation. There was also general agreement that we should start with 
floating the exchange rate and decontrolling interest rates, and finish with the capital 
account, on the rationale that this strategy will best preserve macro stability. 
There has been a long and vigorous debate in China too on opening up the capital 
account, with a roughly similar consensus as in India about sequencing. Over the 
last few years though, China has apparently changed its strategy, as is evident from 
their policy direction. If you accept that measures to internationalize the RMB are a 
big step towards capital account convertibility, then this initiative by China has been 
much bolder than its actions on freeing up exchange and interest rates. 
Controls and financial stability 
• 
The crisis has, however, changed all this. It shifted the debate, from the strategy and 
timing for capital account convertibility, to questioning the very imperative for capital 
account convertibility. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
(ii)  
(iii)  
II.  
• 
     In other words, the consensus that every country should eventually move towards a 
fully free capital account is now broken. 
The  main  argument  in  support  of  the  new  view  –  that  full  capital  account 
convertibility  need  not  be  an  eventual  goal  –  is  that  controls  prevented  emerging 
markets from adopting some of the financial products that proved toxic in advanced 
countries. So, there is merit, it is argued, in retaining capital controls. 
Against  this  is  the  old  argument,  which  is  still  quite  persuasive,  that  as  countries 
become  more  integrated  economically,  they  will  need  to  become  more  integrated 
financially. 
In  that  backdrop,  the  questions  on  this  sub-topic  of  movement  towards  a  fully  free 
capital account are the following: 
(i)  
While  there  is  virtual  consensus  that  free  trade  in  goods  is  welfare  enhancing, 
opinion  is  divided  on  the  virtues  of  financial  openness.  What  explains  this 
difference? In what ways is financial liberalization different from trade liberalization? 
Is full capital account convertibility still an appropriate objective for every country? 
If so, what is the best strategy for achieving it? Should it be Festina Lente, which I 
believe, is Latin for making haste slowly. 
Capital controls as a stabilization tool 
The second issue on which the pre-crisis consensus is broken is the use of capital 
controls as a stabilization tool. 
Before  the  crisis,  the  consensus  was  that  capital  controls  are  bad,  always  and 
everywhere. 
That consensus no longer holds. 
Received  wisdom  today  is  that  capital  controls  are  not  only  appropriate,  but  even 
desirable, in certain circumstances. 
Even so, there are many unsettled debates. 
• 
Effectiveness of capital controls 
• 
The  first  big  debate  is  about  the  effectiveness  of  capital  controls.  People  have 
questioned effectiveness on the basis of mainly two arguments: 
– 
First, that capital controls do not alter the volume of flows, but alter only their 
tenor. 
and  second  that,  capital  controls  can  easily  be  circumvented  by  disguising 
short term flows as long term flows 
 Price vs quantity controls 
• 
• 
Then, there is a debate about what type of controls are effective. 
Countries have used both price based controls such as taxes, as well as quantity 
based  controls.  Evidence  on  which  of  them  has  been  effective,  and  under  what 
circumstances, is not conclusive. 
India’s experience 
• 
In India, for example, we deploy both price based and quantity based controls. [For 
example,  deposits  from  Non-Resident  Indians,  which  are  an  important  source  of 
capital flows into India, are controlled through the interest rates banks can offer, a 
price  variable.  External  borrowing  by  Indian  corporates  is  controlled  through  both 
quantity and price variables.] 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Our experience has been that while quantity controls are more effective in the short-
term, they can also be distorting, inefficient and inequitable. 
Capital controls vs prudential measures 
• 
There  is  also  an  argument  about  whether  capital  controls  can  be  substituted  by 
prudential measures. 
It  is  not  clear  that  they  are  always  exact  substitutes.  If  capital  inflows  are 
intermediated through the banking system, then prudential measures can be applied 
directly on domestic banks, circumventing the need for controls. 
But what if the inflows are direct, that is to say, loans directly from foreign entities to 
domestic  companies?  In  that  case,  the  only  mechanism  to  prevent  excessive 
leverage, and foreign exchange exposure, may be by imposing controls. 
Against that backdrop, the questions on Capital Controls as a short-run Stabilization 
Tool are the following: 
(i)  
Can we define the distortion that capital controls are meant to correct? For example, 
how do we determine if capital flows are excessive or dangerous? 
What  have  we  learnt  about  the  effectiveness  of  capital  controls  as  a  stabilization 
tool? 
When can prudential measures be substituted for capital controls? 
What criteria should we adopt to choose between price based and quantity based 
controls? 
Are  capital  controls  symmetric  as  between  inflows  and  outflows?  In  other  words, 
should  we  use  one  type  of  controls  to  control  inflows  and  another  type  to  limit 
outflows? 
Foreign exchange intervention 
The third important issue on which the pre-crisis consensus has dissolved is foreign 
exchange intervention. 
The  pre-crisis  consensus,  at  any  rate  among  advanced  economies,  was  that 
intervention in the forex market is sub-optimal. 
That consensus no longer holds, with even some advanced economies  defending 
their currencies from the safe haven impact. 
Emerging markets, for their part, have had long and varied experience of struggling 
with forex  intervention. The  policy  dilemma  in  the  event  of  receiving  capital  flows, 
beyond the country’s absorptive capacity, can be quite complex. 
If  you  didn’t  intervene  in  the  forex  market,  then  you  would  have  currency 
appreciation quite unrelated to fundamentals. 
– 
If  you  intervened,  but  did  not  sterilize  the  resultant  liquidity,  you  become 
vulnerable to inflation pressures and asset price bubbles. 
If you intervened in the forex market and sterilized the resultant liquidity, you 
may find interest rates firming up – which attracts even more flows – a classic 
case of Dutch disease. 
 –  What  all  this  says  is  that  there  is  really  no  benign  option  for  dealing  with 
volatile capital flows. 
There  is  one  other  important  issue  relating  to  forex  intervention.  Both  currency 
appreciation  and  currency  depreciation,  quite  unrelated  to  fundamentals,  are 
  (ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
(v)  
III.  
• 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    complex  problems.  But  there  is  a  significant  asymmetry  between  intervention  for 
fighting appreciation and intervention for fighting depreciation. 
When  you  are  fighting  currency  appreciation,  you  are  intervening  in  your  own 
currency.  Your  capacity  to  do  so  is,  at  least  in  theory,  unlimited,  quite  simply 
because you can print your own currency. 
But  when  you  are  fighting  currency  depreciation,  you  are  intervening  in  a  hard 
currency. Your capacity to intervene is, therefore, limited by the size of your forex 
reserves. What complicates the dilemma is that the market is aware of this. 
So, there is the real danger that by intervening in the forex market, you could end up 
losing forex reserves, and not gaining on the currency. The lower your reserves dip, 
the more vulnerable you become. And the vulnerability can become quite serious if 
your reserves go below the level markets perceive as necessary to regain market 
access. 
It should also be clear that a failed defence of the exchange rate is worse than no 
defence. So, when you are intervening in the forex market, it is important to make 
sure that your intervention is successful. 
In that context, the questions on this topic of forex intervention are the following: 
(i)  
Under  what  conditions  is  it  appropriate  for  countries  to  intervene  in  the  forex 
market? 
Under what conditions is forex intervention preferable to capital controls? 
In most cases, countries claim that they are intervening in the forex market, not to 
target any particular rate, but only to manage the volatility in the exchange rate. Is it 
necessary  then  to  define  upfront  your  measure  of  volatility  that  will  trigger 
intervention? 
Reserves 
The optimal level of reserves that countries may hold has been one of the important 
policy issues post-crisis. 
An argument in support of countries holding sizeable foreign exchange reserves has 
been  their  role  as  a  war  chest,  as  a  source  of  liquidity,  and  as  an  instrument  for 
inspiring market confidence. 
The  argument  against  holding  reserves  has  centred  on  the  opportunity  cost  of 
holding them, and also that the comfort they provide may encourage excessive risk 
taking and therefore become detrimental to macro stability. 
Questions 
1.  
2.  
How do we measure the costs and benefits of holding reserves? 
How  realistic  are  the  alternatives  to  self-insurance  by  way  of  reserves?  Are  the 
alternatives to self-insurance, the IMF’s new instruments, Flexible Credit Line (FCL) 
and  Precautionary  and  Liquidity  Line  (PLL),  bilateral  and  multilateral  swap  lines, 
really  effective  alternatives  to  having  an  own  war  chest  of  reserves?  Are  the 
alternatives flexible enough to accommodate country circumstances? Are they quick 
enough to provide relief in a crisis situation? Do they still carry the stigma usually 
associated with IMF assistance? 
How do you measure the adequacy of reserves? And how do you build in country 
circumstances into that measurement? 
(ii)  
(iii)  
2.  
• 
  3.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3.  
• 
 International provision of liquidity 
The global financial crisis has revived the familiar concerns about the global reserve 
currency and the availability of liquidity in times of stress. 
The  crisis  has  illustrated  the  threat  to  global  stability  because  of  a  single  reserve 
currency. 
Questions 
1.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
Are  the  risks  of  a  single  reserve  currency  being  exaggerated?  After  all  the  world 
weathered the global financial crisis quite well even with a single reserve currency? 
If not, how do we reduce those risks? How do alternate reserve currencies emerge? 
To what extent is increase in SDR issuance a solution to the liquidity problem given 
that the SDR is essentially a liability on member countries’ freely usable resources, 
and not of the IMF? 
Till alternatives to the single reserve currency emerge, what are the obligations of 
the  US  as  the  issuer  of  the  sole  reserve  currency?  In  particular,  what  are  its 
obligations  to  EMEs  whose  currencies  are  not  yet  fully  convertible  on  the  capital 
account? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
