Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Working to achieve a truly inclusive financial system 
Welcoming remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
5th AFI (Alliance for Financial Inclusion) Policy Global Forum, jointly hosted with the Central 
Bank of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, 11 September 2013. 
 It  is  my  great  honour  to  welcome  Her  Majesty  Queen  Máxima.  Let  me  express  our  deep 
gratitude  to  Her  Majesty  for  gracing  this  event.  Her  Majesty,  Queen  Máxima,  as  a  major 
advocate for the development of financial inclusion, has had an important role in bringing the 
attention of the international community to this important agenda. Her Majesty has also been 
an inspiration to us to persevere in achieving our aspiration of greater financial inclusion. Let 
me  also  take  this  opportunity  to  welcome  our  distinguished  speakers,  guests  and  all  the 
participants  from  the  member  countries  of  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI)  to  this 
5th AFI  Global  Policy  Forum  in  Kuala  Lumpur.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  indeed  most 
honoured to jointly host this Global Policy Forum together with AFI. 
We  are  gathering  at  a  time  when  global  economic  and  financial  conditions  remain  highly 
challenging.  While  there  are  now  some  positive  signs  emerging,  global  growth  prospects 
continue to remain uncertain. While the unprecedented and unconventional policy measures 
introduced  by  several  of  the  major  advanced  economies  have  achieved  some  degree  of 
success  in  improving  their  economic  conditions,  their  global  implications  have  been 
profound,  in  particular  in  emerging  economies.  Indeed  the  repercussions  from  their 
impending  exit  from  these  measures  may  be  even  more  significant.  Therein  lies  the 
importance  for  emerging  and  developing  economies  to  strengthen  our  economic  and 
financial foundations, reduce our risks and vulnerabilities and spur a balanced and inclusive 
growth. 
The events since the eruption of the global financial crisis have also altered our view of the 
world  in  a  number  of  other  fundamental  ways.  Global  reforms  in  the  financial  system  are 
re-shaping the regulatory landscape. The lines that define financial intermediation activities, 
and which connect the financial system to other parts of the economy and other parts of the 
world,  are  also  being  re-drawn.  In  this  environment,  emerging  and  developing  economies 
need to be engaged to ensure that unintended consequences on our financial systems and 
consequently on our economies are minimised. 
A key concern in this environment is thus the strengthening of the protection of segments of 
society, in particular, small businesses and households, from being marginalised by market 
forces, and from the disproportionate impact of instability, crises and reforms. Related to this 
is  the  need  to  reinforce  socially  responsible  finance,  and  to  ensure  that  financial  systems 
serves  the  real  economy  and  to  address  the  new  and  growing  risks  of  financial  exclusion 
which can result in part of our community to be disenfranchised, particularly, but certainly not 
only, during periods of financial crises. 
In this environment, financial inclusion has gained greater prominence as a key priority for 
the reform and development agenda. 
The theme of the AFI Forum this year, “Driving Policies for Optimal Impact”, underlines 
the need for us to have a better understanding of the interactions between the objectives and 
effects of financial inclusion, financial stability and integrity, and consumer protection policies. 
This  need  has  become  more  pronounced  with  the  recent  global  developments.  Global 
prudential  standards  have  been  significantly  strengthened  and  are  increasingly  applied  to 
financial  institutions  in  developing  countries.  This  has  heightened  the  practical  challenges 
faced  in  implementing  these  standards  in  a  socio-economic  setting  where  promoting 
inclusive opportunity is an important objective. The same is also true with stronger standards 
to combat money laundering to safeguard the integrity of the financial system. In building a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
financial  system  that  is  resilient  against  crises  and  abuse,  we  cannot  neglect  the  socio-
economic impact of policies pursued. Our efforts to build a stronger and more stable financial 
system would also work to strengthen linkages between finance and development and not to 
weaken it. 
Consumer  protection  regulation  is  also  being  significantly  strengthened  in  many  countries 
following the global financial crisis. This has been driven in large part by the recognition that 
an  effective  consumer  protection  framework  serves  not  only  to  protect  individuals  from 
excessive risk; it also has an important role in protecting the financial system from systemic 
risk. While this has positive spillovers for financial inclusion, more can and must be done to 
ensure  that  consumer  protection  policies  are  designed  to  adequately  protect  vulnerable 
groups, and ensure that financial innovation is pursued in a responsible manner. 
To address these issues, we are delighted this year to have the participation of the global 
standard  setting  bodies  together  with  members  of  the  AFI  at  this  Forum.  We  share  a 
common interest in seeking to lower the barriers to financial inclusion and to create a larger 
positive impact of policy measures on financial inclusion. An important starting point is for the 
global  standards  to  reflect  financial  inclusion  perspectives.  The  standards  setters  have 
pointed out that this is supported by the concept of proportionality which underpins the global 
standards. Of great importance is how this is going to be translated into practice. By drawing 
on  the  diverse  experience  of  AFI  members  present  at  this Forum,  it  is  hoped  that  we  can 
start to build a common understanding of “proportionality in practice”. This is important not 
only  to  support  the  financial  inclusion  agenda,  but  also  achieve  the  outcomes  of  financial 
stability and consumer protection that were intended by the global standards. This would also 
promote the wider adoption of these global standards. 
Increasing risks of financial exclusion 
Financial  inclusion  has  now  progressed  from  access  to  financial  services,  to  also  being 
concerned  with  whether  the  financial  services  are  appropriate  to  individual  circumstances, 
and  are  being  used  effectively  to  improve  individual  welfare.  In  addition,  it  needs  to  be 
concerned with whether vulnerable groups face increased risks of financial exclusion. This is 
particularly  important  in  a  rapidly  changing  financial  and  social  landscape.  Sophisticated 
risk-profiling  methods  employed  by  financial  institutions  can  make  it  more  difficult  for 
deserving  individuals  and  small  businesses  to  qualify  for  financial  services.  Aggressive 
marketing  practices  by  financial  institutions  and  more  complex  financial  products  can  also 
lead to poor financial decisions. 
The way in which financial services is delivered to consumers is also moving towards more 
cost-efficient  channels  that  reduce  the  need  for  face-to-face  contact,  except  for  high  net 
worth  customers.  Enquiries  and  complaints  are  handled  largely  by  phone  or  e-mail,  and 
usually  in  a  fragmented  manner  by  different  parts  of  a  financial  institution.  This  can  mean 
less effective advisory support for vulnerable groups of financial consumers. While the wider 
adoption of electronic channels has enormous potential to increase financial inclusion, also 
needed is to ensure access to the relevant technology, in order to avoid being disadvantaged 
from using  alternative channels that will become relatively  more costly. A delicate  balance 
therefore needs to be achieved in developing solutions that will allow the financial system to 
grow  and  innovate  in  support  of  the  economy,  but  without  widening  the  divide  in  our 
economy. 
The role of non-bank financial institutions 
In  many  of  our  countries,  non-bank  financial  institutions  are  being  envisaged  for  a  greater 
role  in  increasing  financial  inclusion  and  thus  to  contribute  to  sustainable  economic  and 
social development. For some time now, particularly after the global financial crisis, stronger 
regulation  and  balance  sheet  constraints  of  the  banking  sector  have  also  led  to  the  rapid 
expansion  of  non-bank  credit.  For  the  most  part,  however,  this  expansion  has  not  been 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
well-managed,  resulting  in  growing  concerns  with  over-indebtedness  in  many  parts  of  the 
world. One response has been to strengthen the regulation of such institutions, and reduce 
the  inconsistencies  in  prudential  and  conduct  standards  that  apply  between  banks  and 
non-banks. Another has been to capture better information on the activities of non-banks as 
a basis to inform more targeted policy measures.  
The  question  of  how  to  evolve  the  role  of  non-bank  financial  institutions  to  continue  to 
contribute in sustainable way to financial inclusion is a complex one. While we can agree that 
a different approach to regulation from that applied to banks is justified, it cannot be at the 
expense  of  protection  for  financial  consumers,  and  risks  to  financial  stability.  This  middle 
ground is what is needed, taking into account the specific context of our own economies. 
The role of financial education 
Another important strategy for financial inclusion is the enhanced role of financial education. 
This  is  not only  to  encourage  greater  participation  in  the mainstream  financial  system,  but 
also to keep individuals already in the mainstream from being financially excluded in future 
as a result of changes in the financial landscape. In a recent report by the OECD, a lack of 
awareness  of  different  types  of  financial  products,  low  level  of  confidence  and  poor 
knowledge  of  how  products  work  were  identified  as  barriers  to  financial  inclusion.  These 
factors  will  become  more  acute  in  an  increasingly  more  complex  and  technology-driven 
financial  system.  Effective  financial  education  will  however,  require  more  innovative 
approaches,  broader  partnerships 
the  Government,  educators,  and 
non-Governmental organisations collaborating with regulators and the financial industry. The 
AFI network provides an important platform to examine these and other issues. 
involving 
Conclusion 
Through the AFI platform, we have a unique opportunity to work together to improve lives 
through  financial  inclusion  and  to  have  an  enduring  impact  on  global  issues  and 
developments. In this connection, a specific outcome of this Forum will be the commitment of 
AFI members to an Accord. This Accord will build on Maya Declaration of 2009 to extend the 
commitment  of  AFI  members  to  take  the  financial  inclusion  agenda  a  step  further  forward 
towards achieving the vision of a truly inclusive financial system. 
Let me conclude by expressing on behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia our deep gratitude to Her 
Majesty  Queen  Máxima  for  gracing  this  event.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  distinguished 
speakers and resource persons who have travelled from various parts of the world to share 
with us your valuable insights. To all participants, I hope this will be a memorable event, and 
one that will generate new knowledge and new ideas to spur your own country’s journey to 
deeper financial inclusion. Once again, “Selamat datang” to Kuala Lumpur and thank you for 
being here.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
