H R Khan: Principles for financial market infrastructure and innovations 
in retail payment systems – some perspectives 
Inaugural address delivered by Mr H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at  the  International  Seminar  on  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  and 
Innovations in Retail Payment Systems organised by the Reserve Bank of India, New Delhi, 
14 February 2013. 
 The speaker acknowledges with thanks the contributions of Shri Simanchala Sahu and Shri. Surajit Bose of the 
Reserve Bank of India. 
It is a pleasure to be here in New Delhi to inaugurate this International Seminar on Principles 
of Financial Market Infrastructure (PFMI) and Innovations in Retail Payment Systems in the 
midst of the guest speakers and distinguished participants from around the world. The spring 
season  in  New  Delhi  is  very  pleasant  and  its  beauty  is  all  pervasive.  I  am  sure  the 
participants will enjoy the beauty of New Delhi and there would be a lot of takeaways from 
the seminar. I understand that after completion of the seminar the participants will have an 
opportunity  to  see  the  splendour  of  Taj  Mahal,  a  world  heritage  monument,  known  for  its 
grandeur and magnificence. It touches the hearts of millions of tourists every year to remind 
them  the  power  of  love.  Like  Taj  Mahal,  the  Payment  Systems  with  its  many  innovations 
have  charmed  billions  of  population  across  the  globe  through  its  products,  services, 
efficiency and convenience. It has assumed such a criticality that it has become necessary to 
regulate  it  with  utmost  care  and  diligence  as  any  slippage  could  lead  to  instability  in  the 
financial  sector.  The  Payment  Systems  of  the  country  touches  millions  every  day  through 
different delivery channels, instruments and institutions. In India too, we have created such a 
mega Payment System infrastructure that is expected to cater to 1.2 billion people. As you all 
are aware, the development of Payment Systems in a country, both Large Value and Retail, 
depends  upon  its  banking  and  financial  structure  and  vision  of  regulators  to  modulate  the 
developments.  However,  while  framing  policies  for  orderly  development  of  the  Payment 
Systems, regulators do face newer challenges every day. 
Challenges in large value payment systems 
Recent  crisis  has  once  again  emphasized  the  need  for  an  efficient  and  secure  financial 
structure. Large-Value Payment Systems that contribute significantly to financial stability is 
one  of  the  critical  components.  Various  initiatives  of  the  Committee  on  Payment  and 
Settlement Systems (CPSS) and the Technical Committee of the International Organization 
of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  have  been  the  offshoots  of  the  increasing  risk  and 
uncertainty  in  the  financial  markets,  particularly  visible  during  the  recent  financial  crisis. 
Financial  Market  Infrastructures  (FMIs)  have  stood  the  test  of  time  by  settling  obligations 
whenever they were due and provided market participants enormous confidence to transact 
business without the risk of defaults and failures during periods of uncertainty and volatility. 
Nevertheless, the need for sound risk management and governance with focus on areas like 
liquidity and credit risks has been realized by all the stakeholders and this has acted as the 
driving force behind the initiatives to review the existing standards as a part of crisis proofing 
exercise.  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructure  (PFMI)  are  part  of  such  initiatives. 
PFMI  is  meant  for  the  Financial  Market  Infrastructure  (FMIs)  like  Systemically  Important 
Payment  Systems  (SIPS),  Central  Securities  Depositories  (CSDs),  Securities  Settlement 
Systems  (SSSs),  Central  Counter  Parties  (CCPs)  and  Trade  Repositories  (TRs)  (newly 
included)  which  facilitate  the  recording,  checking  and  settlement  of  financial  transactions. 
The  CPSS  and  IOSCO  have  published  new  PFMI  replacing  their  previous  principles  and 
standards  viz.  (i)  Core  Principles  for  Systemically  Important  Payment  Systems  (CPSIPS) 
(2001),  (ii)  Recommendations  for  Securities  Settlement  Systems  (RSSS)  (2001)  and 
(iii) Recommendations for Central Counterparties (RCCP) (2004). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
These 24 principles (PFMI/2011) which have come in place of the existing standards include 
new  features  like  (i)  default  handling  of  clearing  participants;  (ii)  addressing  of  operational 
risk; (iii) principles on segregation and portability; (iv) tired participation and (v) handling of 
business risk. The new principles in essence reflect the learnings from the recent financial 
crisis. Along with these principles five responsibilities have been assigned to the regulators. 
They are : 
i. 
FMIs should be subject to appropriate regulation, supervision and oversight by the 
central bank, market regulator or other relevant authority; 
These  authorities  should  have  the  powers  and  resources  to  carry  out  their 
responsibilities in regulating, supervising and overseeing FMIs; 
Authorities  should  clearly  define  and  disclose  their  regulations,  supervisory 
& oversight policies with respect to FMIs; 
Authorities  should  adopt  the  relevant  internationally  accepted  principles  for  FMIs 
and apply them consistently; and 
Authorities should cooperate with each other, both domestically and internationally 
in promoting the safety and efficiency of FMIs. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
As  we  observe,  the  focus  of  the  new  principles  along  with  the  above  responsibilities  is  to 
improve  efficiency  and  safety  by  limiting  systemic  risk  and  enhancing  transparency  and 
stability in the financial system 
their  oversight/supervision.  National  authorities  should  use 
Assessment methodology and disclosure framework under PFMI 
CPSS and IOSCO have also published the assessment methodology for the PFMIs and the 
disclosure framework for FMIs. The objective of the assessment methodology is to provide a 
framework for assessing an FMI’s observance of each of the 24 principles and the relevant 
authorities’ observance of each of the five responsibilities. The assessment methodology is, 
therefore,  a  tool  to  promote  the  implementation  and  ongoing  observance  of  the  principles 
and  responsibilities  and  to  help  ensure  objectivity  and  comparability  across  all  relevant 
jurisdictions. The assessment methodology is primarily intended for external assessors at the 
international  level  and  in  particular,  international  financial  institutions,  such  as,  the  World 
Bank  and 
International  Monetary  Fund  {e.g.,  assessment  under  Financial  Stability 
Assessment  Programme  (FSAP)}.  It  also  provides  a  baseline  for  national  authorities  to 
assess  FMIs  under 
the 
assessment methodology in its current format or develop an equally effective methodology 
for their national oversight/supervision processes. 
The  disclosure  framework  requires  an  FMI  to  publicly  disclose  sufficient  information  to 
participants  and  prospective  participants  so  that  they  can  understand  the  design  and 
operations of the system, their rights and obligations, cost and risks from participating in the 
system. Information that should be publicly disclosed extends beyond all relevant rules and 
key  procedures  and  includes  other  explanatory  material  to  help  promote  a  better 
understanding  of  operations  of  the  FMI  and  their  impact  on  participants  and  the  market  it 
serves.  The  disclosure  framework  thus  aims  at  enhancing  the  transparency  in  operations 
& risk  management  systems  and,  in  the  process,  facilitate  comparison  across  FMIs  in 
different jurisdictions. 
Implementing 24 principles and five responsibilities in their true spirit is a challenge before 
the FMIs and the regulators in terms of enabling legal provisions, availability of infrastructure, 
management  of  risks,  cost  for  putting  in  place  default  handling  mechanism  and  effective 
system of oversight of FMIs. All these responsibilities require resources, both financial and 
human, in the central banks, FMIs and other regulators. This Seminar is part of the initiatives 
of RBI for capacity building in this critical area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Challenges in Retail Payment Systems 
The  Retail  Payment  Systems  today  is  dominated  by  continuous  innovations  aided  by 
breakthroughs in technology. It has brought immense benefits in terms of new products and 
delivery channels and at the same time, they have engendered concerns for the regulators 
across the globe. Such innovations in the retail payment landscape have thrown challenges 
to regulators in the following key areas: 
i. 
Increased  use  of  technologies  like  internet  and  mobile  phones  have  resulted  in 
innovative yet complex products and processes; 
The lines of demarcation between products are getting blurred as multiple access 
channels and devices are being increasingly used interchangeably (e.g. both mobile 
banking and internet payments through smart phones); 
The entry of non-bank players into payment space has increased responsibilities of 
the regulators for continuous monitoring of their activities as they may pose threat to 
the payment systems in terms of cost and assurance to the consumers; 
The pricing related issue of payment services offered by non-banks has become a 
major concern; 
The  security  issues  often  threaten  the  confidence  of  users  of  the  technology 
dominated retail payment system products; 
In  the  context  of  efforts  being  made  for  financial  inclusion,  trade-off  between 
expanding the reach of financial services to unbanked and the sustainability of the 
business model has become a challenge; 
Although the recent financial crisis did not show any strong evidence of correlation 
between payment systems and financial stability, going forward payment systems, 
both  large  value  and  retail  could  be  the  source  of  instability  when  the  financial 
transactions moves largely to electronic mode that gives rise to several operational 
& financial risks; and 
As  often  innovations  are  technology  driven  and  developments  in  retail  payment 
system have been rapid, the expertise and competence of staff of central banks and 
others engaged in regulation and oversight has become a major issue that needs to 
be addressed effectively. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
These challenges, therefore, need innovative solutions. However, taking the capacity of the 
regulators to encourage or inhibit the innovations, it is important to create policy environment 
that  meets  the  expectation  of  the  consumers  for  a  safe  and  sound  payment  systems  and 
encourages participants of the payment system to sustain their business interest. 
Reference of PFMI for the Retail Payment Systems: 7’S Framework 
It  is  appropriate  to  ask  the  question  whether  and  how  the  24  new  Principles  for  Financial 
Market  Infrastructure  would  be  relevant  for  the  Retail  Payment  Systems.  Although  at  the 
current juncture Retail Payment System may not threaten the financial stability, the segment 
requires greater monitoring and oversight to keep the public confidence in the system. Any 
breach  of  trust  will  prove  disastrous  for  the  payment  systems  leading  to  macroeconomic 
concerns,  particularly  in  emerging  countries  like  India  where  several  initiatives  have  been 
taken  or  are  on  the  anvil  to  further  financial inclusion  by  leveraging  developments  in  retail 
payment system. One could possibly suggest a “PFMI Light” framework that could strike a 
balance between the need for a safe and sound retail payment system & the requirements of 
accessible and affordable financial services for the unbanked/under-banked population. Here 
I would like to briefly flag the following seven issues in the form of what could be called as 
7’S  Framework.  The components  of  the  7’  S  Framework  are: Structure, Safety, Suitability, 
Standards, Settlements, Sustainability and Strategy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Structure 
The  Retail  Payment  System  plays  an  important  role  in  the  economy  although  the  total 
amount of settlement is less than that of Large Value Payment System. The retail payment 
differs from Large Value Payments as it has to be accessible and affordable by a common 
man.  There  is  a  need  to  create  payment  system  infrastructure  that  provide  users  the 
experience  of  the  cash  payment  or  near-cash  payments  to  wean  them  away  from  cash 
usage. This would require a lot of investment in Research & Development and understanding 
the need of the stakeholders to design the Retail Payment Systems. The trust in the Retail 
Payment System would increase once the Retail Payment Service providers are authorised 
by the regulators having legal backing to lay down rules and regulations (Principle 1 of the 
PFMI). Governance plays a key role in setting up credible and robust retail payment systems 
that supports stability of the broader financial system and works in public interest (Principle 2 
of the PFMI). Like many countries, the Payment & Settlement Systems Act, 2007 provides 
statutory power to the Reserve Bank of India to regulate and supervise the payment system 
entities. This has helped Reserve Bank to promote an orderly payment system structure in 
the country. 
Safety 
Safety and soundness of the Retail Payment Systems is of prime importance. Safety boosts 
confidence  in  the  system.  One  of  the  basic  principles  of  safety  is  identifying  the  risks  and 
responsibilities of various stakeholders and managing it effectively (Principle 3 of the PFMI). 
Risks  like  credit  (Principle  4  of  the  PFMI),  collateral  (Principle  5  of  the  PFMI),  margin 
(Principle 6), liquidity (Principle 7), operational (Principle 17) and business risks (Principle 15 
of  the  PFMI)  remain  as  major  challenges  before  the  system  participants  and  system 
operators  of  the  Retail  Payment  Systems.  As  a  regulator,  we  are  required  to  create  a 
framework that enables all the stakeholders to design and provide Retail Payment Systems 
so as to address these risks, particularly in the context of introduction of newer technologies 
and  complex  products.  The  continuous  assessment  of  various  risks  should  be  carried  out 
using  on-line/off-line  methods  and  market  intelligence  to  avoid  any  serious  setback  to  the 
payment systems. The soundness of Retail Payment System remains the critical element of 
the regulatory framework and supervisory policies of central banks and regulators. It is the 
responsibility  of  the  regulators  to  ensure  that  the  policies  are  aligned  with  the  country’s 
economy  and  its  emerging  needs  without  sacrificing  the  sound  principles  of  safe  payment 
system. Another aspect of safety would be the availability of robust Business Continuity Plan 
(BCP)  and  Disaster  Recovery  (DR)  framework  so  that  critical  payment  systems  remain 
robust and are able to handle disruptions in efficient manner. 
Suitability 
Although the urge for replicating the successful payment systems of other countries in one’s 
own country is very high, it is necessary to customize the processes and products as per the 
suitability  to  the  country  keeping  in  view  particularly  the  socio-economic  and  cultural 
distinctiveness  and  the  regulatory  and  institutional  aspects  Regulators  need  to  assess 
effectiveness of different payment products in their jurisdictions by the authorized entities to 
ensure that they suit the needs of the common people, the complexities are understood by 
them  and  they  have  inbuilt  provision  for  consumer  protection  (Principles  21  and  23  of  the 
PFMI). There should be an institutional mechanism to assess and certify the retail payment 
products that matches minimum laid down norms by the regulators. Regulators also need to 
keep  a  check  on  proliferation  of  products  and  systems  which  are  difficult  to  monitor.  The 
suitability may be assessed from the point of view of the SMART principles, i.e., Simplicity, 
Manageability, Acceptability, Risk controls and Transparency. 
Standards 
It is very important to create standards and principles that create a level playing field for the 
system  participants,  system  providers  and  consumers.  Standards  like  PFMI,  Basel  III  and 
ISO help in creating best practices that act as benchmarks for the players and the industry. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Standards  also  reduce  discretionary  powers  leading  to  fewer  disputes  and  chances  of 
favouritism.  While  setting  standards,  we  need  to  be  sensitive  to  the  practicality  of  their 
implementation.  Setting  higher  standards  that  are  not  achievable  by  the  stake  holders  will 
remain on paper. Further, standards need to be flexible to cater changing needs and should 
not act as barriers for the entry of new payment system players. Standards should take into 
account cost of compliance as that is ultimately passed on to consumers. One example is 
policy of regulators on default handling and guarantee mechanism (Principle 13 of the PFMI) 
applicable for retail payment systems that has cost implications for system participants. It is, 
therefore, necessary to take a practical view on such cases to prescribe the rules that are 
implementable  and  cost-effective  taking  into  account  the  risks  involved  in  retail  payment 
systems. Further, there should be standard setting bodies that can continuously benchmark 
the products, systems and services for continuous improvements. Regulators need to play 
an active role in encouraging entities to put in place various standards and leveraging them 
for  business  growth  and  risk  management.  There  is  also  strong  case  for  uniform  security 
standards across the jurisdictions for minimizing frauds in electronic banking. A case in point 
is  frauds  relating  to  misuse  of  international  credit  cards  due  to  the  absence  of  the 
requirement of second factor authentication for all the Card Not Present (CNP) transactions. 
Settlements 
As the retail payment being dominated by the deferred net settlement processes, there is a 
need  for  a  guaranteed  retail  payment  &  settlement  systems  that  will  give  comfort  and 
assurance  to  all  the  stakeholders.  In  describing  the  settlement  characteristics  of  net 
settlement systems, the concept of certainty of settlement is sometimes used. This concept 
refers to the certainty that the system will be able to effect final settlement when the netting 
cycle  and  the  associated  settlement  procedures  have  been  completed.  Certainty  of 
settlement relates to a multilateral netting system’s ability to ensure the timely completion of 
daily settlements in the event of inability to settle by a participant with the largest single net 
debit  position  or  failure  of  more  than  one  participant.  The  PFMI  also  emphasizes  on 
settlement risk. Principle 8 of the PFMI which talks about settlement finality addresses the 
fundamental  issue  of  the  finality  of  transactions  processed  by  an  FMI.  This  principle  is 
equally  applicable  for  the  Retail  Payment  Systems  as  also  Principle  9  of  the  PFMI  which 
encourages settlements using central bank money and where a commercial bank is used for 
settlement there has to be strict control credit and liquidity risks. 
Sustainability 
The  sustainability  depends  a lot  on  efficiency  and  effectiveness  (Principles  21  &  22  of  the 
PFMI) of the system that meets the goals and objectives laid down by the payment system 
participants.  Efficiency  can  be  measured  on  three  parameters,  i.e.,  Cost,  Time  and 
Assurance.  Cost  effective  does  not  necessarily  mean  providing  services  at  lower  cost  to 
consumers; it has to be cost effective for  the system and the service providers too. It has 
always been a debate who should set the price, i.e., regulators or market. Although it sounds 
good  to  leave  the  cost  aspect  to  markets,  it  is  not  always  true,  particularly  in  developing 
countries with high rate of financial illiteracy and where payment systems are still evolving. In 
the  Indian  context,  it  is  the  regulator  that  often  takes  various  initiatives  to  develop  the 
payment systems and sometime even the products. Hence, they, at times, put a cap on the 
price of services to ensure that consumers use the payment services offered through various 
delivery  channels  to  the  maximum  extent.  For  example  recently  in  India  Reserve  Bank  of 
India  has  reduced  merchant  discount  rate  for  use  of  debit  cards  to  promote  card  based 
transactions which have not taken off in a big way although the number of cards issued is 
significant.  Regulators  have  also  to  ensure  that  service  providers,  particularly  non-banks, 
remain  healthy  and  robust  so  that  they  can  deepen  the  payment  system  infrastructure. 
Consumers  expect  access  to  the  payment  systems  that  provides  timely  services  to  them 
(Principle 18 of the PFMI). Therefore, a balance has to be achieved between timely service 
and fees charged by the service provider. Technologies and shared infrastructure are to be 
encouraged to minimize cost and ensure timely services due to economy of scale. The third 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
factor  of  efficiency  is  assurance.  All  the  stakeholders  should  have  assurance  in  using  the 
retail payments system. The retail payment system should have inbuilt capability to protect 
consumers’  interest,  particularly  in  the  electronic  payment  environment.  The  endeavors 
should  be  towards  designing  fraud  proof  systems  and  reliable  compensation  mechanisms 
that will boost confidence of all the stakeholders. 
Strategy 
Regulators of retail payment systems should put in place a short, medium and a long term 
strategy with a transparent manner (Principles 23 & 24 of the PFMI). It helps all the stake 
holders to prepare themselves in advance without any surprise. Reserve Bank of India, for 
example,  has  to  come  out  with  a  strategy  paper  in  the  form  of  Payment  Systems  Vision 
Document for 2012–15 describing all its plans for the next three years. A major focus area of 
the Vision Document is Retail Payments. The thrust of the vision is to proactively encourage 
electronic payment systems for ushering in a less-cash society in India and ensure payment 
and  settlement  systems  in  the  country  are  safe,  efficient,  interoperable,  authorised, 
accessible, inclusive and compliant with international standards. Reserve Bank of India had 
consulted all stake holders before finalizing the Vision Document so that they are on board 
during the critical phase of implementation. I am happy to share with you that such a strategy 
has enabled us to take many initiatives along with all the stakeholders. The strategy should 
include sensitizing all stakeholders like bank staff, system providers, service providers and 
consumers on the risk and responsibilities of using the payment services. Mediums like TV, 
social  media,  newspaper,  outreach  programmes  and  town  hall  meetings  are  best  way  to 
achieve  the  objectives.  The  school and  college  students  particularly  need  to  be  sensitized 
through their curriculum or through familiarization programmes as they are the future users of 
the  retail  payment  systems.  Pensioners,  housewives  and  unbanked  people  are  vulnerable 
groups  who  need  to  be  treated  on  a  special  footing  in  usage  of  retail  payment  products. 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  has,  for  instance,  started  an  initiative  called  e-BAAT  (Electronic 
Banking Awareness And Training) for creating awareness on use of different retail electronic 
payment products for different target groups. 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  let  me  reiterate  that  implementation  of  the  new  PFMI  is  going  to  be  a  big 
challenge before all of us. There is a need to assess the relevance of PFMIs for the Retail 
Payment Systems which are characterized by expanding volumes arising out of Person to 
Person (P 2 P), Government of Person (G 2 P) and e-commerce transactions, continuous 
innovations  and  increasing  complexities,  particularly  in  the  context  of  technology  driven 
products and processes. Possibly a “PFMI Light” approach for the Retail Payment Systems 
could be appropriate keeping in view the need for a safe, efficient and robust retail payment 
systems  that  would  serve  the  cause  of  accessible,  appropriate  and  affordable  financial 
services for the consumers, particularly those who have remained financially excluded. I am 
sure  this  two  day  seminar  would  further  enrich  our  understanding  of  the  Principles  of 
Financial  Market  Infrastructure  and  the  innovations  emerging  in  the  retail  payment  system 
space  through  the  presentations  of  eminent  experts  and  lively  interactions  among  the 
participants.  I  am  confident  the  views/suggestions  that  would  emerge  from  this  seminar 
would in some way help all the stakeholders to promote safe and sound payment systems in 
our respective jurisdictions. I wish all the participants a pleasant stay in India and wish the 
seminar all success. 
Thank you all for patient hearing. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
