Benoît Cœuré: Ensuring the smooth functioning of money markets 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the 17th Global Securities Financing Summit, Luxembourg, 16 January 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,1 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  speak  to  you  today  at  this  annual  Global  Securities  Financing  Summit 
organised by Clearstream / Deutsche Börse Group. 
In my remarks today, I will talk about the smooth functioning of money markets and the role 
of market infrastructures in this respect.  
The speech is composed of two parts. I will start with some comments on developments in 
the euro area (interbank) money markets. As you are well aware, the financial crisis and the 
subsequent  sovereign  debt  crisis  have  led  to  a  gradual  shift  from  the  unsecured  to  the 
secured segment of the money markets. Moreover, the crises have exposed the weaknesses 
of certain financial institutions, causing the European interbank money market to fragment. 
Fragmentation has occurred between cash-rich and cash-strapped banks and also between 
different  jurisdictions,  leading  to  a  “renationalisation”  of  money  markets.  Since  money 
markets can be a source and a propagation channel of financial instability, it is important to 
ensure their proper functioning and mitigate the potential risks they pose. 
In the second part of my speech I will consider the role of market infrastructures in ensuring 
well-functioning  money  markets.  For  this  part,  I  will  refer  back  to  work  conducted  by  the 
Basel  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  in  2010  when  it  examined 
the extent to which the market infrastructure for repos added to the uncertainty or instability 
evident  in  some  repo  markets.  I  will  take  up  two  issues  identified  in  the  related  report 
published by the CPSS2 and which can be considered relevant for the smooth functioning of 
euro money markets, i.e. the role of market infrastructures in providing adequate protection 
against  counterparty  risk  as  well  as  the  efficient  use  of  collateral.  In  so  doing,  I  will  also 
discuss some tensions which have emerged recently relating to a particular development at 
market infrastructure level, where it is important to quickly address the underlying issues in 
order to move forward. 
Secured and unsecured money markets: developments in the euro area 
1.  
Well-functioning money markets are an essential component of the financial system. When 
money markets do not function, financial stability and the transmission of monetary policy are 
at risk, with potentially severe adverse consequences for the real economy. Deep and liquid 
money  markets  insure  banks  against  liquidity  risk,  a  risk  that  arises  naturally  in  banking, 
where maturity mismatch is the nature of the business. Unsecured money markets exert a 
useful  disciplinary  effect  on  banks.  Money  markets  also  are  the  starting  point  for  the 
redistribution of the liquidity provided by central banks and hence the starting point for the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy.  For  example,  the  EONIA  rate  –  the  rate  of  unsecured 
overnight lending between some of the largest euro area banks – is an important first link in 
the chain of monetary policy transmission. 
Ever since the financial turmoil started in August 2007 – more than five years ago – and then 
became  a  severe  crisis  with  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  one  year  later  in 
                                                
1  
I  wish  to  thank  Fiona  van  Echelpoel,  Benjamin  Hanssens,  Florian  Heider,  and  Marie  Hoerova,  for  their 
contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
2   CPSS report: “Strengthening repo clearing and settlement arrangements”, September 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
September 2008,  money  markets  have  not  been  operating  smoothly.  The  outbreak  of  the 
financial  crisis  has  been  well  documented,  but  it  is  worthwhile  recalling  the  extent  of  the 
shocks,  which  are  still  being  felt  today.3  Within  a  few  days  after  the  demise  of  Lehman 
Brothers  on  15 September  2008,  the  EURIBOR-OIS  spread,  which  had  been  zero  a  little 
over  12  months  before,  rose  to  a  staggering  186  basis  points  (in  the  United  States  the 
spread rose to 365 basis points).  
In addition, cash-rich banks were apparently no longer lending to cash-poor banks. The flow 
of liquidity in the financial system came to a sudden stop. Prior to the bankruptcy of Lehman 
Brothers, banks hardly ever deposited funds at the ECB (where they earn the deposit facility 
rate,  which  at  the  time  was  1%  less  than  the  policy  rate).  After  the  Lehman  bankruptcy, 
banks suddenly deposited an aggregate amount of around €200 billion. Deposits increased 
since the ECB responded to the tensions in the market by accommodating the increase in 
banks’ demand for liquidity.4 The extent of banks’ use of the ECB’s deposit facility is a useful 
indicator of the impairment of the flow of liquidity throughout the banking system, especially 
when the group of depositing banks is different from the group of borrowing banks.5 
A further troubling indication of the malfunctioning of money markets right after the Lehman 
bankruptcy  came  from  cross-border  transactions.  Before  the  bankruptcy,  cross-border 
transactions accounted for 60% of all unsecured overnight interbank lending. Right after the 
bankruptcy,  this  proportion  dropped  to  50%.  A  fall  in  the  cross-border  flow  of  liquidity 
indicates  a  fragmentation  of  the  euro  area  money  market  along  national  borders  and 
threatens the implementation of a common monetary policy throughout the euro area. 
The  ECB  reacted  and  succeeded  in  calming  markets,  including  money  markets,  first  by 
conducting  two  monetary  policy  operations  with  a  three-year  maturity,  and  then,  most 
recently,  by  committing  to  remove  redenomination  risk  in  countries  having  signed  to  an 
ESM assistance programme (the so-called Outright Monetary Transactions, OMTs for short). 
For example, the share of the cross-border overnight transactions increased gradually from 
30% to 50% following the OMT announcement. 
The rise and fall of the EURIBOR-OIS spread, of the use of the ECB’s deposit facility and the 
proportion of cross-border transactions all indicate that banks are more risk-averse than they 
were  before  the  financial  crisis.  Money  markets,  especially  unsecured  ones,  suffer  from 
counterparty risk, that is, the fear of not being repaid. 
Accordingly,  driven  by  the  desire  to  protect  and  ensure  repayment,  transactions  in  money 
markets  have  become  both  more  short-term  and  secured.  There  is  no  official  data  on  the 
overall size of the repo market in the euro area, although surveys are regularly conducted by 
ICMA and the ECB. According to the latest ICMA survey, the total value of repo contracts 
outstanding on the books of the 62 participating institutions was €5.6 trillion in June 2012, 
in  December  2011.6  The  ECB’s  Money  Market  Study  of 
down 
from  €6.2 
trillion 
                                                
3   See,  for  example,  F.  Heider,  M.  Hoerova  and  C.  Holthausen,  “Liquidity  hoarding  and  interbank  market 
spreads:  The  role  of  counterparty  risk”,  ECB  Working  Paper  No  1126,  2009.  See  also  B.  Cœuré,  “The 
importance  of  money  markets”,  speech  delivered  at  the  Morgan  Stanley  16th  Annual  Global  Investment 
seminar, Tourrettes, Provence, 16 June 2012. 
Injecting liquidity in the financial system increases the assets of the Eurosystem, which leads to an equivalent 
increase in liabilities, in this case in the form of more deposits from banks. 
4  
5   A  similar  cessation  of  interbank  lending  after  the  Lehman  bankruptcy  has  been  documented  in  the  United 
States. See G. Afonso, A. Kovner, and A. Schoar, “Stressed, Not Frozen: The Federal Funds Market in the 
Financial Crisis”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 66, No 4, 2011. 
6   See International Capital Market Association, “European Repo Market Survey”, No 23, June 2012, available at 
http://www.icmagroup.org/assets/documents/Market-Info/Repo-Market-Surveys/ICMA-ERC-European-Repo-
Survey-June-2012.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
December 2012  with  172  banks  participating  shows  a  similar  development.7  The  Money 
Market  Study  also  compares  the  development  of  the  secured  with  the  unsecured  market. 
And  indeed,  while  the  unsecured  money  market  has  steadily  contracted  since  2007,  the 
secured money market has held its ground over the same period. 
Another, more recent and troubling development in the functioning of the money markets is 
the  on-going  investigations  into  manipulations  of  key  money  market  reference  rates.  The 
ECB is closely following this development and is supporting the attempts to reform reference 
rates, given the role they play in the transmission of monetary policy. In our response to the 
European  Commission’s  public  consultation,  while  stressing  that  reference  rates  should 
remain private market initiatives, we have called for short-term governance reforms to restore 
and  uphold  the  credibility  of  these  reference  rates,  associated  with  longer-term  measures 
involving changes in the calculation methodology. In the short term, governance reforms and 
increased supervisory and regulatory scrutiny can help to restore the market’s confidence in 
the  integrity  of  the  benchmarks  and  to  ensure  their  continuous  viability.  An  appropriate 
balance  must  be  found  between  a  sound  production  process  with  adequate  controls  and 
safeguards  on the  one hand,  and  cost-efficiency  for  contributing  banks on  the  other  hand. 
Also it is important that regulation is uniformly applied and enforced within the EU to avoid 
risks  of  further  fragmentation  in  the  money  markets,  and  that  international  coordination  is 
sought. In the longer term, a broader overhaul can be conceived, involving changes in the 
calculation  methodology  and  possibly  other  changes  to  reflect  the  structural  changes  that 
have  taken  place  in  terms  of  the  functioning  of  the  money  market  since  the  onset  of  the 
crisis,  such  as  the  shift  towards  secured  transactions.  However,  this  process  should  be 
primarily driven by the market, based on the needs of end-users, while being supported by 
the public sector.  
In  light  of  the  fundamental  importance  of  money  market  reference  rates,  we  are  closely 
following the developments taking place as regards the shrinking number of panel members 
for  establishing  EURIBOR  and  EONIA  rates.  Given  the  authorities’  commitment  to 
addressing  the  shortcomings  revealed  in  the  rate-setting  process,  it  is  in  the  interest  of 
markets  that  banks  remain  in  the  panel  while  the  regulatory  framework  is  being  amended 
and  behave  as  responsible  market  participants,  thus  preventing  potential  disruption  in  the 
functioning of an important financial market segment. 
Related  to  the  shift  of  money  market  transactions  to  the  secured  segment  is  the  use  of 
central  counterparties  (CCPs).8  In  2012,  CCP  repo  transactions  accounted  for  55%  of  all 
repo transactions (up from 50% in 2010). In addition to the use of CCPs, triparty repo9 has 
become more important. Triparty repo accounted for 11% of all repo transactions in 2012 (up 
from 9% in 2010). 
I will come back to CCPs and triparty repo later on, but would first like to say some words on 
collateral and haircuts.  
Collateral  of  course  is  intended  to  hedge  default  risk,  while  haircuts  are  usually  seen  as 
being intended to hedge the risk on that collateral. In times of market stress however, large 
and  sudden  margin  increases  can  create  self-reinforcing,  pro-cyclical  spirals  of  increasing 
weakness,  exacerbate  market  swings  and  oblige  market  dealers  to  provide  collateral  to 
                                                
7   See  ECB  Money  Market  Survey:  http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/euromoneymarketstudy201212en.pdf? 
4261e943bbcfec98572319740bda877b 
8   A  CCP  is  an  entity  that  interposes  itself  between  the  buyer  and  the  seller  of  a  repo,  thereby  reducing 
counterparty risk for both seller and buyer as long as the CCP itself is well diversified and well governed. 
9   Under  triparty  repo,  a  central  securities  depository  (CSD),  an  international  CSD  or  a  custodian  bank,  for 
example, acts as a facilitator between the buyer and the seller of a repo. The triparty agent handles the related 
collateral management, including valuation and substitution as well as re-use of the collateral with a central 
bank where possible. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
support  secured  transactions  just  when  it  is  most  costly  to  do  so.  Two  examples  come  to 
mind. 
First, when the sovereign debt crisis intensified, haircuts on government bonds under stress 
also went up because the rise in yields reduced their collateral value. For example, when the 
spread  on  Italian  ten-year  government  bonds  relative  to  core  issuers  rose  to  over 
450 basis points in November 2011, the haircut for Italian government bonds was increased 
by 500 basis points, leading to a posting of intraday margins about 12 times greater than in 
any other preceding month in 2011. On the day of the increased haircut alone, the spread 
between Italian and German government bonds rose by 60 basis points.  
In  addition,  margin  increases  generally  reduce  the  amount  that  a  repo  seller  can  borrow, 
which might increase the seller’s probability of default. This can trigger a negative feedback 
loop: increases in the probability of default might cause repo buyers to increase the haircuts 
imposed  on  the  seller, which  reduces  the  amount  the  seller  can  borrow  (when  it  needs  to 
borrow subsequently), and so on.10 
The  ECB/Eurosystem  has  been  successful  in  easing  market  tensions  using  standard  and 
non-standard tools. However, the underlying structural problems which relate to uncertainty 
about risk, whether in the form of counterparty, credit, liquidity or redenomination risk, need 
to be solved. When implemented, the Single Supervisory Mechanism will play a key role in 
comforting  confidence  in  euro  area  banks  and  re-establishing  cross-border  liquidity  flows 
within the region. Market re-integration has now started. It will succeed only if it is supported 
by  continued  efforts  by  governments  to  bridge  fiscal  and  competitiveness  imbalances. We 
can consider how the further development of market infrastructures can be an important part 
of this process. 
The role of market infrastructures 
infrastructures  have  proven  very  resilient 
2.  
In  the  second  part  of  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  consider  the  role  of  market 
infrastructures.  
the  crisis.11  Resilient  market 
Market 
infrastructures also play an important role in helping to address some of the issues that have 
been  identified  in  the  money  markets.  In  this  regard  we  can  usefully  build  on  the  CPSS’ 
analysis of areas for further development and for enhancing market infrastructures in repo 
markets. The CPSS has identified seven issues directly or indirectly related to repo market 
infrastructure that may affect the resilience of repo markets. I would like to pick up on two of 
these seven issues now in the context of euro area money markets. The first issue concerns 
“effective  protection  against  counterparty  credit  risk”,  which  I  believe  can  be  addressed  to 
some  extent  by  the  use  of  CCPs,  while  the  second  issue  relates  to  “the  inefficient  use  of 
(high-quality) collateral due to constraints within repo clearing and settlement arrangements”, 
which is being addressed via collateral optimisation initiatives.  
to 
Role of central counterparties (CCPs) 
a)  
CCPs play a major role in reducing counterparty risk, thereby mitigating the potential risks 
associated  with  the  drying-up  of  funding  sources.  First,  as  independent  clearing  agents, 
CCPs are well positioned to offer effective protection against counterparty risk through the 
application of consistent margin requirements to a wide range of counterparties and through 
                                                
10   See  T.V.  Dang,  G.  Gorton,  and  B.  Holmström,  “Financial  Crises  and  the  Optimality  of  Debt  for  Liquidity 
Provision,” working paper, November 2009. 
11   Speech  by  Benoît  Cœuré,  at  the  joint  ECB-MNB  conference  on  “Cost  and  efficiency  of  retail  payments: 
2012. 
Evidence, 
https://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2012/html/sp121115_2.en.html. 
banks”,  Budapest, 
15  November 
actions 
central 
policy 
and 
role 
of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
multilateral netting and risk sharing. Second, CCPs also provide enhanced transparency for 
the markets they serve, which in turn facilitates appropriate risk management and may also 
help to reduce excessive leverage. Third, as a result of multilateral netting, CCPs may also 
free up collateral.12  
Overall, provided that it is well-managed and in line with applicable regulatory and oversight 
requirements, a CCP can be expected to guarantee trade execution under a wide range of 
market conditions, including extreme or exceptional scenarios. This supports trading also at 
times  of  distress  when  uncertainty  and  risk  aversion  may  disrupt  activity  and  exacerbate 
volatility in markets.  
Given  the  benefits  of  central  clearing  for  market  resilience  and  financial  stability  more 
broadly, the ECB welcomes the overall increase in the share of transactions that are cleared 
through  CCPs.  It  also  supports  the  execution  of  repo  transactions  via  CCPs.  In  Europe, 
market incentives seem sufficiently strong to favour use of CCPs, and we would not see a 
need at the current juncture to advocate regulatory action to impose central clearing of repos, 
as has been the case for OTC derivative transactions.  
At  the  same  time,  an  expanded  use  of  CCPs  should  be  accompanied  by  effective 
supervision and oversight, which always needs  to be kept up to date and in line  with new 
market  developments.  The  global  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  (PFMIs), 
developed  jointly  by  CPSS  and  the  International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions 
(IOSCO) and published last April, are a key pillar in this regard. Major jurisdictions around 
the  world  are  now  updating  their  supervisory  and  oversight  requirements  for  CCPs  in 
response  to  the  new  PFMIs,  thereby  leading  to  an  even  more  robust  set-up  for  CCPs. 
Another major strand of work currently underway at both international and EU level concerns 
the  development  of  recovery  and  resolution  regimes  for  CCPs.  In  the  EU,  the  European 
Commission has recently consulted the public on a possible framework for the recovery and 
resolution  of  financial  institutions  other  than  banks,  covering  CCPs  and  other  market 
infrastructures.  We  trust  that  the  European  framework  will  be  closely  aligned  with  the 
respective global work of the CPSS and IOSCO.  
Besides CCPs, another key infrastructure to be considered in relation to the repo market is 
the  trade  repository.13  Trade  repositories  provide  a  comprehensive  overview  of  the 
transactions in the markets they serve, which contributes to better risk management, public 
supervision and oversight as well as market discipline. The ECB actively supports the current 
work to develop such a central database for the EU repo market.14 It could be established in 
a joint effort by public authorities and the financial industry. 
Collateral optimisation  
b)  
Let me now turn to the second point on collateral optimisation.  
As  recognised  in  the  CPSS  report,  the  “efficient  and  flexible  use  of  collateral  facilitates 
market participants’ collateral management and can contribute to the development of liquidity 
and smoothly functioning repo markets”. This was considered to hold true for repo markets in 
normal times as well as allowing an enhancement of the resilience of repo markets in times 
of  stress.  The  need  for  efficient  and  flexible  use  of  collateral  facilities  has  even  become 
                                                
12   See, for instance, D. Duffie and H. Zhu, “Does a Central Clearing Counterparty Reduce Counterparty Risk?”, 
Review of Asset Pricing Studies, Vol. 1, Issue 1, December 2011. 
13   Trade  repositories  are  central  databases  that  compile  and  aggregate  data  across  various  execution  and 
clearing venues. 
14   See  Vítor  Constâncio,  Introductory  remarks  to  the  ECB  workshop  –  Repo  market  and  securities  lending: 
see  https://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2012/ 
3  December 
database, 
2012, 
towards 
html/sp121203.en.html. 
an  EU 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
greater in the past couple of years, taking into account the generally increasing demands for 
collateral assets coming from various quarters. Efforts are therefore being made to seek out 
creative  and  innovative  ways  to  make  better  use  of  existing  collateral  in  terms  of  making 
these assets available, when and where they are needed. 
Both the Eurosystem and the industry have taken a number of initiatives in this respect. At 
today’s conference, you will probably hear more about the many innovative solutions that are 
coming from the industry in this respect, so I will limit myself to some key initiatives in which 
the  ECB/Eurosystem  is  directly  involved,  although  naturally  cooperating  closely  with  the 
industry. 
The first initiative in this respect of course is TARGET2 Securities – T2S. The main objective 
of establishing this single European infrastructure for securities settlement is to reduce risk 
and  increase  efficiencies  in  the  post-trade  environment,  especially  as  far  as  cross-border 
settlement  is  concerned.  This  greatly  enhanced  process  for  transferring  collateral  across 
national  borders  in  Europe  will  in  itself  be  a  huge  benefit  to  market  participants  –  both  to 
cover  collateralised  money  market  transactions  as  well  as  collateralised  credit  operations 
with  central  banks.  Moreover,  T2S  incorporates  several  features  that  aim  to  help  banks 
optimise their collateral management. Once T2S goes live for example, banks will no longer 
need  to  hold  multiple  buffers  of  collateral  when  settling  in  several  European  countries  and 
can  instead  use  the  state-of-the-art  T2S  auto-collateralisation  and  self-collateralisation 
features, also on a cross-border basis.  
The  second  initiative  that  I  want  to  mention  is  the  implementation  of  cross-border  triparty 
collateral  management  services  within  the  Eurosystem  collateral  framework.  Triparty 
services, as you know, involve a triparty agent acting as a facilitator between the two parties 
to the repo. Triparty services are already used  within the current operational framework of 
the Eurosystem, although only on a domestic basis and limited to a small number of euro 
area countries (Germany, Luxembourg, France and Italy). In 2014 however, the possibility to 
collateralise Eurosystem credit operations by using triparty services on a cross-border basis 
will  be  introduced,  thereby  allowing  for  greater  efficiencies  in  collateral  mobilisation  and 
re-use  of  collateral  received  in  triparty  repo  with  the  respective  central  banks  of  the 
Eurosystem.  
Another 
triparty  settlement 
interoperability.15 When we refer to this, we should keep in mind that an important feature of 
the European repo market set-up is the (increasing) integration between the repo clearing, 
settlement and collateral management layers. While there is an increasing integration across 
these  layers  however,  there  remains  in  some  cases  a  certain  fragmentation  that  limits 
traders’  opportunities  based  on  the  location  of  the  collateral. Working  in  close  cooperation 
with  the  European  Repo  Council  (ERC),  the  international  central  securities  depositories 
(ICSDs)  have  started  to  develop  a  triparty  settlement  interoperability  model  to  support 
settlement of general collateral trading cleared by CCPs. With the interoperability between 
the  two  ICSDs’  collateral  management  systems,  market  participants  would  avoid  the 
fragmentation of their liquidity pools. 
The  ECB  is  fully  behind  this  market-led  triparty  interoperability  initiative  because  of  its 
collateral pooling benefits and efficiencies. Moreover, it reduces the costs for triparty repos 
related  to  collateral  management,  settlement  and  legal  charges,  and  allows  trading  to  be 
executed regardless of the location of the collateral. Non-discriminatory, risk-based access to 
and  by  market  infrastructures  is  an  important  element  of  the  new  international  regulatory 
framework.  With  market  participants  increasingly  moving  to  central  clearing,  the  business 
is  associated  relates 
initiative  with  which 
the  ECB 
to 
                                                
15   Triparty  interoperability  is  especially  relevant  for  standard  interbank  operations/repos,  which  are  cleared  at 
CCPs and where CCPs use standardised baskets of eligible collateral (also referred to as general collateral 
(GC) baskets). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
case for triparty interoperability is growing. Furthermore, the new CPSS-IOSCO principles for 
financial  market  infrastructures  were  specifically  strengthened  to  facilitate  access  and 
interaction between such infrastructures.  
Some  of  the  key  parties  involved  in  this  triparty  settlement  interoperability  initiative  have 
started  to  show  signs  of  retreating  in  past  months.  While  the  ECB  understands  the 
complexity of establishing a triparty interoperability model and the substantial efforts and in 
particular  the  investment  costs  required  to  make  it  work,  it  would  like  to  strongly  urge  all 
parties to continue to work together. Interoperability will bring important benefits – by allowing 
a more efficient use of collateral by bringing together separate pools of liquidity. The ECB 
remains ready to continue to support the triparty settlement interoperability initiative and to 
help bring the project forward.  
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude.  
The resilience and proper functioning of market infrastructures is of paramount importance to 
ensure  well-functioning money  markets.  Public  authorities  and  central  banks  have  both  an 
interest and an obligation to ensure that market infrastructures have a high level of security 
and operational performance. The market infrastructures in the euro area are performing well 
in this respect and, as we have heard, there are a number of initiatives under way to further 
enhance this (in particular as regards the collateralisation processes). 
I would, however, urge industry representatives to further pursue the triparty interoperability 
project,  and  seek  to  find  ways  to  address  the  issues  which  have  recently  appeared.  In 
particular, where these issues are not going to be addressed by T2S, I would encourage the 
industry  to  find  a  solution  now.  It  is  of  great  importance  that  collateral  can  flow  freely, 
regardless of its location.  
I am confident that further improvements will be made. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
