Mojmír Hampl: Should non-euro area countries welcome the banking 
union? 
Speech by  Mr Mojmír Hampl, Vice Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the Europolis 
Conference “Auf dem Weg zu mehr Stabilität”, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, 5 April 
2013. 
 My remarks today focus on non-euro area countries’ attitude to the SSM (Single Supervisory 
Mechanism), as it is the key part of what is called the banking union (BU) which is “almost” 
finalized. 
Let me start with a statement that the so-called BU is currently only an emerging concept. 
We are very far from the final version and it is difficult to guess what the final outcome might 
be.  Nevertheless,  what  we  get  in  the  end  will  be  critical  for  the  position  of  non-euro  area 
countries. 
So, what is it all about? The proposed BU is based on four/five pillars, or “legs”: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
Problems emerge immediately, because each pillar is at a different stage of negotiation and 
approval, involves different rules of approval and, more importantly, so far each applies to a 
different group of countries: 
a. 
CRD IV – the Capital Requirements Directive, or single rules 
SSM, or the Single Supervisory Mechanism under the ECB 
Single resolution and recovery mechanisms a rules 
A single system of deposit guarantees 
Finally, a fiscal back-up through the ESM 
The ESM already exists. But it will have to be clarified under what conditions it may 
be used for direct recapitalization of financial institutions. What’s important for our 
discussion is that exclusively euro-area countries are covered with the ESM. 
CRD IV will apply to all 27 EU members and is close to be approved. 
b. 
The SSM has recently been negotiated for euro-area countries plus volunteers from other 
c.  EU countries, but has not been approved yet. Germany is currently blocking its 
approval. Its political sensitivity is not negligible, but do not forget that “money” is not 
involved directly yet. Nevertheless, its future functioning will require money, and that 
will be crucial. 
The single resolution and recovery rules for banks are proposed and meant for the 
whole EU27, while the resolution authority will most likely cover only the members 
of the SSM. All these are now under preparations and discussions, exactly as the 
new rules for the DGS. 
d. 
The  resolution  rules  and  the  single  DGS  are  where  the  political  clashes  will  inevitably 
happen. Two reasons for that: 
1. 
First, this is where the money enters. One has to realize that the incentives of the 
various  countries  and  pan-European  institutions  are  different.  “Northern”  countries 
want to cut the banking sectors of “southern countries” free from local politicians, but 
at  no  additional  cost.  ”Southern  countries”  want  money.  And  many  pan-European 
institutions  and  politicians  across  the  board  support  anything  heading  towards  a 
European  political  union.  Different 
in 
negotiations. 
incentives  mean  different  positions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
2. 
Second, some EU bodies are obsessed with the “all EU countries must be same” 
approach. While there may be some point to this, why insist on it in the case of the 
single resolution system, for instance, if it has been negotiated that the SSM only 
applies  to  euro-area  countries  plus  volunteers?  One  can  hardly  expect  non-euro 
area countries not participating in the SSM to jump at the single resolution system if 
it means sharing the burden with those inside the banking union without the same 
treatment  in  the  area  of  a  fiscal  back-stop.  At  the  same  time,  would  you  join  the 
SSM if you did not have a clue how the single resolution rules were going to work? 
The CNB’s position was: let’s discuss the whole thing (BU) in one shot as a one compact and 
coherent  package  where  the  balance  between  powers,  duties,  responsibilities  and  money 
always  remains  assured.  And  negotiate  everything  as  a  single  animal,  so  that  illogical 
inconsistencies are not being produced all along. Sure, that would take much more time, but 
the final outcome might look better and we would not build up the house from the roof down. 
We are debating the supervisory part first, while burden-sharing (money) is being left for the 
future.  The  sequence  of  steps  should  ideally  be  exactly  the  opposite  one.  Why?  My 
observation is that the way the various bail-outs and the SSM have been negotiated so far 
shows that the readiness and willingness even among euro-area countries to share money is 
declining over time. And this is exactly the opposite of what should have been happening if a 
functioning  banking  and  contingent  fiscal  union  had  been  emerging.  So  we  are  risking 
creating a half-baked BU which will not necessarily be ready for future bad times. And it is 
also a partial answer to the question of potential participation of some non-euro countries in 
the SSM. Simply, it is too premature to judge whether the BU is going to be a good project 
worth participating, or not. Only after the whole project with all it “legs” is created can one 
seriously answer this question. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
