John Murray: Exits, spillovers and monetary policy independence 
Remarks  by  Mr  John  Murray,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian 
Association for Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 27 August 2013. 
 Introduction 
Extraordinary  monetary policy  measures  were  taken  in  the  heat  of  the financial  crisis,  and 
continue to be applied five years later, as a necessary part of restoring economic growth and 
stability. While no major advanced economy currently employing these measures is expected 
to begin withdrawing monetary stimulus in the near future, mildly encouraging data from the 
United States, coupled with recent statements from various Federal Reserve officials, have 
definitely caught the market’s attention. 
The outsized impact that the statements had on asset prices around the world is notable for 
a  number  of  reasons.  First,  the  statements  only  suggested  that,  provided  economic  data 
continued  to  come  in  largely  as  expected,  the  Fed  might  start  reducing  the  rate  at  which 
further monetary  stimulus  was  being  added  to the  system. This  is materially  different from 
actually  reducing  the  amount  of  stimulus  which,  in  the  case  of  the  United  States,  is  still 
expected by most observers to begin in the second half of 2015. 
Second, market consensus, as judged by commentary just prior to the Fed statements, had 
already  arrived  at  the  same  conclusion  –  specifically,  if  economic  events  transpired  as 
projected,  Fed  “tapering”  would  begin  sometime  in  the  autumn  or  early  winter  of  2013.  In 
other words, the Fed’s statements were merely confirming, in a conditional sense (i.e., with 
no guarantees), what the market already expected. 
Despite  all  of  this,  the  pronouncements  appeared  to  trigger  an  exaggerated  reaction  in 
financial markets. Bond yields spiked, and prices for a number of other financial assets that 
had  benefited  from  expectations  of  ongoing  asset  purchases  by  the  Fed  dropped 
precipitously, not just in the United States but in almost every other country. 
The magnitude of the response was viewed by many with a mixture of surprise and alarm. 
Surprise because these prospective policy moves had been so widely anticipated and clearly 
telegraphed by the Fed, and because the market reaction was so pervasive. Alarm because 
it suddenly seemed that unwinding unconventional monetary policies (UMP) might not be as 
straightforward and painless as many had thought or at least had hoped. The fears voiced by 
UMP critics appeared to have been confirmed. 
My objective here today is twofold: first, to put these developments in a broader context and 
diffuse some of the angst that has surrounded them; second, to view them more specifically 
from the standpoint of Canada. What are the likely implications for our economy? What are 
the  possible  risks?  What  are  the  elements  that,  especially  from  a  Canadian  perspective, 
provide some comfort? 
Uncharted waters 
Policy-makers around the world responded in a timely and aggressive manner in the autumn 
of  2008,  when  what  had  previously  been  characterized  as  a  period  of  “extreme  market 
turbulence”  developed  into  a  full-blown  crisis.  The  severity  of  the  situation  was  quickly 
recognized, as was the potential for it to degenerate into another Great Depression, but on a 
truly global scale. Coordinated and substantive fiscal remedies were applied, together with 
concerted monetary policy easing. However, room for manoeuvre on the fiscal front in most 
advanced  economies  (AEs)  was  soon  exhausted,  and  attention  had  to  turn  to  fiscal 
consolidation as opposed to expansion. Monetary policy was, by default, the “only game in 
town” – but it, too, faced a critical constraint. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Low inflation and the impossibility of pushing nominal interest rates significantly below zero 
meant that there was little scope for lowering real interest rates and easing credit conditions 
by conventional means. Official short-term interest rates – the instrument of choice for central 
banks – were cut aggressively but soon hit the zero lower bound, where most of them have 
remained for the past five years (Chart 1). 
This in itself was an “unconventional” development. Official short-term rates had never been 
as  low  or  had  remained  there  for  as  long.  It  was  soon  apparent,  however,  that  even  this 
would  not  provide  sufficient  easing  to  restore  market  functioning  and  resurrect  collapsing 
economic activity. Other, more unconventional, means would have to be deployed. 
These  alternative  measures  took  two  forms.  The  first  is  often  referred  to  as  “forward 
guidance,” and involves an explicit commitment by central banks to leave short-term interest 
rates  low  for  a  prolonged  period.  By  doing  this,  central  banks  hope  to  condition  market 
expectations, lowering interest rates further out the yield curve (much like additional cuts to 
short-term interest rates would have done, had they been possible). 
The commitment to extend monetary easing well beyond the point where central banks might 
have  been  expected  to  begin  tightening  under  more  normal  circumstances  also  served  to 
raise  inflation  expectations,  thereby  lowering  the  real  rate  of  interest  even  further.  The 
increased  certainty  provided  by  forward  guidance  regarding  the  path  of  future  rates 
reinforced this stimulative effect.1 
Most  central  banks  that  used  this  instrument  initially  relied  on  a  loose  form  of  calendar  or 
date-based guidance, in which they committed to leave rates low for “an extended period of 
time.” In some cases, a more specific time frame was mentioned, such as mid-2014 or mid-
2015. 
The  commitment  was  not  unconditional,  however.  There  was  a  clear, 
implicit, 
understanding  that,  if  the  state  of  the  macroeconomy  and  the  inflation  outlook  were  to 
change materially, the central bank would respond appropriately. 
The Bank of Canada pioneered the use of conditional guidance in April 2009.2 It committed 
to  hold  the  policy  rate  at  its  effective  lower  bound  through  the  second  quarter  of  2010, 
conditional on the outlook for inflation. The Bank’s guidance succeeded in changing market 
expectations regarding the future path of interest rates, providing the desired stimulus and 
thereby underpinning a rebound in growth and inflation in Canada (Chart 2).3 
In more recent applications, forward guidance has become more explicitly outcome- or data-
based,  with  some  central  banks  identifying  thresholds  such  as  specific rates  of  inflation  or 
unemployment which, if crossed, would prompt a reconsideration of their policy track. 
The  second  form  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  employed  by  many  central  banks 
involves  purchasing  large  amounts  of  government  bonds  or  other  financial  instruments. 
“Quantitative  easing,”  as  it  is  generally  known,  is  viewed  as  a  complementary  and  more 
direct means of easing credit conditions, exerting immediate upward pressure on the prices 
of the assets that were purchased, as well as those of other assets, through a process of 
if 
                                                
1   At the zero lower bound, interest rate risk is asymmetric: short-term rates can rise, but they cannot fall. This 
asymmetry causes the mean or expected outlook for short rates to be greater than the modal or most likely 
path. Thus, guidance can lower long-term rates by reducing uncertainty about the future path of short-term 
rates, even if it does not change the modal expectation as to the duration at the lower bound. 
2   For  a  review  of  the  evolution  of  forward  guidance,  see  M.  Carney,  “Monetary  Policy  After  the  Fall”  (Eric 
J. Hanson Memorial Lecture, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 1 May 2013). 
3   See Z. He, “Evaluating the Effect of the Bank of Canada’s Conditional Commitment Policy,” Discussion Paper 
No. 2010–11, Bank of Canada, 2010; and M. Woodford, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-
Rate  Lower  Bound,”  paper  presented  at  the  Jackson  Hole  Symposium,  “The  Changing  Policy  Landscape,” 
31 August–1 September 2012 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
portfolio  substitution.4  It  is  this  form  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  that  has  probably 
provoked the greatest  degree  of  unease  on the  part  of many  market  participants. Chart 3 
shows how the balance sheets of various central banks have grown over the past five years. 
They have now reached levels equivalent to 20 or 30 per cent of GDP. 
In the case of Japan, the central bank’s balance sheet is projected to hit nearly 60 per cent of 
GDP within the next two years. While a number of vocal critics dispute the wisdom of these 
actions, there is general agreement – based on a growing body of evidence – that forward 
guidance  and  quantitative  easing  have  had  a  significant  and  beneficial  impact.  Credit 
conditions have improved, market functioning has been restored and interest rates well out 
the yield curve have been lowered materially. More importantly, real economic activity and 
employment have been supported, and a global deflation/depression has been avoided.5 
Some  people  believe  that  these  policies  will  prove  too  effective  and  will  induce  runaway 
inflation;  others  believe  that  they  have  been  largely  ineffective  but  carry  significant  future 
costs  in  the  form  of  financial  instability  and  lost  central  bank  independence.  Even  the 
supporters of unconventional monetary policies would acknowledge that they involve some 
risk, but that, at least until now, the benefits have far outweighed any current or prospective 
costs. 
Extricating ourselves from UMP and effecting a smooth exit, the critics argue, is going to be 
extremely difficult if not impossible. They contend that the situation is “unprecedented,” and 
that we are in “uncharted waters.” 
Once bitten... 
One can understand why emerging-market and developing economies (EMDEs) might feel 
particularly exposed. Over the postwar period, there have been repeated episodes of sharp 
interest rate increases in the advanced countries followed by financial crises in EMDEs. In 
the  post-Volcker  period,  for  example,  short-term  interest  rates  in  the  United  States  have 
jumped by more than two percentage points within a one-year period on several occasions. 
A similar, although slightly less extreme, pattern can be observed in long-term interest rates. 
One  of  the  best-known  examples  of  a  disorderly  jump  in  U.S.  long-term  rates  occurred  in 
1994, immediately preceding the Mexican financial crisis (Chart 4). 
Mexico’s  experience  is  not  unusual.  In  many  cases,  the  spillover  effects  on  EMDEs  have 
been  dramatic.  Moreover,  these  episodes  involved  large  adjustments  in  conventional,  as 
opposed  to  unconventional,  monetary  policy.  Aggressive  tightening  in  the  early  1980s  by 
                                                
4   Quantitative easing refers to outright purchases of financial assets funded by the expansion of the monetary 
base  through  the  creation  of  central  bank  reserves  –  in  other  words,  enlarging  the  central  bank’s  balance 
sheet. If assets are imperfect substitutes, these purchases push up the price of, and reduce the yield on, the 
purchased  assets  (which  are  normally  government  securities  but  could  include  private  assets).  As  private 
investors  rebalance  their  portfolios  toward  other  assets,  the  stimulative  impact  is  spread  across  financial 
markets. 
  Many central banks, especially during the most acute phases of the crisis, also employed policies known as 
“credit easing,” which involves purchases of private sector assets in certain credit markets that are important 
to  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system  but  are  temporarily  impaired.  The  objective  of  credit  easing  is  to 
reduce risk premiums and improve liquidity and trading activity in these markets. 
In addition to these “hydraulic” effects, both quantitative and credit easing can have “signalling” effects. That 
is, both can affect perceptions of the central bank’s reaction function. Like forward guidance, signalling effects 
can provide additional stimulus by affecting expectations of future monetary and financial conditions. 
 5   See  E.  Santor  and  L.  Suchanek,  “Unconventional  Monetary  Policies:  Evolving  Practices,  Their  Effects  and 
Potential  Costs,”  Bank  of  Canada  Review  (Spring  2013):  1–15;  B.  Bernanke,  “Monetary  Policy  Since  the 
Onset  of  the  Crisis”  (speech  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  Symposium,  Jackson 
Hole, Wyoming, 31 August 2012); and M. Joyce, M. Tong and R. Woods, “The United Kingdom's Quantitative 
Easing Policy: Design, Operation and Impact,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin (2011Q3): 200?212. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Volcker, for example, coincided with the beginning of the Latin American debt crisis and the 
so-called “lost decade.” This is not to say that policy tightening by advanced economies was 
always the primary cause of these crises, nor was it always the catalyst. Many, if not most, 
were self-induced. 
Ironically,  concern  among  EMDEs  over  the  past  five  years  has  focused  mainly  on  the 
problems  associated  with  too  much  monetary  easing  in  advanced  economies.  Negative 
spillover  effects  in  the  form  of  excessive  capital  inflows  and  upward  pressure  on  their 
exchange rates have at times made it difficult for them to control domestic credit conditions 
and have threatened their international competitiveness. 
Without  arguing  the  merits  of  these  complaints  in  detail,  it  is  perhaps  worth  noting  the 
following. First, most observers, including the International Monetary Fund, believe that pull 
factors  have  been  more  important  than  push  factors  in  attracting  these  capital  inflows.  In 
other  words, 
to 
accommodative policies elsewhere, was the major driving force. 
Second,  the  argument overlooks  the fact that  UMP  presumably  led  to faster growth  in  the 
advanced economies and the global economy more generally, which benefited the EMDEs. 
The alternative would have been much less appealing. 
Finally, there might have been less need for UMP were it not for the restrictive measures that 
many  of  the  EMDEs  had  used  to  control  capital  flows  and  exchange  rate  movements 
beginning  well  before  the  crisis.  These  restrictive  measures  contributed  to  sizable  global 
imbalances, which in turn fuelled the crisis. They also inhibited the required rebalancing of 
global demand after the crisis, increasing the need for aggressive monetary policy responses 
by the United States and other advanced economies. 
Spillover  effects  from  policies  run  both  ways.  EMDEs  have  grown  large  enough  that  their 
collective influence on global conditions now matches that of the advanced economies. 
inherent  attractiveness  of 
in  EMDEs,  as  opposed 
investing 
the 
Why this time might be different 
Before getting too excited about the negative consequences of exiting, it is important to step 
back  and  consider  why  events  might  unfold  in  a  manner  that  is  more  benign  than  some 
critics have feared. 
The first – and most obvious – reason is that the exit will start from a point of extraordinary 
policy accommodation, and will involve gradually reducing the amount of stimulus in place, 
as opposed to initiating a rapid and severe policy tightening. Moreover, it will be undertaken 
only when officials believe there are clear and convincing signs that the U.S. economy and, 
subsequently,  others,  have  achieved  self-sustaining  momentum  (“escape  velocity”).  In  this 
sense, exiting should be regarded as a good and natural thing. 
Unlike  earlier  episodes,  these  actions  will  not  be  taken  in  the  context  of  an  overheated 
economy that requires a quick and substantive dose of policy tightening to dampen economic 
activity and inflationary pressures. 
The  second  reason  is  that  monetary  authorities  have  learned  the  value  of  clear 
communication  from  previous  unfortunate  experiences,  such  as  in  1994,  when  almost  no 
attempt was made to forewarn markets.6 
The  same  can  be  said  of  the  more  positive  experience  of  the  past  few  years  in  which 
effective communication has been used successfully to condition market expectations. 
                                                
6   Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan did try to prepare markets for higher short-term interest 
rates in testimony before the Joint Economic Committee a few days before the February 1994 meeting of the 
Federal Open Market Committee at which the tightening began. However, this preparation was quite minimal 
in comparison with recent Fed statements about “tapering.” 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The third reason is that not all advanced economies will be exiting from UMP at the same 
time,  because  they  are  at  different  points  in  the  business  cycle.  Much  of  Europe  is  still  in 
recession and the European Central Bank is considering additional policy easing.7 Japan is 
in the midst of more ambitious easing as part of the “Three Arrows” program for reflating its 
economy.  The  lack  of  synchronization  in  policy  stances  across  countries  should  help  to 
moderate the reaction of global interest rates. 
The fourth reason is that unconventional monetary policy is not really all that unconventional, 
either in concept or application. In many ways, it is a throwback to an earlier era. Using asset 
purchases to inject or withdraw high-powered money into or from the economy is how most 
textbooks  used  to  describe  the  monetary  policy  process.  Conducting  monetary  policy  by 
indirect means, through announced changes in the target overnight rate, while simpler and 
effective in normal times, is a relatively new development. 
Guidance, the other form of UMP, is simply a modern version of moral suasion and window 
guidance, which were actively used by most central banks through the 1950s and 1960s (if 
not  later).  The  pre-Treasury  Accord  period  also  serves  as  an  example  of  rather  direct 
guidance.8 
Neither  is  the  scope  nor  size  of  the  monetary  policy  adjustment  unprecedented.  It  all 
depends  on  how  you  measure  it.  The  growth  in  asset  purchases,  whether  measured  in 
absolute terms or relative to GDP, is truly enormous, and is no doubt responsible for much of 
the shock and awe that UMP has attracted. However, if one focuses on the resulting growth 
of credit over the recent period or the movements in long-term interest rates, the effects are 
less  concerning.9  The  swings  in  credit  and  interest  rates  from  the  start  of  many  past 
tightening  episodes 
than  anything  currently 
contemplated. 
This is not to say that the process is without risks or will necessarily be smooth. However, as 
noted earlier, authorities have learned some valuable lessons about communication and the 
importance  of  working  with  markets.  Their  intentions  and  tentative  game  plans  have  been 
clearly laid out, as well as the events that would likely trigger the start of the exit. 
In the United States, for example, the Fed has introduced explicit thresholds and outlined the 
sequence  in  which  the  withdrawal  of  stimulus  would  likely  proceed.  The  exit  would  be 
preceded by a gradual decrease in the size of asset purchases (i.e., a slowing in the amount 
of  extra  easing),  followed  by  the  end  of  asset  purchases,  a  gradual  withdrawal  of  excess 
liquidity  from  the  system,  measured  increases  in  the  federal  funds  rate  and,  eventually,  a 
normalization of the Fed’s balance sheet. All of this would be contingent on the evolving state 
of  the  economy.  Importantly,  incentives  would  be  well  aligned.  Those  countries  that  are 
their  conclusion  were  much  wider 
to 
                                                
7   At the European Central Bank’s July and August press conferences, ECB President Mario Draghi stated that 
the ECB’s Governing Council was maintaining an easing bias. In August, he said specifically that they had 
unanimously agreed that “the key ECB interest rates, including the rate on the deposit facility, will remain at 
present or lower levels for an extended period of time.” He emphasized that this downward bias is due to the 
subdued outlook for inflation. See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2013/html/is130801.en.html. 
In  1942,  after  the  United  States  entered  the  Second  World  War,  the  Federal  Reserve  committed  to 
maintaining a low interest rate peg on government bonds. It did so at the request of the U.S. Treasury. The 
Fed’s independence was restored in 1951 with the Treasury Accord. 
8  
9   The fact that large changes in the monetary base have been associated with only moderate changes in credit 
and interest rates may lead some to conclude that these policies have been less effective than anticipated. 
This conclusion, however, is based on a faulty premise. In fact, the magnitude of the change in the monetary 
base is not surprising. As the opportunity cost of holding money – the nominal interest rate – declines, the 
interest elasticity of money demand increases. Near the zero lower bound, this effect causes the velocity of 
money to collapse. The effectively infinite demand for money causes the relationship between the narrow and 
broad  monetary  aggregates  (the  money  multiplier)  to  break  down.  Consequently,  changes  in  the  monetary 
base have almost no effect on asset prices and aggregate demand. Rather, the stimulative effects of UMP are 
mainly attributable to the induced changes in the composition of private sector portfolios and signalling effects. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
exiting would understand the dangers of leaving too early or too late, while those countries 
that would feel the effects should have no desire to see the process unfold any differently. 
Having a major advanced economy fail to reach escape velocity through a premature exit, or 
generate an inflationary spiral through a late departure, would surely be in no one’s long-term 
interest. 
Spillovers 
Spillovers are an unavoidable consequence of openness and globalization. Policy actions by 
systemically important countries – both AEs and EMDEs – will necessarily have an impact on 
others.  Indeed,  similar  actions  by  many  small  countries,  taken  together,  would  have  the 
same effect. 
Moreover, there should be no presumption that spillovers are always and everywhere bad, 
although the term admittedly sounds slightly pejorative. Actions taken by one country that are 
in its own long-term interest (keeping its house in order) typically benefit others (keeping the 
neighbourhood safe). More fundamentally, the benefits that open markets bring by directing 
capital to its most productive ends and allowing countries to maximize the gains from trade 
cannot typically be separated from other external shocks without serious costs. 
Those  countries  with  less-developed  institutions  and  financial  systems,  limited  policy 
credibility,  greater  foreign  currency  debt  and/or  more  precarious  economic  situations  are 
certainly more exposed than others to external shocks.10 It is, therefore, not surprising that 
the  recent  Fed  statements  had  a  larger  impact  on  assets  in  EMDEs  with  higher  debt  and 
deficits and that are perceived to be more dependent on external financing (Charts 5, 6). 
This was a natural and predictable reaction, but one that should be largely reversed unless 
fundamentals justify it. 
The  first  response  that  countries  should  make  if  the  shocks  persist,  and  are  regarded  as 
unhelpful,  is  to  review  the  stance  of  their  own  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  to  determine 
whether there is anything that requires adjustment. 
If  the  external  shocks  seemed  to  pose  financial  stability  risks,  macroprudential  measures 
might  be  introduced  as a  complement  or  backstop  to  existing  regulations  and  oversight of 
domestic financial systems. However, they should be used judiciously by targeting financial 
vulnerability itself, and not as a pretext for more protectionist and, ultimately, welfare-eroding 
measures.  The  temptation  to  impose  additional  capital  controls,  engage  in  persistent  and 
large-scale  exchange  rate  intervention  and  otherwise  inhibit  necessary  adjustments  in 
relative prices should be resisted. 
Some countries that dislike the spillover effects associated with the monetary policies of AEs 
are also unhappy with the options that they have for managing them. 
Many  of  these  countries  favour  fixed  exchange  rate  arrangements.  However,  trying  to 
stabilize  the  exchange  rate  with  monetary  policy  is  viewed  as  undesirable  because  of  the 
implications  for  domestic  credit  conditions.  Capital  controls  would  allow  them  to  stabilize 
domestic  credit  conditions  and  the  exchange  rate  but  create  serious  distortions  over  time. 
The preferred solution, in the opinion of many of these countries, is for the United States to 
internalize the effects of its monetary policies – more specifically, not to exit or at least to do 
so at a time that is more convenient for others. 
                                                
10   In previous episodes, an accumulation of foreign currency sovereign debt played an aggravating role. In the 
current  situation,  it  is  firms  in  EMDEs,  not  sovereigns,  that  have  built  up  significant  unhedged  short-term 
foreign currency debt. A depreciation of EME currencies would raise the local currency value of firms’ debt. 
EME  authorities  could  limit  the  accumulation  of  foreign  currency  debt in  the  future  by  adopting  appropriate 
regulatory  measures  and  by  allowing  for  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility.  The  latter  would  discourage 
unhedged foreign currency debt by creating two-sided exchange rate risk. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The problem that these unhappy countries face has a long history in international economics 
– old wine in new bottles. The most succinct exposition of this problem is often credited to 
the  Canadian  economist  Robert  Mundell,  and  is  popularly  referred  to  as  the  “impossible 
trinity” or “trilemma” (Figure 1).11 
Countries,  Mundell  observed,  cannot  simultaneously  enjoy  the  advantages  of  free  capital 
movements,  a  stable  exchange rate  and  an  independent  monetary  policy.  Only  two  of  the 
three are possible at any one time, so countries must choose. 
Following the advice of their critics would oblige the United States and several other AEs to 
surrender some of their monetary policy independence. In our view, however, this would be a 
Faustian bargain. There is a much better way to proceed. The trilemma should be resolved 
by  allowing  exchange  rates  to  float,  while  preserving  the  free  movement  of  capital  and 
monetary  independence  for  all.  Other  palliatives  might  be  appropriate  as  a  temporary 
expedient  if  there  is  obvious  evidence  of  market  excesses,  but  should  not  be  used  as  an 
ongoing crutch. 
Canada’s experience 
Globalization and the economic interdependence that it implies are nothing new for Canada. 
We have always been a relatively small and open economy with close ties to other, much 
larger, economies. Globalization and the emergence of new economic powers in  Asia and 
Latin America have expanded the number of connections but not the fundamental facts of 
Canada’s economic situation or the policy environment within which we operate. 
Canada abandoned all of its currency controls and virtually all of its capital controls shortly 
after the Second World War, and moved to a floating exchange rate in 1950, well before the 
collapse of the Bretton Woods system.12 
Despite  the  monetary  independence  that  a  floating  exchange  rate  gave  us,  our  long-term 
interest rates have always moved closely with those of the United States (Charts 7 and 8). 
This  should  not  come  as  a  surprise,  given  the  close  real  economic  ties  between  our 
economies and the highly integrated nature of our capital markets. The same is true of other 
countries now that they have shifted to open regimes similar to our own (Charts 9 and 10). 
Nevertheless, Canada has been able to control inflation and has been a successful inflation 
targeter since 1991, influencing economic activity and aggregate prices through adjustments 
in interest rates at the short end of the yield curve. These changes are in turn reflected, albeit 
with declining influence, out the yield curve to longer-dated instruments and, importantly, in 
the exchange rate. 
In this regard, the exchange rate serves as both an automatic buffer for internal and external 
shocks and as an integral part of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. Indeed, in a 
classic paper written in the early 1960s, Mundell (Mundell, 1963) showed how, in a world of 
complete asset substitutability and perfect capital mobility, real interest rates would be largely 
determined  by  international  market  forces  with  the  exchange  rate  moving  in  response  to 
changes  in  domestic  monetary  policy  to  provide  most  of  the  desired  accommodation  or 
tightening. 
Mundell’s model was extremely simple and included a number of heroic assumptions, but it 
accurately  reflected  important  elements  of  the  world  in  which  open  economies  operate. 
                                                
11   R.  A.  Mundell,  “Capital  Mobility  and  Stabilization  Policy  under  Fixed  and  Flexible  Exchange  Rates,”  The 
Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science 29, no. 4 (1963): 475–485. 
12   Canada has had more experience with a floating exchange rate than any other major country. While Canada 
reverted to a fixed exchange rate in 1962, this proved to be temporary, and the dollar was allowed to float 
again in 1970. Overall, the Canadian dollar has floated for 55 of the past 63 years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Although  authorities  are  able  to  exercise  considerable  influence  over  real  interest  rates, 
especially at the short end of the yield curve, and central banks are ultimately responsible for 
the rate of inflation in their economies, it is the exchange rate that does a great deal of the 
work. 
It is important to note, in this regard, that international arbitrage does not require complete 
interest  rate  equalization,  just  the  equalization  of  (risk-adjusted)  rates  of  return,  including 
anticipated  moves  in  the  exchange  rate.  Control  of  the  short  rate  is  possible  because 
monetary policy shifts the expected rate of currency appreciation or depreciation. 
The response of the Canadian economy to the Fed’s easing of UMP over the past five years 
has been exactly as one would expect. Asset purchases and Fed guidance put downward 
pressure on long-term interest rates in the United States and upward pressure on equity and 
other asset prices. The U.S. dollar depreciated as investors sought higher returns elsewhere, 
putting  downward  pressure  on  foreign  interest  rates  and  upward  pressure  on  global  asset 
prices and foreign currencies. 
Although the resulting upward pressure on the Canadian dollar served as a drag on domestic 
growth, the effects of this headwind were more than offset by the positive effects of stronger 
U.S.  demand  for  our  exports,  higher  asset  prices,  higher  commodity  prices  and  an 
improvement  in  our  terms  of  trade.13  In  other  words,  Fed  easing  was  a  net  positive  for 
Canada,  making  a  difficult  situation  better.  The  process  will  work  in  reverse  once  the  exit 
begins, but with one important difference: it will take place in the context of a strengthening 
U.S.  economy.  The  improving  underlying  strength  of  the  U.S.  economy  should  more  than 
compensate for the drag from higher interest rates. Stronger external demand, coupled with 
downward  pressure  on  our  currency  and  support  for  commodity  prices  from  a  global 
economic recovery, will provide the lift. 
Of  course,  the  process  is  unlikely  to  unfold  quite  as  neatly  or  mechanically  as  I  have  just 
described.  Rudiger  Dornbusch  (Dornbush,  1976)  extended  Mundell’s  framework  to  a 
dynamic  environment  and  showed  that  forward-looking  behaviour,  together  with  price 
stickiness, could generate exchange rate overshooting.14 In the real world, there are a host of 
other  reasons  for  exchange  rates  and  other  asset  prices  to  overreact,  including  “animal 
spirits”  and  excessive  exuberance.  These  should  be  transitory,  however,  with  markets 
settling at levels consistent with fundamentals after a short period of time, assisted perhaps 
by some additional guidance. 
Conclusion 
The  exit,  when  it  comes,  will  not  be  without  challenges  both  for  those  exiting  and  those 
feeling the effects of the exit. Nevertheless, this process should be viewed positively, as a 
sign that the global economy is  well on the  way to recovery and that it is time for interest 
rates to begin normalizing. If interest rates are kept low for too long, both price and financial 
stability would suffer. 
Markets seldom operate in a smooth, textbook, fashion. They are prone to excessive moves 
in response to breaking news or changes in sentiment. Although past experience with sharp 
interest rate moves might give cause for concern, especially among smaller economies with 
less-developed financial markets and institutions, a number of factors are working in favour 
of a smoother transition this time. 
                                                
13   On the impact of UMP on Canada, see Box 1 in the Bank of Canada’s October 2012 Monetary Policy Report. 
It  should  be  noted  that  several  other  factors  also  influenced  the  Canadian-dollar  exchange  rate,  including 
strong commodity prices and general weakness in the U.S. dollar. 
14   R. Dornbusch, “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,” Journal of Political Economy 84, no. 6 (1976): 
1161–76. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
One of the most critical differences is the emphasis that is now put on clear communication 
and  the  increased  awareness  of  the  importance  of  transparency.  The  unwinding  of  UMP 
should be one of the best-telegraphed events in monetary history. 
A second important factor working in our favour is the tight alignment of incentives on the 
part of countries that are exiting as well as those that are affected by the process. No one 
wants it to proceed in a disorderly manner, and no one should want the exit to occur too early 
or too late. 
A  third  significant  development  from  the  perspective  of  EMDEs  is  the  greatly  improved 
circumstances in which these countries find themselves, in terms of their size and resilience. 
The  impressive  fiscal, financial  and  structural  reforms  that  many  of  them  have  undertaken 
will put these economies in a far better position than they were 30, 20, or even 10 years ago. 
The  same  cannot  be  said  of  every  country,  of  course.  Much  more  remains  to  be  done  in 
many  EMDEs  as  well  as  AEs.  There  can  be  no  guarantee  that  the  exit  process  will  end 
positively  for  all  countries.  Vulnerabilities  that  were  previously  concealed  by  generous 
amounts  of  global  liquidity  may  become  more  evident  as  normal  monetary  conditions  are 
restored. All of this underscores the importance of countries getting their houses in order. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
