Graeme Wheeler: Forces affecting the New Zealand economy and policy 
challenges around the exchange rate and the housing market 
Speech  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the 
Institute of Director, Auckland, 30 May 2013. 
 Thank you for the invitation to meet with you today. I would like to discuss some of the key 
forces  shaping  our  economy  and  the  challenges  they  present  for  businesses  and  for  the 
Reserve  Bank.  I  will  focus  mainly  on  two  highly  topical  areas:  the  exchange  rate  and  the 
housing market, but first let me frame them in a broader context. 
Forces affecting the New Zealand economy 
i)  
Our economy is buffeted by a range of domestic and international factors. Some are driven 
by  natural  events,  like  the  $40  billion  rebuild  activity  in  Canterbury,  and  the  decline  in 
agricultural  production  and  spending  associated  with  the  drought.  Some  result  from 
international  conditions,  like  the  20  percent  decline  and  subsequent  recovery  seen  in  our 
export commodity prices over the past 18 months, or the monetary and liquidity policies of 
major  central  banks  that  increase  the  upward  pressure  on  our  exchange  rate.  Other 
pressures, such as house price inflation, are driven by supply shortages, pent up demand, 
and  the  lowest  mortgage  rates  in  50  years.  And  others,  such  as  the  government’s  fiscal 
consolidation, represent major adjustments in domestic economic policy. 
At  the  same  time,  businesses  also  face  challenges  in  adjusting  to  powerful  long-term 
structural changes that are global in nature. These include: the growing importance of China 
and the East Asia Region as a major pole for global growth and international trade; the global 
transfer  of  skill  enhancing  technologies;  the  relative  decline  in  the  international  price  of 
information  technologies  and  manufactured  goods;  and  the  rising  international  demand  for 
highly skilled labour. 
Producers therefore have many global and domestic forces to respond to. The success with 
which  they  adjust  to  global  structural  changes  is  also  influenced  by  current  economic 
conditions. For example, the challenges faced by producers competing against foreign low-
cost producers, or multinationals with global supply chains, increase when our exchange rate 
overshoots.  On  the  other  hand,  the  high  exchange  rate  makes  imports  of  capital  goods 
cheaper and may encourage the take up of capital intensive technologies. 
The interaction of multiple forces can pose difficult policy challenges for the Reserve Bank, 
although taken in isolation, the direction of their short-term impact on output, employment, 
and  inflation  is  reasonably  clear.  For  example,  the  high  exchange  rate  and  fiscal 
consolidation generally exert downward pressure on demand, output growth, and inflation. In 
contrast, the massive programme of reconstruction in Canterbury, and the increase in house 
prices  and  residential  construction  in  Auckland,  are  boosting  demand  and  output,  and 
tending to exert upward pressure on inflation. 
One  of  the  more  complex  analytical  challenges  for  example,  is  whether  New  Zealand  can 
achieve the resource allocation needed for the rebuilding activity in Canterbury and Auckland 
without seriously damaging its tradables sector. This damage could occur if the relative price 
changes needed to induce the supply response spilled over into broad inflationary pressures, 
necessitating tighter monetary policy and creating further upward pressure on the exchange 
rate. This is one reason why reducing the Government’s demand for resources through fiscal 
consolidation is so important. 
I will now turn to the issue of exchange rate pressures and the housing market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
ii)   Exchange Rate Pressures 
The  high  exchange  rate  continues  to  be  a  significant  headwind  for  the  tradables  sector, 
restricting export earnings and encouraging imports over domestic tradables production. 
Our real effective exchange rate is about 18 percent above its 15 year average1. There are 
several reasons for this exchange rate appreciation. Foreign investors are attracted by our 
higher growth, commodity linkages into Asia, and positive interest rate differentials in a low 
yield  world.  Our  economy  is  growing  more  strongly  than  most  advanced  economies,  our 
terms of trade are 17 percent higher than their average level during the 1990s, and central 
banks  in  countries  representing  around  two  thirds  of  world  output  currently  have  official 
interest rates between 0 and 1 percent. In addition, various types of quantitative easing have 
added USD5 trillion of assets to central bank balance sheets over the past four years. These 
policies,  which  seek  to  stimulate  growth  by  ‘printing  money’,  have  negative  currency 
spillovers for attractive investment destinations such as New Zealand that experience foreign 
portfolio inflows and upward exchange rate pressure. 
Fluctuations in investor risk appetite are also an important factor influencing our exchange 
rate. The surge in global liquidity, and especially that associated with quantitative easing, has 
led to rising equity markets in several countries. We see this most recently in Japan and the 
US,  where  the  Nikkei  and  S&P  indexes  have  increased  by  40  percent  and  16  percent 
respectively since the end of 2012. 
A close relationship exists between the New Zealand dollar and international risk assets such 
as equities. A rise in the S&P 500 often reflects a broader ‘risk on’ trading environment that 
leads to higher exchange rates in the currencies of better performing advanced economies 
such as New Zealand, Australia, Norway, Sweden, and some emerging market economies. 
Among the developed market currencies, the Kiwi has been the third strongest performing 
currency against the US dollar (after the Mexican peso and Swedish krona) over the past 12 
months. 
Figure 1: NZ dollar and global equities 
Source: RBNZ, Haver 
                                                  
1   The  real  effective  exchange  rate  provides  a  more  accurate  picture  of  competitiveness  than  the  nominal 
effective  exchange  rate  as  it  corrects  for  differences  in  relative  inflation  rates  (or  relative  unit  labour  cost 
movements) between New Zealand and its major trading partners. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On 11 April 2013, our exchange rate, on a trade weighted basis, reached a post float high of 
79.7. Fortunately it has retreated a little in recent weeks as a result of a stronger US dollar. 
Investors, however, remain keen to hold New Zealand dollar assets even though, in our view, 
the  exchange  rate  remains  significantly  over-valued.  For  the  current  exchange  rate  to  be 
sustainable  in  the  long  term,  sizeable  increases  in  the  terms  of  trade  and/or  productivity 
would be needed. 
In mid-2012 the IMF suggested that New Zealand’s exchange rate was over-valued by 10–
20 percent. The current account deficit is sizeable, and private sector external indebtedness 
is high. Foreigners already hold 69 percent of outstanding New Zealand government bonds. 
Investors  also  appear  to  downplay  the  liquidity  risks  inherent  in  a  small  market  like  New 
Zealand. Our past exchange rate cycles have exhibited substantial overshooting followed by 
a sharp and rapid exchange rate depreciation. Such rapid exchange rate corrections reflect 
the drain in market liquidity that can occur when a small market like New Zealand begins to 
turn down. 
Figure 2: NZ’s real effective exchange rate 
 Source: Bank for International Settlements 
Note:  BIS  real  effective  exchange  rate  for  New  Zealand,  broad  measure  incorporating 
bilateral rates with 61 economies. 
It  is,  nevertheless,  possible  that  the  exchange  rate  could  remain  strong  for  some  time. 
Recent  output,  demand,  and  confidence  indicators  in  New  Zealand  have  been  favourable 
whereas key economic indicators in the Eurozone remain grim and there is some uncertainty 
about  the  strength  of  growth  in  the  US.  A  further  surge  in  global  liquidity  is  expected  as 
Japan endeavours to double its base money supply within two years. And while the Federal 
Reserve could begin to cut back its bond purchase programme later in the year, quantitative 
easing  could  well  increase  in  the  UK  and  the  euro  area.  In  addition,  central  banks  and 
sovereign  wealth  funds,  which  tend  to  be  more  long-term  investors,  have  been  increasing 
their presence in the New Zealand market. 
The Reserve Bank has been responding to the rising exchange rate through two avenues: in 
maintaining the Official Cash Rate (OCR) at an historically low level; and through a degree of 
currency intervention. 
The  high  exchange  rate  is  reflected  in  the  current  low  level  of  the  OCR.  The  appreciating 
exchange rate exerts downwards pressure on inflation in the tradables sector by lowering the 
cost of imported goods and reducing activity and resource pressure in the tradables sector 
(tradables inflation has been negative since the second quarter of 2012). This means that the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
OCR  can  be  set  at  a  lower  level  than  would  be  the  case  if  the  exchange  rate  had  not 
appreciated as strongly. 
Figure 3: Tradables and non-tradables inflation 
 Source: Statistics NZ 
In assessing whether to intervene in the exchange market, we apply four criteria. These are 
whether the exchange rate is at an exceptional level, whether its level is justifiable, whether 
intervention  would  be  consistent  with  monetary  policy,  and  whether  market  conditions  are 
conducive to intervention having an impact. This last factor is especially important given the 
volume  of  trading  in  the  Kiwi.  (In  the  most  recent  survey  –  April  2010  –  by  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, the Kiwi was the tenth most traded currency in the world with daily 
turnover of spot and forward exchange transactions totalling around USD $27 billion.) 
In  recent  months  we  have  undertaken  some  foreign  exchange  transactions  to  try  and 
dampen  some  of  the  spikes  in  the  exchange  rate.  But  we  are  also  realistic  in  respect  of 
potential  outcomes  given  the  strength  of  the  foreign  demand  for  the  New  Zealand  dollar 
relative to the scale of our intervention capacity. We can only hope to smooth the peaks off 
the exchange rate and diminish investor perceptions that the New Zealand dollar is a one-
way bet, rather than attempt to influence the trend level of the Kiwi. But we are prepared to 
scale up our foreign exchange activities if we see opportunities to have greater influence. 
iii)   Housing pressures 
Housing has a particularly important role in the New Zealand economy. It comprises almost 
three  quarters  of  household  assets  and  mortgage  credit  accounts  for  over  half  of  total 
banking system lending. Consequently, housing is a major source of value and of risk to both 
our household sector and banking system. 
In considering the sources of risk around housing, the Reserve Bank focuses on three broad 
dimensions. First, what are the inflation risks from rising construction costs, rents, and other 
housing-related  expenditures,  and  the  additional  spending  from  ‘wealth  effects’  associated 
with rising house prices and households’ willingness to borrow against housing capital gains? 
Second, how well are the banks capitalised in order to protect their balance sheets against a 
significant fall in house prices, and how serious might the risk be for individual banks and the 
domestic financial system as a whole? And third, what is the possible impact of a significant 
fall in house prices on the New Zealand economy? While these three risks relate to both our 
price stability and financial stability mandates, it is the financial stability risk that concerns us 
most in the current situation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  IMF  consider  New  Zealand  house  prices  to  be  over-valued  by  around  25  percent2. 
House prices, relative to disposable incomes and rents, are high by international standards, 
and  unlike  in  some  other  economies,  our  house  prices  did  not  decline  significantly  in  the 
aftermath of the global financial crisis. Our median house price is 12 percent above the end 
2007 level even though New Zealand experienced the biggest house price boom in its history 
over the 2003 to 2007 period (and the most rapid house price inflation in the OECD). 
We are now into our second major house price cycle over the past decade and house prices, 
as measured by the Real Estate Institute of New Zealand, rose by 8 percent over the past 
year  (March  quarter  2013  over  March  quarter  2012),  and  13  percent  in  Auckland  and  10 
percent in Christchurch. Outside these areas, prices rose by an average of around 4 percent, 
although there is considerable variation among districts. 
House price increases are being driven by a combination of supply shortages (especially in 
Auckland and Christchurch), pent up demand, and the lowest mortgage rates since the mid-
1960s. The rise in house prices in Auckland in particular has strong momentum. Easy credit 
conditions mean that the cost of credit is now only slightly above average rental yields of 4.5 
percent and this, combined with the rise in house prices, increases the incentive for renters 
to become first home buyers and for existing house owners to upgrade. 
Banks are competing aggressively to meet the demand for mortgage lending. Consequently, 
the share of mortgage lending to clients with deposits less than 20 percent of the value of the 
house now comprises around 30 percent of new lending across the five major banks – up 
from around 23 percent in October 2011. Households remain highly levered with household 
debt around 145 percent of household disposable income. The correction in the debt ratio 
after the global financial crisis was gradual relative to the build up over the 15 years prior to 
the global financial crisis, and the ratio has recently picked up. 
Figure 4: Household debt as a percent of disposable income 
 Source: RBNZ 
Despite being over-valued, house prices could continue rising for some time. In this respect, 
the  recently  agreed  Auckland  Accord  reflects 
the 
responsiveness of housing supply. Other measures can help. The adoption of the full range 
of supply side measures in the Productivity Commission’s recent report would lower costs, 
and  the  demand  for  housing  could  also  be  moderated  by  changing  the  tax  treatment  of 
housing to reduce its attractiveness as an investment relative to other assets. But the current 
the  growing  need 
improve 
to 
                                                 
2  
IMF, April 2013, “New Zealand – Staff report for the 2013 Article IV Consultations”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
supply/demand  imbalance  in  Auckland  is  very  large  and  it  could  take  several  years  to 
address this through supply measures alone. 
Adding to the challenge is the decline in capacity in the construction industry in the last five 
years. According to the latest Business Demographic Statistics, in February 2012 there were 
5,000 fewer firms and 14,000 fewer employees in the construction sector than there were in 
February 2008. Despite this overall decline, construction sector employment in Canterbury 
had  increased  by  15  percent.  Although  the  construction  sector  is  a  relatively  fluid  industry 
and attracts workers from other sectors, the level and pace of construction activity outside 
Canterbury will no doubt be constrained by the pull of resources into the Canterbury rebuild. 
A strong run-up in housing markets can be a risk to future financial stability because it can 
increase both the risk of a sharp correction and the consequent financial sector disruption. 
The Reserve Bank is concerned that the current escalation of house prices is increasing the 
probability and potential effect of a significant downward house price adjustment that could 
result from a future economic or financial shock. These concerns are shared by the OECD 
and by the IMF in its recent review of the New Zealand economy, and housing risks have 
been noted recently by all three of the major international credit rating agencies. 
We are responding to the financial stability risks around the housing market in several ways: 
by  raising  banks’  capital  requirements  for  housing  lending;  conveying  our  concerns  about 
risks  to  financial  stability;  and  putting  in  place  a  framework  for  macro-prudential  policy  to 
address those risks and increase the financial system’s resilience. 
Earlier this month, following a review of the major banks’ housing risk models, we raised the 
risk weights applying to all current and new high loan-to-value ratio (LVR) housing loans for 
the four major banks that use their own models to calculate minimum capital requirements. 
This  represents  a  12  percent  average  increase  in  housing  capital  (an  increase  of  around 
$125 million on average) and it should further strengthen the capacity of banks to withstand a 
housing downturn and encourage banks to review the riskiness of the loans they are writing. 
We  have  been  expressing  concerns  about  the  financial  stability  risks  associated  with  the 
scale  of  housing  lending,  and  especially  high  LVR  lending,  in  our  published  research  and 
speeches,  and  in  our  conversations  with  bank  boards,  audit  committees,  chief  executives, 
and risk management teams. 
We  recently  completed  a  round  of  public  consultation  on  a  macro-prudential  policy 
framework  that  is  aimed  at  building  additional  resilience  in  the  financial  system  during 
periods of rapid credit growth and rising leverage or abundant liquidity. The instruments can 
also  help  to  dampen  growth  in  credit  and  asset  prices  that  might  pose  risks  to  financial 
stability. These measures would require banks to hold additional capital buffers, have higher 
proportions of stable sources of funding, or limit the share of high LVR lending. Instruments 
such as counter cyclical capital buffers and overlays on sectoral risk weights are aimed more 
at  increasing  banks’  capital  adequacy  rather  than  increasing  the  cost  of  lending  for 
borrowers. Quantitative restrictions on the share of high LVR lending are designed to more 
directly affect the supply and cost of this type of lending. 
Two  weeks  ago  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  I  signed  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding 
confirming  the  elements  of  the  policy,  including  the  range  of  policy  instruments,  and 
governance arrangements relating to their possible deployment. We are currently working on 
the operational details for each of the instruments and will soon be consulting with banks on 
these features. 
Macro-prudential instruments directed at the financial sector risks arising from the housing 
sector  have  been  deployed  in  several  countries  (eg.,  Canada,  Israel,  Korea,  Norway,  and 
Sweden), with weight often put on restrictions around the level of high LVR lending. While 
there  are  important  design  issues  to  address  in  devising  such  measures,  the  empirical 
evidence to date suggests that during episodes of quickly rising real estate prices, LVR limits 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
can  help  reduce  the  incidence  of  credit  booms  and  decrease  the  probability  of  financial 
distress and sub-par growth following the boom3. 
One should be cautious in predicting the size of the impact of such measures when house 
prices  are  increasing  rapidly,  but  we  believe  that  macro-prudential  instruments  could  have 
played a useful role in building up capital buffers and reducing credit demand and asset price 
pressures in the housing price boom of 2003–2007. 
iv)   The exchange rate and the housing market 
The exchange rate and the housing market present difficult challenges for monetary policy 
when both the currency and asset prices appear to be overvalued and investor demand is 
expected to remain strong. 
Generally,  housing  demand  can  be  constrained  by  raising  official  interest  rates  and  letting 
them feed through into higher mortgage costs. However, while this would help constrain the 
demand  for  mortgage  finance,  increasing  the  OCR  would  carry  significant  risks  in  New 
Zealand in the current environment. It would increase the interest rate differential between 
New Zealand and most of the advanced countries, and could lead to a further strengthening 
in the exchange rate and further downward pressure on tradable goods prices. This would, in 
turn,  be  expected  to  push  CPI  inflation  further  below  the  1  to  3  percent  target  range.  The 
exchange rate impact could be pronounced if investors believed that the increase in the OCR 
was a precursor to further increases and saw New Zealand as leading other countries in the 
monetary policy tightening phase. 
Viewing the issue from another perspective, if our exchange rate continues to strengthen on 
a trade weighted basis, in the absence of a corresponding improvement in New Zealand’s 
economic outlook, inflation pressures would diminish and a reduction in the OCR might be 
warranted. However, with mortgage interest rates at a 50-year low, large housing shortages 
in Auckland and Christchurch, and surveys indicating that home buyers expect price rises to 
continue, a lower OCR would quickly feed into higher house prices and further increase the 
risks to financial stability. 
This is where macro-prudential policies can play a useful role. Capital and liquidity overlays 
can help build up buffers in the banking system while adding to the cost of bank funding. And 
loan-to-value restrictions may help to reduce the actual supply of mortgage lending. 
While these measures are aimed at financial stability objectives, their effects might also have 
the  benefits  of  increasing  the  degrees  of  freedom  available  to  the  Reserve  Bank  in 
conducting  monetary  policy.  For  example,  if  house  price  pressures  abate,  all  other  things 
unchanged, it would increase the possibility that the OCR could remain at its current level for 
longer  than  through  this  year,  which  is  the  time  profile  built  into  the  forward  projections 
contained in the March 2013 Monetary Policy Statement. Similarly, if housing pressures are 
much less of a concern and the exchange rate continues to appreciate and the inflation risk 
looks low, it may create opportunities to lower the OCR. 
Macro-prudential measures can be useful in helping to restrain housing pressures, but they 
are  no  panacea.  This  reinforces  the  importance  of  progressing  measures  to  enhance 
productivity in the construction sector, free up land supply, and examine related tax issues. If 
the  house  price  and  credit  expansion  begin  to  fuel  excessive  consumption  spending  and 
inflationary pressures, a monetary policy response would become more likely. 
                                                 
3   Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’ Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro, April 2013, “Rethinking Macro Policy II; Getting 
Granular”, IMF Staff Discussions Note. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
v)   Concluding comments 
As a small open economy, New Zealand can expect to be buffeted by an array of domestic 
and financial shocks that are sometimes temporary in nature or linked to longer-term global 
structural  change.  But  these  are  extraordinary  times.  Not  only  does  the  economy  need  to 
absorb the impact of a significant drought, a major programme of fiscal reduction, and the 
resource allocation associated with rebuilding our second largest city, we also have to adjust 
to  heavy  portfolio  inflows  that  cause  our  exchange  rate  to  appreciate  and  reduce  the 
profitability  and  competitiveness  of  our  tradables  sector.  And  we  need  to  do  so  at  a  time 
when house price inflation is increasing risk in the New Zealand financial system. 
Many of these challenges will be with us for some time. The Government’s fiscal adjustment 
is expected to be spread over three years, the Canterbury rebuild is likely to take a decade or 
longer, and the housing supply/demand imbalance in Auckland could take three to five years 
to close if left to supply measures alone. On the external side, New Zealand is likely to be an 
attractive investment destination for the foreseeable future and interest rate rises in the major 
economies may be two or more years away. The Reserve Bank needs to achieve its price 
and financial stability objectives in this environment. Doing so will require us to draw on the 
full array of policy instruments, including macro-prudential instruments, as appropriate. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
