Ryuzo Miyao: Central banking further into uncharted territory 
Speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
held by the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of Japan, Tokyo, 28 May 2013. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  honor  and  pleasure  to  have  an  opportunity  to  speak  today  at  the  Foreign 
Correspondents’  Club  of  Japan.  Almost  five  years  have  passed  since  the  outbreak  of  the 
global  financial  crisis.  Central  banks  in  the  advanced  economies  have  been  implementing 
unconventional  monetary  policies.  With  the  introduction  of  quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary  easing  –  or  QQE  –  in  April,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  decided  to  step  further  into 
uncharted territory of monetary policy. 
Many central banks have been pursuing aggressive easing policies to put their economies on 
a  sustainable  growth  path  through  price  stability.  Such  aggressive  measures  have  already 
come close to the boundaries of fiscal policy. The role of a central bank to ensure financial 
system stability has also become increasingly important. 
To ensure price stability and financial system stability, central banks of today are mandated 
to play an ever larger role and to ensure accountability. They are expected to steer policy 
aggressively  yet  prudently.  Today,  I  will  talk  about  monetary  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Japan, 
which goes further into uncharted territory. 
I.  
Developments of economic activity and prices, and path toward achieving 
the 2 percent price stability target 
Let  me  begin  by  presenting  a general  picture  of  the  current  developments  and  outlook for 
economic activity and prices. 
Japan’s economy has started picking up. Public investment has continued to increase, and 
housing  investment  has  generally  been  picking  up.  Private  consumption  has  increased 
resilience.  Exports  and  production  have  stopped  decreasing.  Business  fixed  investment 
appears to have stopped weakening. As for the outlook, domestic demand is likely to remain 
resilient due to the effects of monetary easing and various economic measures. The growth 
rates of overseas economies will gradually pick up. Japan’s economy is expected to return to 
the  moderate  recovery  path  around  mid-2013.  Thereafter,  a  virtuous  cycle  of  production, 
income, and spending is expected to be maintained. Japan’s economy is likely to continue 
growing above the potential growth rate. 
The  year-on-year  rate  of change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI, for all  items  excluding 
volatile food) has recently been around 0 percent or slightly negative. As for the outlook, it is 
expected  to  follow  an  upward  trend.  That  reflects  factors  such  as  an  improvement  in 
aggregate supply and demand balance as well as a rise in the medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations. Toward  the  latter  half  of the  three-year  projection  period, the  CPI  inflation  is 
likely to reach the price stability target of about 2 percent (Chart 1). 
Based  on  the  general  picture,  in  my  view,  the  path  toward  achieving  the  2  percent  price 
stability target is expected to go through the following six steps (Chart 2). 
First,  the  recovery  in  overseas  economies  will  strengthen  the  recovery  trend  in  Japan’s 
production  and  exports,  thereby  increasing  corporate  profits.  Second,  financial  conditions 
including  asset  prices  will  become  even  more  accommodative.  Behind  that  are  several 
factors, such as the continued trend of investors’ active risk-taking – the so-called “risk-on” 
trend, a moderate rise in U.S. long-term interest rates, and strong monetary easing by the 
Bank of Japan. Third, these two steps will encourage firms’ positive initiatives to make fixed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
investment  and  implement  structural  reform.  That  will  in  turn  bring  a  gradual  rise  in  the 
potential  growth  rate  of  Japan’s  economy.  Fourth,  with  the  expectations  for  sustainable 
economic  recovery,  household  spending  should  stay  firm  and  prices  should  gradually 
increase,  accompanied  by  the  narrowing  of  the  negative  output  gap.  Fifth,  public  inflation 
expectations will gradually rise. And, in that situation, the actual inflation rate is likely to rise 
above  1  percent  during  fiscal  2014.  And  sixth,  as  the  virtuous  cycle  of  a  five-step  path  is 
maintained,  economic  recovery  will  continue.  The  public’s  expected  inflation  and  the 
medium-  to  long-term  trend  inflation,  the  so-called  “anchor,”  will  likely  increase  gradually 
toward  2  percent.  As  a  result,  the  actual  inflation  rate  is  projected  to  continue  to  rise, 
approaching the 2 percent price stability target. 
As I told above, the Japan’s economy is likely to achieve the 2 percent target as the inflation 
rate rises together with a sustainable economic recovery. Meanwhile, the public’s expected 
inflation, a key element in the inflation outlook, consists of three factors. The actual inflation 
rate, expectations for economic recovery, and the medium- to long-term trend inflation (i.e., 
the anchor). In the fifth and sixth steps, it is important that the public’s expected inflation rises 
as  the  actual  inflation  as  well  as  expectations  for  economic  recovery  steadily  rise.  As  the 
actual inflation rate rises further beyond 1 percent, the public recognizes that the anchor will 
increase accordingly. 
II.  
Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
Outline 
In  April,  the  Bank  introduced  the  QQE  policy.  The  new  policy  constitutes  all  necessary 
measures to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a 
time horizon of about 2 years. A set of policy measures represents the Bank’s very strong 
easing stance. 
As  for  the  size  of  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet  as  a  whole,  namely,  quantity,  the  operational 
target was changed from the overnight call rate to the monetary base. It will increase at an 
annual  pace  of  60–70  trillion  yen.  As  for  the  composition  of  assets  on  the  balance  sheet, 
namely,  quality,  the  Bank  increased  the  amount  and  extended  the  maturities  of  Japanese 
government bonds (JGBs) to be purchased. Specifically, the Bank will purchase a massive 
amount of JGBs so that the outstanding amount of its JGB holdings will increase by 50 trillion 
yen annually. The average remaining maturity of JGBs purchased will be extended to about 
7  years.  And,  the  Bank  substantially  increased  the  purchase  of  risk  assets  such  as 
exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). 
The new policy framework has three main things. First, the Bank took very drastic steps both 
in terms of quantity and quality. Second, rather than adopting an incremental approach, the 
Bank took all-out measures necessary to overcome deflation. And third, the Bank decided to 
continue with the QQE policy as long as it is necessary for maintaining the 2 percent price 
stability target in a stable manner. The Bank thus made a firm commitment to continuing the 
powerful easing by linking it with the policy target. 
If I may add another point, the Bank will conduct the current policy within the framework of 
flexible  inflation  targeting.  Like  many  other  central  banks  that  have  adopted  inflation 
targeting, the price stability target will be achieved in a balanced manner, accompanied by a 
sustained economic recovery. That does not mean that the Bank conducts monetary policy 
rigidly to achieve the 2 percent target inflation rate at any cost. While the target is pinpointed 
at 2 percent, it does not mean that any deviation from 2 percent is unacceptable. Rather, the 
inflation rate has to be maintained averagely and stably. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Long-term interest rate path 
Transmission channels of the QQE are mainly for working on longer-term interest rates and 
asset  prices,  as  well  as  for  encouraging  portfolio  rebalancing  and  inflation  expectations 
(Chart 3). 
Here,  let  me  summarize  the  impact  of  the  QQE  on  long-term  interest  rates.  First,  the 
purchase of JGBs will absorb those securities circulating in the market. Thus it will continue 
to put downward pressure on the term premium of JGB yields. Second, as expectations for 
economic recovery and inflation rise, the expected short-term interest rates (i.e., the future 
path of short-term interest rates) will gradually increase. Note that the expected short-term 
interest rates form the basis of long-term interest rates. There may be upward pressure on 
long-term interest rates in Japan, reflecting, for example, a steady recovery in the U.S. and 
overseas  economies  and  a  rise  in  long-term  interest  rates  overseas.  That  can  also  be 
interpreted as a rise in expected short-term interest rates. 
Therefore, the future path of long-term interest rates will receive both upward and downward 
pressure. It  will  depend  on  policy  actions  and  their  effects,  as  well  as  changes  in  external 
conditions.  Here  is  an  important  point.  Even  when  there  is  upward  pressure  on  long-term 
interest rates due to expectations for economic recovery, monetary policy will continue to put 
downward pressure on interest rates, and therefore strongly support economic recovery. If 
the  aggressive  easing  policy  continues  when  expectations  for  economic  recovery  and 
inflationary  expectations  steadily  rise,  it  will  further  increase  an  economic  stimulus.  Such 
effect has to be well kept in mind. 
In the meantime, there has been a rise in long-term interest rates. Several factors contributed 
to that move, such as a rise in long-term interest rates in the United States and Europe as 
well  as  a  rise  in  Japanese  stock  prices.  The  Bank  has  been  carefully  examining 
developments  in  the  bond  market  and  closely  communicating  with  market  participants.  In 
order to encourage policy effects, the Bank continues to pursue flexible market operations by 
adjusting the frequency, pace, and scope of purchases, as necessary. 
When considering the future path of long-term interest rates, we need to avoid an unintended 
rise  in  interest  rates  due  to  an  increase  in  fiscal  risk  premiums.  The  government’s  efforts 
toward  restoring  fiscal  soundness  have  received  close  attention  overseas.  It  is  strongly 
expected that such efforts will steadily make progress. 
More fundamentally, to reduce the risk of an unintended rise in interest rates, it is necessary 
to  constantly  enhance  the  credibility  of  Japan’s  economy  and  its  growth  potential  through 
regulatory and institutional reforms. To keep extremely accommodative financial conditions 
leading  to  economic  growth,  it  is  critical  to  further  support  “animal  spirits”  –  that  is, 
entrepreneurship – in the private sector. That should be achieved mainly through regulatory 
and institutional reforms as well as trade policy. 
Meanwhile, an exit strategy from the unprecedented easing policy is expected to take some 
time. It is still premature to discuss any concrete plan at this stage. When the time comes, it 
will be necessary to design a smooth exit strategy that market participants can anticipate. On 
this  point,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  discussing  exit  strategies  and  making  efforts  to 
convey information to the public. What matters is to ensure that long- and short-term interest 
rates  as  a  whole  will  follow  a  stable  path.  It  also  matters  to  enhance  the  market’s 
predictability for the outlook for economic activity and prices as well as policy management 
through enhanced communication. While keeping such future challenges in mind, the Bank 
will continue to conduct appropriate monetary policy. 
Risks 
There are both upside and downside risks concerning the outlook for economic activity and 
prices. Those include developments in overseas economies and global financial markets, the 
conduct  of  policies  both  at  home  and  abroad,  and  the  private  sector’s  economic  activity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Going  forward,  if  such  risks  come  out,  we  will  comprehensively  assess  how  large  and 
persistent these risks are, and make adjustments as needed. 
The point is that the Bank is firmly committed to continuing with the QQE policy as long as 
necessary  to  achieve  the  2  percent  price  stability  target.  Let  us  consider  a  case  that 
downside  risk  comes  out  and  the  outlook  becomes  weaker  than  the  baseline  scenario. 
Market  participants  expect  that  achieving  the  target  will  be  delayed.  Thus  they  expect  the 
duration of the QQE will be extended and the total amount of asset purchases will increase. 
As a result, an accommodative effect will become stronger and the effects on longer interest 
rates  and  asset  prices  will  be  further  strengthened.  That  will  in  effect  help  accelerate 
achieving  the  price  stability  target.  By  contrast,  in  case  upside  risk  comes  out,  a  reverse 
mechanism will work. In such a manner, commitment to the continuation of the QQE policy 
and linking it with the price stability target will reduce the effects of both upside and downside 
risk. In other words, the policy framework contains an “automatic stabilizing mechanism” that 
stabilizes the economy and policy duration. 
III.  
Japan’s experience under quantitative easing policy 
Evaluating quantitative easing policy 
The Bank pursued quantitative easing (QE) policy between 2001 and 2006. It was a policy 
framework  regarded  as  a  frontrunner  of  unconventional  monetary  easing.  In  terms  of 
quantity,  the main  operating target  was  the  current  account  balance  on the  Bank’s  liability 
side. The Bank increased the current account balance step by step from about 5 trillion yen 
at the time of the introduction to about 35 trillion yen. On the asset side, the Bank initially 
increased the purchase of JGBs and later diversified its market operations. While regarded 
as part of prudential measures, the Bank also decided to purchase risk assets. Namely, it 
purchased equities held by financial institutions in order to address concern over the financial 
system. The Bank also made a commitment to continuing with the QE policy until the CPI 
inflation rate rose stably above zero percent. 
A  survey  of  empirical  studies  in  2006  (see  Ugai  (2006))  summarized  the  effect  of  the  QE 
policy  as  follows.  The  commitment  to  policy  continuation  effectively  lowered  the  short-  to 
medium-term zone of the yield curve through lowering expected short-term interest rates. On 
the other hand, quantitative expansion of the balance sheet and qualitative changes in the 
composition of the assets, including the purchase of JGBs, had mixed effects. These effects 
included  portfolio  rebalancing  and  changes  in  expected  short-term  interest  rates,  namely, 
signalling effects. The survey only evaluated to what extent the QE policy had contributed to 
easing  financial  market  conditions.  An  evaluation  of  a  more  important  effect,  namely,  its 
ultimate impact on economic activity and prices, was not clearly conducted at that time.1 
Since  then,  empirical  studies  on  the  QE  policy  have  shown  gradual  progress  in  terms  of 
impact on financial market conditions and macroeconomic effects on economic activity and 
prices.2 Now several studies examine its impact on economic activity and prices. The main 
                                                
1   An  effect  of  preventing  further  deterioration  in  economic  activity  and  prices  through  avoiding  financial 
institutions’ funding concern and ensuring financial system stability was considered to be substantial. 
2   As  a  recent  study  on  the  effects  on  financial  conditions,  Ueda  (2006)  carried  out  an  event  analysis  and 
analyzed the effects of two months window induced by policy changes. The study found that an increase in 
quantity associated with increased purchases of JGBs that was implemented at the outset of the introduction 
of quantitative easing policy worked on stock prices and foreign exchange rate in a significant manner. The 
effect of an increase in quantity without increases in JGB purchases was not significant. As a study on the 
ultimate impact on economic activity and prices, time-series analysis by Honda, Kuroki and Tachibana (2007) 
is well known. There is also a recent study by Kimura and Nakajima (2013) and Shibamoto and Tachibana 
(2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
finding of empirical studies so far is that it had a positive effect on the real economy, mainly 
through the stock price route (see Honda et al. (2007), Shibamoto and Tachibana (2013)). 
When discussing the effects of the QE policy, it is intrinsically difficult to strictly distinguish 
various  aspects  contained  in  the  policy  and  analyze  their  effects  respectively.  It  has  a 
quantity aspect, namely, expansion of the monetary base or the total balance sheet through 
an increase in the Bank’s current account deposits. It has a quality aspect, namely, changes 
in  the  composition  of  assets  including  purchasing  JGBs.  And  it  has  an  aspect  of  putting 
downward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest  rates  through  the  commitment  to  continuing 
easing  policy,  namely,  the  policy  duration  effect.  An  increase  in  quantity  is  naturally 
accompanied by changes in asset composition. When the purchase of JGBs lowers longer-
term  interest  rates,  such  a  decline  can  be  caused  by  a  decline  in  term  premiums.  It  also 
could be caused by a decline in expected short-term interest rates (signalling effect). Then 
the latter overlaps the policy duration effect through commitment. Rather than decomposing 
and discussing the effects of quantity, quality, and commitment separately, it is important to 
analyze  the  overall  effect  of  the  policy  as  a  package.  That  is  especially  necessary  in 
analyzing the ultimate effect on the macroeconomy. 
Effects of quantitative easing policy on the macroeconomy: an analysis based on a 
time-series approach 
Based on the recent progress in empirical studies, let me show you  what I have analyzed 
about  the  effects  of  the  QE  policy  on  the  macroeconomy.  Here  I  used  a  time  series 
approach. That approach has been frequently used to analyze the effects of monetary policy. 
I should emphasize that what I am going to show you here is only a tentative empirical result. 
For an outline of an analytical method used here and the details of empirical results, please 
see  the  appendix.  In  the  basic  models,  production,  the  monetary  base,  stock  prices,  the 
foreign exchange rate, and the inflation rate were used. 
For analysis, I used three sample periods. First, March 2001 to March 2006, when the QE 
policy was implemented. Second, March 2001 to March 2007, extending the period for one 
year. And third, March 2002 to March 2007, shortening the second period by one year. The 
second period took into account the possibility that the easing effect would increase as the 
exit  approached.  By  extending  the  sample  period  and  comparing  it  with  the  first  sample 
period, one could assess the policy effect during the final phase of the QE policy. About one 
year since the beginning of the QE policy, an increase in quantity was accompanied by an 
increase in the purchase of JGBs. By comparing the second and the third sample periods, 
one could analyze whether changes on the Bank’s asset side represented by the purchase of 
JGBs, namely a qualitative aspect, had brought a difference in the policy effect.3 
Main empirical results can be summarized as follows. 
First, an exogenous increase in the monetary base had a positive effect on production and 
stock  prices  and  a  negative  effect  on  the  foreign  exchange  rate,  namely,  the  yen 
depreciation. Note that those effects were associated with some uncertainty. 
Second, there was a positive effect on the inflation rate in the second sample period. The 
effect was not clear for the other sample periods. 
Third, comparing the first and second sample periods, the effect on production was stronger, 
more  long-lasting,  and  statistically  significant  in  the  second  period.  It  suggests  that 
quantitative easing might have had a stronger effect through the end of the policy. 
                                                
3  
It is also possible to set the end of the third sample at March 2006 and to compare it with the first sample 
period.  In  such  case,  the  number  of  samples  decreases  and  the  standard  error  of  the  empirical  results 
becomes  larger.  Here,  to  make  a  comparison  based  on  a  more  accurate  estimate  with  securing  a  larger 
number of samples, I compared the estimated results of the second and the third sample periods. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Fourth, comparing the second and third sample periods, the effect on production was weaker 
in the third period. The initial phase of quantitative easing was accompanied by an increased 
purchase  of  JGBs,  and  the  financial  system  was  uneasy  at  that  time.  The  effect  of  a 
qualitative aspect might have been more pronounced in the beginning. 
In  summary,  the  QE  policy  as  a  whole  had  a  certain  effect  on  economic  activity,  which  is 
production here, and a transmission channel through asset prices – namely, stock prices and 
the  foreign  exchange  rate  –  was  working.  Its  effect  on  prices  was  not  as  clear  as  that  on 
economic activity. Compared to an improvement in economic activity, the response in prices 
was  not  that  substantial.  This  result  can  be  interpreted  that  a  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve 
during quantitative easing was relatively flat. 
What I have shown here is the effect of an exogenous increase in the monetary base during 
the  estimation  periods.  Yet,  we  should  not  interpret  this  effect  as  purely  coming  from  the 
aspect  of  quantity  only.  Rather,  we  should  understand  this  effect  coming  from  the  policy 
package as a whole. The package includes changes on the asset side, including an increase 
in JGB purchases. It also includes purchases of banks’ shareholdings, therefore containing 
the  effect  of  stabilizing  the  financial  system.  And  it  further  includes  the  commitment  effect 
through the end when the exit from the policy was more recognized. 
Please allow me to repeat that the results and interpretations above are only tentative, and 
that the empirical evidence accompanies considerable uncertainty. 
Implication on quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
Based on the tentative analysis of the QE policy’s experience, what implications can we draw 
for the performance of the current QQE policy? 
Looking back on the economic conditions, a virtuous cycle in the economy emerged through 
the latter half of quantitative easing policy, during the 2003–2006 period. During that period, 
people  came  to  have  the  prospect  of  resolving  banks’  nonperforming  loan  problem  and 
financial  system  instability.  With  the  tailwind  of  a  strong  recovery  in  overseas  economies, 
Japanese  firms  made  progress  to  resolve  the  “three  excesses,”  namely,  the  excesses  in 
employment,  capital  stock,  and  debt. They  also  made efforts to  carry  out  structural reform 
and new investment spending. Those efforts were strongly supported by the accommodative 
financial conditions with quantitative easing and the exchange rate policy at that time. The 
economic recovery continued and the output gap turned positive. The negative inflation rate 
reduced and the medium- to long-term trend inflation rate clearly rose. In short, during the 
2003–2006 period, Japan experienced a virtuous cycle: a recovery in overseas economies, 
aggressive monetary easing, progress in structural reform, a rise in the potential growth rate 
of  the  economy,  a sustained  economic  recovery,  and  an  increase  in the  medium-  to  long-
term expected rate of inflation (Charts 4-6). 
The QQE policy will proceed with a much larger scale and drastic easing measures both in 
terms of quantity and quality, compared with the QE policy. Now the economies at home and 
abroad  are  heading  toward  a  recovery  and  we  have  the  prospects  for  a  virtuous  cycle,  in 
which  many  aspects  seem  to  overlap  those  during  the  2003–2006  period.  The  Bank’s 
baseline  scenario  for  economic  activity  and  prices  is  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target 
under a virtuous cycle similar to that during the 2003–2006 period. The current QQE policy, 
together  with  cumulative  effects  since  the  period  of  comprehensive  monetary  easing,  will 
further strongly support such a baseline scenario from the financial side. 
Unlike  that  period,  the  Bank  clearly  set  the  2  percent  price  stability  target.  By  taking  all 
possible measures necessary for achieving the target at the earliest possible time, the Bank 
showed  its  strong  stance  on  achieving  the  target.  On  that  basis,  the  Bank  made  a 
commitment to continuing with the QQE policy as long as it is necessary for maintaining the 
2  percent  target  in  a  stable  manner.  It  is  expected  that  a  mechanism  for  which  the  public 
inflation expectations rise will work stronger than during the 2003–2006 period. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concluding remarks 
Japan’s economy over the past few years has been generally defensive. Behind that were 
the persistent slowdown in overseas economies, investors’ risk aversion in global financial 
markets,  and  the  yen’s  appreciating  trend.  With  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  about  the 
outlook, Japanese firms focused on taking a defensive stance, holding back active initiatives, 
including business fixed investment. 
Many  Japanese  firms  have  potential  for  fighting  against  headwind.  In  fact,  some  reports 
indicate that more than 20,000 firms have existed for more than 100 years. Many firms have 
changed  their  business structures  in  response  to  changes  in  external  conditions  and  have 
been continuing business. Japanese firms still have potential for growing by bringing together 
technology  and  wisdom  and  creating  high  value-added  goods  and  services  at  home  and 
abroad.  Overseas  economies  and  global  financial  markets  have  started  to  improve.  Firms 
are finally beginning to enjoy an environment in which they can show their entrepreneurship, 
or “animal spirits.” 
The  Bank  has  decided  on  the  QQE  policy.  The  policy  will  support  those  who  try  to  make 
progress in the real economy from the financial side, and help achieve sustainable economic 
growth  through  price  stability.  The  Bank  has  moved  further  into  uncharted  territory.  Policy 
management and its accountability matter more than ever. The Bank will continue to make 
utmost  efforts 
the  economic  conditions  accurately  and  conduct  policy 
appropriately. 
Thank you. 
 
to  assess 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Effects of the quantitative easing policy  
on the macroeconomy: outline of an empirical analysis 
Appendix: 
About the effects of Japan’s quantitative easing policy, I have conducted an analysis based 
on a time-series approach (vector autoregression model). In this appendix, I will explain the 
outline of the empirical analysis. 
Background 
Interdependence  between  economic  variables  is  generally  expressed  in  simultaneous 
equations. Based on the equations, we can analyze how major economic variables – such as 
economic activity, prices, money, and asset prices –, which are determined within a model, 
are influenced by changes in external factors, for example, monetary policy. 
A time-series approach is, along with a traditional large-scale econometric model, one of the 
main  analytical  approaches  to  estimate  policy  effects.  It  can  provide  analysis  using  a 
relatively small-scale model with less identifying restrictions. In macro-empirical analyses on 
Japan’s  quantitative  easing  policy,  time-series  models  have  been  used  as  a  major  tool 
(Honda et al. (2007) etc.).4 
Outline of the analysis 
A  basic  model  is  a  vector  autoregression  (VAR)  model  consisting  of  four  variables:  the 
industrial production (y), the monetary base (MB), the nominal foreign exchange rate (e), the 
Nikkei stock average (pk), or five variables adding the consumer price inflation rate (π). Each 
variable except the inflation rate is logarithmic value and monthly data are used.5 
There are three sample periods: (i) March 2001-March 2006, (ii)  March 2001-March 2007, 
and (iii) March 2002-March 2007. The lag order of the model is four periods. 
Based  on  standard  recursive  restrictions,  exogenous  changes  in  the  monetary  base  are 
identified as the monetary policy shock. 
Analysis goes as follows. Estimate a reduced form model of the above four or five variables, 
impose constraints for structural model identification, and estimate a structural model. Then 
estimate  how  an  increase  in  one  unit  of  an  identified  monetary  base  shock,  changes  of 
1 percent, influences variables within the model over time, that is, a dynamic effect. That can 
be obtained as an impulse function of a monetary base shock on each variable. 
Empirical results 
Appendix  Charts  1  and  2  illustrate  the  dynamic  effect  of  a  monetary  base  shock  on  each 
variable, that is, an estimated value of impulse response. A solid line in the chart is a point 
estimate  of  impulse  response,  and  dotted  lines  are  one  standard  error  band  (68  percent 
confidence interval). 
                                                
4   A method to analyze macroeconomic effects other than a time-series approach includes a “plug-in” approach, 
in  which  policy-induced  developments of  financial  variables  are  thrown  into  an  existing econometric model, 
and a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model (Chung et al. (2012), Chen et al. (2012)). 
5   The details of data are as follows. Indices of industrial production (seasonally adjusted. Source: Ministry of 
Economy,  Trade  and  Industry).  Monetary  base  (adjusted  for  reserve  ratio,  average  amount  outstanding, 
seasonally adjusted. Source: Bank of Japan home page). Nominal effective exchange rate (Source: Bank of 
Japan  home  page).  The  Nikkei  stock  average  (monthly  average  of  daily  figures.  Source:  Bloomberg). 
Consumer  price  inflation  rate  (year-on-year  rate  of  change,  all  items  excluding  food  and  energy.  Source: 
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Estimated impulse response showed that, by an exogenous increase in the monetary base, 
production  increased,  stock  prices  rose,  and  the  foreign  exchange  rate  depreciated.  The 
standard  error  bands  were  wide  to  a  certain  degree,  and  some  included  zero  in  the 
confidence interval. Therefore it should be noted that estimated results were accompanied by 
some uncertainty. 
For the inflation rate, there was to some extent a statistically significant positive effect in the 
sample period (ii) (Appendix Chart 2, middle row, bottom box). In other sample periods, the 
effect was limited. 
Comparing the three sample periods, as a whole, the effect (point estimate) in the period (ii) 
was  generally  the  largest  and  long-lasting  and  had  a  statistically  significant  impact  on 
production. 
Additional analyses 
I have added several different specifications – different variables, sample periods, lag orders, 
and identification restrictions – to the above basic model and made additional analyses about 
the robustness of the empirical results. 
Specifically, (i) use the Bank’s current account instead of the monetary base, (ii) add other 
variables that are deemed important for the economic and financial conditions at that time 
(add  each  variable  to  the  four-variable  model):  variables  include  the  U.S.  stock  prices, 
Japan-U.S. interest rate differentials for 2-year government bonds and 10-year government 
bonds, the long-term interest rate, net exports, real business fixed investment, and potential 
output,6  (iii)  use  different sample  periods:  March  2001-March  2008  and  March  2002-March 
2007,  (iv)  use  different  lag  orders:  6  and  8  period  lags,  and  (v)  use  different  identifying 
restrictions.7 
These additional analyses generally showed similar results, which confirmed that the above-
mentioned empirical results were robust to a certain degree. 
 
                                                 
6  
I have constructed 5-variable models by adding each variable to the end of 4-variable model, and estimated 
based  on  recursive  restrictions.  Variables  were  the  Dow  Jones  industrial  average  for  the  U.S.  stock  prices 
(monthly average), the U.S. government bond yield minus JGB (2-year bond and 10-year bond) for Japan-
U.S. interest rate differential. Long-term interest rate was 10-year bond yield. Net exports and business fixed 
investment were monthly data obtained by linear interpolation of the quarterly real data (the Cabinet Office 
statistics). I have estimated potential output, based on a production function approach (convert quarterly data 
into  monthly  data  using  linear  interpolation).  All  variable  were  logarithmic  value  except  for  interest  rate 
variables. 
7   Here  I  have  used  following  identifying  restrictions:  (i)  change  the ordering of  the  variables  with  maintaining 
recursive restrictions, and (ii) assume different non-recursive restrictions. For the former assumption, I have 
estimated following five-variable models with different orderings: (y, e, pk, MB, 𝜋)、(MB, e, pk, y, 𝜋)、(e, pk, 
MB, y, 𝜋). For the latter, the following contemporaneous restrictions were assumed in the estimation based on 
the main five-variable model: stock-price shock and/or inflation shock are allowed to have a contemporaneous 
effect  on  monetary  base  (that  is,  removing  cotemporaneous  zero  restrictions  from  the  policy  response  of 
monetary base) and MB shock and/or exchange rate shock are not allowed to have a contemporaneous effect 
on inflation (that is, adding these contemporaneous zero restrictions). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 References 
Chen,  Han,  Vasaco  Curda  and  Andrea  Ferrero  (2012),  “The  Macroeconomic  Effects  of 
Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs,” Economic Journal, 122 (November), F289–315. 
Chung,  H.,  J.P.  Laforte,  D.  Reifschneider,  and  J.C.  Williams  (2012),  “Have  We 
Underestimated  the  Likelihood  and  Severity  of  Zero  Lower  Bound  Events?”  Journal  of 
Money, Credit and Banking, 44(s1), pp47–82. 
Honda,Yuzo, Yoshihiro Kuroki and Minoru Tachibana (2007), “An Injection of Base Money at 
Zero  Interest  Rates:  Empirical  Evidence  from  the  Japanese  Experience  2001–2006,” 
Discussion Paper No.07–08, OSIPP, Osaka University, March 2007. 
Kimura, Takeshi and Jouchi Nakajima (2013), “Identifying Conventional and Unconventional 
Monetary  Policy  Shocks:  A  Latent  Threshold  Approach,”  Bank  of  Japan  Working  Paper, 
No. 13-E-7, May 2013. 
Shibamoto, Masahiko and Minoru Tachibana (2013), “The Effect of Unconventional Monetary 
Policy  on  the  Macro  Economy:  Evidence  from  Japan’s  Quantitative  Easing  Period,”  RIEB 
Discussion Paper, Kobe University, April 2013. 
Ueda,  Kazuo  (2013),  “Abenomics  and  Asset  Prices: 
Expectations?” CARF Working Paper, No.F-310, University of Tokyo, March 2013. 
Ugai,  Hiroshi  (2006),  “Effects  of  the  Quantitative  Easing  Policy:  A  Survey  of  Empirical 
Analyses,” Bank of Japan Working Paper, No.06-E-10, July 2006. 
It  Case  of  Self-Fulfilling 
Is 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
