Sayuri Shirai: Japan’s monetary policy in a challenging environment 
Speeches  by  Ms  Sayuri  Shirai,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
Bank  of  Italy  and  at  the  Eurasia  Business  and  Economics  Society  Conference,  Rome,  
11–12 January 2013. 
 Introduction 
I.  
It is indeed a great honor to have this opportunity to address you today. In my presentation, I 
would  like  to  focus  on  Japan’s  macroeconomic  performance,  monetary  policy,  and  the 
environment  surrounding  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Some  of  the  issues  I  will  raise 
today – such as population aging and associated macroeconomic and structural issues – are 
traditionally regarded as long-term issues for central banks, and they thus tend to be treated 
as  issues  beyond  the  framework  of  monetary  policy.  Nonetheless,  a  number  of  European 
countries,  such  as  Italy  and  Germany,  are  currently  facing  a  rapidly  aging  population  in  a 
similar  manner  to  Japan.  Therefore,  I  believe  that  those  issues  will  be  actively  debated  in 
Europe in the near future as factors affecting the conduct of monetary policy. For this reason, 
deepening the understanding of Japan’s experience may provide useful inputs, especially for 
countries  whose  economies  have  entered  a  mature  stage.  Cultivating  a  more  profound 
insight  into  Japan’s  experience  may  also  promote  innovative  ways  of  thinking  about  the 
conduct of monetary policy.  
Let  me  briefly  outline  the  content  of  this  presentation.  The  main  purpose  of  my  talk  is  to 
describe  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  (hereafter  the  Bank) 
has been conducting for almost all of the past two decades since its first cut in the policy rate 
in 1991 in response to the bubble burst in real estate and stock prices. Owing to the limited 
time  available,  I  would  like  to  shed  light  on  two  types  of  nonstandard  monetary  easing 
adopted by the Bank under the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates: (1) the first round 
of  monetary  easing  –  the  so-called  quantitative  easing  (QE)  during  2001–06;  and  (2)  the 
second  round  of  monetary  easing  –  the  so-called  comprehensive  monetary  easing  (CME) 
from 2010 until the present. The final part of my presentation will focus on structural issues 
and associated macroeconomic performance. The issue of the effectiveness of the conduct 
of  monetary  policy  in  the  current  challenging  environment  will  also  be  explored.  I  am  very 
much looking forward to active discussions with you after my presentation. 
II.  
First round of monetary easing under the quantitative easing (QE) policy 
(2001–06) 
Let  me  start  my  presentation  by  providing  you  with  a  brief  summary  of  the  economic 
performance since the 2000s and the experience under QE of 2001–06.  
Framework for the QE policy  
A.  
Before falling into a prolonged mild deflation phase, Japan experienced the collapse of the 
bubble in real estate and stock prices in the early 1990s, and the subsequent financial crisis 
in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  Over  the  same  period,  Japan  suffered  from  a  prolonged 
recession  and  negative  output  gap  notwithstanding  several  short-lived  recovery  phases 
(Chart 1). The growth rate of the headline consumer price index (CPI) and core CPI (defined 
as all items except fresh food) gradually dropped and shifted to a continuous modest decline 
from 1998 (Chart 2). Moreover, the economy was adversely affected by the bursting of the 
U.S.  IT  bubble  in  2000.  Exports  and  production  dropped  sharply  in  early  2001,  while  CPI-
based price changes remained in negative territory.  
Under this environment, the Bank adopted a new monetary easing framework – the so-called 
QE policy – in March 2001 with a view to stemming the continuous price decline and setting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the basis for sustainable economic growth.1 This unique policy was a nonstandard monetary 
policy  since  it  was  introduced  in  the  presence of  a  virtually  zero  uncollateralized  overnight 
call  rate  or  very  short-term money  market  interest  rate.2  It  consisted  of the following  three 
main elements.  
First,  the main  operating target  was  shifted from  the  policy  rate  (uncollateralized  overnight 
call  rate)  to  the  current  account  balance  at  the  Bank  –  a  transformation  from  interest  rate 
targeting to reserve targeting. The target balance was then increased gradually by expanding 
excess reserves (Chart 3). To be precise, the target amount was raised nine times from the 
initial 5 trillion yen (which is higher than the required reserve level of 4 trillion yen) to around 
30–35 trillion yen in January 2004 in response to the deteriorating economy. The same target 
amount  was  then  maintained  until  the  end  of  the  QE  policy.  The  attempt  was  made  to 
achieve this reserve target mainly through money market operations with various maturities 
of one year or less.  
Theoretically, this measure, which led to an expansion of the Bank’s balance sheet (or the 
monetary  base),  was  supposed  to  affect  the  financial  and  capital  markets  through  the 
following:  (1)  the  portfolio  rebalance  effect  (lowering  the  risk  premiums  of  financial  assets 
that are imperfect substitutes for the monetary base); and (2) the signaling effect (lowering 
the expectations for the future path of short-term interest rates), as indicated in Chart 4. The 
portfolio  rebalance  effect  refers  to  the  channel  through  which  expansion  of  the  Bank’s 
balance  sheet  helps  reduce  the  risk  premiums  of  riskier  assets,  thereby  inducing  financial 
institutions and investors to invest more actively in those assets. This action may raise their 
prices, thus indirectly stimulating business fixed investment and consumption – and hence 
general prices. The signaling effect refers to the situation in which a central bank sends out a 
signal to the market through an expansion of the balance sheet, which leads to expectations 
that  the  future  path  of  short-term  interest  rates  will  remain  low  for  a  longer  period.  Since 
central banks can control the future path of short-term nominal interest rates, the expansion 
of the balance sheet signals the Bank’s future monetary policy conduct. Such expectations 
then affect various expectations for longer-term interest rates and the yields of other financial 
assets in the financial markets. 
Second, the Bank made a clear commitment to maintaining this policy until the condition of 
the  core  CPI  registering  “stably  0  percent  or  a  year-on-year  increase”  was  met.3  This 
innovative  monetary  policy  tool  is  nowadays  often  referred  to  as  “forward  guidance.” 
Theoretically,  this  policy  is  supposed  to  lower  future  short-term  interest  rates  through  the 
signaling effect – by promoting market expectations that the virtually zero interest rate will be 
maintained for some time in the future even after economic conditions improve.4  
                                                
1   Previously, the uncollateralized overnight call rate (targeted policy rate) was lowered to 0 percent in February 
1999 to cope with deteriorating economic conditions and deflation risk. The zero interest rate policy was then 
abandoned, and the policy rate was raised to 0.25 percent in August 2000 with a view of reduced deflationary 
pressures  driven  by  weak  demand.  In  February  2001,  the  increase  in  the  policy  rate  ceased,  and  it  was 
lowered to 0.15 percent. 
2   Under the QE policy, the uncollateralized overnight call rate stayed at around 0 percent owing to the ample 
liquidity provision. To be precise, the interest rate under the QE policy declined to 0.001 percent – a level even 
below the 0.02-0.03 percent that prevailed during the zero interest rate policy. 
3   The forward guidance was clarified further in October 2003 by introducing two exit conditions: (1) the most 
recently  published  core  CPI  registers  0 percent  or  above  and  such  a tendency  is  confirmed for over  a few 
months; and (2) the projected core CPI does not register below 0 percent. These conditions were regarded as 
necessary so that there may be cases that the Bank will judge it appropriate to continue with QE even if these 
two conditions are fulfilled.  
4   See Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary 
Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 139-211, 2003; and Reifschneider, David, and John 
C. Williams,  “Three  Lessons  for  Monetary  Policy  in  a  Low-Inflation  Era,”  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and 
Banking, 32 (4) Part 2, pp. 936-66, 2000. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Third, it was decided to increase the outright purchase of (long-term) Japanese government 
bonds (JGBs) if deemed necessary to facilitate meeting the targeted current account balance 
at  the  Bank.  Indeed,  the  amount  of  JGBs  purchased  rose  steadily.  Theoretically,  this 
measure aims at altering the composition of the Bank’s balance sheet without changing its 
size and is sometimes referred to as a “credit easing” policy. Like measures to expand the 
current  account  balance  at  the  Bank,  the  expected  effects  could  be  decomposed  into  the 
portfolio  rebalance  and  signaling  effects.  In  practice,  though  the  increase  in  the  current 
account  balance  at  the  Bank  was  mainly  conducted  through  relatively  short-term  market 
operations,  this  measure  was  regarded  as  an  additional  tool  to  ensure  that  the  targeted 
balance would be met. 
Economic recovery setting the stage for exit from the QE policy 
B.  
Over  the  same  period  of  2001–06,  expansionary  economies  overseas  contributed  to  an 
increase  in  Japan’s  export  growth.  Thus,  Japan’s  economy  was  finally  able  to  enter  a 
recovery phase after the trough in January 2002. Corporate profits grew during this period 
despite  the  rise  in  imported  crude  oil  prices  and  other  material  prices.  Reflecting  growing 
production  capacity  constraints  caused  by  active  production  activities,  business  fixed 
investment – especially in the export manufacturing sector – recorded high growth; however, 
the  level  of  investment  remained  below  the  scale  of  cash  flow.  Household  income  rose 
moderately owing to an increase in employment, but also partly thanks to a moderate per-
worker  nominal  wage  increase  (driven  mainly  by  rising  working  hours),  an  increase  in 
dividend income, and the rise in stock prices, thereby supporting consumption activities.  
The  economy  was  recovering  steadily  after the beginning  of  2002,  and the  recovery  trend 
was getting stronger (Chart 1). It seemed that the economic growth would continue for the 
foreseeable  future.  It  was  clear  that  the  main  engine  for  the  growth  was  exports  and 
associated  domestic  business  fixed  investment  activities,  which  had  been  supported  by 
favorable  worldwide  economic  growth  and  the  depreciation  of  the  yen.  The  yen’s 
depreciation, especially vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar and the euro, was promoted mainly by the 
growing yen carry trade (selling yen and buying foreign currencies) in the face of interest rate 
differentials and the risk-taking behavior of investors (Chart 5). This view is consistent with 
the  fact  that  both  large  and  small  and  medium-sized  firms  in  the  manufacturing  sector 
indicated more favorable sentiment over business conditions than their counterparts in the 
nonmanufacturing sector. 
Regarding price developments, the core CPI – having moved into negative territory since the 
late  1990s  and  remained  more  or  less  in  a  mild  deflation  phase  –  finally  turned  positive 
toward  late  2005  (Chart  2).  This  was  followed  by  larger  increases  after  the  beginning  of 
2006.5  Several  firm-based  surveys  indicated  that  companies  faced  very  strong  capacity 
constraints  in  terms  of  capital  stock  and  employment,  which  suggested  that  the  negative 
output  gap  had  mostly  been  eliminated  (Chart  1).  Since  the  economy  was  expected  to 
expand at a pace above its potential, it was thought that the output gap would likely become 
positive and then widen moderately. One concern was that unit labor costs (ULCs) continued 
to decline since increases in hourly productivity had been large. However, wages began to 
increase  in  2005  in  the  presence  of  a  tighter  supply  and  demand  balance  of  labor  over  a 
relatively  wide  range  of  industries,  while  the  rate  of  productivity  increase  was  expected  to 
slow down in the prolonged stage of economic recovery. Thus, it was projected that in the 
near future, ULCs would stop declining and start increasing moderately. Moreover, various 
                                                
5   To  be  precise,  the  core  CPI growth  rate  turned  positive  in  November  2005,  and  the  rate  for  January  2006 
announced in early March was 0.5 percent (though that of the headline CPI remained in negative territory over 
the same period of 2005 and shifted to a positive 0.5 percent in January 2006). However, these figures were 
retroactively adjusted downward, and the previously positive figures fell into negative territory in August 2006, 
when  the  base  year  for  the  CPI  was  shifted  from  2000  to  2005.  The  scale  of  downward  adjustment  was 
greater than with the past trends and was thus beyond the projected one. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
in 
from 
firms, 
intense  competition  among  domestic 
surveys indicated that firms and households were adjusting inflation expectations upward for 
both the short term and the medium to long term. 
Like other advanced countries, Japan had been witnessing the phenomenon of the rate of 
increase in the CPI becoming less sensitive to changes in the output gap over recent years – 
the so-called flattened Phillips Curve. Nonetheless, the Bank assessed that the CPI inflation 
was likely to rise gradually based on the already-mentioned considerations: (1) an expected 
further improvement in the output gap; (2) expected tighter labor market conditions, partly as 
a  result  of  growing  economic  activity;  and  (3)  rising  inflation  expectations  of  firms  and 
households. The increase in international commodity prices and the yen’s depreciation also 
contributed to the rising inflation prospects.  
Based on these observations, it was expected that the uptrend in the CPI would probably be 
achieved, even though those movements would be partially offset by downward pressures 
intensified  cross-border 
stemming 
competition  under  deepened  globalization,  and  advances 
information  and 
telecommunication  technology.  The  growth  rate  of  the  core  CPI  was  thus  estimated  to  be 
within the range of 0–1 percent in fiscal 2006 and would approach the level of slightly below 
1 percent in fiscal 2007.   
In  March  2006,  the  Bank  thus  concluded  that  it  was  time  to  exit  the  QE  policy  since  the 
conditions laid out in the commitment had been fulfilled.6 Therefore, the decision was made 
to  reintroduce  the  standard  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  as  an  operating  target  for 
money market operations instead of the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank. 
Also,  the  new  target  for  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  was  set  at  effectively 
0 percent.  
At the same time, the Bank adopted a new framework for the conduct of monetary policy by 
setting the “understanding of medium- to long-term price stability.” This is the level of the CPI 
inflation rate currently recognized as price stability by each member of the Policy Board of 
the Bank. An agreement was made among board members that a range of such an inflation 
rate would remain approximately between 0 and 2 percent with the median of 1 percent. It 
was also agreed that the rate would be reviewed annually. You may wonder why the range of 
inflation was lower than that of many other advanced countries. This is because the  Bank 
found it important to take into account past price movements: namely, the average rate of 
inflation  over  the  previous  few  decades  had  been  lower  than  that  of  major  overseas 
economies and had been low even during the bubble period of the 1980s. In addition, Japan 
had experienced a prolonged period of lower rates of inflation since the 1990s. Under such a 
low  inflation  environment,  it  was  regarded  as  likely  that  the  rate  of  inflation  at  which 
households and firms perceived price stability would also be low.  
After March 2006, the level of interest rates turned positive as a result of the Bank’s decision 
to  raise  the  policy  rate  twice  in  light  of  favorable  developments  in  economic  activity  and 
prices: from 0 percent to 0.25 percent in July 2006, and further to 0.5 percent in February 
2007. This level of the policy rate was maintained until October 2008.  
Was the QE policy effective? 
C.  
This  unique  monetary  policy  contributed  to  rapid  expansion  of  the  monetary  base,  both  in 
terms of the absolute amount and as a percentage of GDP. After the size of the monetary 
base  was  expanded  from  38  trillion  yen  in  1990  (9  percent  of  GDP)  to  65  trillion  yen 
(13 percent of GDP) just prior to initiation of the QE policy, it further swelled to 110 trillion yen 
                                                
6   Since  the  core  CPI  growth  rate  (before  the  adjustment)  registered  positive  from  November  2005  through 
January 2006 and given the already-mentioned assessment over economic and price developments, it was 
judged that the conditions appeared to have been met. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(22 percent of GDP) by March 2006. The scale of monetary accommodation contrasted with 
that in the United States and the euro area at that time (Chart 6).  
Empirically, the effects of the QE policy can be examined by decomposing the transmission 
mechanism  into  the  following  two  stages:  (1)  the  transmission  mechanism  from  monetary 
easing to financial and capital markets (first stage); and (2) the transmission mechanism from 
the first stage to the real economy and prices through financial and capital markets (second 
stage).  This  is  conceptualized  in  Chart  7.  Ugai  (2006)7  summarizes  existing  empirical 
analyses of the QE policy related to the first stage by focusing on the aforementioned three 
features of that policy: (a) the effect of expanding the size of the Bank’s balance sheet (or the 
monetary base) by increasing the current account balance at the Bank; (b) the effect of the 
forward guidance policy on the expected future path of short-term interest rates; and (c) the 
effect of altering the composition of the Bank’s balance sheet by increasing the purchases of 
JGBs (Chart 4). 
To summarize the research results, the effect of the QE policy was traced mainly through the 
forward guidance policy by pushing the yield curve downward (namely, through the signaling 
effect). The portfolio rebalance effect meanwhile had mixed results, depending on the types 
of  assets. In  particular,  the  purchase  of  JGBs  had  little  impact  on  lowering  risk  premiums. 
However,  some  research  analyses  demonstrated  the  presence  of  the  portfolio  rebalance 
effect  through  the  channel  of  cross-border  capital  flows.  Namely,  the  QE  policy  induced 
capital  outflows,  whose  funds  were  then  reinvested  in  Japanese  stocks  by  foreign  hedge 
funds, and they contributed to raising those stock prices.  
With  regard  to  the  second  stage,  a  small  number  of  empirical  studies  have  examined  the 
impact of QE on macroeconomic performance. Some demonstrated that an expansion of the 
Bank’s balance sheet had a limited impact on aggregate demand and prices; other studies 
showed  that  there  was  a  statistically  significant  positive  impact  of  QE  on  industrial 
production, but no statistically significant impact was found on the core CPI.8 
The  overall  assessment  of  the  QE  policy  was  made  by  the  then  Bank  Governor  Fukui  in 
2006.9 First, the policy stabilized the financial system through the ample liquidity provision at 
a time when there were strong concerns over its stability. The ample liquidity provided by the 
Bank met rising liquidity demand by financial institutions, and it thus successfully avoided a 
repetition of the large-scale credit crunch that occurred during the 1997–98 financial crises. 
Second,  the  policy  created  and  maintained  a  very  accommodative  environment  that 
supported the recovery of Japanese firms through the commitment to continue zero interest 
rates.  In  particular,  bank  lending  rates  and  interest  rates  on  corporate  bonds  continued  to 
decline as a result of the flattening of the yield curve as well as the gradual decrease in credit 
risk  premiums.  Meanwhile,  the  Bank  stressed  that  a  side  effect  of  the  QE  policy  was 
shrinkage  of  the  interbank  markets  owing  to  fewer  arbitrage  transactions  and  reduced 
demand for fund-raising from the market. This led to a decline in credit lines among financial 
institutions and a cut in resources allocated to the interbank market business within financial 
institutions. The function of the interbank market appears to have been impaired. 
Moreover,  it  was  clear  that  such  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  could  not  promote 
active  lending  activities  by  banks  (Chart  8).  This  was  mainly  attributable  to  the  size  of 
                                                
7   See Ugai, Hiroshi, “Effects of the Quantitative Easing Policy: A Survey of Empirical Analyses,” Bank of Japan 
Working Paper Series No. 06-E-10, 2006. 
8   See Adachi, Seiji, “Yen no Ashikase,” Toyo Keizai Inc., 2007; and Fujiwara, Ippei, “Evaluating Monetary Policy 
When  Nominal  Interest  Rates  Are  Almost  Zero,”  Journal  of  the  Japanese  and  International  Economy, 
Vol. 20 (3), pp. 434-53, 2006. 
9   See  Fukui,  Toshihiko,  Opening  remarks  at  the  conference  organized  by  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and 
Economic  Studies  entitled  “Financial  Markets  and  the  Real  Economy  in  a  Low  Interest  Rate  Environment,” 
2006. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
negative shocks triggered by the bursting of the bubble and their subsequent impact on the 
financial  system.  Policies  for  dealing  with  the  deteriorating  balance  sheets  of  financial 
institutions caused by ample nonperforming loans were very slow; this was partly because 
there was hope for a reversal of the real estate and stock price decline, which would remove 
the possibility of a financial crisis or stagnation of the economy. Even at a later stage, when 
experts  finally  agreed  on  the  need  to  provide  public  support  for  financial  institutions, 
measures to inject public funds into those institutions met with public opposition (Shirakawa 
2012).10 At the same time, the drag on aggregate demand was severe owing to the balance 
sheet problems of firms and three types of excesses – employment, investment, and debt. 
Nonetheless, it was pointed out that the liquidity provided by the Bank exerted a small, but 
still positive, effect on banks’ lending activities (Bowman et al. 2011).11  
III.  
Second round of monetary easing under the comprehensive monetary easing 
(CME) policy (2010 to the present)  
That was a brief summary of how the Bank coped with difficult economic situations in around 
the first half of the 2000s. The next issue is the Bank’s most recent policy framework – the 
CME policy that has been adopted since October 2010. But before addressing that issue, I 
would  like  to  talk  about  how  the  Bank  reacted  to  the  global  recession  triggered  by  the 
Lehman shock in September 2008 prior to the introduction of the CME policy.  
Quick ending of the normalization period of monetary policy 
A.  
Global economic conditions deteriorated sharply after autumn 2008 with the intensification of 
turmoil  in  the  U.S.  and  European  financial  systems  as  well  as  in  global  financial  markets. 
Exports decreased significantly owing to a sharp downturn in overseas economies. Business 
fixed  investment  also  declined  substantially,  which  reflected  the  deterioration  in  corporate 
profits  and  financial  conditions.  Moreover,  the  yen  began  to  appreciate  against  the  U.S. 
dollar in summer 2007 with the weakening of the global risk appetite and the unwinding of 
the  yen  carry  trade  (Chart  5).  As  a  result,  the  nominal  exchange  rate  of  the  yen  shifted 
drastically.  In  the  household  sector,  private  consumption  weakened  against  a  backdrop  of 
deterioration in consumer sentiment and in the employment and income situation. Therefore, 
it  seemed  likely  that  the  economic growth  rate for  2008  would  deteriorate.  Meanwhile,  the 
headline  and  core  CPIs  rapidly  increased  in  summer  2008,  which  was  due  mainly  to  the 
surge in commodity prices. Thereafter, the effects of commodity prices gradually waned, and 
the headline and core CPIs started to moderate by late 2008. 
Against  this  background,  a  series  of  accommodative  monetary  policy  measures  was 
adopted.  First,  the  level  of  the  policy  rate  was  lowered  twice:  from  0.5  percent  to  around 
0.3 percent in October 2008 and further to around 0.1 percent in December 2008. Thus, a 
period  of  raising  the  policy  rate  was  sustained  only  during  2006–08.  Similarly,  the  interest 
rate applied to the complementary lending facility (a backstop to provide liquidity to financial 
institutions)  was  cut  from  0.75  percent  to  0.5  percent  in  October  2008,  and  further  to 
0.3 percent  in  December  2008.12  In  October  2008,  the  complementary  deposit  facility  was 
established and the interest rate applied to excess reserves was set at 0.1 percent. 
                                                
10   See  Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  “Deleveraging  and  Growth:  Is  the  Developed World  Following  Japan’s  Long  and 
Winding Road?,” Lecture at the London School of Economics and Political Science, 2012. 
11   See  Bowman,  David,  Fang  Cai,  Sally  Davies,  and  Steven  Kamin,  “Quantitative  Easing  and  Bank  Lending: 
Evidence from Japan,” International Finance Discussion Papers No. 1018, Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, 2011. 
12   After  the  interest  rate  applied  to  the  complementary  lending  facility  was  lowered  from  0.25  percent  to 
0.1 percent  in  September  2001,  the  same  rate  was  maintained  during  the  QE  policy.  It  was  then  raised  to 
0.4 percent in July 2006 and further to 0.75 percent in July 2007 in accordance with an increase in the policy 
rate. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Second, the Bank newly adopted a three-month funds-supplying operation at the fixed target 
interest rate (0.1 percent) against pooled collateral up to a total amount of 10 trillion yen in 
December 2009. This operation aimed at promoting a further decline in longer-term interest 
rates  in  the  money  market.  In  March  2010,  the  amount  of  this  operation  was  raised  to 
20 trillion  yen.  In  August  2010,  an  additional  six-month  funds-supplying  operation  was 
introduced  with  the  maximum  amount  of  10  trillion  yen.  Thus,  the  total  amount  provided 
under this operation reached 30 trillion yen. 
Third,  the  “Special  Funds-Supplying  Operations  to  Facilitate  Corporate  Financing”  was 
established  in  December  2008  to  ensure  stability  in  the  financial  markets  and  facilitate 
corporate  financing.  The  Bank  provided  financial  institutions  with  an  unlimited  amount  of 
funds over the fiscal year-end against the value of corporate debt pledged as the standing 
eligible collateral at a policy rate. It was extended three times and the implementation period 
ended in March 2010. Corporate bonds and CP were also purchased in 2009. 
Fourth,  the  expression  of  the  “understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability” 
(introduced  in  March  2006)  was  clarified  further  in  December  2009  by  eliminating  the 
possibility of 0 percent rate of price change. Namely, the expression was changed to “in a 
positive  range  of  2  percent  or  lower  with  a  midpoint  of  around  1  percent.”  This  measure 
aimed at removing public concern that 0 percent inflation would be tolerated by the Bank.  
Framework for the CME policy 
B.  
After the Lehman shock, overseas economies temporarily leveled out and showed a sharp 
recovery from the second half of 2009 thanks to active fiscal and monetary policies adopted 
collectively by major economies. However, the pace of growth began to slow somewhat after 
mid-2010, mainly because of the waning demand-boosting effects of fiscal policy measures. 
Moreover, global  investors  became  increasingly  risk  averse  in  2010  as  the  sovereign  debt 
problem in some peripheral European countries grew into a focus of concern and uncertainty 
heightened  over  the  outlook  for  the  global  economy,  especially  in  the  United  States. 
Consequently,  credit  spreads  on  corporate  bonds  mainly  in  the  United  States  and  Europe 
have  widened  since  2010,  and  stock  prices  in  many  countries,  including  Japan,  became 
unstable.  
With regard to Japan’s economy, signs of a moderate recovery were evident in 2009, but the 
pace began slowing down as the growth in exports and production decelerated in mid-2010. 
The  slow  pace  of  recovery  was  also  expected  in  the  near  future  due  to  the  continued 
slowdown in overseas economies, the ending of demand-boosting fiscal policy measures to 
promote expenditure on durable consumer goods, and the continued appreciation of the yen. 
The  yen  continued  to  appreciate  since  it  has  been  viewed  as  a  relatively  safe  currency 
(Chart 5).  
Given  this  background,  the  Bank  introduced  the  CME  policy  in  October  2010.  This  policy 
comprises the following three pillars. First, the guideline (or targeted policy rate) for money 
market operations was changed from “around 0.1 percent” to “around 0–0.1 percent.” This 
policy could be regarded as a virtually zero interest rate policy. In addition, the interest rate 
applied to the complementary lending facility was maintained at 0.3 percent and that to the 
complementary deposit facility at 0.1 percent.  
Second, the Bank newly introduced the forward guidance policy and made the commitment 
to  a  zero  interest  rate  policy  being  maintained  until  the  price  stability  defined  under  the 
“understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability”  was  in  sight.13  The  expression 
describing price stability was maintained as in a positive range of 2 percent or lower with a 
                                                
13   This commitment will be pursued under the condition that no problem is identified when examining risk factors, 
including  the  accumulation  of  financial  imbalances.  The  same  condition  applies  to  all  other  revised 
commitments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
midpoint of around 1 percent. In February 2012, an important decision was made to revise 
this  framework  in  two  steps.  The  first  step  was  to  introduce  “the  price  stability  goal  in  the 
medium to long term,” which would be “within a positive range of 2 percent or lower,” while 
setting  the  goal  “at  1  percent  for  the  time  being.”  The  definition  of  this  goal  was  to  be 
examined  in  principle  once  every  year.  The  second  step  was  to  strengthen  the  forward 
guidance policy by committing to the CME policy through the virtually zero interest rate policy 
and the Asset Purchase Program, which I will describe later, until the Bank judged that the 
1 percent goal was in sight. 
I believe that these changes constitute a considerable departure from previous practices for 
two reasons. One is because medium- to long-term price stability is now defined as a “goal” 
and  is  uniformly  set  through  the  consensus  of  all  members  of  the  Policy  Board.  Previous 
price stability was defined as an “understanding” in a manner that embraced differing views 
of price stability by each member, or it was simply a collection of the board members’ various 
views. The other reason is that at both the market and individual level, the word “goal” may 
be viewed as a sign of stronger action on the part of the Bank than the word “understanding” 
would suggest, even though the Bank’s determination to conquer mild deflation is intact. It is 
true that some people regarded the term “understanding” as being too passive, and it did not 
indicate  positive  action  by  the  Bank.  For  this  reason,  these  changes  accompanied  the 
decision to increase the total size of the Asset Purchase Program by 10 trillion yen, partly to 
demonstrate  the  Bank’s  strong  commitment  and  also  to  ensure  the  path  toward  economic 
recovery.  I  take  the  view  that  these  actions  helped  promote  public  understanding  of  the 
Bank’s determination to overcome mild deflation. 
Third,  the  Bank  introduced  the  Asset  Purchase Program to  promote  the  decline  in  longer-
term  interest  rates  and  various  risk  premiums.  The  assets  to  be  purchased  under  the 
program covered JGBs (with a remaining maturity of one to three years),14 treasury discount 
bills (T-Bills), commercial paper (CP), corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and 
Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs).  The  existing  three-  and  six-month  funds-
supplying  operations  are  still  in  effect.  The  total  outstanding  amount  of  assets  to  be 
purchased and funds-supplying operations (hereafter called simply the amount of the Asset 
Purchase Program) was initially set at about 35 trillion yen, and it was decided to meet the 
target by the end of 2011. Since then, monetary easing has been repeatedly strengthened. 
The total amount of the program was increased eight times from the initial 35 trillion yen to 
the  current  target  of  101  trillion  yen  (to  be  completed  by  the  end  of  2013),  as  shown  in 
Chart 9.  During  2012,  the  program  was  expanded  five  times  (February,  April,  September, 
October, and December). The increase has been conducted mainly through the purchase of 
JGBs (from an initial 1.5 trillion yen to 44 trillion yen) and T-Bills (from an initial 2 trillion yen 
to 24.5 trillion yen).  
What are the differences between the QE and CME policies? 
C.  
The  CME  policy  differs  from  the  QE  policy  in  several  ways.  First,  the  Asset  Purchase 
Program covers a wider range of financial assets than those of the QE policy and those of 
other central banks with nonstandard monetary policies. This reflects the view that the direct 
purchase  of  various  financial  assets  may  encourage  the  further  decline  in  longer-term 
interest rates and risk premiums through possibly greater portfolio rebalance and signaling 
effects (Chart 10).  
Second,  the  CME  policy  directly  aims  at  lowering  longer-term  interest  rates  and  risk 
premiums through an emphasis on asset purchases – the asset side of the Bank’s balance 
sheet. This is a sharp contrast from the QE policy, where the main focus was on the size of 
                                                
14   In addition to the Asset Purchase Program, the Bank regularly purchases JGBs (with the remaining maturity of 
up to 30 years, including that of one year or less) at the rate of 21.6 trillion yen per year to counterbalance the 
increased amount of banknotes in circulation. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the current account balance at the Bank – the liability side of the Bank’s balance sheet. It is 
important to  note  that  the  volume  of  the current  account  balance  is  less  emphasized  here 
than in the QE policy. Instead, with the CME policy it is important to examine whether there is 
room  for  further  monetary  easing  by  encouraging  a  further  decline  in  longer-term  interest 
rates  and  risk  premiums.  Thus,  the  size  of  excess  reserves  is  no  longer  a  target  and  is 
endogenously determined as a result of market operations. 
Third, the positive interest rate of 0.1 percent applied to the complementary deposit facility 
(introduced in October 2008) remains under the CME policy, while the policy target was set 
in the range of around 0–0.1 percent. This differs from the QE policy, where no such a facility 
was present under the zero short-term interest rate environment. The Bank pays an interest 
rate of 0.1 percent on banks’ excess reserves with the Bank for several reasons. First, as 
pointed  out  earlier  with  respect  to  the  assessment  of  the  QE  policy,  shrinkage  of  the 
interbank markets may generate a situation in which financial institutions are unable to raise 
funds promptly from the markets when most needed. As a related issue, since this interest 
rate forms the floor for interbank market interest rates, the Bank is able to smoothly provide 
sufficient  liquidity  to  the  market  without  causing  large  fluctuations  in  the  interbank  market 
rates. Moreover, as a future issue, it has also been pointed out by Svensson (2012)15 that 
maintaining such a deposit facility interest rate makes it easier for a central bank to conduct 
an exit strategy smoothly by containing excessive inflation risks within the phase of economic 
recovery. If such a rate already exists, a central bank may be able to raise the deposit facility 
interest rate, thereby leading to higher interbank market interest rates even if there are ample 
excess reserves.  
However, positive aspects related to removing the interest rate have been pointed out. For 
example, a positive impact on the yen’s depreciation could be expected by further lowering 
short-term interest rates. One issue over which there is a lack of clarity concerns the impact 
of removing the deposit facility interest rate on financial institutions’ lending behavior. There 
is a view that removing such an interest rate may increase their lending since there is no gain 
from placing excess reserves  with the Bank. On the other hand, it has been stressed that 
such removal would lower financial institutions’ profitability and thus rather stifle the incentive 
to take credit risks by increasing lending activities. Such pros and cons related to the deposit 
facility interest rate need to be better understood and properly discussed in light of the impact 
on overall economic and price movements. 
Similarly,  the  Federal  Reserve  applies  a  positive  interest  rate  on  the  deposit  facility  at 
0.25 percent  while  the  target  policy  rate  is  set  in  the  range  of  0–0.25  percent.  This  is  a 
possible  reflection  of  maintenance  of  the  interbank  market  function  being  regarded  as 
essential  in  the  United  States.  Meanwhile,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  dropped  the 
deposit facility interest rate from 0.25 percent to 0 percent in July 2012 while lowering the 
interest rate charged on marginal refinancing operations from 1 percent to 0.75 percent. This 
can probably be attributed to the limited adverse impact of such a rate cut on the interbank 
market  given  that  financial  institutions  already  depend  heavily  on  central  bank  liquidity 
provisions; this is a result of the segmented, malfunctioning interbank market in the euro area 
since the deepening of sovereign debt problems.  
Is the bank’s framework different from inflation targeting? 
D.  
Globally, a number of central banks adopt inflation targeting, such as those in Canada, New 
Zealand, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. It is widely known that inflation targeting 
actually  refers  to  flexible  inflation  targeting  for  these  countries,  as  clarified  by  Dr.  Lars 
E.O. Svensson, the distinguished scholar in the field of finance theory and deputy governor 
                                                
15   See Svensson, Lars E. O., “Practical Monetary Policy: Examples from Sweden and the United States,” NBER 
Working Paper Series No. 17823, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
of  the  Riksbank  in  Sweden.  Flexible  inflation  targeting  is  different  from  the  original  strict 
interpretation  of  inflation  targeting,  which  focuses  solely  on  price  stability.  Flexible  inflation 
targeting refers to the conduct of monetary policy that attempts to choose a policy rate path 
such  that  the  corresponding  forecasts  for  inflation  and  output  gap  (or  other  resource 
utilization measures) seem best for stabilizing inflation around the inflation target and output 
gap around a sustainable level. Thus, rather than simply achieving the inflation target at any 
cost,  flexible  inflation  targeting  aims  to  attain  a  better  balance  between  securing  inflation 
stability and reducing negative output gap. In this sense, achieving the inflation target will be 
attempted  in  the  medium  to  longer  term  by  taking  into  account  various  shocks  that  occur 
unexpectedly  and  considering  their  impacts  on  economic  growth  performance.  Namely, 
monetary policy is conducted flexibly. 
Moreover,  the  global  financial  crisis  has  woken  central  banks  to  the  fact  that  adhering  to 
inflation targets was unable to avoid the financial crisis triggered by the Lehman shock. Thus, 
there  is  an  increasingly  shared  view  among  central  banks  that  attending  to  financial 
imbalances  is  an  important  element  in  conducting  monetary  policy.  For  these  reasons, 
flexibility  in  monetary  policy  is  stressed  under  the  current  flexible  inflation-targeting 
framework,  in  which  a  number  of  central  banks  permit  deviation  of  actual  inflation  from 
inflation targets. Sometimes, such deviations can last quite a long time. 
The Bank does not adopt an inflation-targeting framework, but it conducts monetary policy 
flexibly  in  the  manner  of  a  central  bank  under  a  flexible  inflation-targeting  framework  by 
taking into account the impact on economic growth performance and financial imbalances. 
There are a number of other similarities between its policies and such a framework.  
First, the medium- to long-term price stability goal is set within a positive range of 2 percent 
or  lower.  This  indicates  that  the  numerical  goal  of  2  percent  (the  level  of  inflation  often 
adopted as an inflation target under the flexible inflation-targeting framework) is not rejected, 
but  the  range  of  inflation  is  broad  to  allow  consensus  among  board  members  holding 
differing views. The short-term goal was set at 1 percent for two main reasons: (1) to take 
into account past price movements (or price perceptions among households and firms); and 
(2) to accommodate the view that a longer-term goal could be achieved in conjunction with 
efforts  to  strengthen  potential  economic  growth  by  various  constituents,  including  the 
government, the Bank, financial institutions, and firms. If such collective efforts bear fruit, it is 
very possible to achieve the inflation rate above 1 percent. Regarding the medium- to long-
term  price  stability  goal,  Mr.  Shirakawa,  the  governor  of  the  Bank  and  chairman  of  the 
Monetary  Policy  Meeting,  gave  instructions  at  the  meeting  in  December  2012  that  the 
definition of price stability as well as its numerical expression could be discussed at the next 
meeting in January, as almost a year would pass since the price stability goal was introduced 
in February 2012.  
Second, the Bank makes a strong commitment to maintaining the CME policy with the aim of 
achieving the 1 percent goal. Since this is a promise to markets and individuals, the degree 
of the Bank’s determination to cope with current economic difficulties is no different from that 
of other central banks in adopting flexible inflation targeting. However, if such an intention is 
not well received, the Bank may need to seek better communication strategies.  
Third, the Bank and other central banks have defined their perspectives on economic growth 
and  general  prices  for  the  next  few  years  by  means  of  regular  reports.  In  the  case  of  the 
Bank, the report called the “Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices” is published twice a 
year (April and October) and describes the baseline scenario and examines the likelihood of 
this scenario coming about. In addition, the report analyzes whether the Japanese economy 
is  likely  to  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability  in  the  longer  run.  At  the 
same  time,  the  Bank  examines  the  risks  related  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  (i.e., 
financial imbalances, uncertainty related to global demand, and tail risks arising from other 
countries). The medium-term review over those prospects is conducted in January and July 
each year. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Fourth,  as  a  related  issue,  it  should  be  noted  that  both  the  Bank  and  other  central  banks 
under flexible inflation targeting adopt an inflation forecast approach, not an actual inflation 
approach  in  conducting  monetary  policy.  This  reflects  the  fact  that  “current”  inflation  is 
essentially predetermined by the following: (1) previous decisions by firms and households; 
(2) past wage contracts; and (3) several shocks and other factors (such as value-added tax 
[VAT] and sales taxes). Thus, central banks have imperfect control over “actual” inflation, as 
explained  by  Dr.  Svensson  (1996).16  Moreover,  both  markets  and  individuals  may  find  it 
difficult to monitor and evaluate monetary policy, since the impact of monetary policy appears 
with a lag of about one and a half to two years depending on economic circumstances and 
thus they have to wait that length of time before any proper evaluation can be made.  
For  these  reasons,  the  reality  is  that  central  banks  can  affect  only  future  inflation  or  an 
inflation forecast – not actual inflation, as Dr. Svensson pointed out. And such an inflation 
forecast becomes an intermediate target toward achieving the inflation target (or goal). The 
main point here is to bring the inflation forecast closer to the inflation target (or goal) within a 
certain  period.  In  this  sense,  the  expression  used  by  the  Bank  for  describing  the  forward 
guidance policy – maintaining the CME policy until the Bank judges that the “1 percent goal 
is in sight” – could be interpreted as adopting an inflation forecast approach. This inflation 
forecast approach is a standard approach adopted by many central banks around the world. 
However, some people regard the term “in sight” as having a passive connotation and not 
signaling the Bank’s strong determination to achieve that 1 percent goal. Thus, how to signal 
the Bank’s intention correctly to the market and the general public could be one of the issues 
for further discussion.  
Was the CME policy effective? 
E.  
The  CME  contributed  to  a  large  expansion  of  the  monetary  base  and  exceeded  the 
maximum level observed during the QE period of 2001–06 (Chart 6). Please recall that the 
Bank had already expanded the size of the monetary base significantly since the 1990s by 
conducting  a  series  of  accommodative  monetary  policy  measures  in  response  to  various 
negative shocks. Thus, the size of the monetary base as a percentage of GDP was already 
higher than those of the United States and the euro area when the Lehman shock occurred. 
In  response  to  the  financial  crises,  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area  injected  massive 
liquidity  to  the  market.  Japanese  financial  institutions,  on  the  other  hand,  avoided  the 
financial  crisis  this  time  owing  to  the  relatively  sound  balance  sheets  after  having 
experienced the crisis in the 1990s. Nonetheless, the size of the monetary base expanded 
under the CME and currently exceeds 26 percent of GDP – higher than those of the United 
States (17 percent of GDP) and the euro area (18 percent of GDP). 
In the current very accommodative monetary environment, domestic financial markets have 
remained favorable. In the money market, the overnight call rate remains at extremely low 
levels. Interest rates on term instruments and lending rates have declined further (Chart 11). 
As a whole, firms’ funding costs through bank loans and the issuance of CP and corporate 
bonds  have  declined  to  record  low  levels.  Moreover,  long-term  bond  yields  have  been 
declining  steadily.  In  particular,  the  yields  on  JGBs  up  to  three  years  have  declined  and 
flattened.  Furthermore,  the  financial  market  remained  resilient  after  the  Great  East  Japan 
Earthquake  of  2011,  partly  because  the  Bank  reacted  quickly  with  a  prompt  injection  of 
massive  liquidity  to  the  financial  system  in  order  to  preempt  possible  deterioration  in 
investors’ confidence. 
By means of an event study, it has been empirically demonstrated that the CME policy has a 
positive  impact  on  financial  markets.  Following  the  monetary  easing  events,  that  study 
                                                
16   See  Svensson,  Lars  E.  O.,  “Inflation  Forecast  Targeting:  Implementing  and  Monitoring  Inflation  Targets,” 
NBER Working Paper No. 5797, 1996. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
determined that the yields on JGBs declined across all maturities. Similarly, corporate yields 
decreased  across  investment  grades,  and  bond  issuances  also  improved.  The  prices  of  
J-REITs  surged.  The  Bank’s  monetary  easing  fended  off  a  further  appreciation  of  the  yen 
and  supported  stock  prices.  Most  of  the  impact  on  financial  markets  arose  from  the 
announcement of new easing measures, rather than from subsequent actual purchases. This 
suggests  that  investors  tend  to  price  the  expected  impact  of  the  Bank’s  subsequent 
operations or purchases immediately upon an announcement being made.17 
Meanwhile, firms’ demand for external funds remains weak in the presence of improved cash 
flow and limited domestic and foreign demand. The amount of outstanding bank loans in the 
private sector has recently showed an increase, though at a very moderate pace (Chart 8). 
During the previous QE period, it was viewed that banks’ lending activities remained sluggish 
mainly because of the balance sheet problems of banks and firms. However, even after the 
soundness  of  their  balance  sheets  was  restored  and  financial  institutions’  lending  attitude 
became favorable, lending activities remained moderate. This mainly reflects a shortage of 
credit demand arising from sluggish economic activities and could be partially attributable to 
the structural issues that I would now like to discuss. 
Structural issues related to the conduct of monetary policy  
IV.  
In this final section, I would like to point out some structural changes that have been affecting 
the environment surrounding the conduct of monetary policy as well as the Bank’s efforts to 
cope with the various issues. 
Structural issues affecting macroeconomic performance 
A. 
To begin with, demographic changes are one of the most important ongoing structural issues 
that Japan faces. Globally, Japan is taking the lead in dealing with demographic trends and 
associated  macroeconomic  issues.  It  is  well  known  that  Japan  has  faced  a  decline  in  its 
working-age population (15–64 years) in absolute terms since the mid-1990s. The trend of a 
declining total population began in 2011 (Chart 12). As a result, Japan has become the most 
advanced aging society in the world. The rapid reversals in the growth rates of the working-
age population and total population seem unprecedented at the global level.  
Why are Japan’s demographic changes occurring so fast and taking the lead in the world? 
This situation is due to a low level of the fertility rate, limited migration inflows, and longevity 
being  simultaneously  present.  Let  us  look first at  the  total fertility  rate  (average  number of 
children that would be born to a woman over her lifetime). Chart 13 shows that there is a 
sharp  difference  between  Japan  (1.39)  and  the  United  States  (2.01).  Though  the  rates  of 
Germany (1.39) and Italy (1.41) are comparable to that of Japan, some advanced European 
countries  have  higher  rates,  as  exemplified  by  France  (2.03),  the  United  Kingdom  (1.98), 
Sweden (1.98), and Finland (1.87). In Asia, some economies have total fertility rates that are 
even  lower  than  Japan’s;  they  include  South  Korea  (1.22),  Singapore  (1.15),  Hong 
Kong (1.11),  and  Taiwan  (0.90).  So  Japan  is  not  unique  in  terms  of  its  low  fertility  rate. 
However, the reason for Japan taking the lead in demographic changes arises from a low net 
migration rate and the rapid growth of the elderly population. The net migration rates (defined 
as the difference between immigrants and emigrants divided by 1,000 inhabitants) are very 
high  in  Singapore  (15.62),  Italy  (4.67),  and  the  United  States  (3.62).  Although  the  rate  in 
Germany (0.71) is relatively low, it exceeds Japan’s (0).  
With  regard  to  aging,  the  elderly  dependent  ratio  –  defined  as  the  ratio  of  the  elderly 
population (aged 65 years and above) to the working-age population – in Japan has been 
quickly rising (Chart 14). The ratio is higher than that of other economies, such as Germany 
                                                
17   See  for  example  Lam,  W.  Raphael,  “Bank  of  Japan’s  Monetary  Easing  Measures:  Are  They  Powerful  and 
Comprehensive?,” IMF Working Paper WP/11/264, 2011. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and Italy, whose rate of aging is faster than in other European countries. This reflects the fact 
that Japan’s life expectancy at birth is greater than in other countries (Chart 15). Moreover, 
the ratio of the elderly population to the total population (the elderly population ratio) is the 
highest  in  Japan  (23  percent),  followed  by  Germany  and  Italy  (20.6  percent  each).  These 
levels are much higher than in France (17 percent) and the United States (13 percent). Also, 
Japan’s  elderly  population  ratio  is  much  higher  than  the  aforementioned  Asian  economies 
whose  total  fertility  rates  are  low:  Hong  Kong  (13  percent),  South  Korea  (11  percent), 
Taiwan (11  percent),  and  Singapore  (9  percent).  This  is  why  aging  issues  tend  to  be 
regarded  in  Asia  (excluding  Japan)  as  being  on  the  future  structural  agenda  in  spite  of 
frequently reported articles and growing awareness. 
It is clear that the main issue for Japan is how the society will cope with the rapidly declining 
rates of its working-age and total populations (charts 16 and 17). Though Germany follows 
Japan  with  regard  to  declining  trends  in  working-age  and  total  populations,  those  trends 
could be partially mitigated by net immigration flows. Moreover, it has been noted that there 
is no sign of a decline in the working-age and total populations in the United States. In other 
words, it may not be appropriate to compare Japan with the United States when the impact 
of  demographic  changes  on 
the  environment 
surrounding the conduct of monetary policy is being examined.  
the  macroeconomic  performance  or 
Why are structural issues so important for the conduct of monetary policy? 
B. 
The  following  question  naturally  occurs:  how  do  demographic  changes  affect  Japan’s 
macroeconomic  performance?  In  answering  that  question,  let  us  first  examine  Japan’s 
economic  growth  trend. Demographic  changes  –  especially  the  decline  in  the  working-age 
population  –  have  been  depressing  Japan’s  potential  growth  and  thus  its  actual  economic 
growth  over  the  past  decade  (Chart  18).  The  impact  of  these  changes  occurs  in  various 
ways, including a direct decrease in the labor force, slow growth in labor productivity, and a 
shift  in  the  consumption  structure  from  manufacturing  to  nonmanufacturing.  Moreover, 
demographic  changes  affect  the  economic  growth  performance  by  contributing  to  sluggish 
expectations for economic growth (namely, slow sales market growth expected domestically 
by  firms  and  limited  income  growth  expected  by  households),  and  reduced  demand  for 
business and residential investment (Chart 19).18 Therefore, it is essential for Japan to raise 
productivity growth (namely, the rate of per-worker growth in real GDP), which mitigates the 
negative  impact  of  growth  in  the  labor  force  (Chart  18)  and,  simultaneously,  find  ways  to 
cope with the rapid pace of demographic changes.   
In  addition  to  economic  growth,  Japan’s  output  gap  has  remained  negative  for  almost  the 
entire  period  since  the  mid-1990s  (Chart  1).  Generally,  the  negative  output  gap  (excess 
supply) is regarded as being caused by cyclical factors or temporary shocks to the economy, 
such  as  natural  disasters.  Indeed,  the  output  gap  has  deteriorated  following  a  series  of 
domestic and external shocks, such as the collapse of the asset bubble in the early 1990s, 
the Japanese financial crisis and East Asian currency crises in the second half of the 1990s, 
the collapse of the IT bubble in the United States during the early 2000s, the global financial 
crisis  of  2008,  the  European  sovereign  debt  problems  since  2010,  the  Great  East  Japan 
Earthquake and Thailand floods of 2011, and the spreading effects of recent developments 
in the relations between Japan and China. Except for a short period, this series of shocks 
has prevented the negative output gap from narrowing quickly to positive territory.  
                                                
18   See  Shirai,  Sayuri,  “Have  Demographic  Changes  Affected  Japan’s  Macroeconomic  Performance?  –  Some 
Implications for Monetary Policy –,” Speeches at the Bank of Finland, the Riksbank, and Stockholm University, 
Bank of Japan, 2012; and Shirai, Sayuri, “Demographic Changes in Asia and Japan’s Economic and Financial 
Developments,”  Summary  of  a  Speech  at  a  Meeting  with  Business  Leaders  in  Kumamoto,  Bank  of  Japan, 
2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
In addition, structural issues have also contributed to the long-standing negative output gap. 
Some may argue that the output gap is likely to shrink quickly if firms adjust their production 
plans in response to a shortage in demand. However, this may not necessarily be the case in 
Japan.  Let  us  imagine  an  economy  in  which  firms  in  existing,  declining  industries  survive 
despite declining demand and profitability and do not rapidly adjust their business models to 
cultivate newly emerging or potentially large markets (i.e., goods and services related to the 
elderly  population,  medical  treatment,  pharmaceuticals,  robotics,  and  energy).  Such 
structural  rigidity  may  be  sustained  because  of  various  regulations,  a  lack  of  adequate 
support  in  developing  new  industries,  and  slow  corporate  responses.  In  such  a  case,  the 
negative  output  gap  is  likely  to  persist  in  existing  industries,  while  newly  emerging  or 
potentially  large markets  do  not  promptly  develop  to  stimulate  new  demand  (and  possibly, 
generate a positive output gap). This may lead not only to a persistent negative output gap, 
but also to sluggish economic growth even after the output gap has been eliminated. 
Furthermore, the phenomenon of long-standing mild deflation could be associated with such 
structural issues. To conquer deflation, it is essential to mitigate these structural issues and 
give  rise  to  the  following  situations:  (1)  a  permanent  shift  of  the  output  gap  from  negative 
(excess supply) to positive (excess demand); (2) a rise in expectations for future economic 
growth  that  lead  to  higher  inflation  expectations;  and  (3)  stable  income  and  wage  growth 
without adversely affecting firms’ competitiveness and profitability. Though those situations 
are  interrelated,  an  improvement  in  expectations  for  economic  growth  –  as  described  in 
situation (2) – may be essential since it could exert a favorable effect in both situation (1) and 
situation (3), thereby setting the stage for stable price increase (charts 19 and 20).  
Banks’ efforts to stimulate potential economic growth and credit demand 
C. 
In  the  light  of  this  situation,  the  Bank  has  been  examining  how  monetary  policy  could 
contribute  to  mitigating  the  structural  issues  and  associated  macroeconomic  performance. 
With a view to promoting potential growth from the perspective of monetary policy, the Bank 
introduced a new facility called the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility in 2010 (Chart 21). 
This facility aims at providing financial institutions with longer-term funds (with a maturity of 
one year, but this can be rolled over up to three times). The interest rate is low – currently 
0.1 percent. The funds will be provided to financial institutions based on their applications for 
loans and investment extended by them in growth-oriented sectors. The maximum amount of 
funds available under this facility is 3.5 trillion yen. Under this facility, the Bank also provides 
separate  funds  for  financial  institutions  if  they  perform  asset-based  lending  ([ABL]  up  to 
500 billion yen) and small-lots investments and loans (up to 500 billion yen). Moreover, U.S. 
dollar lending is provided by using the U.S. dollar reserves held by the Bank (up to 12 billion 
U.S. dollars).  
In  October  2012,  the  Bank  decided  to  establish  the  framework  for  the  Stimulating  Bank 
Lending Facility by way of supporting active lending activities by financial institutions, thereby 
stimulating  credit  demand  by  firms  and  households  (Chart  21).  This  facility,  which  will  be 
introduced in 2013, will provide long-term yen-denominated funds at a low cost (0.1 percent) 
to financial institutions up to an amount equivalent to the net increase in their lending to firms 
and households. With this new facility, the coverage of eligible loans extended to financial 
institutions is wider than with the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility. The duration of each 
loan will be one, two, or three years, and it will be possible for the loans to be rolled over for 
up to four years. The total amount of funds provided by the Bank will be unlimited. Financial 
institutions eligible for loans under this facility include foreign branches of domestic financial 
institutions  and  both their  yen-denominated  and foreign  currency-denominated  lending  can 
be covered. This reflects the view that the growth potential of financial institutions and firms 
is closely linked to their overseas activities in this globalization era and that their enhanced 
competitiveness would indirectly boost the growth of the Japanese economy. Given that the 
actual annual increase in loans extended by financial institutions amounted to 15 trillion yen, 
it is possible that this facility could invite more than that amount. The Bank designated this 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
facility, together with the aforementioned growth-supporting funding facility, the Loan Support 
Program. Both facilities will be maintained until the end of March 2014. 
Conclusions 
V.  
Finally, I would like to stress that I remain optimistic that the issues of low potential economic 
growth, negative output gap, and mild deflation can be overcome in the medium term. This is 
because  many  Japanese  firms  are  striving  to  become  more  innovative  and  competitive  in 
addition  to  exploring  new  sources  of  demand,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  With  their  high 
technology level and experience, I believe Japanese firms can take the lead in developing 
innovative,  higher  value-added  goods  and  services  in  such  areas  as  robotics,  medical 
treatment  and  elderly  care,  medical  supplies,  biotechnology,  and  energy.  Many  newly 
developed  goods  and  services  are  likely  to  contribute  to  creating  a  more  convenient, 
comfortable life for the elderly. Such business opportunities can also be explored globally – 
especially  in  Europe,  where  the  pace  of  aging  is  rapidly  progressing,  and  in  Asia’s  high-
income aging economies. The competitiveness of Japanese firms is likely to be strengthened 
further if a more business-friendly environment is created. 
The Bank will continue to support the business community by ensuring an accommodative 
monetary environment and providing long-term funds through financial institutions. The Bank 
recognizes  that  Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of  overcoming  deflation  as 
early  as  possible  and  achieving  sustainable  growth  with  price  stability.  Meanwhile,  I  will 
continue  to  devote  myself  to  considering  how  the  Bank  can  best  respond  to  the  current 
challenging environment without being biased in advance to possible measures. In addition, I 
would  like  to  make  greater  efforts  to  improve  the  communication  strategies  in  order  to 
facilitate an understanding of the Bank’s monetary policy both in Japan and abroad. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
16 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19 
   20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21 
22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23 
24 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  25 
26 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
27 
28 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
