Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Supporting the development of entrepreneurship 
in Nigeria 
Keynote address by Mr Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at 
the  launching  of  the  South-South  Entrepreneurship  Development  Centre  (EDC),  Calabar, 
2 September 2013. 
 Protocol 
1.0  
It  is  my  honour  and  pleasure  to  address  this  audience  on  this  occasion  of  the 
launching of the South-South Zone, Entrepreneurship Development Centre, located here in 
Calabar, Cross River State. The high-level turnout at this event, is an eloquent testimony to 
the commitment of Nigerians to participate in worthy development efforts that hold promise 
for improving the lot of our citizenry, particularly the youth. 
2.0  
It is evident that we as a nation are confronted with a wide range of developmental 
challenges.  The  2012  general  household  survey  conducted  by  the  National  Bureau  of 
Statistics,  revealed  that  23.9%  of  the  adult  working  population  is  unemployed.  More 
worrisome  is  the  fact  that  the  unemployment  rate  has  exhibited  a  worsening  trend,  rising 
from 8.2% in 1999 to the 23.9% in 2011. In Cross River State specifically, the rate increased 
from 7.9% in 2002 to 18.2% in 2011. This would obviously not only have a significant effect 
on the psychology of the individuals concerned, but also have a destabilizing impact on the 
wider society. 
3.0  
In  its  bid  to  support  efforts  to  reverse  these  glaring  development  challenges,  the 
Central  Bank  of  Nigeria  has  over  the  years,  continued  to  partner  with  Government  at  all 
levels and some stakeholders to initiate policies, programmes and schemes that will impact 
the lives of youth in the country. 
4.0  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the main purpose of our gathering this morning is to officially 
flag-off the Central Bank of Nigeria supported Entrepreneurship Development Centre located 
in  the  South-South  zone.  The  centre  would  be  expected  to  serve  Akwa  Ibom,  Rivers, 
Bayelsa,  Edo,  Delta  and  Cross  River  States.  Consequently,  it  will  advertise  and  enroll 
trainees from these States. 
5.0  
This  initiative  commenced  2008  in  three  locations  namely;  Onitsha  (South-East), 
Kano  (North-West),  and  Lagos  (South-West).  Between  2008  and  2013,  the  three  centres 
have trained a total of 41,828 persons, counseled 94,259 entrepreneurs and have directly led 
to the creation of 13,124 jobs. Furthermore, a total of 1,743 trainees were linked to financial 
institutions from which they obtained loans amounting to N227.84 million to start or expand 
their  businesses.  This  first  phase  of  the  CBN-EDC  initiative  came  to  an  end  April  2013 
having operated for 5 years. Ladies and Gentlemen, for sustainability purposes, i am pleased 
to inform you that the Management of the Bank has extended the tenure of the first phase 
CBN-EDCs  by  an  additional  three  years  to  enable  the  host  State  Governments  in  the 
aforementioned zones key in and participate actively in the enhanced EDC model. The Bank 
is therefore in the process of putting together phase 2 of the programme for the South- East, 
North-West and South-West zones. 
6.0  
The  modest  achievements  recorded  and  the  experiences  of  the  EDC  have 
encouraged the Bank to roll out the project in the remaining three geopolitical zones of North-
East  (Maiduguri),  North-  Central  (Markudi)  and  South-South  (Calabar).  To  date  the  new 
centres  have  trained  all  together  1,381  participants  in  the  first  half  of  2013,  in  spite  of 
teething challenges faced. I particularly appreciate the Government of Cross River State for 
allocating  a  temporary  training  venue  for  the  Implementing  Agency,  Sheild  Academy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Partners to commence its training activities before today’s official flag-off of this magnificent 
building that will permanently host the centre. 
7.0  
Permit me at this point to take a few minutes to provide a brief highlight on the EDC 
to  create  an  understanding  of  its  concept,  operational  modality  and  what  is  required  from 
stakeholders (Government,  CBN, Implementing Agencies,  and  Financial  Institutions  etc) to 
make the programme a success. 
8.0  
The EDC provides a platform for State Governments, private sector and the Central 
Bank  of  Nigeria  to  jointly  support  entrepreneurship  development  across  the  country.  The 
centres  provide  facilities  for  training  particularly  secondary  school  leavers  and  university 
graduates  to  obtain  skills  on  how  to  identify,  choose,  and  practically  engage  in  profitable 
production of goods and services. 
9.0  
The State Government is expected to provide the enabling environment through the 
provision of conducive structure and a site for the centres, while the Central Bank of Nigeria 
engages private consultants to independently operate the centres. It is worth reiterating that 
the  States  where  the  EDCs  are  located  and  the  implementation  agency  were  selected 
through  a  competitive  bidding  process  to  guarantee  efficiency  and  effectiveness  in  its 
operations. 
10.0  The  Governments  of  the  respective  States  are  also  expected  to  enlighten  their 
indigenes and provide the required financial and moral support to take full advantage of the 
opportunities  offered.  Trainees/graduates  of  the  EDCs  are  expected  to  be  attached  to 
incubation  facilities,  where  they  could  commence,  practice  and  perfect  their  chosen 
businesses upon graduation before standing independently on their own. 
11.0  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  to  reiterate  my  earlier  point,  out  of  41,828  participants 
trained  in  the  pilot  phase  of  the  EDCs  between  2008  and  April  2013,  only  1,743,  (about 
4.17 per  cent)  of  the  trainees  were  linked  to  financial  institution  for  loans,  which  we  found 
quite worrisome as it was an obvious hinderance to achieving the objectives of the EDCs. 
This  has  been  one  of  the  major  challenges  of  the  programme  for  which  efforts  are  being 
made to address. I am pleased to inform you that the Bank through NIRSAL Plc., the CBN's 
Incentive-based,  Risk  Sharing  System  for  Agricultural  Lending,  would  support  trainees  in 
agricultural  value-chain  businesses  by  way  of  credit  guarantees,  insurance,  technical 
assitance  and  other  incentives.  Also,  the  Bank  on  August  15,  2013,  launched  the  
=N= 220 Billion Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Fund (MSMEDF) which 
has  a funding  window  for  Financial  Institutions,  particularly  Microfinance  Banks,  to  provide 
funding for the financial needs of the EDC graduates. This Fund will provide long-term low 
interest funding  to  eligible  MFI, for un-lending to  beneficiaries  at  single digit  interest rates. 
60% of the Fund is dedicated to businesses owned and managed by women. The Governing 
Council  of  the  EDCs  is  also  exploring  ways  to  key  in  to  the  Bank  of  Industry's  recently 
launched  Bottom  of  the  Pyramid  Fund  for  the  EDC  graduates  to  access  for  their  chosen 
businesses . Let me use this opportunity to urge the Nigerian financial institutions and other 
stakeholders here present, to support innovations and services that will enhance the success 
of the implementation of the EDC in the South-South. State Governments in the geopolitical 
zone  are  encouraged  to  set  aside funds  dedicated  to the graduates  of  the  EDC to  enable 
them  start  up  and  expand  their  businesses.  I  should  also  add  that  the  Bank  has  recently 
reviewed  the  Microfinance  Policy  to  allow  State  Governments  to  establish  Microfinance 
Banks that can provide financial services to micro, small and medium scale entrepreneurs. 
12.0  
I would want to emphasize that the ultimate goal of the EDC concept is to achieve 
the replication of the Centres in each State of the Federation. At this juncture, I would like to 
urge  others,  particularly  governments,  NGOs  and  wealthy  individuals  in  society  to  explore 
setting up EDCs, as they can be a valuable conduit for building the entrepreneurial capacity 
of people and assisting them to contribute to the economic wellbeing of the country. 
13.0  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the EDCs hold promise for engaging our youth in productive 
and  positive  activities.  It  will  assist  in  job  and  wealth  creation,  promote  growth  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
development  and  checkmate  restiveness  and  other  vices  in  our  society.  All  efforts  must 
therefore be made to support the realization of its objectives. 
14.0  
In conclusion, I would like to once again congratulate Sheild Academy Partners and 
the Government of Cross River State for winning the bid to be the implementation agency 
and host state for the South-South EDC and solicit the participation of all the stakeholders in 
the South-South zone to ensure the success of the Centre in the zone. 
On this note, I declare the Central Bank of Nigeria- Entrepreneurship Development Centre -
South-South geopolitical zone opened and particularly expect the Centre to be a resourceful 
Entrepreneurship Centre for the teeming youths of the South-South geopolitical Zone. 
15.0 Thank you all for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
