Pentti Hakkarainen: Banks and payment services in Finland 
Speech  by  Mr  Pentti  Hakkarainen,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Nets 
Holding A/S Management, Helsinki, 19 September 2013. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finland website. 
I’m glad to have this opportunity to share with you some of my views about the main trends 
and challenges for banks and payment services. I will also talk about Finland, but mainly as 
an example. The trends and challenges present everywhere have been clearly visible in our 
small and open market. 
Challenging environment of retail banking 
Retail banking is originally about deposit taking, lending to households and companies, and 
providing  payment  services.  Since  1990s  the  financial  sector  expanded.  Retail  banks  got 
involved  with  new  services  such  as  wealth  management,  funds,  brokerage  and  even 
corporate finance. There was convergence of insurance and banking products and financial 
conglomerates  were  born.  Banks  did  not  only  expand  their  customer  services  but  also 
became active players in the financial markets for their own account. 
Basic banking services like payment services were automated, and brought to new channels. 
Some  trends,  however,  were  missed.  As  an  example,  many  banks  did  not  respond 
sufficiently to emerging needs of internet payments that would support online shopping, or 
mobile or real time payments. In the digital environment, payment innovation was left to new 
non-bank institutions to a large extent. After the recent financial crisis, we have seen a new 
interest  in  basic  retail  banking.  The  industry  is  also  seeking  cost  efficiencies  from  all 
functions. 
This reminds me of developments in the Finnish banking sector in 1990s. Finnish banks had 
invested heavily in information technology during 1970s and 80s, when the regulations of the 
time directed competition to service and quality enhancements. Only when a severe banking 
crisis  hit  the  Finnish  banking  industry  in  early  1990s,  banks  had  to  make  full  use  of  their 
technological  capabilities.  Electronic  payments  were  promoted  heavily  with  customer 
education  and  price  incentives.  This  has  paid  off,  and  Finns  currently  use  electronic 
payments predominantly. 
During the following 5 years, recovering from the crisis, banks more than halved their work 
force  from  55,000  persons  to  about  25,000  when  at  the  same  time  banking  activities  and 
volumes  were  expanding.  Currently,  Finnish  banks  have  managed  the  turbulent  times 
relatively well. 
The European banking sector faces much the same challenges as the Finnish banks during 
1990s.  In  order  to  recover  and  to  comply  with  the  forthcoming  regulations,  banks  need  to 
seek cost efficiency. Payment processing is traditionally seen as investment intense service, 
where  heavy  fixed  costs  allow  economies  of  scale  with  relatively  low  marginal  operating 
costs. Old legacy systems may not provide a viable platform for new requirements coming 
from the Single Euro Payments Area or new payment instruments. 
During  a  period  of  low  interest  rates  banks  cannot  cross-subsidise  payment  services  from 
other revenue sources. At the same time, end-customers are not willing to pay for paying. 
The  equation  is  quite  difficult.  Banks  are  obviously  asking  themselves  the  very  relevant 
question whether it is worthwhile to invest and maintain this type of processing capabilities, 
or should they be outsourced or bought from companies which are specialized in processing. 
Should  banks  not  concentrate  in  what  they  know  best:  customer  relationship  and  risk 
management? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Drivers of change in payment services 
Main  characteristic  of  payment  services  is  the  two-sidedness:  in  order  to  provide  payment 
services, both the payer and the payee must participate in the same network. Payment cards 
need to be issued and merchants need to accept the card in their payment terminal to enable 
card payments. This type of network requires co-operation between service providers. At the 
same time, we want to see competition in services provision. Competition gives incentives to 
streamline processing of payments and to service innovation. The competition takes place in 
the customer interface, whereas the efficient processing of payments needs co-operation for 
standards and security. 
Other  driving  forces  of  payments  development  are  changing  demographics,  changing 
customer demand and integration. 
I  mentioned  earlier  that  banks  have  not  met  customer  demand  for  internet  or  mobile 
payments  or  real-time  payments.  I  know  that  cards  are  heavily  used  when  paying  in  web 
shops,  but  that  is  not  what  cards  were  designed  for.  There  are  initiatives  for  improved 
security  for  card  payments  in  the  internet,  but  there  is  still  room  for  improvement  there. 
Mobile  payments  have  been  of  high  expectations  but  nothing  much  in  reality.  Some 
jurisdictions have created real-time payment systems, but mainly with support from the public 
authorities. European regulation aims to open the competitive market by allowing payment 
institutions  to  provide  payment  services.  There  is  a  lot  of  talk  about  big  data,  mining  the 
payments data for better customer relationship management. Banks have a strong position 
keeping customers’ accounts, but if they are not sensitive to the changing customer demand, 
they may well lose the momentum. 
There  is  a  Finnish  study  showing  that  95%  of  people  between  ages  16–65  use  internet 
regularly  and  53%  of  people  between  65  and  74  years  do  so  as  well.  The  majority  of 
payments  in  shops  are  made  with  cards.  Aging  population  does  not  mean  that  people 
suddenly  lose  their  capabilities.  In  the  future,  we  see  more  active  and  demanding  aging 
population requiring services online as they have used to get them during working life. With 
experience these people may be more risk sensitive and they are able to demonstrate their 
needs,  but  they  are  no  way  hindering  services  development,  rather  the  contrary.  It  goes 
without saying that the younger population considers the internet and mobile services as self-
evident. 
People today are used to being online all the time and they are used to travelling according 
to their wishes. In my youth, a trip from Helsinki to Stockholm was special, nowadays young 
people  choose  where  they  want  to  travel  or  study  globally,  and  people  have  summer 
cottages in Thailand. In these circumstances it is very difficult to justify why payments need 
excessive  bureaucracy  or  time.  International  payment  card  companies  have  succeeded  to 
create a global acceptance network benefiting the card users, though authorities in several 
jurisdictions  have  pointed  out  problems  in  their  fee  structures.  The  Single  Euro  Payments 
Area, SEPA, harmonizes European payments: Payment Services Directive harmonises the 
rights and liabilities of payment service providers and their customers and SEPA standards 
harmonise the technical environment of payments. The migration to SEPA may be a burden, 
but in the long run, it is a source of efficiency and should be seen in that light. 
Bank of Finland approach to payment services 
Bank of Finland has a longstanding view that the role of central banks should remain rather 
limited in retail payment systems. Central banks as overseers and regulators should promote 
competition friendly environment for retail banking and payment services as well as ensure 
that the systems are safe, reliable and efficient to the society as a whole. Central banks can 
act  as  catalysts  for  change  and  improvements.  However,  retail  payment  related  services 
should not be provided by central banks as this may distort the competitive environment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We  have  pointed  out  and  expressed  five  principles  against  which  we  evaluate  the 
development of payment services. 
Firstly, we wish to promote technical efficiency making payments cheaper, faster and more 
secure.  Technology  is  not  a  goal  itself  but  a  tool.  Often  in  adopting  new  technologies  in 
network industries we face the chicken and egg problem: when is the market ripe for new 
technologies and when the technologies are ripe to benefit the industry and its customers. 
Sometimes here, the central bank’s catalyst role may be needed. 
The second principle for payment services is non-discrimination. There are people who may 
have limited capabilities to use internet or mobile services. Strive for efficiency must be done 
with responsibility. Prevailing agreements and promises of service with customers cannot be 
one-sidedly  (unilaterally)  broken.  We  cannot  allow  financial  inclusion  to  deteriorate  due  to 
services development. 
Thirdly, pricing of payment services should promote efficiency and be based on costs. Cross-
subsidization  may  distort  price  signals.  However,  academic  research  shows  that  full  cost 
coverage may lead to socially suboptimal use of payment instruments as well. Prices should 
give right incentives to payment services users. At the same time, strong players may not 
use  their  negotiating  powers  in  a  way  that  distorts  the  balance  in  the  network  industry.  I 
believe  the  scrutiny  by  competition  authorities  and  possible  forthcoming  regulation  has  its 
roots in the understanding that international card companies were not sufficiently sensitive to 
see merchants’ benefit as well. 
The fourth issue we want to emphasise is continuity and contingency of payment services. 
With  this  high  number  of  electronic  payments,  internet  banking  and  especially  card 
payments,  they  have  become  completely  critical  to  our  society.  This  means  very  high 
requirements  for  their  safety,  continuity  and  contingency.  This  is  an  ongoing  topic  for 
discussion  between  overseers  and  payment  industry,  and  very  relevant  when  Nets  is 
planning its future operations in Finland. 
Our fifth principle promotes international compatibility by harmonization and standardization. 
I’ve  already  mentioned  the  harmonization  of  European  retail  payments  by  SEPA  and  the 
potential for efficiency it brings. 
Standardisation is the key for efficient processing. Everyone who wishes to benefit from cost 
efficient  processing  should  promote  common,  open  standards,  not  only  on  European  level 
but globally. We follow with great interest the Nordic banks’ initiative to use SEPA standards 
also for non-euro currencies. They have really grasped the potential of common standards. 
In  SEPA  standards,  cards  industry  is  lagging  behind.  Hopefully  the  knot  stopping  card 
payment standards can be opened by the industry itself. However, the regulators seem to be 
ready to take action if needed, as seen for SEPA credit transfers and direct debits. 
Conclusion 
The trend to harmonise and standardize services and to seek economies of scale is here to 
stay.  Card  payments,  which  work  mostly  efficiently  and  provide  convenience  and  safety 
compared to cash, are an elementary part of this trend.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
