Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The changing face of talent 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the AIF (Asian 
Institute of Finance) International Symposium 2013 “Changing face of talent”, Kuala Lumpur, 
28 August 2013. 
 from 
talent  development  and 
the  current  environment, 
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  to  the  AIF  International  Symposium  on  the 
Changing  Face  of  Talent.  In  preparing  for  the  future,  a  future  that  is  going  to  be 
fundamentally  different 
its 
management will need to be accorded with an even greater priority than previously. This is 
on  account  of  two  significant  shifts  in  the  landscape  that  we  are  operating  in  that  will 
fundamentally  affect  the  human  capital  that  we  need.  The  first  is  the  rapid  and  significant 
transformation of the economic, financial and business landscape which will continue to have 
far reaching changes on the talent requirements. The second is the changes in the character 
and  nature  of  the  talent  that  is  now  coming  on  stream.  These  emerging  changes  have 
warranted  new  approaches  to  human  capital  development  and  management.  To  not 
recognise these changes and their implications will not only affect business performance but 
also the overall economic progress of a country. 
My address this morning will briefly discuss the fundamental changes that are affecting the 
financial and economic landscape and its implications for talent requirements. My remarks 
will then proceed with some reflections on the changing nature and character of the talent 
that is coming on stream. I will then conclude with some thoughts on the implications these 
developments on talent development and management, in particular, for the financial sector. 
The challenge for recruiting and retaining the right talent has also become increasingly more 
acute, particularly for the financial sector. Therein lies the urgency for the greater focus of 
attention on these issues and the need to accord greater priority for this important agenda. 
The transformation of the economic and financial landscape 
The  economic,  financial  and  business  landscape  is  rapidly  being  transformed  and  is 
continuously  evolving.  Globalisation  and  internationalisation,  accelerated  by  liberalisation 
and  the  rapid  advancement  in  technology  are  increasing  connectivity  between  economies 
and  between  financial  markets  across  borders.  This  is  resulting  in  greater  international 
economic and financial integration and interdependence. Regional integration in Asia has for 
example created immense opportunities for economies of scale while paving the way for new 
and  larger  markets.  A  significant  global  shift  in  this  environment  is  also  the  growing 
importance  of  emerging  economies.  As  a  result,  many  of  these  economies  are  becoming 
huge consumer markets. In Asia, this is resulting in greater regional trade and cross border 
investment  activity.  A  further  fundamental  change  is  the  shift  towards  greater  market 
orientation  as  markets  are  deregulated  and  liberalised.  In  addition,  the  more  discerning 
consumers have heightened further competition resulting in a more competitive environment. 
The  operating  environment  for  businesses  have  therefore  become  more  complicated  with 
increased uncertainties in the economy and the financial markets. 
Structural  shifts  are  also  taking  place  at  the  national  level  in  most  of  the  emerging 
economies. These include the demographic shifts which are transforming the workforce. The 
demographic structure has an increasing component that comprises a young population and 
a  growing  middle  income  segment.  This  trend  is  exemplified  by  consumers  that  have 
become  more  discerning,  with  higher  expectations.  This  is  also  reinforced  by  increased 
longevity. The workforce is also progressively affected by the growing urbanisation which is 
becoming an important feature in most emerging economies. 
The international, regional and national financial landscape also continues to be significantly 
transformed. At the international level a growing number of new financial centres will emerge. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
There  will  also  possibly  be  new  international  reserve  currencies  and  a  greater  network  of 
financial institutions that originate from an increasing number of emerging economies from 
different  parts  of  the  world.  This  will  facilitate  greater  inter-linkages  between  financial 
systems,  especially  among  the  emerging  economies.  These  evolving  developments  will 
result  in  an  increased  interconnectedness  of  financial  markets  with  the  consequence  of 
increased contagion and interdependence. Increasingly financial systems have also become 
prone to crisis. The recent global financial crisis has prompted the international community to 
respond  with  wide-ranging  fundamental  reforms  that  is  also  transforming  the  international 
financial system. 
At  the  regional  level,  the  Asian  region  has  become  more  cohesive  with  regional  financial 
integration  intensifying  to  facilitate  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  financial  resources  in  our 
region.  At  the  national  level,  the  landscape  has  also  been  significantly  transformed  to 
become  more  liberalised,  more  market  oriented  with  greater  adoption  of  technology.  With 
more  developed  intermediaries  and  markets,  the  financial  system  has  now  become  more 
complex,  sophisticated  and  diversified.  With  the  increased  risks  associated  with  these 
changes, equally significant has been the transformation of the regulatory and supervisory 
framework. 
These structural shifts are reshaping the demand for talent across the world. The success of 
businesses  and  the  effectiveness  of  governments  and  policy  makers  critically  depend  on 
having  the  right  talent.  Increasingly,  talent  has  become  the  most  important  asset  of  an 
organisation. As job complexities intensify, talent with new competencies and higher skill sets 
including  technical  skills  with  digital  capabilities  will  be  required.  Developing  skills  for 
analytical  and  creative  thinking  skills  will  also  be  needed  to  promote  innovation,  solve 
complex problems, deal with the potential for multiple scenarios and to effectively manage 
wide  ranging  trade-offs.  Given  the  increased  level  of  international  business,  it  will  also  be 
vital  for  talent  to  be  able  to  deal  with  globalisation  –  an  environment  with  a  more  diverse 
workforce  and  to  be  able  to  be  able  to  operate  effectively  across  different  cultures, 
generations and perspectives. Communication skills, the potential to work collaboratively and 
managing complex relationships are further new skills required in this environment. Equally 
important  are  the  new  leadership  skills  that  are  needed  in  this  new  more  complex,  more 
ambiguous  and  highly  uncertain  environment.  This  includes  the  ability  to  manage  in  crisis 
conditions. Talent with these new capabilities have tended to be short in supply. 
The  demand  for  such  talent  with  the  new  competencies  and  skills  is  made  even  more 
complex  and  challenging  by  the  changing  character  and  nature  of  the  talent  itself.  Firstly, 
there  is  now  greater mobility  of  the  talent  within  industries,  between  industries  and  across 
borders.  No  longer  can  organisations  rely  on  employment  to  retirement.  The  potential  for 
retention has become challenging with the motivation of the workforce now becoming highly 
different.  Among  the  factors  that  are  important  for  the  new  generation  is  for  the  job  to  be 
interesting,  challenging  and  fulfilling.  They  are  drawn  to  greater  engagement  with  the 
leadership,  greater  empowerment  and  being  accorded  greater  exposure  and  potential  for 
future  development.  A  lack  of  recognition  of  the  changes  in  the  motivation  of  the  new 
generation  of  the  talent  will  not  only  present  itself  as  a  major  challenge  for  human  capital 
management  but  it  is  also  likely  to  affect  the  harmonisation  and  cohesiveness  of  the 
organisation and its overall performance. 
Talent in the financial sector 
Let  me  say  a  few  words  about  the  specific  talent  challenges  in  the  financial  sector.  The 
structural changes taking place in the financial system and the recent global financial crisis 
has and continues to drive dramatic change in the financial industry. Financial institutions are 
facing  increased  regulation,  greater  uncertainty  in  the  operating  environment,  uneven 
competitive conditions and a severely damaged reputation in many parts of the world. These 
developments  have  important  implications  for  the  financial  services  workforce.  The  bar  on 
professional  competence  demanded  of  talent  in  the  industry  has  also  been  raised 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
significantly and is also changing in its emphasis, with the ability to form sound judgments 
becoming a more important requirement of talent. New political and regulatory pressures are 
being  brought  directly  to  bear  on  talent  management  strategies,  for  example  arising  from 
compensation  reforms  and  greater  regulatory  scrutiny  of  new  hires  at  the  top  levels  of 
management.  There  has  also  been  a  growing  focus  on  the  role  of  talent  in  regaining 
confidence in the financial sector, in terms of the ethical standards and values embraced and 
demonstrated by the workforce in the financial industry, and the strength and integrity of its 
leadership. 
The financial sector has historically been and remains highly productive in relative terms. In 
Malaysia for example, the financial sector has had the highest total-factor productivity growth 
over the recent decade relative to other sectors of the economy. Employment in the financial 
sector  has  also  been  growing  annually  with  a  large  proportion  of  the  growth  being  in  the 
higher skilled segment. This accounts for the higher level of wages in the financial sector at 
about RM36,000 annually, compared to the national average of RM21,700 annually for the 
economy. Financial services employees are also generally educated to a higher level, with 
more  institutions  requiring  post-graduate  or  professional  qualifications,  in  addition  to  the 
relevant  work  experience,  for  holding  key  and  senior-level  positions  within  the  industry.  In 
light of the more challenging environment going forward, generating the supply pipe line for 
talent  and  addressing  the  short  supply  of  critical  talent  with  new  skills  need  to  be  given 
urgent priority. 
What  are  these  skills?  There  has  been  considerable  attention  to  the  shortage  of  new  and 
higher technical competencies – including in the area of risk assessment and management  
– required by financial institutions in the new operating environment. The growth in Islamic 
finance has also added important new dimensions to the talent requirements. Beyond these 
clear  gaps  however,  the  promotion  of  more  sustainable  business  models  in  finance  will 
require  additional  new  skills  which  have  not  traditionally  been  areas  of  focus  in  financial 
institutions.  This  includes  skills  in  change  and  crisis  management,  business  recovery 
planning,  the  ability  to  develop  and  sustain  long-term  customer  relationships,  and  skills  to 
direct  and  manage  operations  in  international  and  cross-cultural  contexts.  Also  particularly 
important will be the ability to build, motivate and lead strong teams under significantly more 
challenging  conditions  in  which  institutions  may  be  more  constrained  by  regulation  in  their 
ability to recruit and retain talent simply by paying more. 
Perhaps more than in any other sector, the response to the challenges facing the financial 
industry in managing talent needs to be much broader, forward looking and more strategic 
given its central role within the economy. Even in countries that are not contemplating new 
compensation  regulations,  financial  institutions  need  to  carefully  consider  the  higher 
expectations  of  regulators  for  compensation  and  incentive  systems  to  be  more  closely 
aligned  with  prudent  risk-taking.  Talent  strategies  must  reinforce  a  strong  and  enduring 
ethical  foundation  of  the  organization,  while  developing  the  individual  and  organisational 
agility to deal  with external forces of change, including changes induced by economic and 
financial  cycles.  And  an  increased  emphasis  on  leadership  effectiveness  and  succession 
planning  will  be  key  to  sustaining  long-term  value  and  confidence  in  financial  institutions 
going forward. 
The issue before us is then, how can the talent be prepared for this new environment? And 
how  can  the  changing  nature  and  character  of  the  new  generation  of  talent  be  effectively 
managed to produce the best results for the organisation. Let me venture to elaborate some 
thoughts on the preparation of talent for increasingly complex positions in organisations. The 
best universities, in particular, the business schools from around the world have come under 
great scrutiny regarding their ability to produce the right kind of talent that organisations now 
require in this changing environment . 
The  reviews  have  not  only  been  on  the  curriculum  to  reflect  the  new  demands  of 
organisations  but  also  on  the  balance  between  theory  based  education  and  the  education 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
that actually produce high performing practitioners. This included not only the development of 
new skills and capabilities but also the values and attitudes. Among the conclusions of the 
reviews are that students that graduate need to have a greater understanding of globalisation 
so  that  they  are  able  to  have  a  global  perspective.  It  should  also  extend  to  having  an 
appreciation  of  the  external  environment  of  businesses  that  includes  not  only  international 
developments but also trends to legal, social, political and environmental developments so 
that  students  do  not  graduate  with  rigid  mindsets  and  are  able  to  contextualise  their 
circumstances. 
Given the highly diverse developments and perspectives that exist, thinking skills will require 
the ability for integrated thinking. This involves being able to effectively frame the issues that 
require  solutions  or  decisions.  Very  often  it  involves  the  need  to  take  into  consideration 
multiple  perspectives,  some  of  which  may  be  conflicting  so  that  the  judgements  and 
conclusions need to balance these considerations. 
For emerging economies such as Malaysia, generating the right talent is urgently needed for 
our current and future environment. While investment in education reform and investment in 
people through the education process is vital, this will require time before they will generate 
results. How then can graduates be prepared in the transition? How can the existing work 
force be strengthened to meet the new demands of businesses in the changed current and 
future environment? This will involve continuous capacity building for every part of the career 
life-cycle,  from  the  entry  point  to  senior  management  and  leadership.  The  highly  dynamic 
environment  requires  this  priority  to  be  accorded  and  the  necessary  resources  to  be 
committed for this agenda. 
The changing face of talent, the new generation of talent coming on stream and its different 
nature and character also presents new challenges for human capital management. It calls 
for a transformation of human resource strategies. Given that in this new environment human 
capital has become a key factor that will drive results, it is therefore not only the investment 
in talent that has become key, but also their management. 
Human capital management therefore needs to be a top priority in organisations. Certainly 
this  is  the  case for financial  institutions for  which  the  demands  and  expectations  are  high. 
New  approaches  and  strategies  for  human  capital  management  will  be  required.  These 
strategies need to be aligned with the strategic objectives of the organisation. A vital part of 
this is the capacity building of the human capital management team itself to ensure that they 
will  best  serve  their  organisation.  There  also  has  to  be  strong  engagement  between  the 
leadership and the human capital management team. There has to be an acute awareness 
of how the forces of change and the new environment is reshaping the demand and supply 
of talent and how the existing talent needs to be transformed to meet the objectives of the 
organisation in a highly dynamic environment. 
Human capital management is no longer about the efficient delivery of support services. It is 
now  about  the  management  of  talent  in  the  organisation  to  strengthen  and  enhance  its 
performance.  The  human  capital  management  also  needs  to  be  well  supported  by  an 
integrated  information  system  that  can  allow  for  rigorous  analysis  that  can  become  an 
important basis for decision making. Finally, there need to be continuous socialisation of the 
human  capital  reforms  to  ensure  the  effective  implementation  of  the  difficult  reforms  and 
changes in the organisation. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  As  we  advance  forward  into  the  future,  the  economic  and 
financial landscape can be expected to be continuously redefined. If we are to stay ahead of 
the curve and be well positioned to meet the new challenges, high priority needs to be given 
to  talent  development  and  management.  Education  and  capacity  building  to  generate  the 
new  talent  with  the  right  skills,  mindsets  and  values  is  only  one  part  of  the  solution.  New 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
strategies  and  approaches  for  the  effective  human  capital  management  is  an  equally 
important part of the equation. 
Many  of  these  issues  are  likely  to  be  discussed  at  this  symposium.  Let  me  thank  the 
speakers,  especially  those  who  have  travelled  here  from  a  far  for  their  contribution  to  this 
symposium.  Let  me  take  the  opportunity  to  wish  you  an  engaging  and  productive 
symposium. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
