Pentti Hakkarainen: Enhancing the free information flow and cooperation 
between supervisory and other authorities 
Luncheon speech by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the 
2nd  FIN-FSA  Conference  on  EU  Regulation  and  Supervision  –  “Banking  and  Supervision 
under Transformation”, Helsinki, 12 February 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
One of the most important lessons from the financial crisis has been that there was no 
adequate  coordination  and  exchange  of  information  between  central  banks  and 
supervisors.  In  other  words,  the  macro  and  micro  supervisory  perspectives  were  not 
combined. Another lesson has been that there were no macro-prudential tools available to 
intervene effectively – for instance – in growing instabilities in real estate markets, and the 
necessary macro-prudential tools are only now becoming available. 
It is certainly very important to develop the new macro-prudential instruments and policies – 
this is quite clear. However, it is even more important in my view that major trends and 
risks  in  the  financial  sector  or  the  macro-economy  do  not  escape  the  attention  of 
financial  supervisors.  To  achieve  this  you  need  constant  and  very  close  cooperation 
between supervisors and central banks. The macro and micro supervisory functions should 
not be seen as separate silos but two sides of the same coin! 
After  every  financial  crisis  there  are  always  needs  to  correct  shortcomings  which  have 
appeared  in  the  crisis  as  evident  ex  post.  This  time  it  is  not  different.  Now  we  have  seen 
many  ideas  how  to  step  up  the  necessary  cooperation  between  the  macro-  and  micro-
supervisory functions and move central banking and supervision closer together. In Finland, 
the decision to put supervision close to the central bank was made already earlier [– in 1994 
regarding  financial  sector  supervision  and  in  2009  also  insurance  sector  supervision  –  ] 
based on lessons learned from the banking crisis in the early 90’s and on practical reasons 
like efficient use of limited resources in a small country. 
The  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  (the  Fin-FSA)  is  at  the  same  time  an  independent 
organisation, with its own decision-making structure, but also an integral part of the Bank of 
Finland.  We  have  now  reaped  important  benefits  from  our  model  during  the  recent 
financial  crisis.  There  are  several  examples  of  the  benefits  of  our  model.  Common 
databases are shared, valuable information is exchanged and extensive cooperation takes 
place in financial stability analysis and stress testing. 
One concrete example is the handling of the troubled Icelandic banks in 2008 here in 
Finland. I think it is a good illustration of how big the value added can be from close central 
bank  –  supervision  links.  Thanks  to  having  access  to  signals  from  the  central  banking 
community  of  potential  major  liquidity  problems  in  Icelandic  banks,  the  Finnish  Supervisor 
was  able  to  act  quickly  in  full  cooperation  with  the  Icelandic  authorities  and  minimise  the 
damage for depositors and the Finnish banking sector more broadly. Hence, information from 
the central bank was very useful for the supervisor to prepare timely actions. [Even though 
the banking sector remained stable, people were nevertheless nervous and – for example – 
currency  in  circulation  increased.  Good  collaboration  with  the  banking  industry  facilitated 
reaching  a  solution  rapidly.  Smooth  cooperation  also  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  allowed 
effectively limiting negative consequences for financial stability.] 
Cooperation between the macro- and micro supervisory functions should be so close 
that  it  becomes  self-evident  at  all  levels  of  the  organisation  and  there  are  no 
bureaucratic obstacles or turf battles between the two functions. [You have reached a 
good  level  of  cooperation,  when  the  alternative  way  of  working  than  doing  things  together 
and exchanging data and ideas, does not even cross peoples’ minds.] We consider that our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
cooperation between the central bank and the supervisor is already at a good level. Having 
said that, there is always room to improve, and we are working further on that. 
Dear guests, you may now think that the model I have been describing may be good 
for Finland, but is it really fit also for larger economies or the Euro Area and the EU as 
a whole? My answer is yes. Also in the Banking Union, the macro- and micro supervisory 
functions should be as close together as possible also at the centralised level. 
As a matter of fact, a similar model of close central banking and supervision links is 
being implemented for the new supervisory system in the Banking Union. The ECB will 
be leading the supervisory work for significant banks and hosting the new Supervisory Board. 
As  a  first  fundamental  thing,  monetary  policy  issues  and  decision  making  are  kept  clearly 
separate from supervisory responsibilities. This model allows reaping the benefits of a close 
relationship between central banking and supervision and maintaining the independence of 
supervision through a separate decision making structure. Independence of the supervisory 
work needs to be safeguarded in the internal organisation of the ECB, while not preventing 
the necessary tight cooperation between the central banking and supervisory functions. 
Cooperation  between  the  two  functions  should  be  constant  and  effective  in  both 
directions. The macro-prudential risk assessment greatly benefits from the risk picture that 
is emerging from micro-supervisory data and ideas of where major risks are can be “reality 
checked”  against  supervisory  data  on  banks’  actual  exposures.  And  in  the  other  direction, 
macro-prudential  risk  picture  needs  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  design  of  supervisory 
plans  and  inspection  programmes  to  direct  supervisory  resources  in  high-risk  areas.  It  is 
important to note that micro-supervision actions can have an impact at the macro-level – i.e. 
micro supervisory tools also affect macro issues. 
In  addition to  the  close  cooperation  between  macro  and  micro  supervision,  another 
issue is of crucial importance – that is effective resolution of crisis banks. Here, again, 
effective cooperation between central banks and supervisors is vital – as is equally important 
the  cooperation  with  the  potentially  separate  resolution  authority;  whatever  the  final 
institutional set up will be. This is really the core issue for the Single Resolution Mechanism – 
which is now being planned – to function properly. 
While we are making very good progress with the Single Supervisory Mechanism, we need 
to  make  strong  progress  also  on  the  resolution  side.  When  resolution  works well it will 
force the guiding principle that “bail-in” is the rule and “bail-out” a rare exception – 
and taxpayers’ involvement will be minimised. 
[For  a  successful  resolution  system,  three  elements  are  the  most  important.  First, 
national  authorities  need  new  effective  and  harmonised  powers  and  tools  to  resolve  failed 
banks. Second, we should establish a Union-level resolution system – the Single Resolution 
Mechanism, which should go hand in hand with the Single Supervisory Mechanism as far as 
the scope of banks and countries is concerned. That is, the Single Resolution  Mechanism 
should cover the entire euro area banking sector plus banks in those non-euro area countries 
that wish to join the SSM. And third, bank resolution funds, prefunded by the banks, should 
form  the  primary  financial  backstops.  For  deeply  systemic  banking  crises  there  can  be  a 
need for an ultimate fiscal backstop, but it should be clearly emphasised that a bail-out would 
be a rare exception.] 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude by stressing again the most important issue I see, 
which  is  the  free  information  flow  and  cooperation  between  supervisory  and  other 
authorities.  Improving  this  also  by  removing  obstacles  hindering  the  flow  of  information 
would  guarantee  efficiency  in  preventing  and  handling  future  crises.  Even  though  it  is 
tempting to think that “this time is different”, I can guarantee that in the future things will not 
be  different  and  nasty  surprises  and  crises  will  surely  occur,  and  that  time  again  a  well-
functioning supervisory system is of essence. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
