Jun Il Kim: Achieving balanced growth and promoting economic 
development 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jun  Il  Kim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the 
International Seminar 2012, hosted jointly by the Bank of Korea and the Daegu-Gyeongbuk 
Development Institute, Daegu-Gyeongbuk, 14 November 2012. 
 Good afternoon. 
Distinguished speakers, participants, and ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak at this international seminar hosted jointly by the Bank 
of  Korea  and  the  Daegu-Gyeongbuk  Development  Institute.  I  am  very  grateful  to  all 
speakers, particularly those who traveled from abroad to attend this seminar, and President 
Seong-Keun Lee of the Daegu-Gyeongbuk Development Institute. 
I find this seminar is quite timely, and addresses very topical issues that we should tackle to 
achieve balanced growth. Balanced growth has received a great deal of attention not only at 
the national level but also at the international level. Global imbalances were at the root of the 
global crisis.  
The euro’s fragility as a common currency also stems from the growing imbalances within the 
euro area, particularly between the core and the periphery. Indeed, the central theme of the 
G20 process is to achieve strong, sustainable and balanced growth. 
Balanced regional growth is an imperative from Korea’s perspective, given its far reaching 
implications  on  economic  resilience  and  social  cohesion.  For  instance,  uneven  economic 
development  across  regions  over  the  past  five  decades  or  so  has  resulted  in  too  much 
concentration  of  economic  activities  in  the  Seoul  Metropolitan  area  and  therefore  too  little 
utilization of available resources of other regions.  
Such regional disparity has then undermined social cohesion, political unity, and economic 
competitiveness  of  the national  economy.  Moreover,  it  is  never  optimal  from the  efficiency 
point of view because the marginal return on investment is far from being equalized across 
regions. 
Daegu-Gyeongbuk  region  is  a  victim  of  such  regional  disparity.  At  present,  it  accounts  for 
about 10 percent of national GDP and population, down from above 12 percent two decades 
ago. It was a home of Korea’s prospering textile industry until the 1980s but gave its way to 
China  afterwards.  This  region  has  struggled  since  then  to  find  a  new  engine  of  growth, 
despite  some  limited  success  in  attracting  investment  in  mobile  electronics  and  steel 
industries.  
I believe that key to successful regional economic development is the quality of less mobile 
production  factors  such  as  government  services,  institutions,  human  capital,  and  natural 
environment, among others. The quality of less mobile factors of a region will determine the 
extent  to  which  it  can  attract  mobile  factors  for  production  such  as  physical  capital  and 
finance. 
In  this  respect,  the  recipe  for  success  is  very  much  the  same  between  regional  economic 
development  within  the  national  border  and  globalization  beyond  the  national  border.  In  a 
globalized world, economic success of an individual country would be determined largely by 
how much productive investment and finance it can attract. And the abundance or lack of its 
own mobile factors would be neither a constraint nor an advantage that a country would face 
in its economic development. 
Likewise, regions within a country are competing with each other for investment resources 
available domestically or internationally, and their success depends on how attractive they 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
are as the destination of investment. As such, the essence of such competition should focus 
on how to upgrade the quality of less mobile factors of each region. 
In this light, I should emphasize the leading role of local governments and also the central 
government in promoting regional economic development. To be specific, local governments 
should  provide  a  clear  vision  and  framework  for  sustainable  development  with  detailed 
strategies  to  support  business  and  human  capital  development.  Deregulations,  supportive 
tax system, and administrative services would then be designed within the framework.  
The  central  government  could  incentivize  regional  development  by  delegating  more 
authorities to local governments for their autonomy and, more importantly, by prioritizing the 
allocation  of  fiscal  resources  among  local  governments  according  at  least  in  part  to  their 
supportive  performance  in  regional  economic  development.  It  would  be  ideal  if  regional 
development  strategies are  closely  nested  with  national  development  strategies  in  the first 
place. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Promoting  economic  development  is  always  a  highly  complex  task.  It requires  a myriad  of 
inputs including knowledge, information, network, dedicated efforts of the people, and good 
luck  as  well.  And  we  all  know  that  economic  development  is  an  evolutionary  process  of 
learning and adaptation. 
Today’s seminar is particularly meaningful in that we will learn from the rich experiences of 
our  advanced  peers,  especially  Germany  and  Japan.  I  believe  that  learning  from  others’ 
experiences  is  as  important  and  productive  as  learning  by  doing.  And  I  am  sure  that  this 
seminar will offer very useful guidance to our long journey to rebuild this region’s economy.  
I look forward to your active exchange of ideas and in-depth discussions.  
Thank you once again for joining us today. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
