K C Chakrabarty: Indian banking sector – pushing the boundaries 
Valedictory address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at  the  11th  Advanced  Management  Programme  “Towards  the  next  orbit  –  Indian  banking 
sector”, organized by the International Management Institute (IMI), New Delhi, 14 February 
2013. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Dimple Bhandia in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Dr  Pritam  Singh,  Director  General,  International  Management  Institute  (IMI), 
participants  from  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  the  commercial  banks!  It  is  a  pleasure  to  be 
amongst  you  today  as  you  complete  the  first  leg  of  the  learning  experience  which  is  the 
Advanced  Management Programme. I believe that the programme is craftily designed with 
an appropriate blend of lectures and interactive sessions with some leading academicians, 
industry  captains  and  management  experts,  both  from  India  and  from  European  business 
schools. It is a rare learning opportunity for all participants – to understand and gain insights 
into  global  banking  systems  and  develop  awareness  and  appreciation  of  the  emerging 
business environment. Apart from the opportunity to gain from structured classroom learning, 
such programmes also offer a unique forum through which participants can learn from each 
other and assimilate the best management practices across organizations. I hope all of you 
will take advantage of this wonderful opportunity. 
2. 
Being  a  part  of  the  banking  system,  which  forms  the  core  of  the  financial 
architecture of the economy, you have an  inimitable opportunity to influence the economic 
lives of the nation’s populace. We all know that banking plays a silent, yet crucial part in our 
day-to-day  lives.  The  banks  perform  financial  intermediation  by  pooling  savings  and 
channelizing  them  into  investments  through  maturity  and  risk  transformations,  thereby 
keeping the economy’s growth engine revving. 
3. 
The  central  theme  of  the  programme,  as  in  the  previous  year,  is: “Indian  Banking 
Sector:  Towards  the  next  orbit”. The  theme  is, arguably,  even  more  relevant  today  than  a 
year ago. While, on the one hand, the outlook for the global economy continues to be grim, 
the outlook for the domestic economy is also far more subdued than the last year. Growth of 
the Indian economy for 2012–13 is projected at 5 per cent – significantly below the 9 per cent 
growth rate envisaged during the Twelfth Plan and well below our desired goal of double digit 
growth rate. The Indian banking sector has also faced significant challenges. Asset quality of 
banks  has  come  under increasing  pressure  with  rising  NPAs  and  Restructured  loans. The 
Gross  NPA  ratio  for  the  banking  system,  which  was  2.4%  in  March  2011,  increased  to 
3.6 per  cent  by  September  2012.  Going  forward,  the  banking  system  will  continue  to  face  
a  challenging  environment  given  that  its  fortunes  are  closely  linked  with  those  of  the 
economy – domestic and global. 
4. 
Having  seen  the  challenges  before  the  Indian  banking  system,  what  are  our 
motivations for discussing, today, the issue of taking the Indian Banking Sector towards the 
next orbit? Our elementary knowledge of astrophysics would tell us that for being propelled 
to the next orbit, a rocket needs to pull against the earth’s gravitational force. For this, the 
rocket needs to have the requisite fire power to generate the necessary “escape velocity”. 
Also, the rocket needs to be in a stable condition before the blast can propel it to a higher 
orbit. In the absence of adequate propellant force, the rocket would fail to defy the force of 
gravity and would crash land. 
5. 
So, as we deliberate upon this issue today, are we comfortable with the dynamism 
and stability that the Indian banking system possesses? What do we actually wish to achieve 
by  taking  the  banking  sector to the  next  orbit? The  issue  which  needs to  be  addressed  is 
whether we – from the regulatory community or as part of the commercial banking sector of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  country  –  are  satisfied  with  the  financial  system  as  it  exists  today.  The  answer  to  this 
question is not very comforting. Events in recent years have called to question the relevance 
and purpose of the financial sector. Episodes like the “Occupy Wall Street” movement leave 
little scope for doubt that the global financial crisis has left the financial sector discredited. 
Thus, if the financial system has to play a purposeful and relevant role in the economy and if 
it has to regain its credibility, it will have to develop the necessary fire power and stability and 
move to the next orbit. 
6. 
What are the key drivers for propelling the banking sector forward? Which are the 
key factors that will determine whether the banking system is able to transform itself into a 
relevant,  purposeful  and  credible  system?  What  are  the  major  challenges  and  hurdles 
ahead?  What  are  the  major  goals  that  the  banking  sector  has  to  achieve  in  the  next  few 
years? I will spend some time in trying to answer these questions.  
The key drivers and challenges for the banking system originate from different sources. 
7. 
First,  the  regulatory  environment  in  which  banks  in  India  are  functioning  is 
undergoing  a  paradigm  shift.  In  particular,  with  the  implementation  of  the  global  reforms 
agenda relating to Basel III, implementation of OTC derivative reforms, reducing reliance on 
credit rating agencies, amongst others, the regulatory landscape of banks is set to change 
forever, both domestically and in the global arena. This will, inter alia, require banks to fine 
tune and refine their risk management systems. 
8. 
Second,  the  growing  global  emphasis  on  fair  treatment  to  customers,  financial 
inclusion and improved Know Your Customer (KYC) practices will require banks to reorient 
their business models, their data and information systems, and, in fact, the very mindset of 
banking, if banks have to remain relevant, going forward. 
9. 
Third,  impending  developments  in  regulatory  policies  are  likely  to  result  in  banks 
facing a far more competitive environment in the coming years relative to what was, virtually, 
a sellers’ market so far. As banks’ customers – both businesses and individuals – become 
global, banks will also need to develop global ambitions. The challenge for banks will be to 
develop new products and delivery channels that meet the evolving needs and expectations 
of its customers. 
10. 
Besides  the  formidable  challenges  that  the  evolving  global  regulatory  and 
supervisory  landscape  present  for  banks,  the  developments  in  the  domestic  business/ 
regulatory environment will also need to be factored in as banks set about recalibrating their 
business plans. For instance, in line with global developments, India is also embarking upon 
a  project  to  develop  a  framework  for  assigning  a  unique  Legal  Entity  Identifier  for  all 
customers  accessing  the  formal  financial  system.  However,  before  attaining  this  goal  at  a 
national  or  global  level,  we  need  to  immediately  ensure  that  within  each  institution  a 
customer is assigned a unique ID and that there are no instances of multiple customer IDs 
for the same customer. This is important not just from the perspective of better management 
of customer business, but also for an effective AML framework. 
11. 
Similarly, frauds are a cause for concern within the banking system, particularly for 
the public sector banks, which account for a large proportion of total frauds reported in the 
banking system. Frauds do not just represent lost money; they also indicate serious gaps in 
banks’ systems and processes and in the internal control framework. Plugging these gaps 
and  institutionalizing  a  mechanism  for  identifying  accountability  and  taking  stringent  action 
against the perpetrators of the frauds is very important for tackling this menace. 
12. 
The leveraging of the banking system by Multi-level Marketing (MLM) companies to 
defraud  common  people  of  their  hard  earned  money  is  another  critical  challenge  that 
financial sector supervisors are facing in various jurisdictions, including in India. It results in a 
loss  of  confidence  of  customers  in  the  formal  financial  system  and  could  have  severe 
adverse implications, particularly at a time when we are putting all our energies into bringing 
the marginalized groups within the fold of the banking system. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
13. 
All  these  developments  will  present  significant  challenges  for  the  banking  system 
and  banks  will  need  to  face  them  head-on  in  the  coming  years.  To  gear  up  to  these 
challenges,  banks  will  need  to  look  inwards  –  at  their  human  resource management, their 
information systems and the technology at their disposal. Importantly, they will need to look 
into the efficiency with which they perform their functions – that of credit intermediation and 
the allocation of funds to the most productive sectors of the economy. These will be the key 
internal  drivers  of  change  if  banks  are to gear  up  to  the  emerging regulatory  and  external 
environment and move into the next orbit.  
Let me now dwell on some of the major issues in a greater detail. 
Risk management 
14. 
The risk management challenge for banks has been steadily growing over the last 
two to three decades. This can be attributed to several developments in the financial sector 
over the last couple of decades. First, the deregulation of financial markets led to increased 
volatility placing greater demands on banks to manage their risks. Second, banking activities 
diversified from the traditional function of lending and borrowing to a larger set of activities 
including, inter alia, custodial services, securities underwriting and corporate advisory. Third, 
complex global financial institutions emerged leading to growing inter-connectedness of the 
financial system. Fourth, the role of securities and derivative products in banking expanded 
with increasing growth of complex financial products. The recent financial crises have further 
reemphasized the importance of risk management frameworks for banks. 
15. 
The question for the Indian banking sector is to what extent the risk management 
framework in banks are oriented towards identifying risks and tracking the passage and path 
of risks so as to be able to price the risks appropriately. My own view is that we in India are 
still  at  a  rudimentary  stage  and  hence,  the  banking  system  needs  to  urgently  work  on 
upgrading its risk identification, management and pricing abilities. 
16. 
An  associated  issue  arising  in  this  context  is  the  growing  importance  of  stress 
testing.  Stress  tests,  typically,  assess  the  resilience  of  banks  to  shocks  in  an  extreme 
adverse scenario as compared to a baseline scenario. It also provides banks’ management 
with a tool to improve their internal risk managements by identifying the stress points in their 
operations. The relevance of stress tests for assessing banks’ resilience to shocks lies in the 
fact  that  these  tests  focus  on  the  unexpected  or  “tail”  events  going  beyond  typical  risk 
management assessments. If banks are to meet the challenges of the emerging environment 
and  to  move  to  the  next  orbit,  it  would  be  critical  that  the  stress  testing  results  be 
incorporated  in  the  business  and  capital  assessment  and  planning  exercise  of  banks. The 
overall  acceptable  levels  of  expected  and  unexpected  loss  willing  to  be  incurred  by  banks 
should  be  a  management  decision  driven  based  on  rigorous  and  analytical  assessment of 
available information. While it is not expected that banks provide for unexpected losses in the 
manner  prescribed  for  expected  losses,  the  “economic  capital”  which  the  bank  seeks  to 
maintain must be driven by considerations which encompass such losses. 
17. 
A risk management framework is incomplete without an effective system of internal 
controls and methodologies. The first line of defense for risk management has to come from 
bank  managements  and,  especially,  from  bank  boards.  Unless  the  bank’s  management  is 
geared to internalize and institutionalize a risk and control culture in banks, any attempts to 
increase the resilience of banks can be effective only to a limited extent. The management 
has a critical role to play in ensuring the right balance between the business units and risk 
management,  both  in  times  of  stress  and  in  good  times,  when  there  is  a  tendency  for 
misaligned incentives to emerge. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Treating customers fairly 
18. 
The touchstone of any successful business lies in the edict that “customer is king”. 
Serving customers is, essentially, the reason why the banks exist in the first place. But over 
the  years,  I  believe,  the  customer  has  become  rather  peripheral  in  the  banks’  scheme  of 
things. In my view, while for the private sector banks, shareholders have, perhaps, emerged 
as the sole focus; for the public sector banks, employees and their well-being has become 
the primary focus. In my opinion, neither approach is sustainable in the long run. Improving 
bottom lines and preserving NIMs are the primary motives for the bank management, while 
making banking services accessible and the transactions affordable, has reduced to being a 
regulatory agenda. 
19. 
Ensuring fair treatment for the customers has become a priority for financial sector 
regulators globally and the regulatory framework is being tightened across jurisdictions. The 
expectation from financial service providers is that they display high levels of transparency in 
product  design,  pricing and financial  disclosures.  In  addition,  a  credible,  cost  effective  and 
expedient grievance redressal mechanism has to be made available to all customers. Banks 
must  make  use  of  technology  to  deliver  banking  products  and  services  in  a  cost-effective 
manner. Customer education is also critical so that the user can have the ability to choose 
appropriate  and  need  based  products  and  services.  Unless  the  banking  system  becomes 
customer  centric  in  all  its  dimensions,  it  would  fail  to  attain  sufficient  momentum  to  gain 
access to the next orbit. 
Know your customer, his business and business risks 
20. 
Across the world, greater emphasis is being laid by the financial service providers 
on  knowing  their  customers.  It  has  important regulatory  and  business  dimensions.  From  a 
regulatory  perspective,  banks  and  other  financial  service  providers  are  expected  to 
understand the business activities of their customers so that they do not, inadvertently, end 
up being conduits for illegal activities such as terrorism, MLM, frauds, hawala transactions, 
etc.  From  a  business  perspective,  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC),  Know  Your  Customers’ 
Business  (KYCB)  and  Know  Your  Customers’  Business  Risks  (KYCBR)  are  important  for 
understanding the nature of the customer’s business, which would help in offering suitable 
products,  managing  credit  exposure  and  generating  early  warning  signals  for  potential 
delinquency risks. 
21. 
It is important that the emphasis on KYC compliance is effectively conveyed across 
the organization by the top management, not just for meeting regulatory requirements, but as 
an opportunity to understand the customer better and maximize the gains from the customer 
relationship. 
Human resource management 
22. 
We  must  realize  that  the  traditional  factors  of  production  named  in  economics 
textbooks are no longer relevant in the banking industry. Land, labour, physical capital and 
enterprise  have  given  way  to  skills,  technology  and  human  capital  as  the  prime  factors  of 
production in the banking sector. Employees are no longer “labour”, they are “people” who 
ought to be nurtured and cared for. When I say “people”, I mean the bank management and 
all employees – officers, clerical staff and the sub staff. An organization’s “people” are the 
force  that  can,  potentially,  make  the  difference  between  success  and  failure.  When  the 
marketplace  has  number  of  players  with  broadly  similar  product  offerings,  the  ability  and 
motivation  levels  of  employees  could  be  the  clinching  factor  when  it  comes  to  gaining  an 
edge over rivals. The challenge before management is to use the vast unused potential in 
people  and  produce  “leaders”  out  of  “managers”  who  can  not  only  work  hard  but  also 
motivate their co-workers for producing extraordinary results. The sector needs to recognize 
the  transformation  in  the  factors  of  production  in  the  banking  industry  early  and  aim  to 
effectively  harness  these  new  factors  for  its  own  betterment  and,  more  importantly,  in  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
interest  of  the  society.  By  effectively  utilizing  these  new  factors  of  production,  the  sector 
could  quickly  bring  in  more  and  more  financially  excluded  people  under  the  ambit  of  the 
formal banking system and help it to be seen as a relevant and purpose-oriented sector. 
Promoting financial literacy 
23. 
In  today’s  digitized  world,  stating  that  information  is  power,  is  perhaps  to  state  a 
truism.  Our  economy  is  traversing  towards  being  a  knowledge  economy.  This  is  amply 
demonstrated by the contribution of services sector in our economy. However, much as we 
would hate admitting it, we are a financially illiterate society. And here, I am not talking about 
the common man alone. The financial illiteracy is all pervasive – the banks, the regulators, 
the  policy  makers  –  all suffer from  some  degree  of financial  illiteracy.  Let  me quote  a few 
examples  to  drive  home  my  point.  Take  the  recent  instances  where  banks  had  sold  forex 
derivatives  to  their  customers  without  proper  understanding  of  their  suitability  and 
appropriateness. Neither the customers nor the banks had an iota of understanding of the 
quagmire  that  they  were  getting  into  while  entering  into  these  contracts.  The  subsequent 
legal wrangling and losses suffered by some of the banks aptly demonstrate their financial 
illiteracy.  Take  the  case  of  the  Benchmark  Prime  Lending  Rate  (BPLR),  which  was,  till 
recently, used by the banks for lending to their borrowers. My understanding of the BPLR is 
that it is the rate at which the bank lends to its best borrowers i.e. those borrowers who are 
least likely to default on their loans. However, for years together, the banks continued to lend 
to their borrowers well below their BPLR until the regulator introduced the base rate regime. 
Another  conundrum  that  needs  to  be  solved  is  one  surrounding  the  gold  import.  Though 
many of us have realized its implications for the Current Account Deficit, there have not been 
very sincere efforts to check its imports. We need to examine why public money should be 
utilized  for  importing  gold  by  banks.  I  firmly  believe  that  we  need  to  begin  a  vigorous 
campaign to educate the society about the myth of investment in gold as a “safe asset” and a 
“hedge against inflation.” I believe that the Indian banking sector cannot be propelled into the 
next orbit unless all its stakeholders and the society as a whole, has attained basic financial 
literacy. 
Improving efficiency 
24. 
What  are the  attributes of  an  efficient financial  system? To my  mind,  efficiency  of 
any system may be gauged in terms of its ability to not only deliver products and services in 
a  cost-effective  and  affordable  way,  but  also  in  an  inclusive  manner.  Neither  of  these  two 
traits  characterizes  our  present  banking  and  financial  system.  A  wide  section  of  the 
population remains excluded from the formal financial system even years after “growth with a 
human face” has been the clichéd socio-political agenda of the policy makers. Moreover, the 
operating  cost  of  banking  system  remains  at  an  elevated  level  which  renders  the  banking 
transaction costs unaffordable for the common man. The dream of financial inclusion cannot 
be realized unless the banking transaction costs are brought down substantially. This would 
need  a  collective  effort  from  the  policy  makers,  bank  managements,  regulator  and  the 
employees. Effective use of the new factors alluded to above- skills, technology and human 
capital- would help in increasing the productivity and, thereby, lowering the transaction costs. 
For the realization of this dream, the banking system would need to acquire allocational and 
operational efficiency:  
• 
Allocational  Efficiency:  This  requires  banks  to  ensure  that  the  precious  societal 
resources are allotted to the most productive activities and that the interests of the 
vulnerable sections of the society are also taken into account. 
Operational Efficiency: Operational Efficiency requires banks to provide financial 
products and services to its customers in a safe, secure and speedy manner and to 
ensure that the cost of financial intermediation is minimized.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
25. 
As  you  all  gain  knowledge  and  exposure  through  this  Advanced  Management 
Programme, I expect you to deliberate and introspect on how your banks and the banking 
system as a whole can improve on both- allocational and operational efficiency parameters- 
so  that  the  financial  intermediation  function  is  efficiently  performed.  You  must  realize  that 
banks would need to “perform or perish.” This will be an important takeaway for all of you 
from  the  programme  and  will  determine  whether  banks  can,  indeed,  regain  the  trust  and 
confidence of the common man on the street and retain their pivotal position in the emerging 
financial order. 
Challenges before regulator/supervisor 
26. 
Though  the  Indian  banking  system  remained  largely  unaffected  by  the  global 
financial  crisis,  we  cannot  pat  ourselves  on  the  back,  for  it  was  much  to  do  with  lack  of 
product innovation and a comparatively lesser degree of integration with the global markets. 
The  coming  years,  however,  will  pose  big  challenges  for  the  supervisors  as  well.  The 
significant  rise  in  interconnectedness  of  financial  markets  across  jurisdictions,  the  growing 
complexities of banking products and services, introduction of newer delivery channels and 
the  need  for  emphasizing  on  inclusion  of  the  vulnerable  and  marginalized  groups  has 
significantly  increased  the  challenges  presented  before  the  financial  sector  regulator/ 
supervisor. 
27. 
The  supervisory  processes  within  the  Reserve  Bank  are  changing  so  as  to  make 
them more forward looking and geared to assess the risks that the supervised entities pose 
to  the  supervisory  objectives.  The  processes  are  being  re-oriented  to  move  away  from 
transaction based to risk based and from incidence based to theme based supervision. An 
effective supervisory regime must facilitate good business and must obstruct bad business. 
Supervisory  practices  will  also  need  to  imbibe  additional  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis 
which are emerging in the form of new regulatory and supervisory benchmarks like Basel III, 
revised  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Bank  Supervision,  increased  focus  on  systemically 
important  banks,  etc.,  if  they  are  to  remain  robust  and  relevant  in  a  changing  banking 
environment. 
28. 
The  decks  for  banking  systems’  flight  to  the  next  orbit  cannot  be  clear  unless  all 
necessary safeguards have been validated by the regulators/supervisors. The latter have a 
key  role  in  overseeing  the  banks’  transition  to  the  next  orbit  for  it  has  to  ensure  that  the 
banking system smoothly settles into the next higher orbit without crash landing. Some of the 
major safety checks that the regulator and supervisors need to perform are related to the “Fit 
and  Proper”  assessment  of  the  senior  management,  adequacy  of  the  management 
information  systems,  risk  management  processes,  internal  audit,  grievance  redressal 
system, compliance to regulatory guidelines and prescriptions, etc. 
Conclusion 
29. 
We  are  all  living  in  exciting  times  –  times  which  offer  as  many  opportunities  as  it 
offers  challenges.  While  the  global  and  domestic  economic  environment  might,  presently, 
give little cause for cheer, one needs to look at the opportunities available and also seek to 
strengthen  our  systems  and  processes  by  institutionalizing  the  lessons  learnt  during  this 
period.  This  will  help  in  strengthening  the  financial  system  so  that  it  sees  through  these 
challenging times and is ready to thrive, as the economy sets on its recovery path. 
30. 
In  this  process,  while  the  bankers  have  to  act  as  change  agents  within  their 
institutions, supervisors have a critical role to play in ensuring that they are equipped with the 
necessary skills to deal with a rapidly expanding, increasingly complex and global banking 
system. The financial system the world over has come under increased public scrutiny. Both 
supervisors and supervised entities are increasingly accountable for their actions. We need 
to collectively and decisively act in the interests of the economic system. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
31. 
Perhaps, the greatest opportunity that exists is the vast mass of financially excluded 
people who are waiting to be touched by the formal financial system. The potential benefits 
to the banking system and to the economy from financially including this segment would be 
enough to galvanize the economy and restore it back to the high growth trajectory. 
32. 
Each one of us assembled here today has to walk the extra mile to ensure that the 
Indian banking system acquires the necessary “escape velocity” to catapult itself to the new 
orbit. I wish you all the very best of learning in the remaining part of your programme. Thank 
You! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
