Daniel Mminele: OTC derivatives reform – lessons from the financial 
market regulatory reform process 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Daniel  Mminele,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank, at the 2013 Emerging Markets Dialogue on OTC Derivatives Reform, Johannesburg, 
12–13 September 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good  afternoon  ladies  and  gentlemen.  Thank  you  to  the  Deutsche  Gesellschaft  für 
Internationale  Zusammenarbeit  (GIZ)  and  the  Federal  Ministry  for  Economic  Cooperation 
and Development (BMZ) for inviting me to deliver the concluding remarks at the end of the 
two-day  workshop  of  the  Emerging  Markets  Dialogue  on  Over-The-Counter  (OTC) 
Derivatives Reform, as well as for sponsoring this very important and topical event. I would 
also  like  to  extend  my  thanks  to  our  co-hosts,  namely  the  National  Treasury,  in  particular 
Deputy  Minister  Nene,  and  the  Financial  Services  Board  through  Deputy  Chief  Executive 
Officer  Bert  Chanetsa.  Last  but  certainly  not  least,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  many  staff 
members  from  all  organisations  co-hosting,  who  have  contributed  to  the  organization  and 
success of this event. 
Unfortunately,  I  have  not  had  the  benefit  of  listening  to  the  various  panel  discussions  and 
what I am sure were thought-provoking comments made by the various speakers over the 
last two days. Therefore, to avoid the risk of repeating what others may have said, I thought I 
would  take  a  broad  approach  to  the  subject  and  offer  some  thoughts  on  the  lessons  that 
emerging market and developing economies can draw from the financial market regulatory 
reform process that has taken place over the past 5 years and how this can be applied to the 
OTC derivative reform process. 
The headwinds were strong and remain strong 
2. 
In  Washington  in  2008,  the  G-20  committed  to  fundamentally  reform  the  regulation  of  the 
global  financial  system.  The  objective  was  to  correct  the  regulatory  failures  that  in  part 
contributed to the global financial crisis, and to build a safer, more resilient financial system 
that could better serve the needs of the real economy. This global financial regulatory reform 
process  began,  and  continues  to  be  undertaken,  in  a  period  which  is  characterized  by 
subdued economic growth, elevated unemployment levels, and volatile financial markets. In 
these  extraordinary  circumstances,  policy  makers  have  resorted  to  non-conventional 
measures  both  on  the  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  side  and  have  tried  to  balance  the 
competing short-term need to promote economic growth and create jobs with the longer term 
imperative to construct stable financial systems and achieve sustainable growth paths and 
healthy public finances. Despite this complex and challenging environment, G-20 countries 
have managed to make significant progress towards meeting their 2008 commitments. 
Governor  Mark  Carney, in  his  capacity  as  the  Chair  of the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB) 
noted in an open letter to the G-20 dated 2 September 2013, that major progress has been 
made in building stronger financial institutions and more robust markets through substantially 
strengthened international standards. However, work on this front is far from complete. 
Governor Carney stated that the G-20’s objective of strong, sustainable and balanced growth 
requires an open, integrated and efficient global financial system. Clearly, one aspect of such 
a financial system is efficient and stable derivative markets that work for market participants 
in both the advanced economies and in emerging market and developing economies. This 
workshop is therefore of direct relevance to the global financial reform agenda. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Our  challenge  is  to  make  sure  that  the  reforms  that  are  proposed  at  the  global  level  for 
derivatives  markets  do not  have  adverse  unintended  consequences for emerging markets, 
and can be implemented in ways that ensure we remain active and attractive participants in 
global financial markets. A “one-size-fits-all” set of regulations without consideration of timing 
and scope may not be appropriate and reflective of where some economies are in terms of 
their financial market development. In order to meet these challenges, it is important that we 
understand the implications of the currently proposed OTC derivative reforms and can act, 
collectively, in the appropriate global, regional and domestic forums to mitigate any adverse 
consequences and maximize their benefits for markets and our domestic and international 
stakeholders. The growing presence of emerging market and developing economies in the 
global  regulatory  reform  process  provides  an  opportunity  to  shape  the  outcomes  of  the 
process. 
3. 
Expanded role and responsibilities of emerging markets and developing 
economies 
The  international  financial  standard-setting  bodies  were  historically  dominated  by  the 
advanced economies. Today, emerging market and developing countries collectively account 
for about half of the global economy, it therefore is no longer feasible that they be excluded 
from important decisions that are made, which affect the management of the global economy 
and regulatory reform. As a result, following the crisis that started in 2007 the leaders of the 
G-20 agreed to expand the membership of the international standard-setting bodies and to 
strengthen  the  mandate  and  capabilities  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  which  was 
subsequently  re-established  as  the  FSB.  This  has  helped  these  bodies  to  become  more 
representative and will strengthen their role in developing and encouraging their members to 
implement policies in the interest of a stable global financial system. 
In order to enhance its effectiveness, the FSB, represented at this workshop by Mr Rupert 
Thorne,  Deputy  Secretary  General,  is  now  seeking  to  incorporate  a  broader  range  of 
participants into its activities. For example, it has created Regional Consultative Groups that 
bring an additional 70 countries into the policy  discussion. In a similar vein, emerging and 
developing countries are represented on the committees of the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision, and the Basel Consultative Group was established to facilitate a broad dialogue 
with non-member countries. 
But there is no such thing as a free lunch. Those of us from emerging market and developing 
countries,  who  participate  in  the  international  standard-setting  bodies,  where  financial 
regulatory reforms are discussed, now have an obligation to use our voice in these forums in 
a  responsible  manner.  This  means  that  we  need  to  be  actively  engaged  in  meetings,  be 
ready to take constructive positions on the various items on the reform agenda, including on 
OTC  derivative  reforms,  which  positions  are  supported  by  solid  research,  and  convincing 
arguments. We also need to pay due regard to the concerns of both those emerging markets 
and developing countries that are participants in these meetings, and those that are not at 
the table. 
We have previously witnessed how putting forward well-reasoned positions can have positive 
outcomes. For example, South Africa, together with other emerging market and developing 
economies helped to bring about refinements to certain elements of the Liquidity Coverage 
Ratio (LCR) under the Basel III framework. Based on research, including our participation in 
the Financial Stability Board’s “Study of effect of regulatory reforms on emerging market and 
developing economies”, which clearly demonstrated the potential adverse, albeit unintended, 
consequences  of  some  elements  of  the  proposed  LCR,  the  standard-setting  bodies 
recognized that the LCR required refinement. The revised LCR standards were announced in 
early  2013  and  they  accommodate  the  concerns  of  jurisdictions,  like  ours,  which  have  a 
shortage of adequate high quality liquid assets as defined. Similarly, the combined efforts of 
affected  countries,  including  emerging  markets,  are  making  progress  in  reviewing  the  Net 
Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) proposals, and ensuring that any unintended adverse impacts 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that 
the  FSB  appreciates 
are  limited.  The  proposed  OTC  derivative  reforms,  particularly  the  role  of  central 
counterparties  (CCPs)  in  derivative  markets,  is  another  topic  that  runs  the  risk  of 
undermining one of the core objectives of the rule-making bodies, namely global parity. 
Fortunately, 
international  regulatory  standards  can  have 
unintended consequences. In this regard, I want to express my appreciation to the FSB for 
its  most  recent  report  on  the  unintended  consequences  of  the  international  regulatory 
reforms  and  for  their  stated  intention  to  continue  monitoring  the  reform  implementation 
process so that it can identify these unintended consequences.  
It seems to me that we can draw two lessons from these examples. First, now that emerging 
markets  have  representation  and  are  active  participants  in  the  international  regulatory 
process, it is possible for us to influence this process. To do so, we need to cooperate with 
each other. We need to collaborate and coordinate our efforts in all available regional and 
global forums to make our case for balanced outcomes on the existing items on the reform 
agenda.  Fortunately,  there  are  many  opportunities  for  such  collaboration.  They  include,  in 
addition  to  the  G-20,  the  FSB  and  the  international  standard-setting  bodies  and  their 
outreach  efforts,  regional  groupings  such  as  the  SADC  Committee  for  Central  Bank 
Governors  (CCBG),  the  Committee  of  African  Banking  Supervisors  (CABS)  and  the 
Association of African Central Banks (AACB), and emerging market and developing country 
groupings like the BRICS and the G-24. 
Second, as I have just indicated, we can only become effective participants in these forums if 
we base our efforts on solid research and careful preparation. This will enable us to identify 
those issues which have the potential to generate significant benefits or to inflict significant 
adverse impacts on our financial systems and countries. It will also help us to marshal our 
arguments and resources to effectively advocate for our positions on these issues. 
It  is  clear  that  workshops  like  the  one  we  are  now  concluding  are  important  precisely 
because they help us with regard to both the issues I have just mentioned. By allowing us to 
exchange  ideas  and  experiences  on  key  issues  on  the  international  regulatory  reform 
agenda, gatherings such as this one help us identify our common concerns and the ways in 
which  we  can  collaborate  to  address them. They  also  help  us  deepen  our knowledge  and 
understanding of these issues, and broaden our network of contacts. 
As I draw towards the conclusion of my remarks, let me briefly come back to OTC derivatives 
specifically. 
Quo vadis on OTC derivatives reforms for emerging markets? 
4. 
In Governor Carney’s open letter to the G-20, the FSB highlighted the structural deficiencies 
in the lightly regulated OTC derivatives market, and the systemic risk this poses for the wider 
financial  markets  and  the  real  economy.  I  do  not  propose  to  go  into  detail  on  the  current 
efforts to address these deficiencies because I know that you have discussed them during 
the  past  two  days.  However,  I  wish  to  emphasize  that  although  these  regulatory  reforms 
have  been  primarily  designed  to  respond  to  the  needs  and  dynamics  of  the  derivative 
markets in advanced economies, regulators in emerging market and developing economies 
will be required to comply with these rules if they wish their markets to be accepted as part of 
the global financial system. While this is understandable and we fully intend to comply with 
the final rules, it is important to recognize the challenges present in our own markets. 
One benefit of forums like this one is that it enables participants from emerging markets to 
meet  and  exchange  views  on  OTC  derivative  reforms.  This  is  important  for  a  number  of 
reasons.  Firstly,  while,  it  serves  the  global  interest  to  achieve  standardization  in  derivative 
transactions’ contracting, pricing and documentation, it is also important to make sure that 
the interests of all stakeholders are adequately addressed in the ways these transactions are 
standardized.  If  emerging  market  and  developing  countries  do  not  have  opportunities  to 
discuss  these  matters,  with  appropriate  attention  to  all  the  technical  details,  amongst 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
themselves, this is less likely to happen. Second, we all have a vested interest in derivative 
transactions that are transparent and as safe as possible. In principle, this can be most easily 
achieved  through  standardized  transactions  executed  through  central  counterparties  and 
reporting to trade repositories. In practice, however, not all countries derivative markets are 
big  enough  to  support  the  necessary  market  infrastructures.  As  such,  they  would  require 
more  flexible  approaches  to  OTC  derivatives  than  is  the  case  in  the  larger  advanced 
economies.  This  suggests  that  there  is  a  need  to  collaborate  on  developing  regulatory 
proposals that are appropriate to our conditions. If we do so, and can undertake the research 
and preparations needed to develop the arguments to support our preferred approach, I am 
confident, based on past experience, they will receive a fair hearing and where appropriate, 
will  be  incorporated  into  the  current  international  proposals  for  regulating  OTC  derivative 
markets. 
Conclusion 
5. 
In  many  ways,  financial  markets  in  emerging  market  and  developing  countries  are  still 
developing.  The  benefits  that  derivative  markets  offer  and  the  challenges  they  bring, 
therefore,  are  not  necessarily  comparable  with  the  benefits  and  challenges  applicable  to 
advanced  countries.  In  addition,  the  benefits  and  challenges  associated  with  derivative 
markets in specific countries may differ due to our markets’ differing stages of development. 
For this reason it is valuable for us to be able to share views and exchange experiences and 
to learn from each other. I hope that you all felt that this workshop has contributed to this 
objective and that it will help all of us in our efforts to promote transparent, predictable and 
safe derivatives markets that meet all our needs. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
