Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Crafting a regional agenda for child & youth 
finance 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Asia  and  the  Pacific  regional  meeting  on  “Child  &  youth 
finance”, Manila, 4 December 2012. 
 Secretary Imelda Nicolas of the Commission on Filipinos Overseas; CYFI Managing Director 
Jeroo  Billimoria;  distinguished  resource  persons;  child  and  youth  representatives  Callista 
(12 years  old)  from  Indonesia,  Sam  (11  years  old)  from  Uganda  and  Jessie  from  the 
Philippines;  fellow  advocates  of  financial  inclusion  from  Asia  and  the  Pacific;  our  media 
partners; special guests, good morning  and welcome to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the 
Philippine central bank. 
We at the Bangko Sentral are happy that you have come to the Philippines to discuss child 
and youth finance in Asia and the Pacific – where it is said roughly 60% of the world’s youth 
reside. 
Here in the Philippines alone, about half of our total population are young. It is important for 
our country therefore to ensure that our youth are given proper basic education that will allow 
them to grow into responsible self-reliant adults. Indeed, to us at the Bangko Sentral, finance 
education is for everyone.  
Thus, when a 2006 survey indicated that less than 5% of the Filipino youth save regularly, 
we made a decision to place child and youth finance education high on our agenda. This is 
important to us. After all, we have roughly 25 million students in both elementary and high 
school levels. And as Philippine National Hero Dr. Jose Rizal once said “Ang kabataan ang 
pag-asa ng ating bayan.” The youth are the hope of our future.  
Furthermore,  the  2006  Citibank  Financial  Quotient  Survey  indicated  that  Filipinos  have  a 
financial intelligence quotient of 47.8 points, less than half the maximum score of 100.  
While  there  were  other  countries  that  had  lower  scores,  the  result  was  disturbing  for  us 
nevertheless. It was an indication that over the long term our countrymen may miss out on 
the  opportunities  that  development  brings.  or  worse,  be  unprepared  to  weather  financial 
uncertainties that may arise in the future.  
These  results  provided  us  with  the  strong  resolve  to  broaden  and  deepen  our  financial 
education program. Since then, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas has been implementing an 
integrated  economic  and  financial  learning  program  that  covers  different  segments  of  our 
society – from students to young adults to overseas Filipinos and their families to teachers 
and parents as well as the unbanked and the underbanked.  
Our ultimate goal is to make people part of our financial system while giving them protection. 
In other words, we want to develop an inclusive financial system that will generate inclusive 
growth through financial education and protection.  
In this connection, I am pleased to report that the development of the Philippine microfinance 
sector  is  one  success  story  in  our  continuing  efforts  to  develop  a  more  inclusive  financial 
system. In fact, the Philippines has been cited for the fourth consecutive year for having the 
world’s best regulatory environment in promoting microfinance.  
Millions  of  Filipino  microentrepreneurs  and  their  families  have  been  liberated  from  poverty 
through microfinance which gives access to credit without collateral. As of June 2012, banks 
have  an  outstanding microfinance  loan  portfolio  of  P  7.7  Billion  and  an  equally  impressive 
savings portfolio of P4.3 Billion from microentrepreneurs.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Indeed,  the  success  of  many  microentrepreneurs  is  proof  of  the  empowering  benefits  of 
gaining  access  to  financial  services.  This  is  the  reason  why  we  are  optimistic  about  the 
impact of having lessons on entrepreneurship taught to our elementary students.  
Using language and concepts that are easy for children to understand, the Bangko Sentral 
and  the  Department  of  Education  produced  teaching  guides  to  instill  in  children  an 
understanding and consciousness of financial issues. This is at the heart of the BSP-DepEds 
finance education program.  
The  lessons  range  from  telling  the  difference  between  needs  and  wants  to  undertaking 
income-generating  ventures  to  the  concept  of  inventory  to  acquiring  the  qualities  of  a 
successful entrepreneur. All these with the aim to hone their financial decision-making skills 
that will serve them well into adulthood. 
Ladies and gentlemen. In this journey, we have met many challenges; but we also gained 
partners along the way. One of our partners was the Learning Section of the local newspaper 
Philippine Daily Inquirer. Supported by Citi and the Bangko Sentral, it published a six-week 
series designed for high school students: “Money Matters for Teens: You Can Bank on It.” It 
eventually earned the top prize from the World Association of Newspapers for “excellence in 
efforts to engage the youth.”  
Another partner is The Bankers Institute of the Philippines which conducts personal finance 
management  lectures  for  teachers  and  parents  of  elementary  school  pupils.  Schools  now 
request this program which runs parallel to the classroom teachings of elementary pupils.  
At the same time, 12 banks joined hands to launch the Kiddie Account Program. While these 
banks were no stranger to children’s accounts, they all agreed on the need to make saving 
affordable, accessible and convenient to attract more kiddie savers.  
After  negotiations  that  took  nearly  two  years,  the  12  banks  agreed  on  a  common 
denominator: children are welcome to open accounts with them with a minimum deposit of 
only  100  pesos  or  less  than  US$3.00.  And  to  further  help  make  saving  a  habit,  bank 
representatives also go directly to schools to service children’s deposits.  
So  far,  so  good:  thousands  of  new  accounts  are  being  generated  by  the  Kiddie  Account 
Program and withdrawals are minimal. Since children exert influence in household decisions, 
we hope that their habit of saving will rub off on other members of the households, including 
the adults.  
Based  on  the  results  of  the  BSP’s  Household  Finance  Survey,  only  20%  of  Philippine 
households maintain bank accounts. We are therefore looking at this program as a way to 
help raise the savings rate in the Philippines.  
I  understand  that  yesterday  many  of  our  foreign  delegates  visited  the  Aurora  Quezon 
Elementary School to observe how financial lessons are taught and to hear how banks are 
implementing their Kiddie Account Programs. Did you find it useful? That is good to know.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  our  continuing  journey  takes  us  through  uncharted  territory. 
Nevertheless,  we  are  encouraged  by  positive  feedback  – from the  pupils  who  start  saving 
regularly, to the teachers who say they learn life lessons from the program.  
Also  a  positive  is  the  2011  Citi  Financial  Quotient  Survey  where  the  Philippines  showed 
sustained improvements in its score.  
Nevertheless, we have a long way to go and a lot more to learn. It is for this reason that we 
look forward to this Regional Meeting on Child and Youth Finance for Asia and the Pacific.  
I hope therefore that our conference today will be successful and fruitful.  
Finally, we thank the Child and Youth Finance International for bringing this regional meeting 
to  Manila  and  for  taking  the  lead  in  the  global  movement  to  promote  the  habit  of  saving 
among  schoolchildren.  We  also  commend  their  design  props  today  –  the  multi-colored 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
balloons  and  throw  pillows.  It  reminds  us  that  while  we  are  tackling  a  serious  subject,  we 
should not forget that our intended beneficiaries should find it fun to find ways to grow and 
manage their own money. 
We also thank all the speakers and delegates from here and overseas who have come to 
contribute to the crafting of the regional agenda for child and youth finance.  
And to our foreign delegates, we hope you enjoy your stay here in the Philippines. Thank you 
all and Mabuhay! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
