William C Dudley: Remarks at panel discussion on OTC derivatives 
reform and broader financial reforms agenda 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  2013  OTC  Derivatives  Conference,  Paris,  France, 
12 September 2013. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here.  Who  wouldn’t  want  to  be  in  Paris  –  anytime  –  let  alone  in 
September?  My  comments  today  will  focus  on  how  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives 
reform fits in with the broader financial reform agenda and those aspects of the reform effort 
in  OTC  derivatives  that  could  potentially  fall  short  relative  to  those  broader  objectives.  My 
short  answer,  which  I  will  elaborate  on  in  my  remarks,  is  that  the  OTC  derivatives  reform 
effort fits in very well with the broader reform agenda, but there are significant risks that we 
will fall short in this arena relative to what we are likely to achieve elsewhere. 
As I see it, the G20 reform effort for OTC derivatives has three broad goals: 
 
 
Reduce systemic risk with respect to OTC derivatives activities;  
Improve the ability to aggregate and analyze over-the-counter derivatives OTCD risk 
exposures across markets, institutions and product classes; and  
Improve competition and protect against market abuse.  
 
Systemic  risk  is  being  reduced  in  a  number  of  different  ways.  First,  mandating  the 
standardization,  whenever  possible,  and  central  clearing  of  OTC  derivative  trades  can 
reduce risk by transforming a complex web of bilateral firm exposures into a smaller set of 
net exposures between each dealer and the central counterparty (CCP). Given their role in 
fostering  financial  stability,  robust  financial  market  infrastructures  (FMIs)  that  are  properly 
risk-managed can serve as a source of strength in times of stress. Central clearing can also 
reduce  systemic  risk  by  requiring  collateral  from  the  participants.  To  the  extent  that  the 
OTCD reform effort results in the greater use of collateral, that should also help make the 
system safer. 
Second, 
risk 
management,  and  resolution  and  recovery,  as  well  as  implementation  of  the  Principles  for 
Financial  Market  Infrastructures  (PFMIs)  promulgated  by  the  Committee  on  Payment  and 
Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions 
(IOSCO)  should  make  FMIs  more  robust  and  resilient.  FMIs  performed  well  during  the 
financial  crisis,  but  with  OTCD  reform,  we  are  asking  FMIs  to  do  even  more,  so  the  bar 
needs to be higher.  
Third,  firm-level  risk  management  is  being  strengthened  in  a  variety  of  ways  such  as 
requiring  mandatory  margin  requirements  for  bespoke,  non-cleared  trades.  Firms  need  to 
understand  the  risks  associated  with  OTC  derivatives  activity  and  set  aside  capital  and 
exchange  margin  to  cover  these  risks.  Moreover,  authorities  are  developing  supervisory 
approaches  to  oversee  market  infrastructures  and  participants  to  ensure  compliance  with 
evolving regulatory frameworks. 
Activity  in  the  OTC  derivatives  market  is  gradually  being  moved  into  clearer  view.  In 
particular, over time, mandatory reporting to trade repositories (TRs) and access to that data 
by regulators should facilitate the ability for supervisors and others to assess building risks in 
the global financial market more quickly and comprehensively.  
Improving  competition  and  protecting  against  market  abuse  are  also  important.  These 
objectives are being accomplished by the increased use of electronic trading platforms and 
increasing  capital  and 
improving  governance, 
requirements, 
liquidity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
improving  access  to  CCPs.  This  should  lead  to  more  competitive  markets  that  will  offer 
participants better liquidity and pricing and a greater degree of transparency. 
In general, I think that the first two objectives of OTC derivatives reform fit in well with the 
goals of the broader financial reform effort undertaken in the wake of the financial crisis. I 
would characterize the goals of the broader effort as: 
 
 
 
Reducing the risk of failure of large systemically important financial institutions;  
Increasing the robustness of the system when such failures occur; and  
Obtaining better information more quickly about what is happening in the financial 
system  so  that  the  identification  of  incipient  problems  can  be  improved  and  the 
ultimate interventions – be they macroprudential or firm-specific – can occur earlier 
and with greater conviction.  
Implementation  of  OTC  derivatives  reform  should  make  the  markets  more  resilient  and 
should reduce the risk that they will be a source of contagion in stressed environments. Also, 
the risk of funding runs should be reduced by the increase in the quality of information on 
firm exposures that can be made available to regulators, and, in principle, through increased 
disclosure to market participants.  
I also think that OTC derivatives reform is an important complement to the emphasis placed 
on strengthening individual institutions, which is part of the broader reform agenda. Financial 
stability is not just about individual institutions but also about how the entire system interacts. 
For example, are the incentives in the system appropriate and does the system amplify or 
dampen shocks? Thus, it is important that reform efforts not concentrate exclusively on the 
systemically important financial institutions, but also that these efforts focus on the market 
products  and  practices  and  the  linkages  among  markets,  market  participants  and 
infrastructures. 
Despite  the  progress  made  to  date,  I  do  have  some  concerns  about  the  OTC  derivatives 
reform effort. My first concern is about pace. For example, it seems to me that we have made 
much more progress in strengthening individual institutions through higher bank capital and 
liquidity requirements than we have made in reducing risk in the OTCD space. Now some of 
this is inevitable because OTCD reform is harder and we are not as far along. It requires the 
creation  of  new  institutions  to  clear  such  trades  or  to  house  the  trade  information.  It  also 
requires national legislation to be flexible enough so that it can work coherently on a global 
basis. The difficulty in harmonizing the regulatory treatment of cross-border OTCD activity is 
a  good  example  of  this.  Parenthetically,  I’d  add  that  I  am  very  pleased  to  see  the 
breakthrough achieved between Europe and the U.S. this summer. 
Regardless of the cause, because of the slower pace, we are not yet close to a harmonized, 
robust OTCD system. Thus, we can’t ascertain whether we have achieved what we set out to 
achieve – that is, reducing the amount of risk in the system, making the infrastructure more 
secure, and increasing the flow of information so that regulators and others can develop a 
more coherent view of what is happening in the global financial system. 
I’m also worried that even when we have finished revamping the architecture and regulation 
of OTC derivatives activities, reform may not go far enough in a number of respects. First, I 
am  concerned  that  trades  may  not  be  standardized  to  the  fullest  degree  possible.  A 
preliminary analysis undertaken by the Financial Stability Board that compares the costs of 
clearing  and  margin  requirements  of  standardized  trades  versus  bespoke  trades  suggests 
that  the  economics  with  respect  to  costs  favors  standardizing  OTCD  trades  whenever 
possible. However, the wider spreads that might be earned on bespoke trades, because of 
their  greater  opacity,  could  swing  the  needle  the  other  way,  with  the  higher  profits  on 
bespoke  trades  more  than  offsetting  their  higher  costs.  It  is  too  soon  to  say  yet,  but  we 
should be prepared to push harder for further standardization should the desired degree of 
standardization that we are striving for not materialize. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I also worry that implementation of the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures could 
falter over time. This could happen for several reasons. In particular, we should recognize 
that there is a tension between the profit motive of for-profit CCPs and full compliance with 
the PFMIs. Put simply, some CCPs will prefer to avoid the full costs of compliance. In other 
words, there will always be a risk of a race to the bottom, which we must continually push 
against.  
In  this  respect,  the  effort  could  also  falter  if  countries  were  to  fail  to  enact  the  relevant 
legislation and policies to put the PFMIs in practice. For the global system to be robust, the 
requirements for CCPs will need to be enforced across the different geographic regimes. I 
am also worried about fragmentation. In particular, I worry about the proliferation of TRs and 
CCPs  geographically  –  in  some  cases  in  each  of  the  major  asset  classes.  In  the  case  of 
CCPs, fragmentation would bring two costs. First, the netting benefits would be reduced and, 
second, the system would be more complex. In an ideal world, I would prefer very few, very 
robust CCPs, rather than a proliferation of many, less robust CCPs. But whether that is what 
we will get is unclear to me at this point. 
Finally, I am worried that we are not going to achieve the full benefits from trade repositories. 
Regulators,  market  participants  and  TRs  must  continue  to  work  together  to  ensure  that 
comprehensive, and meaningful data are being reported to TRs and that authorities have the 
ability to access and analyze the data from the TRs. Although authorities currently receive 
data, the data are often fragmented and reported in different formats or are not comparable 
across TRs. This poses challenges for regulators and supervisors of market participants and 
global  CCPs  as  well  as  authorities  more  broadly.  Aside  from  the  issues  with  TR 
fragmentation, data quality and regulatory access to data, we could be leaving considerable 
money  on  the  table  by  not  using  the  TR  dataset  to  increase  transparency  into  the 
marketplace more broadly. 
Moving forward on all of these issues will require global coordination and continued efforts 
across  all  stakeholders.  Authorities  must  continue  to  coordinate  their  oversight  of  global 
infrastructures.  Where  FMIs  are  “global,”  that  is  providing  services  across  multiple 
jurisdictions  and  in  multiple  currencies,  it  is  important  for  the  relevant  authorities  to  find 
efficient  ways  to  cooperate  with  each  other  to  effectively  carry  out  their  respective 
responsibilities.  Additionally,  where  there  are  overlapping  or  contradicting  regulations, 
authorities must provide clear guidance to the market on how regulation will be applied. 
One final point: What matters is not the standardization of OTC derivatives, central clearing 
or the use of the trade repositories per se, but instead the results that flow from these efforts. 
These  institutions  are  just  devices  to  achieve  an  end  –  less  risk,  more  robustness  and 
greater  transparency.  In  the  end,  we  will  need  to  assess  our  progress  on  OTCD  reforms 
against those broader qualitative metrics. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
