Mario Draghi: Strengthening financial resilience 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  2013 
International Monetary Conference, Shanghai, China, 3 June 2013. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
It is a great pleasure to speak to you at this year’s International Monetary Conference. 
Let  me  start  by  congratulating  the  organisers  for  devising  a  programme  that  precisely 
pinpoints the key challenges that policy-makers must address on the path towards a more 
resilient financial sector.  
The financial sector constitutes the main link between monetary policy and the real economy. 
So the challenges associated with financial stress and the prospects for financial reform are 
close to the heart of every central banker.  
The economic situation in the euro area remains challenging but there are a few signs of a 
possible  stabilisation,  and  our  baseline  scenario  continues  to  be  one  of  a  very  gradual 
recovery starting in the latter part of this year.  
The drivers of such a gradual recovery are the highly accommodative monetary policy and 
export growth, caused by growing foreign demand. There is an adjustment happening across 
the board, with fiscal deficits and external deficits declining. The price of energy is declining 
as  well  and  finally  there  are  a  number  of  important  wealth  effects  that  can  support 
consumption and investment. These effects come from the rebound of financial markets that 
is benefitting virtually all economic agents, including corporations, banks and households.  
Nevertheless,  vulnerabilities  remain,  and  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  share  my 
thoughts  on 
financial  and  economic 
vulnerabilities from a euro area perspective. In doing so, I will focus on the banking system, 
which accounts for around two thirds of financial intermediation in the euro area.  
When  analysing  the  capacity  and  willingness  of  euro  area  banks  to  lend,  it  is  useful  to 
distinguish  three  factors:  their  funding  situation;  their  capital  position;  and  their  attitude 
towards risk.  
Each  of  these  factors  may,  at  times,  require  targeted  policy  intervention  to  overcome 
obstacles  to  bank  lending.  But  the  types  of  policy  intervention  and  the  domains  of  policy 
responsibility fundamentally differ across these three factors.  
In this context, let me outline what I believe are the three major lessons of the crisis. 
First, the crisis has reconfirmed both the scope and the limits of what central banks can do to 
support the economy. 
Central  banks  play  a  pivotal  role  in  stabilising  funding  conditions  at  times  of  acute  market 
turmoil.  But  they  cannot  compensate  for  weaknesses  in  banks’  capital  positions.  And  they 
cannot substitute for reforms to boost the growth potential of economies. 
Second,  in  the  euro  area,  the  crisis  has  demonstrated  the  capacity  and  unwavering 
commitment  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  to  support  the  economy  in  its  pursuit  of 
price stability.  
We have adopted monetary policy measures that are unprecedented in scale and scope. In 
doing  so,  we  have  benefitted  from  the  array  of  different  perspectives  on  the  Governing 
the  appropriate  policy  response 
to  remaining 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Council.  These  different  perspectives  collectively  shape  the  single  monetary  policy  for  all 
euro area countries and form a durable basis for our united institutional decisions. 
Third, the crisis has shown the need to adjust our monetary policy toolkit to a new reality. A 
very important new tool have been the two 3-year LTROs (long-term refinancing operations) 
that helped avoid a massive euro area wide credit crunch in early 2012. But the most salient 
feature of this new reality is financial fragmentation across euro area countries.  
In  response,  the  ECB  has  adopted  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs).  This  policy 
initiative  was  necessary  to  counteract  the  threats  to  price  stability;  it  has  been  effective  in 
mitigating fragmentation and especially in fulfilling our mandate of maintaining price stability. 
Let me explain in a little more detail. 
Improving banks’ funding situation 
As the crisis has demonstrated forcefully, a sudden retreat of market liquidity can severely 
rattle financial markets.  
Unable  to  refinance  their  illiquid  assets,  banks  are  forced  either  to  explore  alternative 
sources of funding or to engage in large-scale fire sales to shrink that part of their assets that 
remains tradable, although at falling prices.  
To  avoid  socially  costly  fire  sales  and  in  common  with  most  other  central  banks,  the  ECB 
compensated  for  the  shortfall  in  private  finance  by  providing  solvent  banks  with  additional 
central bank liquidity against adequate collateral.  
In doing so, the Governing Council followed three avenues. 
First, we provided these banks with ample access to central bank liquidity – both by reducing 
our  main  policy  rate  and  by  expanding  the  collateral  pool  against  which  we  would  lend  to 
euro area banks. 
Second, we provided reassurance to market participants that ample access to central bank 
liquidity would persist over the relevant planning horizon. Most notably, our two three-year 
long-term refinancing operations (LTROs) assured banks that their liquidity needs would be 
met over horizons that stretch beyond the usual maturity of central bank credit. In fact, the 
LTROs come closer to matching the average maturity of their loan books.  
Third,  we  forcefully  confronted  financial  fragmentation  which  has  weakened  the  impact  of 
monetary policy in the very parts of the euro area where it is most needed. Fragmentation 
has  created  divergent  borrowing  conditions 
firms  and  households  with  equal 
creditworthiness but different country codes. 
As our main tool to combat fragmentation, we adopted Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs). 
OMTs  allow  for  targeted  intervention  in  euro  area  sovereign  debt  markets  –  provided  the 
country  concerned  commits  itself  to  strict  and  effective  conditionality  under  an  EU/IMF 
economic adjustment programme. 
for 
A closer look at OMTs 
At almost one year from its announcement, the benefits of OMT are visible to everybody:  
Spreads in sovereign debt markets have fallen substantially. Since the OMT announcement, 
spreads  on  long-term  bonds  for  Spain,  Italy  and  Ireland  have  fallen  by  around  250  to 
300 basis points and for Portugal by almost 600 basis points.  
Spreads in corporate debt markets have fallen by about 150 to 200 basis points for important 
market segments, and made it easier for firms to raise funds in the market. This has been the 
case for highly rated large corporations as well as for other corporations.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Banks have been able to re-access the market, for both funding and for raising capital, and 
the strong divergence in funding costs across constituencies has receded somewhat.  
Deposits have flown back: banks in stressed countries have seen the deposits by the euro 
area money-holding sector increasing by about 200 billion euros since August 2012.  
Another sign of normalisation, and a very important one for German savers, pension funds 
and  insurance  companies,  has  been  the  increase  in  German  government  bond  yields, 
previously  suppressed  by  panic-driven  safe-haven  flows,  which  have  edged  up  by  around 
25 basis points. 
And  the  best  summary  indicator  for  fragmentation  and  related  payment  flows  in  the  euro 
area, the level of Target balances, has shown a decline by 285 billion euros, or 25%, since 
the peak last year. Target balances now roughly stand at levels prevailing before the launch 
of the two 3-year LTROs in late-2011.  
The  establishment  of  OMT  has  therefore  been  beneficial  to  everybody:  sovereigns, 
corporations,  banks  as  well  as  individuals,  and  it  has  benefitted  both  periphery  and  core 
countries.  
Therefore, I would like to reflect in more detail on this measure. What is its purpose? 
OMTs  are  aimed  at  eliminating  redenomination  risk  from  the  markets  –  the  unwarranted 
anticipation of euro area breakup.  
Redenomination risk undermined our ability to preserve price stability and contravened the 
singleness of monetary policy.  
The possibility that financial claims may be redeemed in a different unit of account than the 
one in which they were denominated at issuance – that is, the euro – was the prime source 
of panic that fractured transmission of monetary policy a year ago.  
OMTs priced that risk out of market values and act as a deterrent against a resurgence of 
fundamentally  unjustified  redenomination  fears.  But  their  role  is  cast  within  a  robust 
framework  in  which  the  ECB  can  fulfil  its  primary  task  of  ensuring  stable  prices  in  steady 
financial conditions. And the fiscal authorities can take care of their solvency conditions and 
concentrate on structural adjustment.  
One concern that has been raised with regard to OMTs is that they may discourage reform at 
the national level.  
Quite  the  opposite  is  true.  OMTs  can  be  applied  only  if  governments  accept  policy 
conditionality  that  leads  to  reforms.  At  the  same  time,  it  was  the  requirement  of  effective 
conditionality embedded in OMTs discourages governments and parliaments from requesting 
a programme unless strictly necessary.  
They can either reform  without OMTs and retain economic sovereignty or they can reform 
with  OMTs  but  give  up  some  of  their  economic  sovereignty.  Either  way,  they  have  to 
persevere in their reform efforts. 
So it is quite misleading to compare OMTs to historical episodes in which governments relied 
on central bank support to replace fiscal consolidation.  
Another  concern  made  against  OMT  was  that conditionality  weakens  the  independence  of 
monetary  policy.  The  reality  is  that  OMT’s  are  not  tied  to  political  decisions  since  the 
Governing  Council  retains  its  full  discretion,  even  after  a  country  has  engaged  in  a 
programme.  In  addition,  that  same  conditionality  ensures  that  the  governments  remain 
solvent, which in turn protects the freedom of action of monetary policy. 
A  third  argument  made  against  OMTs  suggests  that  they  would  reintroduce  excessive 
compression of euro area bond yield spreads, as observed prior to the crisis. 
This too is inaccurate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
OMTs are designed to keep government bond yields just below ‘panic’ levels, as previously 
defined, not to bring them down to levels that would somehow help government solvency.  
As we have seen, the mere existence of OMTs keeps government bond yields from rising 
excessively: the market expects that if yields rose too much, governments would apply for 
the programme and ECB purchases would bring yields back down. OMTs have therefore had 
a  self-fulfilling  downward  effect  on  yields,  just  as  before,  in  absence  of  OMT,  there  was  a 
self-fulfilling upward effect with a potentially catastrophic risk for the euro area. 
But this downward effect does not mean that spreads are forced to converge. In fact, ECB 
intervention under OMTs would not address those parts of sovereign bond yield spreads that 
are fundamentally justified.  
The implication of a high backstop rate is that governments continue to have the incentives 
to raise their primary balance towards stabilising levels and to engage in structural reform. 
These are the only two options for them to lower their funding costs well below the backstop 
level implied by the OMTs.  
For governments and parliaments, the ultimate driver of their actions remains employment. It 
is  important  to  recall  that  always  and  especially  in  the  present  situation,  the  need  for 
governments and parliaments to reform does not stem so much from the bond market but 
from the dramatic conditions in the labour market. Unfortunately, millions of unemployed 
are a much greater driver to reform that the interest rate to be paid on sovereign debt. And 
unfortunately,  OMTs  have  almost  no  effect  on  the  sources  of  employment  creation. 
Indeed, while OMTs have eliminated one dimension of financial fragmentation (the risk of 
euro  breakup),  they  only  have  a  muted  and  indirect  effect  on  the  other  source  of 
fragmentation – the adverse feedback loop between sovereigns and banks.  
A final criticism of OMTs is portraying them as a means of transferring risks from peripheral 
to core euro area countries via the ECB balance sheet. Quite the opposite has happened: 
the elimination of catastrophic outcomes strongly benefits core countries. 
To see this, recall that the tail risks that OMTs seek to address distort financial prices and 
quantities  in  both  the  core  and  the  periphery.  Tail  risks  generate  a  glut  of  liquidity  in  core 
banking  systems,  as  monetary  assets  are  relocated  by  panicking  investors  from  fragile 
countries to safe-havens.  
With  OMTs,  pressure  to  reform  remains  on  peripheral  countries,  while  re-establishing 
confidence  in  the  euro  area  reduces  the  flows  of  money  from  the  periphery  to  the  core 
countries like Germany.  
So what do the data say? I mentioned already the large decline in overall Target balances, 
and it is important to add here that this improvement has materialised also for Germany: the 
Target claim of Germany has fallen from a peak of 760 billion euros in the middle of last year 
to about 590 billion euros last month. This is a decrease of 170 billion euros or 22%.  
This important improvement largely reflects the removal of unwarranted fears of a systemic 
collapse of monetary union that was previously priced-in by markets. Today, the euro area is 
therefore a more stable and resilient place to invest in than it was a year ago.  
And not a single euro of government bonds has been purchased under the OMT programme.  
Strengthening banks’ risk absorption capacity 
Banks’ capital position clearly lies outside the remit of central banks. In fact, it is – first and 
foremost – the responsibility of shareholders to ensure that their bank is solvent and able to 
sustain its core business. And if the private sector is unable or unwilling to provide the capital 
necessary to achieve solvency, it is for the fiscal and regulatory authorities to decide whether 
and how to act. 
Monetary policy cannot substitute for or subsidise either of these policy domains. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But  the  euro  area  has  achieved  significant  progress  in  terms  of  solvency.  Banks  have 
received fresh capital. Problematic legacy assets have been removed from banks’ balance 
sheets, notably in countries under financial assistance programmes 
More remains to be done. In particular, two policy initiatives should take precedence.  
First,  we  need  to  create  full  transparency  about  the  risks  on  banks’  balance  sheets.  Such 
transparency  is  a  pre-condition  for  the  banking  sector  to  return  to  lasting  health.  And  a 
healthy banking sector is a pre-condition to revitalising bank lending. 
Second, we must align investors’ incentives with those of society. This means that market 
participants  that  stand  to  benefit  from  the  upside  of  risky  activities  should  also  bear 
commensurate losses on the downside.  
Europe is making some progress in these areas too. 
To  strengthen  transparency,  we  are  establishing  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM), 
which  tasks  the  ECB  with  overseeing  major  parts  of  the  European  banking  system.  By 
placing  this  responsibility  with  an  independent  institution  at  European  level,  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism will ultimately allow earlier identification of financial risk.  
To  strengthen  incentives,  the  institutional  architecture  is  being  augmented  by  rules  to 
facilitate  investor  participation  in  dealing  with  distressed  banks.  In  particular,  harmonised 
rules  and  procedures  for  bank  recovery  and  resolution  are  currently  being  developed  at 
European  level.  To  ensure  a  fully  consistent  and  effective  application  of  these  rules,  their 
implementation  should  be  placed  within  the  remit  of  an  independent  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism.  
Before  the  ECB  takes  over  the  SSM,  it  will  conduct  together  with  the  national  supervisory 
authorities and with an appropriate involvement of private sector companies, a balance sheet 
review of those banks that it takes into the SSM. To this end, the national budgets and where 
needed, the ESM will have to provide adequate backstop.  
Mitigating macroeconomic risk 
The  final  determinant  of  banks’  capacity  and  willingness  to  lend  concerns  their  attitude 
towards risk.  
Like  any  central  bank,  the  ECB  cannot  control  microeconomic  risk  –  how  banks  assess 
whether a specific potential borrower will fail to repay a loan.  
But the ECB is actively contributing to a reduction in macroeconomic risk: by firmly stabilising 
inflation  expectations,  it  provides  a  nominal  anchor  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  This 
supports lending and borrowing decisions, and ensures that longer-term investment projects 
remain profitable. 
But it is the responsibility of national governments to eliminate uncertainty about growth and 
the sustainability of public finances.  
Without unravelling the progress already achieved, it will be essential to focus consolidation 
on  the  fiscal  composition  of  the  budget,  reducing  those  expenditures  that  make  the  least 
contribution  to  growth  and  reducing  the  tax  burden  on  economic  activity.  To  inspire 
confidence, policy-makers must follow-through with their fiscal reform agenda. In fact, little 
would be gained from a loosening of fiscal adjustment today if it creates market expectations 
that additional tightening will become necessary tomorrow. 
In  the  medium  term,  we  need  to  ensure  that  the  adjustment  is  based  on  increasing  the 
productivity of our economies.  
Only  through  steadfast  pursuit  of  such  structural  reforms  can  the  competitiveness  of  euro 
area economies in the global marketplace be restored.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Summary and outlook 
Let me summarise.  
Strengthening financial resilience requires ambitious policy efforts in various areas. Lending 
to the real economy can only be expected to resume if accommodative monetary policy is 
accompanied by swift balance sheet repair and determined fiscal and structural reforms. 
Within the euro area, recent progress suggests that decision-makers are ready to tackle the 
simultaneous  tasks  of  reforming  their  domestic  economies  and  completing  the  institutional 
architecture at the European level. 
The ECB will continue to support macroeconomic performance by ensuring price stability in 
the euro area.  
In calibrating our policy response to future challenges, the ECB will remain deeply committed 
to our monetary policy framework.  
That framework is characterised by pursuing unambiguously price stability, firmly preserving 
our central bank independence and tailoring our policy instruments to the specific challenges 
at hand, while maintaining fixed our price stability objective.  
As such, our framework is inspired by successful experiences of other central banks which 
have demonstrated the benefits for monetary policy to rely on a sound institutional anchor, 
and have earned trust and respect based on their clear commitment to price stability. The 
ECB has the same commitment and has the task to implement its monetary policy not in a 
single-country but in a multi-country setting.  
This  different  context  and  the  unprecedented  threats  to  financial  stability  during  the  crisis 
have required new instruments to achieve the same objective of medium-term price stability 
for  the  whole  of  the  euro  area.  We  have  consistently  delivered  on  that  commitment  ever 
since  the  euro  was  launched.  Over  these  last  13  years,  inflation  expectations  have  on 
average been at 1.9%. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
