DeLisle Worrell: What is meant by productivity in services, and why it 
matters for Barbados’ economic future 
Opening remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Central Bank of Barbados week of excellence, Bridgetown, 25 February 2013. 
 The economy of Barbados is fuelled by foreign exchange. By that I mean that the growth of 
the economy depends on growing the sectors that earn and save foreign exchange. Three of 
four of those sectors sell services – tourism, international business and financial services and 
energy. That is why today I focus on productivity in services. 
Foreign exchange markets are highly competitive, and to grow your market share or to grow 
with the market you have to keep pace with the competition, and find ways to get ahead. The 
way to outrun the competition in the international market is to improve "productivity", broadly 
defined. 
Before discussing productivity in services, I need to dispel the myth that we can grow tourism 
and  international  business  by  lowering  our  prices.  Barbados  commands  a  tiny  share  of 
Caribbean  tourism,  less  than  5  percent,  and  a  miniscule  percentage  of  global  tourism  to 
tropical resorts. So long as our prices are right we can sell to our full capacity; if our prices 
are too high we’re out of the market altogether; and if our prices are too low we are offering 
our customers a bargain at our expense, unnecessarily. If our prices are right, why do  we 
sometimes  fall  below  capacity  when  global  markets  contract?  That  is  because  we  are 
maintaining our productivity relative to the competition, but we’re not improving. The solution 
is not to lower your prices – in a depressed market that won’t get you many more customers, 
and those that you do get will probably be pinching their pennies. Rather, you want to get 
ahead by outgunning the competition, through improved productivity. That way you can grow 
while others are at a standstill, or regressing. 
To raise productivity in services we must do all of the following: 
• 
• 
• 
Cultivate the individual customer; 
Aim to exceed expectations, in every transaction; 
Never  leave  the  customer  without  the  product  or  service  they  need,  or  without 
assistance towards obtaining what they need; 
Always give excellent value for money; you may then charge what price you must in 
order to give excellent service, and the discerning customer will gladly pay. 
Deal  patiently,  courteously  and  fully  with  difficult  customers  and  problematic 
circumstances.  Even  if  the  customer  cannot  be  satisfied,  they  must  nevertheless 
walk away having had a pleasant experience. 
  These might not be what we think of when we think productivity, but they are the real sources 
of productivity, because they produce improved real value for the same input of labour and 
materials. 
How do private firms and government achieve improved productivity? 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Engage the worker; 
Empower the worker; 
Motivate the worker; and 
Cultivate a community of the workplace, with an emphasis on sharing experiences, 
teamwork and helping each other to achieve our best performance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The future of our economy is in our hands. We must figure out for ourselves what is the way 
forward, led by our own wit and resources. Each worker can make a positive contribution to 
their  own  future  and  the  future  of  our  country,  by  becoming  engaged,  motivating  and 
empowering  ourselves  and  those  that  work  with  and  for  us,  and  caring  enough  for  the 
welfare and prospects of fellow workers that everyone helps out when the going gets tough. 
When  that  becomes  the  pervasive  culture  of  organisations  and  the  society,  we  will  have 
become a formidable international competitor and a byword for excellence in the Americas, 
Europe and the rest of the world. That must be our steadfast goal. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
