Vítor Constâncio: Presentation of the ECB Annual Report 2012 to the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European 
Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 
to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 
24 April 2013. 
 Madam Chair, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a great pleasure to present to you the European Central Bank’s Annual Report for 2012. 
The ECB has always stressed that its independence must be accompanied by the highest 
standards of accountability. The Annual Report is central to discharging this obligation. 
In  my  introductory  remarks,  I  will  first  give  an  overview  of  the  economic  and  monetary 
developments  in  2012.  I  will  then  set  out  our  assessment  of  economic  policies  and 
governance.  Finally,  I  would  like  to  make  some  comments  on  future  steps  towards 
establishing a banking union. 
Economic and monetary developments in 2012 
Last year we were faced with a very challenging environment for monetary policy in the euro 
area. The sovereign debt crisis kept financial market stress high. 
This confidence crisis has adversely affected growth and employment. Following two years 
of  growth,  GDP  declined  by  0.6%  in  2012.  Private  consumption  declined  and  investment 
faltered. Unemployment increased to unprecedented levels.  
In this context, monetary and loan dynamics have been subdued. M3 growth strengthened 
moderately to 3.0% in 2012. But it essentially de-linked from credit creation, which instead 
became  increasingly  weak,  with  annual  loan  growth  to  the  private  sector  turning  negative 
over the course of the year to stand at –0.2% in December. 
Annual  HICP  inflation  reached  an  average  of  2.5%  in  2012.  Inflation  developments  have 
been driven by high energy prices and increases in indirect taxes –  which have been one 
element of well needed fiscal consolidation plans As we had forecast consistently throughout 
2012, inflation rates have since declined rapidly standing at 1.7% in March this year.  
The Governing Council remains strongly committed to its price stability mandate. Long-term 
inflation  expectations  have  remained  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  price  stability.  Over  the 
course of 2012 decisive measures were taken to support the transmission of the historically 
low key interest rates to the real economy. The three-year LTROs launched at the turn of the 
year  have  prevented  that  funding  stress  in  interbank  money  markets  led  to  a  disorderly 
unwinding  of  bank  balance  sheets,  which  could  have  had  serious  consequences  for  price 
stability. 
Towards the middle of 2012 unfounded fears of the reversibility of the euro led to a sharp 
increase in sovereign bond and bank lending rates in some countries. In order to safeguard 
the singleness of monetary policy and ensure a smoother transmission of interest rates to the 
real  economy,  the  Governing  Council  announced  in  August  its  readiness  to  undertake 
Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) in secondary markets for sovereign bonds.  
The announcement of OMTs has proven to be an effective backstop against unfounded fears 
of reversibility. However, the transmission channel cannot be fully repaired if governments do 
not  address  the  root  causes  of  the  crisis;  this  includes  ensuring  sustainable  public  debt 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
levels,  improving  competitiveness,  strengthening  bank  resilience  and  further  improving  the 
institutional setting of EMU.  
levels. 
to  safe 
In  order 
to  decline 
Economic policies and EMU governance  
The financial and sovereign debt crises left significant scars on public finances in the euro 
area. The government debt ratio increased by around 25 percentage points between 2007 
and  2012.  This  reflected  the  workings  of  automatic  fiscal  stabilisers  and  discretionary 
expansionary measures to sustain incomes in times of falling economic activity, the sizeable 
public support to the banking sector, and, in some cases, the continuation of unhealthy fiscal 
trends.  
Since  2010  a  number  of  euro  area  governments  have  embarked  on  a  determined 
consolidation path. As a result, government deficit ratios declined significantly from their peak 
levels. In 2012, the euro area government deficit-to-GDP ratio was about 3 percentage points 
lower than the deficit recorded in 2009.  
Fiscal  adjustment  has  been  particularly  strong  in  countries  under  market  pressure.  In 
Greece, for example, the structural primary balance is estimated to have improved by more 
than  14  percentage  points  of  GDP  between  2009  and  2012.  The  improvement  was 
5.7 percentage points for Portugal, 4.3 for Ireland, 3.9 for Spain and 3.6 for Italy. Past and 
current consolidation efforts are gradually bearing fruit. Economic adjustment, both internal 
and  external,  has  been  significant,  has  implied  high  costs  in  terms  of  unemployment  and 
should  not  put  into  risk  of  unraveling  now.  This  will  allow  debt  ratios  to  stabilise  and 
subsequently 
to  generate  growth  and  reduce 
unemployment, continued efforts to consolidate public finances should be accompanied by 
determined  structural  reforms,  thereby  promoting  a  mutually  reinforcing  process  between 
restored fiscal sustainability, financial market access and future economic growth prospects.  
The structural reforms should be ambitious, broad-ranging and with long-lasting effects. They 
should address product markets, network industries, labour markets, and the modernisation 
of  public  administration.  To  support  employment,  wage-setting  should  become flexible  and 
aligned  with  productivity.  These  reforms  will  help  to  regain  competitiveness,  increase 
employment, set the foundations for sustainable growth and support the return of confidence. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  several  stressed  countries  already  did  significant  reforms  which  are 
reflected  in  the  competitiveness  gains  since  2008  in  terms  of  relative  unit  labour  costs 
(UCLs). In fact, since then and in relation to other Euro Area members, Ireland reduced its 
unit labour costs by 19.4%, Spain by 9.5%, Greece by 8.9% Portugal by 6.6%and Italy by 
just 0.1%. The reductions achieved against their more significant 36 trading partners were 
even  higher  and,  more  importantly,  the  gains  since  2008  sizably  reduced  the  cumulative 
evolution  of  their  ULCs  since  1999.  The  significant  losses  of  competitiveness  from  the 
inception of the euro and the beginning of the crisis in 2008 have been meanwhile corrected. 
In fact, relatively to the other Euro Area members from 1999 to the end of last year Greece 
reduced  its  ULCs  by  5.8%  and  Portugal  by  2.4%  whereas  Spain  increased  theirs  by  only 
2.9% and Ireland by 1.6%.  
These improvements in competitiveness were also reflected in significant reductions of the 
external  accounts  of  all  the  stressed  countries.  The  latest  Commission  economic  forecast 
indicates that for 2013 all stressed countries will have an external surplus with the exception 
of Greece with a deficit 2% of GDP well below previous results.  
The adjustment efforts of the countries under market stress have been positive and certainly 
have also contributed to the improved financial market conditions.  
Looking  back  at  2012,  reforms  at  the  European  level  implied  that  significant  progress  has 
been made in putting in place the necessary building blocks for a deeper and more stable 
EMU.  Europe’s  leaders  recognised  the  need to complement  EMU  with  a  banking  union, a 
fiscal union, a genuine economic union and eventually a deeper political union. We now have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
an  ambitious  agenda  and  a  clear  long  term  vision.  The  progress  towards  sound  public 
finances has been underpinned by institutional reform. New rules were applied to strengthen 
oversight of budgets and to monitor emerging macroeconomic imbalances more effectively. 
The signature of the fiscal compact was a significant milestone in this regard. 
Looking  ahead  we  need  to  remain  ambitious,  with  the  ultimate  aim  to  secure  stability  and 
prosperity for the euro area. This year should be aimed toward putting these decisions into 
practice by focusing on their proper implementation.  
Completing banking union 
I  would  now  like  to  make  some  remarks  on  further  steps  towards  establishing  a  banking 
union.  The  recent  agreement  in  the  trilogue  on  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  (SSM) 
represents a very important step. It is of crucial importance for the efficient functioning of the 
euro  area  and  represents  a  major  step  forward  in  European  integration.  The  necessary 
preparations for the SSM are underway at the ECB. However, key organisational decisions 
can only be taken once the legal text has entered into force and the Supervisory Board has 
been set-up. Therefore the timely adoption of the Regulation by early summer is crucial. 
We look forward to constructive discussions with the European Parliament on the agreement 
covering the modalities of accountability and confidentiality on supervisory matters. We are 
confident  we  will  be  able  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  thorough  democratic 
accountability,  confidentiality,  operational  effectiveness  and  the  respect  of  the  ECB’s 
independence.  
Another priority is the establishment of a single resolution mechanism. This is a necessary 
complement to the SSM and fundamental to the creation of a banking union. I see three key 
features  of  a  single  resolution  mechanism  which  I  want  to  emphasise  today:  a  set  of 
instruments, an authority and a fund. 
First,  the  single  resolution  mechanism  requires  a  comprehensive  set  of  enforceable 
resolution  tools  and  powers.  The  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  provides  a 
harmonised resolution framework for Europe and a clear tool-kit of powers and instruments 
in  all  Member  States.  It  should  include  provisions  on  bail-in  and  introduce  depositor 
preference. This will contribute to predictability, avoid disruption to essential banking services 
and shield taxpayers from excessive exposure. The urgent adoption and implementation of 
this Directive is therefore of paramount importance. 
Second,  the  single  resolution  mechanism  requires  a  strong  authority  at  its  centre.  Mere 
coordination  between  national  authorities  is  not  sufficient  for  cross-border  resolution  in 
crises. This single resolution authority should have independent decision-making powers that 
would  enable  prompt  and  decisive  action.  It  should  ensure  that  we  re-shift  the  balance 
between bail-outs and bail-ins, where the private sector is held responsible for its risk-taking 
decisions.  Those  that  benefit  from  the  gains  should  also  pay  for  the  losses.  The  single 
resolution  authority  should  ensure  a  resolution  strategy  that  takes  account  of  all  relevant 
factors, notably financial stability, the impact on the real economy and a least cost principle 
for the taxpayer.  
To do this, the single resolution authority should ensure costs are first borne by shareholders 
and  creditors.  However  this  may  not  be  sufficient,  therefore  the  single  resolution  authority 
should have a privately-funded European resolution fund at its disposal. Only then, and as a 
last  resort,  should  it  have  access  to  a  temporary  and  fiscally  neutral  public  backstop,  the 
contributions to which should be paid by the private sector either via ex post levies or, more 
normally, as a result of the reprivatisation of the intermediary institutions (e.g. bridge banks) 
or other good assets resulting from the resolution process. 
Progress  in  these  elements  of  a  future  banking  union  is  very  important  in  the  present 
economic  environment  of  low  growth.  Part  of  the  European  problem  has  to  do  with  the 
situation of the banking sector: pressed for capital, intending to deleverage and risk averse in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
managing  credit  risk.  Consequently,  credit  is  being  contained  although  it  is  virtually 
impossible  to  disentangle  the  contribution  of  supply  restrictions  versus  weak  demand  in 
explaining the average decline of credit to the economy.  
In the markets there is the suspicion that banks’ balance-sheets need more repair with full 
recognition of potential losses and that is also affecting the lending behaviour of banks. No 
one  has  provided  clear  evidence  that  this  is  true  and  that  is  why  the  balance-sheet 
assessment that the SSM has to conduct before actually starting supervision is so important 
to re-establish market confidence in our banks to reduce their funding costs.  
Therefore, the establishment of the SSM, the possible use of direct European recapitalisation 
and the creation of a single resolution mechanism will decisively contribute to the desirable 
separation  of  banks  and  sovereigns.  To  regain  market  confidence,  restoring  full  banking 
sector health must be a priority in order to create improved growth prospects. This is why the 
banking union project is crucial at this particular moment.  
Economic growth in Europe is now essential to complete the adjustment and the rebalancing 
that  have  been  going  on.  Therefore,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  that  the  momentum  is 
maintained towards implementing structural reforms at national level and towards building a 
stronger Economic and Monetary Union through European institutional reforms. I trust that 
the European Parliament will continue to play an active and positive role in this process. 
I thank you for your attention and stand at your disposal for questions. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
