Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s recent economic and financial market 
developments 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Press Conference on 
the Monetary Policy Decision of Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 31 July 2013. 
 Today,  on  31  July  2013,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  Monetary  Policy  Statement  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  on  the  first  half  of  2013. 
Based  on  the  latest  monetary  and  economic  developments  in  Albania,  and  following  the 
discussions about their outlook, the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council decided to lower 
the key  interest  rate  by 0.25%  percentage  points  to  3.50%.  Lowering the  key  interest rate 
would  improve  the  conditions  for  a  higher  aggregate  demand,  hence  helping  inflation  fall 
back toward  the  Bank’s 3.0% target.  Further  easing  of monetary  policy  takes  into  account 
expectations for  a  contractionary  fiscal  policy  over  the  second  half  of  the  year  and  makes 
room for a fast and low-cost adjustment of public finances. 
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting. 
The first months of 2013 confirmed our assessments of Albania’s slow economic growth and 
weak  inflationary  pressures.  Albania’s  economic  activity  continues  to  suffer  from  sluggish 
aggregate demand reflecting economic agents’ uncertainties about the future, relatively tight 
lending standards, and economic weaknesses of our main trading partners. However, amid a 
challenging macroeconomic environment, Albania’s economic and financial stability remains 
stable. In the first half of the year, inflation remained low due to weak demand-side pressures 
and anchored inflation expectations. The latter reflect Bank of Albania’s prudential monetary 
policy. 
This policy has enabled the long-term interest rate cut and has contributed to maintaining the 
banking system soundness parameters. Also, Albania’s improved external position, together 
with  the  national  currency’s  stability  and  financial  sector’s  overall  sound  balances,  have 
further  strengthened  the  financial  stability  and  ensured  one  of  the  pillars  necessary  for  its 
long-term development. 
The second-quarter inflation turned out 2.2%, a lower rate than in the first quarter. Lower 
agricultural  product  inflation  and  steady  prices  for  other  CPI  basket  items  shifted  this 
quarter’s inflation down. Agricultural price inflation accounted for about 90% of the headline 
inflation,  reflecting  both  the  price  volatility  of  agricultural  products  and  their  relatively  high 
share in the CPI basket. 
From  the  macroeconomic  perspective,  the  presence  of  spare  productive  capacity 
continues to determine the inflation performance. The sluggish growth of aggregate demand 
is associated with low increase in investments, employment, wages and labour costs in the 
economy. This chain of factors is further translated into weak pressures for consumer price 
rise.  It  is  also  confirmed  by  the  record  low  rates  of  core  inflation  over  this  period.  On  the 
supply side, the low price rise in the domestic market has reflected the price stability in global 
markets and economic agents’ anchored inflation expectations. 
With regard to economic developments, INSTAT data show that the first-quarter economic 
growth  was  1.7%,  remaining  similar  to  the  previous  year’s  figure.  The  economic  activity 
expansion  in  the  first  quarter  relied  heavily  on  the  industrial  sector  growth,  while  the 
agriculture and services sectors marked a positive but weak growth. 
By contrast, construction sector continued to contract. Available information on the second 
quarter suggests that the economy performed better, mainly reflecting the high fiscal stimulus 
during this period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
From the demand components perspective, economic growth during the first half of the 
year  owes  mainly  to  higher  exports  and  public  spending  over  this  period,  while  the 
contribution of consumption and private investments appear weak. Though monetary stimuli 
increased  during  the  last  quarter,  uncertainties  about  the  future  contracted  consumption 
and  private  investments.  These  uncertainties  are  reflected  in  a  cautious  behaviour  of 
Albanian  households  and  businesses  and  their  reluctance  to  take  risks.  Their  higher 
inclination  to  save  and  the  lower  degree  of  borrowing  improve  the  private  sector  balance 
sheets but impact negatively the aggregate demand and medium-term economic growth. 
Performance  of  fiscal  indicators  in  the  first  six  months  of  the  year  reflected  an 
expansionary fiscal policy, which was manifested in higher budget spending and fiscal deficit. 
This  stance  was  more  noticeable  in  the  second  quarter.  The  increase  in  budget  spending 
impacted  positively  on  the  economic  growth  over  this  period,  but  the  overall  impact  of the 
fiscal policy will depend on the degree of observing the budget indicators adopted for 2013. 
Public spending marked 12.2% annual growth in the first half of this year, influenced heavily 
by capital spending. On the other hand, budget revenues for this period were down by 2.9% 
on a year earlier, reflecting the weak performance of tax revenues. These developments are 
materialised in a significantly increased budget deficit, which turned out to be twice higher 
than a year earlier. 
The budget deficit dynamics was reflected in a higher public debt over this period. 
At the end of the first quarter, the public debt as a share of GDP accounted for 63.3%. The 
public  debt  constitutes  one  of  the  major  weaknesses  of  the  Albanian  financial  system. 
Therefore, the Bank of Albania suggests that taking immediate measures to control this debt 
would  contribute  significantly  to  reducing  uncertainties  and  risk  premia  in  the  economy. 
Taking advantage of the opportunity, we reiterate the need for putting in place a reliable and 
transparent fiscal rule. This  is  the  best  way  to  discipline  the fiscal  policy  and  preserve  the 
trust of financial markets about the Albanian public debt in the long run. 
Data on the external sector of the economy show that foreign demand contributed positively 
to Albania’s economic growth and to trade deficit narrowing during the first half of the year. 
This behaviour was due to the 17.4% annual growth in exports and the 6.3% annual decline 
in  imports  over  the  same  period.  Consequently,  the  trade  deficit  dropped  22.2%  over  this 
period. 
The  insofar  adjustment  of  the  trade  deficit  is  a  positive  development  of  the  Albanian 
economy.  However,  this  deficit  reduction  is  heavily  thanks  to  transient  factors.  Detailed 
analysis  of  trade  exchanges  confirms  high  concentration  of  Albanian  exports  in  certain 
geographical  regions  or  in  certain  product  groups  and  their  low  value  added.  For  stable 
growth  of  exports  and  sound  adjustment  of  the  trade  deficit,  the  policy-makers’  attention 
should  focus  on  increasing  the  competitiveness  of  domestic  products  and  expanding  the 
base of exports through accelerated structural reforms. 
Financial  market  developments  have  reflected  the  low  risk  premia  and  inflation,  hence 
enabling better transmission of easing monetary policy signals that started at the beginning 
of this year. Interbank interest rates have performed in line  with the key  interest rate, with 
slight volatility. 
The  primary  market  yields  on  government  securities  have  dropped  sharply,  particularly  on 
longer-term maturities. Over the last months, the interest rate cut was faster on deposits but 
lower on loans. Interest rates on loans responded more slowly than other market rates due to 
low lending to economy during the last months. 
Monetary  developments  highlight  continuation  of  weak  inflationary  pressures  in  the 
economy.  The  annual  money-supply  growth  acceleration  reflected  primarily  the  private 
sector’s  added  demand  for  financing  over  the  last  two  months.  Also,  households’  and 
businesses’ demand for money remained weak. Private sector credit slowed down sharply, 
and at the end of May it was 0.2% lower than a year earlier. The weak lending performance 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
is increasingly reflecting the businesses’ lower demand for loan, alongside the tight lending 
standards. 
Meanwhile,  the  past  three  months  recorded  households’  higher  demand  for  loan,  hence 
signalling a probable revival of this loan. 
Our  projections  for  the  economic  outlook  support  the  assessment  that  the  Albanian 
economic activity will grow slowly over the period ahead, at levels comparable with those of 
the first half of the year. Foreign demand will be the driver of economic growth in the coming 
quarters,  while  the  first-half  fiscal  stimulus  is  likely  to  lack  in  the  second  half  of  the  year. 
Indirect data do not yet reveal any signals for consumption and private investment recovery. 
The  below-potential  economic  growth  will  be  associated  with  weak  demand-side 
inflationary  pressures  and  in  the  absence  of  any  unforeseen  supply-side  shocks, 
consumer prices will increase at low rates. Annual inflation, as to four quarters ahead, is 
expected to fluctuate around the 1.1% – 3.8% range, with a 90% probability of occurrence. 
Against this setting, our monetary policy will keep on preserving its stimulating nature even 
over the quarters ahead. 
Also, we will continue to provide the banking system with all the liquidity needed for a smooth 
functioning of financial markets. 
Concluding,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  lower  the  key  interest  rate  by 
0.25 percentage points, to 3.50%. The Supervisory Council deems that this lowering would 
create  better  monetary  conditions  to  meet  our  medium-term  inflation  target,  which  will 
continue to guide our monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
