Duvvuri Subbarao: Banking structure in India – looking ahead by looking 
back 
Speaking  notes  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
FICCI–IBA  (Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  &  Industry  –  Indian  Banks’ 
Association) Annual Banking Conference, Mumbai, 13 August 2013. 
 1. 
For  the  fifth  year  on  a  trot,  you  have  given  me  the  privilege  of  inaugurating  this 
prestigious  and  influential  FICCI–IBA  Annual  Banking  Conference.  In  my  fifth  year  as 
Governor of RBI, I have the Governor’s annual schedule firmly ingrained in my mind. I have 
come to expect, even look forward to, this event in September every year. I am aware that 
the  organizers  have  advanced  the  schedule  by  a  month  to  extend  to  me  the  honour  of 
inaugurating this conference before I demit office next month. I am deeply touched.  
Banking structure 
2. 
What should be the focus of my remarks today? At earlier conferences, I focussed 
on narrow themes within the banking domain. Should I pick another narrow theme for this 
year’s conference as well? I deliberated on it quite a bit. Since I will be laying down office as 
Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in  about  4  weeks’  time,  I  determined  that  it  may  be  most 
appropriate if I loosened the constraint and addressed a broader topic. And the topic I have 
chosen is to look ahead to the appropriate banking structure for India.  
3. 
When we issued the guidelines for licencing of new banks in the  private sector in 
February this year, the Reserve Bank said that it will come out with a Discussion Paper on 
the Banking Structure in India. That paper is in the final stages and will be released shortly. 
The issues that I will address today will inevitably overlap with some of the issues that will be 
covered in the Discussion Paper but there need be no presumption that the coverage and 
nuancing of the issues will be similar. 
Indian financial sector – the big picture 
4. 
In order to look ahead to issues on the way forward, it may be instructive to look at a 
snap shot of the Indian financial system as it is today and review the evolution of the banking 
system over the last 20 years of economic reforms. Let me do that quickly and briefly so as 
to set the context for the issues that I will address. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Banks dominate the Indian financial system. 
  The banking system is dominated by commercial banks. 
 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Public sector banks have more branch presence relative to their share of assets. 
 What do the above data tell us about the big picture?  
• 
Within  the  banking  system,  public  sector  banks  (PSB)  continue  to  dominate  with 
73% of market share of assets and 83% of branches.  
Rural and urban co-operatives banks have a relatively small share in the banking 
system.  However,  given  their  geographic  and  demographic  outreach,  they  play  a 
key  role  in  providing  access  to  financial  services  to  low  and  middle  income 
households in both rural and urban areas.  
Similarly, RRBs play a key role in promoting financial inclusion. The Government is 
pursuing branch expansion and capital infusion plans for the RRBs.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
    Since  nationalisation  of  14  major  commercial  banks  in  1969,  followed  by 
nationalisation  of  another  6  banks  in  1980,  Indian  banking  system  has  expanded 
rapidly. 
The number of bank offices increased from about 8,000 in 1969 to over 100,000 by 
2012.  
The average population per branch office has sharply declined from 64,000 in 1969 
to 13,000 today.  
Both per capita deposit and per capita credit have expanded about 600 times. Even 
accounting for inflation, this is significant expansion.  
Major banking sector reforms since 1991 
The economic reforms initiated in 1991 also embraced the banking system. Following are the 
major reforms aimed at improving efficiency, productivity and profitability of banks. 
• 
New banks licenced in private sector to inject competition in the system. 10 in 1993 
and  2  more  in  2003.  Another  lot  of  new  banks  will  be  licenced  in  the  next  few 
months.  
FDI+FII up to 74% allowed in private sector banks 
Listing of PSBs on stock exchanges and allowing them to access capital markets for 
augmenting  their  equity,  subject  to  maintaining  Government  shareholding  at  a 
minimum of 51%. Private shareholders represented on the Board of PSBs. 
Progressive  reduction  in  statutory  pre-emption  (SLR  and  CRR)  to  improve  the 
resource  base  of  banks  so  as  to  expand  credit  available  to  private  sector.  SLR 
currently at 23% (38.5% in 1991) and CRR at 4% (15% in 1991). 
Adoption  of  international  best  practices  in  banking  regulation.  Introduction  of 
prudential  norms  on  capital  adequacy, 
recognition,  asset 
classification, provisioning), exposure norms etc.  
Phased liberalisation of branch licensing. Banks can now open branches in Tier 2 to 
Tier 6 centres without prior approval from the Reserve Bank. 
Deregulation  of  a  complex  structure  of  deposit  and  lending  interest  rates  to 
strengthen  competitive  impluses,  improve  allocative  efficiency  and  strengthen  the 
transmission of monetary policy. 
Base rate (floor rate for lending) introduced (July 2010). Prescription of an interest 
rate floor on savings deposit rate withdrawn (October 2011). 
Functional autonomy to PSBs. 
Use  of  information  technology  to  improve  the  efficiency  and  productivity,  enhance 
the payment and settlement systems and deepen financial inclusion  
Strengthening  of  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC)  and  Anti-money  Laundering  (AML) 
norms; making banking less prone to financial abuse.  
Improvements in the risk management culture of banks. 
(income 
IRAC 
         Post-crisis regulatory reforms around the world  
• 
The  financial  crisis  exposed  the  risk  posed  by  the  Global  Systemically  Important 
Financial Institutions (G-SIFIs) as these were “too big to fail”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     Post-crisis, US, UK, European Union took initiatives (Paul A Volcker in US, Sir John 
Vickers Independent Commission on Banking in UK, Erkki Liikanen in the European 
Union) to recommend as structural reforms in the banking sector to build safeguards 
against instability.  
The  Volcker  Rule  and  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  Wall  Street  Reform  and  Consumer 
Protection Act have brought significant changes to the US financial system.  
The  Volcker  Rule  separates  investment  banking,  private  equity  and  proprietary 
trading  (hedge  fund)  sections  of  financial  institutions  from  their  consumer  lending 
arms. Banks are not allowed to simultaneously enter into an advisory and creditor 
role  with  clients,  such  as  with  private  equity  firms.  The  Volcker  Rule  aims  to 
minimize conflicts of interest between banks and their clients through separating the 
different types of business practices financial institutions engage in.  
The  Independent  Commission  on  Banking  (Vickers  Report)  in  UK  has  inter  alia 
recommended ring fencing of UK banks, such that the ring fenced banks would be 
permitted  to  extend  only  retail  and  commercial  banking  services  to  limited  clients 
including individuals and small and medium-sized organizations (SMEs) in UK. 
The Liikanen Report for the EU concluded that risky financial activities need to be 
separated from deposit-taking banks within the banking group, with the objective of 
making banking groups (mainly deposit-taking and providing financial services to the 
non-financial sectors in the economy) safer and less connected to trading activities. 
Issue No. 1: public vs private ownership of banks 
• 
      Abstracting  from  ideology,  from  a  pragmatic  perspective,  both  public  and  private 
banks  have  respective  advantages  and  disadvantages.  Private  ownership  brings 
competition, professionalism and operational efficiency. Public ownership makes it 
easier to pursue social objectives such as mass banking, financial inclusion etc. 
Private  banks  have  comparatively  greater  freedom  in  terms  of  recruitment,  salary 
and  compensation.  On  the  other  hand,  PSBs  are  perceived  to  offer  more  job 
security, and consequently, employee turnover is lower.  
PSBs dominate the banking sector in India and will continue to be dominant in the 
foreseeable  future.  However,  these  banks  require  substantial  capital  to  support 
growth.  
The critical question is whether the Government, given its limited fiscal space, can 
meet the enhanced capital needs of public sector banks under the Basel III capital 
regulations.  
Reserve  Bank  has  made  an  estimate  of  the  additional  capital  requirements  of 
domestic banks for full Basel III implementation till March 2018. These estimates are 
based  on  two  broad  assumptions:  (i)  increase  in  the  risk  weighted  assets  of  20% 
p.a.; (ii) internal accrual of the order of 1% of risk weighted assets. 
The estimates suggest that the Indian banks will require an additional capital (on top 
of internal accruals) to the tune of ₹4.95 trillion; of this, non-equity capital will be of 
the  order  of  over  ₹3.30  trillion,  while  equity  capital  will  be  of  the  order  of 
₹1.65 trillion.  
Specific  to  public  sector  banks,  the  estimates  suggest  that  public  sector  banks 
would require an additional capital to the tune of ₹4.15 trillion; of which equity capital 
will be of the order of ₹1.43 trillion, while non-equity capital will be of the order of 
₹2.72 trillion. The Government’s contribution to the equity capital of PSBs would be 
of the order of ₹900 billion at the existing level of shareholding of the Government. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  Government’s  contribution  will  come  down  to  approximately  ₹660  billion  if  its 
shareholding comes down to 51%.  
Finally, how should the Government enforce its rights and obligations as the owner 
of PSBs? Through the Board or through other means of interaction?  
 Table - V 
Additional1 Common Equity Requirements of  
Indian Banks under Basel III 
1  Over and above internal accruals 
 Over the last five years, the Government has infused ₹477 billion in the PSBs. An 
additional amount of ₹140 billion is proposed to be invested during the current year.  
Currently, government shareholding in public sector banks ranges from 55% to 82%. 
There is sufficient headroom available to the Government for dilution of its stake in a 
number of public sector banks. 
Given its fiscal constraints, should the Government dilute its shareholding in PSBs 
to  51%  or  should  the  Government  go  further  and  acquiesce  in  reducing  its 
shareholding  to  below  51%,  but  build  in  some  safeguards  for  retaining  requisite 
management control? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   6 
   Possible options other than the budgetary support available to the Government: 
– 
– 
Issuance of shares with differential voting rights or non-voting shares. 
Reduction in the Government shareholding and insertion of protective clause 
to protect Government’s control over public sector banks. 
Formation of Holding Companies for PSBs.  
– 
Need for a debate on the ideal capital structure of public sector banks such that they 
can best serve the demands of inclusive growth of the economy.  
Issue No. 2: consolidation of banks  
• 
Consolidation assumed significance after the introduction of financial sector reforms 
starting early nineties.  
Gained  momentum  after  the  Narasimham  Committee  –  I  (1991)  put  forward  the 
broad pattern of the banking sector [3 or 4 large banks, 8 to 10 national banks, local 
banks and rural banks].  
Reiterated by the S.H. Khan Committee (1997), Narasimham Committee – II (1998), 
Raghuram  Rajan  Committee  (2009),  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
(CFSA) (2009) and Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility (2006). 
All Committees viewed that restructuring of the banking system should be market-
driven based on viability and profitability considerations and brought about through a 
process of Mergers & Amalgamations. 
Since the first round of nationalization of banks in 1969, there have been a total of 
41 mergers and amalgamations. Of these, 17 happened before the onset of reforms 
in 1991 and 24 after that. 
The nature of M&As has been as follows: 
 Arguments in support of consolidation 
• 
Higher  capital  base  after  consolidation  will  facilitate  increased  lending  activity  and 
faster GDP growth. 
Boost infrastructure financing from the perspective of enhanced exposure limits for 
single and group borrowers. 
Meet the banking service demands of Indian corporates, both at home and globally. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
          Cost benefits for banks due to economies of scale and economies of scope such as 
centralised back office processing, elimination of branch overlap and duplication of 
administrative 
infrastructure,  better  manpower  planning,  optimum 
funds 
management, consolidation of operations, savings in IT and other purchases. 
Consolidation will afford focused supervision. 
Larger  size  means  wider  and  richer  experience  in  financial  inclusion.  Possible  to 
bring larger collective experience to identify successful models. 
International acceptance and recognition. 
Better risk management. 
Arguments against consolidation 
• 
Lead  to  complexity  and  Too-Big-To-Fail  (TBTF)  or  Too-Connected-To-Fail  (TCTF) 
moral hazards with adverse impact on financial stability. 
Regulatory issues: Significant big banks could resort to monopolistic practices that 
may  result  in  unequal  competition  and  distortive  and  even  predatory  behaviour  in 
the market. Such practices could also blunt the monetary transmission and market 
mechanism for efficient allocation of resources. 
Could  pose  problems  such  as  technology  migration  issues,  customer  attrition, 
implementation costs, HR issues (viz. seniority, salary, transfers, promotion, parity in 
perks etc.) and litigation, will not be able to provide personalized services provided 
by small banks.  
Criteria for consolidation/merger 
• 
Presently, significant skewness in the size of banks. The second largest bank in the 
system is almost one-third the size of the biggest bank. This creates a monopolistic 
situation. The task is to ensure that there are at least 4–5 banks of comparable size 
at all times to ensure that consolidated banks do not acquire monopolistic market 
power, adopt predatory behaviour and force smaller banks into unviable models. 
Organic merger or inorganic merger? 
Issue No. 3: large and small banks 
An issue related to the debate on consolidation in banking sector is the merits and demerits 
of large and small banks.  
In support of large banks  
• 
Large  banks  can  exploit  economies  of  scale  and  scope  leading  to  economic 
efficiency. 
Large banks will have the capacity, resilience and innovative zeal to pursue financial 
inclusion. They will bring diverse experience to bear on local initiatives.  
Large  banks  can  potentially  become  significant  global  players  and  thereby  give  a 
global reach to Indian corporates.  
Large banks with huge capital base can better meet the huge funding requirements 
of the infrastructure sectors.  
      8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Against large banks  
• 
• 
Large banks can become too-big-to fail, leading to moral hazard problems. 
Proliferation  of  non-core  activities,  either  in  the  books  of  the  bank  or  through  off-
balance  sheet  vehicles  such  as  investment  banking,  securitisation,  derivatives 
trading,  etc.  could  pose  significant  systemic  risk  because  of  their  complexity  and 
opacity. 
Large  banks  can  use  power  derived  from  their  information  monopoly  to  suppress 
competing institutions and markets. 
Large banks may dilute the benefits of competition. 
In support of small banks 
• 
Small banks have a comparative advantage in the supply of credit to small business 
units,  small  farmers  and  other  unorganized  sector  entities,  thereby  furthering  the 
cause of financial inclusion.  
Small  local  banks  are  more  nimble  and  flexible.  They  can  effectively  cater  to 
unbanked  areas  and  meet  localised  needs.  Can  be  more  efficient  in  financial 
inclusion.  
Small banks with limited area of operation would require less infrastructure, staff and 
hence the operational expenses would be low.  
Failure of a small bank will not have any systemic impact and resolution would be 
easier. 
Against small banks 
• 
Small  banks  are  potentially  vulnerable  to  sector  concentration  risk.  For  instance, 
community  banks  in  the  US  suffered  losses  due  to  their  excessive  reliance  on 
lending to commercial real estate. 
Small banks are vulnerable to geographic concentration risk from the local economy 
and hence require higher level of CRAR. 
Small banks are not big enough to finance big investments, including infrastructure. 
Small banks are prone to local influence capture.  
A  large  number  of  small  banks  put  pressure  on  the  supervisory  resources  of  the 
central bank. 
Our experience with LABs /UCBs /RRBs  
• 
Out  of  six  LABs  licensed  by  RBI,  2  were  closed  down,  inter  alia,  due  to 
mismanagement and only 4 are functioning. The overall performance of functioning 
LABs is less than satisfactory as they have become high cost structures. 
The LAB model has inherent weaknesses owing to its small size and concentration 
risk  resulting  in  unviable  and  uncompetitive  cost  structures,  adverse  selection, 
constraints  in  attracting  and  retaining  professional  staff  /management  due  to 
locational disadvantage.  
UCBs suffer from mismanagement, growing NPAs, state intervention, politicization 
and poor resource base. There have been 111 mergers and amalgamations among 
the UCBs with the number of UBCs placed at 1,618 as at end March 2012. 
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 Experience  with  RRBs  is  similar.  Over  the  years,  the  number  of  RRBs  has  come 
down from 196 to 62. 
Issues with encouraging large banks in India 
• 
What is our definition of a large bank? By large bank, do we mean a bank with large 
asset size or a bank with global foot print? Some of the Chinese banks fit well into 
the first definition. They are large in terms of their assets, but they are not global in 
the sense that they have no global presence. Some of the American or European 
banks  may  not  be  large  in  terms  of  assets,  but  they  have  presence  in  many 
jurisdictions. 
What type of largeness should Indian banks attempt? Large banks like the Chinese 
banks or large banks with global presence? Note that it will take several years for 
our banks to achieve the status of a large global bank. Our biggest bank is ranked at 
about  60  in  the  global  league  of  large  banks.  It  may  take  years  for  our  banks  to 
become  global  players  by  way  of  organic  growth.  However,  we  should  aspire  to 
have a few Indian multinational banks in the near future by selective acquisition. 
Issues with small banks in India 
• 
Merely  encouraging  small  banks  without  addressing  the  disadvantages  of  being 
small?  
Small banks are prone to fail frequently, and we have to develop the political and 
financial resilience to accept failures of small banks.  
There  is  a  need  for  a  faster  and  more  effective  framework  for  resolution  and 
settlement of deposit insurance claims in the event of failure of a bank. 
When  small  banks  become  successful,  they  naturally  want  to  expand  and  grow. 
Should we allow a smooth transition from small to big? But if we do that, aren’t we 
defeating the very rationale for such banks viz. that they will be nimble and flexible 
and meet local demands?  
Issue No. 4: licensing policy 
• 
The RBI issues bank licences under section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
The licence enables the bank to do banking and other financial services activities 
listed in the Banking Regulation Act.  
India follows a universal bank licensing regime. 
Licensing policy for domestic private sector banks 
• 
Pursuant to the recommendations of Narasimham Committee I in 1991, guidelines 
on  new  banks  were  released  in  1993  with  a  minimum  capital  requirement  of 
₹1 billion. 10 new private sector banks were licensed 
Pursuant to Narasimham Committee II (April 1998) on Banking Sector Reforms, a 
new set of guidelines were issued in 2001 with a capital requirement of ₹3 billion. 
2 new private sector banks were licensed. 
In February 2013, fresh guidelines for licensing of new banks were issued, inter alia 
permitting business/industrial houses to promote banks with a capital requirement of 
₹5 billion.  
       10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Licensing policy for foreign banks  
• 
At present, foreign banks operate in India as branches of the parent bank. Currently, 
permission for  opening  of  branches  by  foreign  banks  in  India  is  guided  by  India’s 
commitment to WTO to allow 12 new branches in a year. 
Development financial institutions  
• 
• 
Development Financial Institutions (DFIs) do not require a banking licence. 
Post-Independence,  DFIs  were  established  mainly  to  meet  the  demand  for  long-
term finance by the industrial sector. 
They had the benefit of low-cost funds through Long Term Operation (LTO) funds 
from RBI at concessional rates, funds from multilateral and bilateral agencies duly 
guaranteed  by  the  Government.  They  were  also  allowed  to  issue  bonds,  which 
qualified for SLR status. For deployment of funds, they faced little competition as the 
banking system concentrated largely on  working capital finance and almost totally 
yielded the term finance space to DFIs. 
Post-financial sector reforms in the 1990s, the privileged access to low-cost funds 
was withdrawn forcing DFIs to raise resources at market-related rates. On the other 
hand,  they  had  to face competition  in  the  term finance  space from  banks  offering 
lower rates. The change in operating environment, combined with high accumulation 
of  non-performing  assets,  due  to  a  combination  of  factors  put  financial  stress  on 
DFIs. Today, DFIs are very marginal players in the financial sector.  
Pursuant to the recommendations of the Khan Working Group on Harmonizing the 
Role and Operations of DFIs and banks, a Discussion Paper was prepared outlining 
the issues. 
A  broad  policy  framework  was  outlined  in  the  Mid-Term  Review  of  Monetary  and 
Credit  Policy  of  1999–2000  of  RBI  indicating  that  the  desired  path  was  towards 
universal  banking.  DFIs  were  given  the  option  to  transform  into  a  bank.  The 
operational guidelines for enabling a DFI to convert to a universal bank were issued 
in 2001.  
Is it necessary now to review our commitment to universal banking? Should we go in 
for differentiated licensing? 
Differentiated licensing 
• 
In October 2007, Reserve Bank prepared a Discussion Paper on Differentiated Bank 
Licensing which said that the case for differentiated licensing will be reviewed after a 
certain degree of success in financial inclusion is achieved and the Reserve Bank is 
satisfied  with  the  quality  and  robustness  of  the  risk  management  systems  of  the 
entire banking sector. 
Time to reevaluate this issue of Differentiated Licensing? 
Arguments in support of differentiated licensing 
• 
Specialized  entities  have  expertise 
infrastructure finance. 
Core  competency  could  be  better  harnessed  leading  to  enhanced  productivity  in 
terms of reduced intermediation cost, better price discovery and improved allocative 
efficiency.  
in  risk  assessment  and  structuring  of 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  With  differentiated  licences,  we  can  get  around  issues  of  conflict  of  interest  that 
arise when a bank performs multiple functions. 
Customised  application  of  supervisory  resources  according  to  the  banking  type 
could result in optimisation of scarce resources. 
Argument against differentiated licensing 
• 
Given  the  extent  of  financial  exclusion  in  India,  is  it  advisable  to  create  a  regime 
where some banks are freed of the obligation of financial inclusion?  
A universal bank will be able to cross subsidise across sectors to optimize utilization 
of resources and ensure better profitability of banks. 
Will specialized banks be prone to concentration risk because of narrower business 
models?  
The critical issue on the way forward  
• 
Differentiated  licensing  for  various  banking  activities  (retail,  wholesale,  trading  in 
securities,  mortgage  lending,  infrastructure  financing,  micro  lending,  etc.)  with 
differentiated regulatory requirements depending upon the risks involved? 
If  we  accept  Differentiated  Licensing  in  principle,  a  special  category  of banks that 
will come up for consideration, is Investment Banks. Let me now discuss licensing of 
pure Investment Banks.  
Issue No. 5: investment banking 
• 
Post  sub-prime  crisis,  the  US  investment  banking  sector  collapsed  due  to  high 
leverage and severe maturity mismatches. 
Soon after, leading investment banks such as Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs 
converted themselves into bank holding companies.  
Investment banking in India: current regulatory framework  
• 
The  term  investment  bank  is  not  legally  defined  in  India,  and  no  entities  are 
registered as such with SEBI.  
“Investment  Banking”  is  commonly  used  to  define  entities  that  are  into  asset 
management, capital raising, trading in securities, portfolio management, merchant 
banking,  underwriting,  broking  and  those  offering  business  and  financial  advisory 
services.  
Pure  investment  entities  which  do  not  have  presence  in  the  lending  or  banking 
business are regulated primarily by the capital market regulator (SEBI).  
Banks are subject to regulatory restrictions on their investments.  
Why and how of investment banks 
• 
Pure investment banks have a comparative advantage in corporate structuring and 
raising  capital  from  the  market.  As  Indian  corporate  go  global,  do  we  need  pure 
investment banks in India to serve their sophisticated financial needs and advisory 
services?  
Will exclusive investment banks militate against development goals – priority sector 
lending, financial inclusion? 
        12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Is  Investment  Banking  under  the  proposed  Non-Operative  Financial  Holding 
Company (NOFHC) a possible option?  
Need  for  more  extensive  debate  on  the  pros  and  cons  of  exclusive  investment 
banks in India. 
Issue No. 6: Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC)  
• 
Unified Financial Authority (UFA)  
RBI  
Financial Sector Appellate Tribunal  
Resolution Corporation  
Financial Redressal Agency  
Financial Sector Development Council  
Public Debt Management Agency 
FSLRC was constituted by the Government “with a view to rewriting and cleaning up 
the  financial  sector  laws  to  bring  them  in  tune  with  the  current  requirements”. 
FSLRC submitted its Report to the Government in March 2013.  
The  Commission  proposes  shifting  from  rule  based  to  principle  based  regulation. 
The  logic  is  that  the  principles  will  be  enshrined  in  the  law  and  the  law  need  not 
change to reflect changes over time and changes in technology. 
As per FSLRC, The new financial regulatory architecture will comprise:  
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Today RBI has the following regulatory and supervisory responsibilities: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Regulator of banks & non-banks ie all deposit taking and credit institutions 
Regulator of Payment Systems 
Regulator of Markets (viz., money, forex & g-sec) 
Major  responsibility  for  financial  stability,  macro-prudential  regulations  & 
supervision of financial conglomerates 
Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee (through its subsidiary) 
Customer Grievance Redressal relating to banks 
– 
– 
FSLRC  recommends  that  RBI  should  eventually  (within  5–10  years)  focus  on 
monetary  policy  and  traditional  central  banking  activity  only,  and  shed  all  other 
regulatory and supervisory functions. 
In the interim, FSLRC recommends that  
– 
– 
The Reserve Bank will be the regulator for banking and payment systems. 
The  Unified  Financial  Authority  will  be  the  regulator  for  all  ﬁnancial  services 
other than banking and payment systems. 
RBI  will  share  responsibility  for  financial  stability  with  FSDC  and  other 
regulators.  
 Further,  RBI  to  be  free  of  responsibilities  relating  to  Public  Debt  Management, 
Customer Grievance Redressal relating to banks, and deposit insurance. 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
Why RBI should regulate both banks and non-banks?  
• 
One of the major causes of the 2008 financial crisis was that credit intermediation 
activities  were conducted by non-banks (the so called shadow banks) which  were 
primarily outside the regulatory purview. This raised serious concerns of regulatory 
arbitrage, requirements for similar regulation of entities performing similar activities 
and  issues  of  commonality  of  risks  and  synergies  of  unified  regulation  for  such 
entities.  
Strong  interlinkages  between  banks  and  NBFCs.  Unified  regulation  by  the  same 
regulator essential for financial stability. 
For  Monetary  Policy  to  be  effective,  credit  creation  (i.e.  by  banks  and  credit 
institutions like NBFCs) should be regulated by the central bank. 
Post-crisis, the trend has been to entrust more, not less, regulation to central banks. 
Issue No. 7: Non-Operative Financial Holding Companies (NOFHC) 
• 
• 
There are three types of banking models prevalent around the world. 
Europe has adopted Universal Banking model. In the US, the predominant model is 
Bank  Holding  Company  (BHC)  or  Financial  Holding  Company  (FHC).  Most  other 
jurisdictions follow the Bank-Subsidiary model.  
India adopted Bank-Subsidiary model till the early 90s, and then moved on to the 
Universal Banking model. 
RBI  had  constituted  a  Working  Group,  under  former  Deputy  Governor  Shyamala 
Gopinath,  in  June  2010  to  study  the  different  holding  company  structures 
internationally  and  to  indicate  a  roadmap  for  adoption  of  the  holding  company 
structure in India. 
The  Working  Group  felt  that  a  holding  company  structure  would  better  enable 
oversight of financial groups from a systemic perspective. 
The Working Group had also recommended that there should be a separate statute 
for regulation of financial holding companies. 
New banks in the private sector would be set up under a Non-Operative Financial 
Holding Company (NOFHC). 
The objective of NOFHC is that the holding company will ring fence the regulated 
financial  services  entities  of  the  promoter  group,  including  the  bank,  from  other 
activities  of  the  group  i.e.,  commercial,  industrial  and  financial  activities  not 
regulated by financial sector regulators. The objective is also that the bank should 
be ring-fenced from other regulated financial activities of the Group. 
NOFHC  will  be  registered  as  a  non-banking  financial  company  (NBFC),  but 
regulated like a bank. 
For  the  PSBs,  a  High  Level  Committee  set  up  by  the  Government  has 
recommended  formation  of  a  non-operating  financial  holding  company  (HoldCo) 
under  a  special  Act  of  Parliament  to  act  as  an  investment  company  for  the 
Government; to hold a major portion of the Government's shareholdings in all PSBs; 
to raise long-term debt from domestic and international markets to infuse equity into 
PSBs. 
Need  for  debate  on  whether  a  holding  company  structure  is  suited  to  the  Indian 
banking and financial system. 
            14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Issue No. 8: subsidiarisation of foreign banks 
• 
• 
i.e. 
foreign  banks 
incorporation  of 
lessons  support  domestic 
At present, foreign banks operate in India as branches of the parent banks.  
Post  crisis 
subsidiarisation 
Main advantages of local incorporation are: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Ring fenced capital within the host country 
Easier to define laws of which jurisdiction apply  
Better corporate governance, local board of directors 
Effective control in a banking crisis and enables host country authorities to act 
more independently as against branch operations 
Regulatory comfort 
– 
Potential  down  side  risk  could  be  domination  of  the  domestic  financial  system  by 
Wholly Owned Subsidiaries (WOS) of foreign banks.  
There  were  certain  taxation  and  other  issues  which  needed  to  be  resolved  in 
consultation with Govt. of India. The Income Tax Act has since been amended to 
exempt  foreign  bank  from  payment  of  capital  gains  tax  on  subsidiarisation.  The 
Banking  Laws  (Amendment)  Bill,  2012  amended  the  Indian  Stamp  Act,  1899 
whereby conversion of branch/es of a foreign bank into WOS as per the scheme or 
guidelines of RBI shall not be liable to duty under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 or any 
other law for the time being in force.  
Apart from taxation issues, there are a few other important issues in conversion of 
foreign bank branches into wholly owned subsidiaries, mainly of a legal nature, like 
transfer of rights and liabilities, finality of transfer, etc. which need to be addressed. 
These  issues  are  under  examination  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  After  resolution  of  all 
these issues comprehensive guidelines on subsidiarisation of foreign banks in India 
will be issued. 
Conclusion 
• 
I  have  raised  some  issues  relevant  in  the  context  of  thinking  through  a  banking 
structure for India that best promotes our aspiration for fast and inclusive growth. 
I am conscious I raised issues without necessarily giving the Reserve Bank’s views. 
That  is  deliberate.  The  Reserve  Bank  needs  the  benefit  of  larger  and  informed 
debate on these issues.  
I trust you will engage on these issues when the Reserve Bank’s Discussion Paper 
comes out in a few days. 
My best wishes for the success of this Conference. 
Thank you once again for inviting me.  
        BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
Indicators of Impact of Financial Sector Reforms 
Annex 
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
