Erkki Liikanen: Reforming the structure of the EU banking sector 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the High-
level  Expert  Group  on  reforming  the  structure  of  the  EU  banking  sector,  Berlin,  25  June 
2013. 
 It is great to be in Berlin. Berlin has inspired many of us through our lives. 
In 1961, I was a young boy in school. I listened the news from Berlin with excitement and 
fear.  Two  years  ago  many  books  were  published  which  gave  the  broad  context  to  these 
historical events. 
In 1972 as a young member of Parliament I came to West Berlin for the first time and also 
crossed the border to the east. Detente was only in an early phase. This memory is still vivid 
in my mind. 
In 1988 the IMF annual meeting was organised in West Berlin. As a finance minister I met 
face to face the demonstrators who did not appreciate our presence at all. I went jogging to 
Brandenburg Tor and watched to the east, but could not imagine what would happen soon. 
In 2007, on the 30th of September Haile Gebrselassie run the Berlin Marathon and made a 
new world record 2.04, 26. He made history. I took part in the same marathon and lost to him 
by more than 2 ½ hours. Still the citizens of Berlin gave us both great support. We learned to 
know Berlin really by foot. What a great experience. 
Two months earlier, in July 2007, first turbulences had emerged in the financial markets. One 
of the premieres was seen here in Germany, even though the root causes were in the US 
subprime market. We heard first time about IKB. 
It is already almost six years ago now. We have seen many phases of the crisis. First was 
the  subprime  crisis.  Then  came  the  systemic  financial  crisis  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
brothers. 
The economic crisis or the Great Recession, as it is also called, followed. 
In 2010 we were faced with the sovereign debt crisis. And last year we had a wide crisis of 
confidence in Europe.  
What have we learned from this crisis?  
These years have taught us many lessons. One is that recovery after a recession which has 
been  triggered  by  a  financial  crisis  is  slow.  The  leverage  goes  up  fast but  deleveraging  is 
slow.  
But in Basel last week-end, where Central Bank Governors met at the BIS, it was noted that 
it  is  possible  that  both  trend  and  productivity  growth  had  started  to  falter  even  before  the 
crisis.  So  the  financial  crisis  deepened  the  economic  slowdown,  but  this  was  not  the  only 
cause. 
Last years have also shown that the economic pillar of the Maastricht EMU was not robust 
enough. The contagion can be an especially pronounced problem in a monetary union and 
we need stronger framework and stronger tools to tackle it.  
At the same time, we need to be fair: this has not been just a crisis of politics or a crisis of the 
EMU.  The  economic  theory  and  especially  the  modern  theory  of  finance  have  been 
challenged. This crisis has cast doubt on many commonly held beliefs from the last 25 years. 
Many textbooks will be re-written. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
But  still  there  are  issues  which  we  have  learnt  in  economics  and  economic  history  which 
have passed the test. First: A growth model based on ever-growing debt levels won’t last. 
Second:  The  stability  of  the  whole  economy  is  important,  not  only  the  control  of  public 
deficits.  The  economy  needs  to  be  competitive.  Third:  an  educated  workforce,  reliable 
institutions and a functioning infrastructure provide a foundation for renewing the economy.  
How have we changed the EU and EMU?  
As  to  the  EMU,  the  economic  governance  has  been  strengthened  based  on  the  lessons 
learnt.  First,  we  have  now  a  stronger  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (SGP)  and  the  new 
macroeconomic imbalances procedure, which pays attention on the balanced development 
of  the  whole  economy.  The  governance  has  also  been  improved.  Second,  the  crisis 
management  structures  have  been  developed  and  the  ESM  has  been  in  place  since  last 
October.  Third,  the  banking  union  is  an  important  step  towards  further  strengthening  of 
financial stability. 
We have not only new rules, we have also more market discipline. We need both. 
True  ownership  of  the  governance  is  crucial.  We  need  more  Europe  and  we  need  more 
national  responsibility.  A  clear  separation  of  responsibilities  between  Brussels  and  the 
member states is very important. 
As  regards  the  crisis  management  structures,  the  ESM  as  a  crisis  fund  is  just  a  part  
– although an important part – of the story. It is of utmost importance that the design of the 
adjustment programmes relies on state of the art expertise, practices and experience. The 
programmes  must  be  built  on  realistic  assumptions  on  the  macro  outlook  and  public  debt 
stability.  This  is  the  best  way  to  guarantee  that  the  financial  support  drawn  from  the  ESM 
remains a bridge loan instead of becoming a permanent transfer. I find also the role of the 
IMF important and useful. I hope that also in the future the involvement of the IMF is sought 
for the design of country-specific conditionality and monitoring. 
The third part, the banking union, is not yet complete. 
The current plan consists of three pillars: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
The  setting-up  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is  progressing.  Two  months  ago  the 
informal Ecofin Council in Dublin reached a political agreement over the single supervisory 
mechanism for banks. The SSM should be fully operational one year later. 
The next step is to agree on the Single Resolution Mechanism and the bail-in rules. It is also 
important  to  get  the  details  right.  Like  monetary  policy,  a  successful  bank  resolution 
mechanism relies on credibility. To achieve credibility and to prevent moral hazard, central 
resolution  authority  must  be  protected  from  political  pressures  by  a  clear  and  narrow 
mandate. 
Protecting a sovereign against contagion from a weak financial sector is not the only goal of 
the banking union. 
The  banking  union  should  also  protect  banks  against  contagion  from  a  weak  sovereign.  It 
should  allow  the  private  sector  to  maintain  access  to  credit  even  if  the  solvency  of  the 
sovereign is in doubt. This would help to restore the credibility of the no-bailout rule, support 
market discipline and reduce moral hazard. 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 
Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) 
Harmonized deposit guarantee schemes (DGS)  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
What has the ECB done and why? 
During  this  crisis  monetary  policy  has  had  a  strong  stabilizing  role  during  the  crisis  in  all 
advanced countries. 
In 2008 and 2009 policy rates were quickly lowered to historically low levels in the United 
States, United Kingdom and also in the euro area. In addition, many central banks have used 
unconventional monetary policy tools. As a result, central bank balance sheets have grown. 
In the euro area, the primary objective of the ECB’s monetary policy has been, is and will be 
to maintain price stability. The Governing Council of the ECB has defined price stability as 
the year-on-year increase in the HICP below but close to 2% over the medium term. 
During  the  crisis  the  main  policy  tool  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has  been  the 
conventional policy rate. 
The unconventional measures of the ECB have focused on repairing the impaired monetary 
policy transmission: to narrow the existing gap between the intended impact of policy rates 
and the actual rates that the households and firms encounter. 
In  the  euro  area  the  role  of  the  banking  sector  is  crucial  for  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy. Two very long (3-year-long) refinancing operations were conducted to remove liquidity 
uncertainty  and  facilitate  the  function  of  the  euro  area  money  market.  Again,  the  final 
objective was to improve the transmission of the proper monetary policy.  
Another crucial segment in the monetary policy transmission is the government bond market. 
Partly due its size – it is the largest capital market in the euro area – it lays the foundation for 
price formation in other capital markets, like bank and corporate bonds. Government bonds 
are also important repo instruments. 
A year ago, in spring and summer 2012, fears of a break-up of the single currency area and 
the  associated  implicit  exchange  rate  risk  led  to  several  tensions  in  the  euro  area  capital 
markets. As a result, the steering of monetary policy was not functioning fully, or was, in part, 
not functioning at all.  
At  the  same  time,  economic  indicators  pointed  to  a  significant  credit  crunch  and  a  severe 
decline in economic activity. As a result, there was a risk of an incipient deflationary spiral; 
the primary goal of the Governing Council – price stability – was not ensured.  
Against this background, the Governing Council set up the OMT programme. There are three 
crucial elements in the programme.  
First,  a  necessary  conditionality  is  to  ensure  that  the  Member  State  remains  under 
considerable pressure to implement reforms and maintain fiscal discipline. 
Second,  this  necessary  conditionality  is  not  yet  sufficient.  In  addition  an  OMT  transaction 
must  be  warranted  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective.  This  decision  will  be  made 
independently by the Governing Council of the ECB. 
Third,  the  transactions  will  be  discontinued  during  the  quarterly  EFSF/ESM  programme 
evaluation  period.  The  continuation  of  OMT  transactions  requires  that  the  programme 
remains on track. 
The OMT is designed to stay strictly within the mandate of the ECB.  
Central banks have been able to play a stabilising role first against the forces of the financial 
collapse and then supporting a recovery of the real economy. 
But the central banks cannot repair the balance sheets. They cannot consolidate the public 
finances. Central banks cannot implement the structural reforms. 
Everyone has to take his or her own responsibility. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
We need more growth. How can we achieve it?  
The  pace  of  recovery  in  advanced  economies  has  been  disappointing.  Still  between  2001 
and 2007, they grew 2.3%. Between 2010 and 2012 annual average  was 1.3 %. The BIS 
report from 23 June 2013 reads: “The only major exception is Germany, which bounced back 
from a period of stagnation in the early 2000s”. 
The lower growth reflects lower employment with lower productivity growth. This holds true 
for Europe, too. A lot of research tells that rigidities in product and labour markets go hand 
in  hand  with  lower  productivity  and  employment.  Even  though  changes  have  taken  place, 
pockets of high regulation still remain especially in the service sector. OECD indicators tell 
that  further  liberalisation  of  product  markets  would  allow  many  countries  to  raise  their 
employment  rates.  Liberalising  entry  into  regulated  sectors  can  be  an  important  source  of 
investment and job creation. Product market liberalisation is a way to enhance growth. 
The  reforms  in  labour  market  are  also  very  important.  When  economies  with  imbalances 
recover from downturn there is a major need to reallocate resources for example from real 
estate and construction sector to new areas. 
Demography also calls for labour market reforms. In the coming years in many countries a 
greater  number  of  people  will  retire  than  enter  the  labour  market.  We  need  reforms  to 
increase the labour supply. 
How is public sector consolidation progressing? 
Many  advanced  countries  have  raised  their  public  debt  to  high  post-war  levels.  High  debt 
levels  make  countries  vulnerable,  put  a  drag  on  growth  and  limit  their  room  for 
countercyclical policies. 
This we do know. We have discusses and monitored the public debt closely last years. BIS is 
an international organisation with high reputation. How did they see the debt development? 
According  to  BIS:  “the  largest  adjustment  has  taken  place  in  economies  facing  financial 
market pressures, Greece is expected to improve its underlying primary balance by almost 
17 percentage points of potential GDP by the end of 2013, while Ireland and Portugal are 
expected to have improved theirs by 7.3 and 6.8 points respectively”. For Spain the figure is 
8.3 and Italy 5.1. 
These are not small figures, we must admit. 
Still,  the  work  must  continue.  All  countries  need  a  healthy  primary  surplus  to  take  care  of 
their  borrowing  costs.  Often  the  most  critical  question  is  how  they  succeed  in  curbing  the 
expenditure related to pensions and health care. 
On banking 
I spoke about the banking union. 
Banks  have  a  vital  role  in  providing  finance  to  households  and  firms.  This  holds  true 
especially  in  Europe  where  the  share  of  the  banks  in  the  financing  of  companies  has 
traditionally been large compared to capital market financing. It holds especially true in the 
case of financing of SME’s. 
So, it is important that the regulatory reform as a whole supports and strengthens the banks´ 
ability to provide socially vital financial services efficiently. Various banking models can be 
successful  in  this  task,  if  sufficient  competition  is  maintained  and  decision-making  is  not 
distorted by expectations that some banks are too big or too important to fail. 
The key objective is to ensure a banking sector that is capable of financing the real economy 
and fulfilling its other important functions. At the same time, this objective cannot be achieved 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
without  restoring  and  further  enhancing  the  resilience  of  banks  and  the  confidence  in  the 
banking sector as a whole. 
We  need  a  banking  sector  that  is  sustainable  and  does  not  rely  on  any  extraordinary 
taxpayer support. 
This is the aim of the reforms, when more capital and better liquidity buffers are required. 
This  is  also  the  objective  of  the  proposals,  which  aim  at  separating  insured  deposits  from 
high  risk-taking  activities  such  as  proprietary  trading  in  securities.  These  prudential  and 
structural reforms and the banking union are actually complementary, supporting each other. 
We should see that they are carried out. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
