Vítor Constâncio: 2012 Bernácer prize award ceremony in honour of 
Nicholas Bloom 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  the 
occasion of the Awarding Ceremony of the Germán Bernácer Prize for Promoting Economic 
Research in Europe to Nicholas Bloom, Madrid, 24 September 2013. 
 I wish to thank Marie Hoerova for the help in preparing this text. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be part of this session to award the 2012 Germán Bernácer Prize to 
Nicholas Bloom, Professor of Economics at Stanford University. Nicholas Bloom has made 
influential contributions to the academic debate in two broad areas, both of which are of great 
relevance  for  central  bank  policy-makers.  First,  his  research  on  the  effects  of  policy  and 
economic  uncertainty  on  business  cycles  helped  us  understand  better  some  of  the  key 
contributing factors to the protracted slump in output during what has become known as the 
Great Recession. Second, his research on the determinants of good management practices 
at the firm level provided important insights on how to support long-term economic growth 
and competitiveness, including in the European context. 
The  financial  and  economic  crisis  that  started  in  the  summer  of  2007  brought  about 
unprecedented  challenges  for  central  bank  policy-makers.  Some  well-accepted  paradigms 
and  widely  used  models  have  come  to  be  questioned.  It  is  of  course  the  fact  of  life  that 
central bankers operate in an ever-changing and, to use one of the keywords from Professor 
Bloom’s research, uncertain world. It is thus an important responsibility of a central bank to 
ensure  that  relevant  new  insights  from  academic  research  find  their  way  into  the  actual 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  Eurosystem  attempts  to  cope  with  this  responsibility  by 
fostering a constant intellectual exchange with the research community. The ECB organises 
great many seminars, conferences and workshops where the most recent research findings 
can be discussed, and invites leading scholars to visit and conduct research in the ECB, for 
example  by  means  of  the  Wim  Duisenberg  Fellowship.  Moreover,  the  ECB  supports 
promising young researchers by funding five Lamfalussy Fellowships each year. The aim is 
to  promote  policy-relevant  research  that  meets  the  highest  academic  standards.  The  ECB 
also  leads  and  co-ordinates  research  efforts  through  Eurosystem  research  networks  to 
obtain research output which is necessary for ECB decision-making but which is as of yet 
unavailable at universities or other research institutes. I will come back to activities of one 
such research network at the end of my remarks. 
Research by Nicholas Bloom analysing the effects of uncertainty shocks on the economy is a 
prime  example  of  a  policy-relevant  research  output.  Published  in  Econometrica  in  2009,  it 
could not be more timely.1 The unprecedented level of uncertainty has been one of the key 
distinguishing  features  of  the  Great  Recession.  Economic  uncertainty  refers  to  an 
environment in which little or nothing is known about the future state of the economy. There 
is  a  variety  of  sources  of  economic  uncertainty,  ranging  from  wars,  acts  of  terrorism  and 
natural disasters to changes in economic and financial policies. Professor Bloom highlighted 
the adverse effects of heightened uncertainty on economic activity. Uncertainty leads firms to 
cut back or defer hiring and investment decisions. It also drives consumers to put off buying 
new goods. As a result, uncertainty can escalate financial stress and recession, as well as 
                                                
1  Nicholas Bloom, 2009, “The impact of uncertainty shocks”, Econometrica 77(3), pp. 623–685. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
stall labour market recovery.2 What was new was the attempt to measure general and event 
uncertainty  through  a  variety  of  indicators,  avoid  the  trap  of  reverse  causation  with  the 
economic fluctuations it was trying to explain and insert the variable in a DSGE model. 
Professor Bloom’s work on uncertainty inspired further research on the effects of uncertainty, 
including on the links between uncertainty and monetary policy.3 For example, the idea that 
changes in uncertainty may interact with monetary conditions and can drive global financial 
cycles was one of the themes in this year’s Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, the 
annual  gathering  of  prominent  central  bankers,  finance  ministers,  leading  academics  and 
financial market players from around the world.4  
Because  of  its  latent  nature,  uncertainty  is  difficult  to  quantify  and  has  to  be  measured 
indirectly using a variety of indicators. Here, too, Nicholas Bloom, together with Scott Baker 
of  Stanford  University  and  Steven  Davis  of  the  University  of  Chicago,  made  an  important 
contribution in developing an economic policy uncertainty index for the US, Europe and other 
major  economies.  The  measure  has  been  used  not  only  in  academic  papers  but  also  by 
investors and financial professionals.5 It has also been subject to intense discussions in the 
blogosphere  in  view  of some  of  its  political  uses. The  difficulties  in finding good  indicators 
controlled to avoid reverse causation and the use of political events provided fodder for the 
debates.  Professor  Bloom’s  work  on  measuring  uncertainty  stimulated  more  systematic 
analysis  of  uncertainty  indices  also  at  the  ECB.  We  developed  our  own  composite 
uncertainty  indicator  which  combines  four  components:  systemic  stress,  uncertainty  of 
private households and firms, political uncertainty and financial risk aversion. 
Measurement  difficulties  were  also  an  issue  Professor  Bloom  had  to  tackle  in  the  second 
strand of his research, namely in his research on the role of management practices in driving 
productivity  and  growth  differentials  across  companies  and  across  countries.  Due  to  an 
absence of good quality data on management practices, little prior research was conducted 
on this important topic. To address this gap in the literature, Nicholas Bloom, together with 
John  Van  Reenen  of  the  London  School  of  Economics,  developed  a  methodology  for 
quantifying management practices. They carried out a large research project which used a 
new survey approach to measure management practices in a systematic way in more than 
4,000  manufacturing  firms  across  Europe,  the  US  and  Asia.  The  aspects  of  management 
practices  their  approach  focuses  on  are  systematic  performance  monitoring,  setting 
appropriate targets, and providing incentives for good performance. They showed that firms 
with better management practices are larger, more productive, grow faster, and have higher 
survival  rates.  A  conservative  estimate  indicates  that  differences  in  management  practices 
                                                
2  See Nicholas Bloom, 2011, “The uncertainty shock from the debt disaster will cause a double-dip recession”, 
VoxEU.org,  22  August;  and  Scott  Baker,  Nicholas  Bloom  and  Steven  J.  Davis,  2012,  “The  Rocky  Balboa 
recovery”, VoxEU.org, 20 June. 
3  There is a vast body of literature that builds on Nicholas Bloom’s uncertainty research. I will only name a few 
papers  which  involved  ECB  researchers.  Using  German  data,  Popescu  and  Smets  find  that  uncertainty 
shocks are less important drivers of business cycles compared to financial risk aversion shocks; see Adina 
Popescu  and  Frank  Smets,  2009,  “Uncertainty,  risk-taking  and  the  business  cycle  in  Germany”,  CESifo 
Economic Studies 56(4), 596–626. Bekaert et al. document that a lax monetary policy in the US decreases 
both risk aversion and uncertainty, with the former effect being stronger; see Geert Bekaert, Marie Hoerova 
and Marco Lo Duca, 2013, “Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(7). 
4  See Hélène Rey, 2013, “Dilemma not trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy independence”, 
paper presented at the Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium. Incidentally, Hélène Rey  was the 2006 
Germán Bernácer Prize winner. 
5  For more details on the construction of the measure see Scott Baker, Nicholas Bloom and Steven J. Davis, 
2012, “Measuring economic policy uncertainty”, working paper, Stanford University. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
account for a significant proportion (10–30%) of the differences in productivity between firms 
and between countries.6  
Their  research  did  not  stop  at  documenting  the  impact  of  the  differences  in  management 
practices.  They  also  offered  suggestions  for  policy  interventions  that  could  encourage  the 
uptake of good management behaviour. Competitive and flexible markets enable managers 
to  re-optimise  resources  within  and  outside  the  firm  more  easily.  Educational  standards 
matter as well. Better-managed firms have better educated workers and they use them more 
efficiently. Moreover, better educated managers have necessary skills to adopt state-of-the-
art  management  practices  and  adapt  to  changing  environment.  This  enables  them  to 
maintain and improve their global competitive position. Multinational companies also have a 
strong positive effect, as they transplant their management styles to the countries in which 
they operate.7  
These research-based conclusions highlight a key role of structural reforms in the wake of 
the  global  economic  crisis.  Countries  with  more  competitive  market  conditions,  better 
education and more investment in R&D and innovation policies can maximise the beneficial 
impact  of  managerial  capital  on  productivity  and  growth.  From  the  policy  perspective, 
competitiveness issues have been identified as one of the root causes of the economic crisis 
in  Europe  and  have  therefore  been  explicitly  included  in  the  surveillance  processes 
established  at  EU/euro  area  and  G20  level.  To  further  advance  research  in  this  area,  the 
Eurosystem  established  the  Competitiveness  Research  Network  (CompNet)  at  the  end  of 
2011.  The  network’s  objective  is  to  develop  a  more  consistent  analytical  framework  for 
assessing  competitiveness,  one  which  allows  for  a  better  correspondence  between 
determinants  and  outcomes.  To  do  so,  the  network  functions  as  a  unique  forum  in  which 
different  approaches  and  measures  of  competitiveness  can  be  discussed,  researched  and 
developed,  and  eventually  reconciled.  Developing  a 
includes  a 
complementary  use  of  micro  and  macro  data  can  lead  to  improved  analyses  of 
competitiveness issues.8 
I am confident that Nicholas Bloom  will continue making extraordinary contributions to this 
and  other  research  areas 
I  herewith  extend  my  sincerest 
congratulations to you – Nicholas – for winning the 2012 Bernácer Prize.  
the  coming  years. 
framework  which 
in 
                                                
6  See Nicholas Bloom and John Van Reenen, 2007, “Measuring and explaining management practices across 
firms and countries”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), pp. 1341–1408; and Nicholas Bloom and John 
Van Reenen, 2010, “Why do management practices differ across firms and countries?” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, 24(1), pp. 203–224. 
In  a  recent  contribution,  Nicholas  Bloom  and  co-authors  showed  that  US  multinationals  obtained  higher 
productivity from IT than non-US multinationals and that establishments taken over by US multinationals (but 
not  by  non-US  multinationals)  increased  the  productivity  of  their  IT.  They  attributed  a  bulk  of  productivity 
differences  to  differing  people  management  practices  across  US  and  non-US  firms.  See  Nicholas  Bloom, 
Raffaella  Sadun  and  John  Van  Reenen,  2012,  “Americans  do  I.T.  better:  US  multinationals  and  the 
productivity miracle”. American Economic Review 102(1), pp. 167–201. 
7 
8  For more information about the Network visit http://www.ecb.europa.eu/home/html/researcher_compnet.en.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
