K C Chakrabarty: Revving up the growth engine through financial 
inclusion 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
32nd Skoch Summit, Mumbai, 6 June 2013. 
 1. 
Mr.  Montek  Singh  Ahluwalia,  Deputy  Chairman,  Planning  Commission;
Mr. U.K. Sinha, Chairman, SEBI; Mr. Sameer Kochhar, Chairman, Skoch Group; Ms. Stuti
Kacker,  Secretary,  Department  of  Disability  Affairs,  Ministry  of  Social  Justice  and 
Empowerment;  Mr.  S.S.  Tarapore,  Distinguished  Fellow,  Skoch  Development  Foundation;
Ms.  Chitra  Ramkrishna,  Managing  Director  and  CEO,  NSE;  Mr.  Bhaskar  Pramanik,
Chairman, Microsoft Corporation (India); delegates to the Summit; members of the print and 
electronic media; ladies and gentlemen. It is a pleasure and privilege for me to be present
here today at the inaugural session of the 32nd Skoch Summit on the theme of “Regaining 
8% Growth with Equity”. I find the theme of the conference particularly relevant now as the 
temporary  loss  of  growth  momentum  provides  us  an  opportunity  to  recalibrate  our  growth
strategies to ensure that the benefits of future economic growth are shared by all sections of
the society, particularly, the poor and excluded groups. This objective needs to be at the core
of any strategy that we adopt to rekindle the growth momentum. Hence, I congratulate Skoch
for choosing this particular theme for its Summit. 
2.  
Considering the illustrious and respected bevy  of speakers who would be sharing 
their views on regaining the higher growth trajectory during the day, I would concentrate on
highlighting some of the recent initiatives that we have taken to ensure that the objective of
equitable growth is achieved through financial inclusion (FI) particularly, inclusion of the poor
and  marginalised  sections  of  the  society.  I  would  also  share  some  of  the  challenges  that
currently hinder our FI initiatives.  
Our approach to financial inclusion 
We have sought to adopt a structured and planned approach towards FI by not just
3. 
focussing  on  improving  access  to  financial  services  but  also  encouraging  demand  for
financial  services  through  financial  literacy  initiatives.  Some  of  the  defining  features  of  our
approach to FI are: 
 
We have adopted a bank-led model for FI, but have permitted non-bank entities to 
partner banks in their FI initiatives. 
We  have  encouraged  banks  to  leverage  technology  to  attain  greater  reach  and
penetration  while  keeping  the  cost  of  providing  financial  services  to  the  minimum. 
While  we  remain  technology  neutral,  we  require  banks  to  seamlessly  integrate
whatever technology they choose, with their CBS architecture. 
As a philosophy, we have always encouraged banks to pursue FI as a commercial
activity  and  to  not  view  it  as  social  service  or  charity.  The  self-sustainability  and 
commercial viability of the FI initiatives are important if banks have to scale up their
operations to cover more unbanked areas. 
We have advised banks to adopt innovative business models and delivery channels 
to expand their FI efforts. There is a need for banks to develop new products and
design  new  delivery  models  that  are  customized  to  the  unique  needs  of  the
financially excluded population, both in the rural and urban areas. 
The Reserve Bank has sought to play a supportive role in FI by creating a conducive
regulatory environment and providing institutional support to banks in their FI efforts.
Importantly, we have provided banks the freedom and the space to determine their
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
own  strategies  for  rolling  out  FI  and  have  encouraged  them  to  identify  their  own
goals and targets through their respective Financial Inclusion Plans.  
Institutional mechanism 
4.  
Our strength lies in the fact that we have created a robust institutional mechanism to
support the roll out of banking services across the country. This was essential considering
the enormity of the task in terms of the number of excluded people and the geographical size
of the country. Our institutional architecture includes: 
 
The  Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC)  chaired  by  the  Union
Finance  Minister  and  involving  heads  of  all  financial  sector  regulators,  which  has
financial inclusion and financial literacy as one of its important mandates. 
A  technical  group  on  financial  inclusion  and  financial  literacy  under  the  FSDC 
involving not just the financial sector regulators, but also the education boards and
curriculum developers. 
A high level Financial Inclusion Advisory Committee (FIAC) set up by RBI to focus
on providing strategic direction to FI initiatives across various stakeholders. 
A  strong  institutional  mechanism  at  the  level  of  banks  through  35  State  level
Bankers’  Committees,  644  Lead  District  Managers  and  more  than  100  thousand
bank branches. 
More than 700 Financial Literacy Centres and RSETIs imparting financial literacy to
complement the financial inclusion measures. 
    Recent financial inclusion initiatives 
Learning from the experience gained from the outcomes of our FI initiatives over the
5.  
years, the Reserve Bank has taken certain additional steps to provide greater impetus to the
process of financial inclusion.  
 
We have encouraged banks to adopt a structured and planned approach to financial
inclusion  with  commitment  at  the  highest  levels,  through  preparation  of  Board 
approved Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs). The first phase of FIPs was implemented
over the period 2010–2013. The Reserve Bank has sought to use the FIPs as the
basis for FI initiatives at bank level through certain measures: 
– 
– 
Banks advised to prepare Board approved FIPs for the period 2013–2016.  
RRBs  also  advised  to  prepare  comprehensive  FIPs,  consequent  to  their
migration to CBS in 2011. 
In  order  to  ensure  closer  monitoring  of  FI  performance  of  bank  branches,
banks  have  been  advised  to  disaggregate  their  FIPs  up  to  controlling  office 
and branch level. 
Structured,  comprehensive  monitoring  mechanism  put  in  place  by  RBI  for
evaluating  banks’  performance  against  their  FIP  plans.  Annual  review
meetings  are  being  held  with  CMDs  of  banks  to  ensure  top  management 
support and commitment to the FI process. 
    2 
 In the Annual Policy Statement for 2013–14, banks have been advised to consider 
frontloading (prioritizing) the opening of branches in unbanked rural centres over a
three year cycle co-terminus with their FIPs. This is expected to facilitate the branch 
expansion in unbanked rural centres. 
After successful achievement of the target of ensuring provision of banking services
through a banking outlet in every village with population above 2000 by March 2012,
BIS central bankers’ speeches
     SLBCs were advised to prepare a road map for provision of banking services in all
unbanked villages with population below 2000 in a time bound manner. Under the
road map, SLBCs have identified about 485000 unbanked villages with population
less than 2000 and the same have been allotted to banks. 
An integrated approach has been adopted for achieving financial inclusion through
financial  literacy.  Financial  Literacy  Centres  and  rural  branches  of  scheduled
commercial banks have been advised to conduct outdoor Financial Literacy Camps 
at least once a month. 
In  order  to  ensure  consistency  in  the  messages  reaching  the  target  audience  of
financially  excluded  people  through  these  financial  literacy  camps,  the  Reserve
Bank has released a comprehensive Financial Literacy Guide containing guidance 
note for trainers, operational guidelines for conduct of financial literacy camps and
financial literacy material.  
In order to ensure smooth roll out of the Government’s Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) 
initiative, banks have been advised to: 
– 
Open  accounts  of  all  eligible  individuals  in  camp  mode  with  the  support  of
local Government authorities. 
Seed the existing and new accounts with Aadhaar numbers. 
Put  in  place  an  effective  mechanism  to  monitor  and  review  the  progress  in
implementation of DBT. 
 Emphasis is on increasing the proportion of brick and mortar branches vis-a-vis BC 
outlets.  The  guidelines  on  opening  25%  of  all  new  branches  in  unbanked  rural
centres and opening of intermediate brick and mortar structures have been issued
for this purpose. 
Greater emphasis is being placed on volume of transactions carried out through the
newly opened bank accounts. The monitoring format for progress in FIP has been
modified  to  include  detailed  coverage  of  transactions  in  savings,  credit  and  EBT 
accounts  through  BCs.  Besides,  banks  have  also  been  advised  to  monitor  cost
incurred on financial inclusion activities. 
Challenges to financial inclusion 
6.  
While several initiatives are being taken for ensuring widespread financial access,
certain factors continue to impede progress. Let me highlight some of the major issues that
various stakeholders face in their quest for universal financial inclusion: 
 
The  goal  of  universal  financial  access  is  yet  to  receive  the  complete  conviction/
commitment of the Board/ top management of banks. This is often due to a lack of
genuine  belief  that  this  can  be  pursued  as  a  profitable  business  activity.  I  have
always maintained that the expenses incurred on FI initiatives need to be viewed as
an investment instead of being considered as expenses, and the same should be
weighed against present/ future benefits likely to accrue from the same. 
Another major challenge is that banks are yet to develop sustainable and scalable
business  and  delivery  models  to  guide  their  FI  initiatives.  While  several  alternate 
models have been tried out, the time has come for banks to zero in on the models
that they find most suited to their goals and to focus on scaling up the same. 
While  access  to  financial  services  has  improved,  the  usage  of  the  financial 
infrastructure continues to be tardy. While more than 2.70 lakh banking outlets are
available across the country, the number of transactions in these accounts remains
unimpressive. For instance, nearly half of the Basic Savings Bank Deposit accounts 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
are not seeing transactions. This not only restricts the potential benefits that could
accrue from increased financial access but also reduces the viability of FI activities
for  banks  and  BCs.  The  reduced  viability,  in  turn,  impacts  the  scalability  of  the 
model, thereby hampering FI efforts. 
Technology issues: While banks have innovated on technology, the same has not
resulted  in  significant  reduction  in  the  cost  of  providing  financial  services.
Beneficiaries/  stakeholders  often  complain  of  constraints  in  digital/  physical 
connectivity. This coupled with delays in issuance of smart cards, reliability issues in
hardware infrastructure such as hand held devices, etc. have impacted the quick roll
out of financial services across the country. It is, indeed, disheartening to note that 
India, despite being the software service provider to the world, is unable to develop
reliable  software  solutions  and  back  office  services  for  supporting  our  own  FI
activities. 
The  process  of  seeding  the  bank  accounts  with  Aadhaar  numbers  is  faced  with 
various  constraints  which  could  impact  the  roll  out  of  the  Government’s  DBT 
initiatives. 
At  last,  I  would  say  that  the  collective  will  power  of  the  society  and  of  all  the
concerned  stakeholders  is  lacking  and,  consequently,  the  mission  of  complete 
financial inclusion is yet to become a national ambition. 
   Conclusion 
The  task  of  financial  inclusion  in  a  country  like  ours  with  large  population  and
7.  
geographical  spread  is,  indeed,  challenging.  The  data  released  from  the  recent  census  of 
India  indicates  that  only  58.7%  of  households  in  India  avail  of  banking  services  with  the
figure  being  54.4%  for  rural  areas  and  67.8%  for  urban  areas.  While  there  is  greater
awareness  among  policy  makers  and  financial  sector  participants  about  the  importance  of 
prioritising the goal of universal financial access, there is a need to ensure that progress on
the ground is in line with these expectations. The opening of bank accounts is only the first
stage  and  the  focus  now  is  not  just  on  improving  access  but  also  on  better  use  of  the 
financial  infrastructure.  In  this  regard,  the  collaborative  approach  combining  financial
inclusion  with  financial  literacy,  along  with  closer  monitoring  of  progress  in  transactions,  is
expected to boost operations in FI accounts. 
8.  
Considering  the  enormity  of  the  task,  the  combined  will  power  of  the  society  is
required  to  ensure  success  in  this  challenging  objective.  All  stakeholders,  including  policy
makers,  regulators,  state  and  district  administration,  IT  solution  providers,  software  and 
hardware vendors, civic society, media and public at large have to come together and pool
their collective might if we have to ensure that the goal of meaningful financial inclusion and
leveraging financial access as a means for economic empowerment of the excluded masses, 
is successfully achieved. 
Thank you. 
  
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Annex: 
Progress in financial inclusion 
SR 
Particulars 
Year 
ended  
Mar 10 
Year 
ended  
Mar 11 
Year 
ended  
Mar 12 
Year 
ended 
March 13 
Progress 
April 10–
March 13 
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  
Banking Outlets – Rural 
Branches  
Banking Outlets – BCs  
Banking Outlets – Other 
Modes  
Banking Outlets –TOTAL  
Urban Locations covered 
through BCs  
BSBD Accounts (No. in lakh) 
OD facility availed in BSBD 
Accounts (No. in lakh)  
KCCs (No. in lakh)  
GCC (No. in lakh)  
8  
9  
10   BC-ICT Accounts (No. in 
lakh)  
ICT Accounts-BC-Total 
Transactions (No. in lakh)  
11  
 33378 
34174 
142 
67694 
447 
734.53 
1.83 
243.07 
13.87 
34811 
80802 
37471  
141136  
40845  
221341  
595 
116208 
3146  
181753  
8424  
270610  
7467 
187167 
8282 
202916 
3771 
1047.59 
5891  
1385.04  
27124  
1833.30  
26677 
1098.77 
6.06 
271.12 
16.99 
27.05  
302.35  
21.08  
39.42  
337.87  
36.29  
37.59 
82.43 
22.28 
132.65 
316.30 
573.01  
810.38  
677.73 
265.15 
841.64 
1410.93  
2546.51  
4799.08 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
