Thomas Jordan: Monetary policy and the business cycle 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  75th  anniversary  celebrations  of  the  KOF  Swiss  Economic  Institute, 
Zurich, 23 September 2013. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Monetary policy contributes to the prosperity of an economy by ensuring price stability in the 
medium and long term. This makes it possible to put resources to more efficient use, from an 
economic point of view, and also promotes investment and, with it, long-term growth. Price 
stability also helps to avoid undesirable distribution effects. Households with lower incomes 
derive particular benefit from this. 
Monetary policy can be used to dampen cyclical fluctuations. However, it is not suitable for 
short-term fine-tuning of the economy. From the point of view of the business cycle, the goal 
of monetary policy must rather be the reduction of larger risks and the alleviation of extreme 
situations. An example of one such measure is the minimum exchange rate, which the Swiss 
National Bank (SNB) set on 6 September 2011 to halt the Swiss franc's upward trend, thus 
averting a deflationary spiral and warding off the danger of a serious economic crisis. 
Monetary policy decisions are always subject to uncertainty. It is therefore of key importance 
that the SNB has a sound decision-making basis. To this end, it uses a variety of models and 
empirical  approaches,  and  also  conducts  its  own  surveys.  In  addition,  the  SNB  analyses 
economic indicators for Switzerland and abroad, and follows the assessments and forecasts 
of other institutions. 
KOF Swiss Economic Institute at the Swiss Federal Institute for Technology Zurich (ETH) is 
without  doubt  the  best-known  for  economic  analysis.  It  makes  a  significant  contribution 
towards  understanding  the  Swiss  economy  with  its  regular  data  surveys  (for  example,  the 
survey  of  companies  it  has  been  systematically  conducting  since  1955),  as  well  as  its 
economic forecasts and special analyses. In doing so, KOF fulfils an important role for the 
SNB's monetary policy and, ultimately, for the greater good of our country. 
For this reason, the SNB has been connected with the KOF Swiss Economic Institute since 
its beginning in the 1930s. Both institutions maintain a stimulating exchange of information 
and  ideas  to  this  day.  With  high-quality  economic  analysis  closely  linked  to  scientific 
research,  KOF  Swiss  Economic  Institute  will  continue  to  make  a  valuable  contribution  in 
future - to ensure an even better understanding of the Swiss economy. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
