Jens Weidmann: The euro – political project and prosperity promise 
Introductory statement by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
Rencontres Économiques d’Aix-en-Provence, Aix-en-Provence, 7 July 2013. 
 Introduction 
1 
Ms Boone, Mr Beytout, Mr Lahoud, Mr Papantoniou, Mr Reynders, Mr Védrine 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today. I am very happy to be back here in Aix-en-
Provence, a place which brings back so many fond memories. In a way, one could say that I 
have come full circle: 25 years ago, I came to Aix as a student eager to learn and discuss 
economics and Europe – and, of course, to enjoy student life in this beautiful Provençal city. 
Today, I intend to do the same. Unfortunately, this pertains only to the first part. 
The euro – political project and prosperity promise 
2 
Whenever the topic of conversation turns to economics and Europe, the euro normally takes 
centre stage – today more than ever. But it is worth remembering that the euro was also a 
political  project  from  the  very  outset.  Back  in  1949,  the  French  economist  Jacques  Rueff 
declared that money would pave the way for European integration: “L’Europe se fera par la 
monnaie ou ne se fera pas.” 
50 years later, Jacques Rueff’s vision took shape. But the integration brought about by the 
economic and monetary union was by construction an asymmetric one. Monetary policy was 
united.  But  fiscal  and  structural  policies  remained  matters  of  national  responsibility,  albeit 
subject  to  coordination  rules  that  sought  to  address  the  deficit  bias  inherent  in  this 
institutional setting. 
This was in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity as enshrined in the European Treaties. 
It  was  also  supposed  to  be  in  keeping  with  the  principle  of  liability,  as  spelled  out  in  the 
no-bail-out  clause,  which  sought  to  complement  the  coordination  rules by  fostering  market 
discipline  with  regard  to  fiscal  policy.  And  it  was  in  keeping  with  the  primacy  of  monetary 
stability by virtue of an independent European System of Central Banks and the prohibition of 
monetary financing. 
Together with the rules laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact, these precautions were 
designed to contain the tensions inherent in a framework that combines a single monetary 
policy with 17 national economic policies. 
Besides being designed to promote stability, the euro promised to foster prosperity as well. 
Hopes  were  high  that  the  euro  would  set  in  motion  a  process  of  real  convergence.  It  was 
expected  that governments  would  have  no  choice  but to  implement  structural reforms  and 
improve  their  supply  side,  since  stimulating  demand  would  no  longer  be  an  option.  Fiscal 
policy was supposed to be bound by the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact and by the 
disciplining effect of the financial markets; monetary policy, meanwhile, would no longer be 
available to national policymakers at all. 
We  now  know  that  things  did  not  quite  work  out  as  expected.  That  poses  a  fundamental 
question:  do  we  need  to  shift  economic  policies  to  the  European  level  to  make  monetary 
union viable? Or will it suffice to amend the existing framework? 
In my remarks, I wish to argue that both avenues can in principle lead to a stable framework. 
The changes required to amend the current framework are by no means trivial. But it is my 
impression that, at the current juncture, they might be more feasible than giving up national 
sovereignty in fiscal and economic matters. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
A stable framework for a prosperous monetary union 
3 
The  crisis  can  be  read  simultaneously  as  a  sovereign  debt  crisis,  a  balance  of  payments 
crisis and a financial crisis. But in my view, there is one basic economic principle which goes 
a long way towards explaining it: people respond to incentives. 
And  in  the  case  of  Europe,  implicit  guarantees  for  banks  and  sovereigns  caused 
shareholders,  investors,  governments  and  voters  to  ignore,  or  worry  less  about  risk. 
Underestimated contagion effects between countries exacerbated these effects. In the end, 
the balance between liability and control – which is essential for any market economy – had 
got out of kilter. 
This, for me, largely explains the unsustainable developments in the run-up to the crisis. And 
this is what needs to be changed for the euro area to regain its footing. 
In  terms  of  the  implicit  guarantee  given  for  sovereigns,  a  genuine  fiscal  union  would  be  a 
path towards establishing a framework which balances liability and control. In this scenario, 
control  and  intervention  rights  would  be  shifted  to  the  European  level.  If  this  prerequisite 
were  fulfilled,  a  greater  mutualisation  of  liabilities  would  become  feasible  –  and  may  be 
justified. 
But  it  seems  to  me  that  giving  up  national  sovereignty  in  fiscal  matters  does  not  enjoy  a 
majority in Europe at this juncture – neither among politicians nor among the general public 
in the member states. President Hollande’s recent response to the European Commission’s 
recommendations  for  reform  is  a  case  in  point:  “Elle  n’a  pas  à  nous  dicter  ce  que  nous 
devons faire.” 
And mutualising debt without mutualising control would exacerbate the tensions inherent in 
EMU’s framework rather than eliminate them. It therefore would not resolve Europe’s woes, 
but only make matters worse. It would not, in particular, preserve the currency union as a 
stability union. 
So  for  me,  the  only  feasible  way  forward  is  to  strengthen  the  framework  laid  down  in  the 
European Treaties. This implies stiffening the fiscal rules which were stretched and ignored 
too often in the past, with Germany being one of the culprits. 
The new Stability and Growth Pact is a step in the right direction. But the mere existence of 
these rules does not suffice. We need to actually apply them. Softening the rules would be a 
step backwards. The European Commission recently suggested taking public investment out 
of the deficit calculation. In my view, this only serves to make the procedure arbitrary and 
intransparent. 
In addition to stronger rules, we need to make sure that in a system of national control and 
national  responsibility,  sovereign  default  is  possible  without  bringing  down  the  financial 
system. Only then will we really do away with the implicit guarantee for sovereigns. 
To achieve this, we have to sever the excessively close links between banks and sovereigns. 
Currently, European banks hold too many of their own governments’ bonds. This is because 
banks  do  not  have  to  hold  any  capital  against  their  government  debt,  as  the  risk  weight 
assigned  to  sovereign  bonds  is  zero.  To  counteract  excessive  investment  in  sovereign 
bonds,  we  need  to  change  the  capital  rules  for  these  bonds  to  make  sure  they  are 
adequately  risk-weighted;  and  we  need  limits  for  banks’  exposures  to  sovereigns,  as  is 
already  the  case  for  private  creditors.  Only  then  will  banks  be  able  to  cope  with  the 
repercussions of sovereign default. 
Getting  to  grips  with  the  implicit  guarantee  for  sovereigns  would  be  a  big  step  towards 
eliminating  the  inherent  tensions  in  the  monetary  union’s  structure.  Removing  the  implicit 
guarantee for banks would be another one. 
To  make  that  happen,  we  have  to  ensure  the  resolvability  of  banks.  Defining  a  clear 
hierarchy of creditors is crucial. Shareholders and creditors will have to be first in line when it 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
comes  to  bearing  banks’  losses  –  instead  of  taxpayers.  And  to  further  strengthen  market 
discipline,  the  establishment  of  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  for  systemically  important 
banks  as  well  as  a  single  resolution  mechanism  will  be  an  important  step  forward.  In  this 
regard, a common resolution regime will have to ensure that banks without a viable business 
model can exit the market in an orderly fashion. 
Such a regime is crucial not only for financial stability, but for sustainable growth as well. A 
functioning  resolution  regime  strengthens  incentives  for  effective  credit  monitoring  and 
moderates  banks’  risk  appetites.  In  so  doing,  it  enhances  the  allocation  of  capital  and 
reduces the risk of a bubble emerging. 
Better still would be if banks didn’t reach the point of having to be wound down in the first 
place. In this regard, higher capital requirements are a big part of the solution – the single 
supervisory mechanism is another. 
The role of monetary policy 
4 
These are necessary steps that will put the euro area back on the path to prosperity. Finally, 
please allow me to make a few short remarks on the role of monetary policy during the crisis. 
Monetary policy has already done a lot to absorb the economic consequences of the crisis, 
but it cannot solve the crisis. This is the consensus of the Governing Council. The crisis has 
laid bare structural shortcomings. As such they require structural solutions. 
“Structural  reforms  may  hurt  a  few  vested  interests,  but  they  would  clearly  strengthen  the 
effectiveness,  competitiveness  and,  yes,  also  the  fairness  of  our  economies.”  Those  are 
Mario Draghi’s words, not mine. I agree, however. 
The best contribution a central bank can make to a lasting resolution of the crisis is to fulfil its 
mandate: that of maintaining price stability. And this is what Jacques Rueff actually meant 
when  he  made  that  famous  statement  in  1949.  As  David  Marsh  has  pointed  out,  it  was  a 
declaration  of  support  for  common  principles  of  monetary  stability  rather  than  an  early 
advocacy of a single currency. We should not jeopardise now what we have fought so long to 
achieve. 
Conclusion 
5 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
Monetary union has always been both a political project and a prosperity promise. To fully 
unleash the common currency’s potential, efforts are needed on two fronts: structural reforms 
as well as the abolition of implicit guarantees for banks and sovereigns. 
But I did not come here to preach; I came here to discuss, to listen, and to learn. So without 
further ado, I would like to hand over to our moderator, Nicolas Beytout.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
