Linah K Mohohlo: Developing and diversifying Botswana’s banking 
sector 
Keynote speech by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the official 
launch of Bank of India (Botswana) Limited, Gaborone, 9 August 2013. 
 I would like to thank the Managing Director of the Bank of India, Mr Mishra, together with the 
Board  and  Management  of  Bank  of  India  (Botswana)  Limited  for  inviting  me  to  launch  the 
opening of the bank’s subsidiary in Botswana.  
I  wish  to  recognise  the  presence  of  His  Excellency,  the  High  Commissioner  of  India  to 
Botswana,  Mr  Chandra,  and  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  Botswana  to  two  distinguished 
guests from India, the Chairperson and Managing Director of the bank, Mrs Viyalakshmi Iyer, 
and the Head of the bank’s International Division, Mr Narayanan. I can assure you that the 
Bank of Botswana, and significant others in the country, couldn’t be more grateful that you 
chose Botswana as the preferred destination for your business expansion.  
You are, therefore, warmly welcome to Botswana’s banking sector, which has come a long 
way  from  the  1950s  when  there  were  only  two  banks  in  the  country.  The  country  is  now 
home  to  13  licensed  banks  from  which  we  deservedly  expect  to  have  an  even  more 
diversified banking product range and improved service delivery.  
I  now  know  that  the  new  bank  is  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  Bank  of  India,  which  is 
headquartered  back  home  in  India.  The  parent  bank  was  incorporated  in  1906  in  Mumbai 
(India)  and  is  majority-owned  by  the  Government  of  India.  It  is  a  well-established 
international banking group with over 4 000 branches in India and 52 operations in 20 other 
countries. Botswana is now home to the 53rd overseas centre of the bank. The many years 
of accumulated experience of the parent bank puts the Botswana subsidiary at an advantage 
from which to leverage the managerial, operational and technical expertise. The subsidiary 
bank should also have at its disposal the technological infrastructure and financial resources 
of the parent bank.  
It,  therefore,  comes  as  no  surprise  that  the  Bank  of  India  (Botswana)  Limited,  intends  to 
provide  a  full  range  of  commercial  banking  services  that  will  cater  for  all  sectors  of  the 
economy, with particular focus on the Small, Medium and Micro Enterprises (SMMEs) and 
the mining sector. As we are all aware, SMMEs play a critical role in contributing to economic 
growth, employment generation and poverty reduction, especially in developing economies; 
Botswana is no exception. Indeed it is these small enterprises which ultimately grow into big 
businesses which, in Botswana’s case, would be a welcome development for the economic 
diversification drive.  
As  a  way  of  making  effective  inroads  into  the  competitive  business  environment,  the  new 
bank  is  advised  to  attract  and  employ  qualified  citizen  staff,  in  order  to  tap  into  their 
knowledge  of  the  local  market  and  business  contacts.  It  is  also  important  that  your  staff 
should be trained and exposed to relevant work processes on an ongoing basis.  
I can assure you that the fruits of investing in human capital will be as bountiful as they are 
elsewhere  in  the  competitive  parts  of  the  globe.  As  all  banks  in  Botswana  are  constantly 
reminded,  the  success  or  otherwise  of  any  institution  is  reflective  of  the  quality  of  its 
personnel.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  relative  competitiveness  of  the  parent  Bank  of  India  is 
testimony to the fact that India’s financial institutions have some of the most highly trained 
and competent experts, a large number of whom work at institutions of note internationally. 
Similarly, it is hoped that the enlightened competent, efficient and effective staff of the Bank 
of  India  in  Botswana,  including  the  local  Board,  will  be  given  the  space  to  exercise  and 
discharge their respective responsibilities in an appropriate manner. They should have the 
necessary  authority  to  make  independent  judgments  on  adjusting  business  strategies  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
operations in line with local market conditions and national aspirations. In other words, the 
local oversight responsibilities should not be undermined or weakened.  
While the parent bank has the overall responsibility for major strategic and policy decisions 
affecting  the  group,  it  is  crucial  that,  within  this  hierarchical  structure,  important  business 
decisions relating to the day-to-day operations of a subsidiary bank are made and tailored to 
the  needs  of  Botswana.  Routine  referrals  for  decision-making  to  the  regional  office  or 
headquarters can only undermine the subsidiary’s course. Unnecessary referrals could also 
have the potential to deny the bank the opportunity to make timely and proactive business 
decisions  that  could  grow  the  bank’s  operations  and  ensure  that  it  is  able  to  compete 
favourably in the local market.  
In this connection, you should be able to take advantage of the relocation of some functions 
of  the  Diamond  Trading  Centre  International  from  London  to  Gaborone,  in  the  fullness  of 
time, as this will generate downstream business activities associated with the beneficiation of 
rough diamonds. As indicated in your bank’s business agenda, it is Botswana’s expectation 
that  you  will  have  an  important  role  in  contributing  to  the  national  policy  on  economic 
diversification, by supporting the diamond and related business ventures.  
Honoured  Guests,  the  entry  of  another  bank  in  the  Botswana’s  financial  sector  can  only 
heighten expectations of better and cost effective service delivery as the sector responds to 
the needs of the economy. We are, however, aware that the realisation of this goal still faces 
some challenges.  
To  begin  with,  and  as eloquently  highlighted  by  His  Honour  the  Vice President  earlier  this 
week, there is public concern (some would say outcry) about bank charges that are out of 
sync with the quality of service. The insidious effect of these high charges is that they impede 
progress  towards  financial  inclusion;  they  also  discourage  saving  and  the  all-important 
activity of financial intermediation.  
This  is  against  the  backdrop  of  research  which  has  shown  that,  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa, 
27 percent of men and 22 percent of women have access to financial services; this includes 
bank accounts, credit and insurance. These very low financial inclusion ratios are less than 
half  of  those  of  developed  countries,  where  92  percent  of  men  and  87  percent  of  women 
have access to financial services. I trust that the entry of the Bank of India into the country’s 
banking sector will contribute positively to the country’s efforts to enhance access to financial 
services by all segments of the population.  
Please allow me to sing from the same hymn book with His Honour the Vice President again, 
when  he  expressed  the  expectation  that,  as  primary  operators  of  the  payments  system, 
banks  need  to  put  in  place  modern  banking  and  payments  technologies  to  enhance  the 
efficiency and timeliness of the clearing and settlement systems. The Bank of Botswana is 
confident  that  the  entry  of  the  Bank  of  India  (Botswana)  Limited  to  the  Botswana  clearing 
system, will provide the added impetus to the Cheque Imaging and Truncation project, the 
objective of which is, among others, to reduce the cheque clearance cycle. Time is of the 
essence in this respect.  
Furthermore,  distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  will  agree  that  it’s  about  time  the 
country  had  a  well-developed  and  functioning  interbank  market  which  would  provide  an 
enabling environment for funds of any quantum to flow between and among banks on the 
one hand, and their customers on other hand; and at the same time lending a hand to the 
monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
So far, the Bank of Botswana efforts of fostering the development of an efficient inter-bank 
market have not yet borne desirable fruit. These efforts are frustrated, in part, by the conduct 
of  some  major  banks  which  discriminate  against  other  licensed  commercial  banks  for  no 
apparent  sound  reasons.  This  unjustified  conduct  does  not  distinguish  between  inter-bank 
and other forms of lending activities. It is also anti-competitive and constitutes unwarranted 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
discriminatory practice. All banks in Botswana will know that time is not on our side in this 
respect too. The practice must be nipped in the bud.  
The  banking  sector  also  faces  the  challenge  of  imperfections  in  attracting  long-term  funds 
from institutional investors. There are cases where these market imperfections have resulted 
in financial deals for long-term deposit placements at great cost to some banking institutions, 
mainly because related contracts contain terms and conditions that are patently unfair and 
asymmetrical.  Invariably,  this  practice  unduly  raises  the  cost  of  banking  services  to 
customers in general. The Bank of Botswana expects to work with all interested parties, if 
need be, to rid the market of such near unethical business conduct.  
Not all is lost, however; it is encouraging that, in some quarters, discernible improvements 
are evident in containing the level of bank charges. There is also progress in the direction of 
diversification  of  banking  products  on  offer.  I  hasten  to  add  that  the  concern  about  the 
exorbitant charges should not be construed to mean that bank profitability is frowned upon. 
On the contrary; the Bank of Botswana and the country take pride in having a profitable, well 
capitalised and regulated banking sector which operates in a safe and sound environment, 
even in the face of the ravages of the global financial crisis and economic recession in some 
parts of the world. Indeed the sector can still be relatively profitable within the strictures of 
prudential  standards  on  safe  and  responsible  lending,  without  having  to  unnecessarily 
impose high charges for the services rendered.  
Honoured guests, you will recall that one of the major lessons from the recent global financial 
crisis  is  that  unsound  banking  systems  and  imprudent  credit  underwriting  standards  can 
undermine macroeconomic stability. It is very important, therefore, that we need to guard our 
own banking sector jealously and vigilantly so that it can continue to be healthy, sound and 
well run, and ultimately develop into one of the engines of sustainable economic growth and 
development for the country.  
Speaking  of  the  need  for  prudent  banking,  I  wish  to  stress  the  importance  of  banks 
continuing  to  play  a  proactive  role  in  preventing  opportunities  for  financial  fraud  and  other 
forms  of  crime  that  can  only  tarnish  the  integrity  and  reputation  of  the  country’s  financial 
sector. Among other initiatives, banks must ensure that their internal control environment is 
up  to  standard  and  effective;  for  example,  compliance  with  “Know-Your-Customer”  (KYC) 
requirements must be up to date. Indeed, Botswana banks have vested interest in ensuring 
effective compliance with both the spirit and principles of the global standards on anti-money 
laundering and the financing of terrorism.  
Director  of  Ceremonies,  distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  I  come  to  the  end  of  my 
remarks, I wish to reiterate my commendation of the Board, management and staff of Bank 
of India for bringing additional banking services and facilities to Botswana.  
I  invite  the  bank  and  its  personnel  to  settle  in  well  and  relatively  quickly,  and  make  your 
presence felt in the Botswana banking sector; in which case, it would not be unreasonable to 
expect expansion of the bank’s operations to other parts of the country sooner rather than 
later. Please rest assured of the Bank of Botswana’s support, at all times, in more ways than 
one, including through regulation and supervision. I know I am speaking to the converted as I 
remind you of the merits of maintaining cordial working relations with relevant organs of the 
banking sector, particularly the regulator. It does make life easier.  
Your  Excellency,  the  High  Commissioner  of  India  to  Botswana,  honoured  guests, 
distinguished ladies and gentlemen; this concludes my remarks. 
It  is  now  my  distinct  privilege  and  honour  to  declare  the  Bank  of  India’s  presence  in 
Botswana officially launched.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
