Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Economic transformation and inclusive growth in 
frontier economies 
Welcome  and  opening  remarks  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Thailand,  at  the  conference  on  “Economic  transformation  and  inclusive  growth  in  frontier 
economies”,  jointly  organized  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the  Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA), Bangkok, 28 January 2013. 
 Frontier  economies  are 
Ministers and Central Bank Governors, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
It gives  me  great  pleasure  and  honor to  welcome  each  and  every one  of you  to 
Thailand,  and  more  specifically,  to  the  Conference  on  “Economic  Transformation  and 
Inclusive  Growth  in  Frontier  Economies”.  This  event  is  the  second  in  a  series  of 
conference  jointly  organized  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the  Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA). 
The  topic  of the  conference  is  timely  and  relevant  to  current  developments 
2. 
in  the region.  Frontier  economies  are  new  and  becoming  large  markets.  They  all  have 
the  potential  to  grow  into  tomorrow’s  emerging  economies.  In  recent  years,  we  witness 
faster  economic  growth  in  frontier  economies  than  larger  emerging  economies. We  have 
seen frontier economies integrate into the regional and global economy. 
full  of  potential.  However,  continued  efforts  on 
3. 
strengthening  policy  frameworks  are  still  needed.  This  is  to  ensure  long  term 
economic  growth  and  sustain robust economy.  And  I believe  that  today’s  conference  will 
contribute  to these  efforts  as we  will share  and learn  the  appropriate lessons of  others. 
One  can  leap jump  the  process,  without repeating  the  mistakes.  Our  discussion  will 
revolve  around the  critical  decisions  on  policy considerations for economic development 
and the way forward. 
4. 
Sharing  lessons  about  economic  development  leads  naturally  into  a  discussion 
about the development  experiences of Thailand. Thailand’s rapid growth between the late 
1970s  and  1997  was  the  result  of  the  structural  transformation.  We  moved  from  primary 
production  to  industrial  production,  mostly  manufacturing  and  high-value  agricultural 
products.  The  combination  of  (1)  processed  agricultural  products, 
import 
substitution  industrialization,  and  (3)  export promotion was the principal feature of 
economic development. 
5. 
Moving up global production chains elevated Thailand’s per capita income of $100 
in  the  early  1960s  to  nearly  $3,000  after  1997.  More  importantly,  the  process  has 
resulted  in  the dramatic  fall  in  poverty  and  improved  the  living  conditions  of  the  Thai 
people.  The  rate  of poverty had been reduced from 57 per cent in early 1960s to around 
24  per cent  in  1981  and  to  8 percent  in  recent  years. Thailand’s  economic  development 
story  has  thus  attracted  broad  interest  from  policy  makers,  multilateral  agencies  and 
academics. 
6. 
As  in  most  transformed economies,  economic  transformation can  be  associated 
with rising income inequality and depletion of resources. In 1970s, the average household 
income in Bangkok  was  2.6  times  larger  than  the  rural  area,  then  in  1998,  increased  to 
3.4  times.  And, during  the  transformation  period, Thailand’s  forest  cover  rapidly  depleted 
by nearly  half.  Thus, we shouldn’t  discard  these  in our desire to achieve  sustainable  and 
equitable growth, since this can lead to the deterioration of social solidarity and ecology. 
(2) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
is 
7. 
Here,  it is  worth  noting  that the  three  prerequisites  for sustainable  and  equitable 
growth should  be  properly  addressed.  They  are  (1)  social  inclusion,  (2)  ecology  and, 
(3) the stability of  financial system. Any kind of  disruption in any  of  these fundamentals 
can jeopardize sustainable  and  equitable growth.  Thus, today, lessons  that will be  drawn 
from  the  development  experiences  of  Thailand  shall  be  focused  on  these  three 
fundamentals. 
8. 
Firstly,  with regard to social  inclusion, one obvious  consideration is how  to create 
opportunities  for  everyone  to  contribute  to  and  benefit from  economic  growth.  Therefore, 
we need  to take into account the principle of  equality of  opportunity when planning 
and implementing the process of economic development. 
To  follow  the  principle  of  equality  of  opportunity,  we  need  to  ensure 
9. 
unbiased governance  and  regulatory  environment  for  businesses  and  people.  This 
is  to  remove  or reduce arbitrary restrictions  and to  create  “competitive  neutrality”.  A level 
playing  field  is the first and foremost step for the prevention of income inequality. 
Although  a  fair  playing field is  important,  it  is,  in  itself,  not  enough to uphold 
10. 
the principle  of  equality  of  opportunity.  By  realizing  that  everyone  is  endowed  with 
different  capacity  as  well  as 
in  different  social  and  economic  contexts, 
supportive  policy  adapted for  each  social  group  is  needed.  For  instance,  as  in  the 
case  of  Thailand,  researches  indicate  that  broadening  financial  access  and  promoting 
financial  literacy  has  significantly  raised  the country’s  growth  rate. In this light, the  Bank 
of Thailand (BOT) has included financial access as our urgent aspect in the current BOT’s 
financial master plan. 
11. 
Secondly,  on  ecology,  we  heed  the  lesson  of  how  to  progress  while  ensuing  to 
environmental  sustainability.  After  the  rapid  development  stage  in  Thailand,  ecological 
problems have become more prevalent. Concerns have been raised over the sustainability 
of ecology and, more fundamentally, the socio-economic well-being of the people. 
12. 
Today,  effort  has  been  made  to  maintain  the  balance  between  the  ecology  and 
growth. For  instance,  environmental  protection  and  sustainable  development  have  been 
included as an integral part of Thailand’s National Development Plan since 1997. However, 
the goal of ensuing environmental sustainability cannot be easily established. And I hope 
that  today’s  conference  will  also  examine  the  environmental  sustainability  while 
focusing on growth and inclusiveness. 
13. 
Lastly,  on  the  stability  of financial  system,  the  lessons  that  can  be  appropriately 
derived  from  Thailand’s  experiences  are  on  external  imbalances  and  the  effects  on 
financial  institutions. The  1997  financial  crisis  was  originated  from  large  capital  inflows. 
Between  1992  and  1996, Thai  economy  had  attracted  massive  volumes  of capital  inflow 
of  more  than  355  billion  bahts from abroad.  At that  time,  the  volatile  international  capital 
flows  went  into  our  financial  system and  increased  the  system’s  vulnerability.  The  crisis 
then  erupted  when  there  was  a  sudden  and  large  capital  outflow,  which  during   
1997–1999  amounted  to  some  389  billion  bahts.  What followed  is the closing  down  of 
numerous financial institutions as well as the economic slump. 
In  hindsight,  we  have  learned  that  international  capital  flows  work  both 
14. 
ways.  On  one  hand,  they  support  long-term  income  growth  through  saving  and 
investment.  On  the  other hand,  they  increase  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system.  We 
must,  therefore,  keep  in  mind that foreign  capital  can be  the  “Achilles  Heel”  to  the 
financial  system.  In  this  regards,  high-frequency  monitoring  data  and  shock-absorptive 
policy framework are essential. 
We  have  been  improving  our  financial  system  from  the  lesson  of  the  1997 
15. 
crisis.  Legal  and  regulatory  reforms  have  been  made  to  ensure  the  stability  of financial 
system.  Today, we  may  say  that  our  effort  has  paid  off  as  our  financial  system  is  now 
resilient  and  in  a  good  position  to  support  growth.  This  is  especially  evident  during  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2008 financial crisis where the resiliencies of our financial system as well as the framework 
of our monetary  policy  were  put  to test.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no  fixed  formula  for  the 
success  among  policy  makers.  The  best policy mix is timely, contextual selection of 
market tools, and coordination across agencies. 
Ministers, Governors, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
16. 
I  expect  that  our  dialogue  today  will  contribute  to  the  traditional-and-beyond 
insight and information on how to achieve sustainable and equitable growth. This will help 
alleviate standard of living for the entire region. And I am convinced that today’s conference 
will play an important role  in  sharing  developments  in  the  frontier  economies  –  the  next 
wave  of emerging  economies which  will contribute  to the regional and global growth  and 
prosperity. 
17. 
Last  but  not  least,  I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  our  co-
hosts,  the International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the  Japan  International  Cooperation 
Agency  (JICA),  who  make  the  conference  possible.  I  wish  you  all  a  successful 
conference  and look forward  to your discussions. 
18. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
