Michael Gondwe: Enhancing access to financial services in Zambia 
Speech  by  Dr  Michael  Gondwe,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  launch  of  the 
Mpongwe  branch  of  the  National  Savings  and  Credit  Bank  Zambia  Limited  (NATSAVE), 
Mpongwe, 28 June 2013. 
 The Copperbelt Province Minister, Hon Mwenya Musenge, MP 
The Mpongwe Area Member of Parliament and Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Hon 
Gabriel Namulambe, MP; 
The Copperbelt Province Permanent Secretary, Mr Stanford Msichili; 
The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture, Dr Shamulenge; 
The Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture, Mr Siazongo Siakalenge; 
Your Royal Highnesses the Chiefs Present; 
The Mpongwe District Commissioner; 
The NATSAVE Chairman of the Board, Dr Chiselebwe Ngandwe; 
The NATSAVE Managing Director, Mr Cephas Chabu; 
Distinguished NATSAVE Customers; 
Management and Staff of NATSAVE; 
Colleagues from Bank of Zambia; 
Members of the Press; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It is my honour and privilege to officiate at this very important launch of the National Savings 
and  Credit  Bank  (NATSAVE),  Mpongwe  Branch.  Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  Board  of 
Directors and Management of NATSAVE for inviting me to this momentous occasion, which 
marks the official opening of the Mpongwe Branch which is the first ever bank branch in this 
economically  vibrant  district.  I  commend  the  Board  and  Management  of  NATSAVE  for  the 
effort  in  opening  this  branch  which  will  go  a  long  way  in  supporting  the  Bank  of  Zambia’s 
strategic objective of increasing financial inclusion. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  role  of  financial  services  in  economic 
development cannot be over-emphasized. It is generally accepted that financial services play 
an important role in improving income-generating opportunities and overall living conditions 
among  households.  Furthermore,  better  access  to  finance  not  only  increases  economic 
growth, but also helps to fight poverty and reduces income inequality between the rich and 
the poor in society. It is for this reason that the role that financial services play in an economy 
is sometimes compared to the significant role that blood plays in the human body. It should 
be stressed that no economy can function efficiently, if at all, without financial products and 
services. 
The opening of this branch by NATSAVE is therefore expected to spur economic growth and 
contribute  to  the  ease  of  access  to  financial  services  which  has  for  long  time  been  a 
hinderence to economic development in this district. We therefore, expect that the opening of 
this branch will unlock the vast economic potential of this district. 
Honourable Ministers, the Bank of Zambia attaches great importance to initiatives that seek 
to enhance the provision of financial services to the underserved sectors of the economy. To 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
this effect, the Bank has continued to implement the Financial Sector Development Plan. The 
Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  seeks  to  address  various  weaknesses  in  the  Zambian 
financial  system,  among  them  being  the  low  financial  intermediation  and  limited  access  to 
finance. 
In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  has  incorporated  financial  inclusion  as  part  of  its  current 
strategic  plan  in  which  it  has  undertaken  to  achieve  financial  inclusion  to  50%  of  the 
population of the land by 2015 from the current level of 37.3%. The rationale for this objective 
is that it responds to the need to bring the poor into the financial system and thereby avail 
them of the opportunities for financial access and growth. It is expected therefore that this 
branch  we  are  opening  today  will  play  its  part  in  enhancing  savings  mobilization  and 
effectively channeling the savings to support financing of economic activities. 
Honourable Ministers, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, the Bank of Zambia has for 
sometime  now,  been  discussing  with  commercial  banks  and  financial  institutions  such  as 
NATSAVE on the need to seek ways and means of introducing branches and agencies in 
districts  which  do  not  have  any  bank  branches  or  agencies  such  as  Mpongwe,  Masaiti, 
Lufwanyama to name but a few. 
I am pleased to inform you that, in November 2012, the Bank of Zambia sent a mission to 
Mpongwe and Masaiti to gather information which could assist in developing a business case 
for financial institutions to establish branches and support economic activities  in these two 
districts.  The  report  we  obtained  from  the  mission  provided  overwhelming  evidence  of  a 
viable  business  case  for  not  only  one  bank  branch  but  several,  to  open  up  in  these  two 
districts, especially in Mpongwe district. 
For instance, the mission observed that in Mpongwe, in the 2011 farming season, the Food 
Reserve  Agency  (FRA)  paid  out  a  total  of  K52  billion  (Kr  52  million)  to  small-scale  maize 
farmers while an additional K7 billion (Kr 7 million) was paid to commercial farmers. Coupled 
with this, total sales from maize alone exceeded about K80 billion (K80 million) if total sales 
to agents other than the FRA was included. It was further observed that the district produces 
more maize than the other nine districts on the Copperbelt put together. 
In  addition,  it  was  noted  that the  payments made  to  the farmers  were growing  steadily  as 
evidenced by the increase from K19 billion (Kr19 million) in 2010 to K58 billion (Kr 58 million) 
in 2011 while members of the Farmers Union had accessed about K2.4 billion (Kr2.4 million) 
in loans from banks outside the district for the 2010/2011 farming season alone. 
Furthermore, 
that  2,700  residents  of  Mpongwe,  comprising 
Government/Civil  Service  employees  and  registered  farmers  use  the  financial  services 
located either in Kitwe, Ndola or Luanshya. It must be noted that this number did not include 
other persons in the productive sector such as private businesses. 
Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  report  further  observed  that  a  total 
monthly  wage  bill  of  about  K2.8  billion  (Kr2.8  million)  was  paid  out  to  the  residents  of 
Mpongwe in 2011. These funds did not include grants and other sources of funding utilized 
by various Government organs and private individual and businesses. 
The  area  also  has  a  number  of  commercial  farmers  including  conglomerates  such  as 
Zambeef who are engaged in producing crops like wheat, soya beans, barley and maize in 
large scale and employ a large number of permanent and seasonal workers. The potential 
for  increased  investments  in  agriculture  and  agro-processing  industries  is  also  enormous. 
The  Government’s  focus  developing  the  country  through  infrastructure  development  will 
therefore lead to the realization of this potential in the near future. 
Mr Chairperson, the Bank of Zambia is pleased to see NATSAVE taking up the challenge 
and setting up this branch where other banks have failed. I am certain that this branch we 
are unveiling today will very soon become one of the most profitable branches in the entire 
NATSAVE network. 
the  Mission  reported 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Furthermore, it is heartening to note that NATSAVE is not stopping here but is earmarked to 
open  another  branch  in  Lufwanyama  district  on  July  26,  2013  to  increase  its  total  branch 
network to 32. I wish to assure the Board and the Managing Director of the Bank of Zambia’s 
utmost support as you expand your outreach to the areas which need financial services the 
most. I also wish to encourage other players in the banking sector to emulate NATSAVE and 
set up branches in other unbanked districts throughout the Country. 
Distinguished  Guests,  an  important  element  for  effective  financial  service  provision  is  to 
complement branch expansion with increased product innovation. The ability to offer different 
types of products to suit the local needs of Mpongwe district will go a long way in enhancing 
access to financial services in this area. The Bank of Zambia is determined to facilitate viable 
branch  expansion,  and  the  introduction  of  new  and  innovative  financial  products,  to  tap 
savings and channel these savings to investment. The Bank will therefore continue to work in 
close collaboration with the financial sector to cultivate partnerships in order to establish the 
frameworks  and  pursue  policies  that  will  drive  financial  innovation,  build  strong  financial 
institutions and partnerships to ensure a stable financial sector in the country. 
As I conclude, let me once again again commend the Board and Management of NATSAVE 
for this enviable initiative of spreading the branch network throughout the country and having 
presence  in  economically  viable  areas  such  as  Mpongwe.  I  wish  to  assure  you  that  the 
opening of this branch will soon result in increased investment, creation of jobs and a growth 
in profits for the bank. 
Honourable  Ministers,  Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentleman,  it  is  now  my 
singular  honour  and  pleasure  to  declare  the  National  Savings  and  Credit  Bank,  Mpongwe 
branch, officially opened. 
I THANK YOU 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
