Mark Carney: Rebuilding trust in global banking 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  to  the  7th  Annual  Thomas  d’Aquino  Lecture  on  Leadership, 
Lawrence  National  Centre  for  Policy  and  Management,  Richard  Ivey  School  of  Business, 
Western University, London, Ontario, 25 February 2013. 
 Introduction 
Six years ago, the collapse of the global financial system triggered the worst global recession 
since the Great Depression. 
Losing savings, jobs, and houses has been devastating for many. Something else was lost – 
trust in major banking systems. This deepened the cost of the crisis and is restraining the 
pace of the recovery. 
The real economy relies on the financial system. And the financial system depends on trust. 
Indeed,  trust  is  imbedded  in  the  language  of  finance.  The  word  credit  is  derived  from  the 
Latin, credere, which means “to have trust in.” Too few banks outside of Canada can claim 
credit today. 
Bonds  of  trust  between  banks  and  their  depositors,  clients,  investors  and  regulators  have 
been  shaken  by the mismanagement  of  banks  and,  on  occasion,  the  malfeasance  of their 
employees. 
Over  the  past  year,  the  questions  of  competence  have  been  supplanted  by  questions  of 
conduct. Several major foreign banks and their employees have been charged with criminal 
activity,  including  the  manipulation  of  financial  benchmarks,  such  as  LIBOR,  money 
laundering,  unlawful  foreclosure  and  the  unauthorized  use  of  client  funds.  These  abuses 
have raised fundamental doubts about the core values of financial institutions. 
In my remarks today, I will discuss the breakdown of trust and what is required to rebuild it. 
The G-20’s comprehensive financial reforms will go a long way but will not be sufficient. 
Virtue cannot be regulated. Even the strongest supervision cannot guarantee good conduct. 
Essential will be the re-discovery of core values, and ultimately this is a question of individual 
responsibility. More than mastering options pricing, company valuation or accounting, living 
the  right  values  will  be  the  most  important  challenge  for  the  more  than  one-third  of  Ivey 
students who go into finance every year. 
Trust is strained at multiple levels 
Between banks and their shareholders: Most major banks outside Canada are now trading 
well  below  their  book  value,  indicating  shareholder  concerns  about  a  combination  of  the 
quality of bank assets and the value of their franchises (Chart 1). 
Between banks and their debt-holders: Bank credit ratings have been downgraded, and even 
the revised ratings reflect continued reliance on sovereign backstops (Chart 2). 
Between banks and their supervisors: For too many institutions, concerns over competence, 
conduct and, ultimately, culture have fed supervisory concerns and built the political case for 
structural measures, such as ring fencing, or prohibiting certain activities, such as proprietary 
trading. 
Between supervisors in advanced economies: Fearful that support from parent banks cannot 
be  counted  upon  in  times  of  global  stress,  some  supervisors  are  moving  to  ensure  that 
subsidiaries in their jurisdictions are resilient on a stand-alone basis. Measures to ring fence 
the  capital  and  liquidity  of  local  entities  are  being  proposed.  Left  unchecked,  these  trends 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
could substantially decrease the efficiency of the global financial system. In addition, a more 
balkanized  system  that  concentrates  risk  within  national  borders  would  reduce  systemic 
resilience globally. 
Between  emerging  and  advanced  economies:  Given  that  the  crisis  originated  in  the 
advanced economies, the incentives for emerging and developing economies to ring fence 
their financial systems are particularly pronounced. This has been, at times, supplemented 
by more active management of capital inflows, further fragmenting the global system. 
Finally,  and  most  fundamentally,  there  has  been  a  significant  loss  of  trust  by  the  general 
public  in  the  financial  system.  There  is  a  growing  suspicion  of  the  benefits  of  financial 
deregulation  and  cross-border  financial  liberalisation,  a  suspicion  that  could  ultimately 
undermine support for free trade and open markets more generally.1 
The costs are potentially enormous 
A  global  system  that  is  nationally  fragmented  will  lead  to  less  efficient  intermediation  of 
savings and a deep misallocation of capital. It could reverse the process of global economic 
integration  that  has  supported  growth  and  widespread  poverty  reduction  over  the  last  two 
decades. 
Within economies, the hesitancy of firms to invest reflects in part low confidence that their 
banks will be there to provide credit through the cycle. 
Reduced trust in the financial system has increased the cost and lowered the availability of 
capital  for  non-financial  firms.  The  massive  response  of  central  banks  has  provided  some 
offset but access to credit remains strained. 
Consider  fractional  reserve  banking,  which  allows  banks  to  transform  savings  into 
investments, driving growth and wealth creation. At its core, such banking relies on the trust 
of depositors, bonds of trust that are so vital they have been reinforced by the state through 
deposit insurance and supervisory oversight. 
In  turn,  the  trust  between  financial  counterparties  multiplies  base  money  created  by  the 
central  bank  many  times,  creating  an  aggregate  credit  supply  that  finances  our  modern 
economy. 
When  trust  in  the  system  is  lost,  this  process  reverses.  Depositors  and  investors  become 
reluctant to provide funding to banks, banks to lend to other banks, and, in some of the most 
affected countries, both are sceptical of the ability of governments to backstop the system.2 
Since  the  crisis,  money  multipliers  have  plummeted  in  the  crisis  economies.  In  the  United 
States  and  European  Union,  the  ratio  of  M2/M0  fell  by  55  and  40  per  cent,  respectively, 
between  2006  and  2012.  While  some  of  the  decline  reflects  the  end  of  excess  and  the 
weakness  of  credit  demand  in  a  deleveraging  economy,  the  magnitude  of  the  decline 
indicates the extent to which trust has been shaken. In contrast, in Canada, where trust in 
the system has, if anything, increased, the ratio has risen by 22 per cent (Chart 3). 
Rebuilding trust: the Five Cs 
So  what  to  do?  A  combination  of  institutional  and  individual  initiatives  –  the “Five  Cs”  –  is 
required. 
                                                
1   See also “The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report: The Final Report of the National Commission on the Causes of 
the Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States,” Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, January 2011. 
2   This skepticism is in part related to the fiscal and sovereign debt situations in some of the affected countries. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  G-20’s  comprehensive  financial  reforms  will  go  a  long  way  to  rebuild  trust.  The  good 
news is that there has been progress, even if it is not yet fully reflected in market valuations 
or public attitudes. 
Capital 
Many people remember the pivotal moment when Lehman Brothers collapsed, but that was 
only  one  example  of  a  widespread  failure  of  banking  models  across  the  advanced 
economies. 
That same year, major banks in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, France, 
Ireland, Switzerland, the Netherlands and Belgium either failed or were rescued by the state. 
Gallingly, on the eve of their collapse, every bank boasted of capital levels well in excess of 
the standards of the time. 
So  it  should  be  no  surprise  when  building  a  more  resilient  system, the first  priority  was  to 
strengthen the bank capital regime. Through higher minimums, surcharges for systemically 
important banks, countercyclical buffers and tougher definitions of capital, the largest banks 
will have to hold at least seven times as much capital as before the crisis. 
As a backstop to the risk-based capital framework, a simple, but effective leverage ratio has 
been imported from Canada. It protects the system from risks we might think are low but in 
fact are not. 
Since the end of 2007, major banks in the United States and Europe have increased their 
common equity capital by $575 billion and their common equity capital ratios by 25 per cent. 
Canadian  banks  are  setting  the  pace.  Since  withstanding  the  financial  crisis,  they  have 
become considerably stronger. Their common equity capital has increased by 77 per cent, or 
$72 billion, and they already meet the new Basel III capital requirements six full years ahead 
of schedule. 
Clarity 
Greater clarity, the second “C,” is critical to well-functioning capital markets. 
In the run-up to the crisis, financial institutions became increasingly opaque. Their balance 
sheets were stuffed with mark-to-model assets, massive undisclosed contingent exposures, 
and debt classified as regulatory capital. Annual reports ran over 400 pages in some cases, 
leaving investors exhausted but no better informed. 
In the past few years, there have been some improvements, including better accounting for 
off-balance-sheet securitisations, and enhanced disclosures of credit risk and the transfers of 
financial assets. 
Encouraged  by  the  G-20,  U.S.  and  international  accounting  standard-setters  have  made 
progress toward a single set of high-quality reporting standards, particularly in the areas of 
revenue recognition and asset valuation. 
But  more  is  required.  The  two  boards  have  not  yet  been  able  to  agree  on  a  common 
approach for asset impairment based on expected, rather than incurred, losses. The G-20 
has now called on them to redouble their efforts. 
One of the most important initiatives to improve clarity is the work of a private sector group, 
the  Enhanced  Disclosure  Task  Force  (EDTF), which  was  formed  at  the  encouragement of 
the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB).3  It  has  made  a  series  of  recommendations  to  improve 
annual financial reporting by banks based on seven principles. Disclosures should be clear, 
                                                
3   “Enhancing  the  Risk  Disclosures  of  Banks,”  Report  of  the  Enhanced  Disclosure  Task  Force  (29  October 
2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
comprehensive, relevant, consistent, comparable, and timely. Finally, annual reports should 
explain how risk is actually managed. 
Once  adopted,  enhanced  disclosure  will  contribute  to  effective  market  discipline,  better 
access to funding, and, importantly, improved market confidence in banks. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  joins  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  in 
encouraging  major  Canadian  banks  to  implement  the  EDTF  standards  as  soon  as  is 
possible. 
Better  disclosure  of  a  bank’s  current  financial  condition  can  be  usefully  supplemented  by 
regular  assessments  of  the  impact  of  stress  on  it.  Stress  tests  can  expose  excessive 
mismatches in maturities and currencies, find evidence of undue forbearance in lending and 
reveal excess or correlated asset concentrations. In the current environment, the FSB has 
emphasised particularly the value of stressing against sharp movements in yield curves. 
Capitalism 
Perhaps the most fatal blow to public trust has been the perception of a heads-I-win-tails-
you-lose finance. Bankers made enormous sums in the run-up to the crisis and were often 
well compensated after it hit. In turn, taxpayers picked up the tab for their failures. Thus, at 
the heart of financial reform must be measures that restore capitalism to the capitalists. 
To that end, the FSB is enhancing the role of the market. The measures to improve clarity 
will enhance market discipline. 
The  development  of  effective  resolution  tools  will  also  help  diminish  the  moral  hazard 
associated  with  “too  big  to  fail.”  The  FSB  has  identified  those  banks  that  are  systemically 
important at the global level and developed a range of measures that, once implemented, will 
help to ensure that any financial institution can be resolved without severe disruption to the 
financial system and without exposing the taxpayer to the risk of loss. 
The knowledge that this could happen should enhance market discipline of private creditors 
who previously enjoyed a free ride at the expense of taxpayers. 
While  solid  progress  has  been  made  it  is  not  yet  mission  accomplished.  In  the  coming 
months,  jurisdictions  need  to  articulate  comprehensive  plans  to  resolve  each  systemic 
institution.  These  should  include  effective  cross-border  agreements  for  handling  a  failure 
and, a minimum amount of bail-inable liabilities and the publication of a presumptive path for 
resolution. 
To take stock, the FSB will report to the G-20 leaders at the St. Petersburg Summit on the 
extent to which “too big to fail” has been ended and, if not, what further steps are required. 
Connecting with clients 
Financial capitalism is not an end in itself, but a means to promote investment, innovation, 
growth  and  prosperity.  Banking  is  fundamentally  about  intermediation  –  connecting 
borrowers and savers in the real economy. Yet, too many in finance saw it as the apex of 
economic activity. 
In the run-up to the crisis, banking became more about banks connecting with other banks. 
Clients were replaced by counterparties, and banking was increasingly transactional rather 
than relational. 
These attitudes developed over  years as new  markets and instruments were created. The 
initial  motivation  was  to  meet  the  credit  and  hedging  needs  of  clients  in  support  of  their 
business  activities.  However,  over  time,  many  of  these  innovations  morphed  into  ways  to 
amplify bets on financial outcomes. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
An important example of a useful, but eventually misused, innovation is securitisation, which 
initially provided funding diversification for banks while spreading risk among investors with 
different load-bearing capacities. 
However, in the run-up to the crisis, highly complex chains developed, linking low-risk money 
market funds with high-risk subprime mortgages via off-balance-sheet structured investment 
vehicles  (SIVs).  Banks  sold  mortgages  into  the  SIVs  and  many  of  the  SIVs  in  turn  wrote 
credit  insurance  contracts,  often  to  the  very  banks  that  sponsored  them,  to  “insure”  the 
bank’s proprietary credit positions. 
These  links  with  banks  were  simultaneously  too  weak  and  too  strong.  The  shift  of  credit 
exposure from originating bank to the SIV eroded underwriting and monitoring standards. 
In  addition,  the  transfer  of  risk  itself  was  frequently  incomplete,  with  banks  retaining  large 
quantities  of  supposedly  risk-free  senior  tranches  of  structured  products.  Moreover,  the 
insurance provided by the SIV was only as good as the quality of the mortgages bought by 
the  bank.  These  dynamics  were  at  the  heart  of  the  Canadian  non-bank  asset-backed 
commercial paper fiasco. 
Similarly,  the  rapid  expansion  of  banks  into  over-the-counter  derivatives  was  initially 
motivated by the desire to provide hedges to their clients as end-users. These transactions 
eventually  morphed  into  a  mountain  of  intra-financial  system  claims,  largely  divorced  from 
end-users, with banks and other financial entities trading among themselves. 
The magnitude of these developments was remarkable. In the final years of the boom, the 
scale of shadow-banking activity exploded. The value of structured investment vehicles, for 
example, almost tripled in the three years to 2007. Credit default swaps grew sixfold over the 
same period. 
As  intra-financial  sector  claims  grew,  banks  became  increasingly  detached  from  their 
ultimate clients in the real economy. In most professions, people see the ‘real’ impact of their 
work:  teachers  witness  the  growth  of  their  students,  farmers  that  of  their  crops.  When 
bankers become disconnected from their ultimate clients in the real economy, they have no 
direct  view  of  the  impact  of  their  work.  The  LIBOR-setter  sees  only  the  numbers  on  the 
screen as a game to be won, ignoring the consequences of his or her actions on mortgage-
holders or corporate borrowers. 
Fortunately,  there  are  some  signs  that  global  banks  are  returning  to  their  roots.  Complex 
securitisation chains have dissolved. Mechanistic reliance on credit ratings is declining. With 
higher capital requirements on trading activities (and the prospect of structural restrictions), 
traditional lending is looking more attractive. These shifts will promote diverse private sector 
judgments,  reduce  cliff  effects  and  build  resilience,  and  possibly  over  time,  a  measure  of 
trust. 
But there arguably has not yet been a full recognition of the need for banks to return to what 
Ed  Clark  calls  “old  fashioned  banking  –  activities  that  help  grow  their  country  and 
communities.”4 To do this, some banks may need to reconsider their values. 
Core values 
The fifth “C” – core values – is the responsibility of the financial sector and its leaders. Their 
behaviour  during  the  crisis  demonstrated  that  many  were  not  being  guided  by  sound  core 
values. 
Many in the wake of the crisis looked first to how compensation affects behaviour. Indeed, an 
important  lesson  was  that  compensation  schemes  that  delivered  large  bonuses  for  short-
                                                
4   E. Clark, “Building a Better Banking System for America” (speech to Chief Executives’ Club of Boston, Boston 
College, Boston, MA, 26 April 2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
term returns encouraged individuals to take on too much long-term and tail risk. In short, the 
present was overvalued and the future heavily discounted. 
To better align incentives with long-term interests of the firm and, more broadly, society, the 
FSB developed Principles and Standards for Sound Compensation Practices. Core elements 
include deferred variable performance payments, paying bonuses in stock rather than cash, 
and introducing bonus clawbacks. 
Of course, no compensation package can fully align the incentives of a bank’s shareholders 
and  its  risk-takers.  Even  if  such  a  package  could  be  devised  it  would  not  internalise  the 
impact of individual actions on systemic risks, including on trust in the banking system. 
More fundamentally, to think that compensation arrangements can ensure virtue is to miss 
the  point  entirely.  Integrity  cannot  be  legislated,  and  it  certainly  cannot  be  bought.  It  must 
come from within. 
Purely  financial  compensation  ignores  the  non-pecuniary  rewards  to  employment,  such  as 
the satisfaction received from helping a client or colleague succeed. When bankers become 
detached from end-users, their only reward is money, which is generally insufficient to guide 
socially useful behaviour.5  
Few  regulators  and  virtually  no  bankers  saw  these  limitations.  Beliefs  in  efficient,  self-
equilibrating markets fed a reliance on market incentives that entered the realm of faith.6 As 
Michael Sandel has observed, we moved from a market economy towards a market society.7 
This  reductionist  view  of  the  human  condition  is  a  poor  foundation  for  ethical  financial 
institutions needed to support long-term prosperity. 
To help rebuild that foundation, bankers, like all of us, need to avoid compartmentalisation or 
what the former Chair of HSBC, Stephen Green, calls “the besetting sin of human beings.”8 
When we compartmentalise, we divide our life into different realms, each with its own set of 
rules. Home is distinct from work; ethics from law. 
In  the  extreme,  as  Ed  Clark  observed,  “Bank  leaders  created  cultures  around  a  simple 
principle: if it’s legal and others are doing it, we should do it too if it makes money. It didn’t 
matter if it was the right thing to do for the customer, community or country.”9  
To  restore  trust  in  banks  and  in  the  broader  financial  system,  global  financial  institutions 
need  to  rediscover  their  values.  This  was  the  conclusion  of  research  conducted  here  at 
Western.10  
For  companies,  this  responsibility  begins  with  their  boards  and  senior  management.  They 
need  to  define  clearly  the  purpose  of  their  organisations  and  promote  a  culture  of  ethical 
business throughout them. 
                                                
5   R. Rajan, “When Money Is the Measure of All Worth,” in Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the 
World Economy (Princeton,N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2010). 
6   T.  Padoa-Schioppa,  “Markets  and  Government  Before,  During,  and  After  the  2007-20XX  Crisis,”  (Per 
Jacobsson Lecture, 27 June 2010, Basel, Switzerland). 
7   Michael J. Sandel, What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 
2012). 
8   S. Green, Good Value: Reflections on Money, Morality and an Uncertain World (London: Allen Lane 2009). 
9   E. Clark (remarks delivered at the Bank of Canada Annual Economic Conference, “Financial Intermediation 
and Vulnerabilities,” Ottawa, 2 October 2012). 
10   J.  Gandz,  M.  Crossan,  G.  Seijts,  and  C.  Stephenson,  “Leadership  on  Trial:  A  Manifesto  for  Leadership 
Development,” Richard Ivey School of Business, 2010. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But  a  top-down  approach  is  insufficient.  Employees  need  a  sense  of  broader  purpose, 
grounded in strong connections to their clients and their communities. To move to a world 
that  once  again  values  the  future,  bankers  need  to  see  themselves  as  custodians  of  their 
institutions, improving them before passing them along to their successors. 
Conclusion 
It  has  been  said  that,  “trust  arrives  on  foot,  but  leaves  in  a  Ferrari.”11  After  the  Ferrari 
screeched out of the parking lot in 2008, what steps have been taken to rebuild trust? 
There has been progress. As the new Basel capital rules are implemented, and the reliance 
on  ratings  agencies  diminishes,  market  infrastructure  improves;  and  as  banks  –  and, 
crucially, their investors – develop a better appreciation of their prospects for risk and return, 
business models are beginning to change. 
Already, a couple of banks have fallen off the list of globally systemic banks because they 
have  simplified,  downsized  and  de-risked  their  business  models.  Other  institutions  are  de-
emphasizing high-profile but risky capital markets businesses that benefited employees more 
than shareholders and society. 
Global banks have made significant progress in reforming their compensation practices so 
that  rewards  more  closely  match  risk  profiles.  In  addition,  boards  of  directors  and  risk 
committees  are  taking  more  responsibility  to  ensure  that  remuneration  packages  and 
employee behaviour are aligned with updated institutional cultures.12  
Unfortunately, a spate of conduct scandals ranging from rigging LIBOR to money laundering 
has overshadowed these steady and material improvements. 
This underscores that it remains the collective responsibility of banks, regulators and other 
stakeholders to rebuild trust in banking. Banks need to participate actively in reform, not fight 
it. Until recently, too few bankers acknowledged their industry’s role in the fiasco. The time 
for remorse is far from over. 
At  the  same  time,  the  public  sector  needs  to  be  more  vocal  and  appreciative  when  the 
industry makes major contributions. This has been the case with the EDTF and in work on 
bail-in debt, a key element of ending “too big to fail.” In addition, the best global organisations 
are now recognising the need to address their corporate ethics. All of these efforts should be 
publicly encouraged and reinforced. 
Ultimately,  it  will  be  down  to  individual  bankers,  including  the  Ivey  grads  who  will  go  into 
finance. Which tradition will you uphold? Will your professional values be distinct from your 
personal ones? What will you leave those who come after you? 
 
                                                 
11   R. Sermon, “Investing in Integrity” (speech to the Trust and Integrity in the Global Economy Conference, Caux, 
Switzerland, 19 July 2012). 
12   See a summary of a recent FSB workshop with the financial industry on compensation practices, and the most 
recent FSB peer review of compensation practices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
