Deepali Pant Joshi: Consumer protection – agenda for inclusive growth 
Address by Dr Deepali Pant Joshi, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
National  Seminar  on  “Consumer  protection  –  agenda  for  inclusive  growth”,  New  Delhi, 
24 July 2013. 
 Thanks  to  Smt.  Sonali  Sengupta,  General  Manager  for  presenting  the  speech  at  ASSOCHAM,  New  Delhi. 
Assistance rendered by Mr. Bipin Nair, Assistant General Manager, Smt. Mruga Paranjape, Manager is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
I  congratulate  Assocham  on  the  timely  initiative  of  hosting  this  event  and  bringing  to  the 
centre  stage  of  debate  very  critical  issues  as  customer  Empowerment  and  Financial 
Inclusion. 
The  “post  crisis”  world  is  governed  by  a  new  paradigm  of  customer  empowerment.  The 
financial crisis has highlighted the importance of financial consumer protection for the long-
term stability of the global financial system. Rapid increase in the use of financial services 
brings  into  sharp  salience  the  need  for  strengthened  financial  regulation  and  consumer 
education to protect and empower consumers. 
Consumer  empowerment  is  a  central  goal.  Education  of  consumers  through  information 
disclosure or through consumer literacy is utilized as a means to even out asymmetries of 
bargaining  power  between  consumers  and  financial  services  providers.  In  the  area  of 
consumer  credit  and  financial  literacy,  investment  empowerment  relies  on  the  consumers’ 
ability to understand complex financial products and their knowledge and experience of using 
such products and services. 
All financial products contain risks and also offer rewards. Financially literate consumers are 
individuals  who  are  equipped  to  assess  risks  and  to  make  informed  decisions  about  the 
suitability of financial products to their situation. 
There  are  differences  between  individual  consumers.  This  granularity  arises  due  to  the 
differences  in  incomes  of  consumers.  The  largest  issue  to  be  tackled  is  an  asymmetry  of 
bargaining power between the financial services provider and the consumer of services. The 
consumers  are  always  the  weaker  parties  in  need  of  protection.  Consumers  need  to  be 
enabled  to  navigate  the  financial  markets  to  make  choices  beneficial  to  their  needs.  They 
should be able to understand complex financial products and should be equipped with the 
knowledge  and  skills  to  assess  risks  and  make  informed  decisions  about  the  suitability  of 
financial products to their situation. 
A  well-functioning  consumer  protection  regime  provides  effective  safeguards  for  retail 
financial services consumers while empowering consumers to exercise their legal rights and 
fulfil their legal obligations. 
The Banking Ombudsman Scheme provides clear consumer protection rules with regard to 
banking  products  and  services.  The  necessary  institutional  arrangement  for  grievance 
redress is in place. However, these rules need objective, timely and fair implementation. All 
these three aspects are important. 
BCSBI  has  also  developed  codes  of  conduct  and  these  codes  are  widely  publicized  and 
expected to be adhered to. 
Dispute  resolution  mechanisms  to  be  effectively  utilized  require  financial  literacy  of 
consumers  and  this  is  the  process  of  consumer  empowerment  which  alone  can  ensure 
financial inclusion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Financial inclusion and inclusive growth  
Financial  exclusion  is  a  barrier to  attaining  a  high  growth  rate  it  should be  the  unremitting 
endeavour  to  draw  the  excluded  into  the  pale  of  mainstream  financial  institutions  A 
developed financial system broadens access to funds and banking facilities conversely in an 
underdeveloped  financial  system  high  cost  informal  sources  as  moneylenders  proliferate. 
Lower the availability of funds and higher their cost fewer are the economic activities that can 
be financed and hence lower the resulting economic growth. Today we are painfully aware 
that there  are  a  vast  number  of  unreached  people  excluded  from formal  financial  services 
Potential entrepreneurs small enterprises fail to grow and prosper due to capital constraints. 
Financial deepening is thus a necessary for economic growth as Dr Manmohan Singh has 
explained.  The  goal  of  the  development  process  is  to  include  every  last  member  of  our 
society  especially  those  at  the  margins.  This  not  only  broadens  the  support  base  for 
development it also strengthens the ability to perform the core developmental goal. 
Extent of financial exclusion in India  
Let us be clear as to the enormity of the challenge half of the country is unbanked Thirty four 
years after bank nationalisation and extensive bank branch building 6 lakh villages in India, 
rural branches of SCBs including RRBs number 33,495. 
Post nationalization, number of bank branches of scheduled commercial banks increased 
Starting with 1990s the focus shifted to strengthening financial institutions as part of financial 
sector reforms. Number of rural branches actually came down in the decade of the nineties 
leading in the middle of the next decade to critical concerns on inclusion. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
  Financial Inclusion and inclusive growth  
Inclusive growth allows people to “contribute to and benefit from economic growth”. 
Bank led model  
Keeping  in  view  the  existing  infrastructure  of  bank  branches  in  India,  we  have  adopted  a 
bank-led model for financial inclusion which leverages technology for optimisation of results. 
The FI initiatives are ICT enabled and ride on new delivery models be customised by market 
participants to best suit their requirements. The development of the habit of banking would 
lead to an increase in savings and investment improve the efficiency of allocation of capital 
and increase the ability of monetary authorities to stabilise the economy in times of crisis. 
Our  experience  shows  that  the  goal  of  financial  inclusion  is  better  served  through 
mainstream  banking  institutions  as  only  they  have  the  ability  to  offer  the  suite  of  products 
required  to  bring  in  effective/meaningful  financial  inclusion.  A  well-functioning  financial 
system  creates  necessary  conditions  for  more  rapid  economic  growth  so  that  there  is  a 
positive correlation between economic growth and the financial system. 
Minimum bouquet of products and services  
To  meet  the  criterion  of  availability  of  banking  services,  a  minimum  of four  basic  products 
must be offered to customers: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
A savings cum overdraft account 
A pure savings account, ideally a recurring or variable recurring deposit 
A remittance product to facilitate EBT and other remittances, and 
Entrepreneurial  credit  products  like  a  General  Purpose  Credit  Card(  GCC)  or  a 
Kisan Credit Card (KCC) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Since size of population and the distribution foot print of bank branches are not enough to 
cater each and every person in the country; to increase number of bank branches through 
FIP following initiatives were taken: 
 Relaxed regulatory requirements  
i. 
Relaxed  regulatory  dispensation  on  KYC  norms:  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC) 
requirements  for  opening  bank  accounts  have  been  relaxed  and  simplified, 
especially  for  small  accounts  with  balances  not  exceeding  Rs.  50,000/–  and 
aggregate credits in the accounts not exceeding Rs. one lakh a year. In modification 
to the earlier guidelines on KYC norms, RBI has now advised banks not to insist on 
introduction for opening bank accounts of customers. In addition to this RBI has now 
allowed banks to use Aadhaar Card as a proof of both identity and address and the 
MNREGA Job Card as an officially valid document for opening of bank accounts. 
Mandatory requirement for opening branches in unbanked villages: To further 
step up the opening of branches in rural areas so as to improve banking penetration 
and  financial  inclusion  rapidly,  the  need  for  opening  of  more  brick  and  mortar 
branches, besides the use of BCs, was felt. Accordingly, domestic SCBs have been 
mandated in the Monetary Policy Statement – April 2011 to allocate at least 25 per 
cent of the total number of branches to be opened during a year in unbanked rural 
(Tier 5 and Tier 6) centres. There are few studies on the impact of bank branches 
and  development.  In  2003  Burgess  and  Pande  examined  the  branch  expansion 
policy  of  commercial  banks  implemented  post  nationalisation.  From  1990  to  1997 
the  RBI  branch  authorisation  policies  specified  that  banks  could  establish  a  new 
bank branch in a location with one or more bank branches only if they set up four 
branches  in  a  location  with  no  new  bank  branches  This  regulatory  prescription 
ensured  that  banks  opened  rural  branches  in  states  where  financial  development 
was  lower  to  address  the  regional  inequities  in  development.  Their  results  to 
evaluate the impact of a new rural branch on poverty suggested that a one percent 
increase in the number of banks in rural locations reduced rural poverty by 0.36% 
per cent and increased total output by 0.55% per cent Rural branch expansion also 
increased  non  primary  sector  output  and  non-agricultural  employment.  These 
favourable  effects  show  the  positive  influence  of  bank  branches  on  economic 
ii. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
development  Banks  to  the  1990s  disbursed  a  greater  share  of  credit  to  the  less 
developed states this trend reversed after the 1990s. 
In the Annual Policy Statement for 2013–14, banks have been advised to consider 
frontloading (prioritizing) the opening of branches in unbanked rural centres over a 
three  year  cycle  co-terminus  with  their  FIPs.  This  is  expected  to  facilitate  faster 
branch expansion in unbanked rural centres. 
“Step into a bank step out of poverty is our central message” 
 Business  correspondent/  Business  facilitator  model.  In  January  2006,  the 
Reserve  Bank  permitted  banks  to  utilise  the  services  of  non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs), micro-finance institutions (other than Non-Banking Financial 
Companies)  and  other  civil  society  organisations  as  intermediaries  in  providing 
financial and banking services through the use of business facilitator and business 
correspondent (BC) models. The BC model allows banks to do “cash in – cash out” 
transactions at a location much closer to the rural population, thus addressing the 
last  mile  problem.  As  on  March  31  2013,  banks  have  reported  deploying 
1,95,380 BCs which covered 2,21,341 villages. 
Introducing technology. To ensure sustainability and scalability of business model, 
technology was adopted. It leads to higher costs at initial stage however; it brings 
better opportunities and optimization of result. The UID is also good instrument of 
connecting to all the people once it gets effectively operational. 
The direct benefit transfer scheme and the Adhar number are going to be very 
significant in the years to come the RBI has accepted Adhaar as a proof of identity 
and as fulfilling KYC requirements 1st of January, 2013. Nearly 11 lakh beneficiaries 
have received the benefit directly into their bank accounts.  
Financial inclusion plans of banks for 3 years  
RBI  in  January  2010  had  advised  all  public  and  private  sector  banks  to  submit  a  Board 
approved three-year Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP) starting April 2010. Banks were advised 
to devise FIPs congruent with their business strategy and comparative advantage to make it 
an  integral  part  of  their  corporate  plans.  These  plans  broadly  included  self-set  targets  in 
respect of rural brick and mortar branches opened, BCs employed, coverage of unbanked 
villages with population above 2000 as also other unbanked villages with population below 
2000  through  branches/BCs/other  modes,  no-frills  accounts  opened  including  through  
BC–ICT,  Kisan  Credit  Cards  (KCC)  and  General  Credit  Cards  (GCC)  issued,  and  other 
specific  products  designed  by  them  to  cater  to  the  financially  excluded  segments.  Banks 
were advised to integrate Board-approved FIPs with their business plans and to include the 
criteria on financial inclusion as a parameter in the performance evaluation of their staff. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
implementation  of  these  plans  was  closely  monitored  by  the  Reserve  Bank  on  a  monthly 
basis  through  a  quantitative  reporting  format.  Qualitative  aspect  under  FIP  was  monitored 
through a qualitative report submitted by banks on quarterly basis. 
A snapshot of the progress made by banks under the 3 year Financial Inclusion Plan 
(April 10 – March 13) for key parameters during the three year period is given below:  
 Challenges in financial inclusion 
• 
Business Model: The business models are yet to emerge hence upscaling is not 
taking  place.  Banks  need  to  evolve  Appropriate Business  Model  .Credit  linkage  is 
vital Electronical Benefit Transfers are useful but to be users of financial products 
the SCRIPT Savings Credit Remittance Insurance Pension and Transfers must be 
available both sides of the equation Access and Usage must be equally strong. 
BC  model  was  envisaged  as  cheaper  model  of  doorstep  delivery  as  opposed  to 
bank  branches  however  the  ease  and  comfort  of  transaction  for  the  customer  is 
higher at bank branch level. 
Limitations  and  Lack  of  infrastructure  for  scaling  up;  physical  and  technical 
infrastructure  roads  and  in  several  cases  digital  connectivity  also  hampers  the 
process  
The  biggest  challenge  remains  the  need  for  attitudinal  change  and  of  empathy 
with the customer the need for a Buy In and of passionate belief and commitment to 
the idea of financial inclusion. 
   New banks  
New  banks  are  expected  bring  sustainable  business  models,  bring  innovation  in  banking 
products and services and improve penetration of banking activities. We need new banks to 
bring  new  business  models  and  not  for  derivative  products  and  investment  banking.  At 
mezzanine  finance  level,  Banks  also  need  sensitivity  to  default  rates.  They  require  an 
estimation  of  extent  of  losses,  loss  given  default  our  message  is  that  Financial  Inclusion 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
should be viewed nether from the prophet or the profit motive but as a pragmatic business 
opportunity by the Banks. I would do well to sum up with Dr P Chidambarams enunciation 
Dr Chidambaram  stated  The  reforms  since  1991  have  changed  the  face  of  the  Indian 
economy India is slowly but surely being recognised. Economic reforms have led to a sharp 
decline in people below the poverty line sustainability of the reform process demands that all 
sections of society stand to gain from it only if the poorer sections of society also perceive a 
visible  change  in  quality  of  their  life  will  the  reform  process  continue  in  our  vibrant 
democracy. I thank you for a patient hearing and wish your deliberations all success. 
Annex 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
1. 
Progress in modes of FI delivery 
2. 
Progress in KCCs and GCCs 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3. 
Progress in number of accounts 
4. 
Progress in O/D facility availed 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
