Graeme Wheeler: The introduction of macro-prudential policy 
Speech by Mr Graeme Wheeler, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to Otago 
University, Dunedin, 20 August 2013. 
 New  Zealand’s  economy  is  now  one  of  the  most  rapidly  growing  among  the  advanced 
economies. Growth is likely to remain strong and become more broadly based over the next 
two  years,  particularly  as  construction  activity  in  Christchurch,  Auckland  and  elsewhere 
gathers momentum and provides further stimulus to the manufacturing sector. Our forecasts 
in the June 2013Monetary Policy Statement, which are currently being reviewed for the next 
Statement in September, suggested that in 12 months’ time the economy could be growing 
at just over a 3 percent annual rate, with the unemployment rate declining towards 5 percent 
and annual CPI inflation back within the 1 to 3 percent target range. 
These summary indicators, however, disguise the nature and complexity of the adjustments 
taking  place  in  New  Zealand.  Included  among  them  are  the  impact  of  the  monetary  and 
liquidity  policies  of  major  central  banks,  domestic  economic  policy  settings,  the  powerful 
long-term global structural changes affecting our economy, and the effects of natural events 
such as earthquakes and drought1. Just as firms and households develop strategies to adjust 
to these forces, the Reserve Bank also needs to respond to them in meeting its goals of price 
stability and financial stability. I will turn to two of the largest forces influencing our economy 
– our over-valued exchange rate and the over-valued housing market.  
The over-valued exchange rate 
1. 
Our  exchange  rate  is  over-valued  relative  to  what  would  be  sustainable  long-term  in  the 
absence  of  sizeable  increases  in  our  terms  of trade  and  productivity.  Against  many  of the 
world’s major currencies, the New Zealand dollar is positioned in the top decile relative to its 
historic experience. At these levels, the exchange rate is a considerable headwind for New 
Zealand’s  exporters  and  those  that  compete  with  imports,  although  it  has  benefited 
purchasers of imported goods and services and contributed significantly to the current low 
level of inflation. 
Our real exchange rate is about 16 percent above its 15 year average2. It is important to look 
at  both  long-standing  structural  and  more  recent  cyclical  factors  when  considering  the 
reasons  for  New  Zealand’s  high  real  exchange  rate  –  although  at  any  time  the  relative 
strength of these factors can change. 
 
                                                
1   These were referred to in a recent address delivered to the Institute of Directors in Auckland on 30 May 2013: 
Forces  Affecting  the  New  Zealand  Economy  and  Policy  Challenges  Around  the  Exchange  Rate  and  the 
Housing Market. 
2   The  real  effective  exchange  rate  provides  a  more  accurate  picture  of  competitiveness  than  the  nominal 
effective  exchange  rate  as  it  corrects  for  differences  in  relative  inflation  rates  (or  relative  unit  labour  costs 
movements) between New Zealand and its major trading partners. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Figure 1: New Zealand’s real effective exchange rate 
Source: Bank for International Settlements. 
Note: BIS real effective exchange rate for New Zealand, narrow measure incorporating bilateral rates with 
27 economies.  
Some  of  the  appreciation  in  the  real  exchange  rate  over  the  past  decade  is  due  to  the 
improvement in our terms of trade (or the ratio of export prices to import prices), which are 
now 20 percent higher than the average for the 1990s. This reflects the rapid growth of the 
East  Asian  economies,  and  especially  China,  and  the  rising  global  demand  for  protein. 
Another  factor  exerting  upward  pressure  on  the  real  exchange  rate  is  New  Zealand’s  low 
level  of  savings  (relative  to  our  business  and  residential  investment  needs)  and  our 
consequent dependence on foreign savings to achieve these needs. Our low propensity to 
save means that higher interest rates than elsewhere are needed to achieve similar inflation 
outcomes and these higher real interest rates result in upward pressure on the real exchange 
rate. 
In  recent  years  some  important  cyclical  factors  have  also  been  important  drivers.  These 
factors  have  made  the  returns  on  New  Zealand  financial  assets  more  attractive  when 
compared  to  the  returns  available  in  many  advanced  countries  experiencing  lower  growth 
rates and adopting more stimulatory monetary policies. 
Monetary  policy  in  the  advanced  countries  has  been  highly  accommodating  with  countries 
representing  two  thirds  of  global  output  having  policy  interest  rates  between  zero  and 
1 percent3. In addition, the Federal Reserve, European Central Bank, Bank of England and 
the Bank of Japan have cumulatively conducted around USD 6 trillion of additional monetary 
stimulus through quantitative easing. These liquidity injections, often involving the purchase 
of  longer  maturity  government  securities,  have  been  designed  to  boost  domestic  asset 
prices, stimulate spending and, in some instances, depreciate the exchange rate. 
The  combination  of  historically  low  policy  rates  and  quantitative  easing  has  lowered  bond 
yields globally and the increased investor demand for riskier and higher yielding assets has 
compressed  spreads.  New  Zealand  government  bonds,  with  their  relatively  high  yields 
compared  to  other  advanced  economies,  remain  attractive  to  foreign  investors  who  own 
68 percent of government bonds on issue. 
                                                
3   These countries comprise the United States, Japan, UK, Canada, the 17 Euro zone countries, Sweden and 
Switzerland. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The magnitude of the policy challenges that led central banks in the US, Europe, and Japan 
to  have  policy  rates  at  or  close  to  the  lower  bound  of  zero,  and  to  resort  to  large  scale 
quantitative easing, are much greater than those facing New Zealand. 
For example, the US experienced a huge decline in household wealth. The Federal Reserve 
reports  that  median real  net  household  wealth  fell  39  percent from  2007  to  2010  to  levels 
seen in 1992. In 2011, the median real level of US household income dropped to its lowest 
level since 1995. Partly due to the Federal Reserve’s highly accommodating monetary policy 
that helped to stimulate employment and a recovery in the housing and equity markets, real 
levels of wealth have now returned to their 2007 level, although not for the median and lower 
income groups.  
Deleveraging in the euro area, especially in the financial sector, is proceeding more slowly 
than in the US and the euro area economy has just emerged from an 18 month recession. 
The unemployment rate for the euro area is around 12 percent, and 15 percent if Germany is 
excluded.  Several  countries  face  major  adjustments.  For  example,  unemployment  rates 
exceed 25 percent in Spain and Greece, Italy’s real per capita income is back at 1996 levels, 
and  annual  labour  productivity  growth  in  France  and  Italy  has  lagged  that  of  Germany  by 
1.5 and 2.1 percentage points respectively since 2000. 
Japan  has  suffered  bouts  of  stop/start  growth  and  deflation  for  the  past  two  decades.  Its 
general level of prices is now back at 1992 levels and general government net debt is around 
145  percent  of  GDP.  In  April  2013,  the  Bank  of  Japan  announced  its  intention  to  double 
Japan’s monetary base by the end of 2014 in an attempt to achieve an annual inflation goal 
of 2 percent. 
New Zealand is likely to continue to attract offshore portfolio flows, especially since the larger 
advanced  countries  are  unlikely  to  raise  short-term  policy  rates  for  a  considerable  time. 
Investors  also  seem  to  be  differentiating  more  between  Australia  and  New  Zealand. 
Australia’s exchange rate has fallen by 13 percent on a trade weighted basis since April 2013 
and market expectations are for a further easing in policy rates. This upward pressure on the 
cross rate is of concern, as Australia is the destination for around a third of New Zealand’s 
manufactured exports and these are more labour intensive than exports of commodities and 
dairy products. 
The over-valued housing market 
2. 
Housing plays a critical role in our economy. It represents almost three quarters of household 
assets and mortgage credit accounts for over half of banking system lending. Consequently, 
housing  is  a  major  source  of  value  and  of  risk  to  the  household  sector  and  the  banking 
system. 
The Reserve Bank focuses on the housing market for three main reasons. First, housing and 
the  construction  sector  can  be  a  source  of  inflationary  pressure  if  construction  costs  and 
rents  increase  and  the  “wealth  effects”  of  rising  house  prices  feed  through  into  additional 
spending or borrowing to finance consumer goods. Second, the possibility of a significant fall 
in house prices can have important implications for financial stability and on the ability and 
willingness of banks to lend to support a recovery. Finally, declining house prices can have 
significant impacts on output and employment, especially when the associated de-leveraging 
of household and corporate balance sheets continues for several years. 
At  present,  rising  construction  costs  are  not  a  major  concern  for  monetary  policy. 
Construction  costs  in  Christchurch  are  up  12  percent  over  the  past  year  and  they  have 
recently been rising in Auckland. Changes in relative prices are needed to attract additional 
workers  and  resources  into  the  construction  sector,  but  the  Reserve  Bank  will  continue 
assessing  the  risk  of  any  spill-over  of  these  prices  into  more  generalised  inflationary 
pressures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Our main concern is the rate at which house prices are increasing and the potential risks this 
poses  to  the  financial  system  and  the  broader  economy.  Rapidly  increasing  house  prices 
increase the likelihood and the potential impact of a significant fall in house prices at some 
point in the future. This is particularly the case in a market that is already widely considered 
to be over-valued. 
The Reserve Bank is not alone in expressing these concerns. Over the past several months 
the  IMF,  OECD,  and  the  three  major  international  rating  agencies  have  pointed  to  the 
economic and financial stability risks associated with New Zealand’s inflated housing market. 
In  April  this  year, the IMF  suggested that  New  Zealand  house  prices were  over-valued  by 
around 25 percent, and the OECD has expressed similar views4. 
Figure 2: House price to income across OECD countries 
(deviations from historical average) 
Source: OECD 
 House  prices  increased  by  16  percent  and  10  percent  respectively  in  Auckland  and 
Christchurch over the past year (three-month moving average to July 2013 over the same 
period  in  2012).  They  increased  by  4  percent  over  the  rest  of  New  Zealand  overall,  with 
considerable  variability  among  regions.  House  prices  are  high  by  international  standards 
when compared to household disposable income and rents. Household debt, at 145 percent 
of household income, is also high and, despite dipping during the recession, the percentage 
is  rising  again.  Furthermore,  the  growth  of  house  prices  is  occurring  after  only  a  small 
correction  following  the  house  price  boom  of  2003–2007  that  saw  New  Zealand’s  house 
prices increase more rapidly than in any other OECD country. 
                                                
4  
IMF, (2013),”New Zealand – Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultations”, April. OECD, (2013), “OECD 
Economic Outlook”, May. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 3: House price inflation by region 
 
Source: REINZ 
 current 
housing 
shortage 
suggests 
that  Auckland’s 
Rising house prices in Auckland and Christchurch are mainly a result of supply shortages, 
although  demand-side  pressures  are  also  a  factor  due  to  pent  up  demand,  the  lowest 
mortgage  rates  in  50  years,  and  aggressive  competition  among  banks  for  new  borrowers, 
including borrowers with low deposits. 
Auckland’s  Council 
is  
20,000–30,000 houses  with  13,000  houses  needing  to  be  built  each  year  to  meet  future 
demand.  Christchurch’s  shortfall  is  around  10,000  houses.  Strikingly,  for  a  city  with 
geographical boundaries equivalent in size to Greater London, and a population of 1.5 million 
(a sixth of Greater London), Auckland has only produced an average of 4300 new houses 
annually over the past three years. 
Initiatives  such  as  the  Auckland  Accord,  and  measures  to  increase  the  availability  of  land 
zoned for residential housing, and to raise productivity and lower costs in the building sector, 
are important for increasing housing supply. However, it is likely to take considerable time for 
the  supply/demand  imbalance  in  the  housing  market  to  correct  through  supply-side 
measures alone. In the absence of demand measures, house prices might continue to rise 
rapidly and pose an increasing risk to financial stability. 
The conventional mechanism to help restrain housing demand while working on the supply 
response would be to raise the Official Cash Rate (OCR), which would feed through directly 
into higher mortgage rates. However, while higher policy rates may well be needed next year 
as expanding domestic demand starts to generate overall inflation pressures, this is not the 
case  at  present.  Consumer  Price  Index  (CPI)  inflation  currently  remains  below  our  1  to 
3 percent  inflation  target.  Furthermore,  with  policy  rates  remaining  very  low  in  the  major 
economies, and falling in Australia, any OCR increases in the near term would risk causing 
the  New  Zealand  dollar  to  appreciate  sharply,  putting  further  pressure  on  New  Zealand’s 
export and import competing industries. 
In  the  current  situation,  where  escalating  house  prices  are  presenting  a  threat  to  financial 
stability but not yet to general inflation, macro-prudential policy offers the most appropriate 
response. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The role of macro-prudential policies 
3. 
One  of  the  major  insights  from  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC)  was  how  rapidly  macro 
instability  could  develop  even  though  an  economy  might  be  growing  close  to  its  potential, 
and be experiencing sound fiscal policy and price stability. Economic and financial risks can 
build up for several reasons, including over-investment in particular sectors such as housing, 
a  rapid  increase  in  leverage  in  the  banking  and  shadow  banking  sectors,  and  excessive 
household indebtedness. The output losses and increased human distress from the massive 
adjustments in the balance sheets of households, corporates, banks, and governments are 
still being felt in many countries five years after the initial impact of the GFC. 
The fallout from the GFC triggered a renewed interest in macro-prudential policy in several 
countries.  While  micro-prudential  policy  settings  (e.g.,  capital  ratios  and  risk  weights)  are 
fixed on a through-the-cycle basis, macro-prudential policy measures provide an overlay to 
mitigate  significant  but  transitory  risks  (such  as  credit  and  asset  price  cycles)  that  can 
endanger the economy and the financial system. 
In  May  2013,  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  the  Reserve  Bank  signed  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  outlining  the  purpose  of  macro-prudential  policy,  the  range  of  policy 
instruments,  and  governance  arrangements  relating  to  their  possible  deployment.  The 
macro-prudential  policy  framework  seeks  to  build  additional  resilience  in  the  domestic 
financial system during periods of rapid credit growth, rising leverage, or abundant liquidity. 
The instruments can also help to dampen growth in asset prices that pose risks to financial 
stability. 
The macro-prudential  measures may  require  banks to  hold  additional  capital  buffers,  have 
higher  proportions  of  stable  funding,  or  limit  the  share  of  high  loan-to-value  ratio  (LVR) 
residential  lending.  Instruments  such  as  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer  and  sectoral 
capital  overlays  require  banks  to  hold  additional  capital  against  potential  shocks  in  asset 
markets  or  particular  sectors.  A  temporary  increase  in  the  core  funding  ratio  would  make 
banks more resilient to liquidity shocks and, like capital buffers, serve mainly to increase the 
resilience of bank balance sheets rather than have a significant dampening effect on asset 
cycles. 
LVR restrictions have the added benefit of dampening asset prices more directly, by affecting 
the  supply  and  cost  of  high  LVR  lending  as  well  as  reducing  the  riskiness  of  bank  loan 
portfolios. 
High LVR lending, as reflected in mortgage lending to borrowers with less than a 20 percent 
deposit, has constituted around 30 percent of new mortgage lending in recent months – up 
from 23 percent in late 2011. This high LVR lending is a significant factor behind the buoyant 
housing demand in some regions. 
Over  recent  months,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  consulting  with  the  banks  on the  use of 
macro-prudential  instruments  and  on  how  LVR  restrictions  could  be  implemented  in  New 
Zealand. Today we are announcing the introduction of speed limits on high LVR lending with 
an  implementation  date  of  1  October  2013.  These  are  designed  to  help  slow  the  rate  of 
housing-related  credit  growth  and  house  price  inflation,  thereby  reducing  the  risk  of  a 
substantial downward correction in house prices that would damage the financial sector and 
the broader economy. 
Under  the  LVR  “speed  limit”,  banks  will  be  required  to  restrict  new  residential  mortgage 
lending at LVRs of over 80 percent to no more than 10 percent of the dollar value of their 
new housing lending flows. However, some loans will not count towards the banks’ use of the 
speed limit. These include Housing New Zealand’s Welcome Home Loans, bridging loans, 
refinancing  of  existing  loans  and  high–LVR  loans  to  existing  borrowers  who  are  moving 
home but not increasing their loan amount. Allowing for these exemptions, we estimate that 
the  10  percent  speed  limit  will  effectively  limit  the  banks’  high-LVR  lending  flows  to  about 
15 percent of their new residential lending. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Banks  commonly  issue  mortgage  borrowers  with  pre-approvals,  which  represent  a  firm 
commitment to provide housing finance and may be valid for up to six months. Banks raised 
the  issue  of  these  pipeline  approvals  in  responding  to  the  Reserve  Bank’s  consultative 
document  so,  as  an  initial  transitory  step,  we  are  allowing  banks  to  meet  the  10  percent 
speed  limit  on  high  LVR  lending  measured  as  an  average  rate  over  a  six  month  period. 
Thereafter,  the  speed  limit for  banks  with  lending  in  excess  of  $100 million  per  month  will 
apply to the average rate over rolling three-month windows, as originally proposed. However, 
we  would  expect  the  banks  to  modify  their  approach  to  issuing  pre-approvals,  in  order  to 
ensure that they fall within the 10 percent “speed limit” on an ongoing basis. 
Banks  with  mortgage  lending  below  $100  million  per  month  will  be  required  to  meet  the 
speed limit on the basis of high-LVR lending rates over rolling six-month windows, to reflect 
the greater volatility seen in the high-LVR lending of the smaller banks. 
When  LVR  measures  have  been  introduced  overseas  they  often  represent  a  strict 
moratorium on high LVR lending5. The speed limits we have set will enable some growth in 
high LVR lending and should have the effect of slowing the rate of growth in house prices. 
In this way, LVR restrictions will support monetary policy. While the primary purpose of the 
restrictions is financial stability, they will also provide the Reserve Bank with more degrees of 
freedom in conducting monetary policy. In particular, they will provide the Bank with greater 
flexibility in considering the timing and magnitude of any future increases in the OCR. This 
flexibility around the need for interest rate adjustments is especially useful in light of the over-
valued  New  Zealand  dollar  and  the  international  monetary  conditions  currently  facing  New 
Zealand. 
Like any other form of regulation, speed limits on high LVR lending will create incentives for 
lenders  to  introduce  lending  products  designed  to  circumvent  the  regulation.  We  are 
concerned  to  ensure  that  specially  designed  lending  products  are  not  developed  with  the 
purpose  of  avoiding  or  undermining  the  LVR  restrictions.  This  is  why  our  framework  for 
implementation will state that banks should not enter into any arrangements to avoid the LVR 
restrictions,  and  we  are  providing  guidance  as  to  the  types  of  measures  that  the  Reserve 
Bank would be concerned about if used to circumvent the LVR restrictions. 
The Reserve Bank expects bank senior management and bank boards to respect the spirit 
and intent of the LVR restrictions and to closely monitor the level of high LVR lending. 
An important issue is how long LVR restrictions might be imposed. This largely depends on 
the  effectiveness  of  the  measures  in  restraining  the  growth  in  housing  lending  and  house 
price inflation. The measures will be removed if there is evidence of a better balance in the 
housing market and we are confident that their removal would not lead to a resurgence of 
housing credit and demand. We will monitor closely the impact of the restrictions, and report 
on that in our Financial Stability Reports. If the measures are not considered to be effective 
(and cannot be made effective through altering the details of the policy) they will be removed, 
but in this case their removal might necessitate higher interest rates than otherwise, or the 
imposition of alternative macro-prudential requirements. 
Concluding comments 
The  outlook  for  the  New  Zealand  economy  over  the  next  two  years  is  for  GDP  growth  to 
increase  and  the  recovery  to  become  more  broadly  based.  Investment  in  Canterbury 
reconstruction  is  not  expected  to  peak  until  2015  and  2016.  By  this  time  the  residential 
                                                
5   For example, Israel currently limits loans to first home buyers to a maximum LVR of 75 percent with LVRs for 
refinancing and investors limited to 70 percent and 50 percent respectively. In Hong Kong, LVRs are capped 
at  70  percent  for  most  borrowers  with  even  tighter  restrictions  targeted  at  certain  parts  of  the  residential 
market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
building  programme  in  Auckland  should  be  well  advanced,  and  the  additional  supply  in 
Auckland and Christchurch should bring greater balance to the housing market. 
But  many  of  the  challenges  discussed  today  will  be  with  us  for  a  considerable  time, 
particularly  as  New  Zealand  is  likely  to  continue  to  be  one  of  the  most  rapidly  growing 
advanced economies over the next two years. The challenges we face with an over-valued 
exchange rate and over-valued housing market are not likely to dissipate quickly given the 
extent  of  the  supply/demand  imbalance  in  the  housing  market  and  the  likely  continued 
attractiveness of New Zealand assets to foreign investors. 
It  is  critical  that  priority  be  given  to  implementing  the  measures  needed  to  alleviate  the 
shortage of housing and land supply, which is the dominant cause of the increase in house 
prices in Auckland and Christchurch. 
But  the  LVR  restrictions  announced  today  have  a  useful  role  to  play  alongside  the  supply 
measures. Both can help reduce the risk of a house price boom ending in a severe housing 
downturn that causes substantial damage to the financial sector and the economy. 
Provided loan-to-value restrictions help to dampen house price inflation, they will also assist 
monetary  policy.  As  such,  they  increase  the  flexibility  available  to  the  Reserve  Bank  in 
determining the timing and magnitude of future adjustments to interest rates. This is not the 
primary reason for the policy, but could be valuable given the ongoing highly accommodating 
monetary conditions in international financial markets. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
