Norman T L Chan: Symposium on Financial Stability – opening remarks 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the HKMA Financial Stability Symposium, Hong Kong, 30 May 2013. 
 (ii) 
Good Morning Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
Welcome to the HKMA Financial Stability Symposium. The Symposium marks the 
20th Anniversary of the HKMA, which is a very young central banking institution comparing 
with its peers. It is very timely and appropriate for the HKMA to convene this Symposium on 
Financial Stability because Hong Kong, like many of our Asian neighbours, have learnt from 
our  own  bitter  experience  in  the  few  years  after  1997  just  how  painful  and  devastating 
financial crisis can become. So it is clearly our common wish to do what we can to reduce 
the risks of financial crisis recurring or at least mitigate the damage that it can cause to the 
financial system and the economy when it occurs. 
2. 
In  this  connection,  it  may  perhaps  be  useful  to  look  back  and  observe  how  the 
mainstream thinking on financial stability have changed or evolved since the time when the 
HKMA was set up in 1993. I would list a couple of key issues below: 
(i) 
there  was  the  belief  that  financial  crises  would  only  occur  in  the  developing 
economies  because  they  had  weak  financial  institutions  and  poor  regulatory 
regimes.  Advanced  economies  would  be  immune  as  they  had  mature  financial 
institutions and robust regulatory systems. We now know that this is not true: Since 
the eruption of the Global Financial Crisis in 2008 we have witnessed the fact that 
even the most advanced economies cannot be immune from financial instability. 
there  was  the  view  that  as  long  as  price  stability  was  attained,  financial  stability 
would not be a problem. We now know severe vulnerabilities in the financial system 
can build up even when inflation is stable and output volatility is low.  
while very few people would doubt the need to avoid financial crises, there was no 
consensus view, not until more recently, on who or which institution should be given 
the  mandate  to  maintain  financial  stability.  Given  what  we  have  experienced  after 
the Global Financial Crisis, the common view nowadays is that central banks should 
take a leading role in maintaining financial stability, given that central banks would, 
in  a  financial  crisis,  typically  act  as,  amongst  other  things,  the  lender  or  liquidity 
provider of the last resort. 
the  term  “macroprudential  policies”  was  little  known  not  long  ago  but  has  now 
become  the  buzzword  that  everybody  in  the  financial  and  regulatory  circles  talks 
about. However, even up to now, there is no clear consensus on what these policies 
mean,  what  are  the  instruments  and  how  effective  they  are,  and  who  should  be 
given the powers to decide when and how to deploy such instruments.  
I am very pleased that at today’s Symposium we have managed to gather a very 
3. 
distinguished group of speakers and participants. I am sure there will be very interesting and 
fruitful exchange of views and ideas on the major financial stability issues, including those 
that I have mentioned earlier. Once again, thank you all for being with us today. 
 
(iv) 
(iii) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
