Paul Tucker: Banking reform and macroprudential regulation – 
implications for banks’ capital structure and credit conditions 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Member of the Financial Policy Committee and 
Member  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  Board,  at  the  SUERF/Bank  of  Finland 
Conference, “Banking after regulatory reform – business as usual”, Helsinki, 13 June 2013. 
 Many thanks for input and conversations to Steve Cecchetti and Anil Kashyap and, at the Bank, James Benford. 
For secretarial support, to Sandra Bannister, Alexandra Ellis and Vicky Purkiss. 
Although  the  current  reform  programme  rightly  extends  to  the  capital  markets  –  over-the-
counter derivative markets, clearing houses and shadow banking for example – nevertheless 
banking is at its core. So today I am going to draw out some of the implications for the credit 
system  –  starting  with  the  micro  regulatory  regime  and  banks’  capital  structure;  and  then 
moving  on  to  the  introduction  of  new  macroprudential  policies  and  their  effect  on  credit 
conditions. 
Micro regulatory reform and banks’ capital structure 
At  a  micro-level,  the  banking  reforms  have  two  important  components.  A  step  change  in 
regulatory requirements on capital, leverage and liquidity, in order to reduce the probability of 
banks failing. And recognising that failure cannot and should not be ruled out, establishing 
credible  and  effective  resolution  regimes.  Separately  and  in  combination,  they  will  change 
how  the  risks  in  banks’  portfolios  are  distributed  across  shareholders,  bondholders, 
depositors and, perhaps most important, taxpayers.  
Resolution regimes: rolling back the implicit subsidy from the state 
The most fundamental effects prospectively flow from making orderly resolution credible for 
the largest and most complex firms. Funding costs for any banks where bailout was STILL 
confidently  expected  would  be  heavily  subsidised,  as  in  the  past.  Where  there  was 
uncertainty,  there  would  tend  to  be  somewhat  subsidised funding  combined  with  a  bias  to 
shorter-term financing which could run at signs of trouble. But such “regimes”, if they merit 
that  description,  are  unsustainable.  Policy  is  clear:  taxpayers  should  not  provide  solvency 
support to banks. Instead, losses exceeding a bank’s equity base should fall on bondholders 
and  other  uninsured  creditors,  in  line  with  the  creditor  hierarchy  that  would  apply  in 
bankruptcy.1 
Other things being equal, exposing the holders of bank bonds to risk will tend to increase the 
overall cost of finance for banks during normal times compared with the past. Earning a fixed 
return  but  exposed  to  downside  risk,  investors  in,  especially,  longer-term  debt  will  be  a 
source of market discipline. That is likely to incentivise banks to be better capitalised than in 
the past – through some combination of less levered balance sheets and less risky business 
activities. For society at large, the counterpart is that, with a lower probability of failure and 
credible plans in place to resolve banks without recourse to public funds, government bond 
yields should be lower than otherwise and the public finances more resilient. 
                                                 
1  For an outline of the keys steps necessary to further the progress already made by the international regulatory community 
on resolution since the crisis, see Tucker (2013), “Resolution and the future of finance”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Re-regulation of the capital structure  
What  about  the  effect  of  the  reforms  to  the  regulatory-capital  regime?  They  affect  the 
distribution of risk between the holders of bank equity and the holders of bank debt of various 
kinds. 
When  fully  implemented,  and  taking  into  account  equity  surcharges  of  up  to  2.5pp  for 
systemically important institutions, Basel 3 increases equity capital requirements by almost 
an order of magnitude.2 That means that, in future, banks will be able to absorb bigger losses 
while remaining a going concern. In other words, more of the risk in bank portfolios is being 
pushed  onto  shareholders,  leaving  less  with  the  creditors.  But  perhaps  less  clear  is  the 
impact on banks’ overall funding costs.  
Will there be any effect at all? Over 50 years ago, Modigliani and Miller famously showed3 
that, under certain restrictive conditions, a firm’s overall cost of funds does not depend on 
how  it  is  financed.  Equity  is  more  expensive  than  debt  finance,  because  it  absorbs  losses 
first. Increasing the proportion of a firm’s balance sheet funded by equity increases the share 
of  that  higher-cost  form  of  financing.  But  it  reduces  the  risk  to  debt-holders,  causing  debt-
financing costs to fall; and the cost of each additional unit of equity also falls as the balance 
sheet becomes less levered. The Modigliani-Miller proposition is that the two effects offset 
exactly, leaving the overall cost of finance unchanged. The argument is simple: so long as 
the  returns  on  a  firm’s  portfolio  of  assets  –  ie  its  business  –  do  not  vary  as  its  financing 
structure changes, the total cost of its funding is invariant to how those returns and risks are 
divided up between shareholders and debt-holders. 
If that were true, there would be no cost to banks, or to the real economy, from ever higher 
equity requirements. Nor – and this point is rarely made – would there be an objection to the 
opposite: ever higher leverage in ever more thinly capitalised banks. In reality, a number of 
features of the real world break the Modigliani-Miller result.  
As  for  all  firms,  interest  paid  by  banks  on  debt  is  deductible  from  corporation  tax,  which 
reduces  the  cost  of  debt  relative  to  equity.  Other  things  being  equal,  the  average  cost  of 
funding  can  therefore  be  reduced  by  issuing  debt.  That  cost  advantage  should  be  largely 
passed on to customers.4 
In addition, banks are special in that they fund themselves with retail deposits, which provide 
monetary services: the nature of banks’ liabilities are central to their business, not just how 
their  business  is  financed.  Many  of  those  deposits  are  protected  by  guarantee  schemes. 
Interest rates on transactions deposits are, therefore, not especially sensitive to the risks a 
bank is running, making it cheaper for banks to fund themselves via this particular form of 
debt finance. Unlike a normal firm, part of the value of a bank does depend upon its capital 
structure. 
There is also a deeper point here about the wider benefits to the economy of the maturity-
transformation services delivered by banks financing their longer-term loans with monetary 
                                                 
2  Basel 2 in effect required a minimum equity capital ratio of 2 percent. But under Basel 3 there is a greater focus on the 
equity that is truly free to absorb losses. As such, almost all regulatory deductions from capital are to be made from equity 
rather than being split across tier 1 and so-called tier 2 “capital” or made from total “capital”. Also, some risk-weights are 
increased; for example, on counterparty credit risk exposures. Together those changes mean that an old Basel 2 core tier 1 
minimum risk-weighted asset ratio of 2% is equivalent to around 1% on a Basel 3 basis. Taking into account the capital 
conservation  buffer  and  the  surcharge  for  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  for  the  largest  banks  the  Basel  3 
equity minimum comes to around 10% (plus any Pillar 2 buffers). 
3  For  the  original  paper,  see  Modigliani  and  Miller  (1958),  “The  Cost  of  Capital,  Corporate  Finance  and  the  Theory  of 
Investment”,  American  Economic  Review,  48,  261–97.  Later  papers  by  the  same  authors  addressed  the  implications  for 
their result of tax, bankruptcy costs etc. 
4  This assumes a bank’s post-tax return on equity is determined, given the riskiness of the bank’s business, in competitive 
global  capital  markets,  with  excess  returns  competed  away.  That  implies  that  a  fall  in  tax  burden  due  to  higher  debt 
financing is passed onto banks’ customers. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
liabilities. Under fractional-reserve banking, combining the provision of both demand deposits 
and  committed  lines  of  credit,  banks  offer  liquidity  insurance  to  their  customers.5  That 
enables households and firms to economise on stocks of liquid savings, releasing more of 
the economy’s savings to the risky projects that help drive growth over the long term. There 
are social benefits from deposit-financing of banks.  
But not everything about banks points towards more leverage, or towards taking on leverage 
via  regular  debt  rather  than  monetary  deposits.  Most  obviously,  Modigliani-Miller  assumes 
that there is no difference between, on the one hand, shareholders bearing losses through 
lower dividend payments and, on the other hand, a firm’s creditors bearing losses through 
the bankruptcy proceedings that follow default or insolvency. This is manifestly not true for 
banks. 
First, as a bank approaches the point of failure, short-term funds will tend to run, with the 
value of its assets reduced by forced sales to generate liquidity. Second, beyond the point of 
failure, there are substantial costs – and not only the fees of the administrators, which are 
common  to  the  bankruptcy  of  firms  of  all  kinds.  Crucially,  bankrupt  banks  find  it  harder  to 
collect their debts and to enforce contracts; counterparties will close out derivative and repo 
contracts if they can. The funds diverted to those counterparties reduce the amount available 
to others, intensifying the scramble to get to the front of the line. For non-financial firms, an 
automatic stay mitigates a disorderly destruction of value. But banks are in the business of 
circulating  funds  and  cannot  function  under  a  persistent  payment  freeze.  There  are  also 
wider  economic  costs.  Smaller  firms  without  easy  access  to  public  debt  markets  face 
switching costs if they have to establish new banking relationships. While they are searching 
for  new  credit,  they  are  likely  to  cut  spending,  adversely  affecting  the  economy.6  Failure 
therefore brings substantial costs, for both the failed bank’s creditors and wider society. The 
equity  owners  need  not  internalize  all  these  costs  so  debt  finance  should  carry  a  risk 
premium, incentivising equity to be preferred over debt, ie lower leverage.7 
Taken together, these various departures from Modigliani-Miller’s simple world mean that a 
bank’s overall funding costs do depend on its capital structure, but in a non-linear way. So 
long as a bank’s capital buffer is sufficient to make the perceived probability of bankruptcy 
remote,  the  bank  will  most  likely  want  to  economise  on  equity,  if  only  for  tax  reasons.  By 
contrast, if capital levels are too thin, bankruptcy will be a real possibility. Economising on 
equity capital is then likely to prove counter-productive as debt-holders, with an eye to the 
costs of resolution or liquidation, will demand ever higher rates of interest. 
Whether  it  is  liquidation  or  resolution  that  beckons  makes  a  difference,  as  resolution  can 
materially reduce both the private and social costs of bankruptcy. Relative to a world in which 
liquidation is a credible threat, having an effective resolution regime will tend to reduce the 
cost  of  bond  finance  and  so  increase  its  share  in  the  capital  structure.  But  as  explained 
earlier, it will tend to raise the cost of bonds and reduce their share in the capital structure 
relative to a state of affairs in which government bailouts are confidently expected. Effective 
                                                 
5  See  Kashyap,  Rajan  and  Stein  (2002),  “Banks  as  liquidity  providers:  an  explanation  for  the  coexistence  of  lending  and 
deposit-taking”, Journal of Finance, vol, 57(1), pp. 33–73.  
7 
6  See  Kashyap,  Lamont  and  Stein  (1994),  “Credit  Conditions  and  the  Cyclical  Behaviour  of  Inventories”,  The  Quarterly 
Journal  of  Economics,  Vol  109,  Issue  3  (Aug.  1994),  P565–592.  That  bank  failure  itself  has  wider  spillovers,  through 
impaired credit availability, is itself another departure from Modigliani-Miller, which assumes that all households and firms 
have symmetric access to credit markets. 
In addition, the management of the bank will find themselves out of a job. In contrast to the managers of failed firms in other 
sectors, they face regulatory hurdles to re-entering the industry. That provides a clear incentive to avoid a fragile capital 
structure. As widely discussed, that needs to be reinforced by remuneration packages that expose their wealth to downside 
risks. Agency issues internal to banks are not covered in my remarks today. For a discussion of those agency issues, see 
Tucker (2013), “Competition, the pressure for returns and stability”, a chapter in book edited by Dombret and Lucius (2013), 
Stability of the Financial System: Illusion or Feasible Concept? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
resolution regimes are, therefore, necessary to give bank investors and managers incentives 
to adopt a prudent capital structure.  
But  even  then  a  bank’s  private  choice  of  capital  structure  will  not  deliver  a  satisfactory 
outcome  for  society  as  a  whole  due  to  the  spillovers  and  negative  externalities  of  failure. 
Resolution  can  help  to  reduce  those  spillovers,  but  banks  must  be  required  to  have  an 
overall  capital  structure  that  makes  orderly  resolution  feasible.  I  shall  return  to  that  after 
bringing in another set of considerations. 
Costs of raising equity 
So far this discussion has essentially been what economists call an exercise in comparative 
statics: would you choose to finance a new bank mainly with debt or mainly with equity? I 
have  skated  over  what  happens  when  a  firm  thinks  about  changing  its  capital  structure. 
There are two issues. 
The  first  arises  from  asymmetric  information.  That  can  make  equity  issuance  expensive  if 
investors worry that a new issue signals that management believe the share price is too high, 
ie  the  assets  and  earnings  streams  are  worth  less  than  the  market  has  thought.  That  can 
occur even if a bank was not in jeopardy, just not as well capitalised as it should be. One way 
of  overcoming  this  is  for  the  prudential  regulator  to  make  a  firm  raise  the  required  equity 
capital once the deficit is identified. Another way might be for banks to issue so-called high-
trigger contingent capital instruments (CoCos), ie bonds that convert into equity if a bank’s 
capital ratio falls below a prescribed but reasonably high level. In steady state, for a bank 
with  a  minimum  equity  ratio  of  10%,  that  trigger  might  be,  say,  8%:  sufficiently  below  the 
required level for the insurance provided by these CoCos not to be prohibitively expensive, 
but sufficiently high that the bonds would convert to equity while the bank was still able to 
fund itself in the market.8  
The  second,  and  in  some  ways  bigger,  issue  relates  to  the  problem  of  a  debt-overhang.9 
Suppose, due to a marked deterioration in the macroeconomic environment, a bank’s equity 
base, even after the conversion of high-trigger CoCos, is revealed to be too thin to cover the 
risks in the business. Debt spreads rise and, in consequence, the value of bonds in issue 
falls. An injection of fresh equity would increase the value of the business, by reducing the 
probability of bankruptcy. But since bond-holders ultimately pay the bankruptcy costs, they 
and  other  creditors  would  be  the  main  beneficiaries  of  recapitalisation:  there  would  be  a 
transfer  of  resources  from  equity  holders  to  bond  holders.  Shareholders  in  a  poorly 
capitalised firm have an incentive, therefore, to keep their hands in their pockets and gamble 
that the economy, and with it their bank, improves.  
A  particular  problem  could  arise  if  losses  were  large  enough  to  exhaust  any  high-trigger 
CoCos,  leaving  the  bank  undercapitalised,  but  not  so  severe  that  solvency  was  in  the 
balance. By limping on and deleveraging, the bank’s supply of credit to the economy would 
be impaired. An option to force a recapitalisation in such circumstances might be CoCos with 
low  triggers.  But  the  bank  might  suffer  a  run,  becoming  unviable  and  requiring  resolution, 
before its measured capital ratio fell through the instruments’ trigger point. Any such bonds 
must, therefore, convert into equity and take “first loss” upon entry into resolution. That is, I 
think,  the  best  way  of  thinking  about  so-called  Point-Of-Non-Viability  (PONV)  instruments 
counted towards “total capital” in the current Bank Capital Accord.10 
                                                 
8  The capital ratio in the trigger would need to be based on the Basel 3 definitions applying at the end of the transition period.  
9  See Myers (1977), “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing”, Journal of Financial Economics, 5, 147–75. 
10  Total capital is in quotation marks here because this is not capital in the same sense as equity. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A Capital Accord for the future 
In  summary,  the  system  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  recapitalise  itself  as  the  probability  of 
failure  rises.  There  is,  therefore,  a  premium  on  getting  micro-prudential  rules  for  minimum 
capital broadly right rather than, as happened in the past, badly wrong. On the one hand, if 
the equity cushion proves to be too thin, the system might well fall over. On the other hand, if 
banks  are  forced  to  hold  too  much  equity,  there  is  a  risk  of  choking  off  the  truly  valuable 
liquidity services that deposit-taking banks provide to the economy. 
Looking ahead, this analysis points to the general shape of a richer regulatory Capital Accord 
for  the  future  –  one  that  distinguishes  more  carefully  between  the  different  phases  of  a 
bank’s life and death. 
Regulatory  intervention  is  plainly  required  to  set  a  minimum  level  of  equity  to  provide 
sufficient  going-concern  loss  absorbency.  That  is  the  core  purpose  of  the  existing  Basel  3 
Accord. But it is not enough. We also need to regulate for a minimum level of term bonded 
debt to provide gone-concern loss absorbency.11  
In effect, in return for the private cost saving due to the tax regime, the authorities would be 
mandating  term  bond  issuance  of  a  minimum  quantity  from  prescribed  parts  of  banking 
groups in order to make resolution feasible. Contrary to some of the academic literature, this 
gives value not to short-term debt on the basis that it can run and so acts as a disciplining 
mechanism, but rather to longer-term bonds. They can absorb losses, helping to recapitalise 
the  firm  in  resolution;  and  can  thus  be  a  source  of  market  discipline  through  price  and 
rationing.12  
That might be enough. I would expect, for example, that package to incentivise banks and 
their investors to issue and buy securities with conversion features that helped them through 
recovery  or  resurrection  without  the  intervention  of,  respectively,  the  regulators  or  the 
statutory resolution authority.  
Alternatively, a richer Accord might go further, mandating so-called high-trigger CoCos, so as 
to encode recovery measures into a bank’s capital structure. And it might even include low-
trigger instruments to aid resurrection when a bank had seriously impaired equity but was not 
on the brink of bankruptcy. Taken together, that would be a robust Accord for normal times 
(equity);  for  recovery  (high-trigger  CoCos);  for  resurrection  (low-trigger  CoCos,  or  PONV 
instruments); and for resolution (term bonded-debt issued from the top of the group).13  
Macroprudential regimes and the cost of finance 
Are reforms to resolution regimes and capital requirements – even a more complete Capital 
Accord along the lines I have sketched for almost the entire capital structure – sufficient to 
preserve  systemic  stability?  The  clear  answer  of  the  authorities  to  that  is  they  are  not 
sufficient,  which  is  revealed  by  our  creation  of  macroprudential  regimes.  That  is  for  two 
reasons.  
First,  any  realistic  regulatory  capital  regime,  however  rich,  will  sooner  or  later  be  found 
wanting  due  to  regulatory  arbitrage  or  an  economic  environment  that  is  more  risky  than 
anything contemplated when it was calibrated. The authorities need to be able to respond to 
                                                 
11 
I  have  argued  before  that  the  minimum  for  gone-concern  LAC  should  not  be  less  than  a  banks’  equity  requirement. 
Otherwise upon insolvency, it cannot be recapitalised back to the regulatory requirement. See page eight of Tucker (2013), 
“Resolution and Future of Finance.”  
12  See Admati and Hellwig (2013), “Does Bank Debt Discipline Bankers? An Academic Myth about Bank Indebtedness”. While 
Admati  and  Hellwig  point  out  the  deficiency  of  short-term  debt  as  a  source  of  market  discipline,  they  pay  insufficient 
attention to longer-term debt given its role in recapitalising banks under resolution. 
13  Or, more accurately, from whichever parts of the group were going to be resolved together as a unit under the preferred 
resolution strategy. See forthcoming Guidance from the Financial Stability Board.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the  system’s  evolving  structure,  or  temporarily  tighten  capital  requirements  while  the 
especially threatening circumstances last. 
Second,  behaviour  within  the  financial  system  itself  can  generate  elevated  risks.  And  that 
tendency towards exuberance is not solely down to moral hazard.  
Quite apart from TBTF, another driving force comes from myopia – a tendency to overlook 
risks  in  banking  during  buoyant  conditions.14  Eventually  risk  does  crystallise,  prompting 
bankers and investors to wake up to the overvaluation of their assets and excessive leverage 
in  the  system.  Credit  tightens,  exacerbating  the  macroeconomic  downturn,  and  so  on. 
Solving the TBTF problem is absolutely necessary but will not be sufficient to consign boom 
and bust to the past. Banking systems comprising lots of small banks have been capable of 
driving themselves over the cliff.  
For  regulation  to  respond  dynamically  to  changing  circumstances  in  order  to  preserve 
systemic  stability,  macroprudential  policy  is  needed.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  the  primary 
objective  of  the  new  Bank  of  England  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC)  is  to  protect  and 
enhance the resilience of the UK financial system, with a subordinate objective of supporting 
growth  and  employment.  As  well  as  being  able  to  make  Recommendations  to  the  UK 
prudential supervisors and securities regulators on anything relevant to stability, Parliament 
has given the FPC power to direct changes in capital requirements for banks.  
Macroprudential tools and system resilience 
In some ways, the effects of a temporary change in macroprudential capital requirements will 
be similar to a permanent change in the capital regime. An action to increase banks’ equity 
base  by,  say,  10%  will  increase  their  loss-absorbing  capacity  by  10%.  That  leaves  the 
system better placed to cope with losses should they crystallise.  
As such, irrespective of whether the action dampens the boom phase of the credit cycle, it 
will reduce the severity of the bust. Fewer, if any, banks will fail; a tightening in credit supply 
is therefore less likely to become a full-blown credit crunch; the resulting slowdown in output 
growth  should  be  less  severe;  the  default  rate  on  bank  loan  portfolios  lower;  and  so  on.  I 
rehearse  that  because the  primary  objective  of  a  macroprudential  intervention  –  improving 
the  financial  system’s  resilience  –  can  be  progressed  even  if  the  credit  boom  itself  is  not 
tempered much.  
Macroprudential measures and credit conditions 
Nevertheless, whether macroprudential interventions could quell a credit boom is important. 
That turns largely on the effects on the cost of finance. I worry that too much of the analysis 
of this area is oversimplified, assuming blandly that an increase in capital requirements will 
always and everywhere lead to tighter credit conditions, and so slow the boom. I would be 
surprised if that were a universal law. 
A required substitution to more expensive equity finance will, indeed, tend to push up banks’ 
funding  costs,  but  the  effect  on  overall  funding costs  will  depend  on  whether,  and  by  how 
much, debt financing costs fall due to a lower probability of bankruptcy. 
Crucially, there is an important difference between, on the one hand, banks having to have 
more  equity  in  steady  state  and,  on  the  other  hand,  an  intervention  by  a  macroprudential 
body to increase capital requirements temporarily. The macroprudential body’s policy action 
will reveal information.  Borrowing some language from the literature on monetary  policy, it 
sheds  light  on  the  policymakers’  views  on  the  current  risks  to  stability  (the  state  of  the 
                                                 
14  See  Gennaioli,  Shleifer,  and  Vishny  (2012).  “Neglected  Risks,  Financial  Innovation  and  Financial  Fragility.”  Journal  of 
Financial Economics 104, no. 3: 452–468; and Tucker (2011), Discussion of Lord Turner’s lecture “Reforming finance: are 
we being radical enough?”. Clare Distinguished Lecture in Economics, Cambridge. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economy and/or the financial system itself), and also on how the Committee reaches policy 
decisions (its reaction function).  
A few examples serve to illustrate the point (Figure 1).  
A  first  distinction  is  between  interventions  in  the  boom  and  bust  phases  of  a  credit  cycle. 
Imagine  that  some  information  came  along  to  suggest  that  the  banking  system,  while 
adequately capitalised currently, will taken as a whole be stretched down the road if credit 
continues  to  expand  rapidly.  Assuming  for  the  moment  common  information  to  the  market 
and the authorities, in this case a macroprudential intervention to require banks to build up 
capital in order to underpin their resilience in the period ahead might add only a shade to the 
cost of finance, as banks lose a small proportion of their tax shield. And if banks choose to 
de-lever, shedding risk to achieve the temporarily higher capital requirement, that action in 
itself might slow the boom. 
Now imagine a scenario in which information came along to reveal the system was seriously 
under  capitalised  right  now.  Maybe  a  bubble  had  gone  unnoticed  until  it  burst  or  some 
banks or funds unexpectedly fail, revealing inadequacies in the regulatory regime. Once the 
market came to appreciate that capital levels were too thin, funding costs would rise sharply. 
In those circumstances, an injection of additional capital, if it could be achieved, could help to 
bring financing costs back down. Although reliance on relatively expensive equity would be 
increased, that is dominated by a large fall in the cost of debt finance as failure becomes a 
more remote possibility.  
In this hypothetical scenario, the policymaker has something of a tightrope to walk. For an 
individual bank, cutting risk exposures by reducing lending might at first blush seem to be a 
step  towards  restoring  capital  adequacy.  For  the  system  as  a  whole,  however,  it  would 
clearly be counterproductive for all banks to delever in that way. The better path, not only for 
economy  but  for  individual  banks  as  part  of  the  financial  system,  would  be  for  banks  to 
strengthen their capital structure so that credit supply was not impaired. 
A second distinction is between the market and the macroprudential policymaker having the 
same information and views on what ought to be done (Column 1, Figure 1) and their having 
different information and views. 
Most interesting are those cases where the market and the FPC are out of synch. Suppose 
the  market  spotted  first  that  the  system  was  dangerously  under  capitalised.  Banks’  debt 
funding costs would rise sharply and would remain elevated until the market saw evidence 
that either the banks or the authorities were grasping the nettle. A belated but decisive action 
to raise capital levels would then come as welcome news (Column 2, Row B). Funding costs 
should fall back, perhaps significantly, and credit conditions could well ease. That would take 
some  of  the  edge  off  the  downturn.  I  want  to  stress  that  in  this  particular  hypothetical 
scenario, an increase in capital requirements has the effect of easing credit conditions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
    
f
o
 
e
t
a
t
S
 
e
l
c
y
c
 
t
i
d
e
r
c
 
d
n
a
 
s
s
e
n
i
s
u
b
 
f
o
 
e
t
a
t
S
Impact of an increase in capital requirements by the Financial Policy Committee 
Figure 1 
View of Market on FPC’s assessment of system capital adequacy 
(1) Agrees and 
expected FPC 
action 
(2) Ahead of 
FPC 
(3) Behind FPC (but 
when FPC acts, 
worries it may not 
have done enough)
(4) Shares FPC’s 
information but 
disagrees that 
system lacks capital
(A) Boom  
Debt spreads 
broadly unchanged 
Debt spreads fall
Debt spreads 
potentially rise 
Debt spreads 
broadly unchanged 
Debt spreads 
(B) Bust 
broadly unchanged 
/ fall slightly 
Debt spreads fall 
significantly 
Debt spreads 
potentially rise, 
could exacerbate 
downturn 
Debt spreads 
broadly unchanged 
Note: Coloured shading indicates direction of change in overall financing costs, and hence likely impact on credit 
conditions.  Blue  (red)  denotes  a  fall  (rise)  in  overall  financing  costs  and  hence  an  easing  (tightening)  in  credit 
conditions.  
 
Alternatively,  the  FPC  might  spot  the  risk  to  the  system  ahead  of  the  market.  Debt  and, 
consequently, credit spreads might have been low for some time, with some sectors of the 
economy  taking  the  opportunity  to  lever  up.  Having  failed  to  spot  the  risks  early,  the  FPC 
moved to require more capital in the system only once the credit cycle had turned. For its 
part, it was only upon seeing the FPC’s action, that the market became alive to the risks. It is 
possible that, having woken up, the market, though somewhat reassured that some action is 
being taken, worries that the FPC has not done enough. In that case, debt spreads might rise 
at  the  same  time  as  banks  switch  towards  more  expensive  equity  financing  (Column  3, 
Row B).  Credit  conditions  could  tighten,  slowing  the  economy  and  so  exacerbating  the 
situation. 
A final variant (Column 4, Row B) would be that although the market and the FPC share the 
same information set, the market thinks an increase in capital requirements is unnecessary. 
In  that  case  debt  spreads,  having  already  been  low  given  the  market’s  view  of  the  risks, 
would not fall. Firms overall funding costs might even rise slightly, given the required switch 
to more expensive equity financing. But, crucially, the system would be more resilient and 
any eventual bust should be less severe.  
These  examples  serve  to  illustrate  that  it  is  unlikely  to  be  as  simple  as:  a  rise  in  capital 
requirements  entails  tighter  credit  conditions.  Where  there  are  question  marks  over  the 
system’s  capital  adequacy,  the  reverse  can  sometimes  be  true.  More  generally,  the  first 
round  effects  on  credit  conditions  will  depend  upon  whether  the  policymaker’s  actions 
revealed  information  about  the  state  of  the  system  and  its  approach  to  policy,  and  on 
whether the market regarded the actions as warranted, insufficient or too much. Overall, this 
underlines  the  importance  of  transparency  –  from  banks  and  from  the  macroprudential 
policymaker.  
Conclusions: The implications of reform for the shape of finance 
Cyclical fluctuations in credit conditions and macroprudential interventions to influence them 
will  not  play  out  in  an  unchanged  financial  system.  In  fact,  it  would  be  surprising  if  the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
market’s  own  response  to  the  crisis  and  the  regulatory  reforms  did  not  drive  structural 
changes in the credit system. The shape of some can perhaps be discerned.  
Too-Big-To-Fail effectively subsidised longer-term bond finance for banks. Combined with lax 
liquidity  regulation,  this  probably  left  the  sector  as  a  whole  with  larger  and  longer-maturity 
asset  portfolios  than  otherwise.  A  few  decades  ago  we  used  to  talk  about  government 
crowding out the private sector from the capital markets. Well, the bloated balance sheets of 
TBTF  firms  essentially  crowded  out  other  long-term  investors  from  parts  of  the  credit 
markets. Unlevered sources of funds struggled to compete with the banks, but instead held 
lots  of  bank  paper,  thinking  it  risk  free.  Competitors  to  the  banks  had  to  lever  up:  fragile 
shadow banks were one result.  
Actions to remove the subsidy from banking will, amongst other things, create conditions in 
which the relative role of unlevered capital market investors can grow. Some of that might 
come through securitisation, although a mature and resilient market in ABS of loans to SMEs 
might well require initiatives to produce rich data sets on credit histories. The time may have 
come  to  evaluate  the  utility  of  the  central  credit  registers  that  have  long  existed  in  some 
continental European and Asian countries.  
None  of  that,  however,  can  alter  banks’  core  comparative  advantage  as  monetary 
institutions:  the  provision  of  liquidity  through  overdrafts,  lines  of  credit  and  other  working 
capital facilities. That role might be aided by a revival of a market in trade credit.15 
Banks  will  always  be  levered  because  their  core  monetary  service  revolves  around 
transaction-account deposits, which are debt liabilities. And, on the other side of the balance 
sheet,  they  will  always  have  somewhat  risky  asset  portfolios  because  being  a  monetary 
institution makes them an efficient supplier of short-term finance to households, firms and the 
rest of the financial system.  
But they can do all that only if they are healthy and prosperous: only sound banks can make 
a credible promise to repay or lend money on demand.  
The fragility in banks’ balance sheets is why they are regulated. Today, I have sketched the 
outline  of  a  Capital  Accord  for  the  future.  An  Accord  that  would  go  beyond  reducing  the 
probability of failure, by also addressing the need to cope with distressed banks, ensuring 
that  resolution  can  be  orderly.  Taking  the  tax-deductibility  of  debt  interest  as  a  given,  the 
banking authorities can make it beneficial to society as a whole, not just to private interests, 
by requiring that a minimum level of term bond finance be part of the capital structure. That 
would provide gone-concern loss-absorbency for new improved resolution regimes to draw 
on. A still richer Accord might include instruments that aid recovery by converting into equity 
in  the  face  of  meaningful  but  not  life-threatening  losses.  This  approach  moves  away  from 
seeing  runnable  short-term  wholesale  debt  as  a  source  of  discipline  on  banks,  to  instead 
seeing  longer-term  bonds  as  providing  a  mass  de  manoeuvre  for  recapitalising  distressed 
banks. Not all forms of leverage are the same.  
But no static regime can ever be enough. If they were, crises would not recur. That is why 
the  new  macroprudential  authorities,  such  as  the  Bank  of  England’s  FPC,  will  be  able 
temporarily to adjust capital requirements when circumstances warrant. I have stressed that 
it is oversimplistic to think of macroprudential interventions to improve capital adequacy as 
always inevitably leading to higher funding costs and tighter credit conditions. It will depend 
upon the prevailing circumstances: whether the banks started out with solid balance sheets, 
what  the  market  knows  and  thinks.  The  FPC  will  need  to  be  transparent  in  order  to  build 
understanding of its actions.  
                                                 
15 
I worry about the withering away of a market for bankers’ acceptances; claims by one company on another, but guaranteed 
by one or more banks, and historically eligible for discount at central banks. As I have said before, corporate treasurers, 
bankers and central banks could usefully work together on this. See Tucker (2012), “Credit conditions for firms: stability and 
monetary policy.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
More  resilient  banking  systems  will  enhance  the  capacity  of  monetary  policy  to  underpin 
growth  in  an  economic  downturn.  And  reduced  financial  system  and  macroeconomic  risks 
should make the cost of finance less volatile, helping businesses and households to plan for 
the  future.  It  will  be  a  while  before  confidence  in  the  system  is  restored,  and  never  again 
should confidence be so blind. But if the destination lies further ahead, we do know where we 
are going. And that itself should be a source of strength, helping our economies to recover. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
