Louis Kasekende: Improving rural access to finance in Uganda 
Opening remarks by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
official launch of the Uganda Rural Challenge Fund, Kampala, 19 April 2013. 
 Your  Excellency  Klaus  Dieter  Düxmann  –  the  Ambassador  of  the  Federal  Republic  of 
Germany 
Distinguished guests 
Members of the Press 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good afternoon. 
I am delighted to be here this afternoon to witness the official launch of the Uganda Rural 
Challenge Fund. The Fund will provide grants aimed at supporting innovations that will lead 
to  increased  access  to  finance  for  rural  enterprises  in  Uganda,  the  bulk  of  which  are  still 
locked out of the formal financial sector. The “rural unbanked” as you will all agree with me 
pose  some  challenges  in  as  far  as  the  financial  sectors  contribution  to  growth  through 
financial intermediation is concerned. Firstly, the rural population cannot be ignored given its 
substantial contribution to GDP through agriculture estimated at about 23 percent of the total. 
Secondly, the rural population constitutes a large share of the total population estimated at 
about  85  percent  of  the  total  population.  There  is  therefore  a  large  potential  market  for 
savings mobilization which is yet to be tapped by the financial sector. 
Looking at the financial access statistics, only 38% of Ugandans receive financial services 
from  both  formal  and  informal  sectors  moreover  when  drilled  down  further  only  20%  use 
formal sector financial institutions i.e. commercial banks Tier 1, credit institutions (Tier 2) and 
microfinance  Deposit  Taking  Institutions  (Tier  3).  This  means  that  nationwide,  62%  of 
Ugandans  are  not  served  by  any  financial  institution  or  groups  (formal,  semiformal  or 
informal).  Further, the  disparity  between  urban  and  rural  access to financial  services  is  so 
wide with urban access at 48% compared to rural access at 35%. This would suggest that 
more  than  12  million  adults  in  rural  areas  do  not  have  access  to  financial  services.  So 
definitely there is a lot of work to be done if the financial sector is to reach the more than 
12 million rural adult population. 
Further  as  of  2012,  Uganda’s  savings  to  GDP  ratio  of  about  11.8  percent  is  among  the 
lowest  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa.  Impediments  to  organized  savings  are  among  others,  high 
fees, high minimum deposits and physical distance from banking institutions.1 According to 
the World Bank Financial Inclusion index (Findex) 2011, maintaining a checking account in 
Uganda costs the equivalent of 25 percent of GDP per capita annually, and about 54 percent 
of non-account holders cite cost as a reason for not having an account. These costs are still 
high and there is scope for lowering them. 
There are a number of options available that could be tapped into to address some of these 
problems. For instance banks, credit institutions and microfinance could open branches even 
where they are unprofitable in the interim so long as they could be funded by other profitable 
branches;  extending  mobile  banking  services,  set  up  agencies  etc.  Developments  in  new 
technology particularly mobile and internet banking could be leveraged to provide a notable 
platform  for  improving  financial  inclusion  and  an  opportunity  to  move  towards  branchless 
                                                
1  Odongo, Albert. “Why Ugandan Banks should start promoting a saving culture.” 26 March 2012. Accessed on 
[http://www.africa-uganda-business-travel-guide.com/why-uganda-banks-should-start-
17th  January  2013. 
promoting-a-saving-culture.html] 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
banking. With technology costs falling over time this is one opportunity for addressing some 
of the cost issues. 
This notwithstanding, commendable growth in terms of products, size and intermediation has 
been  registered  in  Uganda’s  financial  sector  over  the  last  decade  or  so.  This  growth  has 
however  not  compromised  its  soundness,  owing  in  part  to  the  prudent  regulation  and 
supervision by the Bank of Uganda. For instance, Commercial banks’ lending to the private 
sector  increased  from  Shs.  681.9  billion  in  December  2001  to  Shs  7,755.3  billion  in 
December 2012, yet the Non performing loans as a ratio of total gross loans declined from 
6.5 percent to 4.2 percent over the same period. Other positive developments in the sector 
include the increase in the number of banks from 20 in 1999 to 24, bank branch network to 
more than 455 branches compared to 153 in 1999, and ATM’s to more than 600 from 430 
four  years  ago.  Amid  these  developments,  there  have  been  other  equally  important 
developments  in  form  of  massive  investment  in  human  capital  accumulation  in  the  sector, 
leveraging  of  technology  to  deliver  better  services,  and  continued  innovation  to  meet  user 
demands as evidenced by some new products such as internet banking and mobile banking, 
dedicated  products  for  SME’s,  credit  cards,  points  of  sale  services  with  major  service 
providers and retailers, etc. 
It is in this regard that I wish to appreciate and applaud KfW/GTZ/GIZ whose programs in 
microfinance,  rural  and  agricultural  finance  and  setting  up  of  the  credit  reference  bureau 
have contributed towards improvements in the sector and augur well for future improvements 
to the sector. I therefore thank the German government for the continued support to Uganda 
in many aspects, but particularly, the support through KfW and GIZ which is geared towards 
developing the financial sector in Uganda. 
I  wish  to  highlight  the  fact  that  the  Bank  of  Uganda  is  cognizant  of  the  challenges  in  the 
financial sector and is taking several steps to address them. One such move is our financial 
inclusion  agenda  that  aims  at  improving  the  access  and  quality  of  financial  services, 
enhancing  consumer  protection  and  creating  a  larger  population  that  is  literate  in  financial 
matters  and  values  savings.  In  order  to  facilitate  the  extension  of  financial  services  at  a 
greater convenience and cheaper cost to the unbanked population, the Bank forwarded to 
the  Minister  of  Finance,  necessary  amendments  to  the  Financial  Institutions  Act  2004  and 
the  MDI  Act  2003  to  allow  agency  banking  and  Islamic  banking.  In  order  to  augment  the 
safety  of  savings  of  the  predominantly  rural  clientele,  the  amendments  further  include 
bringing the large Tier 4 microfinance institutions that may surpass a set threshold under the 
regulatory ambit of the Bank. 
We  at  Bank  of  Uganda  see  the  Rural  Challenge  Fund  as  another  timely  and  significant 
initiative  that  will  help  cover  some  of  the  costs  that  the  financial  institutions  incur  in  their 
endeavor to extend financial services to rural areas. The fund is also expected to motivate 
the  financial  institutions  to  try  out  new  rural  focused  approaches  that  they  could  not 
undertake  single  handedly  because  of  the  perceived  risk. While  we  welcome  this  initiative 
that  largely  addresses  the  supply  of  loanable  funds  to  the  rural  sector,  we  must  remain 
mindful  of  the  need  to  address  the  issues  that  constrain  rural  enterprises  like  Agricultural 
small holder farmers from accessing formal credit and being profitable. Failure of delivery of 
necessary public goods and services such as quality extension services, market information 
and  rural  infrastructure  may  impede  the  effectiveness  of  great  innovations  like  the  Rural 
Challenge Fund. 
I am personally excited  about the Rural Challenge Fund, more so because it compliments 
Government  efforts  in  improving  access  to  credit  to  transform  a  predominantly  agriculture 
based-rural  sector  through  among  others-the  Agricultural  Credit  Facility  (ACF).  I  thus 
encourage eligible financial institutions to take advantage of this great opportunity. 
Thank you very much for listening to me. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
