Jwala Rambarran: Generating more inclusive economic growth through 
science and technology 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the inaugural International Conference on Science and Technology for Economic 
Diversification (INSCITED), Port of Spain, 5 June 2013. 
 Salutations:  
Let me first of all thank the organizers for inviting me to speak at this inaugural International 
Conference on Science and Technology for Economic Diversification, which goes by the very 
exhilarating acronym of INSCITED.  
The  OAS,  NISTADS  and  NIHERST  need  to  be  commended for  bringing  together  such  an 
excellent group of leading professionals in science and technology, higher education, training 
and  labour  markets  to  exchange  views  with  us  on  critical  socio-economic  transformation 
issues facing developing countries.  
This INSCITED Conference is particularly timely, since it is set against the backdrop of global 
policymakers searching for the holy grail of economic growth after nearly half a decade of 
battling a global financial crisis. Many green shoots of recovery have sprouted and withered 
over the past five years, a stark reminder that the path to sustainable economic development 
is neither straight nor smooth.  
The IMF’s most recent forecast suggests that the world economy is gradually strengthening. 
Global activity is expected to increase from below 3 percent in the middle of 2012 to 3 ¼ per 
cent  in  2013.  The  IMF  is  more  optimistic  about  prospects  for  2014,  projecting  a  modest 
acceleration  of  growth  to  4  per  cent  for  the  world  economy.  But  we  still  are  not  seeing 
economic growth anywhere near the levels prior to the onset of the crisis in 2008 that would 
offer policymakers sufficient opportunity to rebuild buffers without resorting to more painful 
austerity measures.  
In fact, we are now witnessing what the IMF’s Managing Director has labeled a “three-speed” 
world  economy.  Emerging  markets  and  developing  countries  are  doing  well  as  the  main 
driver  of  world  growth  even  though  their  output  has  slowed  compared  with  the  pre-crisis 
period. Some advanced economies like the United States are on the mend, but further policy 
uncertainty could derail the gains made. Others such as Japan and those in the Euro area 
still  have  some  distance  to  travel  in  restructuring  their  economies  and  regaining  fiscal 
sustainability.  
Notwithstanding the fallout from the global financial crisis, we should acknowledge that the 
world  has  still  seen  some  milestones  of  major  progress.  Perhaps  the  most  laudable  of 
these milestones is that the first Millennium Development Goal to “halve the proportion of 
the world population” living in extreme poverty by 2015 was met five years ahead of time. 
In 1990, almost 45 per cent of the developing world lived on less than US$1.25 a day. In 
2010 – 20 years later – the global poverty rate dropped to just over 20 per cent.  
Buoyed  by  this  success,  the  World  Bank  boldly  committed  two  months  ago  at  its  Spring 
Meetings  to  work  with  countries  to  end  extreme  poverty  worldwide  within  a  generation  by 
2030. According to the World Bank’s President, for the first time, an expiration date has been 
set for global poverty.  
We should also acknowledge the fundamental positive transformations that have taken place 
in developing countries over the past few decades. Please allow me to highlight just four of 
these changes.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
First, the UNDP’s March 2013 Human Development Report notes that, in the last decade, all 
countries  accelerated  their  improvements  in  education,  health  and  income  dimensions  as 
measured in the Human Development Index (HDI) to the extent that no country had a lower 
HDI ranking in 2012 than in 2000. The pace of HDI progress has been fastest in countries in 
the low and medium human development categories.  
Second, for the first time in history more than half of the world’s population is living in cities. 
We reached this tipping point in 2008. By 2040, two in three people are expected to live in 
cities and the developing world will be home to 29 of the biggest megacities with populations 
of ten million or more.  
Third,  people  are  becoming  more  connected  through  disruptive  innovations  in  technology, 
which  is  creating,  a  smart  mobile  world.  In  the  insightful  words  of  futurist  Ramez  Naam, 
“More than three-quarters of humanity, in the span of one generation, have gotten access to 
connectivity  that  is  greater  than  any  U.S.  President  before  1995.  A  reasonably  well-off 
person in India or Nigeria has better access to information than Ronald Reagan did during 
most of his Presidential career.” 
Finally, global economic power is shifting faster from the North to the South than most could 
have  imagined  just  a  few  years  ago.  By  2020,  the  combined  economic  output  of  three 
leading  developing  countries  alone  –  Brazil,  China  and  India  –  will  surpass  the  combined 
GDP  of  Canada,  France,  Germany, Italy,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States. This 
fundamental shift in the world’s economic centre of gravity is likely to induce a deep-seated 
change in the governance of international institutions, including the United Nations, the IMF, 
the World Bank and the World Trade Organization, to promote a fairer, more equal world.  
Against this backdrop, Caribbean small island states appear to be gradually recovering from 
the global crisis but unfortunately the region’s recovery lags that of other small states, and 
reflects  part  of  a  worrying  longer-term  trend  in  which  the  Caribbean’s  growth  performance 
has been weakening over the past three decades. According to World Bank data, in 1980, 
the  Caribbean’s  average  per  capita  income  was  twice  as  high  as  that  of  the  average 
developing country. Today, the region’s average per capita income is only a third higher than 
the developing world.  
In  effect,  the  Caribbean  has  been  losing  its  comparative  advantage  due  to  a  variety  of 
external  shocks  for  which  the  region  was  not  well  prepared.  The  Caribbean  has  grappled 
with the drying up of aid flows, dismantling of traditional preferential trade arrangements for 
sugar  and  bananas,  interventions  related  to  anti-money  laundering  and  combating  the 
financing of terrorism, and, of course, the international financial crisis.  
The  Caribbean  has  also  earned  the  unenviable  reputation  as  one  of  the  most  natural 
disaster-prone  and  high  debt  regions  in  the  world.  Sir  Dwight  Venner,  Governor  of  the 
Eastern Caribbean Central Bank captures the interaction between natural disasters and debt 
quite vividly: “Almost every year, we [St. Lucia] have a hurricane season, which can destroy 
the country’s GDP. In some countries, it can also lead to high debt levels. Their infrastructure 
is destroyed before they paid for it, so they borrow again. Then it is destroyed a second and 
sometimes even a third time”.  
The brutal reality is that the Caribbean must find new sources of growth in a very uncertain 
external environment. In the words of the Honorable Prime Minister of St. Lucia, Dr. Kenny 
Anthony, addressing the 24th Meeting of the CARICOM Heads of Government in February 
2013,  “We  need  a  big  conversation  about the  future  of  our  economies.” A  credible  growth 
and diversification strategy is not merely a desirable policy option, but absolutely necessary 
for the region’s very own survival.  
It is in this context that I would like to highlight three potential frontiers of opportunity that, in 
my respectful view, Caribbean policymakers can leverage for inclusive growth and economic 
diversification. Each new opportunity would require the support of science and technology.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     The  first  new  opportunity  relates  to  unlocking  the  tremendous  potential  of  the  “Blue 
Economy” – the Caribbean Sea and its coasts – from which the Caribbean region draws its 
name, identity and economic sustenance.  
The Caribbean Sea is the second largest sea in the world, after the Mediterranean. It is a 
natural asset whose resources provide an endowment of goods and services. The following 
examples are worthy of note:  
• 
The  Caribbean  Sea  is  home  to  one-tenth  of  the  world’s  coral  reefs  and  has  an 
outstanding  biodiversity  of  seagrass  beds  and  mangroves,  all  of  which  are 
attractions to almost one-third of the world’s tourists;  
Seafood accounts for more than 7 per cent of the animal protein consumed by the 
people in the Caribbean;  
Fishing  is  a  significant  provider  of  jobs  and  income  in  the  Caribbean.  More  than 
1.5 million  people  in  the  Caribbean  rely  for  their  livelihood  on  commercial  fishing, 
which generates more than US$1 billion annually in export earnings;  
Marine  and  coastal  tourism  form  the  lifeblood  of  many  Caribbean  economies. 
According to the World Travel and Tourism Council, in 2011, tourism accounted for 
13 per cent of total regional employment, 14 per cent of the Caribbean’s GDP and 
17 per cent to total export earnings;  
The  Caribbean  Sea  is  one  of  the  principal  waterways  in  the  world,  harboring  in 
excess  of  80,000  ship  calls  per  year,  and  is  classified  as  having  one  of  the  most 
intensive maritime traffic in the world; and  
The sea floor of the Caribbean Sea may yield many important minerals available for 
extraction, including silver, gold, copper, manganese, cobalt, and zinc. Technology 
is  emerging  to  commercially  tap  new  sources  of  marine-based  renewable  energy 
from the Caribbean Sea as well medicines that can improve many millions of lives.  
Notwithstanding  its  importance,  in  common  with  ocean  regions  across  the  world,  the 
Caribbean Sea has seen overexploitation and degradation of its marine resources over the 
past  three  to  four  decades.  Reports  from  the  Food  and  Agricultural  Organization  (FAO) 
suggest  that  the  sustainability  of  fisheries  in  the  Caribbean  Sea  is  in  jeopardy  and  that 
precautionary management is critical. Coastal fish stocks depletion has been worsened by 
the threats of ocean acidification and pollution associated with both marine and land based 
activities. Today, these problems are compounded by climate change.  
In  effect,  the  livelihoods  of  communities,  national  economies  and  the  biodiversity  of  the 
ecosystems of the Caribbean Sea are threatened.  
If Caribbean countries can make the institutional reforms needed to reduce open access to 
its  marine  resources  and  to  provide  secure  incentives  for  responsible  husbandry  of  these 
resources, there is significant potential for the Caribbean Sea to contribute even more to food 
security, livelihoods and inclusive economic growth for the region.  
Science and technology has a key role to play in helping to capture some of the economic 
opportunities likely to arise from investing in a healthier Caribbean Sea. Some areas are as 
follows:  
• 
• 
Promotion of responsible fisheries and aquaculture in a green economy;  
Adoption  of  green  technologies  and  investments  to  lower  fossil  fuel  use  to 
dramatically reduce the carbon footprint of the sector;  
Harnessing the potential of marine-based renewable energy (wind, wave and tidal); 
and  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Improving the understanding of deep-sea minerals ecosystems which are a possible 
new revenue stream.  
The second growth frontier for the Caribbean lies in taking advantage of “Green Economy” 
opportunities to reduce its vulnerability to climate change.  
Caribbean countries are expected to be among the earliest and most severely impacted by 
climate  change  in  the  coming  decades.  Warmer  temperatures  are  likely  to  fuel  stronger 
hurricanes  in  a  region  already  battling  frequent  natural  disasters.  Increased  ocean 
temperatures are also leading to coral deaths. Recent studies suggest that some 80 per cent 
of living coral in the reefs of the Caribbean have been lost in the past 20 years.  
More  than  half  of  the  Caribbean  population  lives  within  1.5  kilometers  of  the  coast  where 
houses,  hotels  and  other  infrastructure  are  at  significant  risk  from  stronger  winds,  more 
forceful  wave  surges  and  heavier  rains.  Sea  level  rise  would  deal  the  region’s  tourism 
industry a deadly blow.  
And  these  devastating  impacts  are  likely  to  occur  regardless  of  the  fact  that  Caribbean 
nations produce extremely low levels of global greenhouse gas emissions that drive climate 
change.  
A 2008 study by the Stockholm Environment Institute and Tufts University found that for just 
three categories – increased hurricane damages, loss of tourism revenue, and infrastructure 
damages – the Caribbean’s annual cost of inaction is projected to total US$22 billion by 2050 
and  US$46  billion  by  2100.  These  costs  represented  10  per  cent  and  22  per  cent, 
respectively, of the 2008 GDP of the Caribbean economy.  
The Caribbean therefore must redouble efforts to support inclusive green growth and climate 
smart  development.  This  requires  increased  investment  in  mitigation.  We  need  to  identify 
renewable energy projects that can help conserve foreign exchange and ultimately improve 
fiscal  space.  It  also  requires  ramping  up  investments  in  adaptation.  We  need  to  identify 
“bankable” adaptation projects.  
At  the  same  time,  tailored  support  is  needed  to  help  Caribbean  countries  and  other  small 
island  states  access  climate  related  funds  especially  those  offered  by  the  Global 
Environment Facility (GEF) and the Climate Investment Funds (CIF).  
Here  again,  science  and  technology  can  help  to  leverage  economic  opportunities  in  the 
Green Economy. Some areas are as follows:  
• 
Devising engineering solutions such as sea defenses, hurricane resistant buildings 
and the provision of water storage;  
Developing  technological  solutions  such  as  using  more  resilient  crops  to  protect 
critical biodiversity conservation;  
Creating new incentive mechanisms such as payment for ecosystem services; and  
Facilitating the transition to a low-carbon economy.  
• 
• 
The third frontier of growth opportunity relates to the “Silver Economy.” Population ageing is 
a  global  phenomenon,  which  is  having  major  implications  on  all  aspects  of  human  life  in 
every society. This process is enduring and irreversible. In the Caribbean, people are also 
living longer than ever before but not healthier. At the start of the 21st century, the elderly in 
the Caribbean – persons 60 years or older – represented at least one-tenth of the population, 
larger than ever before in the history of the region.  
World Bank research warns, however, that Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) are rising 
rapidly  as  the  Caribbean  population  ages.  Today,  the  four  leading  causes  of  death  in  the 
Caribbean are all NCDs – heart disease, cancer, stroke, and diabetes. In the Caribbean, five 
times  as  many  people  are  dying  from  NCDs  as  from  all  other  illnesses  combined.  In  fact, 
these findings have spawned the creation of a rather interesting World Bank blog entitled “Is 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
fried chicken setting back development in the Caribbean?” alluding to the fact that unhealthy 
eating habits are a major risk factor for NCDs.  
The  expansion  of  NCDs  is  increasing  the  economic  burden  on  families  and  on  already 
strained  public  health  systems  in  the  Caribbean.  In  Jamaica,  for  instance,  an  average 
individual  suffering  from  NCDs  spends  approximately  one  third  of  household  income  on 
healthcare services and medicine purchases. In the Eastern Caribbean, the annual cost for 
treating a diabetic is more than annual per capita spending for health care in the six countries 
of the Eastern Caribbean.  
Again,  there  is  a  unique  opportunity  for  scientists  and  economic  policymakers  to  take 
advantage of the growth opportunities that arise from reducing the future burden of NCDs, 
promoting healthy aging, and increasing the potential benefit from the demographic transition 
in the Caribbean. And they must do it while ensuring that out-of-pocket health expenses do 
not  inflict  severe  financial  hardship  on  families,  and  while  narrowing  the  gap  in  access  to 
health services and public health protection.  
In closing, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me say that I have faith in the ability of the Caribbean 
leadership  to  move  beyond  talk  about  the  “big  conversation”  to  actual  action  –  seizing 
opportunities  in  the  Blue,  Green  and  Silver  Economies.  Science  and  technology  would,  of 
course, be critical to successfully actioning these opportunities. Success will also depend on 
putting  in  place  sound  policy  frameworks  and  effective  institutional  arrangements.  And,  in 
some  cases,  it  may  require  strong  commitment  and  funding  from  the  international 
community.  
I look forward to this INSCITED Conference becoming a model platform for stimulating new 
thoughts and ideas on how science and technology can help contribute to generating more 
inclusive economic growth.  
I also look forward to further collaboration among the OAS, NISTADS and NIHERST that will 
be of benefit to science, society and state.  
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
