Njuguna Ndung’u: Challenges in developing a successful bond market in 
Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Market 
Leaders Forum dinner, Nairobi, 6 August 2013. 
 Members of the Market Leaders Forum,  
Officials from the Treasury,  
Colleagues at the Central Bank of Kenya,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let me take the opportunity to welcome you all to this event which has been organized to 
take stock of our achievements for the year, review challenges encountered and develop the 
plans for the future. At the outset I wish to commend the market leaders for the effort and 
success in taking this market to a higher level. As you may be aware, Kenya’s bond market 
is now regarded among the top and fastest growing in Africa and this could not have been 
without the strong partnerships that we have continuously cultivated. We are however still a 
long way to achieve liquidity, market efficiency and stability.  
The  2012–13  financial  year  was  a  great  success  with  respect  to  raising  the  borrowing 
requirement  for  the  Government.  The  Market  Leaders  Forum  together  with  market 
stakeholders  contributed  significantly  to  the  success  of  the  bond  market  in  terms  of  the 
following:  
1. 
Successful  financing  of the  FY  2012–13  Borrowing  Plan:  Treasury’s  target for the 
year  was  successfully  achieved  reflecting  a  sterling  performance  especially  given 
that this was the highest in the history of domestic borrowing at Kes. 165bn.  
Benchmark  Bonds  Program  Implementation:  Successful  implementation  of  this 
program during the year was critical for addressing bond market fragmentation and 
increasing liquidity in the market. All 17 bonds valued at Kes 209.8bn issued in the 
year were benchmark tenors, out of which 5, worth Kes 5.4bn were issued through 
reopen  auctions.  Overall,  16  benchmark  bonds  have  been  reopened  since  2009 
when  the  strategy  was  first  employed,  bringing  into  the  market  more  than 
Kes. 183 billion and providing critical financing for the country’s fiscal gaps.  
Longer  Maturity  Profile  of  Domestic  Debt:  Average  maturity  profile  of  government 
bonds  in  the  debt  portfolio  rose  to  7.3  years  by  end  June  2013  compared  to 
6.2 years at the beginning of the year. These are encouraging outcomes given that 
in 2001, the average maturity of all government securities was about 8 months. This 
is indeed a reflection of the continued success in reducing rollover risk associated 
with short term debt which is essential for a well-functioning secondary market for 
bonds.  
Global  recognition  for  Kenya:  Infrastructure  Bond  program  and  the  plan  by  the 
government to issue a Euro bond in the current financial year also signifies that the 
domestic market has matured over time and gained confidence from both local and 
foreign  investors.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  stable  country’s  credit  rating  and  an 
attractive environment for investors.  
Automation  of  primary  market  processes:  In  an  effort  to  enhance  efficiency  and 
safety  of  its  operations,  the  Central  Bank  launched  the  T-24  system  in  all  its 
operations  in  April  2012.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  stakeholders  for  being  patient 
while  the  bank  was  experiencing  challenges  leading  to  the  implementation  of  the 
new system. Going forward the bank is working towards providing internet banking 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
6. 
7. 
which will allow for services such as: online bidding faster dissemination of auction 
results and statements for government securities.  
Competitiveness at auctions: The use of an auction-based method in the issuance 
of  government  securities  over  the  years  has  promoted  price  discovery  and 
competitive prices at the primary market which is a key ingredient for the secondary 
market.  
Kenya Government Bond Index: In October 2012, the Nairobi Securities Exchange 
(NSE)  launched  the  FTSE  NSE  Kenya  Shilling  Government  Bond  Index  as  a 
benchmark tool for measuring market performance. This was a great step in market 
development because the market now has the benefit of further opening up to the 
rest of the world and increasing Kenya’s financial sector competitiveness.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, as you all know our success has not been without challenges along 
the way. Just to mention a few, the slow pace of reforms particularly in the secondary market 
has  promoted  market  illiquidity  and  hampered  faster  growth.  But  above  all,  economic 
vibrancy has been constrained by shocks in both the domestic and international environment 
beyond our control and this has at times affected the momentum of our market development.  
I wish to emphasize that a well-developed and proper functioning financial market is critical 
to economies all over the world as it enhances effectiveness of monetary policy, cushions the 
economy against external vulnerabilities while mobilizing long term financing for public and 
private sector development. Therefore, the development of a robust financial market is not 
only  a  priority  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  but  for  every  stakeholder  in  this  market  to 
embrace.  
Towards  this  objective  I  urge  all  the  stakeholders  to  continue  to  build  a  competitive  bond 
market  that  supports  the  country’s  development  agenda  under  Vision  2030.  In cognizance 
with today’s theme of “Taking Kenya’s bond market to the next level”,  we as stakeholders 
have  set  for  ourselves  a  number  of  initiatives  which  are  ongoing  or  for  the  future.  These 
include:  
1. 
Further  support  to  the  benchmark  bonds  program  through  strategies  for  building 
liquidity  such  as  bond  reopening,  and  initiating  approaches  to  smoothen  the  debt 
maturity structure such as bond exchanges through switches and conversions.  
Promoting financial literacy to ensure market confidence and increased numbers of 
investors, so as to enhance further market deepening.  
Fast-tracking  financial  markets  reforms  particularly  at  the  secondary  market 
including  diversification  of  existing  products,  improving  the  legal  and  operational 
framework  and  expanding  the  trading  platform  to  incorporate  Over  the  Counter 
trading.  But  we  also  need  to  review  and  develop  mechanisms  to  reduce  insider 
activities  and  fraud  so  as  to  mitigate  these  risks  and  increase  the  integrity  of  our 
financial markets.  
At the primary market level, enhancement of products that will include; the issuance 
of project specific infrastructure bonds with bond service costs matched with income 
streams from the projects as well as more products to promote national savings and 
attract small investors and the Kenyan diaspora.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
As  I  conclude,  I  wish  to  thank  the  Market  Leaders  Forum  for  its  invaluable  contribution 
towards market development and at the same time call upon all the stakeholders to take up 
the challenge of enhancing market efficiency and transparency.  
With these remarks, ladies and gentlemen, I invite all of you to relax and enjoy the rest of the 
evening.  
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
