Benoît Cœuré: Triparty Settlement Interoperability 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  signing  ceremony  for  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  on  Triparty  Settlement 
Interoperability, Frankfurt am Main, 15 July 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to host today at the ECB, the signing ceremony for the Memorandum of 
Understanding  on  Triparty  Settlement  Interoperability,  and  to  be  together  with  key 
representatives from the European Repo Council (ERC), and the repo market infrastructures 
who have worked together on this initiative for many years now.  
I have seen in the Memorandum of Understanding that Triparty Settlement Interoperability is 
conveniently abbreviated to “TSI” so I will take advantage of this shorter form in my remarks 
today. 
The aim of the “TSI initiative”, as you are all well aware, is to bring together borrowers and 
lenders, regardless of where the underlying liquidity or collateral is held, thereby avoiding the 
build-up of silos in the market.  
In  order to  place the TSI  initiative  in  context,  let  us  reflect for  a moment  on the  European 
repo market, which has grown significantly since the beginning of the financial crisis.  
As you are all aware, the repo market plays a vital role in the financial system, as a source of 
funding  and  more  generally,  for  the  provision  of  market  liquidity.  The  euro  repo  market  is 
particularly large and has increased significantly in importance in recent years. After an initial 
slowdown  in  interbank  repos  at  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  ICMA  ERC  surveys  have 
shown the value of Euro area repos increase significantly from 4.6 Trillion EUR in 2008 to 
5.6 Trillion EUR by the end of 2012. In the context of these figures, the importance of TSI to 
further improving the efficient working of the repo market can be clearly seen.  
I am extremely pleased that so much progress has been achieved on the TSI over the last 
few months because it is an initiative that has been strongly supported by the Eurosystem 
over  the  years,  and  in  particular  through  the  ECB  Contact  Group  on  Euro  Securities 
Infrastructures,  COGESI.  Indeed,  in  a  workshop  later  today,  we  will  discuss  a  report  on 
collateral eligibility requirements prepared by COGESI (and to which I understand a number 
of persons in this room have contributed) – and we will see that the TSI initiative can help 
market participants in their efforts to meet increasing demands for collateral assets. 
In line with its mandate, the Eurosystem strives to reduce and resolve inefficiencies at market 
level, including at the level of repo market infrastructures, and therefore promotes initiatives 
such as T2S which maximise the liquidity of market participants’ overall collateral pools. TSI 
can be seen as another such initiative. 
Six months ago1, in a snowy Luxembourg setting, I underlined that the ECB is fully behind 
this market-led “TSI initiative” because of its collateral pooling benefits and the efficiencies it 
generates for the repo market. In this regard, the euro area landscape is characterised, on 
the  one  hand,  by  (increasing)  integration  between  the  clearing,  settlement  and  collateral 
management layers; but on the other hand, there is fragmentation based on the location of 
collateral in different market infrastructures.  
A  lot  of  progress  has  been  made  since  the  beginning  of  the  year  –  and  not  only  on  the 
weather front. The efforts that have gone on behind the scenes over the past months by the 
                                                
1  See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2013/html/sp130116.en.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
TSI participants can be measured in relation to the Memorandum of Understanding which is 
on the table for signing today and this represents a major step forward towards an integrated 
market for clearing and settlement (in euro).  
Regarding the next steps, it is important to maintain the current positive momentum as we 
move  into  the  phase  of  implementing  TSI.  I  see  this  signing  ceremony  more  as  a  start  of 
some important work in the field of financial integration than as the end of about 3 years of 
discussions and negotiations among the parties. 
The ECB has a full appreciation and understanding for the extensive technical changes that 
have to be undertaken by the different parties in order to reach a TSI go-live scenario and 
stands ready to support and facilitate the coordination so that go-live can be achieved by the 
end of 2015 if possible, and at the latest in September-2016. 
Let me conclude by expressing my appreciation to all TSI participants for today’s milestone 
achievement  and  I  will  continue  to  follow  with  great  interest,  the  further  progress  on  this 
important initiative.  
Thank you very much for your attention! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
