Andreas Dombret and Felix Hufeld: The Bundesbank and BaFin – “The 
two organisations benefit from each other’s specific expertise” 
Interview  with  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  and  Felix  Hufeld,  Chief  Executive  Director  of  BaFin,  by  the  “BaFin  Magazin” 
published on 1 August 2013. 
 The  Bundesbank  and  BaFin  are  collaborating  closely  in  insurance  supervision.  In  an 
interview,  Bundesbank  Executive  Board  member  Andreas  Dombret  and  BaFin  Chief 
Executive Director Felix Hufeld explain how that collaboration benefits both organisations as 
well as Germany as a financial centre. 
Dr Dombret, Mr Hufeld, under the Financial Stability Act (Finanzstabilitätsgesetz), the 
Bundesbank and BaFin will now also cooperate in supervising insurance companies. 
How will the supervisory tasks be divided up? 
Hufeld:  I  can  answer  that  question  quickly:  microprudential  insurance  supervision,  ie  the 
supervision of individual insurers, insurance groups and pension funds, will remain the sole 
responsibility of BaFin. The Bundesbank is not involved. That is thus a different situation than 
in banking supervision. 
Dombret:  The  Financial  Stability  Act  mandates  the  Bundesbank  to  help  ensure  that  the 
financial system remains stable. It is responsible for macroprudential oversight of all sectors 
of  the  financial  system  –  which  includes  insurers.  The  act  assigns  analytical  tasks,  in 
particular,  to  the  Bundesbank.  It  is  our  job  to  identify  potential  dangers  and  assess 
constellations that could impact financial stability as a whole. These analyses form the basis 
for  the  discussions  within  the  Financial  Stability  Committee,  where  the  Federal  Ministry  of 
Finance,  BaFin  and  the  Federal  Agency  for  Financial  Market  Stabilisation  add  their  own 
input.  Building  on  this  risk  analysis,  the  Financial  Stability  Committee  may  then  issue 
warnings and recommendations. 
That  means  that  BaFin  and  the  Bundesbank  exchange  more  information  nowadays 
than they used to. 
Dombret:  Yes,  the  Financial  Stability  Act  clearly  stipulates  that  we  share  all  observations, 
conclusions and assessments required to fulfil our respective tasks. The two authorities will 
mutually  benefit  from  the  information  and  the  special  expertise  that  they  exchange.  The 
express legislative intent underlying the act is for us to work hand in hand and swap notes 
regarding relevant data, facts and evaluations. And we will jointly ensure that this is the case. 
What does that mean in concrete terms? 
Hufeld: We  have  laid  down  the  details  in  a  joint  administrative  agreement,  which  at  BaFin 
applies to all areas of supervision. The need now is to breathe life into that agreement. We 
have  looked  at  all  the  data  that  we  or  the  Bundesbank  collect  to  determine  for  what 
prudential perspective they are relevant. Certain data that are collected on a regular basis 
are  exchanged  continuously.  BaFin  has  access  to  all  Bundesbank  data  and  information  
– and vice versa – to the extent necessary for each institution to fulfil its respective mandate. 
We will now work out how best to proceed in practice. 
Should insurers fear that the exchange of information will be to their disadvantage? 
Dombret: On the contrary. It is in their own best interests that we seek to maintain a stable 
financial  system.  The  experience  of  recent  years  has  clearly  demonstrated  the  dangers 
associated with systemic risks and cross-sector contagion. 
Hufeld: I agree. And what Mr Dombret just said of course applies equally to microprudential 
supervision.  If  the  Bundesbank  shares  valuable  macroprudential  insights  with  us,  insurers 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in  which 
factors  and 
and their policyholders will be the first to benefit. Another advantage for insurers is that they 
will  not  need  to  establish  a  separate  regular  reporting  channel  to  the  Bundesbank  as  we 
forward  the  data  that  we  receive  to  the  Bundesbank.  It  goes  without  saying  that  the 
forwarded data will be treated confidentially since the Bundesbank, just like BaFin, is sworn 
to secrecy. 
What do the Bundesbank and BaFin do with the information? 
Dombret:  That  is  laid  down  in  the  legal  provisions:  we  use  the  information  to  fulfil  our 
respective mandates. For us, that means that we use the data provided by BaFin to assess 
the stability of the financial system as a whole from a macroprudential view. BaFin, in turn, 
uses  our  data  and  insights  to  effectively  supervise  insurers  and  thus  ensure  that they  can 
honour their contracts on a long-term basis. As I mentioned earlier, the insights gained also 
feed into the consultations of the Financial Stability Committee. 
Hufeld:  There  are  many  ways 
the  Bundesbank’s  macroeconomic  and 
macroprudential expertise will be valuable to us. Take the issue of the current low-interest 
rate phase. The Bundesbank analyses and evaluates the information that we provide. We, in 
turn, can use the results for our microprudential supervision. The exchange of information is 
not, therefore, a one-way street; it results in a beneficial symbiosis of macroprudential and 
microprudential knowhow, which will strengthen Germany as a financial centre. 
Regarding the low-interest rate setting: how will you collaborate specifically on this 
issue? 
Hufeld: This issue demonstrates the importance of our cooperation. We can draw a reliable 
and comprehensive picture of the situation only if we take due account of both the relevant 
macroeconomic  and  macroprudential 
insurers’  particular 
circumstances. And the ongoing period of low interest rates naturally also plays an important 
role in the Financial Stability Committee. We must, therefore, grapple with a difficult subject 
at  the  very  outset  of  our  collaboration.  However,  I  am  sure  that  will  only  strengthen  our 
cooperation. 
Dombret:  The  current  low-interest  rate  setting  is  making  itself  felt  in  all  financial  sectors. 
Credit  institutions  and  insurers  must  take  this  into  account  in  their  business  plans.  As  the 
Bundesbank  has,  for  some  years,  been  observing  the  effects  of  the  low-interest  rate 
environment on the financial system and, not least of course, on life insurers, I expect our 
cooperation with BaFin to prove fruitful in this field, too. 
Another key issue from both a macroprudential and a microprudential perspective is 
that of systemic relevance. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) recently ranked nine 
insurers as global systemically important insurers (see link below). How important do 
you think this step is? 
Dombret:  The  publication  of  this  first  list  of  global  systemically  important  insurers  marks 
another  step  on  the  path  towards  a  more  stable  financial  system.  Banks  are  not  the  only 
entities that can be systemically important – market infrastructures and insurers can be, too. 
The  main  factors  determining  an  insurer’s  systemic  importance  are,  first  and  foremost,  its 
interconnectedness  within  the  financial  system  and  the  size  of  its  non-traditional  and 
non-insurance business. I therefore fully support the FSB’s recent move. However, it is clear 
that we still have a considerable way to go. We must now specify and finalise the regulatory 
consequences associated with this ranking. That will not be easy. Just think of the challenge 
of creating, for the first time, a harmonised international basis for imposing potential capital 
surcharges in the insurance sector. 
Hufeld: It is good that we now know where we stand. Insurers are systemically important in a 
different  way  than,  say,  banks,  as  they  do  not  trade  with  one  another.  Nonetheless, 
identifying global systemically important insurers is a key step towards maintaining financial 
stability and protecting policyholders. I believe that the best way of protecting policyholders is 
to establish effective recovery and resolution plans and to tailor supervision to the complexity 
individual 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of  the  business.  As  I  said  earlier,  we  now  need  to  spell  out  the  regulatory  consequences. 
May I just add that the fact that the list features no reinsurers does not mean that this group 
of insurance companies is not considered systemically relevant. A decision on this issue will 
be taken next year.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
