Andreas Dombret: The importance of being competitive 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  ESMT  (European  School  of  Management  and  Technology)  Open 
Lecture, ESMT, Berlin, 20 February 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Dear Professor Rocholl 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak to you today here at the ESMT. At the time, 
the  decision  to  set  up  a  private  business  school  in  an  academic  landscape  dominated  by 
public  institutions  met  with  a  certain  degree  of  scepticism.  In  this  regard,  ESMT  was  no 
different from most start-ups. But ten years later, the ESMT is doing rather well, and that is 
much less common among start-ups. Failure rates are high among  young enterprises, but 
once  the  initial  phase  has  been  survived,  a  long  period  of robust  health  can  be  expected. 
Optimism is therefore warranted, and not just because the ESMT is entering its teens. 
One  of  ESMT’s  main  fields  of  study  is  in  European  competitiveness.  The  results  of  this 
research  will  hardly  suffer  from  a  lack  of  attention.  It  is  now  widely  agreed  upon  that 
persistent  gaps  in  competitiveness  were  one  of  the  root  causes  of  the  current  crisis. 
Recognising  that  fact  certainly  constitutes  progress.  Nevertheless,  although  a  consensus 
appears  to have  emerged  concerning  how  the crisis  developed,  views  still  differ  on  how  it 
should be resolved. 
That might seem somewhat paradoxical at first. If there really is a consensus that restoring 
competitiveness is key to overcoming the crisis, how is it that prescriptions for remedying the 
euro area’s woes differ so starkly? In my remarks, I wish to argue that such differences of 
opinion have their origin largely in a constant tug-of-war between two competing economic 
objectives: efficiency, in particular motivated by the proper incentives, on the one hand, and 
distributional issues, on the other. 
Or,  to  put  it  more  bluntly,  one  line  of  argument  has  to  do  with  how  EMU’s  growth  engine 
should  be  fixed  and  how  it  should  be  made  to  run  more  reliably,  while  the  other  line  of 
argument is more about who is going to foot the bill – for past and future burdens alike. I do 
not want to disregard concerns about the scale of such burdens or the social and political 
costs of bearing them. Rather, based on a diagnosis of how the crisis came about, I would 
like to stress that, if EMU is not given sound foundations allowing it to function better in the 
future,  the  objectives  of  equity  and  redistribution  will  become  self-defeating  because  there 
will be much less available to distribute. 
The trade-off between sound incentives and burden-sharing 
2. 
The  trade-off  between  equity  and  efficiency  is  at  the  centre  of  the  debate  at  the  national 
level. For example, labour market reforms in the countries at the periphery designed to lower 
barriers  to  entry  and,  hence,  promote  employment  are  being  called  into  question  by 
incumbent  employees  who  fear  downward  pressure  on  wages  and  a  higher  risk  of  being 
made redundant. And this trade-off is at the centre of the debate at the European level. On 
the  one  hand,  there  is  the  desire  to  strengthen incentives  and  controls in  order  to contain 
risks. On the other hand, there is the desire to share the large economic, social and political 
burdens through mutualising risks. There was a similar tug-of-war between sound incentives 
and  increased  burden-sharing  in  the  debate  on  how  the  rescue  mechanisms  should  be 
constructed, in the debate on the introduction of eurobonds as well as the debate on a true 
fiscal union, and it also shaped the debate on banking union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the 
in  point  concerning 
tug-of-war  between  sound 
incentives  and 
Another  case 
burden-sharing is the debate on Germany’s role in rebalancing the euro area. For sharing the 
burden  of  macroeconomic  adjustment,  commentators  such  as  Martin  Wolf  and  Paul 
Krugman have suggested that Germany should lower its competitiveness, say, by means of 
a  considerable  hike  in  wages;  in  other  words,  a  larger  increase  than  is  warranted  by 
conditions  on  the  German  labour  market.  The  idea  behind  this  is  that  competitiveness  is 
relative:  one  country’s  loss  is  another  country’s  gain.  Unfortunately,  according  to  our  own 
estimates,  the  results  of  such  a  policy  would  be  likely  to  disappoint.  We  assumed  an 
additional wage increase in Germany of 2 percentage points above what would normally be 
expected as the outcome of bargaining. Then we used our economic models to calculate the 
effect  that  such  an  increase  would  have  on  the  exports  of  peripheral  euro-area  countries. 
Owing  to  the  nature  of the  trade  flows  between  Germany  and  southern  Europe,  the  effect 
would  be  close  to  non-existent.  Only  Ireland  could  expect  a  moderate  lift.  By  contrast, 
Germany’s  economy  would  take  a  hit.  Depending  on  the  model,  employment  would 
ultimately fall as much as 1 %, and output by ¾ %. There would be no free lunch in terms of 
higher  German  purchasing  power  and  higher  exports  of  deficit  countries.  In  the  case  of 
macroeconomic adjustment, burden-sharing through wage rises in Germany would be truly 
self-defeating. The same applies to a further fiscal stimulus in Germany. 
In a globalised economy, any attempt to shield one European country from competition by 
lowering the competitiveness of another would be doomed to fail. A lasting resolution of the 
crisis will be achieved only by harnessing the forces of the market, not by doing away with 
them. This is true not only for the euro area, but also for the European Union as whole. This 
aspect  of  Prime  Minister  Cameron’s  much-discussed  speech  on  Europe  has  received 
comparatively little attention, but I wish to second him on this point. 
Harnessing the forces of the market for Europe as a whole means making the most of its 
main catalyst for competition and growth. Bringing the single market into line with the digital 
age  and  extending  it  to  the  entire  range  of  services  available  within  the  European  Union 
would  harbour  the  potential  for  even  surpassing  the  gains  already  achieved  by  the  single 
market.  In  his  report1  to  the  European  Commission,  then  Commissioner  Mario  Monti 
estimated the potential growth effects of creating a digital single market to be about 4 %, on 
a par with the gains made since 1993. Further benefits would ensue from a reduction in the 
vast  number  of  exemptions  in  the  single  market  for  services.  Even  if  it  were  not  for  the 
biggest economic crisis in post-war European history, it would be a shame not to tap into this 
reservoir. But under the current circumstances, it is even more imperative to make full use of 
the potential of the single market. 
Reforms in this area could provide a much-needed boost to the monetary union as well. In 
other areas, progress is already visible. The process of macroeconomic rebalancing through 
structural reform is well under way. The current account deficits of Greece, Spain, Portugal 
and Italy are shrinking, and Ireland is already in surplus. Even more importantly, adjustment 
is being accomplished not only by shrinking imports, but also by growing exports. Obviously, 
taking  the  route  of  structural  reform  is  a  steep  and  challenging  climb.  But  upwards  is  the 
direction we should aim for, and we should not deviate from that course. 
Asserting the principle of liability in the monetary union 
3. 
Harnessing  the  forces  of  the  market  through  structural  reform  is  the  right  strategy  for 
regaining competitiveness at national level. By the same token, I am convinced that restoring 
market mechanisms where they have so far been impeded is crucial for strengthening the 
euro area’s institutional framework as well. A constitutive element of any functioning market 
                                                 
1   Monti, Mario (2010): A New Strategy for the Single Market. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economy is the principle of liability. Or, as Walther Eucken put it, “He who profits must also 
bear the losses.” 
When it comes to two of the biggest economic actors in the monetary union, this principle 
applies  only  to  a  limited  extent.  Banks  and  sovereigns  being  a  priori  deemed  systemically 
important,  since  turbulence  on  either  front  threatens  the  stability  of  the  financial  system, 
would not bode well for the future stability of the monetary union. A framework in which two 
of the biggest players are at least partially exempt from the disciplining forces of the market 
would  invite  future  aberrations  and  lack  resilience.  If  we  are  to  put  monetary  union  on  a 
sounder footing, such vulnerabilities need to be addressed as a matter of urgency. And, as 
both problems are so closely intertwined, any attempt to tackle one of them in isolation would 
be likely to fall short of what is required. 
Let me first take a step back and look at why the close link between banks and sovereigns 
has  proved  to  be  so  problematic  in  this  crisis.  If  many  banks  get  into  trouble  at  the  same 
time, possibly because of a large asset bubble bursting, financial stability as a whole is put at 
risk. The government then often has no option but to step in if it wants to prevent a meltdown 
of the real economy. But such a rescue rewards excessive risk-taking and can place a huge 
strain  on  government  finances  –  which  is  what  happened  in  Ireland,  where  the  need  to 
support  the  financial  system  pushed  the  deficit  above  30  %  of  GDP  in  2010.  Conversely, 
weak  government  positions  can  destabilise  banks  –  directly  through  their  exposure  to 
sovereign bonds, and indirectly through worsening macroeconomic conditions. 
Breaking the link between banks and sovereigns is important for making the euro area more 
stable. A banking union can be a big step in that direction – but again, we need to harness 
the  disciplinary  forces  of  the  market,  not  do  away  with  them.  Core  elements  of  a 
comprehensive banking union therefore have to be not just an effective single supervisory 
mechanism, but also a comprehensive bail-in of bank creditors, and a cap on exposure to 
individual  sovereign  as  well  as  an  adequate  risk-weighting  of  sovereign  bonds  on  banks’ 
balance sheet – at least in the medium term. 
Let me elaborate slightly on the second point. In order to minimise the risk to government 
finances  posed  by  bank  rescues,  creditors  have  to  be  the  first  in  line  when  it  comes  to 
bearing banks’ losses. Implicit guarantees have to be removed as taxpayers’ money can only 
be  the  last  resort.  By  the  same  token,  with  regard  to  the  adequacy  of  capital  buffers, 
sovereign bonds need to be adequately risk-weighted. Riskier bonds have to become more 
expensive  in  terms  of  the  amount  of  equity  they  tie  down,  as  is  already  the  case  for 
non-sovereign  bonds.  This  serves  two  purposes.  Firstly,  such  surcharges  are  designed  to 
curb elevated demand and hence bring spreads more into line with the underlying risk, thus 
giving a disciplining signal to the respective sovereign. And, secondly, banks would become 
more resilient in cases of market turmoil. The former chief economist of the IMF, Professor 
Rogoff, even went so far as to state in an interview recently that adequate risk-weighting of 
sovereign bonds constitutes a far more effective debt brake than the mechanism envisaged 
in the fiscal compact. Furthermore, there should be caps on the maximum exposure of banks 
to individual sovereign creditors, as is already the case for private creditors. Such a step is 
especially  important  in  terms  of  reducing  the  systemic  importance  of  any  individual 
sovereign, as Jörg Rocholl pointed out in a Handelsblatt2 article two weeks ago. 
A banking union will contribute to financial stability, but its design needs to preserve sound 
incentives for all the actors involved. This is true not only of future risks, but also of risks that 
have already materialised. After all, a banking union is also an insurance mechanism. And, 
as with any insurance, only loss and damage that is unknown ex ante should be covered. 
Therefore,  “legacy  assets”  –  in  other  words,  those  risks  which  evolved  under  the 
responsibility of national supervisors – have to be dealt with by the relevant member states. 
                                                 
2   Rocholl, Jörg: Risiko Staatspleite (Handelsblatt comment, 04.02.2013, page 48). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Anything  else  would  amount  to  a  fiscal  transfer.  It  may  be  that  such  fiscal  transfers  are 
desirable or even deemed necessary. But then, they should be conducted through national 
budgets  and  be  subject  to  the  approval  of  national  parliaments,  rather  than  under  the 
disguise of a banking union – which would then have to start out under a heavy burden – or, 
for  that  matter,  through  central  banks.  And,  in  the  event  of  such  transfers,  the  proper 
sequencing of events is crucial. We should not end up in a world where risks arising from 
bank balance sheets are rapidly mutualised, while an effective single supervisory mechanism 
is slow in coming. 
Getting the single supervisory mechanism and a common resolution and restructuring regime 
operational is very important. Several conceptual questions need a convincing answer. How 
do we deal with the ten EU members that do not belong to the euro area? How do we ensure 
the effective separation of monetary policy and banking supervision? The devil is often in the 
detail. 
I firmly believe that Europe has to get this project right and that it cannot afford to get off to a 
bumpy start. A banking union will not be a quick fix for the current crisis. But it is a major 
milestone  on  the  road  to  a  more  stable  and  prosperous  monetary  union  and  hence 
instrumental in restoring confidence in the euro area. And this is the reason why I support it 
and why we need to get it right. 
4. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The European debt crisis is heading into its fourth year, and there is still some risk that it will 
remain  on  everybody’s  mind  for  some  time  to  come.  But,  especially  with  regard  to  the 
macroeconomic rebalancing of the euro area, many signs point to a silver lining. Restoring 
market mechanisms through structural reform is starting to pay dividends at national level, 
and this approach should also guide us when addressing the remaining weaknesses in the 
euro  area’s  architecture.  Asserting  the  principle  of  liability  is  key  to  breaking  the  negative 
feedback  loop  between  banks  and  sovereigns.  The  task  is  daunting,  often  tedious  and 
sometimes sobering. But I am convinced that it can be done and that the euro’s best days 
are still ahead of us. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
