K C Chakrabarty: Productivity trends in Indian banking in the post reform 
period – experience, issues and future challenges 
Special address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  FIBAC  2013,  organized  by  FICCI  (Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  & 
Industry) and IBA (Indian Banks’ Association), Mumbai, 13 August 2013. 
 Data  used  in  the  document  in  provisional  and  intended  to  capture  the  broad  trends  only.  It  may  not  tally  with 
actual figures. 
Shri  K.R.  Kamath,  Chairman,  IBA  and  CMD,  Punjab  National  Bank;  Shri  H.S.U.  Kamath, 
CMD,  Vijaya  Bank;  Smt.  V.R.  Iyer,  CMD,  Bank  of  India;  Shri  R.K.  Dubey,  CMD,  Canara 
Bank; Shri M. Narendra, CMD, Indian Overseas Bank; Shri D. Sarkar, CMD Union Bank of 
India;  other  senior  colleagues  from  the  banking  industry;  delegates  to  the  conference; 
members  of  the  print  and  electronic  media;  ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is,  indeed,  a  great 
pleasure and privilege for me to address this august gathering today and I thank FICCI and 
the IBA for this opportunity. The conference, which is in its twelfth edition, has succeeded in 
bringing together the best minds in the banking industry and has grown into a platform which 
deliberates  contemporary  issues  facing  Indian  banking.  I  am  very  glad  to  note  the  theme 
chosen  for  this  year’s  event,  “Consistency,  Quality  and  Resilience:  The  Next  Frontier  for 
Productivity  and  Excellence”.  I  strongly  believe  that  productivity  and  efficiency  in  banking 
services would be the bulwark for all round economic development in India. Considering the 
challenges currently confronting the economy, there is little doubt that the time for the next 
big productivity push in Indian banking is now. I therefore, congratulate FICCI and IBA for 
their  choice  of  theme  for  the  conference  and  do  hope  that  ideas  emanating  from  the 
conference deliberations bear fruition in the coming days. 
2.  I  am  happy  to  note  that  BCG  has  brought  out  a  study  report  on  the  theme  of  the 
conference, which, based on extensive field survey, has recommended several measures for 
attaining productivity excellence in Indian banking. I congratulate BCG for their effort and do 
hope  that  the  banking  industry  gives  serious  thought  to  the  study  recommendations  and 
takes them forward in right earnest. 
3.  During  my  address  today,  I  would  be  highlighting  the  trends  in  productivity  in  Indian 
banking over the last two decades, including trends across bank groups. However, the thrust 
of my address would be on the fact that improvements in productivity and efficiency of banks 
has not had the desired beneficial impact on all segments of our economy and hence, there 
is a need for the entire paradigm of banking productivity and efficiency to be reoriented to be 
in alignment with our national priorities. 
Productivity and efficiency 
4. Investopedia defines productivity as an economic measure of output per unit of input. The 
concept of productivity is more easily applied to industrial settings while it is more difficult to 
define  and  measure  in  the  context  of  services  sector,  including  the  banking  industry.  We 
often have to rely upon proxies to gauge productivity of banks and there is no single measure 
that has been universally accepted as representing banking productivity.  
5. It is common to see the terms “productivity” and “efficiency” being used interchangeably in 
literature. However, productivity is more a measure of performance of labour, which is one of 
the  factors  of  production.  Efficiency,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  much  broader  term  which 
represents the performance of all factors of production. In case of banks, while productivity 
measures the performance of their staff, efficiency represents the combined performance of 
staff,  capital  and  management.  However,  let  me  add  that  there  are  strong  inter-linkages 
between  the  performance  of  the  three  factors  of  production:  high  productivity  of  staff  will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
result in efficient utilization of capital, while an efficient management function would result in 
superior  performance  by  labour  and  capital.  It  would,  therefore,  be  safe  to  conclude  that 
when  all  the  key  inputs  are  optimally  deployed,  the  outcome  will  be  an  “efficient”  bank. 
Having said that, let me state upfront that I would also be using the terms “productivity” and 
“efficiency” concurrently in my address today. 
Productivity and efficiency of banks 
6. Banks form the core of a nation’s financial system, performing the vital function of financial 
intermediation through liquidity, maturity and risk transformation. Finance is the lifeline of any 
commercial  activity  and  banks  act  as  a  link  between  the  savers  and  the  borrowers.  The 
productivity and efficiency of banks, thus, critically impacts the productivity and efficiency of 
all economic activity and is a matter of concern for policy makers and economy  watchers. 
There are two aspects to banking efficiency which I would like to highlight: 
(i)  Allocational  Efficiency:  Allocational  efficiency  focuses  on  ensuring  that  the  precious 
financial resources are allotted to the most productive activities as per development needs of 
society. It seeks to ensure that the broad national priorities are furthered through the process 
of resource allocation and that the interests of the most vulnerable sections are protected.  
(ii)  Operational  Efficiency:  Operational  Efficiency  means  banks  seek  to  provide  financial 
services in a safe, secure, speedy and cost effective manner. The goal should be to ensure 
that the transformation function generates least friction in terms of time and cost overlays.  
7. The concepts of allocational and operational efficiencies have considerable inter-linkages 
and the challenge for banks is to ensure optimal performance on both fronts. However, as I 
would argue later in my address, the Indian banking system has not succeeded in balancing 
these two parameters, with the result that progress on one has been at the cost of the other. 
8. Those who would recollect my address at FIBAC 2012 may remember that I had sought to 
deliberate  on  the  concept  of  allocational  efficiency  through  the  Revised  Priority  Sector 
Guidelines,  which  had  been  issued  a  few  months  earlier.  The  theme  for  this  year’s  event 
permits me to take my thoughts forward by focusing on the other element, viz. operational 
efficiency and on the interplay between the two. 
Importance of productivity in banking 
9.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  banks  perform  the  important  function  of  financial  intermediation 
and the efficiency of their operations has an important bearing on overall economic health of 
the  country.  Greater  efficiency  in  banking  operations  ensures  that  the  cost  of  financial 
intermediation  is  minimized.  At  a  time  when  the  global  and  Indian  economy  are  facing 
challenges on multiple fronts, efficient financial intermediation would provide impetus to the 
process of economic recovery by channelizing funds to the most productive sectors at the 
lowest cost. 
10. Improvement in productivity and efficiency, and the resultant decline in cost of providing 
financial services will help in furthering financial inclusion (FI). More importantly, it will help in 
converting  the  improved  access  to  financial  services  into  improved  usage.  This  improved 
usage will make the FI activities commercially viable both for the banks and for the BCs and 
encourage  them  to  scale  up  their  FI  initiatives,  thereby  helping  in  quickly  bringing  the 
remaining  unbanked  villages  into  the  fold  of  the  formal  financial  system.  Hence,  banking 
productivity  and  efficiency  has  a  direct  impact  on  improving  financial  access  and  financial 
usage. 
11.  The  recent  decline  in  economic  growth  has  presented  significant  challenges  to  banks 
through  rising  impairment  of  assets,  pressure  on  margins  and  volatility  in  non-interest 
income.  In  this  demanding  business  environment,  improved  operational  efficiency  will  help 
banks  in  standing  up  to  the  challenges  and  enable  them  to  maintain  their  health  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
profitability.  I  strongly  believe  that  every  time  the  financial  system  has  been  faced  with  a 
crisis, a resolute push towards improved productivity and efficiency has invariably aided it in 
seeing through the troubled times. 
12. As banks form the core of the country’s financial system, the health and profitability of 
banks will help in ensuring stability and resilience of the entire financial system. Thus, from a 
systemic  stability  perspective  also,  improved  productivity  and  efficiency  of  the  banking 
system is a definite positive. 
Productivity trends in Indian banking 
13. The Indian banking industry has, over the years, taken significant strides in its quest for 
greater  productivity.  Analysis  of  data  (based  on  various  parameters)  indicates  that  Indian 
banks,  particularly  the  public  sector  banks,  have  shown  significant  progress  on  the 
productivity and efficiency front. The efficiency of banks has been analyzed based on cost 
based parameters and profitability linked parameters. 
Cost based parameters 
14.  As  can  be  seen  from  the  table  above,  all  three  ratios  have  seen  a  significant 
improvement  during  this  period,  indicating  improved  efficiency  of  the  banking  system.  For 
instance, the Ratio of Operating Expenses to Average Assets has seen a decline from 2.60% 
to 1.75% during 1992–2013. A bank-group wise analysis indicates that Public Sector Banks 
(PSBs)  have  seen  much  greater  progress  as  compared  to  new  private  banks  and  foreign 
banks (Tables in Annex). The Cost Income ratio across bank groups also indicates similar 
pattern,  with  the  ratio  seeing  a  significant  decline  over  the  period  1995–2013.  The  main 
drivers of this decline were the PSBs, which saw a perceptible decline in this ratio while new 
private banks and foreign banks, in fact, saw a rise in this ratio over the period under review. 
15.  An  analysis  of  the  CAGR  of  various  expense  parameters  indicates  that  operating 
expenses grew at a CAGR of 14.65% between 1992 and 2013, whereas staff expenses grew 
at  a  CAGR  of  13.63%  during  this  period.  PSBs  had  the  lowest  CAGR  for  operating 
expenses, staff expenses and other operating expenses (Table in Annex)  
16. As indicated by Table 2 above, banking productivity in terms of staff costs has seen a 
considerable  improvement  during  1992–2013.  Interestingly,  there  has  been  a  significant 
convergence of these ratios across various bank groups (Tables in Annex). While the ratios 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  have increased over this period in case of foreign banks and new private banks, the ratios 
have seen a considerable decline in case of PSBs. 
Profitability/turnover based parameters 
 17. The NIMs of banks saw a decline from 3.30% in 1992 to 2.79% in 2013. Importantly, the 
NIMs  of  Nationalized  banks  were  considerably  lower  than  that  of  other  bank  groups  and 
stood at 2.39% in 2013, while foreign banks and new private banks had NIMs of 3.89% and 
3.32%  respectively  (Tables  in  Annex).  The  higher  NIMs  indicated  greater  intermediation 
spread  charged  by  banks  and  could  be  viewed  as  a  cost.  Banks  need  to  develop  the 
capability to viably carry out their operations with lower NIMs as this would be essential in 
providing low cost services to the excluded groups. 
18.  It  is  evident  that  improved  productivity  and  efficiency  has  positively  impacted  the 
profitability levels of the banking system. However, as I would be alluding to later, the same 
has  been  due  to  structural  changes  in  banks’  balance  sheet.  The  higher  profitability 
parameters also indicate that the benefits of improved efficiency have not been passed on to 
the customers and have, instead, been retained by banks for higher profits and provisioning. 
19. Thus, the key observations from the analysis of productivity trends in Indian banking are: 
On  both  cost  and  profitability  based  parameters,  the  productivity  and  efficiency  of 
 
banks has seen a definite improvement over the last two decades.  
At  a  bank  group  level,  PSBs  have  performed  better  than  new  private  banks  and 
foreign banks on various benchmarks. 
However,  the  progress  has  not  been  constant  and  continuous  over  this  period. 
There have been phases of rapid and slow growths. 
  Four phases of productivity growth 
20.  In  order  to  better  understand  the  productivity  trends  in  the  banking  system,  the  post 
reform time line in India may be divided into distinct phases based on various internal and 
external developments which impacted the banking sector. 
 
Phase  1  (Pre-1995):  This  phase  represents  the  period  immediately  after  the 
economic  reforms.  Besides  the  challenges  posed  by  the  changes  in  business 
environment due to the reforms, banks also had to adjust to changes in regulatory 
norms. 
Phase  2  (1995–2001):  This  was  a  period  of  stabilization  post  reforms  and  was 
characterized  by  developments  like  computerization,  formulation  of  strategies  for 
technology implementation, challenges of NPAs and banks approaching markets for 
capital.  
Phase 3 (2001–2007): This was the growth phase when the impact of reforms was 
fully felt. This period was characterized by technology upgradation by banks, benefit 
of global liquidity and a period of growth. This was also the phase of build-up of risks 
due to the irrational exuberance exhibited by market players. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  4 
  Phase  4  (2007–2013):  This  last  phase  is  dominated  by  the  global  financial  crisis 
and post crisis pains. The risks building up in the previous phase crystallized during 
this  period.  The  period  is  also  characterized  by  reforms  fatigue,  lack  of  banking 
penetration,  absence  of  internal  reforms  and  ineffective  structure,  systems  and 
people. 
21. In view of the considerable inter-year variations in various productivity indicators, analysis 
of the same has been done over the above four phases in order to identify trends. For this 
purpose, averages of various parameters over the relevant period have been considered. 
   The key observations that emerge from the analysis of expenses across the four phases are: 
 
There is definite evidence of productivity and efficiency gains in Indian banking. This 
productivity gain has led to strengthening of balance sheets of banks. 
The gap between PSBs and other bank groups on various productivity parameters 
has considerably narrowed. Though there were initial concerns that PSBs will lose 
out to competition from the new private banks and foreign banks, it is commendable 
that PSBs have responded well to the challenge and have succeeded in raising their 
efficiency levels. In case of new private banks, expense ratios remain high as they 
are in an expansionary phase. 
The pace of productivity gains has varied with the greatest progress being seen in 
Phase 3 (2001–2007), while lower gains were witnessed in the initial two phases. It 
is observed that the productivity gains started tapering off in the fourth phase. 
Within operating expenses, it is observed that staff expenses have improved faster 
than  other  operating  expenses.  Currently,  other  operating  expenses  of  PSBs 
continue  to remain  considerably  lower  than  new  private  banks  and  foreign  banks. 
This  is  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  they  have  not  paid  adequate  attention  to  the 
physical  infrastructure  and  the  ambience  at  branches.  However,  this  ratio  is  also 
expected to converge in the future. 
Interestingly,  in  phase  4,  PSBs  have  emerged  as  the  highest  per  employee  staff 
expenses among Indian bank groups. This clearly indicates that they have lost the 
staff  cost  advantage  of  the  past.  However,  they  have  saved  on  aggregate  staff 
expenses by curtailing staff deployment with the use of technology. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Global comparison 
22.  While  we  have  made  some  progress  on  the  productivity  front,  it  is  important  to 
benchmark the Indian banking system against global productivity standards in order to get a 
better understanding of where we stand. 
 While  there  has  been a  tangible  improvement  in  our  relative  productivity  levels  on  various 
parameters such as Operating Expenses Ratio, we still lag behind several of our peers from 
Asia and the developed world. For instance, in case of Ratio of Operating Cost to Assets, 
China (0.80%), Malaysia (1.27%) and Korea (1.05%) have much lower ratios as compared to 
the  Indian  position  of  1.65%.  Considering  the  fact  that  we  are  pursuing  the  mission  of 
extending access to affordable banking services to the unbanked poor, we need to target a 
level which is at par, if not better than many of these countries.  
23.  Our  Net  Interest  Margin  at  2.70%  is  also  higher  than  that  observed  in  many  other 
countries.  While  this  would  have  helped  in  improved  profitability  of  our  banks,  the  higher 
margins  indicate  an  extent  of  inefficiency,  which  is  being  passed  on  to  the  ultimate 
customers.  On  the  Ratio  of  Net  Profit  to  Assets,  Indian  banks  are  better  than  many  other 
jurisdictions.  Considering  the  fact  that  our  Operating  expenses  ratio  are  higher  than  many 
countries,  the  ratio  suggests  that  our  banks  have  been  passing  on  the  cost  of  their 
operational inefficiencies to their customers and are, thus, able to record greater profits at the 
cost of their customers. 
What has happened to allocational efficiency? 
24. As was observed from the analysis presented previously, the Indian banking system has 
seen a perceptible improvement in its efficiency levels over the last two decades. However, 
the  question  that  I  would  like  to  pose  here  today  is  that  has  the  improved  operational 
efficiency  resulted  in  attainment  of  desired  outcomes  for  all  sections  of  our  population?  I 
would argue that the improved operational efficiency has not facilitated greater allocational 
efficiency, but has, instead, been at the cost of allocational efficiency. Let me present some 
data to buttress my argument: 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The proportion of rural branches to total branches of scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) 
has seen a sharp decline from 57.16% in 1994 to 37.18%  in 2013. In fact, the number of 
rural  branches  of  SCBs  saw  a  continuous  decline  between  1994–2006.  This  indicated  a 
complete neglect of the requirements of rural areas by banks during this period. It was only 
after  a  determined  regulatory  push  towards  financial  inclusion  that  the  number  of  rural 
branches saw a perceptible rise post 2009. The failure of banks to improve their allocational 
efficiency  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  resources,  in  terms  of  banking  presence,  was  not 
allotted to the most underbanked segments i.e. the rural areas. This was despite the fact that 
improving operational efficiency and access to technology over this period had enhanced the 
capability of banks to better serve rural habitations. Yet it appears that banks chose to ignore 
the need for allocational efficiency. 
The above  data indicates that the number of credit accounts in rural areas increased at a 
CAGR  of  1.4%  between  1994–2012,  while  the  number  of  credit  accounts  in  Metro  areas 
recorded  a  CAGR  of  13.86%.  The  proportion  of  credit  flowing  to  rural  areas  also  declined 
from 18% to 8%, while the proportion of deposits being sourced from rural areas declined 
from 15.1% to 9.4% during this period. Both the above metrics highlight the declining focus of 
banks on rural business and greater emphasis on business in metro areas.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The proportion of bank credit going to agriculture and SSI sectors has seen a steady decline 
from 30.03% in 1994 to 17.95% in 2013. This was despite the fact that these sectors have 
been receiving special attention from policy makers for some time now. As compared to this, 
the  proportion  of  credit  to  medium  and  large  industries  has  marginally  increased  from  its 
levels in 1994, despite their contribution to GDP declining significantly over the years. This 
again  highlights  inadequate  allocational  efficiency  among  banks  and  their  preference  for 
catering to the needs of larger borrowers instead of smaller ones. 
Another measure of inadequate allocational efficiency among banks is the concentration of 
deposit/  credit  indicated  by  the  proportion  held  by  top  10/100  cities  as  compared  to  total 
deposit/ credit. Based on this measure, there has not been any improvement in concentration 
of  credit,  which  has  remained  largely  unchanged  over  this  period  at  around  60%,  while 
concentration  of  deposits  saw  a  considerable  deterioration  from  39%  to  49%.  The 
concentration indicated by the proportion of credit/ deposit to top 100 cities has also been 
steadily increasing over this period. This clearly indicates that smaller towns/ cities and rural 
areas  were  being  deprived  of  credit/  deposit  services  by  banks,  adversely  impacting 
economic growth opportunities available to them. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   The  above  occupation-wise  analysis  of  deposits  indicates  that  the  percentage  of  deposit 
accounts held by individuals declined from 96% to 86% between 1997 and 2012. During this 
period,  the  proportionate  amount  of  deposits  held  by  individuals  saw  a  steep  decline  from 
77%  to  51%.  The  declining  share  of  individuals  in  deposits,  both  in  terms  of  number  and 
amount reinforces the fact that banks have been losing their focus on smaller customers and 
are increasingly moving towards servicing bigger clients. 
 Over  the  period  1994–2012,  the  number  of  very  small  credit  accounts  (limit  upto  ₹25000) 
saw a decline from around 55 million to 44 million despite the total number of credit accounts 
increasing  by  119.4%  over  this  period.  The  outstanding  credit  in  these  accounts  as  a 
proportion of total credit also declined from 18.3% to a mere 1.6%. Similarly, proportion of 
amount outstanding in small loans upto ₹0.2 million to total loans also declined from 30.5% 
to  9.5%  during  this  period.  The  decline  in  smaller  loan  accounts,  which  often  cater  to  the 
needs  of  the  poor  and  marginalized  sections  of  the  society,  again  highlights  the  fact  that 
banks  have  largely  focused  on  catering  to  the  needs  of  the  bigger  borrowers,  which  is 
against  the  principles  of  allocational  efficiency.  Predictably,  the  proportion  of  amount 
outstanding in high value loans (limit > ₹1000 mn) increased from 10% to 31% during this 
period. 
25.  A  similar  analysis  in  case  of  term  deposit  accounts  reveals  that  the  proportion  of 
accounts with deposit less than ₹0.1 mn declined from 93.6% to 73.7% between 2002–2012. 
Importantly,  the  proportion  of  amount  involved  in  such  deposit  accounts  saw  a  sizeable 
decline from 46.8% to 10.9% during this decade. Based on the above trends in credit and 
deposit accounts, it is fair to conclude that banking in India has been increasingly oriented 
towards  wholesale  business.  It  appears  to  be  losing  its  focus  on  retail  and  small  value 
business. Here, I would like to remind our bankers that one of the lessons from the global 
financial crisis was that small value and retail business proved to be a source of stability and 
that banks focusing heavily on wholesale business were the most severely impacted in the 
crisis. 
What has not happened? 
26. From the above data on various parameters, it is apparent that improving efficiencies in 
the Indian banking system have not had the desired beneficial impact on all segments of the 
population. This clearly implies that allocational efficiency has not kept pace with operational 
efficiency and, in fact, I may say that operational efficiency has been achieved at the cost of 
allocational efficiency. The gains from improving operational efficiency have not reached the 
customers, particularly the small customers or the poor and marginalized groups. In terms of 
geographical  spread,  these  gains  have  not  reached  the  rural  areas  and  have  largely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
remained restricted to the metropolitan areas and larger cities. It is regrettable to note that 
despite  the  improvements  made  in  operational  efficiency,  the  problems  of  disparities  in 
Indian banking and low penetration continue unabated.  
27.  While  it  was  expected  that  greater  competition  and  adoption  of  new  technology  would 
result  in  all  round  efficiency  improvement  in  the  banking  system,  it  is  again  apparent  that 
whatever  limited  competition  that  the  banks  have  been  exposed  to  and  the  technological 
progress has not resulted in bringing down the costs of providing banking services. I would 
like to pose the question that is a financial system with high operational efficiency but low 
allocational efficiency sustainable in the long run? 
Why has it not happened? 
28.  There  are  several  reasons  that  can  be  attributed  to  this  trend  of  declining  allocational 
efficiency against improving operational efficiency. Let me list a few: 
 
The  basic  reason  for  the  declining  allocational  efficiency  is  the  lack  of  banking 
penetration in the country. This has resulted in the denial of basic banking services 
such as provision of savings and credit facilities to large segments of our population.  
As was seen from the data analysis also, banks seem to be increasingly focusing on 
wholesale business and have reduced their emphasis on individuals and segments 
such  as  agriculture  and  small  industries.  This  trend  has  adversely  impacted 
allocational efficiency as the same demands that the needs of the smaller customers 
be prioritized while allocating banking resources. 
While new technology has been adopted by banks in India, including migration to 
CBS, the beneficial impact of technological progress on the productivity of banks is 
still low when compared with global standards. This can largely be attributed to the 
fact  that  banks  have  not  succeeded  in  leveraging  technology  to  create  products, 
business models and delivery channels that maximize productivity and efficiency. 
Most  importantly,  technological  progress  has  not  been  accompanied  by  internal 
reforms in banks. Banks have not attempted to carry out comprehensive Business 
Process  and  Structure  Reengineering  to  ensure  that  internal  processes  are 
realigned  by  leveraging  technology  with  the  goal  of  weeding  out  redundant 
processes and simplifying/ automating others. 
   What have we done? 
29.  Ensuring  greater  levels  of  allocational  efficiency  in  the  economy  has  been  one  of  the 
important priorities for policy makers and regulators. In fact, it is difficult to envisage the long 
term sustenance of a social or financial system where large scale disparities and inequalities 
exist. Hence, allocational efficiency, focusing on the needs and expectations of the excluded 
groups, has been receiving the attention of the Government and Reserve Bank. I would like 
to  highlight  some  of  the  steps  taken  to  ensure  greater  allocational  efficiency  in  banking 
operations: 
(i) Prescription of priority sector norms requiring banks to lend a certain part of their credit to 
sectors of the economy which, in the absence of these norms, would not receive adequate 
credit. With the revision in the priority sector norms in 2012, the same have been rationalized 
and larger foreign banks have also been mandated to be at par with Indian banks on priority 
sector lending, in a phased manner.  
(ii) Pricing norms for the priority sector business have been freed and banks are permitted to 
fix interest rates on their own. This will help banks to carry out FI initiatives in a viable and 
self sustaining manner, which will facilitate its scaling up. We, however, do expect that the 
pricing would be non-discriminatory and would not be exploitative. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(iii) There has been a policy shift with emphasis being on greater branch expansion in rural 
areas. This is in recognition of the trend of declining rural branches and the importance of 
brick  and  mortar  structures  in  improving  allocational  efficiency  through  FI.  Accordingly, 
domestic SCBs have been mandated to allocate at least 25 per cent of the total number of 
branches  to  be  opened  during  a  year  in  unbanked  rural  centres,  with  the  incentive  of 
frontloading over the Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP) period. 
(iv)  Banks  have  been  permitted  to  adopt  Business  Correspondents  (BC)  based  delivery 
models  to  effectively  cover  the  last  mile.  A  host  of  institutions  have  been  permitted  to 
become BCs. 
(v)  A  bank-led  structured  and  planned  push  towards  improving  access  and  usage  of  the 
formal  financial  system  by  the  unbanked  masses  has  been  made  by  leveraging  on 
technology. Some of the FI initiatives taken in India include:  
 
Banks have been advised to prepare Board approved FIPs. First phase of FIP for 
the  period  2010–2013  has  been  completed.  Banks  are  now  preparing  the  second 
phase of FIPs for the period 2013–2016. 
To  address  the  issue  of  uneven  spread  of  Bank  branches,  domestic  SCBs  have 
been  given  the  freedom  to  open  branches  in  centres  with  population  of  less  than 
100,000 subject to reporting to RBI. 
A  high  level  Financial  Inclusion  Advisory  Committee  (FIAC)  has  been  set  up  to 
provide strategic direction to FI initiatives across various stakeholders. 
In  order  to  ensure  operational  efficiency  and  close  monitoring  of  BC  operations, 
banks  have  been  advised  to  open  intermediate  brick  and  mortar  structures  to 
provide support to about 8–10 BC units at a reasonable distance of 3–4 kilometers. 
An integrated approach has been adopted for achieving FI through financial literacy. 
Various measures have been taken for the spread of financial literacy. A National 
Strategy for Financial Education has been finalized. Curriculum setting bodies are 
being involved for disseminating financial literacy in schools. 
    What should happen? 
30. The way forward for banks on the path towards greater productivity and efficiency has to 
be  two  pronged.  On  the  one  hand,  banks  need  to  focus  on  further  improvement  in 
operational efficiency so that they  are at par with their global peers. Concomitantly, banks 
also need to concentrate on improving allocational efficiency so that the benefits of improved 
operational  efficiency  are  enjoyed  by  all.  The  key  challenge  will  be  to  ensure  that  the  two 
goals are synergized and allotted equal priority. 
31. There are several other measures that Indian banks need to initiate in order to establish 
the balance between allocational efficiency and operational efficiency: 
 
Banks  need  to  initiate  internal  reforms  in  order  to  ensure  that  their  systems  and 
processes  are  in  a  position  to  leverage  technology  to  maximize  productivity  and 
efficiency  gains.  For  this  purpose,  banks  need  to  look  at  large  scale  Business 
Process and Structure Reengineering. 
Transaction  costs  need  to  be  reduced  by  fully  leveraging  technology.  This  would 
include  creation  of  new  cost  effective  products,  business  models  and  delivery 
channels. 
Banks need to implement robust information systems and IT architecture and should 
harness the power of the IT systems for business development. Besides, a strong IT 
system will also aid in adoption of better risk management practices.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
     Productivity  improvement  should  benefit  people  at  the  bottom  of  the  pyramid 
through  improved  access  to  financial  services  and  lower  cost  of  financial  access. 
Every individual should have the opportunity to improve his/her financial position by 
leveraging access to the financial system. Banks have to facilitate this. 
Banks have to reverse the tendency of focusing on wholesale business and should 
ensure that agriculture, retail and SME business receive adequate attention. This is 
important  not  just  for  improving  financial  access  for  the  smaller  and  marginalized 
groups, but also as a source of stability for banks.  
Banks  should  strive  to  improve  their  pricing  ability,  both  for  liability  and  asset 
products,  with  the  objective  of  ensuring  that  the  pricing  framework  is  transparent, 
non-discriminatory and non-exploitative. The basic principle of pricing should be that 
the  poor  and  the  vulnerable  should  not  be  subsidizing  the  provision  of  banking 
services to the rich. Besides, an effective pricing framework can assist in building up 
balance sheet strength by encouraging good business and shedding bad business. 
However, for all this, banks need to develop the ability to identify risks and to build 
them into their pricing frameworks. 
In  order  to  improve  productivity  and  efficiency,  banks  need  to  be  given  more 
flexibility in operational matters, particularly in manpower practices. In fact, I strongly 
believe that HR practices at banks, particularly PSBs, need to undergo significant 
change  in  areas  such  as  manpower  planning,  job  description,  performance 
appraisal,  promotion  and  placement  policies,  performance  based  compensation 
practices, etc. Attaining greater productivity and efficiency requires not just the right 
technology, systems and processes, but also the manpower with the right skills and 
attitude, demonstrating the necessary flexibility and adaptability to be able to keep 
pace with the changing times. Greater emphasis has also to be laid on productivity 
in terms of per branch and per employee performance. 
Lastly, but most importantly, there is an urgent need for improved governance and 
greater  accountability  across  all  levels  of  management  and  administration.  The 
change in corporate culture and the move towards true productivity and efficiency 
needs to be led by managements in their respective organizations. The pace and 
direction of these changes will be determined by the passion demonstrated by the 
management in pursuing this change. 
Banks have a great opportunity 
32. The theme of the conference alludes to the paradigms of the Next Frontier of Productivity 
Excellence.  To  me,  there  are  three  major  ingredients  that  contribute  to  productivity 
excellence, viz. Technology, Processes and People. I believe that significant opportunities lie 
ahead  for  our  banks  to  leverage  on  these  three  components  to  attain  true  banking 
productivity and efficiency i.e. both operational and allocational. On the technology front, our 
banks have already implemented certain basic technology and are all on CBS. They are, of 
late, also making efforts to incorporate new technology mediums in their delivery channels. 
On  the  technology  front,  banks  have  the  opportunity  to  perfect  their  technology  based 
delivery  models  so  as  to  significantly  reduce  costs  and  improve  penetration  of  banking 
services. 
33. On the Processes front, as I had mentioned earlier, the opportunity for banks is to carry 
out  large  scale  Business  Processes  and  Structure  Reengineering  in  order  to  reap  the  full 
benefits  of  technology.  Here,  I  would  emphasize  the  need  for  changing  Transactional 
Processes,  Business  Delivery  Models  and  use  of  Customer  Relationship  Management 
(CRM) tools to bolster efforts towards productivity and efficiency. 
34.  On  the  People  front,  the  opportunity  lies  in  the  form  of  large  scale  retirement  of  bank 
employees  that  is  to  happen  in  this  decade.  The  consequent  change  in  manpower  profile 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
provides  a  unique  opportunity  for  banks  to  Right-size  and  Right-skill  their  organizations  in 
line with the demands of fostering greater productivity and efficiency.  
the 
imbalances  arising 
Conclusion 
35. The Indian banking system has seen important productivity improvements over the last 
two  decades  with  the  PSBs,  in  particular,  bridging  the  gap  with  new  private  banks  and 
foreign  banks.  However,  the  pace of  progress has  declined,  largely  due  to  lack  of  desired 
impetus.  We  continue  to  lag  behind  several  other  countries  on  various  productivity 
parameters. Our banks have to strive towards closing this gap. 
36.  Banks’  gains  in  operational  efficiency  have,  however,  come  at  the  cost  of  their 
allocational efficiency. The improved operational efficiency has been a result of technological 
progress  and  structural  changes  in  balance  sheet  towards  more  wholesale  business.  The 
operational  efficiency  gains,  though  profitable  for  the  banks,  have  not  had  the  desired 
beneficial impact on the society as a whole, particularly the rural areas, individuals and small 
businesses.  I  would  say  that  the  vulnerability  of  the  banking  system  has  increased  on 
account  of 
in  operational  efficiency  without 
commensurate rise in allocational efficiency. Let me add that both Reserve Bank of India and 
Government of India have already initiated several corrective measures to reverse this trend 
by actively promoting the programme of financial inclusion. The correction process needs to 
be expedited further with greater zeal and vigor. 
37. Banks have to ensure that they attain greater allocational efficiency by extending access 
to  financial  services  to  the  unbanked  masses  and  providing  the  excluded  poor  the 
opportunity  to  leverage  the  financial  system  to  improve  their  economic  condition.  True 
productivity of the banking system can be judged not just by the positive impact on banks’ 
own  financials  but  by  the  impact  it  has  on  the  lives  of  ordinary  citizens.  I  hope  the  Indian 
banking  system  rises  up  to  the  challenge  of  attaining  productivity  and  efficiency  in  its  true 
sense and thereby contributes to the economic growth and prosperity of the nation. 
38. I once again thank FICCI and IBA for inviting me to FIBAC 2013 and providing me the 
opportunity  to  share  my  thoughts  on  this  important  subject.  I  observe  that  several  of  the 
issues raised by me here also find resonance in the report presented by BCG today and that 
they will be deliberated over the two days of the conference.  
I wish the conference all success. Thank you.  
from  growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
Annex* 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15
 16 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19
 20 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21
  22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
