Haruhiko Kuroda: Opening remarks 
Opening remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 2013 Bank 
of  Japan-Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies  (IMES)  Conference,  hosted  by  the 
IMES of the Bank of Japan, Tokyo, 29 May 2013. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Good  morning,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  my  great  honor  to  say  a  few  words  at  the 
beginning  of  the  2013  BOJ-IMES  Conference.  On  behalf  of  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of 
Japan  and  myself,  I  would  like  to  welcome  all  the  participants  from  the  academia,  central 
banks, and international organizations. 
This  year,  we  are  going  to  tackle  the  issue  of  “Financial  Crises  and  the  Global  Financial 
System.” It is no doubt a very familiar theme for all of you. In fact, we have discussed this 
topic time and again. Every time we faced an international financial crisis – we had far too 
many of them – the international financial system had to evolve in response, and that called 
for new ideas, or at least, new twists on old ideas. This was no easy task, as many of you, 
who were my colleagues in arms, would attest without any hesitation. Working on the front 
lines of international finance in the recurring process of turbulence and evolution of the global 
financial  system,  under  many  different  hats,  I  have  always  struggled  with  seemingly 
intractable problems, such as large fluctuations in the exchange rate and huge swings in the 
flows of capital. In retrospect, past discussions and responses regarding the global financial 
system did not follow a straight line. We saw a series of trials and errors. Karl Popper, who 
was a philosopher of scientific methodology, mentioned that for the quest of the truth, “there 
is no more rational procedure than the method of trial and error.”1 Through repeated trials 
and errors in every past financial crisis, economics has actually accumulated new wisdom. 
As we face the formidable task of rebuilding the international financial system severely hit by 
the most recent financial crisis, our trials and errors from the past will certainly provide us 
with valuable insights. 
II.  
The role of the trilemma of international finance in the evolution of the global 
financial system 
In light of wisdom that has been accumulated so far, the starting point of discussion on the 
organization  of  a  global  financial  system  is  the  trilemma  of  international  finance.  As  you 
know, the trilemma shows that no economy can simultaneously achieve the three goals of 
capital  mobility,  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  and  independent  monetary  policy.  Global  financial 
systems  were  adopted  under  the  constraints  of  this  trilemma.  When  an  adopted  system 
became  unsustainable,  the  result  was  a  financial  crisis,  leading  to  the  adoption  of  a  new 
global financial system. This cycle was repeated many times over. Let me briefly turn to a 
few historical examples. 
At  the  end  of  World  War  II,  the  Bretton  Woods  system  was  introduced  to  solve  several 
problems  that  had  occurred  during  the  interwar  period,  including  competitive  devaluations. 
With  controls  over  capital  mobility,  this  system  allowed  the  simultaneous  pursuit  of 
independent monetary policy and the peg to the U.S. dollar, which was exchangeable with 
gold  at  a  fixed  rate.  In  the  1960s,  against  a  background  of  deteriorating  U.S.  balance  of 
payments, there were changes in the international financial environment: the amount of U.S. 
dollars  held  by  non-residents  increased  and  the  Eurodollar  market  came  into  being  and 
                                                
1   Popper,  Karl,  “Science:  Conjectures  and  Refutations,”  Conjectures  and  Refutations,  Routledge  and  Kegan 
Paul, 1963. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
expanded. Under such circumstances, the U.S. gold reserves continued to flow out and as 
the world became more uneasy with the convertibility of the U.S. dollar, the Bretton Woods 
system  was  abandoned.  Consequently,  advanced  economies  maintained  independent 
monetary  policy,  while  adopting  the  floating  exchange  rate  system  and  further  liberalizing 
capital mobility. 
A few decades on, in the 1990s, currency crises hit a number of emerging economies, such 
as Mexico, Thailand, Indonesia, South Korea, Russia, and Brazil. Against a background of 
increasingly  liberal  capital  mobility  and  the  accompanying  growth  of  capital  account 
transactions, the principal driver of the crises was the unsustainable current account deficits 
in  many  of  those  economies  with  de  facto  U.S.  dollar-pegged  exchange  rates.  After  the 
crises, the economies  have  pursued  independent  monetary  policy  and  have  increased  the 
flexibility  of  their  exchange  rates,  while  upholding  capital  mobility.  Moreover,  taking  into 
account  the  lessons  of  the  currency  crises,  Asian  emerging  countries  have  significantly 
increased their foreign exchange reserves and have promoted regional financial cooperation, 
such as the Cheng Mai Initiative. 
In  sum,  the  evolution  of  the  global  financial  system  to  date  is  heavily  influenced  by  the 
episodes  of  past  financial  crises,  at  the  same  time  constrained  by  the  trilemma  of 
international finance. 
III.  
Issues for the rebuilding of a global financial system after the recent global 
financial crisis 
The recent financial crisis has had a great impact on the global financial system as much as 
or even more than past crises. In a world of deepening financial globalization, financial crises 
were  usually  associated  with  emerging  economies  and triggered  by  a  sharp  decline  in the 
exchange rate. But this crisis was different in two respects. First, the epicenter of the recent 
crisis was in the advanced economies and the crisis spread out from there to many emerging 
economies.  Second,  the  crisis  was  triggered  and  then  amplified  by  the  dysfunction  of 
financial systems. 
Reflecting  on these  observations,  I  believe  that the global financial  community  must,  in  its 
efforts to rebuild the global financial system, come to terms with two issues: capital controls 
and financial regulation and supervision. 
On  capital  controls,  in  the  past  currency  crises  involving  emerging  economies,  there  was 
some contagion between those economies. In contrast, in the recent financial crisis, stress 
that arose in the United States and the euro area was transmitted at once to many emerging 
countries,  including  those  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and  Latin  America.  One  of  the 
causes of such international transmission of the crisis is deemed to be financial globalization 
and  the  accompanying  global  upsurge  of  gross  capital  flows,  which  has  led  to  increasing 
attention  over  prudential  capital  controls.  Moreover,  in  recent  years,  the  International 
Monetary  Fund,  which  has  long  emphasized  the  benefits  of  capital  mobility,  has,  at  least 
partially, accepted the necessity of capital controls as a macro-prudential policy tool. 
Turning  to  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions  for  the  purpose  of 
maintaining  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  in  the  wake  of  the  recent  financial  crisis, 
there is a globally renewed recognition of the importance of financial stability. Against that 
background,  international  meetings,  like  those  of  the  G20,  have  discussed  how  financial 
regulation and supervision could be enhanced and harmonized internationally. Meanwhile, in 
the euro area, the discussion on a banking union is underway. In this context, the concept of 
“financial  trilemma,”  which  has  recently  been  proposed  in  the  academia,  seems  to  offer  a 
useful viewpoint2. In the argument of financial trilemma, it is held that any economy cannot 
                                                
2   Schoenmaker, Dirk, “Financial Trilemma,” Economics Letters, 111 (1), 2011, 57–59. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
simultaneously achieve three goals of financial integration (capital mobility), financial stability, 
and national financial policy. 
Conclusion 
IV.  
Finding solutions to these two issues and building a new global financial system under the 
trilemma  of  international  finance  are  no  easy  tasks.  Even  if  we  could  establish  a  global 
financial system that is robust at this time, such a system is unlikely to last forever, given that 
a financial crisis beyond our imaginations may occur in the future. Having said this, it is by no 
means futile for us to examine the relevant issues and pursue a more robust global financial 
system.  As  history  has  shown,  there  were  more  than  a  few  financial  crises,  and  on  each 
occasion, there were discussions on building a  new financial system. The accumulation of 
wisdom  in  the  process  has  been  helpful  for  shaping  the  policy  responses  to  subsequent 
crises and rebuilding of the financial system. 
Today, the global economy has not yet completely shook off the effects of the global financial 
crisis, even after five years since the onset of the crisis. Nevertheless, I am convinced that 
the great challenges posed by the crisis will give us new insights and help us create a new 
and  better  world.  I  hope  that  with  all  the  distinguished  participants  from  around  the  world 
exchanging their experiences and views, this conference will contribute to the accumulation 
of wisdom that is urgently needed for the current efforts to rebuild the global financial system 
and sure to be useful in the future when black swan events strike again.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
