Duvvuri Subbarao: Understanding inequality and poverty in India 
Welcome remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
First Prof Tendulkar Memorial Oration, at the College of Agricultural Banking (CAB), Pune, 
19 January 2013. 
 On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I am delighted to welcome Prof. Abhijit Banerjee, 
who  will  shortly  be  delivering  the  First  Professor  Tendulkar  Memorial  Oration.  I  also  have 
great  pleasure  in  acknowledging  the  presence  here  of  Smt.  Sunetra  Tendulkar  and  other 
family  members  of  late  Prof.  Tendulkar.  Your  presence  here  means  a  lot  to  us.  A  hearty 
welcome also to all the distinguished invitees to this lecture. 
Prof. S.D. Tendulkar 
Prof. Suresh Tendulkar was, by all accounts, one of the pre-eminent economists of India who 
was  deeply  respected  both  in  the  academia  and  the  public  policy  space.  His  scholarship 
straddled  a  wide  range  of  sub-disciplines  in  economics  but  his  seminal  work  on  the 
measurement and analysis of living standards in India, with focus on inequality and poverty, 
will remain his enduring legacy to public policy formulation. 
This topic which dominated his academic work, and the passion with which he pursued it say 
a  lot  about  two  essential  characteristics  that  defined  Prof.  Tendulkar.  The  first  was  his 
abiding sensitivity to poverty and his belief that the design and implementation of anti-poverty 
programmes should be informed by a deeper understanding of the nature of poverty and the 
sociology  of  the  poor.  The  second  was  his  dedication  to  empiricism.  Not  for  him  broad 
generalizations based on anecdotal evidence. He believed that the only route to knowledge 
and  wisdom  is  data,  and  that  public  policy  should  be  based  on  research  findings  that  are 
drawn from diligent analysis of sound data. 
Both  these  characteristics  –  deep  sensitivity  to  poverty  and  a  commitment  to  data  based 
research to understand poverty – have in a way determined Prof. Tendulkar’s academic and 
career  graph.  His  academic  track  record  will  overawe  any  student  of  economics.  After  a 
Masters degree in Economic Statistics from the Delhi School of Economics in 1962 where he 
finished at the top of his class, Prof. Tendulkar got a doctorate from Harvard University with 
big names like Professors Hendrik Houthakker and Hollis Chenery as his thesis advisers. He 
returned  to  India  to  join  the  Indian  Statistical  Institute  (ISI)  following  which  he  went  on  a 
prestigious  two-year  assignment  to  the  Development  Research  Centre  of  the World  Bank. 
Almost  all  of  his  later  active  career,  from  1978  on,  was  in  the  Delhi  School  of  Economics 
where he served with great distinction, first as a professor, then as Head of the Department 
of  Economics  and  finally  as  the  Director  of  the  School.  From  2000  until  his  retirement  in 
2004, Professor Tendulkar served as the Executive Director of the Centre for Development 
Economics in the Delhi School. 
Professor  Tendulkar’s  concern  for  data  quality  led  him  to  a  life-long  involvement  with  the 
process  of  generation  of  economic  data  through  a  succession  of  public  assignments.  He 
served  on  numerous  Working  Groups  for  the  design  and  conduct  of  the  National  Sample 
Surveys,  was  the  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  National  Sample  Survey 
Organisation  (NSSO),  Chairman  of  the  National  Accounts  Advisory  Committee  and 
Chairman of the National Statistical Commission. 
Quite understandably, Prof. Tendulkar’s commitment to empirical research and his sensitivity 
to poverty led him to very extensive and influential work on estimation of poverty in India. He 
was  a  member  of  the  Lakdawala  Committee for  estimation  of  poverty  1993  which,  among 
other things, recommended state specific consumption baskets for estimation of poverty. The 
more  recent  Tendulkar  Committee  Report,  which  was  the  subject  matter  of  a  vigorous 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
national  debate,  revisited  these  norms  and  improved  on  them  by  recommending  bringing 
estimation of rural poverty in line with that of urban poverty. 
Although I had long heard of Prof. Tendulkar from his students and colleagues who spoke 
very highly of him, I did not have the good future of meeting him until late in my career when 
he  was  a  member  of  the  Prime  Minister’s  Economic  Advisory  Council  and  I  was  the 
Secretary to the Council. Later, he became the Chairman of the Council in which position he 
advised the Prime Minister on important policy issues. 
My  association  with  Prof.  Tendulkar  continued  as  I  moved  to  the  Reserve  Bank  in  2008. 
Prof. Tendulkar  was  a  Director  on the  Central  Board  and  Chairman  of the  Eastern  Region 
Local  Board  of  the  Reserve  Bank  during  2006–11.  The  Reserve  Bank  deeply  values  this 
association  with  him  and  has  benefitted  immensely  from  his  wise  counsel  and  mature 
guidance. 
Like thousands of his students, colleagues and well wishers, we in the Reserve Bank were 
deeply  saddened  by  his  unexpected  demise  in  June  2011.  We  remember  him  as  an 
outstanding economist distinguished by his intellectual integrity, and more importantly, as a 
wonderful human being with disarming simplicity and endearing humility. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  decided  to  institute  this  oration  to  honour  the  memory  of 
Prof. Tendulkar,  his  contribution  to  the  Economics  profession  and  his  association  with  the 
Reserve  Bank.  Unlike  other  memorial  lectures  instituted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  which  are 
typically  delivered  in  Mumbai,  the  venue  for  the  Tendulkar  Memorial  Oration  will  be  the 
Reserve  Bank’s  College  of  Agricultural  Banking  in  Pune  which  was  the  native  place  of 
Prof. Tendulkar and the oration will be devoted to a topic in Development Economics. 
Professor Abhijit Banerjee 
We  are  fortunate  that  the  inaugural  Tendulkar  Memorial  Oration  is  going  to  be  delivered 
today by an internationally renowned economist like Professor Abhijit Banerjee who shares 
with  Professor  Tendulkar  a  passion  for  understanding  poverty  based  on  hard  core  ground 
research. Professor Banerjee’s scholarship is deep and extensive, but most of us know him 
through his seminal book – Poor Economics – that he co-authored with Esther Duflo in 2011. 
Poor Economics provides refreshingly original insights into how the poor live and why they 
make such seemingly irrational choices. The unique feature of this book is that it eschews 
generalizations  and  uninformed  guesses  about  the  nature  of  poverty.  Banerjee  and  Duflo 
have literally got their hands dirty by visiting dozens of countries and studying first hand how 
the poor live and how they make decisions about everyday issues. The message of the book 
is that there is no grand, universal formula for poverty reduction. The battle has to be fought 
on several fronts. What works somewhere does not necessarily work everywhere. The way 
forward  lies  in  grass  root  field  experiments  to  understand  the  causal  relationships  in  poor 
people’s behavior and in learning by doing. 
Professor Banerjee is currently the Ford Foundation International Professor of Economics at 
the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology.  In  2003  he  founded  the  Abdul  Latif  Jameel 
Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) with the objective of promoting randomized trials – similar to the 
ones  used  in  medical  research  –  to  study  antipoverty  programs.  Prof.  Banerjee  and  his 
colleagues have a simple, but radical goal. They want to overhaul development aid so that 
more  of  it  is  spent  on  programs  that  actually  make  a  difference.  In  2009,  J-PAL  won  the 
BBVA Foundation “Frontier of Knowledge” award in the development cooperation category. 
Professor Banerjee has had a distinguished academic career. He studied Economics at the 
Presidency  College  in  Calcutta  and  later  at  the  Jawaharlal  Nehru  University  in  Delhi.  He 
earned  his  PhD,  like  Professor  Tendulkar,  at  Harvard  for  his  thesis  entitled  “Essays  in 
Information Economics”. He won several academic awards for his research which has been 
widely acknowledged as pushing the frontiers of development economics. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Identifying of the poor 
Professor Banerjee will be speaking today on “Identifying the Poor”. This is a topic that, for 
us  in  India,  has  been  intellectually  challenging  and  politically  contentious.  Yet,  poverty 
measurement and identification are important for at least three reasons. 
i. 
First,  a  credible  measure  of  poverty  is  a  powerful  instrument  for  focusing  the 
attention of policy makers on the living conditions of the poor. To put it another way, 
it is easy to ignore the poor if they are statistically invisible. 
Second,  in  order  to  target  interventions,  one  cannot  help  the  poor  without  at  the 
minimum knowing who they are. This is the purpose of a poverty profile, which sets 
out the major facts on poverty and then examines the pattern of poverty to see how 
it varies by geography and by community. 
Third, measuring poverty helps to clearly define the expected outcomes of an anti-
poverty programme and also to compare the actual outcomes against the expected 
outcomes. 
ii. 
iii. 
Poverty and the Reserve Bank 
While  all  of  us  understand  the  importance  of  poverty  measurement  for  framing  good 
development polices, one could legitimately ask about why the Reserve Bank is moving out 
of  its  traditional  domain  into  identification  and  measurement  of  poverty.  I  believe  this  is  a 
topic of importance for the Reserve Bank for at least two reasons. 
First,  it  is  well  known  that  inflation  impacts  different  segments  of  the  income  distribution 
differentially. For example, low income segments, which spend a greater proportion of their 
budgets  on  food,  are  more  adversely  impacted  by  high  food  inflation.  On  the  other  hand, 
sluggish demand could well be constraining their employment opportunities. Measuring the 
aggregate  welfare  consequences  of  a  particular  monetary  stance  is  clearly  something  that 
central banks need to be able to do in order to make a holistic assessment of their policies. 
Identification is one important step in that direction, which needs to be complemented with 
focus group or panel tracking approaches. The research community has made some effort in 
this direction; perhaps it is time to give the approach more prominence in the macroeconomic 
policy dashboard. 
The  second  reason 
identification  and 
measurement stems from the priority the Bank attaches to financial inclusion and literacy. I 
must  add  here  that  over  the  last  five  years,  our  financial  system,  particularly  our  banking 
system,  has  been  furthering  financial  inclusion  and  financial  literacy  with  commitment, 
enthusiasm and earnestness. But financial inclusion is not an end in itself; it is a means to 
higher  and more  stable  levels  of  household  welfare.  In  order to  assess whether  this  more 
fundamental  goal  is  being  achieved,  we  need  to  measure  the  impact  of  inclusion 
programmes  on  individual  households,  particularly  those  at  the  lower  end  of  the  income 
distribution.  Here  again,  identification  and  tracking  are  pre-requisites  for  an  effective 
monitoring and control mechanism. 
Despite all our collective experience and expertise, one thing is clear: we need to improve 
our  understanding  of  the  poor  and  of  poverty.  Who  better  to  take  us  along  the  path  of 
continuing education than Professor Abhijit Banerjee? Ladies and gentlemen, please join me 
in  welcoming  Prof.  Banerjee  to  deliver  the  First  Professor  Tendulkar  Memorial  Oration  on 
“Identifying the Poor”. 
the  Reserve  Bank’s 
in  poverty 
interest 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
