G Padmanabhan: Internationalisation and integration of Asian capital 
markets – expanded role for Asian currencies, including the Renminbi 
Comments  submitted  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India,  circulated  at  the  OMFIF  (Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum)  –  LKY 
(Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy) meeting “Asia’s role in the global economy forum”, 
Singapore, 12 July 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Mr. G Mahalingam and Mr. Anand Prakash gratefully acknowledged. 
I  am  indeed  indebted  to  the  organizers,  Lee  Kuan  Yew  School  of  Public  Policy,  National 
University of Singapore for providing me this opportunity to share my thoughts on an issue, 
which has the potential to alter the global financial landscape in the years to come. 
Global financial crisis and its aftermath have renewed the debates pertaining to functioning of 
international  monetary  system  (IMS)  and  the  need  for  multi-currency  system.  Is  there  a 
viable  alternative  for  the  mighty  US  Dollar?  These  debates  coincided  with  the  Chinese 
authorities taking a number of steps to bring about greater internationalization of Renminbi 
(RMB).  At  the  present  juncture,  the  global  financial  system  is  still  dominated  by  the  US 
Dollar,  followed  by  a  few  other  advanced  economy  currencies,  at  the  margin.  In  sharp 
contrast,  emerging  market  (EM)  currencies  are  hardly  used  for  international  transactions, 
notwithstanding the fact that these economies are increasingly getting more integrated into 
the  global  economy  and  their  contribution  to  global  growth,  trade  and  financial  flows  is 
accelerating. 
Since the topic of discussion focuses on the link between internationalization and integration 
of  Asian  capital  markets,  I  shall  limit  my  observations  to  the  issues  relating  to  the 
development and integration of Asian capital markets, and the role this can play in possible 
greater  internationalization  of  Asian  currencies,  especially  the  Renminbi.  Successful 
internationalization is generally associated with financial openness, allowing for the free flow 
of capital and contributing to the development of domestic financial markets, as restrictions 
on the convertibility of a currency for capital account transactions are likely to raise the costs 
of transactions denominated in the currency, and limit foreign access to domestic stores of 
value. Further, the depth and liquidity of financial market is a very important element as it 
provides borrowers and investors access to deep and liquid financial markets onshore, and 
also enable hedging of currency and credit risks. Additionally, offshore markets also play an 
important  part  in  currency  internationalization  efforts  and  their  development  should  go  in 
tandem with financial deepening onshore. 
According to a recent BIS paper (2012), there has been significant progress over the years in 
achieving  greater  regional  financial  integration  in  the  Asian  equity  and  bond  markets.  The 
extent of integration, however, still seems to be limited. The process appears to have stalled 
in recent years, and the two major regional blocs – mature and emerging markets – seem to 
have  different  degrees  of  integration.  According  to  another  BIS  study,  there  has  been  de 
facto  integration  in  Asia,  but  it  is  Sino-centric,  not  so  much  multilateral,  involving  bilateral 
trade between China and other Asian countries. Full-fledged integration of the European sort 
has not taken place in Asia because of various reasons. 
To  this  enlightened  audience,  I  would  like  to  propose  that  internationalization  needs  to  be 
viewed as a continuum and not as two extremes, as different currencies may have different 
levels of internationalization. Internationalization merely refers to greater international use of 
that currency and should not be confused with international reserve currencies like the US 
dollar, which are in a league of their own. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Integration of Indian financial markets 
Now let me turn to the issue of integration of Indian financial markets with global financial 
markets.  The  Indian  financial  markets  are  now  increasingly  getting  integrated  with  global 
financial markets which are reflected in the increasing volatility in Indian financial markets as 
a result of spill over from turmoil emanating from international markets. As witnessed in the 
recent weeks, the Indian Rupee came under some pressure primarily on account of external 
developments and both equity and bond prices witnessed volatility because of global factors 
like deleveraging by FIIs on fears of impending winding up of the quantitative easing by the 
US Fed. 
In the Indian context, broadly speaking, integration of financial markets has been facilitated 
by  various  measures  in  the  form  of  (i)  free  pricing,  (ii)  widening  of  participation  base  in 
markets,  (iii)  introduction  of  new  instruments  and  (iv)  improvements  in  payment  and 
settlement  infrastructure.  Free  pricing  in  the  form  of  market-determined  exchange  rate, 
freeing  of  interest  rates,  gradual  liberalisation  of  capital  account,  etc.,  helped  in  greater 
integration  of  the  Indian  financial  markets.  The  advent  of  FIIs  who  have  access  to  both 
domestic  as  well  as  international  markets,  have  had  a  profound  impact  on  the  domestic 
financial  markets.  The  linkage  between  the  domestic  foreign  exchange  market  and  the 
overseas  market  (vertical  integration)  was  facilitated  by  allowing  banks/authorised  dealers 
(ADs)  to  borrow  and  invest  funds  abroad  (subject  to  certain  limits),  and  to  lend  in  foreign 
currency  to  companies  in  India  and  by  allowing  Indian  companies  to  raise  resources  from 
abroad,  through  American/Global  Depository  Receipts  (ADRs/  GDRs),  foreign  currency 
convertible  bonds  (FCCBs)  and  external  commercial  borrowings  (ECBs).  Several  new 
instruments  were  introduced,  especially  the  derivative  products,  which  facilitated  the 
deepening of market and enabled participants to hedge currency and interest rate risks. A 
number  of  institutional  measures,  and  significant  improvement  in  technology  and  payment 
and  settlement  infrastructure,  such  as,  introduction  of  DvP,  Government  securities  order 
matching platform christened NDS-OM, RTGS, electronic trading system at the exchanges, 
etc., have significantly strengthened the financial sector market infrastructure. 
Progress with regard to internationalization of Asian currencies, especially Renminbi 
and Rupee 
China’s  fast  economic  growth  and  its  increasing  economic  integration  with  the  world  have 
accelerated the progress of Chinese currency’s internationalization. At present, RMB is not 
yet a currency playing the role of store of value, nor an anchor. However, at a limited level, 
China’s endeavor to internationalize the RMB has begun as some progress is already visible 
in transactions with its trading partners. RMB is being widely used in trade and other current 
account transactions with Vietnam, Laos, Myanmar, the Central Asian states, Russia, and so 
forth.  Additionally,  with  respect  to  capital  transactions,  China  has  promulgated  provisional 
rules  governing  the  issuance  of  RMB-denominated  bonds  by  international  development 
institutions.  China  has  permitted  invoicing  of  any  trade  with  Mainland  China  in  RMB.  In 
regard  to  its  management  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  since  the  outbreak  of  the  global 
financial  crisis,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBOC)  has  entered  into  a  series  of  bilateral 
currency swap agreements whereby the PBOC and other central banks (over 20 in number) 
have  agreed  to  exchange  the  RMB  (not  the  US  dollar)  with  the  respective  counter-party 
currencies.  The  Chinese  authorities  have  also  been  taking  a  number  of  proactive  steps 
towards developing an offshore market for RMB. 
Comparisons are bound to be made between Renminbi and Indian Rupee on the issue of 
internationalization.  Indian  Rupee  is  not  fully  convertible  at  this  stage.  While  the  current 
account  has  been  made  fully  convertible,  we  have  consciously  followed  a  calibrated 
approach towards capital account convertibility. It is also important to understand that unlike 
China,  which  runs  large  current  account  surpluses,  India  has  generally  been  a  current 
account deficit country. In view of the large current account deficit, the exchange rate of the 
rupee  is  susceptible  to  the  influence  of  large  capital  movements,  especially  during  crisis 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
periods.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  country  does  not  aspire  to  see  the  Rupee  as  an 
international  currency  particularly  as  we  increase  our  global  integration  through  trade  and 
investment  channels.  In  order  to  promote  Rupee  invoicing  for  trade  related  transactions, 
Reserve Bank of India has taken several steps in recent times. 
Constraints to internationalization of Asian currencies and the way forward 
Let me conclude by flagging five issues. First, as I have already outlined above, a number of 
recent studies on integration of Asian financial markets have, based on empirical analysis, 
concluded that regional integration of Asian financial markets, both equity and debt markets, 
have progressed over the years but is still incomplete and there is a lot of divergence in the 
level  of  integration.  China  has  been  making  definite  moves,  but  there  is  hardly  any 
integration in the rest of Asia, though spillovers from international markets are increasingly 
being felt in other Asian markets, including India, which is indicative of growing integration of 
the  Asian  markets  with  global  markets.  Apart  from  local  factors  such  as  credit  or  liquidity 
risks in some Asian economies, the divergence and the lack of progress in financial market 
integration can be attributed to several factors, particularly the failure to harmonise standards 
in the regions’ capital markets. 
Second, currency internationalization, which entails market liberalization, requires putting in 
place regional financial market infrastructure that includes a regional system of clearing and 
settlement, regional credit guarantee institutions, hedging facilities, and regional credit rating 
agencies to foster cross-border investments. This will also need to be accompanied by the 
harmonisation  of  legal  and  regulatory  systems,  market  practices,  rating  standards, 
accounting and auditing practices, and withholding taxes on bond coupon payments across 
countries  in  the  region.  Additionally,  greater  internationalisation  of  Asian  currencies  would 
require  existence  of  well  developed  and  deep  forex  markets  with  diversified  forex  hedging 
instruments,  which  will  facilitate  issuance  of  foreign  bonds  in  domestic  markets  and  local 
currency bonds by foreign entities. At the present juncture, such preconditions are not being 
fully met in the region. How do we proceed? 
Third, ASEAN countries are nowhere near forming a single market as in the EU. There have 
been  proposals  regarding  formation  of  an  Asian  Monetary  Union  and  a  single  regional 
currency  but  these  proposals  have  not  reached  anywhere.  Full-fledged  integration  in  the 
region will require creation of a supranational institution on the lines of EU but that is just a 
far-fetched  thing  at  this  juncture.  The  lessons  from  not  so  happy  experience  of  European 
integration through a monetary union mechanism will also weigh on the minds of the Asian 
policymakers. In any case, the greater integration and internationalization of Asian currencies 
would  require  an  agreement  between  the  participating  countries  to  be  bound  by  collective 
decisions rather than bilateral ones. How do we achieve this? 
Fourth, in view of the obstacles to regional integration mentioned above, most of the Asian 
countries  are  individually  linked  to  the  global  economy  more  as  compared  to  the  regional 
economy.  Financial  market  integration  is,  however,  important  to  the  region’s  economic 
development.  The  slow  pace  and  the  varying  degrees  of  integration  in  the  region  warrant 
concerted  policy  actions  to  surmount  the  constraints.  Asian  countries  have  shown  their 
political  support  for  greater  financial  co-operation  and  integration.  There  is  certainly  huge 
scope  for  channelizing  regional  savings  in  the  region,  particularly  say  for  investments  in 
infrastructure  development.  There  is  a  need  to  address  obstacles  in  areas  such  as 
differences  in  economic  structure  and  development,  maturity  of  individual  markets  and 
infrastructure. Can we hope for a co-ordinated strategy for promoting integration of the Asian 
financial  markets  that  will  go  a  long  way  towards  facilitating  internationalization  of  Asian 
currencies? 
Fifth, one final thought. As we discuss the issue of internationalisation, we also need to be 
conscious about the problems of unfettered integration with global markets, where the local 
fundamentals recede to the background and the global factors start playing a major role in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
creating  unwarranted  volatility  in  the  markets  as  the  recent  developments  have  amply 
demonstrated. How do we address this issue? India approached this issue exactly the same 
way as the country has approached capital account convertibility – as a process rather than 
an event, by a gradual rather than the Big Bang opening of the door. It is for each country to 
strategise its approach. 
Thank you  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
