Jörg Asmussen: Financial stability in Europe and the progress towards 
banking union 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  at  the  event  “The  way  forward  for  the  Eurozone  and  Europe  –  a  conversation  with 
European policymakers”, organised by the Brookings Institution and the Center for the United 
States and Europe, Washington, 18 April 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  today  to  the  Brookings  Institute  to  share  my  views  on  financial 
stability and the progress towards Banking Union. 
  Financial stability in Europe 
Financial stability in Europe has improved according to the Global Financial Stability Report 
and the stress for the euro area financial system has eased tangibly. For some in the market, 
the  “great  risk  normalisation”  is  the  overarching  theme  for  trades  and  strategies  this  year. 
And broadly  speaking, I think this trend is intact, in particular when taking into account the 
following facts, while financial fragmentation in Europe still remains a fundamental concern: 
• 
There  has  been  a  marked  reduction  of  spreads  and  yields  of  stressed  countries’ 
sovereign bonds. For example the yields for ten year bonds have declined for Spain 
from a peak of 7.6% to currently 4.7% and from 6.6% to 4.3% for Italy. 
Bank  debt  funding  conditions  improved  early  this  year  in  terms  of  lower  financing 
costs and increasing breadth of issuance across banks. 
Deposits  of  euro  area  residents  in  banks  in  stressed  countries  have  increased  by 
about 130 billion euro since August 2012. 
TARGET2 balances of the national central banks in these countries have declined 
by more than 200 billion euro, or about 20% since their peak. 
And finally, bank’s dependence  on central banks liquidity intermediation is waning, 
to some extent as the early repayment of more than a quarter of the LTROs shows. 
Looking at the banking sector, the aggregate solvency position of euro area banks has been 
steadily  improving.  For  large  and  complex  banking  groups,  the  median  core  Tier  1  ratio 
reached 11% at the end of 2012, up from 6.8% at end-2008. Notwithstanding this progress in 
improving  resilience,  capital  buffers  are  very  unevenly  spread  throughout  the  banking 
system. Questions  arise like: do we know enough  about the true quality  of banks’ balance 
sheets and are the banks capable to absorb potential further losses? Clarity about balance 
sheet  valuation  and  recognition  of  unrecoverable  losses  would  be  helpful  to  bolster 
confidence in banks’ calculation of risk-weighted assets. 
A healthier banking sector that stands  on  a sounder  foundation would  also be  very helpful  
– to say the least – in the context of setting up the single euro area supervisor. This leads me 
to the second aspect of my remarks tonight: the progress towards banking union. 
  The progress towards banking union 
Recently,  the  Economist  was  speculating  that  Europe  might  be  “turning  away  from  its 
promised ‘banking union’” and contemplated “banking disunion”. 
Banking sectors that act as regional financial hubs require vigilant supervision. This applies 
especially to cases were potentially  “hot” capital flows on the liabilities side  are financing a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
growing pool  of domestic assets. It has to be  ensured that undue investment risks are not 
taken on the basis of fickle capital. 
Many  commentators  noted  that  if  only  banking  union  had  already  been  in  place, 
developments in Cyprus could have gone different. I think they may have a point. 
After all, why are we establishing banking union? 
• 
• 
• 
First, it will break the vicious feedback between weak banks and weak sovereigns; 
Second, it will help restore the proper transmission of monetary policy; and 
Third, it will improve the incentives for proper supervision and limit the susceptibility 
to any prospective regulatory capture. 
Where do we stand in the process? 
And are we getting off course? 
In  essence,  banking  union  is  a  means  to  fully  reap  the  benefits  from  European  financial 
market integration, while at the same time containing the risks of financial contagion. 
Currently, we can only talk about the banking union project – we do not have such a union 
yet. This is why, basically, the same questions are asked time and again, both in Europe and 
over here: 
• 
• 
Let me share some thoughts on these issues with you. 
The  rather  benign  market  situation  over  recent  weeks  and  months  seemed  to  have  lulled 
policy-makers in a false sense of complacency. Some wonder whether the enthusiasm and 
ambition  for  banking  union  is  waning.  Voices  from  some  countries  seem  to  suggest  a 
backtracking on the idea of direct ESM bank recapitalisation. 
On  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  agreement  was  reached  between  the 
European Parliament, the Council and the European Commission in March. Some technical 
details  still  need  to  be  clarified.  Once  that  is  achieved,  I  expect  the  SSM  regulation  to  be 
formally adopted by the Council and the European Parliament, hopefully around the middle 
of the year. 
At  the  ECB,  preparations  for  the  new  tasks  are  in  full  swing.  In  this,  we  naturally  closely 
cooperate  with  national  supervisors.  At  staff  level,  a  stock-taking  exercise  of  existing 
supervisory issues and practices is under way. 
But  final  decisions  on  organisational  details  of  the  SSM  can  only  be  taken  once  the  SSM 
Regulation has been formally adopted. This is why swift adoption of the legislative act is now 
crucial. We expect to be ready to take up the new tasks in March 2014. 
We still lack clarity regarding the details of the envisaged European framework for resolution 
which should come hand in hand with a single resolution fund which is funded by the banking 
industry itself via levies and not with taxpayers’ money. And before the ECB takes over the 
task  as  the  single  supervisor,  I  would  strongly  advise  to  conduct  a  thorough  and  credible 
asset quality review of those banks which will be supervised by the ECB. It will be key for a 
successful start in the new supervisory structure to have a very clear picture of the risks and 
vulnerabilities in the European banking industry. 
But, as former Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson once said, “when things look the bleakest, 
they almost never are as bad as they seem. Similarly, when they look too good to be true […] 
they almost always are”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
