Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Limitations of monetary policy – the context of 
Thailand 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Foreign 
Correspondents’ Club of Thailand (FCCT), Bangkok, 17 June 2013. 
 Good evening ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of Thailand for the invitation. It is my 
honor  and  pleasure  to  be  back  here  again  to  share  with  you  my  views  on  Thailand’s 
economic outlook and monetary policy. We indeed live in a volatile and uncertain world. Just 
a few months ago we still talked about a two- or three-speed global economy as a fact of life, 
with robust growth expected of emerging markets and sluggish recovery to remain with the 
major  economies.  Today,  with  some  possibility  of  an  earlier-than-expected  tapering  off  of 
QE,  coinciding  with  the  apparent  slowdown  in  many  emerging  market  economies,  the 
convergence of the world economy is already expected by some. One obvious consequence 
is  the  market  overreaction  to  these  premature  signs  of  the  convergence.  The  unsettled 
sentiments over a potential end of cheap money may have contributed to sizeable outflows 
of capital from emerging markets during the past few weeks. As a consequence, emerging 
market  currencies  including  the  Thai  baht  depreciated  sharply,  reversing  gains  since  the 
beginning of the year. 
One lesson from this recent episode is that, expectations can go a long way in influencing 
people’s  behavior,  and  often  with  implications  for  policymakers.  Specifically,  it  reminds  us 
how powerful the expectations channel of monetary policy transmission can be. It is therefore 
of  utmost  importance  that  central  banks  properly  manage  expectations  so  as  to  maximize 
monetary policy effectiveness and maintain policy credibility. This draws me to the focus of 
my  talk  this  evening:  the  limits  of  monetary  policy,  namely,  what  monetary  policy  can  and 
cannot do. Given unprecedented economic headwinds of various sources, monetary policy 
around  the  world  has  been  under  immense  demand.  But  these  expectations,  if  unrealistic 
and not met, could damage central bank credibility, and end up diminishing central banks’ 
influence,  with  unnecessary  costs  to the  economy.  Thus,  it  is  important  that  central  banks 
establish realistic public expectations on their policy. But before I turn to that topic, let me first 
review current economic conditions, the outlook for the Thai economy, and recent monetary 
policy response. 
Recent economic developments and monetary policy response 
Despite  robust  economic  growth  of  last  year,  the  Thai  economy  started  out  this  year  with 
moderation. Growth in the first quarter at 5.3 percent compared to the same period last year 
was  lower  than  what  we  had  expected.  Part  of  this  slowdown  may  have  been  a  natural 
reversion  to  a  more  normal  pace  of growth  after  a  strong  post-flood  acceleration.  But that 
alone  may  not  explain  the  whole  story.  Evidently,  the  recent  slowdown  in  private 
consumption also owed in part to lower farm income and higher household debts which may 
have  held  back  consumers’  willingness  to  spend.  Meanwhile,  uncertainty  about  global 
demand  may  have  pulled  back  private  investment  especially  in  the  export-oriented  sector. 
On the external front, despite some incipient signs of gradual improvements in the US and 
Japanese  economy,  disappointing  Chinese  and  Asian  economic  performance  likely  put  a 
drag on the overall Thailand’s trading partners’ growth and hence continue to weigh on Thai 
exports. 
Looking  ahead,  however, the  medium-term  trajectory  of the  economy  should  remain  intact 
backed by solid economic fundamentals, including high levels of employment, rising income 
and  robust  private  sector  confidence.  Fiscal  policy  should  continue  to  lend  support  to  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
economy especially with the large-scale infrastructure investment expected to phase in from 
the latter part of this year. This would potentially generate a favorable crowding-in effects on 
private spending. 
As  for  price  and  financial  stability,  inflation  eased  further  due  to  lower  oil  and  commodity 
prices, in line with subdued global inflationary pressure. Looking ahead, however, the cost 
pass-through to prices is expected to increase as domestic demand picks up. At the same 
time, risks to financial stability remained an ongoing concern with a particular attention given 
to household debts and some sectors in real estate market. 
In light of these recent developments, the MPC judged that downside risks to growth have 
increased  both  from  domestic  demand  slowdown  and  a  somewhat  slower-than-expected 
global recovery. Although the view on the medium-term outlook of the Thai economy has not 
changed, the balance of risks now seemed to tilt towards growth rather than inflation. The 
MPC therefore decided to cut the policy rate to provide as insurance to the economy in the 
face of greater downside risks to growth. 
With firmly  anchored  inflation  expectations, the Bank  of Thailand  can  today  give  weight  to 
stabilizing  economic  developments  when  setting  the  interest  rate.  However,  should  the 
outlook  for  inflation,  growth,  or  financial  stability  change  in  the  future  period,  there  will  be 
room  for  maneuver  to  counteract  such  developments  through  monetary  policy,  as  well  as 
other  policy  tools  in  an  appropriate  mix  deemed  most  suitable  for  achieving  the  overall 
macroeconomic stability. 
Limitations of monetary policy 
Let  me  now  turn  to  a  topic  that  I  would  like  to  highlight  today,  that  is,  the  limits  to  what 
monetary policy can achieve. The global financial crisis has placed far greater demands on 
monetary  policy  around  the  world.  In  major  economies  where  other macroeconomic  policy 
tools  are  being  impaired,  monetary  policy  was  under  enormous  pressure  to  support  the 
economy.  Central  banks  responded  by  expanding  dramatically  their  traditional  role  as 
lenders of last resort and came up with innovative, unconventional ways to stretch beyond 
what monetary policy can normally do. In emerging markets, given large crisis repercussions 
in  terms  of  excessive  capital  flows,  monetary  policy  was  at  times  expected  to  respond  to 
external  developments  in  dealing  with  global  spillovers.  Overall, monetary  policy  has  been 
pushed into situations and actions that were previously unimaginable. 
Efforts by many central banks to overstretch its normal capacity may have led the public to 
expect too much from monetary policy. There is a danger associated with this conviction, if 
the widening gap between what is expected of central banks and what they can realistically 
deliver  end  up  undermining  central  bank  credibility.  To  maintain  public  trust  in  the  central 
banks, it is important to clearly lay out what monetary policy can and cannot achieve. I would 
like to highlight three areas where monetary policy limits in Thailand are particularly binding 
at present. Understanding these limits would also help explain our monetary policy actions. 
Single instrument, multiple objectives 
1. 
The first limitation has to do with the fact that multiple objectives cannot be targeted using 
one instrument, namely, the policy interest rate. This is a key reason why most central banks 
in  the  world  today  typically  focus  on  a  single  primary  objective  of  price  stability,  which  is 
crucial to a well-functioning market economy and is what monetary policy has most control 
over.  There  are  of  course  other  equally  important  policy  objectives,  in  particular  financial 
stability, as recent global crisis clearly illustrated. The “flexible inflation targeting” is precisely 
designed to allow the central bank to stabilize not only inflation but also to mitigate the risk of 
a build-up of financial imbalances. Endowing central banks with more policy tools to achieve 
this  additional  objective  has  gathered  a  lot  of  support  in  international  policy  forums.  The 
demand for monetary policy does not stop there, however. It has also been suggested that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
monetary policy should respond directly to capital flows and exchange rate for example. Can 
a single policy interest rate target all these objectives simultaneously? 
Of  course,  in  fortunate  coincidences  where  these  objectives  do  not  conflict,  there  is  no 
dilemma. More often than not, however, the policy choices will involve a trade-off between 
different  objectives.  Policymakers  will  have  to  weigh  carefully  the  costs  and  benefits  of  a 
policy decision. Given multiple macroeconomic objectives, there is a need for supplementary 
tools to truly minimize the costs of these tradeoffs. 
As the first example, what policy instruments can be employed to address risks to external 
stability? In many emerging market economies, one often finds problems of exchange rate 
dominance,  namely  the  risk  that  exchange  rate  considerations  dominate  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy and distract central banks from the main goal of price stability. The simplest 
way to address this problem would be to allow for exchange rate flexibility as the first line of 
defense.  Of  course,  this  does  not  and  should  not  rule  out  interventions  to  limit  excessive 
exchange rate volatility. That is the next line of defense. Should the situation warrant, some 
type of capital flow management measures can be deployed in exceptional circumstances of 
sustained  and  substantial  exchange  rate  overvaluation.  However,  given  their  distortive 
effects  and  collateral  damage  it  brings  upon  the  economy,  any  introduction  of  this  type  of 
measures  will  have  to  be  carefully  designed  to  minimize  unintended  consequences, 
especially on productive long-term capital inflows that we highly value. 
As for the case of preventing financial imbalances, it is sometimes proposed that for policy 
rate to have sufficient traction in addressing risks to financial stability, the adjustments may 
need to be so large as to have a significant adverse impact on economic activity, a price too 
dear to pay. Thus, with an additional objective of managing credit growth and asset prices in 
order to avoid financial instability, one really needs another instrument that acts more directly 
on the source of the problem. That is what “macro-prudential policy” is supposed to achieve. 
Imperfect foresight 
2. 
The  second  limitation  of  monetary  policy  lies  with  the  notion  that  all  policymakers  have 
limited capacity to measure economic performance very precisely even in real time, not to 
mention  to  forecast  the  future.  Monetary  policy  is  always  conducted  in  an  uncertain 
environment. Unforeseen macroeconomic shocks, imprecisely estimated effects of policy on 
macroeconomic  variables,  and  noisy  measurement  render  monetary  policy  design  and 
implementation  a  challenging  task.  Our  state  of  knowledge  is  also  far  from  a  perfect 
understanding  of  people’s  decision  making  that  determine  the  future  evolution  of  the 
economy. 
The task is even more daunting when the world is going through significant transformation, 
with  unprecedented  policy  actions  all  across  the  globe,  and  with  yet-to-be-  known 
consequences of such actions and their unwinding. 
Faced with the uncertainty and the complexity  of the environment we  are operating in, we 
need to take a broader perspective and make sure our decisions are robust under different 
plausible eventualities. At the same time, the Bank of Thailand constantly strives to expand 
our economic surveillance capability, by collecting up-to-date intelligence on economic and 
financial  conditions  through  indirect  and  direct contacts  with  the  market. The  insights from 
direct contact, coupled with the information from surveys like our Business Sentiment Survey 
sharpen  the  picture  we  get  from  the  other  available  statistics.  This  is  one  reason  why 
monetary  policy  cannot  simply  follow  mechanistic  and  simplistic rules  based  solely  on  any 
single data. 
Nonetheless, uncertainties can never be off the table. In this light, a prudent approach is to 
move in careful and measured steps. That kind of incremental action in what we perceive to 
be  the  right  direction  is  likely  to  contribute  more  to  economic  stability  than  aggressive 
attempts to fine tune the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Inability to address supply-side impediments 
3. 
The  third  limitation  of  monetary  policy  I  would  like  to  emphasize  today  is  its  inability  to 
address  supply-side  impediments.  Through  interest  rate  adjustment,  monetary  policy  can 
influence  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy.  But  monetary  policy  cannot  solve  deeper 
structural  problems  or  lift  growth  potential  of  the  economy.  That  needs  to  come  from  real 
progresses  that  increase  productivity  and  relax  supply-side  constraints.  Sure,  demand 
stimulating can buy time by cushioning the economy from short-term economic shocks. But 
this  may  possibly  delay  necessary  adjustments of  the  economy  to  longer-term  challenges. 
For  example,  keeping  interest  rate  too  low  for  too  long  and  keeping  exchange  rate 
undervalued, beside encouraging risk taking and storing up financial instability problems for 
the future, may also temper incentives for businesses to improve efficiencies, and may slow 
the reallocation of capital and labor to more productive uses. 
In  the  context  of  Thailand,  one  of  the  most  important  structural  issues  facing  the  Thai 
economy  at  the  moment  is  that  of  the  labor  shortage.  Through  our  business  contact  and 
recent surveys, the labor shortage has scored one of the top concerns by both domestic and 
foreign  businesses  operating  in  Thailand.  Underlying  causes  of  labor  shortage  include  the 
demographic change and education and skill mismatch. Clearly, there is little monetary policy 
can do to solve this supply bottleneck. It can help foster macroeconomic stability conducive 
to business investment, but most of the efforts to address supply-side impediments still need 
to  come  from  a  broader  and  more  balanced  set  of  economic  policies  including  fiscal, 
industrial, technology, and labor market policies. 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  end  my  talk  today  by  saying  that,  as  a  central  banker,  we  should  be  ambitious  in 
making the best use of all available policy tools and in improving our understanding of the 
economy as well as the shocks driving it. But setting the ambition higher than the capability 
of  monetary  policy  would  likely  prove  to  be  counter-productive.  It  is  an  old  established 
wisdom that what monetary policy can best deliver is price stability. While we have learned 
for a great deal about other aspects of macroeconomic stability, there is little disagreement 
that  price  stability  must  remain  the  central  objective  of  monetary  policy  in  the  long  run. 
Abandoning this objective risks de-anchoring price expectations and inducing unnecessary 
economic volatility. The deployment of supplementary tools can go some way to help relax 
its limitation, but monetary policy is no panacea. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Only  by  understanding  both  the  power  and  limits  of  monetary  policy,  will  the  economy  be 
able to reap the most benefit out of this policy lever. The Bank of Thailand will continue to do 
our  utmost  to  strive  for  overall  macroeconomic  stability,  and  the  long-term  prosperity  of 
Thailand. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
