Yves Mersch: Monetary policy in an environment of low growth and 
interest rates 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Nordea 3rd Annual Nordic AAA Seminar, Copenhagen, 13 June 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure to speak to you at this 3rd Annual Nordic AAA Seminar. 
Today’s  seminar  will  examine  the  AAA  fixed-income  market,  considering  both  the  investor 
and the issuer perspective. It is clear that we as central bankers are closely watching these 
markets as they are of crucial importance. 
Take, for instance, the working of monetary policy transmission. The impact of central bank 
action on the term structure of ‘risk-free’ rates is the backbone for the wider transmission of 
our monetary policy stance to a broad range of asset prices, to real activity and eventually to 
price developments. The price level is the ultimate objective of our mandate defined by the 
Treaty on the Union level which therefore can only be challenged by the European Court of 
Justice or a Treaty change. 
Moreover, high-rated sovereign debt also plays a key role in our collateral framework and for 
the implementation of monetary policy. And finally, the yields on AAA-rated sovereign bonds 
provide central bankers with a rich set of information about the market’s outlook for inflation 
or future interest rates. 
The recent years of crisis have provided two important lessons on sovereign debt markets. 
First,  for  sovereign  issuers,  an  AAA  rating  is  not  working  like  an  automatic  life-time 
subscription. It must rather be interpreted as an award that requires healthy public finances 
and  sound  economic  fundamentals  in  order  to keep  it.  And  second,  both financial  stability 
and monetary policy transmission could be at risk if the smooth functioning of sovereign debt 
markets is hampered. 
In my remarks, I will address three issues from a euro area perspective: 
• 
First,  I  will  give  you  a  summary  of  the  current  economic  environment  in  the  euro 
area and the outlook for economic activity and inflation. 
Second, I will elaborate on our latest monetary policy decisions. 
And third, I will address some of the specific questions for our monetary policy. That 
is on the one hand, the challenges close to the zero lower bound in an environment 
of slowly receding financial sector fragmentation and very low interest rates. And on 
the other hand, the challenges arising from keeping interest rates low for too long. 
But  be  aware  that  there  is  no  forward  guidance  in  any  of  my  remarks  that  would 
provoke undue volatility. 
 The currently low inflation environment certainly warrants an accommodative monetary policy 
stance to  improve  credit  conditions  in the  economy.  But  we  are  not  the only  player  in  this 
game.  Engineering  a  broad  based  recovery  and  returning  to  sustained  growth  in  the  euro 
area can only be based on the appropriate structural policy efforts. 
Subdued price pressure over the medium term, economic activity expected to stabilise 
slowly 
Let me start with the current economic conditions in the euro area which show a combination 
of  subdued  underlying  price  pressure,  a  shallow  recovery  of  economic  activity  and  weak 
credit dynamics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In the euro area, the output has continued to shrink in the first quarter of the year, so that we 
have now witnessed a decrease in gross domestic product (GDP) output for the sixth quarter 
in  a  row.  Confirming  this  bleak  picture,  the  unemployment  rate  has  stayed  in  double  digit 
territory. 
On  a  somewhat  more  positive  note,  economic  sentiment  appears  to  be  slowly  picking  up 
from  low  levels.  Looking  ahead  until  the  end  of  next  year,  the  Governing  Council  expects 
euro area export growth to benefit from the recovery in global demand. 
Turning to price developments, euro area headline inflation stood at 1.4 percent in May. Our 
definition of price stability is a positive inflation rate below 2 percent. As capacity utilisation is 
low and the economic recovery is expected to be slow, we expect price pressure to remain 
subdued. Inflation expectations are well anchored. 
Finally, the dynamics of loans to the private sector is still very feeble in the euro area. 
The weakness in current and expected economic activity is certainly an important factor in 
depressing  loan  dynamics  to  the  private  sector  in  the  euro  area  economy.  The  need  for 
deleveraging for several banks, corporations and households is further dragging on growth 
dynamics. On top of that some borrowers are still facing elevated costs of financing, which 
also  differ  strongly  across  the  euro  area.  While  fragmentation  on  the  funding  side  has 
receded, this cannot be said of lending activity to the real economy. 
Focusing on euro area banks’ lending policies – the supply side of loans – credit risk and 
macroeconomic  uncertainty  remain  their  main  concerns,  according  to  the  last  wave  of  our 
Bank  Lending  Survey  in  April.  In  addition,  the  need  for  further  balance  sheet  adjustment 
across sectors has certainly contributed to the slow pace in the provision of loans. 
Euro area monetary policy remains accommodative 
What I just described was a sketch of the situation which  we saw in the ECB’s Governing 
Council  last  Thursday:  On  this  basis,  we  decided  that  our  monetary  policy  stance  should 
remain accommodative as long as necessary and we kept interest rates unchanged. 
Beyond  this  decision  on  rates,  there  is  an  on-going  debate  on  further  measures  the  ECB 
could take, if necessary, to provide additional accommodation or improve funding conditions, 
although, as I mentioned, fragmentation on the funding side is of lesser concern than on the 
lending side. 
This  debate  has  taken  a  broad  scope,  including  for  instance:  measures  to  revitalise  the 
market for Asset Backed Securities; additional long-term refinancing operations; enhancing 
the  framework  for  additional  credit  claims;  and  broader  or  targeted  changes  in  collateral 
policies. All these limited measures are under study or theoretically available on the shelf. 
It is in this context, that also the issue of setting a negative rate on the deposit facility has 
come  up.  Speaking  here  in  Denmark  today,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  more  words  on  our 
decision on the level of that deposit facility rate. 
Some  commentators  wondered  whether  we  would  consider  taking  this  rate  to  negative 
territory, and many of those drew comparisons to the Danish case, where the central bank 
had decreased the rate on certificates of deposits to minus 20 basis points in July 2012. 
The possibly negative deposit rate is one facet of the so-called “Zero Lower Bound” debate. 
While this concept enjoyed some prominence in the academic literature for several years, it 
seems to have now spread into something routinely discussed in taxi-drive small talks. 
At  first  sight,  the  term  “Zero  Lower  Bound”  seems  to  provide  for  an  unambiguous  metric: 
once the relevant monetary policy rate is zero, it cannot fall any further. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
One reasoning behind this is that any type of nominal interest rate cannot fall below  zero. 
Anybody  holding  an  asset  with  such  negative  remuneration  would  simply  switch  to  cash. 
Then he would ‘at least’ earn a nominal return of zero. 
However, this reasoning may be incomplete. One example is the case of negative deposit 
certificate rates at the Danish central bank that I already mentioned. 
So  obviously,  under  certain  circumstances,  some  assets  provide  particular  services  that 
make market participants willing to hold these assets although they display negative interest 
rates. 
To understand the nature of the question on possible negative deposit rates in the euro area, 
let me quickly recall that the ECB operates a corridor system consisting of three rates. 
First,  the  main  refinancing  rate  is  the  interest  the  ECB  charges  in  the  main  refinancing 
operations  with  its  counterparties.  It  usually  provides  the  mid-point  of  the  corridor  system. 
Second,  the  marginal  lending  rate  is  the  interest  charged  on  overnight  lending  from  the 
Eurosystem  to  banks.  It  constitutes  the  ceiling  of  the  corridor  system.  Third,  the  deposit 
facility rate governs the remuneration for excess reserves that our counterparties hold with 
the  Eurosystem  as  overnight  deposits.  It  constitutes  the  floor  to  the  corridor  system. 
Moreover, it also provides the floor on interbank market rates as banks have no incentive to 
lend funds below this rate in the market. 
Setting the deposit rate to a value below zero would imply that the remuneration for excess 
reserves  in  the  euro  area  is  negative.  In  other  words,  banks  are  charged  for  making 
overnight deposits with the ECB. 
From a technical point of view,  we are ready to implement a negative  deposit facility rate. 
And,  in  general,  there  are  constellations  conceivable  where  the  Eurosystem  could  deploy 
such a negative rate, if it is deemed required by our mandate to safeguard price stability. 
So what are the pros and cons? 
Theoretically, a negative deposit rate may provide additional accommodation. In the current 
environment of excess liquidity, the relevant overnight interest rates have shifted close to the 
deposit  rate.  In  this  situation,  reductions  in  the  deposit  rate  could  push  down  overnight 
interest rates further. 
At the same time, possible caveats and unintended side effects of this move have to be kept 
in mind. In particular, crossing the zero line can set off actions in the market that may run 
counter  to  the  central  bank’s  policy  easing  intentions.  For  example,  there  can  be  a 
substitution  by  private  actors  towards  cash  which  becomes  the  highest  yielding  short-term 
asset.  Similarly,  the  money-holding  sector  may  promote  financial  innovations  that  could 
emulate  currency  and  allow  tax  avoidance.  These  actions  may  undermine  the  underlying 
purpose of the move towards negative deposit rates. 
Overall,  the  consequences  are  subject  to  considerable  margins  of  uncertainty  as  such  a 
move has never been observed in the Eurosystem or in any other major currency area in the 
world. 
How  do  these  considerations  differ  from  those  underlying  the  move  by  Denmark’s  or  the 
Swiss central bank? 
Both  countries  apply  a  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  vis-à-vis  the  euro  area.  In  contrast,  the 
ECB does not consider the euro exchange rate as a policy target. This adds an additional 
complexity to the monetary policy objective function. 
What could be the effects of introducing a negative deposit facility rate on the euro exchange 
rate? One can in principle single out three factors that would be at work. First, the traditional 
interest  rate  differential  channel  could  exert  a  downward  pressure  on  the  euro.  Second,  a 
signalling  effect  may  amplify  this  downward  pressure,  as  market  participants  would  see  a 
realisation  of  a  completely  new  scenario,  which  they  had  previously  priced  in  as  a  mere 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
possibility.  At  the  same  time,  an  improvement  of  macroeconomic  prospects  –  the  very 
intention of that policy move in the first place – would possibly exert upward pressure on the 
exchange rate. 
Overall, also for the exchange rate, any gauge of the impact of a move to a negative deposit 
facility rate might be subject to considerable uncertainty. Also the historical experience is of 
limited help: the few instances of such policy movements happened under different economic 
constellations and for central banks that worked under different monetary policy paradigms. 
So,  in  conclusion,  we  are  in  a  situation  of  a  professional  golfer  who  has  a  huge  set  of 
specialised clubs at his disposal – and he is in principle able to master them all. He will then 
draw the most suitable  one depending on the position of the ball and the landscape he  is 
facing.  That  is,  negative  rates  are  in  our  bag  of  tools,  but  may  or  may  not  be  deployed 
depending on the economic landscape. This applies to all other tools and measures that I 
mentioned before as well. 
In  this  context,  our  monetary  policy  strategy  provides  the  necessary  flexibility  to  react  to 
different economic and market constellations. This flexibility derives from our medium-term 
policy horizon and the definition of price stability. It is defined not as a point target but as a 
range of permissible inflation outcomes. These two elements of flexibility ensure that we do 
not have to mechanically react to temporary shifts of prices. Instead, we can adopt a steady 
hand approach. This avoids policy-induced volatility. 
Challenges to monetary policy in an environment of fragmentation and the implications of 
protractedly low interest rates 
This brings me to my third and last part: where do we stand and what are the challenges that 
we are facing in the euro area? 
Since the outset of the financial crisis  in 2007,  we had to adjust and expand our toolkit in 
order  to  be  optimally  equipped  in  serving  our  objective  of  price  stability  amid  evolving 
challenges. 
The biggest challenge that we saw during the last year, I would summarize that with the term 
‘fragmentation’. 
What is behind this? Recall that our objective is to safeguard price stability for the euro area 
as a whole. However, fragmentation in financing conditions means that for two firms with the 
same credit risk, the financing conditions would depend on the area of residence. The same 
holds  for  private  households.  As  a  result,  our  monetary  policy  stance  is  not  transmitted 
homogeneously in all parts of the euro area. In other words, before the crisis, an interest rate 
cut  of  25  basis  points  was  passed through  to  bond  yields,  bank  deposit  rates  and  lending 
rates  in  a  similar  fashion  throughout  the  euro  area.  Now,  this  pass-through  has  become 
smaller on average and its effect very disparate across jurisdictions. 
One of the main factors contributing to fragmentation was the increasingly perceived risk that 
the euro area might break up and some countries would return to a domestic currency – the 
so-called  redenomination  risk.  Such  fears  manifested  themselves  as  undue  and  sizeable 
spread surcharges in sovereign bond yields. But it also affected all sorts of other financial 
asset  prices,  such  as  corporate  bond  yields  and  other  financing  rates,  through  various 
contagion channels. 
So if ‘fragmentation’ is the one word characterizing the main threat to our stability-oriented 
monetary policy, one of our most successful answers to it can be summarized in only three 
letters: OMT. This stands for the programme of Outright Monetary Transactions. OMT keeps 
up  all  motivation  of  the respective  countries for consolidation  and  the  necessary  structural 
reforms. This ‘incentive-preserving’ feature of OMT results from the implied conditionality as 
well as from the fact that after the removal of the excessive ‘panic’ component of bond yield 
spreads, capital markets can exert their disciplining function via sovereign debt pricing. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Finally, although not a single Euro has been spent on OMT yet, the programme has been 
highly successful already. Let me give you a few examples, where the OMT announcement 
has certainly contributed to positive developments, while – of course – it cannot be singled 
out as the sole responsible factor: 
Sovereign  bond  spreads  for  stressed  jurisdictions  came  down  from  the  excessive  levels 
observed  in  summer  2012;  sovereign  bond  yields  in  core  countries  also  normalised  by 
moving  upwards  reflecting  a  reversal  of  previously  extreme  flight-to-safety  flows;  bank 
deposits have been slowly flowing into peripheral countries; banks’ recourse to Eurosystem 
financing  has  decreased;  corporate  bond  spreads  and  financial  market  volatility  has  come 
down; and TARGET balances – the aggregate gross claims of national central banks against 
the Eurosystem – have also decreased. 
While this improvement is certainly welcome, we are facing two challenges: first, significant 
fragmentation – while mitigated – remains. Second, we must be wary of the potential side 
effects of our monetary policy. 
In  fact,  the  partial  relaxation  in  financial  markets,  which  I  mentioned,  has  already  induced 
some  commentators  to  ventilate  the  idea  that  we  may  face  renewed  exaggerations  –  not 
unlike the underpricing of risk that we have seen before the crisis in some market segments. 
Some even assert that the protracted period of low interest rates could by itself be a factor to 
trigger such distortions. 
In fact, a low-interest-rate environment may in principle spur an underpricing of certain risks, 
support  the  emergence  of  asset  price  bubbles,  or  provide  incentives  to  delay  certain 
adjustments in bank balance sheets with the risk of zombie-banking and evergreening. 
However, in the euro area we do not see evidence of broad-based mis-alignments in asset 
prices. As a case in point, common valuation metrics of major stock price valuation levels are 
near their historical averages – rather than exaggerated as was the case in earlier low-rate 
periods. 
At the same time, there is no reason for complacency, and a future build-up of imbalances in 
certain  market  segments  cannot  be  excluded.  But  this  is  exactly  the  field  where 
macroprudential authorities have to be alert and intervene with market-specific instruments. 
So, let me repeat in this context my appreciation for the micro- and macroprudential policies 
at EU and national level that are underway. 
Regarding  the  required  balance  sheet  adjustments  the  benign  market  environment  should 
rather be a supportive factor for that. Decent stock market valuation levels, for instance, tend 
to decrease the cost of capital. That’s helpful for re-capitalisation. Moreover, banks’ balance 
sheets will be scrutinized upon transition to the Single Supervisory  Mechanism – once the 
required backstop for possible recapitalisation needs will be in place. 
In any case, the level of our policy rate has to be always understood as reflecting our best 
attempt of safeguarding price stability in the euro area as a whole. I think, in this respect, the 
single objective is a  very  important guide post to anchor inflation expectations, but also to 
make transparent and traceable the trajectory of our rate setting. 
Conclusion and outlook 
Let me conclude. Almost six years after the outbreak of the financial crisis in summer 2007 
the economic situation in the euro area is far from back to normal. Unemployment is high in 
several  member  states,  growth  is  expected  to  return  only  gradually  and  credit  to  the  real 
economy is reaching the real economy fairly reluctantly overall and at different speed levels 
across  euro  area  countries.  Following  its  objective  of  safeguarding  price  stability,  the  ECB 
had  to  activate  a  variety  of  non-standard  measures  to  improve  the  transmission  of  its 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  However,  we  are  still  operating  in  a  difficult 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
environment  and  fragmentation  of  financing  conditions  across  the  euro  area  is  one  of  the 
most prevalent problems. 
So let me finish with some key messages that, I think, characterise the policy landscape in 
the time to come: 
1. 
Monetary policy has helped to prevent economic outcomes to be even worse than 
what we see today. Monetary policy accommodation is needed to keep prices in line 
with the ECB’s definition of price stability. 
The ECB has not run out of ammunition. We can employ more tools and measures 
whenever they will be needed. 
But monetary policy has limits: it is not effective when it comes to structural issues 
and we should keep in mind the challenges that arise from keeping interest rates too 
low for too long. Therefore we should not forget about the responsibilities of other 
policy areas: 
2. 
3. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
A  properly  designed  banking  union  is  essential  to  restore  financial 
integration and to support a new steady state where bank balance sheets 
will be fit for lending 
Fiscal  consolidation  is  required  to  spur  and  maintain  confidence  of 
consumers and investors 
Structural  reforms  are  key  to  bring  euro  area  economies  back  on  a 
sustainable growth path. 
For  the  ECB,  the  different  crisis  modes  required  various  modifications  in  our  tool  box  of 
monetary  policy  instruments.  But  our  objective  of  price  stability  remained  time-invariant.  It 
has  served  as  an  anchor  of  stability  in  the  euro  area  during  the  crisis;  it  is  helping  the 
transition to a new steady state of a better-integrated euro area economy; and it will certainly 
remain our guiding principle in the future. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
