Luis M Linde: Overview of Spain’s economy in 2012 – reflection and 
outlook 
Testimony  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the  Parliamentary 
Committee on Economic Affairs and Competitiveness, Madrid, 20 June 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I appear before this Committee on the occasion of the presentation of the Banco de España 
Annual Report for 2012, one of the most difficult years for the Spanish economy of the last 
decades. 
I shall begin with a review of the general economic situation, and then focus on the progress 
achieved  in  restoring  the  major  balances  of  our  economy,  developments  in  credit  and  in 
household and corporate debt, the headway in balance sheet clean-up and restructuring of 
our  banking  system,  financial  regulation  reforms  and  progress  in  the  European  Banking 
Union project. I shall conclude with a reflection on the outlook for our economy. 
Situation of and outlook for the Spanish economy 
Throughout 2012 the Spanish economy held on the contractionary course that first became 
discernible  in  late  2011.  GDP  fell  by  1.4%  during  the  year,  far  above  the  0.5%  decline 
recorded in the euro area as a whole. This double-dip recession, the second dip of which is 
less  acute  in  terms  of  the  decline  in  output  but  more  persistent  than  its  2008–2009 
forerunner, has had particularly serious consequences for employment, which shrank for the 
fifth year running in 2012. 
The main macroeconomic and financial figures for 2012 speak for themselves as regards the 
intensity  of  the  adjustments  made  in  an  attempt  to  overcome  the  serious  imbalances  that 
emerged during the last upturn. 
The fall in household income, prompted above all by the heavy decline in employment, along 
with  high  household  debt,  continued  to  exert  a  contractionary  effect  on  spending  capacity 
against an overall background of uncertainty. Once again in 2012, companies, many of which 
are  immersed  in  deleveraging  and  financial  restructuring  processes,  cut  their  investment, 
while  the  adjustment  in  the  construction  sector  continued.  Meanwhile,  the  general 
government  sector  tailored  its  spending  plans  to  the  need  to  reduce  the  budget  deficit, 
following the serious budgetary slippage evidenced at the close of 2011. 
All  these factors combined  to  bring  about  a strong  decline  in  national  demand,  which  was 
only  partly  offset  by  the  positive  contribution  of  the  external  sector.  Imports  fell  forcefully, 
mirroring  the  weakness  of  final  demand,  while  exports  expanded  despite  the  poor 
performance of the euro area markets, to which Spain still directs half of its foreign sales. 
However,  developments  to  date  in  2013  appear  to  confirm  that  the  worst  of  this  second 
recession is behind us. The biggest declines in output were at the end of 2012, and the latest 
data suggest the contraction in GDP is easing. Indeed, in the final stretch of the year, and 
even from the third quarter onwards, positive growth rates might be recorded. 
Fiscal consolidation 
Significant  steps  were  taken  last  year  to  reduce  the  budget  deficit  and  strengthen  the 
budgetary discipline and management framework. 
In the first of these areas, and although both expenditure- and revenue-side measures were 
applied, it should be stressed that the bulk of the effort consisted of spending cuts, allowing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
net overall general government borrowing to be reduced to 7% of GDP, or 10.6% when the 
assistance (a non-recurring expense) to financial institutions is included. 
Last  month  the  European  Commission  announced  a  new  fiscal  consolidation  path,  setting 
new deficit targets of 6.5% and 5.8% for the current year, 2013, and 2014, and of around 4% 
for 2015, and requiring that the 3% threshold laid down by the Stability and Growth Pact be 
met  in  2016.  The  additional  margin  provided  will  help  soften  the  short-term  contractionary 
impact of the fiscal adjustment on activity. 
As  to  public  spending  discipline  and  management,  I  should  first  mention  the  April  2012 
Organic Law on Budgetary Stability. This legislation implements the principles of limiting the 
structural deficit and volume of debt that were enshrined in our Constitution in 2011. 
The Law makes key improvements in terms of the transparency of public finances. Many of 
these improvements were set in train in 2012 and early 2013. In terms of the availability of 
data on general government financial and budgetary conduct, Spain now probably stands at 
the head of the European Union countries. 
To  highlight  the  most  significant  improvements,  the  Stability  Law  firstly  sets  minimum 
reporting  requirements  for  regional  and  local  government,  including  monthly  revenue  and 
spending outturns for regional governments, and quarterly ones for local governments, along 
with the information needed to calculate the budget outturn in National Accounts terms. 
Moreover, since June 2012, the IGAE (National Audit Office) has been regularly publishing 
quarterly accounts of all general government sub-sectors in National Accounts terms, on an 
individual basis for regional government and in aggregate terms for local government. 
Also,  since  October  2012,  the  monthly  regional  government  accounts  have  been  regularly 
published in budgetary accounting terms and, since March 2013, in National Accounts terms. 
Further, from last March, monthly National Accounts figures on Central Government and on 
the Social Security System began to be released, complementing the monthly State data in 
National  Accounts  and  cash-basis  terms,  and  the  monthly  Social  Security  System  data  in 
cash-basis terms that have been published for more than three decades. 
Apart from these reporting improvements, the Stability Law includes mechanisms to correct 
slippage in budget outturn. The Independent Fiscal Responsibility Authority, whose creation 
is scheduled for the end of this year, will complete this new governance framework. 
The pension system 
The sustainability of the pension system is pivotal to the medium- and long-term soundness 
and stability of public finances and to the very credibility of any consolidation programme for 
total  public  spending.  This  is  an  area  where  substantial  measures  have  already  been 
adopted, but in which it is vital to maintain the thrust of reform. 
Our  current  Social  Security  pension  system  is  contributory  and  unfunded,  and  will 
necessarily  have  to  continue  being  so.  It  is  a  fundamental  factor  of  economic  and  social 
stability,  meaning  that  it  is  in  everybody’s  interest  to  address the  risk  of  shortfall,  which  is 
essentially due to demographic developments. To be sustainable, the system must be able 
to properly control its key elements, such as retirement age, the calculation of pensions and 
the so-called “sustainability factor”, which is currently being defined. It is welcome news that 
practically  all  the  political  forces  are  working  in  the  spirit  of  the  Toledo  Pact  which  was 
approved almost 25 years ago and has repeatedly received the support of our Parliamentary 
institutions. 
But it is imperative to point out that, in the long run, the potential of the unfunded system to 
ensure retirees will enjoy a standard of living in step with the levels of income achieved in 
their working life may be limited. Accordingly, supplementary capitalisation formulas must be 
explored to allow more scope for saving during working life. These supplementary systems, 
of  which  there  are  examples  in  different  countries,  may  be  private  but  also  public.  In  any 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
event, as it takes a long time for any drive of this nature to mature, it is also in everybody’s 
interest to set about studying and putting in place the necessary arrangements as soon as 
possible. 
Progress in correcting the external imbalance 
It is in the external sector where the swiftest and sharpest correction of imbalances is being 
made. The adjustment in the external sector continued in 2012 and, as a result, after posting 
a surplus in the second half of the year (an unprecedented development since the launch of 
EMU), the current account was practically in balance, with a deficit of only 0.2% of GDP for 
the year as a whole. Current forecasts point to surpluses on the current account for 2013, 
2014 and successive years. 
In addition to the contraction in imports attributable to the fall-off in domestic spending, this 
performance  reflects  the  restoring  of  the  competitiveness  lost  by  the  Spanish  economy 
during the expansion that ended in 2008. By late 2012, two-thirds of the gap built up since 
2000 between Spanish unit labour costs and those for the euro area on average had already 
been corrected. These gains in competitiveness have been accompanied, in the most recent 
period,  by  notable  growth  in  the  number  of  exporting  firms  and  by  greater  geographical 
diversification of our exports, with an ever-increasing weight of those targeted on emerging 
markets. 
Competitiveness and market reform 
To put the favourable external sector performance on a firm footing, we must build on and 
further the improvements in competitiveness. In this connection, the markets for factors and 
goods  and  services  must  function  in  a  way  conducive  to  containing  costs,  margins  and 
prices. 
Clearly, in the labour market, we need a stable employment-promoting regulatory framework 
which,  at  the  same  time,  affords  sufficient  flexibility  to  attune  working  conditions  to  the 
circumstances of the business cycle. 
Indeed, greater moderation and flexibility can be seen in wage-setting in recent quarters, as 
can – and this is also important – a lesser degree of indexation. A more intensive use of the 
wage and non-wage flexibility mechanisms envisaged in the new regulatory framework would 
lend continuity to this ongoing improvement in competitiveness. 
But our problems of lack of flexibility and competition were not and are not only in the labour 
market. In the market for goods and services, the recently approved National Reform Plan 
includes a set of measures aimed at removing obstacles to competition, attaining productivity 
gains in various sectors and improving the functioning of various institutions. 
Private-sector deleveraging and lending 
The overindebtedness of households and firms is another of the major problems that arose in 
the last upturn in the Spanish economy. Private debt/GDP ratios have fallen from their peaks 
in 2010, but at a relatively slow pace. 
The  main  explanation  for  this  sluggishness  lies  in  the  downturn  in  private-sector  nominal 
income  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis.  Unlike  in  other  economies  with  problems  of  excess 
household and corporate debt, such as the United Kingdom and the United States, in Spain 
weak  nominal  growth  has  weighed  on  the  process  of  debt  re-balancing  and  has  made  it 
reside, above all, on a contraction in lending. 
The last year in which lending posted a positive rate of change in Spain was in 2008. Since 
then,  net  credit  flows,  both  to  households  and  to  non-financial  corporations,  have  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
negative overall, although there was a very slight increase in lending to households for house 
purchase in 2010. 
In  2012,  total  lending  to  the  resident  non-financial  private-sector  fell  by  5.8%;  credit  to 
households  fell  by  3.7%  while  that  to  non-financial  corporations  decreased  by  8%.  When 
total  credit  to  productive  activities  excluding  construction,  real  estate  development  and 
financial services is considered, the decline was not as sharp, standing at 6%. Indeed, credit 
to productive activities excluding construction, real estate development and financial services 
was slightly positive in 2010, but has been negative in 2011, 2012 and in 2013 to date. 
In  considering  these  developments  it  should  evidently  be  borne  in  mind  that  credit  for 
construction and real estate development activities had to shrink as the cyclical upturn ended 
and the excesses of the period 2004–2008 had to be corrected. 
The problem naturally lies in the negative rates of credit flow for productive activities other 
than construction and development, and in the contraction of credit for households, both for 
house purchases and for other purposes. And, in addition to a problem of volume, there is a 
problem  of  prices;  our  households  and  firms  are  paying  higher  interest  rates  than  the 
average rates paid for comparable transactions in the euro area as a whole, although these 
spreads are small in the case of financing for house purchase, very high for consumer loans 
and also substantial for credit obtained by non-financial corporations. 
To explain this we must look both at supply-side factors relating to loanable funds by banks, 
and to demand-side factors on the part of borrowers, households and firms. 
Concerning  the  demand  for  credit,  the  recessionary  environment,  high  unemployment,  the 
hitherto scant growth prospects and uncertainty are evidently affecting potential borrowers. 
On the supply side, neither liquidity – provided in a stable fashion and at a low cost by the 
Eurosystem – nor the shortage of capital would appear to be significant explanatory factors. 
We believe that on the supply side the two most influential factors are the deleveraging of 
banks and the lack of projects that may be deemed solvent, or offer sufficient guarantees. 
There are in fact figures confirming that the most dynamic and productive companies obtain 
financing; the trajectory of exports is a good indicator in this respect. Yet, at the same time, 
we  know  that  many  small  and  medium-sized  companies  (SMEs)  –  with  good  results  and 
prospects, and current in their payments to their banks – have difficulty financing even their 
working capital, or can do so only at a very high cost. 
There is a further factor affecting credit flows, both on the supply and the demand sides. Our 
banking  map  has  changed  considerably  in  recent  years,  with  the  disappearance  or 
transformation of many savings banks which, in different regions, traditionally lent to many 
SMEs. That has led to adjustments in bank balance sheets and to new working relationships 
between  credit  institutions  and  their  customers,  which  may,  at  least  temporarily,  be 
influencing credit flows. 
The need for deleveraging has not only been a consideration for credit institutions, but also 
for non-financial corporations and households; as earlier stated, both households and firms 
incurred  very  high  and  in  many  cases  unsustainable  debt  levels  in  2008–2010.  Indeed,  a 
good number of analysts agree that, in order to expand again, our productive sector is more 
in  need  of  capital  than  of  credit,  given  that  the  correction  of  excessive  debt  has  not  been 
concluded,  without  ruling  out  the  fact  that,  evidently,  the  pick-up  in  economic  growth  may 
assist this correction. 
In any event, there can be no economic recovery without a pick-up in credit flows. But the 
latter cannot ensue from administrative rules that ignore economic rationality or that lead to 
mistaken  decisions  from  the  standpoint  of  the  solvency  of  banks,  including  public-sector 
institutions. 
That  said,  there  are  measures  that  should  be  studied  to  reactivate  credit  for  the  entire 
economy and, in particular, to SMEs and to the exporting sector. The European Investment 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Bank  has  the  means  to  stimulate  loans  to  SMEs  through  an  increase  in  its  funding  to 
European  public-sector  banks  operating  in  this  area.  New  arrangements  could  also  be 
studied for risk-sharing using European funds, for example structural funds, a possibility that 
is already under discussion. And specific schemes to boost export credit could be studied. 
Within the Eurosystem, the Banco de España has always been in favour of initiatives geared 
to  supporting  more  and  cheaper  credit,  through  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures 
that help restore the monetary policy transmission mechanisms. 
But  we  know  that  the  normalisation  of  credit  will  not  come  about,  or  will  be  slower  and 
difficult, if we do not complete the clean-up and reinforcement of the solvency of our banking 
system.  This  is  why  it  is  important  to  clearly  understand  what  has  been  done  in  2012  to 
overcome the crisis and to evaluate the current state of affairs. 
Clean-up, recapitalisation and restructuring of the banking system and financial 
reform 
I shall focus on the six issues that afford us an overview of the situation: the clean-up efforts 
in 2012, the strengthening of solvency, the improved liquidity position, developments in non-
performing loans, expectations for results in the current year, and, finally, regulatory changes 
approved in 2012. 
Clean-up 
Firstly,  balance  sheet  write-downs.  Two  steps  were  taken  in  2012  which  fundamentally 
determined the balance sheet write-downs that Spanish banks’ income statements have had 
to absorb. The first was the requirement, laid down in the royal decrees of February and May 
2012, to set aside provisions to reinforce coverage of loans to the real estate development 
and construction sector and of foreclosed assets. The second was the balance sheet write-
downs stemming from the compulsory transfer to SAREB (the asset management company 
for assets arising from bank restructuring), at an agreed price, of the assets belonging to the 
balance  sheet  segments  I  have  just  mentioned.  This  transfer,  made  by  banks  under 
restructuring or resolution, affected assets totalling €107 billion in terms of their gross book 
value,  with a transfer value of €50.6 billion. With this and other measures, Spanish banks’ 
exposure  to  the  above-mentioned  real  estate  risks  has  fallen  since  2011  by  slightly  more 
than half, from €240 billion to €115 billion. 
In sum, write-downs by Spanish banks in 2012 totalled €87 billion, compared with €32 billion 
in 2011. 
Solvency 
Secondly, solvency. Despite the fact that the major clean-up and provisioning drive by the 
Spanish banking system in 2012 resulted in total losses of €43.7 billion, the system’s level of 
solvency  has  improved.  That  has  been  possible  thanks  to  the  recapitalisation  operations 
performed  by  directly  tapping  the  markets;  to  the  capital  injection  financed  through  the 
Financial Assistance Programme agreed with the European authorities, for a final amount of 
€39 billion; to the conversion of hybrid instruments into capital instruments; and to the funds 
provided by the FROB and the Deposit Guarantee Fund. 
Currently, all Spanish banks meet the regulatory capital ratios required. As at the close of the 
first quarter this year, the solvency ratio of our banking system was 11.6%, compared with 
the current minimum of 8% required under the Basel Accord. 
It is worth stressing – as certain comments made seek to omit this or completely misinterpret 
it  –  that  the  fundamental  intention  and  effect  of  the  capital  injections  with  public  funds 
(whether from the European Stability Mechanism or from the Spanish Treasury) has been to 
prevent the winding-up of banks, thereby preserving customer deposits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
It would be remiss not to mention here the problem of the hybrid capital and subordinated 
debt instruments sold to retail customers by credit institutions which, following the detection 
of capital shortfalls in the stress tests completed last September, were unable to cover their 
capital  needs  with  their  own  resources  and  received  State  aid.  These  banks,  on  requiring 
public financial assistance, are subject to the terms of the Memorandum of Understanding 
signed  on  20  July  2012,  to  Law  9/2012  on  the  Restructuring  and  Resolution  of  Credit 
Institutions and, consequently, to the European Commission’s arrangements governing State 
aid. 
The Banco de España, directly through the FROB and the Deposit Guarantee Fund, and via 
its participation in the Arbitrage Committee set up last March, is collaborating with the other 
authorities involved and with the banks themselves to find the best possible solution to this 
serious  and  multi-faceted  problem;  not  all  these  instruments  are  the  same,  they  have  not 
been sold in the same way, and nor will they be given the same treatment under European 
regulations. 
Liquidity 
Thirdly,  liquidity.  Spain  underwent  a  serious  external  funding  crisis  in  2012.  The  origins  of 
this crisis lay both in the crisis in the euro area and negative market perception of our banks’ 
solvency. 
A  feedback  loop  between  sovereign  risk  and  banking  risk  emerged,  dominated  by  the  so-
called “redenomination risk”, i.e. the risk that certain countries might abandon the Monetary 
Union.  That  led  to  a  very  difficult  situation  for  our  external  funding,  which  the  liquidity 
supplied by the European Central Bank allowed us to address. In the last quarter of 2012, 
however,  the  tensions  eased  and  the  liquidity  of  our  banks  began  to  improve.  The  debit 
position vis-à-vis the ECB decreased from €410 billion in August 2012 to slightly more than 
€250 billion last May. Furthermore, the access of our banks to bond markets has improved. 
NPL ratio 
Fourth, the NPL ratio. In December 2012, after the initial phase of transfer of assets to the 
SAREB, the NPL ratio stood at 10.8%. By March it had increased to 11.2%. The real estate 
development  and  construction  sector  has  the  highest  NPL  ratio  (29%),  while  that  of 
mortgages to individuals is contained (4%), although it is tending to rise. As a result of the 
major  efforts  made  in  terms  of  write-downs  and  provisioning  in  2012  and  the  drastic 
decrease in real estate risk, we can affirm that our banks are able to meet the provisioning 
needs which may arise this year, in 2013, and also in 2014, if there are any. 
Results in 2013 
Fifth,  the  profit  and  loss  account.  As  we  have  indicated,  in  2012  the  large  volume  of 
provisioning led to heavy losses. That said, margins performed positively due to the influence 
of two factors: the fall in interest expenses and the efforts made by many banks to contain 
their operating costs. Particularly strong efforts have been made by banks which have been 
restructured in accordance with the plans approved by the FROB, the Banco de España and 
the European authorities, within the framework of the Memorandum of Understanding of July 
2012. 
As for this year, the preliminary data for the first quarter allow us to be moderately optimistic, 
since an overall profit of more than €4 billion was reported. Virtually all the banking groups 
have obtained profits. 
In  short,  as  the  EU  institutions,  the  ECB  and  the  IMF  have  acknowledged,  we  are 
overcoming the banking crisis, although risks and uncertainties persist which mean that we 
certainly cannot consider the crisis resolved. That said, it needs to be reiterated that there is 
no better way of normalising credit flows than completing this task. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Regulatory changes 
Sixth and finally, before discussing the progress made in the Banking Union project, I would 
like to refer, very briefly, to the most important changes in 2012 in financial regulation which 
are directly related to the handling of the banking crisis. 
The most significant legal change in the financial area was Law 9/2012 of 14 November 2012 
on the restructuring and resolution of credit institutions which strengthens the FROB’s role 
and  anticipates  the  future  directive  which  will  regulate  these  processes  in  Europe.  Royal 
Decree 1559/2012 subsequently regulated asset management companies and, in particular, 
the regime applicable to the SAREB. 
Finally, in the area of bank customer protection, mention should be made of Royal Decree-
Law 6/2012 of 9 March 2012 which established various measures to protect those mortgage 
borrowers in most difficulty, which included the Code of Good Practices, to which virtually all 
Spanish  banking  institutions  adhered.  And,  second,  Banco  de  España  Circular  5/2012  of 
27 June  2012  completed  the  new  legislation  in  this  area,  developing  the  concept  of 
“responsible lending” and enhancing the information system applicable to banking products. 
As for banking supervision, the Banco de España, in compliance with the provisions of the 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  of  20  July  2012,  performed  an  internal  review  of  its 
supervisory procedures. It created a Committee for this purpose which delivered its findings 
last  October.  This  Committee  made  a  series  of  recommendations  which  the  Banco  de 
España is considering and which have already led to changes in the organisational chart of 
the banking supervision department and in procedures. However, the implementation of the 
Supervisory  Mechanism  at  the  European  Central  Bank,  which  we  expect  to  take  place  in 
about one year, will clearly involve the need for changes both to supervisory procedures and 
organisation. Consequently, we need to proceed prudently in this area, our adaptation to the 
new European model being our first consideration. 
Progress toward the banking union 
The decisive push towards banking union was given by the European Summit of June 2012, 
at  a  time  of  grave  uncertainty  and  tensions  in  the  euro  area.  Banking  union  must  be 
understood,  as  conceived  from  the  outset,  as  an  essential  step  to  sever  the  link  between 
banking risk and sovereign risk and to bolster the soundness and irreversibility of Monetary 
Union. 
The banking union will be underpinned by three basic pillars: a single supervisor, harmonised 
resolution arrangements and a European resolution authority with a common resolution fund. 
To date, progress has been mixed in each of these three areas. 
The  European  Parliament  should  shortly  approve  the  legislation  that  creates  the  single 
supervisory mechanism, in which the European Central Bank is to play a central role. The 
single supervisor will become operational twelve months after this approval, but first the ECB 
must analyse the solvency of all the institutions it is to supervise, an exercise that will have to 
be incorporated into the new stress tests to be performed by the European Banking Authority 
next year. 
The Directive establishing the harmonised resolution regime – currently under debate at the 
European Council and the European Parliament – and the legislation to create a European 
authority  and  a  common  resolution  fund  are  still  pending  approval.  In  the  latter  case,  a 
proposal must be submitted, on a date yet to be specified, by the European Commission. 
Conclusions 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the theme of my speech has been the difficult adjustment that the 
Spanish economy is currently going through, which needs to be seen in the context of the 
largely unprecedented international and European setting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The advanced economies, the United States, the European Union, the United Kingdom and 
Japan are operating under extremely loose monetary conditions, with exceptionally abundant 
liquidity  and  very  low  interest  rates.  Emerging  from  this  situation  without  any  impact  on 
growth and without creating fresh financial turmoil will not be easy and considerable risks will 
be encountered along that path. Emerging countries continue to record high growth rates, but 
this momentum is weakening and in 2014 this weakness may become more pronounced. 
In the euro area in a scenario of weak economic growth and despite the improvement since 
summer 2012, monetary and financial markets remain fragmented and the uncertainty about 
monetary union and governance of the European Union has not been completely dispelled. 
In  Spain,  we  have  made  significant  progress  in  correcting  the  imbalances  affecting  our 
capacity to grow and I think we are on the right path to achieving a recovery of activity and 
the creation of employment on a sound basis. However, it will be essential not to abandon 
the  policy  of  reforms  aimed  at  increasing  the  flexibility  of  our  economy  and  at  boosting 
competitiveness. 
The  fundamental  task  outstanding  for  the  Banco  de  España  is,  with  the  help  and  close 
cooperation of the Government and the resolute support of the banking sector, to complete 
the balance sheet clean-up of our banking system, affording it the utmost solvency, efficiency 
and  transparency.  This  target,  to  bring  about  a  system  that  fulfils  its  key  function  to 
intermediate between savers and investors and which enjoys the full trust of customers and 
depositors, will, with hard work and rigour, be within our reach. 
But we will need something more: to restore economic growth, revive investment, create jobs 
and  overcome  the  banking  and  financial  crisis,  we  require  legal  security.  I  take  this 
opportunity to request that you work resolutely to safeguard and strengthen it. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
