Ardian Fullani: Overview of recent economic developments in Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 28 August 2013. 
 Today,  on  28  August  2013,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved the monthly Monetary Policy Report. Based on the latest monetary and economic 
developments  in  Albania,  and  following  the  discussions  on  their  outlook,  the  Supervisory 
Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, at 3.5%. 
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting. 
 According to INSTAT data, annual inflation in July was 1.6%, falling from a month earlier 
and standing below our 3% inflation target. Inflation’s sharp decline in this month is expected 
to be temporary. It was driven by low seasonal food prices and the downward dynamics of 
prices  for  some  other  CPI  basket  items.  However,  the  main  consumer  basket  groups  and 
items continue to be characterised by low annual inflation rates. 
Albania’s  economic  and  financial  developments  have  generated  low  inflation  rates. 
Aggregate demand and economic growth remain weak, thus falling short of the full utilisation 
of the country’s production capacities. 
This  situation  does  not support  employment  and  creates  low  pressures  on  the  increase  of 
wages,  production  costs,  and  profit  margins.  Likewise,  imported  inflationary  pressures 
appear contained, reflecting the moderate performance of global prices and the stability of 
the exchange rate. Finally, the expected inflation from the real and financial sectors appears 
low, whereas the situation of liquidity is in line  with the moderate price rise in the medium 
term.  The  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that,  in  general,  these  trends  will  persist  in  the  period 
ahead and will determine low inflation rates in the medium-term horizon. 
Updated economic analyses suggest that economic activity expanded at low rates during the 
first half of the year. 
Aggregate  demand  and  economic  growth  appear  to  have  improved  slightly  in  the  second 
quarter, in response to higher fiscal stimulus and better performance of consumer spending, 
while private investments remain weak. 
Moreover, foreign  demand  continued  to  provide  positive  contribution  to  boosting  economic 
activity. The latest data from the external sector point to trade deficit narrowing by 14.6%, in 
July, in annual terms. It narrowed thanks to the increase of exports by 23.9% and the slight 
increase of imports by 1.2%. 
Fiscal policy was stimulating during the first seven months of the year, being characterised 
by rapid increase of public expenditure and direct or indirect reduction in some of the taxes. 
During this period, budget expenditure surged 10.4%, whereas budget revenues fell 2.6%. 
This  situation  was  reflected  in  the  budget  deficit  being  2.3  times  higher  than  in  the  same 
period a year earlier. 
The deficit expansion supported the aggregate demand in this period; however, it implies the 
implementation of a prudent fiscal policy for the rest of the year, under the conditions that 
space for borrowing in the second half of the year is exhausted. 
The  easing monetary policy,  lower  demand for  borrowing  by  the  public  sector,  and good 
liquidity situation in the banking sector have contributed to further cutting of interest rates in 
July  and  August.  In  particular,  the  interest  rate  cut  was  more  noticeable  on  government 
securities and deposits in lek and less on loans in lek. This development continues to point to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  presence  of  relatively  high  risk  premia  in  the  financial  market  and  illustrates  also  the 
conservative  lending  policies  applied  by  banks.  Similarly  to  the  experience  of  many  other 
economies, it reveals that the complete transmission of the eased monetary policy to better 
lending terms for the private sector remains problematic. 
On the other hand, the private sector demonstrates elastic demand against the relatively low 
credit cost, hence dampening the transmission of the monetary stimulus to the economy. 
Under these circumstances, credit expansion to the economy continued to mark low growth 
rates. As at the end of the second quarter, credit to the economy stood 0.9% higher than in 
the  same  period  a  year  earlier.  In  addition  to  the  weak  economic  activity,  the  economic 
agents’ perception of uncertainty continues to slacken the private sector’s demand for credit. 
Nonetheless, in June, the private sector credit recovered slightly, compared to the previous 
two months. As at end-June, the M3 aggregate was up 4.5%, in annual terms. 
Looking ahead, the Bank of Albania deems that the drivers of economic growth remain 
weak and uncertain. 
In particular, private investment and consumption suffer from uncertainties and reluctance of 
households and business to undertake long-term commitments. Furthermore, lending terms, 
both at home and abroad, remain relatively tight, hence discouraging credit and investment. 
The performance of these components will determine the economic outlook in the future. 
In a medium-term horizon, the baseline scenario of expected developments is characterised 
by weak and below-potential economic growth – in line with the one noted over the past two 
years.  In  the  absence  of  imported  inflation  pressures,  or  other  supply-side  shocks, 
inflationary pressures are expected to be weak and the annual consumer price rise is 
expected to be in the lower half of the target band. 
This  development  scenario  requires  maintaining  the  stimulating  trend  for  economic 
policies, to support aggregate demand and recovery of potential growth rates. In terms 
of macroeconomic policies, the Bank of Albania deems that the primary objective of the fiscal 
policy  in  the  future  should  be  to  maintain  and  enhance  the  public  debt  sustainability.  This 
course of action will strengthen the confidence of financial markets in Albania’s public finance 
and  reduce  the  costs  for  servicing  the  debt  in  the  long  term.  The  macroeconomic  context 
generated by it would create better conditions for the development of the private sector and 
would leave more space to transmit and strengthen the monetary stimulus to the economy. 
 At  the  end  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  keep  the  key  interest  rate 
unchanged,  at  3.5%.  The  Supervisory  Council  deems  that  the  monetary  conditions  are 
adequate  to  meet  Bank  of  Albania’s  inflation  target  in  the  medium  term.  The  current 
conditions  ensure  the  necessary  monetary  stimulus  to  support  the  domestic  demand.  The 
Supervisory  Council  deems  that  the  expected  dynamics  of  economic  and  financial 
developments  will  require  maintaining  the  easing  trend  of  the  monetary  policy  into  the 
medium-term horizon. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
