Klaas Knot: Financial stability through transparent reporting 
Speech by Mr Klaas Knot, President of the Netherlands Bank, at the “International Financial 
Reporting Standards” conference, Amsterdam, 27 June 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  talk  to  you  about  the  role  accounting  standards  fulfil  in  micro-  and  macro-
prudential  supervision  of  the  financial  sector.  From  experience  I  know  that  the  accounting 
domain, the prudential domain and financial stability cannot be seen separately. 
The  discussion  about  this  subject  has  been going  on for quite  some  time.  But I’ve  always 
contributed to this debate from a supervisory perspective. And so I will today. 
The  main  thread  of  the  debate  has  always  been  “unexpected  losses  versus  expected 
losses”. 
In  other  words:  losses  we  cannot  see  coming  versus  the  net  present  value  of  predictable 
future losses. The question for us is: how to translate the prudential notion of expected and 
unexpected losses to day-to-day accounting practises? 
I have two messages: 
The first: Accounting standards should be designed to reflect expected losses, no more and 
no less than that. And own funds should be designed to absorb unexpected losses. 
The second: Financial reporting and financial stability supplement one another. They are like 
a horse and carriage. 
I believe a combination of transparent capital requirements and accounting concepts based 
on  expected  losses,  would  boost  trust  in  financial  institutions  and  thus  improve  financial 
stability. 
Now,  it’s  a  known  fact  that  the  ancient  Egyptians  were  aware  that  every  good  seven-year 
period  would  be  followed  by  a  bad  seven-year  period.  Seven  years  of favourable  weather 
conditions would be followed by seven years of either too little or too much rain. It’s why they 
saved grain during the seven good years. This old wisdom would serve the financial sector 
well too. 
Stockpiling the metaphorical granary when harvests are good is sound financial policy. 
So,  how  does  this  translate  to  financial  reporting  and  capital  requirements?  Well,  in  the 
debate, prudential regulators are often accused of building in unexpected losses in loan loss 
provisions. 
I  think,  though,  that  the  facts  tell  a  different  story.  Let’s  look  at  the  Basel  Committee  for 
instance.  It  distinguishes  between  expected  and  unexpected  losses.  It  argues  that  capital 
requirements  should  be  robust  enough  to  cover  unexpected  losses.  And  the  Basel 
Committee welcomes that the IASB is considering including the expected loss notion in their 
new financial instruments standard, IFRS 9. 
With a few hundred accounting experts here in the audience, I won’t need to explain why a 
bank that maintains adequate loan loss allowances and robust capital buffers, is doing itself 
a favour. This serves that bank as well as financial stability. 
As to the capital buffers, I take it that most of you are aware that both Basel III and Solvency 
II  contain  stricter  requirements  for  buffers  than  the  former  versions  of  these  solvency 
regimes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
For banks, Basel III specifies that the minimum levels be increased and expanded with so-
called capital conservation and countercyclical buffers. Capital conservation buffers are to be 
built specifically in good times, through profit retention. 
And  countercyclical  buffers  are  meant  to  be  created  in  times  of  rapid  credit  growth,  when 
banks extend a lot of new loans. 
For we know that, more often than not, such periods are followed by a prolonged financial 
downturn. 
As far as the supervisory requirements are concerned, it is the explicit aim that the granaries 
be filled during the good years. Supervisors play a crucial role in ensuring that banks comply 
with this requirement. 
But there’s an important role for accounting standard setters here, too. For I would argue in 
favour of maximum transparency about these buffers. And it wouldn’t surprise me in the least 
if the IASB chose to include disclosure requirements about own funds in their standards, for 
instance in IAS 1. 
Now let me turn to financial stability. Obviously, economies are cyclical: every upward trend 
is followed by a downward one. And vice-versa. 
Given the current negative sentiment, trust in banks has turned sour. To illustrate this, we 
only need to look at the price-to-book ratios of many banks. 
The figures are telling us things are not well. Among a number of reasons why price-to-book 
ratios are this low, is that investors are still expecting hidden losses to appear. 
They  believe  the  banks  have  not  yet  put  these  future  losses  in  the  books  and  are  thus 
sceptical  about  their  financial  health.  For  when  part  of  the  capital  will  be  used  to  absorb 
expected losses, they know that less will be available for unexpected losses.  
Whether these investors are right is irrelevant. What is relevant is that this fear stems from 
knowing that banks apply the incurred loss-model. 
The  impairment  requirements  in  the  current  standard,  IAS  39,  are  just  not  sufficiently 
forward-looking. This is not just their perception; it’s mine too. 
In terms of the grain metaphor, that’s like having a well-filled granary built on soggy soil and 
knowing that the grain is leaking away through cracks in the foundation. 
This  makes  for  a  deadlock  between  investors  and  banks  –  one  that  can  have  adverse 
consequences  for  financial  institutions,  governments  and  national  economies,  as  we  have 
witnessed in recent years. 
In my view, it’s therefore highly advisable that we make the impairment requirements in the 
new accounting standard forward-looking. High-quality accounting standards should form the 
foundation on which these capital buffers are based. Sound reporting will increase trust in the 
institution. 
There  are  those  that  think  it  unwise  to  estimate  future  losses,  as  these  estimates  are 
subjective and imprecise. I would disagree for two reasons:  
First,  expected  losses  can  be  described  in  such  concrete  words  that  they  can  be  properly 
reported  by  the  reporting  entity  and  subsequently  verified  by  the  auditor.  And,  second,  I 
believe that the current incurred loss model is more subjective than people tend to think. 
To illustrate the subjective character of the current incurred loss model, I can draw from our 
experience at the Dutch Central Bank. 
We  are  currently  executing  a  so-called  Asset  Quality  Review.  In  this  review  we’re  also 
evaluating the processes that lead to adequate levels of loan loss provisioning. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
What  we  are  seeing  is  that  different  banks  use  different  interpretations  for  similar  loans. 
Apparently,  there’s  already  room  for  a  certain  degree  of  subjectivity.  I’m  not  too  worried 
about this subjectivity. Preparing financial statements has always carried some measure of 
subjectivity and this will remain so. 
I agree with those who say that too much subjectivity will foster “gaming of the system”. In 
order  to  control  this  subjectivity,  I  would  welcome  that  the  new  IASB  standard,  IFRS  9, 
clearly defines those relevant forward-looking elements. 
For  me  the  proof  of  the  pudding  would  be  preparers  and  auditors  saying  that  the  new 
forward-looking  requirements  cannot  be  ignored  when  calculating  the  expected  loss 
allowance accounts. 
So far, I concentrated on the impairment requirements to be included in IFRS 9. But IFRS 9 
also contains other elements that are quite relevant to us. These are the classification and 
measurement sections. Let me also say a few words about these. It’s generally accepted that 
a bank’s economic value is determined by its cash flows. Accounting standards should reflect 
this. That’s why I am in favour of introducing the business model criterion. 
If the bank’s business is trading, then the Fair Value-method would give a good estimate of 
future  cash  flows.  If  the  bank  specialises  in  hold-to-collect  management  of  financial 
instruments, then unrealised gains should not be part of its own funds. 
Obviously,  I’m  implicitly  referring  to  the  revision  of  standards  for  financial  instruments:  the 
conversion of IAS 39 to IFRS 9. I’m glad we are converting, as the new standard is a big 
improvement. 
For the resulting simplicity will not only help to tell a clear story, but also enhance financial 
stability. And this is just what the main categories “amortised cost” and “fair value through 
profit or loss” will do. 
I know, of course, that the IASB is considering introducing a third category, the so-called Fair 
Value Through Other Comprehensive Income, or FVOCI. 
I’ve been told that this new category resembles an old one, the Available-for-Sale category. 
The very category that caused a lot of uncertainty during the crisis. 
I  would  therefore  advise  the  Board  to  see  to  it  that  this  third  category  is  made  subject  to 
robust conditions, to ensure that this regulation leaves no leeway for arbitraging. 
Finally, I would say that converting from incurred loss to expected loss would greatly improve 
things. As I said earlier, accounting principles should take into account expected losses as 
soon as they are perceptible. This means that the expected loss notion becomes part of the 
amortised cost principle. 
And  I  view  this  notion  as  quite  similar  to  fair  value  notions  that  include  losses  in  market 
indices. These also tend to bear a forward-looking element. To some this may come as a 
surprise,  but  in  my  mind  both  approaches  would  give  us  very  clear  estimates  of  possible 
credit risk losses. And, of course, this would serve financial stability. 
The IASB has been working on the conversion from IAS 39 to IFRS 9 for a while now. I look 
forward to its swift implementation. 
In closing, I would like to leave you with three basic principles:  
One:  Transparent  reporting  of  expected  and  unexpected  losses  contributes  to  financial 
stability.  We  should  make  buffers  in  own  funds  for  unexpected  losses  and  book  in  the 
expected losses as part of the new amortised cost valuation method. 
Two:  Prudential  regulators  and  accounting  standard  setters  such  as  the  IASB  share  an 
interest. Prudential regulators promote sound risk management practices – and accounting 
standard  setters  promote  sound  financial  reporting.  Both  are  prerequisites  for  a  sound 
banking system and, consequently, for financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
I therefore call upon the IASB to continue its cooperation with the regulators, including the 
Basel Committee. 
Three:  The  expected  loss  model  must  be  included  in  the  IFRS  9  standard  for  financial 
instruments – as soon as possible, I would add. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let the granaries of the world be filled to the rafters with grain of excellent quality. And let the 
fields be ready to bear more great harvests. Once everyone sees how well the farmers are 
prepared for the lean years ahead they will happily go about their business. They will trust 
the stability of the system that keeps them fed. 
I thank you for your time and will now happily take some of your questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
