William C Dudley: The outlook for the national and local economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS), at the Staten Island Chamber of Commerce, Staten Island, New York, 16 April 2013. 
 It is always a pleasure to speak with the business community given your important role in the 
community and in the region. I am particularly pleased to have the opportunity to speak to 
the Staten Island Chamber of Commerce and to be part of this distinguished panel. Thank 
you for inviting me today. 
As you know I have the honor of serving as the president and CEO of the New York Fed, one 
of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks that together with the Board of Governors in Washington 
make up the Federal Reserve System, our nation’s central bank. As head of the New York 
Fed I am vice-chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the body that sets 
our nation’s monetary policy. 
The  Fed  was  founded  100  years  ago  in  1913  to  advance  economic  and financial  stability. 
Over this century our nation’s economic output and standard of living has increased greatly, 
but  the  United  States  also  faced  many  different  challenges  –  ranging  from  the  Great 
Depression of the 1930s to the Great Inflation of the 1970s and most recently the financial 
crisis. 
The Federal Reserve is independent from politics and the national government but is subject 
to oversight by Congress, which has set our dual mandate to promote maximum sustainable 
employment  and  price  stability.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  structured  to  ensure  that  the 
economic needs of people and businesses in every part of our country are fully considered in 
our policy deliberations. What I learn in my visit to Staten Island today is an important input to 
our policymaking process.  
As New York Fed president I try to get out of my New York City office as much as I can to get 
a  sense  of  regional  economic  conditions  across  what  is  known  as  the  second  Federal 
Reserve District. I’ve traveled throughout New York, New Jersey and Puerto Rico in recent 
years and plan to visit Fairfield County, upstate New York and Queens later this year. 
These visits give me the opportunity to explain what the Federal Reserve is doing and to get 
your thoughts about the state of our economy and the challenges that you face. 
Today, I will focus on the economic outlook regionally and nationally. After that, I’ll be happy 
to  answer  any  questions  you  have  about  what  the  Fed  does,  and  about  the  economic 
outlook. As always, my views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the FOMC 
or the Federal Reserve System. 
Regional economic conditions 
The financial crisis underscored the fact that the world is a complicated place and that the 
insights  of  professional  economists  and  financial  experts  must  be  supplemented  with  a 
broader set of perspectives from households and businesses. Today’s visit is in that spirit – I 
want to talk about what we are seeing in the economy but also to hear from you firsthand 
about your assessment of economic conditions.  
So what do we see? Let me start with basic economic characteristics. While Staten Island is 
the city’s least populous borough, its population has grown steadily and rapidly, more than 
doubling  in  the  last  half-century  to  close  to  one-half  million  residents.  On  its  own,  Staten 
Island  is  larger  than  all  other  cities  in  the  entire  New  York–New  Jersey  region,  with  the 
obvious exception of New York City.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In  many  ways  –  homeownership,  educational  attainment,  income,  and  demographics  – 
Staten  Island  more  closely  resembles  the  nation  than  the  rest  of  New  York  City.  For 
example,  the  homeownership  rate  on  Staten  Island  is  almost  70  percent,  well  above  the 
30 percent  average  homeownership  rate  citywide.  Still,  with  a  sizable  proportion  of  the 
borough’s workers commuting to Manhattan (about ¼ of the island’s workers or more than 
50,000 people) Staten Island’s economy is closely tied to the rest of the city’s economy, as 
well as to northern New Jersey’s. Thus, when Manhattan sees brisk job growth, the residents 
of Staten Island have better opportunities.  
The  New  York  City  economy  continues  to  rebound  strongly  from  the  2008–09  downturn  – 
more strongly than the nation as a whole. The New York Fed’s index of economic activity for 
the city has grown solidly and steadily for the past three years, signaling a robust rebound in 
the local economy. This strength is reflected in strong job creation: while the U.S. economy 
has thus far recovered only about two-thirds of the jobs lost during the recession, New York 
City has recovered all its lost jobs and then some. In fact, total employment in the Big Apple 
recently surpassed not only its pre-crisis peak of 2008 but also its all-time peak of 1969. 
Here on Staten Island job creation has not been quite as robust over the past couple years. It 
should  be  recognized,  however,  that  Staten  Island’s  economy  was  actually  more  resilient 
than Manhattan’s during the recession, experiencing only minimal job losses. Staten Island’s 
key industries – local-market sectors like health, education and retail trade – tend to be less 
susceptible  to  sharp  economic  downturns  than  more  cyclical  sectors,  like  manufacturing, 
construction and finance. 
Even  so,  not  all  indicators  of  the  local  economy  are  improving.  Unemployment  remains 
stubbornly high, at just over 8 percent. And home prices, though recovering gradually, are 
still down about 15 percent from where they were back in 2007. This compares to nationally 
where they are down about 25 percent on average.  
The New York Fed’s quarterly measures of household credit conditions signal some recent 
improvement, though there clearly remain pockets of financial stress among families here. At 
year-end,  for  those  people  with  a  credit  report,  average  debt  per  person  in  Staten  Island 
ticked up, rising to about $67,000, after trending down for a number of years. A similar uptick 
in debt  was observed nationwide, potentially signaling that households are now somewhat 
more willing to take on debt. Delinquency rates, however, are still fairly high: 9.7 percent of 
all debt in the county is seriously delinquent, well above the national rate. On a more positive 
note,  delinquency  rates  on  Staten  Island  are  declining  and  are  at  their  lowest  level  in 
3½ years.  Mortgage  delinquency  rates,  though  still  above  the  national  rate,  are  also  at  a 
3½-year low. 
Recently, of course, Staten Island’s greatest challenge has been the massive disruption and 
destruction  caused  by  Superstorm  Sandy.  While  many  parts  of  the  New  York  City 
metropolitan region were hard-hit by the storm, the devastation was particularly severe here 
on  Staten Island.  And  this  is  something  that  has  had  large consequences for  some  of  my 
colleagues  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  Nearly  150  of  our  employees  call 
Staten Island their home. While many, thankfully, were spared the full brunt of the storm, I 
know quite a few people whose homes were destroyed or severely damaged and others who 
lost many of their belongings.  
Immediately following Sandy, our Regional and Community Outreach function reached out to 
all of the affected communities as part of a needs assessment. We asked: “How can the New 
York Fed best leverage our resources to help our community?” 
After  dozens  of  conversations  with  leaders  of  the  community,  we  determined  that  pulling 
together  key  service  providers  under  one  roof  would  make  a  useful  contribution.  Our 
outreach team organized a free relief clinic in this very building. We brought together a wide 
variety  of  government  agency  representatives  and  other  service  providers.  I  would  like  to 
acknowledge what is a long list: Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the Small 
Business Administration (SBA), the Office of the New York Attorney General, the New York 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
State Department of Financial Services, the New York Legal Assistance Group, Staten Island 
Legal Services, the Legal Aid Society, MFY Legal Services, various bar associations, New 
York City Department of Small Business Services, Center for New York City Neighborhoods, 
Neighborhood  Housing  Services  of  Staten  Island  and  the  Northfield  Local  Community 
Development Corporation. I’m proud to say we were able to assist over 150 Staten Islanders, 
including homeowners, tenants and small business owners. 
We also heard that it could be challenging to find key recovery information and advice online. 
So  once  again,  we  pulled  key  resources  under  one  roof  –  or  I  should  say  one  URL.  We 
developed  a  Sandy  Information  Center  with  the  best  information  we  could  find  for  folks 
impacted  by  Sandy  –  including  key  deadline  dates  along  with  expert  legal,  finance  and 
insurance guidance. Over 2,000 have benefited from our web resources. 
While we are not yet back to normal in neighborhoods like Midland Beach, Oakwood Beach, 
New Dorp Beach and Tottenville, the situation is improving and I expect that this recovery will 
continue over the coming year. We are going to continue to examine where we can provide 
assistance  in  supporting  this  effort.  One  effort,  for  example,  is  to  provide  assistance  in 
collecting detailed data on the areas that were impacted by the storm.  
From  talking  to  some  local  business  people  late  last  November,  we  know  that  many 
residents and businesses had to wait a long time for insurance claims and small business 
loans, as well as to get their heat and power restored. We also know that eight public schools 
were closed.  
Unfortunately, timely statistics pertaining specifically to Staten Island’s economy are scarce, 
thus making it hard to accurately gauge the impact from Sandy or the strength and breadth of 
the ensuing recovery. So we truly value input from all of you – people on the front lines of the 
local economy – to assist us in gauging recent trends and developments in Staten Island’s 
economy.  
National economic conditions 
Turning to the national outlook, the U.S. economy remains on the slow growth track that has 
persisted since the recession ended in mid-2009. In fact, real gross domestic product (GDP) 
grew just 1.7 percent in 2012, below the 2.2 percent rate of the preceding two years. This 
lackluster and disappointing performance masks the fact that the underlying conditions that 
support growth have been gradually improving. However, in the near-term, this improvement 
in fundamentals is being offset by federal tax increases and spending cuts, which economists 
call “fiscal drag.” The most obvious example of this is the end of the partial payroll tax holiday 
at the beginning of this year. This reduced the take-home pay for all those that pay into the 
Social Security system.  
In a recent speech to the Economic Club of New York, I discussed a number of areas where 
economic fundamentals have improved. Here, let me concentrate instead on some areas of 
the economy where the impact of this improvement in fundamentals has been most evident: 
consumer spending, the housing market, and investment in equipment and software. 
Despite  the  increase  in payroll  taxes  and  in  high-income tax  rates, real  –  that  is,  inflation-
adjusted – personal consumption expenditures rose solidly in January and February. As has 
been the case for some time, the growth of consumer spending has been led by purchases 
of durable goods. Car and light truck sales in the first quarter were at the highest pace since 
the  fourth  quarter  of  2007.  This  growth  in  consumer  spending  probably  is  due,  in  part,  to 
improvements in labor market conditions, household balance sheets and household access 
to credit. However, retail sales were quite weak in March, suggesting that the tax increases 
that occurred at the start of the year may be beginning to have a material effect.  
After a long period of being a drag on the economy, the housing market is now providing lift 
to  economic  activity,  with  upward  trends  evident  in  housing  starts,  home  sales,  and  home 
prices.  To  see  why  this  is  so  important,  in  2009  residential  investment  exerted  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
0.4 percentage  point  drag  on  GDP  growth,  while  in  2013  it  is  likely  to  provide  a  boost  to 
growth on the order of 0.5 percentage point – a swing of nearly a full percentage point. In 
addition,  rising  home  prices  can  create  positive  spillovers  to  the  rest  of  the  economy  as 
higher  home  prices  lift  household  wealth  and  reduce  the  number  of  homeowners  with 
negative equity. 
Business investment in equipment and software, another component of private final demand, 
strengthened in the fourth quarter, and shipments and orders for nondefense capital goods 
suggest  further  growth  in  the  first  quarter.  Moreover,  indicators  of  the  U.S.  manufacturing 
sector,  including  the  ISM  manufacturing  index  and  most  Federal  Reserve  regional 
manufacturing indexes, point to continued moderate growth in the sector.  
So  why  isn’t  the  U.S.  economy  growing  more  quickly?  The  most  important  reason  is  the 
sharp  shift  in  federal  fiscal  policy  from  mild  restraint  in  2012  to  much  greater  restraint  in 
2013.  The  increase  in  payroll  tax  rates,  the  rise  in  high  income  tax  rates,  the  increase  in 
taxes associated with the Affordable Care Act, and the sequester will result in fiscal drag of 
about  1¾  percentage  points  of GDP  in  2013,  an  unusually  large  amount  of fiscal  restraint 
when  the  economy  doesn’t  have  strong  forward  momentum  and  unemployment  is  still 
elevated. 
In terms of the labor market, we have seen only a moderate improvement in labor market 
conditions over the past six months or so. After an encouraging pick up in the pace of job 
creation around the turn of the year, the employment report for March showed a gain of only 
88,000 jobs. While I don’t want to read too much into a single month’s data, this underscores 
the need to wait and see how the economy develops before declaring victory prematurely. I’d 
note that we saw similar slowdowns in job creation in 2011 and 2012 after pickups in the job 
creation rate and this, along with the large amount of fiscal restraint hitting the economy now, 
makes me more cautious.  
Since  September,  payroll  employment  has  increased  an  average  of  188,000  per  month, 
compared  with  an  average  of  172,000  per  month  over  the  previous  two  years.  The 
unemployment rate has declined from a peak of 10 percent in October 2009 to 7.6 percent in 
March;  however,  much  of  the  decrease  is  due  to  a  fall  in  the  number  of  people  actively 
looking for a job. Furthermore, as of March there were still almost 3 million fewer jobs than at 
the  end  of  2007,  and  the  ratio  of  employed  Americans  to the  working  age  population  was 
actually lower than it was at the end of the recession. Also, in an indication that employment 
is far from healthy, job finding rates have changed little since the recession. New York Fed 
staff research agrees with the broad consensus that cyclical factors are the major reason for 
the continued weakness in labor market conditions.  
In sum, these developments lead me to expect sluggish real GDP growth over the course of 
2013 of about 2 to 2½ percent. As such, I anticipate that the unemployment rate will decline 
only modestly through the rest of the year. 
In the near term, there is considerable uncertainty about the outlook, particularly because the 
multiplier effects from fiscal drag and sequestration are still unclear. This uncertainty should 
gradually  decline  –  for  better  or  for  worse  –  over  the  coming  months,  as  the  sequester’s 
impact takes hold and more economic data come in, giving us a clearer picture of the forward 
momentum of the economy. 
Inflation,  as  measured  by  the  personal  consumption  expenditure  deflator,  is  currently  well 
below the Federal Reserve’s objective of 2 percent. There is substantial slack in the labor 
market and in the markets for goods and services, and underlying measures of inflation are 
subdued.  Moreover,  peoples’  expectations  of  inflation  remain  well  anchored  at  levels 
consistent with our 2 percent longer-run objective. Thus, I conclude that the risk that inflation 
could significantly exceed our 2 percent objective is quite low over the next few years, even if 
the economy were to strengthen considerably. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
With inflation well below its longer-run goal and high unemployment, the FOMC decided at its 
March meeting to maintain a “highly accommodative” policy stance: a federal funds rate in a 
range  of  0  to  25  basis  points  with  forward  guidance  based  on  economic  thresholds. 
Moreover,  to  support  a  stronger  economic  recovery,  the  FOMC  is  purchasing  long-term 
Treasury securities at a rate of $45 billion per month and agency mortgage-backed securities 
(MBS)  at  a  rate  of  $40  billion  per  month,  and  will  continue  purchasing  assets  until  it  sees 
substantial  improvement  in  the  outlook  for  the  labor  market,  conditional  on  ongoing 
assessment of benefits and costs. Combined, these actions are intended to ease financial 
conditions and thereby help to establish a self-sustaining economic expansion. 
As I stated in my recent Economic Club speech, the benefits of our asset purchases – as 
reflected  in  improving  financial  conditions  and  the  quickening  pace  of  interest-sensitive 
spending such as that on consumer durable goods, housing, and capital goods – exceeds 
the costs. Furthermore, the labor market outlook has yet to show substantial improvement. 
Consequently, I see the current pace of asset purchases as appropriate. 
At some point, I expect that I will see sufficient evidence of improved economic momentum to 
lead  me  to  favor  gradually  dialing  back  the  pace  of  asset  purchases.  Of  course,  any 
subsequent  bad  news  could  lead  me  to  favor  dialing  them  back  up  again.  As  Chairman 
Bernanke  said  in  his  press  conference  following  the  March  FOMC  meeting  “when  we  see 
that the…situation has changed in a meaningful way, then we may well adjust the pace of 
purchases in order to keep the level of accommodation consistent with the outlook.” 
Conclusion 
Let me reiterate how pleased I am to be here on Staten Island and to have the opportunity to 
speak  to  the  members  of  the  Chamber.  Parts  of  Staten  Island  were  among  the  most 
devastated areas in the region and we at the Federal Reserve Bank are committed to doing 
all  that  we  can  to  help  people  and  businesses  recover.  Many  obstacles  remain  to  be 
overcome but I am confident that Staten Island will meet the challenges that lay ahead.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
