Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Catalysing SME growth 
Speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at 
the  Official  Book  Launch  of  “Catalysing  SME  growth”,  organised  by  Credit  Guarantee 
Corporation Malaysia Berhad (CGC), Kuala Lumpur, 21 June 2013. 
 Saya  ingin  mengucapkan  tahniah  kepada  CGC  atas  pelancaran  buku  “Catalysing  SME 
Growth”, sempena menyambut ulangtahun yang ke-40, yang merakam sejarah CGC dalam 
menyokong  institusi  kewangan  di  Malaysia  bagi  mambantu  menyediakan  pembiayaan 
kewangan untuk perusahaan kecil dan sederhana. CGC sebagai satu institusi, terus kekal 
kukuh dan teguh serta mempunyai pengetahuan yang dalam mengenai teras perniagaannya 
setelah melalui pelbagai kitaran perniagaan dan ekonomi sepanjang 4 dekad. Izinkan saya 
meneruskan ucapan saya dalam bahasa Inggeris. 
The  Malaysian  economy  has  undergone many  changes  in  terms  of  both  size  and  sectoral 
composition since CGC’s establishment in 1972. From being an agricultural-based economy 
with a GDP per capita of RM1,5981, Malaysia has become a more industrialised and service-
oriented economy with a GDP per capita of RM32,124 as at end-2012.1 
This  remarkable  story  of  growth  is  supported  by  the  expansion  of  financing  to  the  private 
sector by the financial system. In 1973, outstanding loans by commercial banks in Malaysia 
stood  at  RM5.5  billion.  As  at  30  April  2013,  total  outstanding  loans  by  commercial  banks 
increased to RM1,138.6 billion2 with annual growth rate (CAGR) of 19.6% since 1973. The 
outstanding amount of SME financing stood at RM184.5 billion (16.2%). 
Relative  to  large  companies,  SMEs  were  traditionally  considered  riskier,  as  SMEs  tend  to 
have  fewer  assets  that  can  be  offered  as  collateral,  lack  of  sufficient  credit  history  and 
regarded  as  unbankable  for  some.  CGC  was  established  to  address  these  concerns,  by 
providing  guarantees  that  enable  SMEs  to  have  expanded  access  to  loans  offered  by 
financial institutions. Thus far, CGC has done a commendable job, providing guarantees to 
more than 420,000 companies, representing about 65% of the total SMEs, with total loans 
approved of more than RM51 billion as at end of 2012. 
SMEs are an important agent of growth and a component to support the nation’s aspiration 
to  transform  into  high  income  and  a  high  value-added  economy.  As  a  group,  SMEs  is  a 
formidable force in the economy, as it forms 97.3% of established businesses and provides 
employment to 57.3% of the nation’s workforce. This contribution was recognised in the SME 
Master  Plan  where  the  growth  by  SMEs  to  the  GDP  is  targeted  to  increase  from  32.5% 
currently, to 41% by 2020. 
As  the  economy  grows  and  becomes  more  sophisticated,  so  does  the  needs  and 
requirements by the SMEs. 
In this regards, CGC has shown its ability to constantly reinvent itself to meet the needs of 
both the SMEs and financial institutions over the last 40 years. Looking at the list of CGC 
schemes  throughout  the  years,  the  development  of  CGC’s  products  had  mirrored  the 
development of the country and the increased sophistication of the economy. 
From  the  book,  we  can  see  a  long  list  of  CGC schemes  introduced  throughout  the  years, 
each reflecting the stage of development of the country then, and also  consistent with the 
strategy  of  the  country’s  economic  policies.  From  CGC’s  earliest  products  such  as  the 
                                                
1  Keluaran  dalam  Negeri  Kasardan  Pendapatan  Negara  Kasar  pada  Harga  Semasa  dan  Harga  Malar, 
Economic Planning Unit (EPU) statistics 
2  Bank Negara Malaysia data 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Hawkers  and  Petty  Traders  Loan  Scheme,  catering  to  financing  as  low  as  RM500,  to  the 
recent Green Technology Financing Scheme, CGC has done well  in providing the needed 
support to the ever-progressing and expanded nature of the Malaysian economy. 
CGC’s  achievements  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  support  of  the  financial 
institutions.  The  successes  of  CGC’s  guarantee  schemes  were  the  result  of  the  trust  and 
collaboration between the corporation and the participating financial institutions. It is for this 
reason that over the years many achievements have materialised. 
CGC  has  achieved  a  lot  of  success  it  can  be  proud  of,  but  as  with  life,  we  must  move 
forward. Change is constant it becomes more rapid. There are a few things that we could do 
for the SMEs. 
First,  we  can  lower  the  financing  cost  for  SMEs  which  obtain  guaranteed  financing  under 
CGC.  On  the  average,  SMEs  are  being  charged  between  10  to  12  percent.  This  is  about 
BLR  plus  5  to  6  percent.  The  rate  imposed  is  much  too  high.  It  seems  that  pricing 
mechanism doesn’t price properly the guarantees given by CGC. We ought to work on this. 
On the part of CGC, we need to response quickly to the banks when guarantees are being 
called upon. An ideal situation is akin to an irrevocable undertaking where once a guarantee 
is called upon, it will be made good immediately. 
Second, to intensify promotion and awareness program on CGC products and services. CGC 
needs  to  work  closely  with  the  trade  associations  and  generate  more  media  exposures 
through radios and TVs. Make CGC a household name among the SMEs. 
Third,  expand  further  advisory  services,  its  reach  and  contents.  Not  all  SMEs  require 
financing, some might need more “hand holding”, and rather than access to financing above. 
Lastly, come up with new and specific guarantee products for new growth area, start-ups and 
young entrepreneurs. Existing guarantee products might not be suitable to meet the needs of 
these groups. CGC should embark a study on this matter and come up with an action plan. 
Before I end my speech, I would like to express my heartfelt congratulations and appreciation 
to the Board, Management and staff of CGC for 40 years of service to the Malaysian SMEs. 
It is our greatest wish that CGC will continue to walk and grow alongside our SMEs in our 
effort to make our country prosperous.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
