Joachim Nagel: How market segments changed over the crisis – 
challenges for future banking 
Speech by Dr Joachim Nagel, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the ESE  (the European Supervisor Education initiative) Conference 2013 “The future of 
European financial supervision”, Frankfurt am Main, 26 September 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  am  delighted  to  be  speaking  at  this  year’s  European  Supervisor  Education  (ESE) 
Conference.  The  idea  of  the  ESE  initiative  is  to  bring  together  the  experiences  of 
practitioners and the theoretical knowledge of academic researchers. The Bundesbank has 
always considered this to be an important issue and has, as a founder member, supported 
this initiative from the beginning. 
As most of you are experts in banking supervision, I will not try to tell you anything new about 
the recent regulatory changes. Instead, my focus will lie on the changing market conditions  
– partly triggered by new regulations – and their impact on banking, especially bank funding. 
The challenges currently facing the European banking sector are reflected in the remarkable 
changes in the refinancing pattern of European banks on the capital and interbank money 
markets.  As  a  central  banker,  I  have  a  special  interest  in  developments  in  the  money 
markets,  so  this  will  be  my  first  main  topic.  Subsequently,  I  will  discuss  some  regulatory 
aspects  such  as  the  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  and  its  possible  impact  on  capital  markets. 
Thereafter, I would like to describe some changes in the repo market and the ongoing trend 
towards clearing via central counterparties, followed by a discussion of developments in the 
market for covered assets. Before I summarise, I will cover the sovereign bond market. 
Money market conditions before and since the financial crisis 
2. 
Up until 2007, the euro interbank money markets were characterised by small counterparty 
risk premia and highly liquid markets. Risk aversion was low, and there was significant trust 
in,  and  among,  banks.  As  a  consequence  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  sudden  loss  of 
confidence  between  counterparties,  overall  turnovers  in  the  euro  money  market  declined 
significantly,  especially  in  the  unsecured  segment.  Even  today,  unsecured  trading  in 
maturities longer than three months is very rare. At the same time, the importance of secured 
market activity has increased, reflecting heightened concerns about counterparty risk. At the 
current juncture, turnover in the secured segment is more than three times higher than in the 
unsecured segment. Secured trading can limit credit risk, as the lender will suffer a loss only 
if  the  counterparty  and  the  pledged  collateral default  simultaneously.  As  limiting  credit  risk 
has  become  a  fundamental  concern  during  the  crisis,  importance  is  increasingly  being 
attached to the liquidity of collateral markets and the associated collateral pricing.  
The  growing  share  of  secured  trading  via  electronic  trading  platforms  can  be  explained 
mainly  by  the  increased  turnover  in  the  secured  segment.  These  platforms  offer  clearing 
services  through  central  counterparties  (CCPs).  CCPs  limit  counterparty  credit  risk  and 
mitigate  information  asymmetry  within  the  market.  As  the  CCP  guarantees  the  transaction 
and defines quality standards for both, participants and the accepted collateral, information 
about  the  individual  counterparties  becomes  less  important.  By  acting  as  an  intermediary 
between  the  trading  partners,  the  CCP  enables  them  to  trade  anonymously  on  these 
platforms. This helped stressed market participants from peripheral countries to access the 
collateralised  money  market  throughout  the  crisis.  In  spite  of  these  positive  effects,  the 
increasing importance of CCPs harbours the risk of contagion effects. The default of one of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
these  central  and  highly  connected  interbank  participants  might  have  serious  impacts  on 
markets. 
The uncertainty involved with transactions between banks of different countries has another 
consequence.  The  Eurosystem  has  become  the  most  important  counterparty  in  the  euro 
money market. Before the first tensions were felt, the Eurosystem generally ensured broadly 
balanced liquidity conditions. Credit institutions on aggregate were allotted as much liquidity 
as  was  needed  under  given  autonomous  factors.  With  the  full  allotment  policy,  liquidity 
provision  increased  sharply.  As  a  consequence  of  very  low  market  rates  relative  to  the 
deposit facility and amid concerns over the credit quality of counterparties, a clear preference 
emerged for storing liquidity on central bank accounts rather than lending it in the interbank 
market. In short, liquidity flows between banks were much smaller than before the crisis. 
The  Eurosystem’s  central  intermediary  role  became  even  more  evident  when  it  started  to 
supply  long-term  liquidity  via  one-year  and  three-year  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
(LTROs). The three-year LTROs were introduced to support bank lending. Furthermore, they 
eased  tensions  in  the  sovereign  bond  markets  of  the  peripheral  countries,  as  banks 
intensified  their  government  bond  purchases.  However,  we  have  observed  a  strong 
preference on the part of banks to buy bonds issued by their home countries. This amplified 
the  interdependence  of  the  banking  sector  and  the  domestic  sovereign  bond  market  in 
certain euro-area countries and aggravated the existing geographical segmentation. 
The  geographical  segmentation  is  reflected  in  European  banks’  reliance  on  Eurosystem 
refinancing. After the Lehman insolvency, this reliance initially increased in most countries as 
risk aversion rose. Later, segmentation developed differently across countries, reflecting the 
perceived riskiness of each country. More recently, the Eurosystem policy to mitigate market 
segmentation  and  to  safeguard  an  appropriate  monetary  policy  transmission,  namely  by 
announcing  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs),  is  mirrored  in  reduced  country 
differences. But this is no justification for the OMTs. It has eased market tensions, especially 
redomination risk. Nonetheless, the Bundesbank’s concerns are still extremely relevant. 
Country  differences  regarding  the  reliance  on  Eurosystem  refinancing  remain  large,  as 
indicated by the share of banks’ balance sheets that is financed by Eurosystem liquidity. This 
has also become obvious in the structure of early repayments of the three-year LTROs. It 
has mainly been banks located in the core countries that have reduced outstanding volumes. 
Furthermore, the reliance on national counterparties has increased. Over the last few years, 
euro-area cross-border activity has declined constantly. 
3. 
Regulatory changes as reaction to the crisis and their impact on market 
structure and banking 
The experience of the recent financial crisis has triggered regulatory changes, especially in 
the  banking  sector.  The  new  Basel  III  banking  standards  will  address  some  of  the  root 
causes  of  the  financial  crisis  and aim  to  prevent  another  build-up  of  liquidity  and  solvency 
risks.  The  Basel  III  framework  for  liquidity  risk  regulation  encompasses  two  ratios  –  the 
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR). Both will have an 
impact on how banks manage their business activities. As the LCR will be introduced earlier 
and  the  details  are  far  more  developed,  I  will  discuss  its  impact  on  euro  money  markets. 
However, the LCR might yet be revised before its final implementation. 
With regard to the assets side of a bank’s balance sheet, a bank will primarily purchase High 
Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA) to improve LCR compliance. Holding these assets outright will 
improve the LCR. Demand for these assets is likely to increase, potentially causing them to 
trade  at  a  premium.  This  regulatory-driven  additional  demand  might  reduce  appetite  for 
lower-quality liquid assets. 
Turning to the liabilities side, banks with an LCR of below one will need to substitute short-
term  for  longer-term  funding.  This  could  reduce  the  volume  in  the  short-term  unsecured 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
interbank  market,  though  banks  will  probably  continue  to  engage  in  significant  short-term 
unsecured  trading  for  daily  liquidity  management  purposes,  as  they  will  still  need  to  fulfil 
reserve  requirements.  Central  banks  will  have  to  monitor  the  impact  the  new  liquidity 
regulations have on monetary policy implementation. 
Unlike interbank funding, central bank refinancing over a 30-day horizon would not count as 
an outflow in the LCR, as it always benefits from a 100% rollover rate. This could increase 
demand for central bank refinancing. If non-HQLA are used as collateral, there would be no 
reduction in the numerator and, therefore, the LCR would rise. Banks may therefore choose 
to boost their cash reserves at the central bank (which count as HQLA) by increasing their 
central bank refinancing that is backed with non-HQLA as collateral. While this also depends 
on the opportunity cost of obtaining liquidity from the Eurosystem, there may be a number of 
banks with large amounts of collateral that is not classified as liquid under Basel III but that is 
eligible for monetary policy operations. 
However, the interaction of LCR with monetary policy operations and the money markets has 
been acknowledged. In January 2013, changes to the LCR were announced. In particular, 
the timetable for fully phasing in the LCR requirement has been extended from 2015 to 2019. 
Additionally, the list of HQLA has been broadened and punctual recalibration of the net cash 
outflows will give banks more time to recover from the crisis and to implement the LCR in a 
more  orderly  manner.  This  will  likely  reduce  the  level  of  market  fragmentation  that  might 
otherwise have arisen had all banks had to meet the LCR 100% requirement by 2015. 
In general, Basel III is the right answer to the lessons learned from the crisis. Nonetheless, 
its impact on market patterns and banking behaviour has to be monitored carefully to prevent 
undesirable developments. 
illiquid  or 
Repo market 
too,  can  become 
4. 
The  net  impact  on  a  bank’s  liquidity  position  of  increasing  its  level  of  repo  funding  is 
somewhat more complex, but overall it tends to improve the LCR and encourages a greater 
level of secured funding, irrespective of duration. However, the higher demand for good and 
liquid assets may reduce the supply for repo markets – potentially reducing liquidity in the 
secured repo markets and adding to market volatility, particularly in times of stress. 
Secured transactions, especially transactions via CCPs, have reanimated the money market 
in times of high uncertainty. This is also reflected in the fact that the share of international 
counterparties  on  trading  platforms  such  as  GC  Pooling  increased  during  the  crisis.  One 
reason  is  that  it  became  apparent  during  the  financial  crisis  that  big  and  well-established 
counterparties, 
these  circumstances, 
collateralisation  has  become  more  important.  However,  there  is  a  growing  gap:  the 
importance  of  collateral  quality  has  risen  sharply,  and  at  the  same  time,  high  quality  and 
liquid collateral is becoming a limiting factor. Furthermore, the ability to increase debt funding 
through repo transactions will also be limited by regulatory changes in the future. 
Additionally, the ample liquidity provided by the Eurosystem, especially via the two three-year 
LTROs, together with the enlarged collateral framework for Eurosystem refinancing has led 
to reduced activity in this market segment, too. The decisive question for market participants 
now  is  whether  the  Eurosystem  will  stick  to  or  reduce  its  non-standard  monetary  policy 
measures such as the full allotment policy and the enlarged collateral framework. 
Given declining excess liquidity related, in particular, to the early repayments of the three-
year LTROs, new business models may arise in the medium term as banks’ funding needs 
will  pick  up  again.  It  is  therefore  up  to  market  participants  to  find  a  new  balance  between 
risks and benefits in relation to cross-border lending. 
Furthermore, the importance of banks’ collateral management will be further enhanced as a 
consequence  of  the  crisis.  Credit  institutions  should  aim  to  manage  their  collateral  more 
insolvent.  Under 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
efficiently  without  taking  on  additional  risks.  CCPs  and  the  use  of  trading  platforms  can 
contribute to this. 
Another  important  factor  on  the  repo  market  of  the  future  will  be  the  planned  financial 
transaction tax (FTT). In its current design, it may harm the short-term repo market segment, 
as  even  a  low  tax  rate  of  0.1%  for  trading  a  sovereign  bond  represents  a  high  burden  to 
short-term and revolving repo transactions. To illustrate the problem, I would like to give you 
an example: for an over-night repo transaction with a current interest rate of 0.04% and a 
volume of EUR 10 million, a total of EUR 10,011 (ie EUR 11 in interest and EUR 10.000 in 
FTT)  has  to  be  paid.  The  tax-free  use  of  the  marginal  lending  facility  of  the  Eurosystem 
involves a payment of EUR 278 in interest. Funding via the repo market would be 36-times 
more  expensive  than  central  bank  refinancing.  Such  a  financial  transaction  tax  would 
probably  reduce  repo  market  activity  and  encourage  Eurosystem  refinancing.  That  is  not 
desirable. 
Market for covered assets 
5. 
Turning to longer-term funding instruments, I would first like to mention that EU banks’ total 
issuance of debt funding dropped by 12% year on year in the first half of 2013 to its lowest 
level  since  2002.  Besides  the  ample  liquidity  provided  by  the  Eurosystem,  which  reduces 
banks’ demand for additional funding, the regulatory changes resulted in banks seeking to 
reduce  their  reliance  on  wholesale  funding  in  favour  of  deposits  from  retail  and  small 
business customers. The decrease in borrowing also reflects pressures facing banks, such 
as the need for smaller, more robust balance sheets, and concerns among investors about 
“bail-in”  rules.  Consequently,  banks  may  face  higher  funding  costs  as  investors  demand 
more compensation for the increased risk of losing their money. 
In addition, higher asset encumbrance has an impact on unsecured bank creditors. The more 
bank assets are used for secured funding, the less remain to secure investors in unsecured 
instruments in the case of insolvency. They will price in a risk premium for this form of bank 
funding. 
As in the money market, we observe fragmentation between core and peripheral countries in 
Europe.  The  perceived  risk  of  financial  sectors  in  the  periphery  and  in  the  core  euro  area 
started to diverge back in 2010 when the financial crisis turned into a sovereign debt crisis. 
Still,  the  individual  quality  of  banks’  balance  sheets  influences  investment  decisions 
significantly. Banks located in peripheral countries have reduced their issuance to a higher 
degree. Developments in their home economies have stressed their balance sheets, namely 
by  the  share  of  non-performing-loans.  Furthermore,  the  nexus  of  sovereign  and  financial 
sector  credit  risks  has  made  funding  a  lot  more  expensive,  if  not  impossible,  for  them. 
Therefore many of these banks are still highly dependent on Eurosystem funding. 
The lower demand has also made itself felt in the volumes of secured instruments issued, 
although markets have, since the crisis, displayed a preference for secured funding. 
Covered bond issuance volumes declined given an ample liquidity supply by the Eurosystem 
and a tendency towards balance-sheet deleveraging. In the first seven months of 2013, the 
volume of newly issued covered bonds denominated in euro decreased by 38%. Issuance 
volume has therefore reached its lowest level since 2009. Given that the volume of matured 
Covered  bonds  significantly  exceeds  issues,  the  resulting  excess  demand  has  narrowed 
covered bond spreads against Bunds. The US tapering discussion, which started at the end 
of  May,  led  to  a  widening  of  spreads,  especially  of  peripheral  issuers.  The  overall 
improvement in market sentiment regarding the European sovereign debt crisis has enabled 
banks located in peripheral countries to step up issuance. The share of issues with volumes 
of  between  EUR  500  million  and  EUR  1  billion,  so  called  “mini-Jumbos”,  has  grown.  This 
development  can  be  attributed 
importance  of  better  asset-liability 
management as a result of regulatory changes that require, amongst others, a better maturity 
match. 
the  growing 
to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Another secured funding market, the ABS market, is still suffering from the financial crisis, 
which  was  partly  caused  by  its  own  excessive  developments.  Therefore,  the  stricter 
regulatory rules regarding ABS are important to prevent similar developments in the future. 
However, we should bear in mind that the ABS market is quite heterogeneous. “Plain vanilla” 
ABS backed by high-quality assets are fairly safe investments which have wrongly got a bad 
reputation. To increase investor confidence, the Eurosystem has supported the ABS market 
by promoting the “Loan Level Data Initiative”, which has significantly improved transparency 
regarding  underlying  assets.  In  turn,  this  has  allowed  the  Eurosystem  to  relax  collateral 
requirements for ABS recently. 
ABS are one the most prominent asset classes used as collateral for Eurosystem refinancing 
operations.  However,  recently,  covered  bonds  and  government  bonds  have  gained 
importance. Nearly half of ABS issues were placed publicly in the first half of 2013 compared 
to one-third in the second half of 2012. This shows some improvement in this market. 
Spreads  on  the  secondary  market  have  also  narrowed  significantly  in  the  last  12  months. 
However,  the  Portuguese  government  crisis  in  June  demonstrated  that  political  incidents 
influence ABS spreads directly. Although Portugal is a relatively small country, developments 
there had a strong impact on the spreads of ABS backed by assets originated by banks from 
other peripheral countries, especially Spain. 
In  terms  of  the  different  types  of  ABS,  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  (RMBS)  still 
represent by far the biggest share of the market. While ABS backed by loans to small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SME ABS) represent a sizeable share of the market, many issues 
are retained and used directly as collateral for Eurosystem refinancing operations. However, 
the  Eurosystem  believes  that  SME  ABS  could  and  should  represent  a  sizeable  source  of 
bank  financing.  They  could  encourage  lending  to  SMEs  and  foster  the  transmission  of 
monetary  policy  by  indirectly  easing  lending  conditions  to  SMEs.  In  the  press  conference 
held  on  2  May,  ECB  President  Draghi  therefore  announced  a  consultation  with  other 
European  institutions  on  “initiatives  to  promote  a  functioning  market  for  asset-backed 
securities  collateralised  by  loans  to  non-financial  corporations”.  This  statement  was  further 
backed  by  the  announcement  on  18  July  that  the  ECB  will  continue  to  investigate  the 
possible acceptance of certain guaranteed mezzanine tranches of SME ABS. 
Another structured instrument I would like to mention are contingent convertibles (CoCos), 
which  could  complement  banks’  various  refinancing  instruments.  As  it  is  a  fairly  new 
instrument with a lot of different arrangements, it is difficult to estimate the exact scope of this 
market  segment.  CoCos  are  a  useful  instrument  to  increase  the  capital  base  in  times  of 
stress. They automatically turn into core tier 1 capital if the trigger – mostly the core capital 
rate – is undershot. Investors have to be compensated for this extra risk alongside default 
risk and subordination risk in case of insolvency. Recently, this additional spread has shrunk 
as  a consequence  of  the  increased  “search  for  yield”  in the  low  interest  rate  environment. 
Consequently, CoCos may become establish as a funding instrument although they bear the 
risk of being converted or even written down to zero. 
As I approach the end of my speech, I would like to focus on a market which has changed a 
lot  during  the  crisis  and  also  plays a  prominent  role  in  central  bank  politics:  the  sovereign 
bond market. 
Sovereign bond market 
6. 
Government bond markets have suffered during the ongoing banking crisis, especially as it 
turned into a sovereign debt crisis. They are no longer considered a homogeneous, risk-free 
asset class. 
Investors’ willingness to take risk diminished sharply. Volatility and liquidity became the most 
important topics for market participants. Bond buyers exercised greater scrutiny and a series 
of  rating  downgrades  prompted  investors  to  re-evaluate  their  belief  that  European 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
government bonds are risk-free assets. This led to a differentiated perception of European 
government bonds and diverging yields for the individual countries. To a certain degree, the 
increased  spreads  seem  to  be  justified.  They  reflect  diverging  fundamentals  in  different 
countries  –  ie  the  different  economic  situation  and  levels  of  public  debt.  It  is  questionable 
whether  the  convergence  of  yields  in  the  years  before  the  crisis  reflected  the  right 
assessment of the various risks underlying these investments. 
Currently, refinancing conditions for the peripheral countries have improved notably. Hence, 
OMT will hopefully never have to be activated. 
However,  market  sentiment  can  change  very  quickly.  In  January  2010,  Greece  received 
offers  of  about  EUR  25  billion  for  its  five-year  government  bond  issue  with  a  volume  of 
EUR 8 billion. A couple of weeks later, Greece was no longer able to refinance its liabilities 
via  the  capital  market.  Although  there  are  currently  small  improvements  in  GDP  growth  in 
several European countries, the risk of renewed tensions in sovereign debt markets is still 
alive  given  low  growth  and  the  slow  implementation  of  reforms  on  the  one  hand  and  the 
expected tapering of the Fed’s quantitative easing programme on the other hand. 
Lower  investor  confidence,  besides  sending  European  government  bond  yields  and  CDS 
premia higher in the secondary markets, has also impacted the primary markets. The space 
left by external creditors was occupied by domestic investors such as banks, who increased 
their investments particularly following the introduction of the three-year LTROs. 
The  trend  towards  renationalisation  is  a  development  that  needs  to  be  monitored.  It 
reinforces  the  interdependence  of  the  sovereign  sector  and  the  domestic  banking  system. 
European banks often only invest in the sovereign bonds of their home countries. 
Credit  institutions  must  increase  their  risk  awareness  in  terms  of  sovereign  bonds.  On  the 
one  hand,  banks  should  have  credit  limits  for  individual  countries.  This  would  reduce 
dependencies on certain debtors. On the other hand, these bonds have to be secured by a 
sufficient  level  of  equity.  In  the  medium  term,  government  bonds  should  be  treated  like 
corporate bonds. Experience has taught us that sovereign bonds are not a risk-free asset. 
Furthermore,  risk-appropriate  treatment  would  lead  to  increasing  yields  of  countries  with 
unsound  finances.  Therefore,  market  regulation  would  provide  an  incentive  for  fiscal 
discipline. 
The current initiative to establish an effective Single Supervisory Mechanism is a step in the 
right  direction.  It  will  help  us  to  identify  risks  at  an  earlier  stage  and  is  therefore  also 
important  for  disentangling  the  critical  link  between  sovereign  and  bank  funding. However, 
the  banking  union,  consisting  of  a  sound  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  Single 
Resolution Mechanism, is a future project to prevent future problems. Existing burdens have 
to  be  treated  separately.  They  arose  under  national  responsibility  and  should  not  be 
mutualised. Therefore, the planned financial inventory of banks’ balance sheets is crucial and 
needs a close examination. Banks which do not have a sustainable business model should 
not be kept alive with public financial support. 
Closing remarks 
7. 
Overall, stress levels in the markets for European government bonds and bank refinancing 
have diminished significantly since the summer of 2012. Nevertheless, the question whether 
the interbank market will return to its former integrated status remains open. Secured trading 
in connection with the use of CCPs may play a crucial role in the changing environment as it 
reduces counterparty risk and helps to improve collateral management. 
The  ongoing  repayments  of  the  three-year  LTROs  reduces  excess  liquidity  in  the  money 
market and could be interpreted as suggesting that market participants no longer need as 
much access to central bank liquidity as before. But let me be unequivocal about one thing: 
this  development  has  been  induced  by  the  markets,  it  has  not  been  triggered  by  the 
Eurosystem. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Furthermore, banks should focus on achieving a reasonable mix of short-term funding and 
refinancing  via  longer-term  repos  and  bond  issues.  This  could  help  alleviate  the  current 
tendency of some banks to leave their cash reserves in the ECB’s deposit facility rather than 
offering  them  in  the  interbank  market.  This  would  be  an  important  step  towards  re-
establishing a well-integrated money market in the euro area. 
The regulatory steps undertaken with Basel III go in the right direction, but their impact on the 
markets has to be carefully considered. 
In  the  banking  sector,  business  models  need  further  adjustments,  which  should  ultimately 
result in a more resilient and diversified sector with a more sustainable risk-return profile. In 
the  current  low  interest  rate  environment,  it  is  surely  no  easy  task  to  increase  earnings. 
However, developments so far go in the right direction as eg German banks’ average equity 
base  has  improved  considerably  since  the  beginning  of  the  crisis.  For  the  twenty  biggest 
credit institutions, the core capital rate has doubled on average. 
Nonetheless,  the  interconnectedness  between  banks  and  their  home  country  has  to  be 
monitored closely as it holds a strong contagion risk. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
