Jörg Asmussen: Eurozone cross-fire: the way out of economic recession 
– assessment of a realist and a response to idealists and cynics 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  at  the  Bank  of  America/Merill  Lynch  Investor  conference,  Washington  DC,  20  April 
2013. 
 Sylvie, 
Laurence, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak at today’s investor conference.  
Introduction 
The  Eurozone  can  be  difficult  to  understand.  Especially  when  seen  from  this  side  of  the 
Atlantic,  the  complexities  of  the  macroeconomic  and  financial  situation  and  of  the  political 
dynamics in Europe can be baffling.  
To  cut  through  the  complexity  and  amidst  fragile  confidence  and  the  “noise”  of  crisis 
management simple answers and “once-and-for-all solutions” seem attractive.  
Unfortunately, this kind of answer is an illusion. Because the crisis in the euro area is multi-
faceted.  
It is, at once, a crisis of public and private debt, a crisis of competitiveness and growth, and a 
crisis  of  trust;  in  institutions,  in  politics  and  in  decision-making.  Tackling  the  crisis 
successfully and comprehensively will require solutions for all of those. 
When I read the commentary, especially over here, on the crisis in Europe, I often see two 
stereotypical responses, those from what I would call “idealists” and those from “cynics”. 
First, the idealists: they say the euro area is too heterogeneous and divergent. They say the 
euro area must integrate completely, or risk breaking up. As a solution to resolve the crisis, 
they  allege  that  only  a  move  to  a  “United  States  of  Europe”  will  do,  with  joint  issuance  of 
debt, a transfer mechanism, and “the works”. 
Then  there  are  the  “cynics”.  They  accuse  Europeans  of  practising  “medieval  medicine”  
– bleeding the patients in a bid to cure them. They contend the “bitter pill of austerity” will kill 
the patient, and the people will not take it any longer. They say that overcoming the crisis will 
need more time, less austerity; more public money, less reform. And they often call on the 
ECB to do more. 
I believe none of these caricatures reflect the reality of the response in Europe. 
The  US  journalist  Sydney  J.  Harris  once  wrote  “an  idealist  believes  the  short  run  doesn’t 
count. A cynic believes the long run doesn’t matter. A realist believes that what is done or left 
undone in the short run determines the long run”. 
I believe it is imperative to convey, not only the short-term outlook for the euro area, but also 
to dispel certain generalisations regarding the ongoing adjustment in Europe and the long-
run vision for Economic and Monetary Union. 
In this context, allow me to briefly outline what I would consider, a “realist’s assessment”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The on-going adjustment in EMU 
The adjustment in the Eurozone is underway. There is also no doubt it is painful, especially 
for the people in some countries of the periphery.  
However, let me give you some evidence of what has actually been achieved. 
In programme countries, we have seen a strong improvement of structural primary balances 
since  2009.  In  Greece,  for  example,  this  is  estimated  to  have  improved  by  more  than 
14 percentage points of GDP between 2009 and 2012.  
To put this into context, in this country, the “sequester” calls for cuts of 1.2 trillion dollars over 
ten  years.  The  equivalent  of  what  Greece  has  done  would  have  meant  for  the  US  an 
adjustment of 1.6 trillion dollars over three years. 
In EMU, this adjustment is being undertaken within a reinforced fiscal framework – a new set 
of rules – which strengthens the ability to prevent and correct the accumulation of excessive 
deficits.  Furthermore,  a  new  framework  for  the  surveillance  of  macroeconomic  imbalances 
has been established.  
And also on this front, a very large correction of external imbalances is visible.  
In Greece, Portugal and Ireland, the current account balances have each improved by more 
than 7 percentage points of GDP between 2008 and 2012.  
It is true that much of the adjustment has been driven by a contraction in domestic demand. 
However,  in  Ireland  and  Portugal  export  performance  has  also  been  strong,  because 
programme countries are now reaping the benefits from their significant improvement in cost 
competitiveness. 
This  is  evident  from  the  significant  reduction  in  unit  labour  costs.  For  Greece,  Ireland  and 
Portugal we see about a 10 percentage point improvement relative to the euro area average. 
The adjustment in Ireland has been spectacular, and translates into about an 18 percentage 
point improvement between 2008 and 2012. This means that the past excesses have by and 
large been undone. 
Government bond spreads now fluctuate at much lower levels compared with the peak of the 
crisis.  This  will  eventually  also  facilitate  the  return  to  bond  market  access  in  Ireland  and 
Portugal. 
This  was  also  assisted  by  the  announcement  of  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs), 
which contributed significantly to removing redenomination risk in the euro area.  
Some may ask: why can’t the ECB do more? Why can’t the ECB be more like the Federal 
Reserve… or the Bank of Japan, for that matter? Why can’t the ECB engage in quantitative 
easing or have an employment target?  
Those who make these calls must first consider the very different institutional set-up in which 
we  operate.  The  ECB  can  only  take  measures  that  are  consistent  with  its  mandate.  Our 
primary objective is price stability, we do not have the wide mandate which for example the 
Federal Reserve has. 
Second,  the  structure  of  the  financial  market  in  Europe  is  very  different.  In  the  US,  for 
example, a large share of financial intermediation takes place through capital markets. This 
provides a broad and deep pool of assets to purchase. However, the structure of the euro 
area  economy  is  largely  bank  based.  Thus  our  monetary  policy  strategy  must  be  tailored 
accordingly, mainly through the provision of credit to the banking system. 
Third, the specific economic challenges we face differ from those in other parts of the world. 
In  this  day  and  age,  where  many  look to  central  banks  as the  ultimate problem-solvers  of 
many economic ills, let me also be clear that there are clear limits of what we, the ECB, can 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
–  and  cannot  –  do.  We  cannot  repair  unsound  budgets.  We  cannot  clean  up  struggling 
banks. We cannot solve deep-rooted problems in the structure of Europe’s economies.  
Conclusion 
I want to conclude with some clear messages.  
To  the  cynics,  my  message  is:  we  will  not  solve  a  debt  crisis  with  more  debt.  Moreover, 
simply giving more time will not resolve the underlying structural problems.  
Member  States  who  are  implementing  the  necessary  adjustments  have  begun  to reap  the 
benefits.  Relaxing  now  would  mean  endangering  the  hard-won  gains  of  past  efforts.  The 
foundations of future growth are fiscal sustainability coupled with structural reforms. 
In a way, we have a “debt ceiling” in Europe too. It is not set by an Act of Congress, but by 
the  markets.  Investors  have  clearly  shown  they  are  not  willing  to  further  finance  Member 
States with such high levels of debt, at a reasonable price. Therefore the adjustment must 
continue.  
To the idealists, my message is that the EU is, at this stage, an emerging union, built on the 
basis of Member States who agree – or disagree – to pool sovereignty. Moving to a deeper 
economic  integration,  which  is  commensurate  with  a  monetary  union,  is  necessarily  a 
process. But it is underway.  
Such a deeper economic union will not be the archetypical Union, which some of you may 
have  in mind. It is  worth remembering that the Union on this side of the Atlantic  was built 
over almost 250 years, and it took 150 years to establish a central bank. The EU is 60 years 
old, and the euro, only 13.  
Over recent years, the euro area has taken big steps forward to reinforce its framework for 
fiscal  and  macroeconomic  governance.  Member  States  continue  to  display  unprecedented 
solidarity  towards  each  other,  providing  financing  for  programmes  of  economic  adjustment 
along  with  the  IMF.  The  establishment  of  a  banking  union,  including  a  single  supervisory 
mechanism  involving  the  ECB  and,  the  forthcoming  proposal  for  a  single  resolution 
mechanism, are further examples of deeper integration. 
Earlier  this  year,  the  ECONOMIST  reviewed  last  year’s  doomsday  predictions  about  the 
imminent demise of the Eurozone. It noted correctly that “the pessimists did not overestimate 
the euro’s problems, so much as underestimate the political will to do enough to stop a euro 
break-up.”  
Going forward, it would be a grave error to underestimate the continuing political commitment 
to  making  the  single  currency  a  success.  But  it  also  remains  true  what  was  once  said, 
namely that EU institution-building is like the love-life of the elephant: Everything goes on at 
a very high level, a lot of dust gets raised – and you have to wait for months and years for 
results. 
Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
