Benoît Cœuré: Monetary policy in the crisis – confronting short-run 
challenges while anchoring long-run expectations 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Journées de l’AFSE (Association Française de Science Economique) 2013 “La crise 
de l’Union Economique et Monétaire (UEM): Enjeux théoriques et perspectives de politique 
économique”, University of Orléans, Orléans, 17 May 2013. 
 I wish to thank Fédéric Holm-Hadulla and Massimo Rostagno for their contributions to this speech. I remain solely 
responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
It is a great pleasure to speak to you today.  
I would like to use this opportunity to reflect on a fundamental tension lying at the heart of 
monetary policy:  
 
A central bank’s success in ensuring macroeconomic stability depends on it having 
a credible commitment to price stability. And to build and nurture such credibility, it 
should  have  a  track  record  of  responding  in  a  consistent,  transparent  and 
predictable way to shocks hitting the economy.  
At  the  same  time,  financial  and  macroeconomic  disturbances  are  sometimes  of  a 
scale and complexity that they alter the underlying structural relationships between 
key  economic  variables.  This,  in  turn,  challenges  monetary  policy-makers  to 
temporarily  adapt  their  established  strategies  to  a  new  environment  without 
undermining their inflation-fighting credentials.  
 The  current  crisis  provides  a  salient  case  study  of  such  a  tension:  starting  with  a  loss  of 
confidence in the solvency of certain financial institutions, the crisis quickly morphed into a 
broad-based  impairment  of  private  financial  intermediation.  As  a  consequence,  the  link 
between  monetary  policy  impulses  and  economic  aggregates  –  which  is  the  structural 
relationship most relevant for central banks – was severely affected.  
Confronted with this new environment, central banks across the globe have expanded their 
toolkits  to  compensate  for  their  reduced  influence  on  economic  outcomes.  The  measures 
they took have in many cases helped to stabilise the economy. But they have also triggered 
a lively debate on where to draw the line between crisis-fighting efforts on the one hand – 
and a general departure from established principles of monetary policy on the other. 
I would like to consider how central banks can resolve the tension between anchoring long-
term expectations and flexibly confronting short-term challenges. I will argue that the key to 
success  lies  in  a  clear-cut  hierarchy  between  the  different  elements  of  a  monetary  policy 
strategy.  In  doing  so,  I  will  highlight  two  distinct  elements:  the  objective  of  policy  and  the 
conduct  of  policy.  The  monetary  policy  objective  of  a  central  bank  should  always  be  the 
overriding concern and guiding principle of any policy action. Building on the credibility that 
derives from having a firm and stable commitment to its objective, the central bank should 
then flexibly tailor its policy conduct to the specific macroeconomic disturbances that it has to 
face.  
As I will demonstrate, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy during the crisis has consistently 
taken this approach. 
Elements of a monetary policy strategy 
Let me first briefly expand on the distinction between the different elements of a monetary 
policy strategy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
What I refer to as monetary policy objectives are the overarching economic goals of a central 
bank.  For  most  central  banks  around  the  globe,  these  goals  include  –  as  a  primary 
component – the pursuit of price stability. This objective is often complemented by ancillary 
policy preoccupations, such as minimising deviations from sustainable growth and financial 
stability. In the modern central banking universe that has emerged since the macroeconomic 
failures of the 1970s, no one would doubt that while price stability is a desirable medium-term 
goal  for  monetary  policy.  Avoiding  excessive  economic  fluctuations  around  the  trend  and 
minimising  financial  instability,  however,  often  has  a  different  status.  These  objectives  are 
ancillary because they have more to do with the path to the medium-term objective – a path 
that  should  minimise  unnecessary  fluctuations  under  way  –  than  with  the  medium-term 
objective itself, which remains price stability.  
That being said, central banks attach different priorities to these ancillary policy goals as they 
seek to steer the economy to its steady state. In the US, for instance, the Federal Reserve 
System  has  a  dual  mandate:  maximum  employment  and  stable  prices.  By  contrast,  the 
Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  clearly  specifies  price  stability  as  the 
primary  objective  for  the  Eurosystem.  I  will  come  back  to  this  distinction  between  the 
Eurosystem and the Federal Reserve at a later stage. 
The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  refers  to  the  way  a  central  bank  goes  about  achieving  its 
objective.  This  usually 
indicators  or 
macroeconomic  aggregates  that  the  central  bank  uses  as  guideposts  towards  its  final 
objective. The aggregates are chosen because of their close empirical association with the 
variables underlying the ultimate monetary policy objectives. They may include, for example, 
broad monetary aggregates or market interest rates. In addition, the policy conduct involves 
certain instruments which a central bank uses to steer the financial conditions under its direct 
control. These include reserve requirements, the monetary base, as well as the key interest 
rates at which the central bank provides liquidity to market participants.  
Changes in monetary policy strategy have very different implications, depending on which of 
these  two  constituent  elements  –  policy  objectives  or  policy  conduct  –  they  affect.  From  a 
practical  perspective,  objectives  are  more  difficult  to  change,  inter  alia,  because  they  are 
usually  enshrined  in  law.  By  contrast,  the  conduct  of  policy  is,  to  a  large  extent,  at  the 
discretion of the respective central bank.  
In  the  euro  area,  for  example,  the  price  stability  objective  has  “constitutional”  status:  it  is 
explicitly  laid  down  in  Article  127(1)  of  the  Treaty.  At  the  same  time,  the  institutional 
framework leaves considerable scope for the Eurosystem to calibrate its policy measures so 
that it achieves its price stability objective. There is one exception to this general fact, which I 
will turn to soon. 
includes  systematic  monitoring  of  specific 
Interactions between the conduct of monetary policy and its objectives 
The  success  of  a  monetary  policy  strategy  depends  on  the  interaction  between  these 
elements: the more credible a central bank’s commitment to its objective, the more flexibly it 
can adjust its monetary policy conduct to specific challenges.  
There are two reasons for this. First, if expectations are firmly anchored by the central bank’s 
objective,  short-term  “innovations”  in  policy  conduct  will  not  induce  market  participants  to 
fundamentally re-assess their anticipations of where the economy will stabilise in the medium 
term, when all the current shocks have dissipated. This is particularly relevant in crises when 
the  central  bank  is  prompted  to  expand  its  toolbox  so  as  to  confront  exceptional 
circumstances. By contrast, without a firm commitment to its objective, the adoption of new, 
temporary instruments may be misinterpreted as a profound shift in the central bank’s overall 
strategy.  And  this  can  change  the  way  society  perceives  the  basic  parameters  of  the 
monetary  policy  framework.  Inflation  expectations  –  one  prominent  parameter  of  how  the 
regime is perceived by the public – can become unanchored.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second, a credible commitment to the objective allows a central bank to tailor the strength 
and  timing  of  its  monetary  policy  response  more  specifically  to  the  shocks  that  hit  the 
economy  from  time  to  time.  Macroeconomic  disturbances  can  be  broadly  categorised 
according to whether they affect mainly the demand side or the supply side of the economy. 
In the case of a negative demand shock, both economic activity and inflation will tend to fall. 
Typically, a financial crisis is one example of a negative demand shock: credit conditions are 
restricted,  aggregate  demand  is  restrained  and  firms  are  encouraged  to  undercut  their 
competitors, thereby exerting downward pressure on inflation.  
To  the  extent  warranted  by  the  magnitude  of  the  shock,  the  central  bank  thus  faces  an 
unambiguous policy prescription, namely to provide additional monetary accommodation.  
In the case of a negative supply shock, the central bank has a policy dilemma as economic 
activity and inflation move in opposite directions. A drop in productivity is a case in point: an 
increase  in  companies’  cost  per  unit  of  output  makes  production  less  rewarding,  and  thus 
lowers the amount of goods and services supplied relative to demand. Here, the central bank 
either temporarily accepts higher inflation, or – in an attempt to keep inflation right on target – 
it reinforces the disturbance driving down output.  
But this trade-off is weakened when the central bank can credibly commit to its price stability 
objective. Knowing that the steady state remains the ultimate goal of policy, private agents 
will  not  factor  in  the  temporary  increase  in  inflation  into  their  price-  and  wage-setting 
behaviour.  As  a  consequence,  the  central  bank  can  afford  a  more  measured  conduct  of 
policy in the face of a negative supply side shock. 
Of course, this is not to say that central banks have carte blanche to adopt any tool or tactic 
that  may  appear  suitable  for  dealing  with  any  short-run  challenge.  The  way  policy  is 
conducted can, in itself, impinge on the central bank’s credibility to meet its objective. One 
example  is  the  monetary  financing  of  fiscal  deficits,  which  may  severely  undermine  the 
capacity of a central bank to freely decide on an appropriate course of action. The flexibility 
of policy conduct is clearly limited to those measures that preserve the central bank’s room 
for  manoeuvre  to  independently  determine  its  monetary  policy  stance  –  now  and  in  the 
future.  
To summarise, for a central bank to be able to confront short-run challenges while anchoring 
long-run  expectations,  it  must  stick  to  three  principles.  First,  it  has  to  consistently  and 
unambiguously  align  any  policy  action  with  a  clearly  specified  objective.  Second,  it  has  to 
adjust its policy conduct flexibly to the specific nature of the macroeconomic shocks hitting 
the economy. And third, in doing so it has to design its policy conduct in a way that does not 
bind its hands and thus possibly jeopardise its medium-term policy objective. 
The monetary policy strategy of the ECB 
Let me relate this analysis to the monetary policy strategy of the ECB. 
As I mentioned earlier, the Treaty unambiguously establishes price stability as the primary 
objective  of  the  ECB.  On  this  basis,  the  Governing  Council  has  communicated  an  explicit 
definition  of  price  stability,  namely  a  range  of  positive  inflation  rates  below  2%  over  the 
medium term. This is a range at which inflation does not distort the allocation of resources in 
the economy. Since the inception of the euro the Governing Council has broadly fulfilled this 
mandate since the growth rate of the euro area harmonised index of consumer prices has 
been on average 2.07%.  
This  clear  objective,  together  with  the  ECB’s  track  record,  has  firmly  anchored  inflation 
expectations in the euro area. Since 1999, the average inflation expectation by professional 
forecasters at a five year horizon has been on average 1.91%. 
In our framework, inflation is obviously an indicator of pre-eminent policy relevance. But it is 
not the only one. In conducting its policy, the ECB has looked at a broader set of indicators 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
which from time to time have released signals which conflicted with those which we extracted 
from  our  inflation  forecast.  Under  our  monetary  pillar,  in  particular,  monetary  and  financial 
trends have acquired such a prominent analytical status that, we think, they allowed a better 
identification  of  the  origin  of  macroeconomic  disturbances.  This  in  turn  has  provided  for  a 
more robust approach to policy overall.  
This monetary pillar “spare tyre” has been relevant in conditions of persistent supply shocks. 
Let me give an example. Since the 1990s and for much of the last decade, inflation in a large 
number of mature industrial economies remained quiescent. Many underlying determinants 
can explain these worldwide conditions. A regained control of inflation expectations by the 
major monetary authorities was certainly a prime cause of price stability. But other factors 
contributed  to  a  sustained  trend  of  disinflation.  They  include  the  delayed  impact  on 
productivity of the digital and internet revolutions that burst upon the scene in the early 1990s 
as well as the supply chain implications of China’s emergence as the world’s manufacturing 
powerhouse.  Positive  supply  side  shocks  were  either  generated  domestically  or  imported 
through an expanded trade intensity of production.  
In the euro area, despite the upward pressures that the ongoing adjustment in relative price 
levels across Member  States was exerting on the euro area price index, “price pressures”  
– defined as the difference between the year-on-year harmonised inflation rate observed in 
each quarter and the upper ceiling of our price stability range of 2% – were absent or even 
negative in the years preceding the Lehman debacle.1 Had the ECB relied on inflation as a 
summary  statistic  of  the  state  of  the  economy,  the  conclusion  would  have  been  that  the 
economy  had  reached  an  ideal  state  of  balanced,  non-inflationary  growth  –  the  “Great 
Moderation”.  
Our  monetary  pillar  was  sending  a  quite  different  signal.  The  growth  rate  of  the  broad 
monetary  aggregate  M3  doubled  during  the  recovery  that  followed  the  bursting  of  the  dot-
com  bubble.  At  the  same  time,  premia  paid  by  borrowers  on  various  categories  of  debt 
contracts had plunged to levels unseen in the recent history of finance. Credit growth closely 
followed the rampant growth rate of M3. These indicators – which are an integral part of our 
monetary  analysis  –  were  sounding  the  alarm  in  an  otherwise  complacent  policy 
environment. The resulting cacophony of indicators gave some headaches to the ECB staff 
who had to interpret them and also to policy-makers, who were forced to challenge the rosy 
outlook offered by the mainstream narratives of the time.  
Now,  in  retrospect,  we  know  that  the  undertone  played  by  the  monetary  analysis,  which 
appeared so much out of tune at the time, was in fact the counterpoint, the hidden score of 
financial  instability.  Lehman’s  demise  and  what  followed  revealed  the  score  of  the  hidden 
voice, and its drama. 
The moral I draw from this episode is the following. The price stability objective needs to be 
reinforced, in the day-to-day conduct of policy, by an intense strategic focus on monetary and 
financial indicators. When financial markets create excessive leverage – too much credit – 
and  engage  in  imprudent  maturity  transformation  –  too  much  bank  money  –  reacting  to 
financial  booms  under  the  monetary  pillar  will  not  only  ensure  price  stability  but  also 
counteract the build-up of risk. Vice versa, very subdued credit dynamics, such as those we 
are  currently  observing,  provide  crucial  signals  of  how  long  the  accommodative  monetary 
stance  is  warranted.  This  probably  requires  a  better  understanding  of  the  ebb  and  flow  of 
liquidity and the drivers of endogenous money creation inside the financial system. 
But the possibility of activating this fail-safe policy mechanism largely depends on how the 
price stability objective is defined. The fact that inflation can move within a certain range is an 
                                                 
1   For an illustration, see figure 2.13 in Fahr, Motto, Rostagno, Tristani and Smets (2011), “A monetary policy 
strategy in good and bad times: lessons from the recent past”, ECB Working Paper n° 1336. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
important pre-condition. Indeed, the Governing Council’s specification of the ECB’s primary 
objective has two characteristic features, which complement its monetary pillar. First, it is a 
range of values, not a point target. Second, it is based on a medium-term orientation.  
This has two implications. First, there is some flexibility as to where inflation could be within 
the  range  at  any  point  in  time.  In  2003  the  Governing  Council  announced  that  within  the 
range of inflation rates consistent with price stability, a rate “close to 2%” should be the aim 
of policy in the medium term. But there is scope for inflation to vary within the range along 
the way to convergence with the medium-term policy aim, and many path configurations are 
possible. Second, the medium term itself is not a pre-set time span, but it is dependent on 
the underlying shocks that may explain inflation dynamics from time to time. 
The former type of discretion – related to the path of convergence of inflation to its medium-
term  level  –  is  critical  when  supply  shocks  are  positive,  that  is,  expansionary  and 
disinflationary.  This  dimension  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  is  not  always 
appreciated, but is important. When inflation pressures are absent or negative and positive 
shocks to aggregate supply feed financial buoyancy – the conditions which prevailed in the 
late  1990s  and  for  a  good  part  of  the  2000s  –  having  a  range  definition  of  price  stability, 
rather than, say, a point target, is essential. The possibility of letting inflation temporarily drift 
down  within  its  price  stability  range  when  faced  with  clear  signs  of  financial  exuberance 
increases the chances of hitting the inflation objective over the long run. 
The  latter  type  of  discretion  –  related  to  the  time  horizon  –  is  crucial  in  the  presence  of 
transitory  negative  supply  shocks  and  demand  shocks.  For  example,  a  cost-push  shock 
deriving from a spike in commodity prices pushes measured inflation upwards and is a drain 
on  demand  and  economic  activity.  In  the  face  of  such  a  disturbance,  the  medium-term 
horizon affords some time for the shock to work its way through the economy and allows the 
ECB to “look through” it to a time when the shock is forecast to have subsided. This in turn 
ensures that the central bank is not forced to introduce further macroeconomic volatility.  
As for a demand shock, the policy-relevant time horizon shrinks. A negative demand shock 
which is recessionary and potentially deflationary will have to be counteracted quickly and 
forcefully.  This  is  in  fact  what  the  ECB  did  during  the  most  acute  phases  of  the  financial 
crisis. This is what we have to do if confronted with severe downside risks to price stability. 
Against  this  background,  let  me  briefly  come  back  to  the  comparison  between  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy framework and that of the Federal Reserve System in the US. As mentioned 
earlier, the mandates of these two central banks differ: the ECB’s framework entails a clear 
ordering  of  objectives  in  which  price  stability  ranks  first,  whereas  the  Fed’s  dual  mandate 
focuses on both price stability and maximum employment. 
Some  observers  have  invoked  this  difference  in  mandates  to  argue  that  the  ECB  is,  by 
comparison, not well placed to support employment and growth in downturns. But, in fact, 
this argument overstates the practical difference in policy-making arising from these different 
mandates.  
To  see  this,  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  monetary  policy  can  only  support  real  economic 
aggregates  in  the  short  run.  By  contrast,  long-term  economic  growth  is  determined  by  the 
structural characteristics of the economy, including the supply of labour and capital, as well 
as  overall  productivity.  Any  attempt  by  monetary  policy  to  permanently  lift  the  economy 
above the growth potential determined by these factors is bound to fail. 
The  Fed’s  dual  mandate  is  not  at  odds  with  this  principle,  I  believe.  As  I  read  it,  the 
employment  dimension  of  the  Fed’s  dual  mandate  is  not  meant  to  influence  the  structural 
path of unemployment. In fact, as I said before, it serves as an explicit acknowledgement that 
the  central  bank  will  be  wary  of  employment  dynamics  when  steering  output  back  to  its 
structural path after economic shocks have perturbed labour market conditions. But, as I just 
explained,  the  ECB’s  price  stability  definition  and  policy  horizon  also  allow  for  substantial 
flexibility  in  calibrating  the  policy  response  to  shocks.  Due  to  this  flexibility,  the  ECB  can 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
pursue  its  long-term  price  stability  objective  without  triggering  socially  costly  short-run 
fluctuations in output and employment. In this regard, it is in line with the key purpose of the 
Fed’s dual mandate. 
The ECB’s crisis response 
In the euro area crisis, the ECB’s capacity to react flexibly within its stable framework has 
been tested exhaustively. One challenge that has rendered this crisis particularly complex is 
financial  fragmentation  between  Member  States.  Two  equally  sound  and  productive 
businesses incur distinctly different costs of capital depending on whether they are located in 
an economically vulnerable country or in a more stable country.  
However,  funding  conditions  for  firms  and  households  constitute  a  key  channel  through 
which monetary policy impulses translate into consumption and investment decisions. As a 
consequence, changes in our main policy rates have had uneven effects across countries, 
thus undermining the singleness of monetary policy. 
The ECB has responded to this with a range of non-standard monetary policy measures. In 
doing  so,  it  has  adopted  solutions  that  have  addressed  the  specific  short-run  challenges, 
while reconfirming its medium-term price stability commitment. 
Let me give three examples. The two 3-year very long term refinancing operations (VLTROs) 
that we launched in late 2011 and early 2012 aimed to alleviate adverse funding conditions 
for  banks  which  were  unable  to  satisfy  their  additional  liquidity  needs  in  the  market.  By 
removing  the  liquidity  constraints  on  credit  supply,  it  has  avoided  a  major  credit  crunch. 
Without the launch of the two refinancing operations, banks would have defaulted on their 
obligations  coming  due  in  the  market,  or  would  have  discontinued  and  withdrawn  existing 
credit lines to companies. The liquidity injection was on a large scale, amounting to around 
€520 billion – taking into account the shifting of liquidity out of other operations. It helped to 
counteract the fragmentation, in that a large share of the overall liquidity uptake under the 
VLTROs came from banks in vulnerable countries. 
At the same time, the interest rate on these operations is indexed to the ECB’s main policy 
rate. Thus, if the ECB were to change this rate for monetary policy reasons, the costs for the 
remaining  period  of  the  three-year  VLTROs  would  also  change  accordingly.  Hence,  the 
three-year liquidity provision which took place at times of extreme stress does not hamper 
the ECB’s capability to transmit changes in short-term interest rates. 
In a similar vein, the programme for Outright Monetary Transactions has been designed with 
a  view  to  combatting  fragmentation  while  preserving  the  credibility  of  the  ECB’s  monetary 
policy  objective.  By  being  tied  to  an  effective  macroeconomic  adjustment  programme,  the 
initiative prevents the intervention on government debt markets to eliminate “redenomination 
risk” – the unwarranted perception of a risk of euro breakup – from becoming a subsidy for 
unsustainable national policies. The European Stability Mechanism will impose on sovereign 
issuers  the  same  solvency  conditions  as  those  imposed  by  the  ECB  on  banks  when  it 
provides them with liquidity. And sovereign solvency is a necessary condition to avoid fiscal 
dominance on monetary policy, and thereby for the ECB to fulfil its medium term objective. 
A third example is the ECB’s action to improve the transmission to the real economy of the 
impulsions provided  by  the  single monetary  policy.  The  broadening  of  the  range of  assets 
accepted as collateral to monetary policy operations makes it possible for euro area banks to 
better mobilise claims on the real economy, and therefore to lend more. The ECB is today 
exploring options to further strengthen lending to the real economy and, in particular, to small 
and medium-sized enterprises, which form the backbone of the euro area economy. But the 
ECB can only act within its mandate. Assuming non-profitable assets today present in the 
balance  sheets  of  banks,  or  seeking  to  artificially  eliminate  differences  in  financing  costs 
arising  from  different  risk  environment  or  from  insufficient  capital  would  amount  to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
substituting actions not taken by other actors. This would be to the detriment of the central 
bank’s independence and freedom of action. 
To sum up, the ECB has stringently followed the guidelines necessary to confront short-run 
challenges while anchoring long-run expectations, and it will continue to do so. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The crisis has exposed the balancing act lying at the heart of monetary policy. On the one 
hand,  central  banks  are  key  participants  in  addressing  short-term  challenges  that  the 
economy  faces.  On  the  other  hand,  their  crisis-fighting  efforts  have  to  be  designed  and 
communicated in full consistence with their long-run price stability mandates. 
To successfully manage this balancing act, monetary policy-makers must clearly distinguish 
between their objective, which serves to firmly anchor market expectations, and their conduct 
of policy, which should flexibly adjust to the specific challenges at hand. 
The  ECB’s  strategic  framework  contains  the  necessary  elements  to  achieve  this  balance. 
Financial conditions have generally improved in the euro area over recent months. The ECB 
will  continue  to  effectively  accompany  the  recovery  that  should  materialise  provided  that 
reform efforts continue both at the level of each euro area economy and to strengthen the 
governance and efficiency of our economic and monetary union.  
I thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
