Ravi Menon: Securing price stability as Singapore restructures 
Speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 
Asian  Bureau  of  Financial  and  Economics  Research  (ABFER)  Opening  Gala  Dinner, 
Singapore, 21 May 2013. 
 Professor Bernard Yeung, Dean, NUS Business School, whose tireless efforts have brought 
to  fruition  the  Asian  Bureau  of  Financial  and  Economics  Research,  distinguished  guests, 
ladies and gentlemen, good evening. 
Interesting times again 
Monetary policy has become interesting again. 
The Great Moderation, beginning in the mid-1980s and spanning two decades, marked the 
triumph  of  monetary  policy  over  the  scourge  of  inflation.  The  formula  worked  brilliantly  – 
independent central banks, with clear mandates to pursue price stability, and doing so with 
consistency  and  credibility,  ushered  in  an  era  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability 
supporting steady economic growth and rising prosperity. 
Then came 2008/2009 – unleashing a financial crisis of unmatched scale and impact, and a 
global recession deeper than any seen since the Great Depression. We are still living in the 
shadows  of  these  two  shocks,  with  the  global  economy  stuck  in  a  hesitant  and  uneven 
recovery and financial market stresses resurfacing from time to time. 
Monetary  policy  in  the  advanced  economies  has  entered  unchartered  waters,  in  a  valiant 
effort to support economic growth, which was being weighed down by deleveraging. In the 
emerging economies, central banks and governments have had to be equally nimble in their 
policy responses, as they grapple with the spillover effects of these unconventional monetary 
policies. 
Singapore  has  not  been  spared  the  effects  of  these  broader  global  developments.  Our 
exchange rate-centred monetary policy has been remarkably successful over the decades, in 
securing price stability amidst rapid economic growth and an open trade and capital account. 
Consumer price inflation has averaged 1.3% per annum during 1985–2005, one of the lowest 
in the world. 
Inflation  surged  briefly  in  2008,  moderated  in  the  wake  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  but 
resumed  an  upward  creep  from  2010  onwards.  Consumer  price  inflation  averaged  4.2% 
during 2010–2012, the longest period of sustained inflation above 4% in Singapore’s history. 
It is particularly challenging that the current bout of inflation is occurring against the backdrop 
of a slowing economy, weighed down by weak external demand and a tight domestic labour 
market. And in a  world  awash  with liquidity searching for both yield and safety, Singapore 
has been at the receiving end of such flows. 
Tonight, I will set out MAS’ policy approach to securing price and financial stability, in this 
“new normal” of an economy restructuring amidst a global environment of slow growth and 
easy money. In most respects, this approach builds on the existing framework for monetary 
policy;  but  in  other  respects,  it  takes  a  more  comprehensive  view  of  macro  stability  and 
signifies the need for policy innovation in dealing with new realities. 
Let me begin by describing the external and domestic context within which MAS is currently 
operating. 
External context: surging liquidity, diverging leverage 
First, the global backdrop. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Monetary policy in the advanced economies has been extraordinarily loose for a prolonged 
period of time. It has been unconventional in three important regards. 
• 
First, short-term interest rates are at or close to the zero bound – and have been so 
for over four years now. 
Second,  central  banks  are  purchasing  non-traditional  assets  in  large  quantities  to 
exert  downward  pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates.  This  has  been  going  on  for 
close to five years now, with central bank balance sheets in the US and the UK, for 
example, ballooning to more than three times their pre-crisis levels. 
Third,  central  banks  are  providing  “forward  guidance”,  either  in  the  form  of 
commitments  not  to  raise  interest  rates  until  certain  real  economy  thresholds  are 
met  or  plans  to  expand  the  monetary  base  until  an  inflation  target  is  reached, 
helping to extend expectations of easy monetary conditions. 
  The  overall  impact  of  these  measures  has  been  to  reduce  tail  risks  in  the  advanced 
economies and prevent a sharp deceleration in growth. But they have been less successful 
in restoring economic growth to pre-crisis trend rates, in the face of deleveraging pressures. 
Debt-to-GDP  ratios  in  the  G3  economies  must  normalise  at  lower  levels  to  restore 
macroeconomic and financial stability. This necessitates a decline in consumption. Banks are 
less willing to lend, and the private sector less willing to borrow. The relationship between 
liquidity and credit appears to have broken down. 
The  wall  of  money  created  in  the  advanced  economies  has  led  to  extremely  low  interest 
rates globally. This, coupled with stronger economic conditions, has led the private credit-to-
GDP ratio in Emerging Asia to rise from 97% in 2008 to 122% in 2012 – this is higher than 
the level seen at the start of the Asian financial crisis. 
In  short,  the  advanced  economies  are  develeraging,  and  the  Asian  economies  are 
releveraging. In and of itself, this is not a problem. In fact, the divergence in leverage is to be 
expected  in  the  context  of  global  rebalancing,  with  advanced  economies  restraining 
consumption and Asian economies boosting domestic demand. 
But  it  is  the  pace  and  composition  of  Asian  releveraging  that  is  cause  for  concern.  While 
much of the rapid loan growth has supported productive economic activity, there have also 
been  substantial  flows  to  asset  markets,  especially  real  estate.  Low  interest  rates  and 
abundant liquidity have contributed to accelerations in property prices and sharp increases in 
household debt. 
• 
Residential property prices in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore have increased 
by 52% on average since 2009, while nominal wages have risen by only 13%. 
Household  debt  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  has  trended  up  in  these  countries,  with 
mortgages accounting for a significant 70–80% of consumer credit. 
 Inflation  in  asset  prices  and  build-up  in  leverage  have  important  implications  not  just  for 
macroeconomic stability but also financial stability. I will come back to this later. 
Domestic context: supply constraints and economic restructuring 
Next, the domestic context. 
The  Singapore  economy  is facing  a  demographic  double-whammy:  the effects  of  low  birth 
rates over the last two decades combined with the entry into retirement of the baby boom 
generation. 
• 
• 
Singapore’s total fertility rate has been very low, at about 1.4 over the last 20 years. 
Baby  boomers  entering  the  “65  &  above”  age  group,  where  significant  numbers 
retire and leave the workforce, will surge by 65% during 2011–2020. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  overall  impact  of  this  double-whammy  is  unmistakeable:  Singapore’s  resident  labour 
force will start to shrink over the next few years, even after taking into account the inflow of 
net migrants. 
Singapore had previously supplemented its resident labour force with foreign workers. Total 
labour force growth averaged 3.7% per annum in the last decade (2001–2010); almost half of 
which  was  contributed  by  foreign  workers.  This  is  unsustainable.  Foreigners  (excluding 
foreign  domestic  workers)  already  account  for  about  one-third  of  the  total  labour  force  in 
Singapore. 
Singapore  is  heading  towards  a  demographic  cliff.  It  cannot  be  avoided.  The  question  is 
whether  the  economy  achieves  a  soft  landing  or  a  hard  landing.  If  we  restructure  our 
economy and raise our productivity, Singapore can grow at a slower but more sustainable 
pace  with  a  moderate  increase  in  costs  and  prices.  If  we  do  not,  costs  will  continue  to 
escalate, competitiveness will erode, and growth will dip sharply amidst higher inflation. 
The transition to productivity-led growth will not be easy. As labour becomes more scarce, its 
price  will  rise,  prompting  an  adoption  of  labour-saving  technologies  or  a  shift  of  resources 
into activities that utilise less labour. This increase in wage cost is a necessary part of the 
restructuring process but will feed through more generally into prices, especially for a range 
of domestic consumer services which had hitherto depended heavily on foreign labour, such 
as cleaning, healthcare, cooked food, and hospitality. Inflation will be temporarily higher, as 
productivity-enhancing measures take time to bear fruit. 
During this transition, which will take a few years, the growth-inflation trade-off will worsen. 
• 
GDP growth will be slower during 2011–2020, at 3–5% per annum, about 2% points 
lower than the average 6% growth in the last decade. This will mainly reflect a sharp 
reduction in labour force growth. 
At the same time, inflation is expected to be around 1% point higher in this decade 
compared to the last. MAS Core Inflation is likely to average 2.5% per annum, and 
CPI-All Items inflation around 3%. 
 Managing  inflation  expectations  and  preventing  inflation  from  escalating  will  be  the  key 
challenge facing monetary policy during the transition to a productivity-based economy. 
Macro policies for economic and financial stability 
Macro  policies  would  need  to  be  on  heightened  alert  to  ensure  that  Singapore’s  enviable 
track record for macroeconomic and financial stability is safeguarded. Let me now elaborate 
on  the  two  key  thrusts  of  Singapore’s  macro  stability  policies  –  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential policy. 
Monetary policy: containing inflation in a restructuring economy 
Let me start with monetary policy framework. I will cover two areas: 
• 
First,  the  continued  relevance  of  the  exchange  rate  in  our  monetary  policy 
framework. 
Second, the calibration of monetary policy responses within this framework. 
• 
Relevance of exchange rate as the instrument of monetary policy 
MAS’ exchange rate-centred monetary policy framework was formalised in the early 1980s. 
While other central banks sought to control money supply or interest rates, MAS has chosen 
to focus instead on the exchange rate as its monetary policy tool to keep inflation in check. 
The  exchange  rate-centred  framework  has  served  Singapore  very  well  for  over  three 
decades. As I mentioned earlier, Singapore has had one of the best inflation records in the 
world despite enjoying one of the fastest rates of economic growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Let  us  quickly  recall  why  the  exchange  rate  is  MAS’  chosen  tool  of  monetary  policy. 
Singapore is a small and extremely open economy. Total exports and imports of goods are 
each well in excess of 100% of GDP. 
• 
Imports  make  up  40%  of  domestic  consumption;  the  exchange  rate  is  thus  a 
powerful tool to moderate the impact of foreign price changes on domestic inflation. 
Exports are the chief driver of economic growth; and the exchange rate, as a key 
factor  affecting  export  demand,  is  thus  also  an  effective  means  for  managing 
aggregate demand and hence overall inflationary pressures. 
 But every now and then, analysts and commentators ask whether the exchange rate-centred 
monetary policy has outlived its usefulness and whether a switch to interest rate targeting or 
inflation targeting would make better sense. With the pickup in inflation in recent years, these 
questions have been more frequently raised. 
Let me assure everyone that, every few years, MAS itself conducts a review of whether the 
exchange rate continues to be the most appropriate tool for Singapore’s monetary policy. Let 
me share briefly the outcome of these studies as they relate to three questions. 
First question: with most of recent inflation in Singapore attributable to the imputed cost of 
accommodation services and car prices, is the exchange rate a less relevant tool? It is true 
that  imputed  rentals  on  owner-occupied  accommodation  accounted  for  about  a  quarter  of 
overall inflation during 2010–2012. But if MAS had not let the Singapore Dollar appreciate, 
CPI-All Items inflation would have been around 2.5% points higher in 2012. Rising housing 
rents and car prices do not undermine the importance of the appreciating exchange rate in 
restraining price increases in the broader basket of goods and services consumed by people. 
Second question: with the principal threat to consumer and asset price stability emanating 
from easy monetary conditions and low real interest rates globally, shouldn’t MAS abandon 
the exchange rate target and seek to control domestic interest rates instead? Well, this is not 
as straightforward as it might appear. 
First, in an open economy setting, higher interest rates will attract even more capital inflows 
to Singapore, especially given our strong macroeconomic fundamentals and persistently low 
foreign interest rates. This could fuel further asset price inflation. 
Second, the hike in interest rates would have to be very aggressive for it to dampen demand 
for  credit,  and  tame  asset  prices.  This  would  mean  a  sharp  appreciation  in  the  exchange 
rate,  which  would  impose  significant  collateral  damage  on  the  broader  economy.  Indeed, 
some regional countries with interest rate regimes are facing the dilemma between raising 
rates  to  curb  credit  booms  and  preventing  the  spillovers  on  capital  inflows  and  their 
exchange rates. 
On  balance,  a  switch  to  a  regime  of  managing  interest  rates  will  be  highly  destabilising. 
There  are  potentially  unpredictable  costs  associated  with  a  shift  in  the  monetary  policy 
regime,  quite  apart  from  its  limited  impact  on  the  other  broader  and  more  predominant 
sources of underlying price pressures in the economy. 
MAS’ assessment has been corroborated by Professor Ilian Mihov, Professor of Economics 
at INSEAD. His pioneering academic work has demonstrated that for an open economy like 
Singapore,  a  monetary  policy  response  based  on  the  exchange  rate  delivers  superior 
economic welfare outcomes compared to an interest rate regime. In particular, the exchange 
rate is better able than the interest rate to reduce volatility in output and inflation. 
Third  question:  with  the  gradual  shift  in  Singapore’s  economic  structure  towards  services 
(which are typically regarded as being non-tradable), does the exchange rate have as much 
impact on aggregate demand and prices in the economy? It is true that services have indeed 
contributed  more  to  GDP  growth  recently.  But  a  significant  portion  of  these  services  are 
exportable, such as financial, IT and professional services. External-oriented manufacturing 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  services  sectors  together continue to  account for more than  half  of  Singapore’s GDP. 
The fundamental structure of the economy as an export-dependent one has not changed. 
Firms – both MNCs and SMEs – have consistently highlighted the importance of keeping the 
exchange rate stable for planning and investment purposes. The exchange rate continues to 
play a key role in household and business decisions, and is an important equilibrating price 
for the economy. 
Calibration of monetary policy responses 
So, the monetary policy framework centred on the exchange rate remains valid. But has its 
calibration been sufficiently responsive to recent challenges to price stability? 
The chief consideration underpinning the stance of monetary policy in recent years has been 
to anchor inflation expectations and contain the risk of a wage-price spiral arising from the 
short-term effects of economic restructuring. 
Since  April  2010,  the  policy  band  of  the  Singapore  Dollar  nominal  effective  exchange  rate 
has been on a modest and gradual appreciation path. The nominal effective exchange rate 
has strengthened by about 3% per annum on average during this period. Within this overall 
tightening stance, MAS has allowed a temporary increase in core inflation to accommodate 
some  of  the  changes  in  relative  prices.  This  is  to  signal  resource  scarcity  and  stimulate 
behavioural shifts. Policy should not be so tight as to hinder the ability of firms to restructure. 
The tight monetary policy stance since April 2010 has been effective in containing inflationary 
pressures and keeping the economy on an even keel. It has had three important effects. 
First, the tighter monetary policy stance has successfully restrained imported inflation despite 
significant price pressures in the external environment during this period. 
• 
In foreign currency terms, wholesale price inflation among Singapore’s major trading 
partners averaged around 5% per annum from 2010 to 2012. 
In  comparison,  overall  imported  inflation  in  Singapore  dollar  terms  has been  fairly 
benign, averaging slightly less than 2% per annum in this period. 
  Specific  examples  illustrate  well  the  efficacy  of  the  exchange  rate  in  dampening  imported 
inflation. 
• 
Global oil prices have risen by an average of 16% per year in 2010–2012. However, 
local petrol pump prices have only increased by 8%. 
Global food prices, as measured by the IMF Food and Beverage Price Index, rose 
by 9% per annum during this period, but domestic food prices increased by just 2%. 
Second, the stronger Singapore Dollar has dampened inflation indirectly by moderating the 
demand for our exports. In turn, this has eased the demand pressure on domestic resources 
such  as  labour  and  industrial  space.  This  has  reduced  business  cost  pressures  and  thus 
overall inflation. 
Third, the tighter monetary policy stance has nudged the level of output closer to its potential, 
thus  preventing  the  economy  from  overheating.  The  positive  output  gap  is  projected  to 
narrow from nearly 4% of potential GDP in 2010 to around 1% this year. 
MAS’  policy  stance  has  begun to  yield  results. Both  CPI-All  Items  inflation  and  MAS  Core 
Inflation have eased from their recent peaks. 
• 
• 
CPI-All Items inflation has fallen from 5.5% in Q3 2011 to 4.0% in Q1 2013. 
At 1.6% in the first quarter of this year, MAS Core Inflation is running at nearly half 
the pace seen a year ago. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
But there is no room for complacency. The pace at which business costs are passed through 
to consumer prices could pick up in the latter half of this year. MAS  will remain vigilant in 
ensuring that the recent gains in controlling inflation are sustained. 
Macroprudential policies: augmenting monetary policy to promote economic and 
financial stability 
Let me move on now to macroprudential policy. This is the new buzzword in central banking 
circles.  It  has  not  been  much  referred  to  in  Singapore,  but  we  have  been  applying 
macroprudential policies for some time now. 
I  will  describe  now  the  workings  of  macroprudential  policies  in  Singapore,  explaining  why 
they are necessary in our context, and how they have been applied. 
Why macroprudential policy 
The conventional thinking pre-crisis was based on two assumptions: 
• 
First,  asset  prices  did  not  matter  much.  Central  banks  therefore  focused  on 
consumer prices and placed less emphasis on asset prices. 
Second, if risks in individual financial institutions were well controlled, the financial 
system  as  a  whole  would  generally  be  safe.  Regulators  therefore  focused  on  the 
safety and soundness of individual institutions and paid less heed to systemic risk. 
 The collapse of the real estate markets in America and Europe, the breakout of the Global 
Financial Crisis, and the contagion of risk to seemingly sound financial institutions – against 
a backdrop of relative macroeconomic stability – showed both assumptions to be wrong. 
Thus was born macroprudential policy – which focused on the health of the financial system 
as a whole and its interactions with the macroeconomy, particularly developments in liquidity, 
leverage, and asset markets. In many emerging market economies, macroprudential policy 
has  become  an  important  complement  to  monetary  policy  to  help  secure  economic  and 
financial stability. 
In  Singapore,  the  focus  of  macroprudential  policy  has  been  to  promote  sustainable  asset 
prices. Asset prices matter for four reasons. 
First, volatile asset prices pose a risk to financial stability, especially when a run-up in asset 
prices is financed by easy credit and accompanied by a build-up in leverage in the economy. 
When asset prices correct, financial institutions’ vulnerability to default and loss increases. 
Second,  asset  price  inflation  is  as  distortionary  as  consumer  price  inflation.  Both  create 
uncertainty,  misallocate  resources,  discourage  productive  investment,  and  ultimately  drag 
down economic growth. 
Third, asset prices have important feedback loops with consumer prices. Rapidly rising asset 
prices 
rentals  and 
accommodations costs that go into the consumer price index. 
Fourth, asset purchases financed by excessive borrowing on the expectation of future capital 
gains  undermine  financial  prudence.  If  households  or  corporates  build  up  leverage  during 
periods of low interest rates, they will be vulnerable when interest rates normalise. 
What can central banks or governments do about asset bubbles or the leverage cycle? An 
oft-cited  reason  for  not  doing  anything  is  that  we  cannot  reliably  determine  whether  asset 
prices have overshot fundamentals or whether leverage has reached unsustainable levels. 
But the issue is not whether we can establish if there is an asset bubble or not. The issue is 
whether  the  rise  in  asset  prices  is  creating  negative  spillover  effects  on  the  economy  or 
whether a future sharp reduction in asset prices will lead to instability or serious dislocations. 
If the assessment is that it would, we have to act proactively to moderate prices now. And 
inflation  expectations  and  also  directly  affect 
raise  general 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
this  has  indeed  been  the  approach  taken  by  MAS  and  the  government  with  respect  to 
property prices. 
How macroprudential policies have been applied 
Singapore  applied  macroprudential  tools  as  early  as  1996,  to  help  cool  an  overheated 
property market. But it is only since 2009 that macroprudential policies have been applied in 
a  more  concerted  and  calibrated  fashion  –  again  to  help  moderate  price  increases  in  the 
residential  property  market.  Following  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  the  confluence  of  low 
interest rates, firm domestic demand underpinned by sustained income growth, and supply 
shortages in the residential property markets caused home prices to rise rapidly. This had 
implications for both price stability and financial stability. 
As  rentals  increased  on  the  back  of  rising  property  prices,  imputed  rentals  on  owner-
occupied accommodation accounted for about a third of overall inflation during 2011–2012. 
CPI-All  Items  inflation  averaged  4.9%  per  annum  during  this  period.  MAS  was  concerned 
that  this  would  unhinge  general  inflation  expectations  and  spill-over  into  more  rapid  wage 
growth across the economy. 
At the same time, the stock of mortgages surged by about 70% from end-2009 to end-2012, 
posing risks for financial stability. To be sure, there was little imminent danger. Households’ 
net asset positions were still strong, with the aggregate household debt-to-asset ratio stable 
at around 16%. The non-performing loan ratios for mortgages remained low at 0.25%, and 
the amount of housing loans in negative equity was negligible. 
But  if  domestic  income  growth  faltered  or  if  the  global  interest  rate  cycle  turned  abruptly, 
mortgage financing burdens could escalate. Households’ balance sheets could deteriorate if 
home prices fell, as much of the increase in household wealth had been driven by a rise in 
the  value  of  property  assets.  The  government  was  thus  concerned  that  households  were 
over-extending themselves in the low-interest rate environment. If a sufficiently large number 
of  borrowers  ended  up  in  distress,  financial  institutions  would  also  come  under  stress, 
thereby  posing  risks  for  financial  stability.  Since  neither  monetary  policy  nor  financial 
supervisory policy could directly address the property market, the government had to resort 
to macroprudential policies. 
However,  unlike  monetary  policy  which  has  a  single  instrument  and  a  clear  target, 
macroprudential  policy  requires  a  multi-dimensional  approach.  This  is  because  there  is  no 
single  instrument  that  has  a  stable  and  reliable  relationship  with  financial  stability  or  asset 
price stability. Each is influenced by a variety of factors. 
Macroprudential  policy  has  thus  relied  on  a  range  of  policy  instruments.  In  fact,  many  of 
these  instruments  are  not  at  the  disposal  of  MAS  but  involve  other  government  agencies. 
The  conduct  of  macroprudential  policy  has  entailed  a  co-ordinated  approach  across  MAS, 
the Ministry of Finance (MOF), and the Ministry of National Development (MND). 
MAS,  MOF,  and  MND,  worked  in  concert  to  implement  several  rounds  of  macroprudential 
measures to help cool the property market: 
• 
MAS  has  progressively  lowered  the  loan-to-value  ratios  on  property  loans  and 
capped mortgage tenures at a maximum of 35 years. 
MOF  has  successively  raised  taxes  on  property  transactions,  in  the  form  of  the 
Sellers’ Stamp Duty and the Additional Buyer’s Stamp Duty. 
MND has ramped up land sales for residential property developments. 
• 
Property  prices  finally  appear  to  be  stabilising.  The  annual  increase  in  private  residential 
property prices slowed significantly from 18% in 2010 to 5.9% in 2011, and further to 2.8% in 
2012. In sequential quarter-on-quarter terms, price increases have dipped below 2%. 
The motor vehicle market is another example of macroprudential policy in action, this time 
complementing monetary policy in addressing concerns regarding consumer price stability. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Singapore has perhaps the most stringent restrictions on car ownership in the world. Anyone 
who  wishes  to  register  a  new  vehicle  in  Singapore  must  first  bid  for  a  Certificate  of 
Entitlement (or COE), which represents a right to vehicle ownership and use of our limited 
road  space  for  10  years.  The  number  of  COEs  is  tightly  controlled,  so  as  to  minimise  the 
number of cars on the road. 
As the supply of COEs dwindled and demand for cars remained firm on the back of strong 
income growth and low interest rates, COE prices rose rapidly in the last three years. At their 
peak  early  this  year,  COE  prices  averaged  around  $90,000,  nearly  five  times  the  level  in 
January  2010.  This  in  turn  drove  up  the  overall  inflation  rate,  and  started  having  spillover 
effects  on  the  rest  of  the  economy  and  shaping  price  expectations  more  generally.  There 
was  also  a  growing  risk  that  buyers  were  over-extending  themselves  by  purchasing  more 
expensive cars, given the low interest rate environment. 
In February this year, MAS announced measures to restrict the financing of car purchases 
for private use. Buyers were limited to borrowing only 50–60% of the total purchase price of 
the  car.  Loans  had  to  be  repaid  within  five  years.  COE  premiums  for  cars  have  adjusted 
downwards by about 25%. 
Macroprudential policy in Singapore is still work-in-progress, as is the case elsewhere. The 
measures have achieved some degree of success in the property and car markets but it is 
too early to declare victory. As with traditional macroeconomic policy, these macroprudential 
measures will be recalibrated as market conditions change. 
There are many unknowns in the theory and practice of macroprudential policy. We need to 
better  understand  the  transmission  mechanisms  through  which  our  various  measures 
operate,  their  inter-relationships  with  one  another,  and  unintended  consequences  or 
distortions they may create. The field is ripe for further research and, I hope, will challenge 
the intellectual curiosity of scholars, such as those assembled here this evening. 
In fact, the ABFER can play a very important role in this regard. Policymakers all over the 
world, including us here at the MAS, have been thrust into a vastly different environment. We 
need to update existing policy paradigms and even develop new ones. It is my hope that the 
collaborative network created by the ABFER will help foster a vibrant research culture and 
provide thought leadership on the important policy debates confronting this part of the world. 
MAS is happy to sponsor and support the ABFER. 
 Conclusion 
Let me summarise my main points. 
The  macroeconomic  landscape  for  MAS  has  become  more  complex,  with  external  and 
domestic forces interacting in unprecedented ways. 
• 
Externally, Singapore is facing a wall of money and rock-bottom interest rates that 
could  potentially  set  off  asset  market  bubbles  that  could  in  turn  have  knock-on 
effects on consumer price stability and financial stability. 
Domestically, we are facing a demographic cliff that will tighten labour markets and 
could potentially set off a wage-price spiral that could unhinge inflation expectations. 
Macro  policies  will  be  on  heightened  alert  to  ensure  that  economic  stability  and  financial 
stability are safeguarded as Singapore navigates this new landscape. We are well placed to 
deal with the risks ahead. 
• 
Our exchange rate-centred monetary policy remains fit for purpose and will continue 
to focus on keeping inflation contained. 
Our  macroprudential  policies  will  complement  monetary  policy  and  financial 
supervisory policies to secure sustainable asset prices and financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 8 
  Most  of  all,  Singapore’s  fundamentals  remain  sound.  Fiscal  prudence,  financial 
discipline, minimising debt and living within our means, will provide us policy space 
and buffer to weather whatever comes ahead. This is an advantage most countries 
do not have. 
I wish you a successful and enlightening conference. Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
