Paul Tucker: Monetary strategy and prospects 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Tucker,  Deputy  Governor  Financial  Stability  at  the  Bank  of  England, 
Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Member of the Financial Policy Committee and 
Member  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  Board,  at  the  Association  for  Financial 
Markets in Europe flagship conference on “Financing growth”, London, 24 September 2013. 
 Around  the  western  world  monetary  policy  is  at  a  critical  juncture.  As  differences  in  the 
relative  pace  of  recovery  in  different  economies  become  apparent,  each  central  bank  is 
having  to  articulate  how  it  sees  the  particular  conditions  it  faces.  Contrast  that  with  early 
2009,  when  we  were  all  simply  priming  the  monetary  pumps  to  prevent  our  economies 
slipping into depression and deflation. Indeed, contrast it with 2011 and 2012 when, again, 
central banks acted more or less in unison to contain, as best we could, the spillovers from 
the  crisis  in  the  euro  area  periphery.  Today,  although  normality  is  hardly  restored,  we  are 
back  to  circumstances  where  differences  in  local  economic  conditions  matter  to  domestic 
monetary prospects and to exchange rates.  
The big policy trade off 
In the UK, the core challenge lies in balancing two medium-term risks – to the economy’s 
productive capacity and to price stability.1 Concretely, the longer the weakness in activity, the 
greater  the  erosion  of  the  economy’s  capital  resources  and  the  damage  to  the  skills  and 
capabilities  of  our  labour  force.  The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  needed  to  provide 
monetary  stimulus  not  only  to  contain  the  short-term  economic  weakness  but,  even  more 
important, to reduce its longer-run costs – social and economic. But we cannot do that at the 
expense  of  price  stability  –  or,  more  technically,  of  allowing  medium-term  inflation 
expectations  to  drift  away  from  the  target  of  2%.  Were  the  anchor  to  slip,  our  ability  to 
support recovery would be undermined. It is sometimes suggested that independent central 
bankers  are  more  averse  to  inflation  than  to  periods  of  low  growth  and  increased 
unemployment. I hope the past few years have demonstrated that, in fact, it is the credibility 
of  the  Bank  of  England’s  commitment  to  price  stability  that  enabled  us  to  provide  such 
exceptional  monetary  support  to  help  the  recovery.  It  is  unimaginable  that,  prior  to  Bank 
independence  in  1997,  any  government  would  have  been  able  to  hold  the  policy  rate  at 
effectively  zero  and  make  a  further  monetary  injection  of  £375bn  without  inflationary 
expectations – and government financing costs – spiralling out of control. 
But credibility is not to be taken for granted. Even we cannot provide stimulus without limit, 
without a wary eye to inflation expectations.  
Nor  has  it  been  at  all  easy  to  judge  just  how  much  stimulus  has  been  needed  to  secure 
recovery given the extraordinary uncertainties about what is going on in the real economy. 
On the one hand, the rise in unemployment, while inflicting a terrible cost on those directly 
affected, has been a lot smaller than anyone would have expected given the weakness in 
output. On the other hand, this means that productivity has fallen over recent years, leaving it 
some 15% below current estimates of its pre-crisis trend path – in sharp contrast to the US. 
Let’s be clear: we do not understand why productivity has been so weak. And that means 
that  we  are  highly  uncertain  about  the  amount  of  slack  in  the  economy  currently  and 
prospectively;  uncertain  about  the  extent  of  the  consequent  downward  pressure  on 
domestically-generated  inflation;  and,  thus,  uncertain  about  the  path  of  output  and 
employment  consistent  with  non-inflationary  growth.  That  sums  up  the  background  to  my 
                                                
1  This  is  reflected  in  pages  13–15  of  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  document  on  forward  guidance,  available  online  at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Pages/forwardguidance.aspx. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
approach  to  policy  settings  over  the  past  couple  of  years.  Provide  stimulus;  pause  to  see 
whether inflation expectations remain anchored; if, but only if, they are and more stimulus is 
needed, provide it etc. A “probing” approach. 
The MPC’s framework of forward guidance 
And, as I see it, that is broadly consistent with the Committee’s new framework of Forward 
Guidance.  The  government  having  revised  its  Remit  to  the  MPC,  the  Committee  has,  in 
effect, formally clarified that it is adopting a probing approach to policy in order to strike the 
right balance between risks to stability and the risks of sclerosis.  
To  be  clear,  I  do  not  see  the  Forward  Guidance  –  and  personally  would  not  favour  – 
committing the Committee to knowingly keeping policy loose beyond the point that would be 
prudent. I say that because, in parts of academia and the commentariat, the expression “low 
for long” is used in a rather special way to mean just that: that policy should be loose beyond 
the  period  that,  ex  post,  would  warrant  special  stimulus,  in  order  actively  to  deliver  a 
persistent  rise  in  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  above  target,  thereby  pushing  down 
prevailing real rates of interest and so accelerating recovery.2 While not without insight on the 
mechanics  of monetary  stimulus, that  stream  of economic  modelling makes the  absolutely 
critical  assumption  that even  as  the  monetary  authority  deliberately  generates  a  persistent 
rise in inflation, its anti-inflation credibility remains 100% intact; later, the central bank simply 
announces that things are back to normal. That is utterly unrealistic. 
To re-iterate: the MPC’s forward guidance provides an articulated framework for a probing 
approach to policy, without a change in our preferences on inflation.3 
Saying  more  about  the  Committee’s  approach  to  policy  in  this  way  might  be  particularly 
valuable  during  a  period  when  signs  of  recovery  have  become  more  apparent.  These  are 
conditions  in  which  it  would  be  very  easy  for  the  financial  markets,  businesses  and 
households to jump to the mistaken conclusion that monetary stimulus will soon begin to be 
withdrawn. Given the slack in the economy, the Committee is not in a rush. 
Assuming anchored inflation expectations, an orthodox central bank would not contemplate 
beginning  to  withdraw  stimulus  until  the  economy  had  reached  “escape  velocity”,  which  I 
have defined to mean “the economy growing, and being set to continue to grow, at a pace 
that gradually absorbs the slack in the labour market and within firms”.4 And at that point the 
central bank would assess the erosion of slack in the economy and thus the extent to which 
downward pressures on inflation were dissipating. 
Since my own policy deliberations have been framed in terms of “escape velocity”, I saw real 
merit  in  any  MPC  Forward  Guidance  being  cast  in  terms  of  a  threshold  for  real  growth. 
Manifestly, this could not be a measure of slack in the economy; it would be clear what it was 
and  was  not.  Once  passed,  it  would  prompt  a  rich  assessment  of  slack  and  inflationary 
pressures, drawing on the widest possible range of indicators. The Committee decided on a 
threshold specified in terms of unemployment.  
The  MPC’s  threshold  is  what  it  says:  a  threshold  for  assessing  inflationary  pressures, 
although the  Committee  must  maintain that  broader  assessment  month-by-month, quarter-
                                                
2  See Woodford  (2012),  “Methods of  Policy Accommodation  at the  Interest-Rate  Lower  Bound,”  presented  at the  Jackson 
Hole symposium. 
3  This is consistent with Bean (2013), “Global aspects of unconventional monetary policy”, the Monetary Policy Committee’s 
Forward Guidance document (op cit); and with the Governor’s remarks during the August Inflation Report Press conference: 
“guidance is not a change in the reaction function, but it gives a better sense of the MPC’s reaction function to financial 
market participants”.  
4  See remarks at the Treasury Select Committee hearing to discuss the Inflation Report on 28 June 2011, and 2012 and 2013 
Annual Reports on Monetary Policy to the Treasury Select Committee.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
by-quarter. The threshold is not a target. Indeed, a monetary authority cannot have a target 
for  unemployment;  it  can  have  a  target  only  for  price  stability,  as  Paul  Volcker  recently 
stressed.5  That  is  why  the  Committee’s  Forward  Guidance  incorporates,  crucially,  a 
“knockout” for  inflation  expectations,  where  individual  members  will  have  to  judge  whether 
they are “sufficiently well anchored”. 
Beyond that, I am glad that in its “financial stability knockout”, the Committee has in effect 
recognised that monetary policy influences risk-taking behaviour in the financial system.6 This 
does not mean that the MPC will suddenly lurch towards a supplementary goal of trying to 
control  excesses  in  markets.  The  UK’s  new  architecture  gives  the  Financial  Policy 
Committee  some  tools  to  do  that  where  there  is  a  threat  to  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system. But in the limit monetary policy can be a backstop – as booms and busts increase 
the likelihood that inflation will be volatile in the future. 
Overall,  the  Committee’s  Forward  Guidance  can  forestall  avoidable  uncertainty  about  its 
“reaction function”, about how policy will be set. But it does not affect the greater uncertainty 
about the evolution of the recovery. 
Uncertainties about the economic outlook 
Of course, financial markets inevitably transform the Committee’s state-contingent guidance 
into predictions of when the Committee will begin to withdraw monetary stimulus; the markets 
trade  instruments  with  different  maturities,  ie  with  time-contingent  features  not  with  state-
contingent  contractual  triggers.  But  the  MPC  provided  state-contingent  guidance  for  a 
reason.  We  cannot  wave  away  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  performance  of  the  real 
economy.  If  we  only  understood  why  productivity  growth  has  been  so  weak,  we  could  be 
more confident about whether or not it will recover in tandem with a recovery in spending. If 
that does happen, the fall in unemployment could be slow, and monetary stimulus might not 
need to be withdrawn for some time. If, on the other hand, productivity growth remains weak, 
job creation as the economy recovers could be strong, as it has been on average over the 
past  couple  of  years.  That  is  why  there  is  a  wide  band  of  uncertainty  around  the  MPC’s 
August  forecast  for  unemployment.  My  own  probability  distribution  for  unemployment  is 
broadly  “flat”  in  the  sense  that  I  do  not  regard  one  of  those  scenarios  as  materially  more 
likely  than  the  other.  As  data  comes  in,  the  Bank’s  projections  for  unemployment  are  far 
more likely to change, in one direction or the other, than the Committee’s forward guidance. 
Probabilistically, that could explain part of the rise in the money market curve given the signs 
of recovery. All this underlines the need for the Committee to keep under review, month by 
month, a wide range of indictors of slack in the labour market and in firms. For example, if 
participation in the workforce develops in unexpected ways, the degree of slack implied by 
any rate of unemployment might change.7 
That recovery is, I trust, finally underway should not be a complete surprise. The MPC has 
provided a massive amount of monetary stimulus over recent years. Its effects were arrested 
for an extended period by the threat of severe turmoil in the euro area, coming on top of an 
erosion of spending power from rising commodity prices. Monetary policy (and credit policy 
for  that  matter)  works  partly  by  incentivising  households  and  firms  to  bring  forward  future 
spending. They were not likely to do so when the risks and uncertainties on our Continental 
doorstep were so great and so unusual. As those immediate risks and uncertainties receded, 
                                                
5  See Volker (2013), “Central banking at a crossroad”.  
6  On the “risk channel” of monetary policy, see Stein and Hanson (2012), “Monetary policy and long-term real rates”; Tucker 
(2012),  “National  balance  sheets  and  monetary  policy:  lessons  from  the  past”;  and  Borio  and  Zhu  (2012),  “Capital 
regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing link in the transmission mechanism?”. 
7  This is broadly comparable to shifts in the velocity of money affecting the interpretation of the rate of growth of the money 
stock when monetary aggregates were used as targets by UK governments in the 1980s. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
it  was  as  if  UK  monetary  policy  was  being  switched  back  on.8  With  monetary  stimulus 
maintained,  now  within  the  framework  provided  by  the  Committee’s  Forward  Guidance, 
recovery will continue to be underpinned – although of course the road will be bumpy.  
That is a key element of what, in our internal discussions, I have called the Keynesian part of 
the Bank’s policy response to the crisis. The Funding for Lending Scheme; the liberalisation 
of  our  liquidity  insurance  to  the  banking  system  –  through  the  Extended  Collateral  Term 
Repo  scheme  and  the  liberalised  Discount  Window  Facility;  and  the  Financial  Policy 
Committee’s related Recommendation to the Prudential Regulation Authority to relax liquidity 
requirements on banks – all these fell under the same broad heading. “Keynesian” because 
we  are  supporting  demand  in  order  to  help  smooth  the  adjustment  the  economy  is  going 
through. 
But  a  central  bank’s  monetary  and  liquidity  interventions  cannot  remove  the  need  for 
adjustment.  The  UK  economy  entered  the  crisis  with  too  much  debt  in  banking,  in  the 
household  sector,  in  government  and,  for  the  nation  as  a  whole,  externally.  And  the  UK 
entered the crisis with the composition of demand imbalanced – too much public and private 
consumption,  too  little  net  trade.  Indeed,  aggregate  demand  had  been  unbalanced  for  so 
long  that  the  economy’s  productive  capacity  was  (and  probably  still  is)  unbalanced, 
investment in capital having followed the pattern of demand. For prosperity to be put on a 
secure footing for the longer term, adjustment is still needed.  
With  one  vital  exception,  engineering  structural  change  in  the  economy  is  not  the 
responsibility of the central bank. 
The  exception  of  course  is  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  banking  system,  which  is  a 
precondition for broader monetary stability. An undercapitalised banking system would not be 
able  smoothly  to  supply  sufficient  credit  to  aid  recovery  as  demand  picks  up,  enabling 
investment in innovations and efficiency. Nor has it been able to do so as much as needed to 
help capital shift to firms and sectors that are beneficiaries of the new pattern of global and 
domestic  demand.  In  my  view,  that  may  explain  some  of  the  weaknesses  in  productivity 
growth.9 The Financial Policy Committee required recapitalisation of the UK’s big banks and 
building societies not simply because that is needed to underpin stability, which it is, but also 
because  a  resilient  banking  system  is  a  precondition  for  sustained  and  better  balanced 
recovery. New entrant banks can do a bit, but the big incumbent banks need to be healthy 
too.  
Their repair is now underway. That has required, and will continue to require, realism about 
asset values, expected losses and risks – not pretending, taking the medicine. In that sense, 
it is a policy in the spirit of Hayek.10 So the overall policy package has combined Keynes and 
Hayek.  
Conclusion 
In  the  wake  of  such  a  massive  crisis,  recovery  has  needed  active  monetary,  liquidity  and 
banking policy. Beyond the realm of central banking, it needs supply-side reform – to create 
optimism about higher incomes and better investment opportunities in the future. 
                                                
8  See  the  Minutes  from  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  meeting  on  7–8  November  2012:  “At  the  present  time,  it  was 
possible  that  elevated  uncertainty  and  a  desire  to  reduce  leverage meant that  real  activity  was  less  responsive to  lower 
borrowing costs than normal. But this situation could easily reverse, and with it the traction that lower yields could have in 
stimulating demand and output.” 
9  See  Broadbent  (2012),  “Productivity  and  the  allocation  of  capital”,  pages  30–33  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s 
November 2012 Inflation Report: and Tucker (2013), Annual Report to the Treasury Select Committee. 
10  There is echo of this in Bean (2013), “Global aspects of unconventional monetary policy”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
If  recovery  does  gain  traction,  the  MPC  will  need  to  avoid  misperceptions  about  the  likely 
course  of  policy.  The  MPC  is  using  Forward  Guidance  to  help  avoid  those  possible 
misconceptions. The  Committee  cannot make the  uncertainty  about the supply  side  of the 
economy and, thus, about the degree of slack go away. But by adopting a probing approach 
and  maintaining  an  eclectic  approach  to  its  assessment  of  the  outlook,  the  MPC  has  the 
wherewithal  to  provide  broadly  the  right  degree  of  stimulus  without  risking,  or  diluting  its 
commitment to, price stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
