Lawrence Schembri: Born of necessity and built to succeed – why 
Canada and the world need the Financial Stability Board 
Remarks by Mr Lawrence Schembri, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the CFA 
Society (Ottawa), Ottawa, Ontario, 24 September 2013. 
 Introduction 
It  has  been  just  over  five  years  since  the  worst  days  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  which 
began  with  the  dramatic  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008.  While  the 
subsequent Great Recession officially ended in June 2009, it hardly seems over, given the 
slow-motion recovery of the global economy. This is especially the case in Europe and the 
United States, where employment has not yet returned to pre-crisis levels. 
Looking back at Canada’s experience of the past five years, a key lesson from the crisis is 
that keeping our own house in order is not enough to shelter us from global financial storms. 
Yes,  Canada’s  recovery  has  been  stronger  than  virtually  all  other  advanced  economies, 
thanks  in  part  to  our  resilient  financial  system.  Our  sound  monetary,  fiscal  and  financial 
sector policies protected us from the worst of the financial crisis and recession. But make no 
mistake:  Canada  was  still  hit  hard.  Output fell  by  3.5  per  cent.  And  from  October  2008  to 
October 2009, the unemployment rate rose from 6.1 per cent to 8.3 per cent. 
Harder lessons were learned at the international level. The breadth and depth of the crisis, 
and the speed with which it travelled around the globe, made world leaders sit up and take 
notice.  In  2009,  the  G-20  identified  the  important  task  of  reducing  the  likelihood  of  future 
financial  crises  and  limiting  their  spillovers  across  borders.  The  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB) was set up to coordinate this work.1 
Today, I am going to talk about the FSB, especially its coordinating role for Canada and the 
global economy. I will focus on: 
why the FSB is needed, 
• 
• 
how it works, and 
• 
its accomplishments to date and plans for the future. 
I will also discuss implications of the FSB’s financial reform agenda for Canada. 
Why we need the FSB 
From my perspective, the FSB is a unique international organization that has certain qualities 
that many associate with Canadians, qualities I believe will help ensure its success in making 
the global financial system more resilient. A resilient global financial system is not an end in 
itself,  but  a  necessary  foundation  for  strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  global  economic 
growth, leading to higher employment and improved living standards. 
The FSB was born of necessity in the aftermath of the financial crisis. Its raison d’être stems 
from  one  overarching  fact:  the  global  financial  system  is  highly  integrated.2  Financial 
institutions  and  markets  are  interconnected  and  interdependent  within  and  across  various 
                                                
1  The  FSB  grew  out  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF),  founded  in  1999  by  the  G-7  in  the  wake  of  the 
financial crises in Asia, Latin America and Russia. 
2  Bank of  Canada  Deputy  Governor  Timothy  Lane, in his  2013  speech,  “Financial  Stability  in  One  Country?” 
argues  that  because  of  global  financial  integration,  it  is  impossible  to  achieve  financial  stability  in  one 
jurisdiction by focusing exclusively on domestic considerations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
sectors, including banking, insurance, and pension and investment funds, and, increasingly, 
across national jurisdictions. 
Thus,  to  achieve  a  comprehensive  and  coherent  approach  to  the  financial  regulation  and 
oversight  necessary  to  attain  the  global  public  good  of  financial  stability,  coordination  is 
essential  across  countries,  across  all  of  the  elements  of  the  reforms,  and  across  many 
different regulators and supervisors. Failure to coordinate would lead to the fragmentation of 
the  financial  system,  which  would  impede  the  global  recovery.  This  need  for  effective 
coordination is why the G-20 established the FSB in 2009.3 
What is the FSB? 
The FSB is not only the newest, it is by far the smallest – with only about 25 full-time staff – 
and  probably  the  least well  known  of the major  international  organizations.4  These  include 
such postwar heavyweights as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and 
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
It is an international organization like no other: 
• 
Its  membership  is  composed  of  national  financial  authorities  from  24  countries, 
including  G-20  members  and  other  significant  financial  jurisdictions  such  as 
Switzerland  and  Singapore.5  An  important  innovation  is  that  it  also  includes 
international financial institutions such as the IMF, the World Bank and the Bank for 
International  Settlements,  as  well  as  international  bodies  that  set  standards  for 
banking, insurance, securities and accounting.6 
The FSB punches well above its weight by levering the knowledge of its 70 member 
agencies, which are home to several thousand financial sector experts. It is these 
experts who do most of the heavy lifting, sitting on committees and working groups 
to  develop  policy  and  conduct  peer  reviews  of  implementation,  supported  by  the 
small FSB Secretariat. 
At  the  FSB,  decision  making  is  based  on  consensus.  The  process  of  policy 
development allows members to input their views at each stage, thereby ensuring 
collective  ownership  of  the  policy  decisions.  The  FSB  relies  on  moral  suasion,  or 
what political scientists like to call “soft power.” 
As such, the FSB wields no legal sanctions but encourages countries to adhere to 
global  standards  and  promotes  a  “race  to  the  top”  through  disclosure  and  peer 
pressure.  The  FSB  or  its  member  standard-setting  bodies  regularly  produce 
peer-led, country-by-country assessments of compliance with global standards. 
                                                  
3  The FSB charter affirms “the FSB’s role in coordinating at the international level the work of national financial 
authorities  and  international  standard  setting  bodies  in  developing  and  promoting  the  implementation  of 
effective regulatory, supervisory and other financial sector policies in the interest of global financial stability”. 
See: http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_120809.pdf. 
4  The majority of FSB staff members are on temporary secondments from member institutions. 
5 
In  addition  to  the  70  member  agencies  from  24  member  countries,  the  FSB  has  six  regional  consultative 
groups to disseminate information and collect feedback from an additional 70 non-member countries. Broader 
implementation of global financial standards is important for supporting the ongoing process of global financial 
and economic integration. 
6  These standard-setting bodies include the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), the International 
Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS),  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions 
(IOSCO),  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS),  and  the  International  Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Because the FSB is a creation of the G-20 Leaders, it has the weight of the G-20 
behind it. The G-20 provides direction and receives regular progress updates from 
the FSB on the financial reform agenda. This close working relationship gives the 
FSB the political leverage it needs to be effective. 
In  short,  the  FSB  was  designed  to  succeed  in  its  coordinating  role.  It  is  an  efficient  and 
inclusive  international  organization  that  can  act  nimbly  to  coordinate  the  efforts  needed  to 
address serious financial vulnerabilities.7 
The FSB may be small, but it is powerful, undertaking work of great significance to create a 
resilient, competitive and integrated global financial system, which is necessary to support a 
rapidly  evolving  global  economy.  Countries  such  as  Canada,  with  open  global  financial 
markets and internationally active financial institutions, especially benefit from the work of the 
FSB. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  FSB  also  embodies  characteristics  that  are  important  to 
Canadians.  It  is  consultative,  guided  by  common  sense  and  consensus;  co-operative;  and 
respectful of process. This perhaps should not be surprising, given that senior officials from 
the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  (OSFI) 
have played prominent leadership roles at the FSB.8 
How does the FSB work? 
The FSB works to achieve its goal of global financial stability through four main functions, or 
steps, which I call the financial policy cycle: 
i. 
Identify  and  assess  financial  vulnerabilities.  The  recent  financial  crisis  pinpointed 
several, and I will discuss those in a moment. 
Develop the necessary policies or global standards to address these vulnerabilities. 
Monitor  the  implementation  of  these  standards  by  national  jurisdictions  to  ensure 
consistency; and 
Assess  the  effectiveness  of  the  regulation,  including  any  unintended  adverse 
consequences on financial market outcomes. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
The  FSB  is  organized  around  these  four  functions,  with  standing  committees  of  FSB 
members who carry out the necessary work.9 
                                                
7  Working with the BCBS, the FSB was able to use its soft-power approach, including its political leverage with 
the  G-20,  to  get  the  new  Basel  III  capital  framework  developed  and  largely  put  in  place  in  five  years.  In 
contrast, it took almost twice as long to reach the same stage with the earlier capital framework. 
8  Former  Bank  of  Canada  Governor  and current  Bank  of  England  Governor  Mark  Carney  has served as the 
FSB  Chair  since  November  2011;  Senior  Deputy  Governor  Tiff  Macklem  was  Chair  of  the  FSB’s  Standing 
Committee on Standards Implementation from June 2009 to April 2013; and Julie Dickson, Superintendent of 
OSFI, has chaired the FSB’s Committee on Supervisory Intensity and Effectiveness since its creation in 2010. 
See M. Carney, “Rebuilding Trust in Global Banking” (speech to the 7th Annual Thomas d’Aquino Lecture on 
Leadership,  London,  Ontario,  25  February  2013);  J.  Dickson,  Remarks  to  the  Institute  of  Internal  Auditors, 
Toronto,  31  May  2013,  and  Remarks  to  the  International  Institute  of  Finance,  Madrid,  21  May  2012;  and 
T. Macklem,  “Raising  the  House  of  Reform”  (speech  to  the  Rotman  Institute  for  International  Business, 
Toronto, 7 February 2012). 
9  The Standing Committee on Assessment of Vulnerabilities (SCAV) conducts regular monitoring exercises to 
identify  and  assess  vulnerabilities;  the  Standing  Committee  on  Supervisory  and  Regulatory  Cooperation 
(SRC)  decides  how  best  to  address  these  vulnerabilities  through  policy  development;  and  the  Standing 
Committee  on  Standards  Implementation  (SCSI)  monitors  implementation  and  assesses  effectiveness.  The 
work of these committees is directed and overseen by the Steering Committee and the Plenary, the FSB’s 
decision-making body. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Let  me  illustrate  the  execution  of  the  first  two  steps  in  this  policy  cycle  by  outlining  four 
principal weaknesses in the global financial system exposed by the financial crisis and how 
the FSB responded. 
Inadequately capitalized banks 
(i) 
In 2008, major banks in the United States, the United Kingdom and continental Europe either 
failed  or  were  publicly  rescued,  in  large  part  because  they  had  insufficient  levels  of 
good-quality capital to absorb the losses incurred from taking on too much credit risk. 
Building more resilient banks 
To address this weakness and build more resilient banks, the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision, an FSB member, developed the Basel III rules to strengthen the quantity and 
quality of bank capital. These rules call for more than tripling the required amount of capital.10 
This  updated  Basel  framework  will  be  further  buttressed  by  enhanced  liquidity  rules,  a 
backstop  leverage  ratio  similar  to  one  that  has  been  used  in  Canada,  a  countercyclical 
capital buffer and stronger supervision to enforce adoption by banks. 
Financial institutions that were considered “too big to fail” 
(ii) 
Large financial institutions, like Lehman Brothers and AIG, were able to take on excessive 
risk  because  they  were  seen  as  being  “too  big  to  fail.”  Consequently,  when  risks  were 
realized,  the  actual  or  looming  failure  of  these  institutions  weakened  investor  confidence, 
spread uncertainty and severely disrupted the global financial system. To stem the massive 
contagion, many of these institutions had to be bailed out at taxpayers’ expense, which was 
patently unfair. Losses should not be socialized; they should be borne by those who profited 
from taking the risk. 
Ending “too big to fail” 
To  end  “too  big  to  fail,”  the  FSB  has  adopted  a  three-pronged  approach,  known  as  the 
Systemically  Important  Financial  Institution  (SIFI)  framework.  The  three  key  elements  in 
development are: 
• 
higher  capital  requirements  for  financial  institutions  that  are  deemed  to  be 
systemically important;11 
standards for the effective resolution of such institutions that eliminate the need for 
taxpayer bailouts and minimize the disruption to the financial system; and12 
more intense and more effective supervisory oversight. 
Shadow banking 
(iii) 
Credit  intermediation  activities  outside  the  perimeter  of  traditional  regulation  are  often 
referred to as “shadow banking.” I prefer to call them “market-based finance” because they 
include securitization, repurchase agreements (repos) and money market funds, which are 
                                                  
10  The minimum requirement for common equity has increased from 2 per cent to 4.5 per cent, and will rise to 
7 per cent when the new capital conservation buffer is added. 
11  In 2011, the FSB identified an initial group of global systemically important financial institutions (G-SIFIs). The 
current group of 28 global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) will be updated in November 2013. The FSB 
and other standard-setting bodies are extending the SIFI framework to domestic systemically important banks 
(D-SIBs). National authorities should begin to apply phase-in arrangements for the requirements for D-SIBs as 
of  January  2016.  See:  http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_121031ac.pdf.  An  initial  list  of 
global systemically important insurers was published in July 2013. 
12  In  2011,  the  FSB  published  the  “Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial  Institutions”, 
which set out how authorities could resolve financial institutions in an orderly manner. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
important  and  useful  forms  of  credit  intermediation.  If  they  are  not  properly  regulated, 
however, these activities are subject to the same sort of systemic risks as banks, including 
contagious  runs.  The  worst  example  from  the  crisis  was  the  faulty  securitization  of  U.S. 
subprime mortgages. 
Transforming shadow banking into more resilient market-based finance 
As measures are put in place to make banks more resilient, there are legitimate concerns 
that greater scrutiny and regulation of the traditional banking sector could result in more risky 
activities migrating beyond the regulatory perimeter to the shadow banking sector. 
First, as part of its ongoing work on vulnerabilities assessment, the FSB has established a 
framework for monitoring shadow banking to identify and evaluate emerging risks. 
Second, as part of its efforts to ensure that shadow banking is transformed into more resilient 
market-based finance, the FSB, at the G-20 meetings in St. Petersburg earlier this month, 
presented  a  set  of  recommendations  for  the  regulation  of  shadow  banking.  These 
recommendations are aimed at increasing transparency, reducing moral hazard and limiting 
maturity and liquidity transformation, with the overall goal of striking a balance between the 
efficiency and competition these activities offer and the bank-like risks they pose. 
Critical financial markets seizing up 
(iv) 
An  important  example  of  a  financial  market  seizing  up  was  the  US$600  trillion  over-the-
counter (OTC) derivatives market, which is a critical source of funding and risk management, 
especially for major financial institutions. 
While  the  OTC  derivatives  market  was  not  an  underlying  cause  of  the  financial  crisis,  its 
complexity, opacity and interconnectedness made the crisis worse. 
Creating more robust and continuous OTC derivatives markets 
To increase the transparency and reduce the systemic risk in these markets, the FSB has 
coordinated  the  development  of  policies  to  ensure  that  transactions  are  reported  to  trade 
repositories  and 
through  central 
counterparties, or CCPs. A central counterparty acts as a buyer to every seller and a seller to 
every  buyer  for  the  financial  transactions  that  it  clears.  This  increases  transparency  and 
reduces counterparty credit risk.13 
that  standardized  OTC  derivatives  are  cleared 
Next step: implementation 
The  third  step  in  the  FSB’s  policy  cycle  is  the  implementation  of  these  global  policies  or 
standards at the national level. 
This is the most difficult and time-consuming step because it means taking global minimum 
standards  or  principles  for  financial  sector  regulation  and  adapting  them  for  local 
implementation. This is where the rubber hits the road. 
The  stated  goal  of  the  FSB  is  for  “full,  timely  and  consistent”  implementation  of  global 
standards  at  the  national  level.  Each  of  these  adjectives  is  essential:  they  underscore  the 
importance  of  a  coherent  and  comprehensive  approach  to  regulation  to  create  a  level 
regulatory  playing  field  across  jurisdictions.  The  FSB  and  its  member  agencies  are 
developing a multi-year framework to monitor the implementation of these reforms. 
Implementation  at  the  national  level  typically  requires  several  steps,  including  revising 
existing  laws  or  passing  new  legislation,  and  developing  rules  or  guidelines  for  market 
                                                
13  Central  counterparties  concentrate  and  mutualize  risk  but  don’t  eliminate  it.  Thus,  they  need  stringent 
standards for risk management and oversight. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
participants. Consistency is difficult to achieve because jurisdictions have different legal and 
institutional frameworks that must be modified to meet new global standards. 
Where is Canada in the implementation process? 
Because  Canada’s  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  were  relatively  well  developed 
going  into  the  crisis,  the  extent  of  the  reforms  needed  here  is  less  profound,  but  still 
important. 
Nonetheless, Canada is leading by example. It was one of the first jurisdictions to implement 
the  Basel  III  capital  framework.14  At  the  beginning  of  this  year,  all  major  Canadian  banks 
were expected to meet the stringent Basel III requirements as specified by OSFI – six years 
ahead of the agreed deadline of 1 January 2019.15 
Canada has also made progress in addressing the problem of too big to fail. OSFI recently 
designated  Canada’s  six  largest  banks  as  domestic  systemically  important  banks  and 
required that they hold 1 per cent more capital and be more closely supervised.16 
Market-based  finance  is  generally  viewed  as  less  vulnerable  in  Canada  than  in  other 
jurisdictions, and the Bank of Canada and our partner agencies want to keep it that way. To 
that end, we have participated fully in the FSB’s shadow banking monitoring exercise and will 
work together to consider how best to implement recent FSB recommendations.17,18 
Finally,  we  have  moved  forward  in  the  implementation  of  the  G-20  commitments  for  OTC 
derivatives.  In  fact,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  joined  a  multilateral  arrangement  for  the 
co-operative oversight of LCH.Clearnet’s SwapClear, a global central counterparty based in 
London, England, and the dominant counterparty for clearing Canadian interest rate swaps.19 
As  I  noted,  the  Bank  is  working  closely  with  other  agencies  at  the  federal  and  provincial 
levels  to  implement  the  new  global  standards  within  a  framework  that  is  best  suited  for 
Canada. 
                                                
14  Since the end of 2007, the major Canadian banks have increased their common equity capital by 70 per cent, 
or $67 billion. 
15  The capital levels of Canada’s major banks are now at roughly 9 per cent or higher. Canadian banks are also 
moving  ahead  to  implement  the  recommendations  of  the  FSB-sponsored,  private-sector-led  Enhanced 
Disclosure Task Force. This task force is providing principles and recommendations for improved bank risk 
disclosures so that investors and others will have timely and useful information about the risk undertaken by 
banks. This report is available at: http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/press/pr_121029.pdf. 
16  The recent federal budget proposed that these banks would be subject to a system of bail-in debt that could 
be  used  to  recapitalize  them  should  their  capital  levels  fall  below  the  level  of  non-viability.  This  proposal 
represents an important step in implementing the FSB’s “Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for 
Financial Institutions”. 
17  T. Gravelle, T. Grieder and S. Lavoie, “Monitoring and Assessing Risks in Canada’s Shadow Banking Sector”, 
Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2013): 55?63. 
18  Canada has gone beyond these shadow banking recommendations by establishing and promoting the use of 
a central counterparty for repurchase agreements to reduce counterparty and overall systemic risk and to use 
collateral efficiently by netting exposures. 
19  As of 2 April 2013, the Bank of Canada acted under the Payment Clearing and Settlement Act to designate 
SwapClear as systemically important. Designation brings the system under the formal oversight of the Bank of 
Canada. It also provides the system’s clearing and settlement rules with legal protections under Canadian law, 
including 
finality  of  settlement.  See 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/2013/03/publications/press-releases/bank-canada-designates-swapclear-
payment-clearing/. 
finality  of  payment  and 
those  pertaining 
to  netting, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Closing remarks – maintaining momentum 
As the dark days of the global financial crisis slowly fade in our collective memory, the real 
challenge  is  to  maintain  the  momentum  of  reform,  and,  in  particular,  to  confront  difficult 
cross-border  issues,  especially  with  respect  to  resolving  international  financial  institutions 
and regulating global financial markets. The groundwork is there. The FSB has fostered the 
necessary  co-operation  and  has  made  solid  progress  in  coordinating  the  development  of 
appropriate global policies to address the main weaknesses exposed by the crisis. It is also 
pushing  forward  in  other  directions,  including  reforming  financial  benchmarks,  like  LIBOR, 
improving data collection and information exchange, and achieving a common global set of 
high-quality accounting standards. The G-20 Leaders have recognized the importance of the 
FSB’s  work  and  last  year,  at  the  Los  Cabos  Summit,  took  steps  to  further  strengthen  the 
FSB’s role in coordinating the development and implementation of financial reforms.20 
At  the  recent  G-20  Summit,  Leaders  once  again  affirmed  the  FSB-led  financial  reform 
agenda. Nonetheless, some have argued that, given the weak recovery, now is not the time 
for the broad financial sector reform being promoted by the FSB. That argument is wrong-
headed for several reasons. 
First,  financial  stability  is  an  important  precondition  for  economic  growth.  In  particular,  the 
countries  with  the  strongest  financial  systems  were  the  first  to  recover.  Indeed,  the 
experience of the United States is an important example. U.S. officials took bold measures to 
stress test and recapitalize their banking system. Now, they are reaping the benefits as the 
recovery in the United States gathers momentum. 
Second, the overall coherence of the reforms, their proportionality relative to the risks and 
their  macroeconomic  effects  are  considered  before 
finalized  and 
implemented.21 
Third, concerns about possible adverse effects of these reforms on the financial system and, 
in particular, on market functioning, are being addressed by the fourth step in the FSB policy 
cycle. The FSB regularly and closely monitors the effectiveness of new regulations, keeping 
an eye out for any material unintended consequences. 
As we know only too well, the global economy and, in particular, the global financial system, 
are  highly  integrated.  Canada  learned  that  lesson  during  the  recent  financial  crisis,  when 
adverse  shocks  spread  rapidly  through  financial  channels. We  also  know  that  the  pace  of 
global  financial  and  economic  integration  will  continue  unabated.  Thus,  to  ensure  the 
resilience of the global financial system and, ultimately, of the global economy, we need a 
global organization that can coordinate the necessary efforts, especially across borders, to 
tackle  emerging gaps  and  weaknesses  in financial  regulation  and  supervision  and  thereby 
help to prevent future crises like the one we just experienced. 
For this we have the FSB – a post-financial-crisis institution for a post-financial-crisis world. 
Thank you very much.  
the  reforms  are 
                                                
20  The G-20 Leaders agreed that the FSB’s mandate should be strengthened; that it be given permanent legal 
standing; and that its capacity and resources be increased. 
21  21. See  “Assessing  the  Macroeconomic  Impact  of  the  Transition  to  Stronger  Capital  and  Liquidity 
Requirements”,  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  December  2010;  “Assessment  of  the  Macroeconomic 
Impact  of  Higher  Loss  Absorbency  for  Global  Systemically  Important  Banks”,  Bank  for  International 
Settlements,  October  2011,  and  “Macroeconomic  Impact  Assessment  of  OTC  Derivatives  Regulatory 
Reforms”, Bank for International Settlements, August 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
