Jörg Asmussen: CEEs and the crisis – current challenges and benefits 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the IIF Central and Eastern Europe CEO Conference, Berlin, 29 April 2013. 
 Dear Tim, 
Dear Mr. Fitschen, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for the invitation to join you here today. 
My  initial  remark  today  may  disappoint  some  of  you,  in  particular  the  journalists  who  are 
present:  as  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  will  meet this  week  as  of Wednesday,  our  “self-
imposed one-week blackout period” applies and I will not comment on monetary policy today. 
Speaking as a European Central Banker in front of an audience with first-hand experience of 
how the crisis in the euro area has challenged Central and Eastern Europe, I expect a lot of 
questions. 
“Is  euro  area  membership  really  a  good  idea  for  those  countries?”,  some  people  may  be 
asking, or “Should they not stay out for the time being until the euro area has sorted itself 
out?”. 
The media  are full  of reports  about the  countries  of the  region  postponing their  envisaged 
entry date, or dropping that goal altogether.1 
On top of this, as the euro area tackles the crisis and reforms its policies and institutions, the 
“in-or-out” question has become more complex. 
A country can be outside the monetary union, but still sign up for the fiscal compact, or join 
the soon-to-be-established Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). The line between helpful 
inclusion and potentially damaging exclusion is not so clear any longer. 
But  as  this  audience  knows  better  than  most,  how  these  issues  are  resolved  will  have 
profound implications for businesses in Central and Eastern Europe. The question whether 
or not to join the euro has major economic consequences. The question whether or not to 
join SSM, and the wider Banking Union, could be decisive for financial stability. 
In  light  of  this,  I  would  like  to  focus  my  remarks  today  on  addressing  these  issues.  In 
particular, I want to answer two questions: 
First, is joining the euro area good for growth? 
Second, is joining Banking Union a good idea? 
Is joining the euro area good for growth? 
1.  
Starting with my first question, ‘is joining the euro good for growth’? 
On the surface, the seven central and eastern EU Member States that have not yet adopted 
the euro seem to be doing better by being outside. Their average growth rate for 2012 was 
1%, compared with a contraction of more than 0.5% in the euro area, while in 2011 it was 
3.2%, compared with under 1.5% in the euro area. 
Moreover, I recognise that, at present, the euro area is not an excellent advertisement for 
stability given the difficulties facing a number of its members. 
                                                
1   See FT of 19 April 2013, especially Romania, Bulgaria, possibly also Poland and Hungary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But  I  also  think  it  is  important  not  to  read  too  much  into  the  current  situation.  Its  causes 
derive much more from policy failures – declining competitiveness, unsound fiscal policies, 
weak oversight of banks – than from sharing a single currency per se. The single currency 
did, for example, not harm Estonia, Slovakia or Slovenia during the crisis. To the contrary: 
they benefited in particular of being part of a monetary union with a stable external value of 
the common currency. 
There are at least three reasons why euro membership can still be attractive for EU Member 
States in Central and Eastern Europe – which I will refer to as CEE Member States – that are 
currently outside. 
First, countries that join the euro area from now on will be entering EMU 2.0. The euro area 
has, however painfully, recognised the flaws in its original design, and taken major steps to 
repair them. There are tougher rules for fiscal policies, stronger oversight of macroeconomic 
imbalances, and a lender of last resort for sovereigns in the form of the European Stability 
Mechanism. In other words, the euro area has gone through its difficult initial learning phase, 
and new members will only reap the benefits of that. 
Second,  the  CEE  Member  States  are  already  very  closely  connected  economically  to  the 
euro area. The euro area is by far their main trading partner, accounting for more than half of 
exports and imports in 2012. More than two out of three euros invested in the region come 
from the euro area. This implies that there could be large benefits from sharing a currency, 
not least in lowering transaction costs and removing exchange rate risks. 
Third, for these Member States, tying themselves to the euro area does not mean becoming 
tied to its current problems. A forthcoming ECB study shows how exporters in CEE Member 
States  are  integrated  into  cross-border  production  chains  with  euro  area  companies:  they 
typically  use  machinery  and  components  sourced  from  the  euro  area,  but  sell  the  final 
products around the whole globe. This means that their economic prospects can be insulated 
from weak demand in the euro area, should it persist or reappear in the future. 
Let me also add that for EU candidate countries the benefits of EU membership remain as 
convincing as ever: the acquis is the surest path to modernisation, democracy and the rule of 
law. 
But while the benefits of euro membership are real, like any club, the euro area has rights 
and  it  also  has  obligations.  And  during  the  crisis,  the  obligations  of  membership  have 
become much more clear. 
First,  countries  have  to  be  ready  and  willing  to  join.  By  this  I  mean  they  must  have 
internalised,  in  their  public  debate,  the  requirements  of  being  part  of  a  monetary  union. 
Countries  cannot  join  the  euro  area  but  continue  with  the  same  economic  policies  based 
exclusively  on  national  considerations.  And  this  consensus  needs  to  be  there  before 
membership. 
Second,  while  the  Treaty  prescribes  the  criteria  for  joining  the  euro,  convergence  means 
more  than  meeting  a  set  of  nominal  criteria  at  a  point  in  time.  It  has  to  involve  laying  the 
foundations  to  prosper  in  EMU  over  the  long-term.  There  cannot  be  labour  markets  that 
protect  insiders;  product  markets  that  shield  closed  professions;  education  systems  that 
hinder  innovation;  public  administrations  that  fail  to  collect  tax  or  pay  arrears;  or  judicial 
systems that cannot enforce contracts in reasonable time. 
Countries that join the euro area in the future are in the enviable position of being fully aware 
of  these  obligations.  They  can  prepare  properly  for  membership  and  hence  maximise  the 
benefits. And indeed, many are already doing that. It is somewhat ironic that the exemplars 
for the right kind of policies for euro area membership are mainly found outside it. 
Latvia is the leading example of how to adjust through internal devaluation, and it is a model 
for others in the euro area. Its “V-shaped” economic recovery illustrates what can be done 
with  a  strong  consensus  to  undo  the  excesses  of  the  past.  After  an  initial  fall  in  GDP  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
almost  18%  in  2009,  GDP  increased  by  more  than  11%  from  2010  to  2012,  and 
unemployment has fallen by almost 7 percentage points from its peak. 
And Poland is a case in point of how not to get into difficulties in the first place: it is a country 
with relatively sound macroeconomic fundamentals, which has managed to avoid recession 
and preserve sustainable growth in recent years. 
To sum up, the case for joining the euro area for CEE Member States remains as strong as it 
has always been – if not stronger, because we have now learned the lessons of the first ten 
years. But it is not a decision that should be taken lightly. It means fundamental reform of 
institutions and economic models. And this can only work if the people are ready and willing 
to endorse it. 
Is joining Banking Union a good idea? 
2.  
But as I said at the beginning, the question for CEE Member States is no longer only whether 
to be in or out of the euro. Differentiated integration means joining the euro area is not the 
only way to deepen integration – with Banking Union being the most tangible example at the 
moment. 
This leads me to my second question: ‘is joining Banking Union a good idea’? 
This is of course a question that can only be answered by the authorities in CEE countries 
themselves. However, the facts suggest there would be a number of benefits. 
Financial interconnectedness between the east and west of Europe is extremely high. In fact, 
it  is  unique  in  the  world.  Around  three  quarters  of  bank  assets  in  the  region  are  foreign-
owned, mostly by parent banks from other EU countries. That is three to four times higher 
than in Asia and Latin America. 
Moreover,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  this  interconnectedness  is  very  risky  if  not  properly 
supervised and managed. 
First, in several countries lending activity in the boom years contributed to unsustainable debt 
dynamics in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. For example, annual growth rates of 
private  sector  credit  remained  well  above  40  per  cent  in  Bulgaria,  Romania,  Latvia,  and 
Lithuania in the run-up to the crisis. 
Second,  foreign  banks  spread  the  crisis  symptoms  through  a  reduction  in  cross-border 
lending;  by  deleveraging  from  the  region  once  the  crisis  started.  The  results  were  quite 
unfair, if that is indeed an adjective that should be used here: even those countries where 
excesses had not been as evident as elsewhere were hit by the drying up in cross-border 
capital flows. 
One way to deal with these problems would be to roll back financial integration. But I think 
this is not a very realistic prescription. Financial interconnectedness is here to stay. 
The other response is to “make interconnectedness safer”. And it would seem that there are 
few better ways to do this than to be part of Banking Union. 
Joining  the  SSM,  which  is  a  central  pillar  of  Banking  Union,  would  have  concrete  and 
tangible benefits, not just for individual banks, but also for the financial system of the region 
as a whole. 
Let me give you an example: as you are fully aware, foreign currency lending in some of the 
countries of the region has been a real source of systemic risk. According to the new capital 
framework for banks (CRD IV), the ECB – as newly empowered macro-prudential authority – 
will  be  able,  on  its  own  initiative,  to  pre-emptively  tighten  prudential  capital  requirements 
above EU-level minimums when national systemic risks are detected. 
In other words, not only will the SSM improve detection of emerging financial risks like those 
that caused the crisis, it will provide a stronger set of tools to counter-act them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
But  Banking  Union  is  more  than  just  the  SSM.  It  will  also  create  a  common  approach  to 
restructuring  and  resolution  of  banks  across  Europe.  We  need  a  consistent  set  of  rules, 
including  a  clear  pecking  order,  to  create  certainty  for  investors  and  reassure  depositors. 
Fortunately, progress here is well underway. 
The Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive – which applies to all 27, soon 28, EU countries 
–  is  the  key  first  step.  This  framework  should  enter  into  force  as  soon  as  possible,  and  I 
would like to see the bail-in provisions advanced to 2015 to reduce the cost of bank repair for 
the public purse. 
The next step is to establish a Single Resolution Mechanism, based on a Single Resolution 
Authority and a fund to be financed by the levies on the banking industry itself. This would 
ensure that all banks in the EU – in particular those here in CEE countries – benefit from a 
level playing field, as bank funding costs would not be determined by the soundness of their 
sovereigns, but rather the soundness of their balance sheets and business models. 
However, to move ahead with Banking Union we need urgent clarity about who will actually 
remain outside. Many countries have given indications that they are considering to join the 
SSM.  But  as  the  legislative  process  enters  the  final  stretch,  and  as  our  own  internal 
preparations  are  gearing  up,  it  is  essential  that  those  intentions  become  something  more 
firm. 
Ideally, we should know by July 2013, when the legislation is expected to be finally adopted, 
which countries outside the euro area are committed to join, and by when. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The  euro  area  is  here  to  stay.  It  will  survive  this  crisis,  it  will  emerge from  it  stronger  and 
more countries will join the euro in the future. 
But  it  is  also  unavoidable  that  the  euro  area  will  change.  We  have  to  move  ahead  with 
deeper  integration.  In  a  monetary  union,  the  economic  policies  of  each  country  are  by 
definition  “a  matter  of  common  concern”.  It  is  right  and  legitimate  that  the  euro  area 
establishes much closer oversight of national decisions – for its own sake, and that of the EU 
as a whole. 
This means that, like it or not, the euro area has become the engine of European integration. 
There will be a Europe of different speeds and the euro area will be the fastest. 
But this process is not a threat to the idea of the European Union. As the fiscal compact and 
the SSM show, countries that are willing and able to fulfil the requirements are invited to join. 
Of  course,  for  every  Member  State  the  timing  and  conditions  have  to  be  right  –  but 
personally, I would like to see this sooner rather than later. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
