Benoît Cœuré: Outright Monetary Transactions, one year on 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the conference “The ECB and its OMT programme”, organised by the Centre for Economic 
Policy Research, the German Institute for Economic Research and the KfW Bankengruppe, 
Berlin, 2 September 2013. 
 I am grateful to F. Holm-Hadulla and A. Saint-Guilhem for their contribution to this speech; all views expressed 
remain mine. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
One year after the inception of the ECB’s Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs), financial 
markets in the euro area are in much calmer conditions and fragmentation is receding. Yet, 
OMTs  have  created  turmoil  elsewhere:  in  the  hallways  of  economics  faculties,  newspaper 
commentaries  and,  maybe,  dinner  tables  across  Europe;  today,  it  is  not  government  bond 
spreads but emotions that are running high. 
I very much welcome this debate. It is important for citizens to inform their view on monetary 
policy  decisions,  and  public  debate  among  experts  can  help  them  arrive  at  a  balanced 
assessment. The euro being shared by 330 million Europeans, it is crucial that such debate 
brings  together  different  European  perspectives.  It  cannot  serve  the  euro  well  to  take  a 
parochial view to its future. 
I  am  therefore  grateful  to  the  organisers  for  setting  up  this  conference  and  inviting  me  to 
explain the rationale and key design features of OMTs. 
Let me address three issues – and come back to them in turn: 
• 
First, the necessity of OMTs. Here, I will recall the circumstances that made OMT 
necessary. 
Second, the effectiveness of OMTs. I will explain why OMTs were effective from a 
monetary policy perspective. 
Finally, the robustness of OMTs. I will show that the design of OMTs is robust to the 
criticisms that have been raised in the public debate. 
  Why OMTs are necessary 
So  let  me  start  by  addressing  why  OMTs  are  necessary.  Here,  two  things  have  to  be 
appreciated: first, all ECB’s policy actions and instruments fully serve our objective of price 
stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  and,  second,  one  year  ago,  we  were  facing  serious 
challenges in achieving precisely this objective. So, let me elaborate. 
At  the  time  when  OMTs  were  announced  in  August  2012,  financial  fragmentation  had 
created  widely  divergent  borrowing  costs  for  firms  and  households  across  euro  area 
countries. As a result, the transmission of monetary policy was severely impaired. 
First, we saw impairments to the traditional inter-temporal arbitrage mechanism, which has 
curtailed the effectiveness of our standard monetary policy. 
Second, horizontal and spatial fragmentation – that is, impairments across banks, markets 
and  countries  resulting  from  structural  impairments  have  challenged  monetary  policy 
operating  with  a  single  instrument.  These  dynamics  were  exacerbated  by  an  adverse 
feedback due to the close association of banks and their sovereigns. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
These  two  dimensions  of  fragmentation  have  been  mutually  reinforcing.  For  example,  the 
lack  of  cross-border  liquidity  in  the  interbank market  impaired  the  price-finding  mechanism 
along the yield curve. As a result, our monetary policy impulses were not evenly transmitted 
across countries or adequately along the yield curve. 
Furthermore,  we  saw  the  emergence  of  a  tail-risk  in  the  euro  area,  which  triggered  self-
perpetuating  dynamics  in  the  economy.1  A  “bad  equilibrium”  of  an  adverse  scenario  was 
possible, triggered by self-fulfilling and reinforcing expectations.2 In this adverse scenario, the 
expectation of one or several countries exiting the euro would have driven public and private 
financing  costs  in  these  countries  at  such  a  high  level  that  they  would  have  had  no  other 
option than to actually exit. 
It  is  clear  that  the  root  causes  of  the  adverse  scenario  were  associated  with  substantial 
losses in competitiveness, lack of fiscal sustainability and financial risks in national banking 
sectors. But an additional factor became prominent: redenomination risk, reflecting fears of a 
possible imminent euro area break-up. 
While exchange rate risk across euro area countries should have disappeared permanently 
with  the  creation  of  the  single  currency,  there  were  signs,  since  the  start  of  the  year  and 
increasingly so during the summer 2012, that investors had started pricing in redenomination 
risk. In investors’ perception, the monetary union had turned from a single currency area into 
a  fixed  nominal  exchange  rate  system  cursed  with  the  classical  “peso  problem”.  Investors 
required  an  interest  rate  premium  as  a  compensation  for  the  risk  that  the  euro  might  not 
remain the irreversible currency of the euro area – at least in its current composition. 
Indeed,  redenomination  risk  was  apparent  in  the  market  for  government  bonds.  The 
inversion  of  the  slope  of  the  term  structure  of  sovereign  bond  spreads  observed  in  early 
summer 2012, for instance, for Spain and Italy was consistent with expectations of imminent 
break-up risks. Markets perceived a high probability that obligations may not be repaid in full, 
or  equivalently  be  repaid  in  a  different,  lower-valued  currency,  which  translated  into 
commands  of  higher  spreads.  If  the  probability  of  this  event  concentrates  over  the  short 
horizon, then the cumulative default probability for longer horizons cannot rise much further, 
and inversion of the spread curve necessarily follows. 
Overall,  in  the first  half of  2012, the  pricing  of  redenomination  risk  led to  a  significant  and 
rapid increase in spreads between government bonds in euro area countries. 
These  divergences  could  not  be  explained  by  changes  in  fiscal  or  macroeconomic 
fundamentals. 
For  example,  the  spreads  of  Spanish  and  Italian  ten-year  government  bonds  relative  to 
Germany had increased by 250 basis points and 200 basis points respectively in July 2012 
compared to one year before. 
In  neither  one  of  the  two  countries,  fundamentals  had  changed  so  spectacularly  to  justify 
such drastic re-pricing of sovereign risk. The Italian government had taken measures which 
would  lead  to  a  reduction  in  the  deficit  below  the  reference  value  of  3%.  The  Spanish 
government had just embarked on a series of reforms re-dressing long-standing problems in 
the labour market and in the banking sector. 
Despite  this,  the  compensation  that  investors  were  asking  for  the  risk  to  hold  Spanish  or 
Italian bonds was almost twice as large as one year before. 
                                                
1   This resembled the environment described in the academic literature on second generation currency crises, 
see  M.  Obstfeld  (1986),  “Rational  and  self-fulfilling  balance-of-payments  crises“.  American  Economic 
Review 76 (1), pp. 72–81. 
2   See  G.  Corsetti  and  L.  Dedola,  2013,  “The  Mystery  of  the  Printing  Press:  Self-fullfilling  Debt  Crises  and 
Monetary Sovereignty”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP9358. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The distortions were not limited to long maturities but observed in all segments of the yield 
curve.  For  example,  as  of  July  2012,  the  spreads  on  Spanish  and  Italian  two-year 
government  bonds  relative  to  Germany  were  averaging  around  500  basis  points  and 
400 basis points respectively. 
Why were these sovereign bond market developments relevant from an ECB perspective? 
In any economy, the government bond market plays a prominent role in the transmission of 
monetary  policy  and  ultimately  matters  for  the  effective  achievement  of  the  central  bank’s 
objective – in our case, price stability. 
Changes  in  long-term  government  bond  yields  are  an  important  driver  of  corporate  bond 
yields and bank lending rates – either through arbitrage relations or through sovereign bonds 
directly serving as a benchmark for the pricing of loans and other assets. 
Through this and other channels, the sovereign bond market turmoil rapidly spilled-over to 
banks,  and  ultimately  it  reached  households  and  firms.  As  a  consequence,  the  entire 
economy’s lending conditions deteriorated significantly in the countries under stress. 
The implications of the crisis were not confined to countries under stress but also visible in 
core  euro  area  countries.  With  fears  of  a  euro  area  break  up  growing,  core  euro  area 
economies became the destination of safe haven flows. 
Liquidity was suddenly drying up in stressed countries, threatening to lead to a destructive 
downward spiral of abrupt deleveraging, fire sales and ultimately deflation. By contrast, there 
was  a  risk  that  abundant  liquidity  in  core  countries  would  unduly  drive  down  financing 
conditions  and  fuel  asset  price  bubbles.  In  fact,  as  market  interest  rates  were  surging  in 
countries under stress, they declined in core countries. German two-year government bond 
yields turned negative in early July 2012. 
Deposit outflows and augmented recourse to central bank borrowing as a substitute for the 
lack  of  alternative  funding  were  reflected  in  intra-euro  area  payment  imbalances.  Target 
balances, an indicator of euro area fragmentation and capital market malfunction, reached an 
all-time high at levels above 1,000 billion euro in the summer of 2012, even though current 
account imbalances were already being reduced. 
In this challenging environment, we were losing the steering ability of our monetary policy. 
The single monetary policy had shifted from “one size fits all” to “one size fits none”. 
Let  me  make  a  general  remark  at  this  stage.  How  should  central  bankers  act  in  such  an 
environment? Policy makers have always the option of doing nothing. Within their mandate, 
they  can  choose  responding  actively  to  the  crisis  by  rethinking  and  potentially  revising  the 
appropriate set of policy instruments, or, alternatively, they can be passive. Being passive is, 
however,  not  an  innocent  policy  stance,  but  a  policy  choice  itself  with  potentially  harmful 
implications  for  price  stability.  As  John  F.  Kennedy  once  observed,  “There  are  risks  and 
costs to action. But they are far less than the long range risks of comfortable inaction.” And in 
the  ECB  case,  passivity  is  not  an  option  if  it  means  failing  to  reach  our  objective  of  price 
stability. It is our unequivocal duty, enshrined in the Treaty, to do whatever it takes within our 
mandate to fulfil our objective. 
So how should active monetary policy being conducted in such an environment, within the 
central bank’s mandate? 
First  and  foremost,  monetary  policy  should  aim  at  repairing  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy by reducing fragmentation, insofar it is not related to structural causes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In this respect, it has been argued that reducing fragmentation can imply a redistribution of 
risk in times of crisis.3 For example, central banks can provide insurance policies against a 
tail event associated a catastrophic scenario. The main insight here is that redistribution of 
risk  is  not  a  zero-sum  game,  but  that  the  overall  risk  in  the  economy,  in  our  case  in  the 
monetary union, can be reduced. I agree with this view, but I would also like to stress that 
any such insurance provided by the central bank should come with appropriate safeguards to 
mitigate moral hazard.4 I will come back to that point later. 
As our main policy response to the crisis, we announced our decision to implement OMTs in 
secondary government bond markets. Let me be clear: OMTs are not to interfere with the 
pricing of sovereign bonds on the basis of economic fundamentals and the respective credit 
and  liquidity  risks  of  the  sovereign.  The  goal  of  OMTs  is  a  narrow  one:  to  eliminate 
unwarranted  and  self-reinforcing  fears  of  a  euro  area  breakup  that  have  undermined  our 
ability to effectively conduct monetary policy in the pursuit of price stability. In this respect, 
OMTs are an instrument tailored to the multiple equilibrium problem outlined above. 
Why OMTs are effective 
Have OMT been effective? OMTs were able to address the impairments to the transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  policy,  by  reducing  fragmentation  and  restoring  the  distributional 
neutrality  of  monetary  policy.  It  has  eliminated  fears  of  disaster  events  and  removed 
denomination risk from the market. 
How  was  this  possible  without  spending  a  single  euro?  OMTs  are  an  insurance  device 
against redenomination risk, in the sense of reducing the probability attached to worst-case 
scenarios. As for any insurance mechanism, OMTs face a trade-off between insurance and 
incentives, but their specific design was effective in aligning ex-ante incentives with ex-post 
efficiency. I will come back later to the reasons why OMTs are incentive-compatible. 
So, what is the evidence that OMTs have been effective? One year after the announcement, 
the positive effects of OMTs are visible in several key indicators. 
First,  distortions  on  the  sovereign  debt  markets  have  receded.  Compared  to  their  peak 
before the OMT announcement spreads on ten-year government bonds for Italy and Spain, 
for example, are now back around levels observed in the summer of 2011. Moreover, CDS 
spreads have gone down in all countries. 
Second,  bank  and  firm  borrowing  conditions  have  relaxed.  Corporate  bond  spreads  in 
stressed  countries  have  declined  substantially,  affording  creditworthy  companies  better 
access  to  market  funding.  This  has  been  observed  not  only  for  highly  rated  large 
corporations  but  also  for  other  corporations,  for  the  financial  as  well  as  the  non-financial 
sector. 
Third, banks have been able to re-access the market, for both funding and raising capital. 
Also, the strong divergence in funding costs across countries has fallen. Deposits outflows 
have  been  reversed:  deposits  by  euro  area  residents  at  banks  in  stressed  countries  have 
increased by about 210 billion euros since August 2012. 
These  improvements  in  the  form  of  reduced  fragmentation  can  be  summarized  by  the 
downward trend in Target balances. These have been reduced by about 300 billion euros or 
some 30% decline from their peak one year ago. They have now returned to levels observed 
before the two three-year LTROs at the end of 2011. 
                                                
3   See M. Brunnermeier, and Y. Sannikov, 2012. “Redistributive Monetary Policy”, paper prepared for the 2012 
Jackson Hole Symposium, Princeton University. 
4   See B. Cœuré, 2012. “Central banking, insurance and incentives”, speech at the ECB conference on “Debt, 
Growth and Macroeconomic Policies” Frankfurt, 6 December. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In sum, these indicators point to significant benefits from OMT for corporations, banks as well 
as individuals in all euro area countries. 
Fears of a possible euro area break-up have receded and impairments to the transmission 
mechanism have been partly reduced. 
Why OMTs are robust 
Does this favourable market response mean that OMTs do not raise concerns? The answer 
is:  no,  but  these  concerns  have  been  intensely  discussed  in  the  Governing  Council,  and 
adequately mitigated. 
The  relaxation  of  financial  turmoil  is,  in  itself,  not  sufficient  for  a  positive  assessment  of 
OMTs. 
In fact, for OMTs to be successful, they have to not only eliminate risk in the market, but they 
have to do so in a controlled and incentive compatible way. 
It has been argued that: 
• 
• 
first, government bond purchases undermine incentives for reform at national level; 
second,  government  bond  purchases  expose  the  ECB  to  balance  sheet  risk  that 
may eventually lead to fiscal redistribution among euro area countries; and 
and  third,  government  bond  purchases  violate  the  monetary  financing  prohibition 
because it directly affects the conditions at which governments can issue debt. 
 I  don’t  address  here  a  fourth  objection,  namely  that  buying  government  bonds  would  be 
conducive to a higher inflation. The ECB has all instruments at hand to retain control of its 
monetary stance, whether OMTs are activated or not. 
Let me explain how OMTs address each of these concerns. 
Incentives for reform 
The argument on incentive compatibility goes as follows: sovereign bond markets act as a 
disciplining  device;  if  governments  adopt  imprudent  economic  policies  they  face  higher 
interest rates in the market; as a consequence, they are forced to take corrective action.5 
But  the  incentive  for  such  corrective  action  is  undermined  if  the  central  bank  shields 
governments from market pressure. In this case, governments can, to some extent, choose 
whether they adopt painful fiscal and structural adjustment – or delay their reform efforts and 
just count on further support from the central bank. 
On a general level, this argument is convincing. Certainly, the euro area needs an active and 
freely  functioning  government  bond  market,  and  lack  of  market  discipline  was  one  of  the 
failures that have led to the crisis. 
But when applying it to the case at hand, one should not ignore the most important feature of 
OMTs, namely: its explicit link to policy conditionality. 
This feature distinguishes OMTs from other historical episodes of central bank intervention in 
government bond markets. And it renders the argument on incentive incompatibility invalid. 
This  is  because  conditionality  removes  the  privilege  for  governments  to  choose  between 
economic adjustment and central bank intervention. 
                                                
5   This  line  of  reasoning  has  also  received  empirical  support.  See,  for  example,  O.  de  Groot,  Holm-Hadulla, 
F. and  Leiner-Killinger,  N.  (2012).  “Cost  of  borrowing  shocks  and  fiscal  adjustment”.  ECB  Working  Paper 
No. 1503. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Even  if  the  ECB  were  to  decide  –  at  its  full  discretion  –  to  buy  bonds  under  OMTs, 
governments  will  have  to  continue  their  reform  efforts  as  required  by  the  respective  ESM 
programme  and  by  IMF  involvement.  Otherwise,  they  would  simply  become  ineligible  for 
OMTs. Hence, no reforms, no OMTs. 
In fact, the policy conditionality not only aligns incentives in the countries already subject to 
an ESM programme. It also aligns incentives in countries that are at risk of requiring support. 
This  is  because,  in  the  programme  context,  national  authorities  face  a  substantial  loss  of 
sovereignty  with  regard  to  economic  policy.  The  political  cost  related  to  this  loss  of 
sovereignty constitutes a forceful deterrent. 
Indeed, the experience with existing EU/IMF programmes shows that governments request 
official assistance only if it is strictly unavoidable through own efforts. 
In other words, there is no incentive for governments to wait and do nothing until they move 
into  an  ESM  programme.  By  contrast,  they  have  an  incentive  to  put  all  their  efforts  into 
solving their problems without having to request a programme. 
Besides, purchases under OMTs are limited to shorter dated bonds, namely, up to the three 
year tenor. Government yields at longer maturities would be entirely determined by market 
forces, and at shorter maturities, fear of the programme running off-track and OMT eligibility 
being lost would be reflected in market prices. 
Overall,  these  considerations  demonstrate  that  OMTs  do  not  eliminate  the  market  as  a 
disciplining device for governments. What OMTs do is to complement the market, which in 
the current crisis has been abrupt and unreliable, by another incentive mechanism. 
Risks to the ECB balance sheet 
Let me turn to the second argument, which is related to the ECB’s risk exposure. Thus far, 
we are in the comfortable situation that desirable effects of OMTs have materialised without 
a  single  euro  being  spent.  In  fact,  risks  to  the  balance  sheet  of  the  ECB  have  vastly 
decreased  since  mid-2012,  thanks  to  the  convergence  in  yields  and  marked  decrease  in 
central bank borrowing. 
But indeed: once we were to conduct bond purchases under OMTs, the Eurosystem would 
assume the concomitant balance sheet risk. 
Under an extreme scenario with the default of the sovereign concerned, the resulting losses 
would have to be shared across the Eurosystem. Ultimately, this could indeed constitute a 
transfer of risk among euro area countries. 
Let me make three remarks on this: 
First, it is precisely the existence of OMT that contains the risk of such catastrophic scenario 
to materialise, since: 
• 
by its very existence OMT eliminates the undue spread components and hence self-
fulfilling default trajectories. 
through conditionality OMT fosters incentives for sound economic and fiscal policies. 
and by focusing on bonds with shorter residual maturity, it limits the duration of the 
risk exposure to a given creditor. 
 Second,  any  risk  comes  with  a  reward.  Under  a  successful  OMT  programme,  interest 
payments  on  the  bonds  purchased  by  the  ECB  amount  to  a  transfer  from  the  benefiting 
country to the ECB, then to the national central banks. 
Third, and more fundamentally, one can argue that a certain transfer of risk among different 
geographical  areas  is  inevitable  and  inherent  in  the  implementation  of  a  single  monetary 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
policy for any currency area. Indeed, for the euro area geographically diverse risk exposure 
is not new and has always been part of the way we conduct and implement monetary policy. 
Think,  for  example,  about  our  main  instrument  for  monetary  policy:  collateralised  liquidity 
provision via our repo operations with banks. 
Here, the  decision  on  the  geographical  allocation  of  liquidity  across  countries  is  not  at  the 
discretion of the ECB: it is essentially market-driven and depends on the liquidity needs of 
the banks. Hence the transfer of risk across countries is inherent. 
Moreover, the transfer of risk is inevitable because a decentralised allocation of liquidity is a 
pre-condition  for  achieving  our  mandate  of  price  stability.  If  we  were  to  impose  a  specific 
distribution of liquidity across countries we would have to renege on our mandate. In sum, 
and  as  discussed  above,  monetary  policy  can  be  redistributive  provided  that  it  aims  at 
restoring distributive neutrality. 
For OMT, it is in essence the same as for our standard framework. 
The  transfer  of  risks  is  inherent  to  the  motivation  of  OMT  because  sources  of  impaired 
monetary policy transmission are unevenly distributed geographically. 
It  is  inevitable  because  imposing  constraints  on  OMT  due  to  risk  sharing  considerations 
would weaken its effectiveness and hamper the ECB in its pursuit of price stability. 
Let me say a more general word on the distributional neutrality of monetary policy6. Central 
banks are untrusted with a narrow mandate and, being independent, they are shielded from 
representative  politics.  They  should  refrain  from  engaging  in  income  redistribution,  which 
should be sanctioned by Parliaments. This does not imply that monetary policy actions do 
not have distributive consequences – in fact, they always have. But these are side-effects of 
a strategy that aim at ensuring price stability, which is by essence neutral as regards income 
distribution. OMTs are just an aspect of such a strategy. The emergence of redenomination 
risk resulted into a situation where monetary policy decisions were not evenly transmitted to 
specific  market  segments  and  regions  in the  euro  area.  OMTs supported  the  distributional 
neutrality of our monetary policy by addressing the underlying impairments. 
The prohibition of monetary financing 
A  final  concern  that  has  been  raised  regarding  OMTs  is  whether  it  violates  the  monetary 
financing prohibition. Let me focus on the economic aspects. 
The economic rationale of the monetary financing prohibition is clear: as history has shown, 
central  banks  cannot  ensure  price  stability  if  they  have  to  permanently  make  up  for  weak 
performance in other policy domains. Article 123 TFEU transports this historical lesson into 
the architecture of EMU. 
The aim and design of OMTs are in full respect of this economic requirement. To see this, we 
again have to recall the concrete design elements of OMTs. 
The first design element that’s relevant here is, once more, the link to conditionality. 
As  mentioned  before,  the  link  to  policy  conditionality  of  an  ESM  programme  ensures  that 
central  bank  intervention  under  OMTs  does  not  replace  reform  efforts  by  other  policy 
domains. 
Instead, OMT can – by design – only be a complement to national reform efforts. 
Hence, the design of OMTs clearly prevents a scenario of harmful central bank support, or 
fiscal dominance over the central bank that has motivated the monetary financing prohibition; 
                                                
6   For  a  detailed  discussion,  see  B.  Cœuré  (2013),  “Monetary  policy  in  a  fragmented  world”,  speech  at  the 
41st Economic Conference of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank. Vienna, 10 June. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
that is: the central bank intervenes, although – or even because – other economic policies 
fail to deliver. 
The second element to keep in mind is the rationale of OMT. 
To  be  clear:  OMT  would  never  be  used  to  indiscriminately  push  down  government  bond 
spreads.  By  contrast,  spreads  should  continue  to  reflect  the  underlying  country  specific 
economic  fundamentals,  fiscal  positions  and  market  risk  perceptions  that  incentivise 
governments  to  engage  in  sustainable  fiscal  spending  and  competitiveness  enhancing 
structural reforms. 
Hence also on this count, OMT does not correspond to the harmful scenario that motivated 
the  monetary  financing  prohibition;  a  scenario,  in  which  the  very  purpose  of  central  bank 
intervention is to reduce yields below the fundamentally justified level so as to preserve debt 
sustainability despite weak policy performance. 
The  aim  of  OMTs  is  the  exact  opposite:  a  deterioration  of  fundamentals  would  induce  the 
ECB to lower or even stop OMT intervention. OMTs would only aim at that portion of bond 
yield spreads that are not fundamentally justified and based on undue risks of a euro area 
break up. 
As I have said elsewhere7, central bank independence and a clear focus on price stability are 
necessary  but  not  sufficient  to  ensure  monetary  dominance.  The  fiscal  authority  must  be 
ready and willing to adjust its revenues and primary spending to stabilise its debt at any level 
of  the  interest  rate  that the  central  bank may  choose.  In  academic  parlance, for  monetary 
policy to remain active, fiscal policy needs to be passive, or “Ricardian”8. 
By creating the right environment, and providing appropriate incentives, for governments to 
take  action  to  ensure  fiscal  solvency,  OMTs  create  the  conditions  to  affirm  the  monetary 
dominance regime which is at the heart of the Treaty. 
Conclusion 
Let me just conclude, by repeating: OMTs are necessary from a monetary policy perspective; 
they were effective in counteracting the destructive market turmoil in the summer of last year; 
and  they  are  designed  in  a  way  that  overcomes  the  key  concerns  associated  with 
government bond purchases by the central bank. 
OMTs  are  not  just  words:  the  ECB  is  fully  prepared  to  use  them.  But  even  if  euro  area 
member states comply with the conditions, there is no automatism to activate OMTs. For the 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  there  is  only  one  single  deciding  criterion  and  that  is  the 
maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  This  overarching  criterion  has  shaped  the 
design of OMTs, and it will decide over its potential activation. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                
7   See  B.  Cœuré  (2012),  “Challenges  to  the  single  monetary  policy  and  the  ECB  response”,  speech  at  the 
Institut d’études politiques. Paris, 20 September. 
8   See  E.  Leeper  (1991),  “Equilibria  under  ‘active’  and  ‘passive’  monetary  and  fiscal  policies”,  Journal  of 
Monetary  Economics,  27,  pp.  129–147;  and  M.  Woodford  (2001),  “Fiscal  requirements  for  price  stability”, 
NBER Working Paper, No. 8072. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
