Timothy Lane: Financial stability in one country? 
Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Weatherhead 
Center 
International  Affairs,  Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts, 
11 February 2013. 
for 
 Introduction 
During the years since the global financial crisis, financial reforms have been moving forward 
on  two  distinct  levels.  The  G-20  leaders’  commitment  to  build  a  more  stable  and  resilient 
global financial system is being advanced through an ambitious global reform agenda. At the 
same  time,  policy-makers  in  each  country  are  implementing  reforms  intended  to  establish 
more stable and resilient systems in their respective jurisdictions. 
Financial  stability  in  each  country  is,  of  course,  an  essential  ingredient  of  global  financial 
stability: policies to achieve financial stability in different jurisdictions are in most cases highly 
complementary, as a stable global financial system is made up of stable national financial 
systems. But tensions do sometimes arise between these two objectives. At the root of these 
tensions  is  the  pervasiveness  of  cross-border  spillovers  –  both  from  the  risks  affecting 
financial stability and from some of the reforms designed to mitigate those risks. 
In Canada – an open economy where the financial system is closely linked with those of the 
United States and other countries – we have a privileged vantage point on these issues. Our 
experience  during  the  global  financial  crisis  and  its  aftermath  is  a  reminder  that  financial 
stability at the national level cannot be fully secured in the face of economic and financial 
shocks  originating  elsewhere.  Financial  instability  speaks  all  languages  and  carries  many 
passports. 
Furthermore,  financial  reforms  have  important  cross-border  implications  that  need  to  be 
addressed to ensure that these reforms have their intended benefits. Thus, financial stability 
is a shared responsibility that must be advanced through international cooperation. Reforms 
agreed  to  at  the  global  level  need  to  be  implemented  fully  and  consistently  in  each 
jurisdiction. 
In my remarks today, I am going to draw on Canada’s experience of the past few years to 
illustrate  these  points.  First,  I  will  review  how  Canada  fared  during  the  financial  crisis. 
Second, I will discuss the risks to Canada’s financial stability that have emerged in the wake 
of  the  crisis.  Third,  I  will  focus  on  some  important  cross-border  elements  of  the  reform 
agenda. 
Canada and the crisis 
It’s  now  well  known  that  Canada  came  through  the  financial  crisis  better  than  many  other 
major  advanced  economies,  with  a  relatively  short  and  shallow  recession  and  a  relatively 
strong recovery. It is now over two years since Canada regained its pre-recession level of 
both real GDP and employment (Chart 1). 
An important reason Canada fared better than other countries was that our financial system 
was more robust. Canada’s banking system was rated “the soundest in the world” by  The 
Banker magazine three years in a row, from 2008 to 2010. No Canadian financial institutions 
failed – or had to be rescued by taxpayers – during the crisis. Leading up to the crisis, our 
banks were less leveraged, less dependent on wholesale financing, and less exposed to the 
structured financial products that brought down some of their peers in other countries. This in 
turn reflected, at least in part, Canada’s tougher regulatory standards and stricter supervision 
and  oversight.  Canada’s  established  policy  framework  and  strong  fiscal  position  gave  the 
authorities considerable room for manoeuvre when the crisis struck. These strengths, in turn, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
were  the  legacy  of  the  harsh  lessons  Canada  learned  during  the  1980s  and  1990s  from 
failures of two small banks and our own sovereign debt problem. 
Nonetheless, Canada’s financial stability came under stress during the crisis. Serious risks 
materialized,  and  had  to  be  countered  by  timely  and  aggressive  policy  action.  Liquidity 
conditions  in  Canada’s  core  funding  markets  –  although  not  as  extreme  as  in  other 
jurisdictions  –  became  very  tight:  in  the  climate  of  fear  following  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers, many Canadian institutions had difficulty obtaining funding (Chart 2). 
In  response,  the  Bank  of  Canada  provided  substantial  short-term  liquidity  support  to  the 
financial system: we made this support available to a broader group of institutions, for longer 
terms, and against a wider range of collateral than under normal conditions. 
During this period, the Canadian government also provided longer-term funding to Canadian 
banks to prevent a severe credit crunch in the private sector (Chart 3).1 
As  a  result  of  these  actions,  Canada’s  core  funding  markets  stayed  open,  and  credit  kept 
flowing to the private sector (Chart 4). 
As  the  global  crisis  gave  way  to  the  Great  Recession,  Canada’s  economy  suffered  the 
consequences – mainly through a collapse in exports to the United States, which was in a 
deep recession. Canada lost output amounting to more than 4 per cent of real GDP and job 
losses  equivalent  to  almost  2  1/2  per  cent  of  our  labour  force.  But  an  aggressive  policy 
response  helped  to  prevent  a  worse  outcome.  The  Bank  of  Canada  eased  policy 
substantially in order to achieve its 2 per cent inflation target: it lowered the overnight policy 
rate to its lowest possible level (1/4 per cent) and took the unconventional step of making a 
conditional commitment to hold it there for more than a year (Chart 5). 
Complementing  this  monetary  policy  response,  the  government  introduced  a  broad-based 
fiscal stimulus package amounting to about 3 1/2 per cent of GDP. While the recession did 
put  stress  on  the  financial  system  –  in  particular,  a  tightening  of  credit  conditions  and  an 
increase in loan losses – the short duration of Canada’s recession kept more serious threats 
to financial stability at bay. 
Global deleveraging and Canada’s unbalanced expansion 
The years since the crisis have brought a different set of challenges to financial stability in 
Canada.  History  teaches  us  that  recoveries  after  a  financial  crisis  are  slower  than  those 
following  normal  recessions  –  a  pattern  that  has  been  well  documented,  in  particular,  by 
Harvard professors Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff.2 Typically, it takes output twice as 
long to return to its pre-recession level after a financial crisis as in a normal recovery, and 
potential output is permanently lower compared with its pre-crisis growth trajectory. This is 
because the legacy of a financial crisis is a lot of debt. Working off that debt – in other words, 
deleveraging – drags down the economy. 
The  recession  following  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  has  run  true  to  form.  In  a  world 
awash in debt, repairing the balance sheets of banks, households and governments can take 
years. In the United States and many other advanced economies, households are no longer 
the engine of growth that they were before the crisis, since they have been curtailing their 
spending  to  rebuild  the  wealth  lost  in  the  housing  crash.  While  much  progress  has  been 
                                                 
1   Government support was provided through the Insured Mortgage Purchase Program (IMPP), which allowed 
the  commercial  banks  to  sell  insured  residential  mortgages  to  the  federal  government-owned  Canada 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation. This program made available a potential Can$125 billion, although only 
about Can$70 billion was used. 
2   C.  Reinhart  and  K.  Rogoff,  “This  Time  Is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly”  (Princeton,  N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 2009). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
made,  household  deleveraging  has  hobbled  private  sector  growth.  In  many  countries, 
financial  institutions  have  also  been  restraining  their  lending  because  of  the  losses  they 
incurred and the need to become less heavily leveraged. And a number of governments too 
have  been  restricting  their  spending  and  raising  taxes,  aiming  to  restore  sustainable  fiscal 
positions. 
This process of deleveraging in other advanced economies creates significant challenges for 
Canada’s financial stability. Specifically, the slow growth path resulting from deleveraging in 
our largest trading partner – the United States – creates a headwind to Canada’s economy. 
This  headwind  has,  in  particular,  been  holding  back  Canada’s  exports,  which  are  far  from 
recovering from their plunge at the start of the recession. As a result, Canada has relied on 
domestic  demand  –  mainly  spending  by  households  –  to  achieve  even  a  modest  rate  of 
economic growth (Chart 6). 
Although it’s better to have unbalanced growth than no growth, this pattern does pose certain 
risks. Consumers have taken advantage of the stimulative financial conditions, including low 
borrowing costs and easy availability of financing, that were put in place to counterbalance 
the external headwinds. In doing so, they have pushed household debt to levels that pose a 
significant risk (Chart 7). 
The proportion of households with stretched financial positions that leave them vulnerable to 
an adverse shock has grown significantly in recent years. These conditions are also reflected 
in stretched valuations in some segments of Canada’s housing market. Also, more houses 
are being built than are needed given demographic trends (Chart 8). 
These  developments  have  led  to  a  significant  buildup  of  vulnerabilities  in  Canada’s 
household  sector.  The  risk  is  that  any  shock  to  economic  conditions  could  be  amplified 
through  a  deterioration  of  housing  market  conditions  and  a  retrenchment  of  household 
spending.  These  conditions  could  then  be  transmitted  to  the  broader  financial  system 
through a worsening of the credit quality of loans. This could prompt a tightening of credit 
conditions and, in turn, set off a mutually reinforcing deterioration in real activity and financial 
stability. 
While  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  characterized  these  household  vulnerabilities  as  the  most 
important domestic source of risk to Canada’s financial stability, the origins of this risk are 
only partly domestic: it is also an after-effect of the global crisis. The crisis gave rise to global 
deleveraging and weak growth that created headwinds to Canada’s economy. In the face of 
those headwinds, very stimulative monetary policy has been needed to achieve the inflation 
target.  And  that  prolonged  stimulative  policy  –  “low  for  long”  –  creates  significant  risks  to 
financial stability. 
I’ve highlighted the risks associated with the household sector, but low-for-long interest rates 
can  lead  to  risks  elsewhere  in  the  financial  system.  Periods  of  low  interest  rates  may,  in 
some circumstances, trigger a “search for yield” driving excessive risk-taking – often through 
investment strategies whose risks are not well understood. 
Until  recently,  this  tendency  toward  excessive  risk-taking  has  been  kept  in  check  by  the 
climate of fear in the post-crisis global financial system – and an acute awareness of some 
important tail risks. Market participants have been concerned about the euro area crisis, the 
fiscal cliff in the United States, and the possibility of a hard landing in China. In the past few 
months,  extreme  negative  outcomes  appear  less  likely,  and  market  participants  have 
regained confidence. While it is good news that the tail risks have diminished, it also means 
that  it  is  now  becoming  even  more  important  to  monitor  financial  institutions’  risk-taking 
behaviour. 
The risks of household imbalances, as well as other risks associated with low for long, can 
be addressed in several ways. First, households, financial institutions and investors need to 
make prudent decisions. More normal times will return, and with them more normal interest 
rates and costs of borrowing. It is the responsibility of households to ensure that they can 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
service  tomorrow  the  debts  they  take  on  today.  As  for  investors,  they  are  responsible  for 
managing the risks they face. Financial institutions also have a responsibility to make sure 
that their clients can service their debts and more broadly, that they understand the risks to 
which they are exposed. 
Among  the  policy  measures  that  can  be  used  to  address  emerging  financial  system 
vulnerabilities, targeted prudential measures are often the best. The Canadian government 
has tightened regulations pertaining to government-backed insured mortgages four times – 
most  recently  in  2012.3  These  changes  involve  more  stringent  requirements  to  qualify  for 
mortgages,  shorter  amortization  periods  and  lower  maximum  loan-to-value  ratios  for 
mortgages.  In  addition,  the  prudential  regulator  has  recently  issued  guidelines  for  the 
mortgage underwriting standards of lenders. If such targeted prudential measures turned out 
to  be  insufficient,  monetary  policy  could  also  be  used,  within  a  flexible  inflation-targeting 
framework, as a complementary instrument to address financial imbalances. So far, though, 
that has not been necessary in Canada. 
The  growth  of  household  credit  has  shown  signs  of  moderating  in  recent  months.  The 
momentum in house price growth, sales of existing homes, and new construction has also 
moderated.  Nonetheless,  financial  system  risks  associated  with  household  imbalances 
remain elevated. And it is possible either that household spending could regain momentum 
or that a more sudden weakening could occur. 
Think globally, act locally 
So far, I have been using Canada’s experience during and after the global financial crisis to 
illustrate the cross-border dimension of the threats to financial stability. Now I would like to 
talk  about  the  cross-border  dimension  of  the  reform  agenda  and  how  it  intersects  with 
national priorities and policy-making. Unprecedented in scope, the direction of reform is often 
agreed at the global level, but where the rubber hits the road is usually at the national – and 
in some cases even provincial or state-level. 
In this context, one salient feature of the financial reforms is that they will not only benefit the 
jurisdiction where they are implemented, but also other jurisdictions. If we look at the costs 
and benefits of the Basel III reforms to increase capital at financial institutions, we see that 
reforms impose costs on banks which may in part be passed on to their customers through 
wider  spreads  between  deposit  and  lending  rates  –  in  turn  generating  some  broader 
macroeconomic effects. At the same time, evidence suggests that higher capital standards 
reduce the frequency and severity of financial crises. 
Research at the Bank of Canada indicates that, on balance, the benefits will far outweigh the 
costs:  Basel  III,  by  improving  the  safety  and  robustness  of  the  Canadian  and  international 
financial  systems,  should  yield  a  net  economic  benefit  to  Canada  equivalent  to  about 
13 per cent of GDP in present-value terms. But here is the key point: three-quarters of the 
prospective benefits for Canada arise from the decrease in the probability of financial crises 
in other countries – and only one-quarter from the reduced probability of a financial crisis in 
Canada  itself.4  Similar  logic  would  apply  to  the  United  States  and  other  countries,  but  the 
arithmetic is particularly compelling for a smaller open economy like Canada. 
These calculations go a long way in explaining why Canada is so committed to the global 
reform  process  –  and  to  ensuring  that  reforms  are  fully  implemented  in  all  jurisdictions. 
Canada has already put in place Basel III capital standards. While there have been delays in 
                                                 
3   See  Bank  of  Canada,  Financial  System  Review,  Box  2,  Table  2-A,  “Mortgage  Insurance  Rules  in  Canada” 
(December 2012): 24. 
4   Bank  of  Canada,  “Strengthening  International  Capital  and  Liquidity  Standards:  A  Macroeconomic  Impact 
Assessment for Canada” Bank of Canada (August 2010). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
some  other  jurisdictions,  the  largest  financial  institutions  in  the  United  States  are  already 
Basel III compliant, in terms of capital. We trust that other jurisdictions will continue to move 
forward  to  implement  these  agreed  standards.  To  help  ensure  that  they  do  –  under  the 
principle “trust but verify” – a robust peer-review mechanism has been established to track 
how jurisdictions are progressing in living up to their G-20 financial reform commitments. 
All financial reform is local 
Some of the reforms taking place at the national level mainly involve the implementation of 
what  has  been  agreed  at  the  international  level.  Clearly,  in  putting  these  international 
standards in place, individual countries need to align them with their own financial structures 
and circumstances. 
In  some  jurisdictions  –  the  United  States,  the  European  Union  and  the  United  Kingdom  – 
reform  has  also  been  proceeding  somewhat  independently  of  the  global  process.  A 
prominent example in the United States is the Dodd-Frank Act which was passed into law in 
2010 and is still in the process of being implemented through extensive rule making. Different 
approaches to achieving broadly similar objectives are being followed in the European Union, 
the United Kingdom and Japan. 
While the various national reform agendas have essentially the same objectives as the global 
agenda  –  a  safe  and  efficient  financial  system  –  there  can  be  tensions  between  them, 
including  conflicts,  inconsistencies  and  overlaps,  which  can  affect  financial  institutions  and 
their clients operating across national borders. 
Reforms of over-the-counter derivatives trades are a good example. The United States and 
Europe  are  taking  a  leadership  position  and  pushing  ahead  with  legislation  in  this  area. 
Conflicts  in  national  regulation  may  arise,  in  which  the  rules  of  one  jurisdiction  cannot  be 
followed without contravening a requirement in another. For example, trade reporting rules 
proposed by the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission may require data that could 
violate  privacy  and  information  laws  in  some  other  countries.  Inconsistencies  may  occur 
when requirements apply to certain products or participants in one country, but not in others. 
Non-financial  companies,  for  example,  may  or  may  not  be  exempt  from  central  clearing 
obligations  depending  on  the  country.  Even  in  the  absence  of  such  conflicts  and 
inconsistencies,  duplicate  obligations  across  jurisdictions  may  increase  compliance  costs, 
undermining economic efficiency. 
National  legislation  can  also  have  extra-territorial  effects.  An  example  is  the  Volcker  Rule 
banning  proprietary  trading  by  deposit-taking  institutions,  which  is  being  introduced  in  the 
United States as part of the Dodd-Frank legislation. Under the regulations initially proposed, 
any  foreign  financial  institution  with  operations  in  the  United  States  would  be  required  to 
comply with the proprietary trading ban on its worldwide operations. Here, the intention is to 
prevent institutions from shifting activities offshore in a bid to avoid the ban on proprietary 
trading.  Moreover,  U.S.  government  bonds  were  exempted  from  the  rule,  while  other 
sovereign  bonds  were  not.  Thus,  for  example,  Canadian  financial  institutions’  trading  in 
Canadian government bonds could be restricted under U.S. law. 
These proposed regulations have raised concerns that U.S. law could dictate the structure of 
major financial institutions in many other jurisdictions. Other jurisdictions – including Canada 
–  have  objected,  both  because  they  do  not  wish  to  have  U.S.  law  applied  to  the  primarily 
domestic operations of their institutions, and also because they do not agree that the Volcker 
Rule  is  the  only  –  or  the  most  effective  way  to  prevent  excessive  risk-taking  in  financial 
institutions. 
An essential element of resolving potential tensions is mutual recognition: each jurisdiction 
should  have  a  sufficiently  strong  regime  that  other  jurisdictions  can  accept  as  broadly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
equivalent, eliminating the need to impose their own rules across borders.5 The foundation of 
mutual  recognition  is  to  have  generally  accepted  global  standards  together  with  a  robust 
peer-review  mechanism  to  ensure  that  those  standards  are  applied  consistently  across 
jurisdictions. 
Collaborative resolution 
Given  the  interconnectedness  of  financial  institutions,  collaboration  is  a  key  element  of 
implementing  reforms.  One  area  where  collaboration  is  particularly  important  is  in  the 
resolution  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  –  those  deemed  “too  big  to  fail.” 
Designing a clear framework for resolution has been a priority of the global financial reform 
agenda. Owing to the size and complexity of cross-border linkages in banking and financial 
markets, when a major financial institution or market is impaired in one country, shocks can 
quickly  spread  to  the  financial  systems  of  other  countries.  During  the  crisis,  differences  in 
rules – and in interests – across jurisdictions impeded the resolution of financial institutions 
such as Lehman Brothers. 
In this light, it is essential to have a clear basis for cross-border collaboration in the resolution 
process.  For  banks 
(G?SIBs), 
crisis-management groups have largely been established to provide a forum for the ongoing 
exchange  of  information  and  the  coordination  of  recovery  and  resolution  measures.  The 
G-SIBs are preparing “recovery and resolution plans” that would facilitate an orderly winding 
up  of  the  institution  if  that  becomes  necessary.  Achieving  the  most  beneficial  level  of 
co-operation for cross-border resolution, however, is a challenge. While the establishment of 
the crisis-management groups is an essential element in the process, much remains to be 
done. 
identified  as  globally 
systemically 
important 
Financial protectionism 
The issues I have raised, the cross-border dimensions of both financial instability and reform, 
could  have  another  unintended  result:  that  of  a  more  fragmented  global  financial  system. 
This tendency – as reflected, for example, in the decline in cross-border financing since the 
crisis – stems naturally from the greater perceived risks of cross-border financial activities, 
together with regulations that seek to protect domestic financial systems (Chart 9). 
A  reduction  in  cross-border  interconnectedness  may  help  to  reduce  contagion,  but  an 
unintended  consequence  could  be  excessive  concentration  and  interconnectedness  within 
countries. More generally, barriers to the movement of capital may carry a significant cost, in 
the  form  of  lost  economic  efficiency  and  growth.  From  a  global  perspective,  these 
considerations need to be balanced carefully. 
If  we  look  at  the  deleveraging  of  financial  institutions,  a  necessary  step  as  they  repair 
balance  sheets  and  meet  new  regulations,  we  see  that  how  they  deleverage  can  lead  to 
fragmentation. 
For  instance,  in  the  European  Union,  national  regulators  have  discouraged  banks  from 
deleveraging  through  restricting  credit  in  their  own  respective  jurisdictions.  Partly  for  this 
reason,  a  number  of  banks,  particularly  in  the  euro  area,  have  been  withdrawing  from 
international  activity.  In  part,  this  has  also  meant  increasing  banks’  exposure  to  their  own 
sovereigns – a major channel amplifying stress during the recent euro-area crisis. 
                                                 
5   One  example  of  mutual  recognition  is  the  jurisdictional  reciprocity  for  internationally  active  banks  in  the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  framework.  See  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  “Guidance  for 
national authorities operating the countercyclical capital buffer” (December 2010): 5. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A  second  source  of  fragmentation  is  the  potential  conflict  between  rules  in  different 
jurisdictions. To the extent that conflicting, duplicate and/or extra-territorial regulations make 
cross-border  activity  disproportionately  costly,  they  may  create  incentives  for  financial 
institutions to concentrate their activities in their own jurisdictions. 
Fragmentation can also occur from explicit financial protectionism. Some emerging market 
economies, for example, have sought to insulate their own financial systems from turbulent 
global financial conditions through a range of measures designed to constrain cross-border 
capital  flows,  including  capital  controls  which  in  some  cases  are  accompanied  by  foreign 
exchange  market  intervention.  The  adoption  of  such  measures  by  a  number  of  countries 
could result in a greater concentration of risk in national economies and ultimately undermine 
global economic growth. 
Conclusion 
The global reform agenda, which is critical to financial stability across countries, will need, by 
its very nature, to be underpinned by global cooperation. New standards agreed upon at the 
international  level  must  be  implemented  at  the  national  level.  As  we  move  past  the 
policy-development  phase,  processes  are  being  put  in  place  to  monitor  implementation, 
including cross-country peer reviews of specific standards by the Financial Stability Board. 
Domestic reform initiatives are equally important, but need to be harmonized in an integrated 
world.  If  conflicts  and  inconsistencies  arise  from  the  requirements  of  different  jurisdictions, 
these initiatives may not succeed in establishing a safer global financial system. 
Financial  stability  is  necessary  for  sustainable  economic  growth.  But  it’s  a  public  good:  its 
benefits are widely shared. Can it be achieved in one country alone? Not a chance. We’re all 
in this together. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
