Michael Gondwe: Economic and financial sector developments in 
Zambia 
Speech by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official launch of the 
Zambia  National  Commercial  Bank  Limited  (Zanaco)  Ndola  West  Branch,  Ndola,  27  June 
2013. 
 The Managing Director, Zanaco  
Members of the Executive Management Team  
Members of the Press  
Distinguished invited Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Let  me  begin  by  tendering  apologies  on  behalf  of  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia, 
Dr. Michael Gondwe who is not able to be with us this evening as he is attending to other 
commitments.  He  however  requested  that  I  represent  him  at  this  important  occasion.  It  is 
therefore  my  honor  and  privilege  to  officiate  at  this  important  occasion  to  launch  the  new 
Ndola west Branch of Zambia National Commercial Bank Limited. I am told that the Branch 
was initially on Maina Soko Road opposite Barclays Bank and that the bank decided to move 
here  because  the  place  is  bigger,  which  I  believe  will  provide  a  better  and  spacious 
environment.  
Distinguished Guests, the Bank of Zambia is reliably informed that since the inception of 
the bank more than 37 years ago, Zanaco has grown its customer base to over 640,000 and 
has  grown  its  network  of  branches  and  agencies  to  64,  in  addition  to  the  branch  being 
launched  today,  53  Zanaco  Xpress  offices  and  26  Zanaco  agents.  The  bank  has  also 
invested  in  more  than  162  ATMs  and  465  Merchant  POS  terminals.  This  development 
demonstrates  the  bank’s  strong  and  long  term  commitment  to  be  a  significant  player  and 
contributor to the development of our financial sector, and the growth of the economy as a 
whole. The Bank of Zambia wishes to commend the Board of the Bank, Managing Director 
and his Team for these commendable developments.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  you  will  no  doubt  be  aware  of  the  crucial  role  that  banks  play  in 
financial intermediation. The real challenge therefore is for all financial sector players to play 
their  honest  part  in  enhancing  savings  mobilization  and  to  effectively  channel  the  public’s 
savings to support financing of viable economic activities. as our economy continues to grow 
and  per  capita  incomes  increase,  demand  for  financial  services  from  both  the  corporate 
sector and the general public will continue to grow rapidly. Therefore, Zanaco’s wide branch 
network will strengthen its capacity to meet this growing demand for financial services.  
Managing Director, Distinguished invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, the Bank of 
Zambia  is  always  pleased  to  be  invited  to  occasions  such  as  the  one  we  are  witnessing 
today, because it gives us an opportunity to share with you and the public some of the key 
developments that are taking place in our financial sector and the economy at large. In this 
regard allow me to say something about what is currently the most topical issue not only in 
the financial sector but in the national economy as a whole. This is Statutory Instrument 32 
now revised and re-named SI 55 on the Monitoring of Balance of Payments.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, as the name of the SI suggests, the aim is to “monitor” and not to 
“control”. There has been much public debate on this subject matter which seems to suggest 
a public misunderstanding of the intentions of the SI. Some quarters have gone so far as to 
link  the  issuance  of  SI  55  to  the  earlier  issued  SI33  as  amended  through  SI78  (Currency 
Regulations) and concluded that Government is introducing exchange controls.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Managing Director, Distinguished invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me to 
clarify that SI33 was issued with the primary intention of reinforcing the use of Kwacha, which 
legal  tender,  for  all  domestic  transactions.  This  is  in  line  with  practice  in  most  countries 
around the world. The SI has is no way intended to stifle business. The initial Monitoring of 
Balance  of  Payments regulations  were  initially  issued  under  SI  32. When  the  Government 
issued SI 32, Bank of Zambia embarked on an exercise to seek the views of the financial 
system  players,  the  business  community  and  the  public  at  large.  Arising  from  these 
stakeholder  engagements,  it  became  clear  that  some  of  the  provisions  of  SI  32  would 
impede  the  smooth  flow  of  business.  It  was  also  evident  that  the  timeframe  within  which 
stakeholders were supposed to prepare for the implementation of the SI was not adequate. 
The  Bank  of  Zambia  therefore  compiled  all  the  stakeholder  inputs  and  comments  and 
submitted proposed amendments to Government.  
Managing  Director,  I  am  glad  to  report  that  Government  responded  favorably  to  the 
submissions  made  and  have  today  re-issued  the  regulations  as  SI  55,  incorporating  the 
majority of the proposed amendments. As you may be well aware, Government extended the 
date of implementation of the SI to 1st July 2013 from the initial 16th May 2013. I now urge 
all stakeholders to read the new regulations carefully and make appropriate representations 
where  need  arises.  The  commercial  banks  in  particular  will  play  a  critical  role  in  giving 
guidance to their customers on the Regulations. The SI has already been posted to the Bank 
of Zambia website which can be accessed from www.boz.zm. Allow me to reiterate that the 
intention of the Balance of Payments regulations are merely to monitor the flow of funds in 
and  out  of  the  republic  with  the  ultimate  aim  to  provide  more  accurate  data  to  facilitate 
decision making on the national economy.  
Managing  Director,  The  Bank  of  Zambia  will  continue  to  implement  and  monitor  various 
regulatory measures aimed at enhancing the operations of the banking sector and efficiency 
in  the  wider  economy  and  remains  committed  to  support  all  efforts  to  reduce  the  cost  of 
doing business in Zambia.  
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  allow  me  to  conclude  my  remarks  by  reminding 
commercial  banks  that  they  must  become  proactive  in  identifying  new  markets  and 
developing appropriate new products and services, especially for the excluded population if 
they  have  to  remain  competitive  and  relevant  in  our  fast  growing  banking  sector.  As  has 
been echoed at various meetings, the Bank of Zambia has financial inclusion as one of its 
strategic objectives and initiatives by market players to make this vision a reality are always 
highly commended. The Bank of Zambia will play its own role and make every effort to create 
an environment that supports innovation and market developments by financial institutions.  
Managing  Director,  distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  It  is  therefore,  the  Bank  of 
Zambia’s  expectation  that  Zanaco  and  other  banks  will  take  advantage  of  opportunities 
arising from the general positive economic outlook on account of improving macroeconomic 
conditions and improvements so far recorded in various sectors of the economy and foster 
greater developments in the financial sector. Finally, let me extend my gratitude to the Board 
of Directors and the Managing Director of Zanaco inviting me on this occasion to mark the 
official launch the Ndola west Branch.  
It now my honour and privilege to declare the Ndola west Branch officially opened.  
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
