Patrick Honohan: The problem of mortgage arrears in Ireland 
Introductory statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to 
the  Oireachtas  (National  Parliament)  Joint  Committee  on  Finance,  Public  Expenditure  and 
Reform, Dublin, 25 September 2013. 
 I  thank  the  Committee  for  inviting  me  to  come  to  speak  about  the  problem  of  mortgage 
arrears,  and  indeed  I  will  also  of  course  welcome  the  opportunity  to  explain  the  Central 
Bank’s  policy  on  other  matters  that  the  Committee  may  wish  to  raise.  I  have  previously 
discussed  with  the  Committee  the  extremely  slow  progress  that  was  being  made  by  the 
banks in arresting the growth in arrears, processing the cases that had fallen into arrears and 
implementing  sustainable  solutions.  Things  are  still  not  moving  as  quickly  as  the  Central 
Bank would prefer; the indications are that the process is working, momentum is building, but 
there is some way to go. 
What is the goal of the Central Bank in addressing the problem of mortgage arrears? 
The  Central  Bank’s  approach  to  this  has  been  driven  by  both  of  its  main  regulatory 
objectives,  prudential  and  consumer.  The  consumer  protection  goal  –  fair  and  reasonable 
treatment  –  has  been  targeted  through,  for  example,  the  Code  of  Conduct  on  Mortgage 
Arrears  (CCMA).  The  mortgage  arrears  targets  have  been  crafted  using  the  prudential 
powers, though there will also be a side-benefit to the consumer. Figuring out exactly how to 
achieve these important policy goals while working within constitutional, legal and practical 
realities has presented novel challenges to the Central Bank. While progress is still too slow, 
I am satisfied that the approach is correct and is progressively yielding results. 
It  is  almost  two  years  since  the  Central  Bank  launched  the  Mortgage  Arrears  Resolution 
Strategy  which  has  steadily  ramped  up  requirements  on  banks  to  improve  their  policies, 
processes  and  staffing  around  this  issue  in  order  to  accelerate  results  on  the  ground.  In 
March  of  this  year,  as  part  of  this  process,  and  with  a  view  to  enhancing  measurability  of 
progress,  the  Central  Bank  introduced  a  regime  of  quantitative  targets  for  ensuring  that 
sustainable solutions are found more quickly for distressed mortgages. 
The banks having reported compliance with the first quarterly set of targets, the Central Bank 
has started the process of auditing a sample of the cases to see whether the solutions being 
proposed by the banks can truly be regarded as sustainable. The internal guidelines under 
which this audit is being carried out have been finalized and posted on the Central Bank’s 
website. (They have been on the website in draft form for the past three months). 
What is sustainability? 
In a nutshell, a sustainable arrangement is one that is affordable for the borrower in both the 
short and the long term, and provides sufficient clarity on what happens to the collateral at 
maturity. The guidelines seek to put sufficient flesh on this concept to allow the criterion to be 
audited, while not being so restrictive as to prevent innovation in solution design. 
Why is initiation of legal proceedings such a big part of this exercise? 
The March 2013 targets document set out three modes of generating a sustainable solution. 
• 
The  first,  preferred,  type  of  solution  is  an  arrangement  where  payments  are 
re-established on the original, or an agreed revised schedule. 
The  second  mode  is  where  the  borrower  opts  for  a  Personal  Insolvency 
Arrangement under the PIA. This was not yet available to borrowers at end-June. 
The  third  mode,  available  to  the  bank  only  where  an  arrangement  could  not  be 
reached or is not appropriate, involves surrender or repossession of the property. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Although each of the banks has reported compliance with the targets for end-June 2013, it is 
notable, though perhaps not surprising, that more than 60 per cent of this initial wave have 
followed the third mode. 
 Why  have  the  banks  relied  so  heavily  on  initiating  legal  proceedings  in  the  first  wave  of 
actions  under  the  Mortgage  Arrears  Resolution  Targets  (MART)  scheme?  Subject  to 
verification  in  the  audit  process,  it  is  possible  that  most  of  these  cases  involve  protracted 
periods  of  arrears  with  limited  cooperation  from  the  borrower  notably  in  providing  the 
information needed by the lender if they are to arrive at a better solution. 
Up-to-date borrower information provided to the lender is essential if the lender is to design a 
better sustainable solution potentially not involving repossession. Neither the lenders nor the 
Central Bank expect that repossession will be the preferred solution in the end for most of 
these  cases.  In  most  cases,  engagement  by  the  borrower  will  make  the  legal  course 
unnecessary. If so, then as always the best course of action for the borrower is to start to 
engage by providing the necessary information to the bank to find out what better course is 
available. 
The Central Bank’s CCMA provides a strong protection framework for borrowers who engage 
with  their  lenders.  Under  the  CCMA  lenders  are  required  to  proactively  engage  with  their 
customers in order to help them address the situation, they must carry out a full assessment 
of the borrower’s situation based on the Standard Financial Statement and each case must 
be  examined  on  its  individual  merits.  Lenders  are  required  to  explore  all  their  options  and 
where they do not offer an alternative repayment arrangement they must inform the borrower 
of the reasons for this and what alternatives are available. The CCMA provides that lenders 
may only commence legal proceedings for repossession only where they have already made 
every reasonable effort to agree an alternative arrangement. 
Clearly,  though,  the  Central  Bank  has  no  mandate  to  prevent  lenders  proceeding  to 
repossession if the borrowers refuse to engage, despite the lender following the procedures 
mandated in the CCMA. 
Any  bank  which  is  proceeding  lightly  to  legal  recourse  with  cooperating  borrowers  without 
satisfying the procedures of the CCMA, or where alternative sustainable arrangements are 
available, is evidently not acting in a manner consistent with the targets regime. This should 
be detected through the audit and corrective action required. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
How come household debt has become such a big problem? 
That household mortgage debt would represent the biggest potential source of loan losses 
after the developer loans was evident from an early stage in the crisis. It was also clear that 
the  problem  would  not  emerge  all  at  once,  but  would  grow  as  distressed  borrowers  ran 
through their savings and (to the extent that unemployment was the problem) found it more 
difficult than they expected to secure a new job. But the ultimate scale of the problem has 
been  hard  to  predict  and  we  did  not  expect  the  banks  to  be  so  persistently  ineffective  in 
getting their arms around this problem and delivering sustainable solutions. 
The  best  available  sustainable  solutions  can  take  several  forms.  Some  merely  involve 
identifying where the defaults are not justifiable given household resources: such borrowers 
need to be brought back on track. Others, especially buy-to-lets, may involve a surrender of 
the property to the bank or its assisted sale, with some sustainable treatment of the shortfall. 
In  other  cases,  the  lender  cannot  be  confident  of  recovering  all  of  the  loan,  but  can  be 
protected against the risk of forgiving more than is needed by the device of a split mortgage. 
Other  schemes  are  possible.  None  of  these  arrangements  is  ideal:  they  generally  imply  a 
great disappointment for the borrower and a loss for the lender relative to what was originally 
envisaged. 
Debt forgiveness 
The  Central  Bank  is  not  empowered,  nor could  it  be, to  insist  on  debt forgiveness  for  any 
particular  borrower.  Relief  for  an  insolvent  borrower  from  indebtedness  is  determined 
ultimately  through  the  insolvency  procedures  for  which  legislation  has  so  recently  been 
reformed  and  in  a  direction  which  is  rightly  much  more  favourable  to  the  insolvent  debtor 
than  was  previous  legislation.  The  Central  Bank  helped  to  advise  on  the  drafting  of  this 
legislation and has been supportive of its aims. Use of this legislation will be an important 
means  of  ensuring  that  over-indebtedness  problems,  especially  those  involving  multiple 
debtors, can be resolved. 
But it should be possible for lenders to avoid imposing the costs and delays of a personal 
insolvency  arrangement  (PIA)  or  bankruptcy  on  many  insolvent  debtors,  by  coming  to 
sustainable negotiated solutions which are better for both borrower and lender. 
Is the split mortgage the Central Bank’s preferred outcome? 
Various  types  of  solution  are  possible  to  deal  with  a  situation  where  the  initial  repayment 
promise looks unsustainable. If appropriately designed – and the criteria have been set out in 
the Sustainability Guidelines – the split mortgage can be a sustainable solution, depending 
on  the  borrower’s  circumstances.  It  can  allow  the  lender  to  take  explicit  account  of  future 
improvements  in  the  borrower’s  circumstances,  while  providing  the  borrower  sufficient 
assurance of affordability now and in the future. But it provides only one of several possible 
approaches. Banks have begun to experiment with other models that can give both them and 
the  borrowers  the  assurance  that  the  repayment  is  going  to  be  back  on  a  firm  basis. The 
Committee has mentioned an approach outlined by Ulster Bank, and on the face of it that 
approach seems to have most of the ingredients needed to be considered sustainable. While 
the  Central  Bank  has  set  out  its  sustainability  guidelines,  nobody,  least  of  all  borrowers, 
would  be  served  by  the  Central  Bank  attempting  to  place  a  narrow  straitjacket  preventing 
innovation  around  possible  solutions  within  those  guidelines.  Banks  are  beginning  to  learn 
from experience the elements that differentiate an ineffective engagement with their arrears 
customers,  from  the  kind  of  engagement  that  leads  to  an  arrangement  which  is  not  only 
sustainable,  but  is  in  fact  sustained  because  it  matches  the  borrower’s  abilities  and 
motivations. Some banks have gone further successfully down this road than others. 
Should the banks be doing more to achieve sustainability? 
Despite all of our efforts, and despite real progress in policies, processes and staffing, far too 
many arrears cases have still remained untreated, whether sustainably or not. For example, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
of 98,000 personal dwelling home (PDH) accounts more than 90 days in arrears at end June, 
fully 74,000 – or three out of every four – were not yet in an arrangement.  
Why have the banks been so slow in acting? It may be, as many have suggested, that the 
delay in correcting the legislative defect identified by the Dunne judgement did represent a 
delay  –  though  it  should  not  have  deterred  non-repossession  action. The  moratorium,  and 
the  CCMA  restrictions  designed  to  prevent  harassment  by  debt  collectors,  likely  have 
contributed  to  some  delay,  but  have  also  been  used  as  excuses.  In  any  event,  the 
moratorium and other CCMA rules have now been streamlined in such  a  way as to retain 
sufficient protections for distressed borrowers – a legitimate and important objective – while 
generating little or no obstacle to efficiently organised collection procedures. The legislative 
defect  identified  in  the  Dunne  judgement  has  also  eventually  been  corrected,  as  was 
recommended by the Central Bank. 
More important has been the fact that the task required a much more focused and effective 
organisational effort at scale than the banks at first realized, a deficiency  which  they have 
been progressively overcoming, since we started to audit and critique their procedures more 
intensively in 2011. 
I believe that there is also a gap between the analysis of the Central Bank and that of some 
of the banks with regard to the need for clarity and predictability about the solutions being 
proposed.  The  Central  Bank  wants  to  be  sure  that  there  is  sufficient  clarity  about  the 
arrangement, for example in regard to the treatment of the borrower’s liability for the shortfall 
in  a  loan  following  an  assisted  sale  or  repossession,  or for  the  warehoused  part  of  a  split 
mortgage. Some of the banks have expressed the opinion that a degree of uncertainty about 
how  these  elements  will  be  treated  could  help  ensure  that  the  bank  recovers  as  much  as 
possible. The Central Bank believes to the contrary that, with such a widespread systemic 
problem of debtor distress, greater clarity on what is residually owed in these circumstances 
is safer for the lender in guarding against any erosion of the debt servicing culture, as well as 
helping  a  broader  restoration  of  household  confidence  which  will  help  the  wider  economic 
recovery and through that boost loan recoverability. In particular, the Central Bank regards 
as  unwise  the  creation  of  a  situation  where,  because  of  such  uncertainty,  the  lender  and 
borrower  hold  inconsistent  expectations  about  what  will  be  enforced  and  recovered  on  a 
particular loan. 
Finally  there  has  been  a  degree  of  wishful  thinking,  a  belief  that  many  cases  will  cure 
themselves even without energetic action by the lenders. 
Leaving  well  enough  alone  is  not,  however,  an  adequate  approach.  Delay  worsens  the 
prospects  for  both  lender  and  borrower.  This  truism  is  now  being  acted  upon  more 
expeditiously.  The  Central  Bank  does  not  have  executive  or  management  control  of  the 
banks’  operations  –  that  has  to  remain  the  responsibility  of  the  Boards  of  Directors  of  the 
banks if we are to get this working properly at all. But the Central Bank is using its powers to 
the  utmost  extent  to  overcome  the  delays.  The  process  is  working;  it  is  still  too  slow,  but 
momentum is building.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
