Benoît Cœuré: Liquidity regulation and monetary policy implementation – 
from theory to practice 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Toulouse School of Economics, Toulouse, 3 October 2013. 
 the 
liquidity 
the  new 
interplay  between 
I wish to thank Conception Alonso and Stefano Corradin for their contributions to these remarks. I remain solely 
responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak at the Toulouse School of Economics. 
In my remarks today, I would like to discuss the recent developments on liquidity regulation 
and 
requirements  and  monetary  policy 
implementation. 
The recent financial crisis provided a vivid illustration of how liquidity risk that materialises in 
some segments of the financial system can lead to the drying-up of liquidity in entire market 
segments,  such  as  unsecured  interbank  markets,  causing  a  system-wide  scramble  for 
liquidity.  In  that  context,  central  banks  have  played  a  role  of  intermediary  for  interbank 
transactions and prevented our bank based financial system from collapsing. 
At the beginning of my remarks, I will talk about the rationale for liquidity regulation and I will 
provide  an  overview  of  the  new  set  of  liquidity  requirements  that  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision  has  proposed  to  complement  its  revised  capital  requirements 
framework. 
These recent developments give rise to two issues that I would like to address today. First, 
how do liquidity regulation and monetary policy implementation interact? I will argue that the 
new set of liquidity requirements is expected to have an impact on how monetary policy is 
implemented in normal times. It is important to understand how this new requirement may 
impact the current operational framework, especially for the Eurosystem, and the functioning 
of money markets. 
The second issue regards lending of last resort. It is commonly accepted that central banks 
have  to  act  as  lenders  of  last  resort  (LOLR)  towards  banks  during  a  crisis  period,  when 
liquidity  can  dry  up.  But  it  is  also  well  known  that  such  intervention  can  generate  moral 
hazard  in  the  banking  system,  lead  central  banks  to  take  unwarranted  credit  risk  and,  in 
some extreme cases, interfere with their primary mandate – price stability. 
Are the new liquidity ratios, in combination with the revised capital ratios, sufficient to prevent 
the  central  bank  from  becoming  the  lender  of  first  resort?  Based  on  recent  academic 
research,  to  which  researchers  of  this  university  have  significantly  contributed, I  will  argue 
that liquidity regulation can ensure that central bank intervention remains exceptional, and be 
designed in a way that is compatible with sound incentives in the banking system. 
Rationale for liquidity regulation 
I would like to begin by briefly highlighting the micro- and macro-prudential benefits that will 
derive from a new set of liquidity standards. In particular, they should lead to an increase in 
individual  credit  institutions’  liquidity  buffers,  and  reduce  the  risks  posed  by  maturity 
transformation. 
The recent financial crisis provided a dramatic illustration of how liquidity risk materialises. 
The inadequacies of banks’ liquidity management became apparent when some markets for 
long-term debt securities (including ABS, ABS CDOs, etc.) experienced a sudden re-pricing, 
resulting  from  the  fact  that  risks  were  not  properly  reflected  in  their  prices.  Banks  faced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
substantial  liquidity  outflows  and  shortages  owing  to  their  excessive  exposure  to  these 
instruments and their excessive reliance on short-term and volatile secured market funding 
sources.  In  the  US, this  phenomenon  mainly  materialised  as  a  “run  on  repo”;1  in  the  euro 
area, it resulted into drying up of foreign currency funding, severe strains in bank unsecured 
funding, and/or a reduced access to repo through clearing houses. In all cases, the central 
bank had to step in and to expand its liquidity provision to banks. 
What  does  this  imply  for  liquidity  regulation?  Regulations  should  start  from  first  principles, 
and  we  therefore  have  to  identify  the  market failures  or  negative  externalities  that  liquidity 
regulation aims at addressing. 
I consider that there are three main objectives for liquidity regulation: a) to reduce the impact 
of uncertainty on the bank risk profile, b) to build up liquidity buffers and c) to mitigate the 
systemic characteristics of a liquidity crisis. 
Maturity  transformation  gives  rise  to  liquidity  risk  since,  by  definition,  a  bank  engaging  in 
maturity transformation cannot honour sudden and large withdrawal requests by depositors. 
They may face similar difficulties if interbank market lenders refuse to roll over their loans. 
Such  coordination  failure  may  arise  not  because  the  depositors  or  the  interbank  market 
participants think the  bank  is  likely  to  be  insolvent,  but  because  they  anticipate  others  will 
withdraw.2 The rationale of liquidity requirements is that they reduce the impact of uncertainty 
on the bank risk profile, since they allow the bank to withstand larger withdrawals. LOLR and 
deposit insurance are other ways to achieve the same means: mitigating the risk of a run. 
The  difference  is  that  liquidity  requirements  are  internalised,  while  LOLR  and  deposit 
insurance  are  externalised  to  the  central  bank  and  to  the  taxpayers,  respectively.  Another 
difference is that liquidity requirements and deposit insurance exert their effects ex ante while 
LOLR happens after the fact. 
An additional micro-prudential benefit derived from liquidity requirements relates to a special 
role of liquid assets. By maintaining liquidity buffers in advance, banks commit to removing 
solvency risk from a portion of their portfolio. This limits solvency risk and encourages good 
risk management, acting as a prudential regulatory tool alongside other requirements, such 
as capital buffers or bail-inable debt, that also exert discipline on bank risk-taking behaviour.3 
A  counterargument  is  however  that  holding  a  large  balance  of  liquid  assets  gives  bank 
management too much discretion and can thus create agency problems.4 
Liquidity standards should also be designed to mitigate adverse effects owing to inherently 
systemic characteristics of a liquidity crisis. The reaction of one bank to liquidity strains might 
create major liquidity strains for other banks. This may indeed require liquidation of long-term 
and  illiquid  assets,  imposing  externalities  on  other  banks  through  a  fire  sales  spiral  and 
various forms of financial contagion. In addition, the failure of a bank that occupies a critical 
size or position in a market could have immediate systemic implications: some segments of 
financial  markets  might  just  cease  to  operate,  and  its  disorderly  collapse  would  lead  to 
                                                
1  Gorton and Metrick (2012) document a full-scale “run” on repo; see G. Gorton and A. Metrick, “Securitised 
banking and  the  run on  repo”,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics,  forthcoming.  However,  Krishnamurthy  et al. 
(2012)  document  that  a  “run”  on  repo  didn’t  seem  to  have  occurred  in  some  repo  segments;  see 
A. Krishnamurthy, S. Nagel and D. Orlov, “Sizing up repo”, NBER Working Paper No. 17768, 2012. 
2  As in D. Diamond and P. Dybvig, “Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity”, Journal of Political Economy 
91, 1983. 
3  Calomiris,  Heider,  and  Hoerova  (2013)  highlight  the  potential  benefits  of  bank  liquidity  requirements  in 
comparison  with  capital;  see.  C.  Calomiris,  F.  Heider  and  M.  Hoerova,  “A  theory  of  bank  liquidity 
requirements”, mimeo, European Central Bank, 2013. 
4  See  S.  Myers  and  R.  Rajan  (1998),  “The  paradox  of  liquidity”,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  Vol.  113, 
pp. 733–771. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
considerable  losses  for  other financial  institutions,  including  the  central bank  itself.5  In  this 
environment,  a  bank’s  private  choice  of  liquidity  buffers  will  not  reflect  what  is  socially 
optimal.6 
In  the  presence  of  such  externalities,  there  is  indeed  a  need  for  explicit  regulation.  This 
leaves the choice open between regulating liquidity through prices (i.e. through interest rates) 
and  through  quantities  (i.e.  liquidity  buffers),  hence  the  intimate  interaction  between 
monetary policy and prudential regulation of liquidity.7 
Similarly,  an  expectation  of  public  sector  intervention  and  support  for  banks  in  crisis  can 
create  moral  hazard  and  distort  the  incentives  faced  by  financial  institutions.8  As  a 
consequence, 
insufficient.  Such 
considerations  call  again for regulators  to  set  and  enforce  prudential  rules,  and for  central 
banks to act in a way that jointly is socially optimal. 
liquidity  buffers  chosen  by  banks  could  be 
the 
The new liquidity regulation: Basel III liquidity standards 
Let me now discuss in some detail the Basel III liquidity standards agreed upon in December 
2010.  The  international  community,  through  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
(BCBS), drew up a proposal for liquidity risk regulation. The proposal includes two ratios, the 
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR). 
Under the LCR, banks are required to hold a minimum level of unencumbered high-quality 
liquid  assets  (HQLA),  the  numerator  of  LCR,  to  withstand  total  net  cash  outflows  over  an 
acute  stress  scenario  lasting  30  days,  the  denominator  of  LCR.  The  LCR  is  specifically 
designed to improve the short-term resilience of banks against liquidity shocks. 
By  contrast,  the  NSFR  measures  the  amount  of  longer-term  stable  sources  of  funding 
employed  by  an  institution,  the  numerator  of  NSFR,  relative  to  the  liquidity  profiles  of  the 
assets  funded  and  the  potential  for  contingent  calls  on  funding  liquidity  arising  from 
off-balance sheet commitments and obligations, the denominator of NSFR. Thus, the NSFR 
requires  banks  to  fund  illiquid  assets  with  a  minimum  amount  of  stable  liabilities  over  a 
horizon of one year. 
Although the objectives of the LCR and NFSR are mainly microprudential in nature, some of 
their  characteristics  also  have  macroprudential  foundations,  and  therefore  should  have 
systemic benefits. Still, they may have unintended consequences. In particular, I would like 
to reflect on how they may interact with central bank operations. 
                                                
5  See, for example, V. Acharya and S. Viswanathan, “Leverage, moral hazard, and liquidity”, Journal of Finance 
66,  2011;  F.  Allen  and  D.  Gale.  “Financial  contagion”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy  108,  2000;  M. 
Brunnermeier  and  L.  H.  Pedersen,  “Market  liquidity  and  funding  liquidity”,  Review  of  Financial  Studies  22, 
2009;  and  R.  Cifuentes,  G.  Ferrucci  and  H.  S.  Shin  (2005),  “Liquidity  risk  and  contagion”,  Journal  of  the 
European Economic Association 3, 2005. 
6  See, for example, E. Perotti and J. Suarez, “A Pigovian approach to liquidity regulation”, International Journal 
of Central Banking 7, 2011. 
7  Stein  (2013)  discusses  liquidity  regulation  through  price  vs.  quantities  as  a  problem  of  social  choice  à  la 
Ronald  Coase,  drawing  on  the  classical  analysis  by  Weitzman  (1974).  Along  these  lines,  if  HQLA-eligible 
assets are scarce, then the HQLA premium is likely to be both high and volatile and a price-based mechanism 
can be more relevant than regulating quantities through the LCR. See J. Stein (2013), “Liquidity Regulation 
and Central Banking”, speech at the “Finding the Right Balance” 2013 Credit Markets Symposium sponsored 
by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Richmond,  Charlotte,  North  Carolina,  April  19,  and  M.  Weitzman  (1974), 
“Prices vs. Quantities”, Review of Economic Studies, vol. 41 (October), pp. 477–91. 
8  Recent papers considering effects of government bail-outs on banks’ maturity mismatch and financial stability 
include E. Farhi and J. Tirole, “Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch, and systemic bailouts”, American 
Economic  Review  102,  2012,  and  T.  Keister,  “Bailouts  and  Financial  Fragility”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
New York Staff Report No. 473, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Liquidity regulation and monetary policy implementation 
Incentives on the asset side of banks’ balance sheet 
How will liquidity regulations and monetary policy implementation interact in normal times? In 
my  view,  the  interaction  is  expected  to  be  complex  and  liquidity  regulation  may  require 
adjustments to central banks’ operational frameworks. 
Although the central bank collateral framework received more limited attention in the recent 
academic literature than collateral used in private transactions,9 it is one of the most complex 
and  economically  significant  elements  of  monetary  policy  implementation.  The  interaction 
between the collateral framework and liquidity regulation is of great importance, especially for 
the Eurosystem.10 
Let me illustrate this. A possible strategy for euro area banks to meet their LCR requirements 
is to increase their reliance on central bank funding using non-HQLA collateral. This is due to 
two features of the LCR calibration, which are of particular relevance for the ECB. 
First,  the  LCR  and  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  framework  differ  as  regards  the 
definition of qualifying assets. The stock of HQLA accepted in the LCR is narrower than the 
stock of assets which are eligible as collateral for the Eurosystem’s monetary policy credit 
operations.  For  example,  asset  backed  securities  (ABS)  and  uncovered  bank  bonds  are 
accepted  as  Eurosystem  collateral,  but  do  not  qualify  generally  as  HQLA  in  the  LCR.  In 
addition, the LCR and the Eurosystem’s collateral framework differ as regards haircuts that 
are  applied  to  specific  categories  of  assets.11  Thus,  there  is  no  alignment  between  the 
definition  and  the  risk  assessment  of  liquid  assets  and  the  central  bank’s  collateral 
framework. This is justified by the different purposes of liquidity regulation and of the central 
bank’s  collateral  framework:  the  collateral  framework  protects  the  balance  sheet  of  the 
central  bank  and,  without  prejudice  to  this  objective,  can  support  monetary  policy 
transmission to the economy, which calls for a broader range of eligible assets, especially in 
such a diverse region as the euro area. This is also justified by the global nature of the LCR 
while central banks frameworks are all different. 
Second, unlike interbank funding, central bank refinancing over a 30-day horizon would not 
count as an outflow in the denominator of LCR, as it always benefits from a 100% rollover 
rate. As a result of these two features taken together, this could increase demand for central 
bank  refinancing.  Banks  could  exploit  regulatory  arbitrage  opportunities  by  posting 
non-HQLA  as  collateral,  which  would  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  LCR.12  While  this  also 
                                                
9  An exception is Hilberg and Hollmayr (2011). They extend a New-Keynesian model introducing an interbank 
market  and  allowing  the  central  banks  to  alleviate  the  liquidity  shortage  on  the  interbank  market  varying 
haircuts on eligible assets; see B. Hilberg and J. Hollmayr (2011), “Asset prices, collateral and unconventional 
monetary policy in a DSGE model”, European Central Bank working paper series, No 1373. For a discussion 
on collateral used in private transactions see G. Gorton and A. Metrick (op. cit.) and J. Geanakoplos (2010), 
“The Leverage Cycle” in D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff and M. Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2009, 
vol. 24, pp. 1–65, University of Chicago Press. 
10  Bindseil (2013) discusses how the collateral framework can interact with liquidity regulation; see U. Bindseil 
(2013) “Central bank collateral, asset fire sales, regulation, and liquidity”, mimeo, European Central Bank. For 
a  description  of  the  Eurosystem  collateral  framework,  see  the  ECB  website,  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ 
paym/coll/html/index.en.html. 
11  Specifically,  Level  1 assets  are  entirely  taken into  account  in  the  LCR  (no  haircut)  and thus benefit  from a 
more  beneficial  treatment  in  the  LCR  than  in  the  Eurosystem’s  collateral  framework,  while  level  2  assets 
generally enjoy lower haircuts in the Eurosystem’s collateral framework than in the LCR. These differences 
certainly reflect the different objectives of the LCR and the Eurosystem’s collateral framework. 
12  Central bank refinancing always benefit from a 100% rollover rate no matter the quality of the assets used in 
the transaction. A 100% rollover rate ensures equal treatment between central banks implementing monetary 
policy through repo operations and central banks implementing monetary policy through outright purchases of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
depends on the opportunity cost of obtaining liquidity from the Eurosystem, there may be a 
number of LCR-constrained banks with large amounts of non-HQLA collateral that is eligible 
for monetary policy operations. 
Imagine a post-crisis monetary policy framework where the liquidity provision by the central 
bank  would  again  be  rationed  and  implemented  through  competitive  auctions  (instead  of 
today’s fixed rate, full allotment). If some banks have no access to market repos using their 
assets  as  collateral  (owing to concerns  in  the market  place  about  country,  counterparty  or 
collateral  risk),  it  will  be  likely  that  these  counterparties  will  bid  in  the  liquidity-providing 
monetary policy tender operations using this collateral in order to obtain cash to cover both 
their funding needs and their LCR. All in all, one may therefore expect a general increase in 
bid  amounts  and  bid  rates  in  tender  operations,  as  well  as  adverse  selection  in  the 
participation to these operations. 
Would this imply a changed risk profile of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet? In principle no, 
as  the  central  bank  is  protected  by  its  risk  management  framework,  including  a  haircut 
schedule calibrated to the credit and liquidity risk of pledged securities. But higher average 
haircuts could imply a higher level of asset encumbrance on the balance sheets of banks, 
with  potential  feedback  loops  onto  the  perception  of  credit  risk  at  counterparty  or  even  at 
country level. 
Let  me  give  a  second  example  of  how  the  interaction  between  liquidity  regulation  and 
monetary  policy  implementation  might  be  expected  to  be  complex,  especially  for  the 
Eurosystem. On one side, the regulation aims at reducing banks’ undue reliance on central 
bank  liquidity,  which  is  an  intended  consequence  of  the  regulation.  On  the  other  side,  the 
regulation  might  lead  to  a  situation  in  which  some  euro  area  banks,  presumably  the  most 
fragile,  would  rely  more  on  the  Eurosystem  than  otherwise.  The  central  bank  then  risks 
becoming a “lender of first resort”. 
Still, on this note, let me recall that the Eurosystem implements monetary policy  in normal 
times in an environment of a large and structural liquidity deficit by using temporary liquidity-
providing operations in the form of reverse repos. This implies that some reliance on central 
bank funding is not undesirable, but rather wanted. The question is: how much is too much, 
to the point where it would allow banks to sustain flawed business models? 
Work  is  being  carried  out  further  on  the  interaction  between  the  LCR  and  central  bank 
facilities so as to ensure that the LCR responds appropriately to the provision and withdrawal 
of liquidity support by central banks. In this context, it has been proposed that central banks 
provide a “Committed Liquidity Facility” (CLF) to banks faced with a scarcity of HQLA. Under 
a  CLF,  the  capacity  to  borrow  from  the  central  bank  counts  towards  HQLA,  with  banks 
paying an upfront fee for a determined amount of CLF commitment. 
The CLF can potentially be useful not only in jurisdictions with a structural scarcity of HQLA, 
like for  example  Australia. The  argument  put forward  is  that  banks  in  crisis  times,  wary  of 
stigma effects, would not let their LCR ratio fall below 100 percent. A CLF, however, would 
allow banks to meet the LCR ratio at all times, although with time-varying reliance on private-
market HQLA and on the CLF. One possibility would be for the central bank to encourage the 
drawdown of private-market HQLA by reducing the pricing of the CLF during crisis time. 
I  would  agree  with  Jeremy  Stein13  that  a  CLF  with  an  upfront  fee  is  very  different  from 
counting  central-bank  eligible  collateral  as  HQLA  at  no  cost,  which  could  weaken  the 
incentive to borrow in markets and create excessive reliance on central bank funding. The 
                                                                                                                                                   
assets. However, it increases the difference in treatment between repo transactions with central banks and 
interbank repo transactions not backed by level 1 HQLA. 
13  See Stein (2013, op. cit.). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
pricing of the CLF should therefore strike the right balance to protect monetary policy without 
undermining the effectiveness of the LCR as a prudential instrument. 
On  the  one  hand,  in  order  to  reduce  pressure  on  demand  for  central  bank  funding,  it  is 
necessary that banks find it more attractive to pay the CLF commitment fee rather than to 
obtain central bank liquidity and leave  it on their accounts at the central bank. A CLF that 
would only be used in stressed times would not serve our purpose. On the other hand, there 
is a danger perceived by some that a CLF could materially change the effectiveness of the 
LCR, as the definition of HQLA would de facto be substantially widened, which would offset 
the objective that banks should self-insure against liquidity risk. To avoid such an outcome, 
the following remedies exist: first, the pricing of the CLF in normal times should reflect the 
opportunity cost of a bank for holding HQLA rather than non-HQLA. As a result, reliance on 
the CLF should not be more attractive than holding private-market HQLA. Second, it has to 
be  borne  in  mind  that  access  to  the  CLF  needs  to  be  collateralised;  hence  collateral 
availability puts a “natural” limit to accessing HQLA in the form of a CLF. 
Incentives on the liability side of banks’ balance sheet 
Having discussed how a bank can operate on the asset side of its balance sheet to improve 
LCR compliance, I now turn to the liability side of its balance sheet. 
A  bank  that  faces  the  possibility  of  a  LCR  shortfall  has  the  incentive  to  (i) decrease  its 
reliance  on  short-term  unsecured  funding,  (ii) decrease  the  30  days  net  cash  outflow,  and 
(iii) to replace it by longer-term funding or, if this is too difficult or too expensive, by secured 
funding. Since outflow rates are zero for secured funding obtained from the central bank, but 
higher  for  secured  funding  obtained  from  other  sources,  the  bank  is  more  likely  to  borrow 
from  the  central  bank  by  pledging  non-HQLA  assets,  either  in  tender  operations  or  in  the 
marginal lending facility.14 As a result, this lessens the need of banks to seek funds in the 
short-term interbank market to ensure that the LCR requirement is met.15 
A reduction in the reliance on short-term unsecured funding is an intended consequence of 
the LCR. However, the implementation of the LCR might then lead to an overall decline in 
unsecured money market activity, which could be problematic for the euro area. 
Money markets play a central role for monetary policy transmission in the euro area. This is 
because the euro area financial system is largely bank-based, and interbank money market 
interest  rates  represent  the  marginal  cost  of  funding  bank  loans.  When  money  markets 
function  normally,  the  ECB  can  influence  the  longer-maturity  rates,  which  are  relevant  for 
determining bank lending rates, by steering very short-term money market rates close to its 
official  rates.  By  the  same  token,  a  potential  further  decrease  in  depth  of  the  unsecured 
money  market,  in  particular  at  the  short-term,  would  further  impair  the  role  of  the  money 
market in allocating and distributing liquidity in the euro area. 
In addition, deep and liquid money markets play an important role in information aggregation 
and  price  discovery.  Indeed,  money  market  rates,  such  as  Euribor  and  Libor,  provide 
benchmark rates for the pricing of fixed-income securities and loan contracts throughout the 
economy.  Moreover,  unsecured  money  markets  play  a  key  role  keeping  in  check  banks’ 
risk-taking  profile.16  The  LCR  may  induce  an  additional  term  premium  in  the  unsecured 
                                                
14  If the bank has enough non-HQLA collateral, after haircuts, to satisfy its additional borrowing needs. 
15  Bech  and  Keister  (2013)  extend  a  standard  model  of  monetary  policy  implementation  to  include  the  new 
liquidity regulation and they discuss how different types of open market operations affect bank balance sheets 
and  the  LCR  calculations;  see  M.  Bech  and  T.  Keister  “The  liquidity  coverage  ratio  and  monetary  policy 
implementation”, BIS working papers, 2013. 
16  Rochet and Tirole (1996) emphasise the role of interbank peer monitoring in reducing borrowers’ moral hazard 
and their excessive risk-taking ex post; see J.-C. Rochet and J. Tirole “Interbank lending and systemic risk”, 
Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  Vol.  28,  No.  4,  1996.  Hoerova  and  Monnet  (2011)  view  market 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
money market (as demand might not be fully matched by supply) and segmentation in the 
market between maturities over and below 30 days. At the same time, by reducing liquidity 
risk,  the  LCR  may  lead  to  lower  liquidity  risk  premia.  The  overall  effect  of  these  two 
countervailing  forces  is  unclear  though.  While  there  could  be  an  overall  impact  on  the 
difference between short and longer-term rates, to assess the overall impact on the monetary 
policy transmission, one would need to see whether the transmission from short to longer-
term  rates  would  be  also  affected.  However,  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  unsecured 
lending beyond 30 days will revive after the crisis. 
As  mentioned,  this  new  set  of  liquidity  requirements  is  expected  to  have  important 
consequences for limiting solvency risk and encouraging good risk management. In fact, the 
regulation  is  expected  to  bring  an  overall  positive  effect  on  the  functioning  of  the  money 
market by internalising the negative externalities for financial stability and monetary policy, 
i.e.  reducing  information  asymmetries  concerning  banks’  liquidity  risk  exposure  and  their 
liquidity risk bearing capacity, creating the conditions for a better functioning of the money 
market.17 
This  has  to  be  combined  with  actions  ensuring  a  proper  functioning  of  the  money  market 
(such  as  oversight  of  reference  rates  along  the  lines  recently  proposed  by  the  European 
Commission). It should also be seen as a complement to regulatory reforms that will improve 
market discipline in other segments of the banks’ liability structure, such as capital buffers 
and the new bail-in rules for senior bond-holders and uninsured depositors. And since bail-in 
rules have confirmed that insured depositors are protected by deposit guarantee schemes, 
meaning  by  the  taxpayer,  the  banking  supervisor  is  the  public  authority  to  whom  insured 
depositors delegate the monitoring of bank behaviour – hence the need for strong banking 
supervision, free of national political influence.18 
Liquidity regulation and lender of last resort 
Finally, let me turn to the interplay between the ex ante regulation of liquidity ratios and the 
ex post provision of liquidity assistance in time of stress by the central banks. 
Walter Bagehot famously advocated that a lender of last resort in a crisis should lend freely 
at  a  penalty  rate  to  solvent  but  illiquid  banks  that  have  adequate  collateral.19  Such 
intervention is seen as the primary method for mitigating the adverse systemic effects of a 
liquidity  crisis,  providing  stability  to  the  banking  system  and  avoiding  unfavourable 
consequences for the real sector. 
Since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  to  prevent  market-wide  liquidity  problems  from  turning  into 
solvency problems for individual banks, the Eurosystem introduced, as of October 2008, a 
                                                                                                                                                   
discipline in the unsecured money markets as a provision of ex ante incentives to mitigate risk of borrowers’ 
investments; see M. Hoerova and C. Monnet, “Money market discipline and central bank lending”, presented 
at  the  workshop  on  the  “Post-crisis  design  of  the  operational  framework”,  mimeo,  European  Central  Bank, 
2011. 
17  The  effects  of  asymmetric  information  and  counterparty  credit  risk  on  the  interbank  market  functioning  are 
analysed in F. Heider, M. Hoerova and C. Holthausen, “Liquidity hoarding and interbank market spreads: The 
role of counterparty risk”, ECB Working Paper No. 1126, 2009. 
18  See  B.  Cœuré  (2013),  “The  implications  of  bail-in  for  bank  activity  and  stability”,  opening  speech  at  the 
conference on “Financing the recovery after the crisis – the roles of bank profitability, stability and regulation”, 
Bocconi University, Milan, 30 September. 
19  The LOLR should lend freely against good collateral, valued at pre-crisis levels, and at a penalty rate. These 
conditions are due to Bagehot (1873) and are also presented, for instance, in Humphrey (1975) and Freixas, 
Parigi and Rochet (2004); see W. Bagehot, “Lombard street”, H.S. King, London, 1873; Humphrey, T. “The 
classical concept of the lender of last resort”, Economic Review, 61, 2–9, 1975; and Freixas, X., Parigi B., and 
J.-C.  Rochet  “The  lender  of  last  resort:  A  21st  century  approach”,  Journal  of  the  European  Economic 
Association, 2: 1085–1115, 2004. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
fixed-rate,  full  allotment  regime  in  its  refinancing  operations,  offering  unlimited  liquidity  to 
banks at a predictable cost against an expanded set of eligible collateral. The widening of 
collateral might be seen as a way to mitigate the adverse and destabilizing effects of short-
term funding “runs” relating to a deterioration of asset liquidity, but it can also be seen as a 
way  to  prevent large  recourse  to  central  bank  liquidity  by  banks,  who  would  otherwise  be 
subject  to  funding  outflows  at  a  later  stage  of  the  crisis.  Such  a  widening  has  to  be 
accompanied  by  proper  risk  management  measures,  such  as  haircuts,  to  mitigate  the 
increase of the risk profile of the central bank. The challenge for the central bank is to “build-
in”  the  possibility  to  expand  the  set  of  eligible  collateral  while  mitigating  the  incentives  for 
banks to abuse it.20 
Similarly, the LOLR’s function of providing emergency liquidity assistance has been criticised 
for  provoking  moral  hazard  by  banks.  Indeed,  support  that  is  considered  as  appropriate 
during  the  crisis  might  have  perverse  effects  on  the  incentives  of  banks  at  a  later  stage. 
Banks may ex ante decide to take an excessive exposure to risk, knowing that the central 
bank will intervene if that risk materialises. Moreover, there is a fine line between liquidity and 
solvency  needs,  which  in  a  crisis  is  often  blurred.  Central  banks  should  therefore  be 
particularly wary not to substitute for capital support that should be provided by shareholders, 
investors, or in last resort by governments. When such moral hazard problems are severe, 
the central bank might consider mitigating but not eliminating the externalities of a liquidity 
crisis – that is, not helping barely solvent banks and thus providing incentives for banks to 
conduct business in safe and sound manner.21 The challenge for the central bank is to find 
the appropriate balance between preserving financial stability and imposing discipline for the 
future. 
While the new set of liquidity standards requires banks to hold sufficient liquid assets in good 
times to meet their outflows in a given stress scenario, it does not exclude the possibility that 
central bank liquidity support will be needed if events turn out even worse than that scenario. 
One  solution  could  be  to  further  increase  the  liquidity  requirements.  However,  additional 
liquidity  requirements  aimed  at  mitigating  systemic  shocks  could  constitute  a  “waste”  of 
liquidity, given that they would be used only under exceptional circumstances. On this note, 
the  emergence  of  a  “home  bias”  following  the  global  financial  crisis  poses  the  risk  of  an 
additional  “waste”  of  liquidity.  The  ring-fencing  of  capital  and  liquidity  by  local  supervisors 
have  constrained  banks’  risk-taking  outside  domestic  jurisdictions  and  banks’  ability  to 
transfer and allocate liquidity across jurisdictions in which they operate. Lack of cooperation 
in the implementation of the new regulatory standards has a potential to lead to overprovision 
of  self-insurance  against  solvency  and  liquidity  risks,  when  capital  could  be  invested  for  a 
more productive use. 
Alternatively, a solution would consist in requiring banks to form pools of liquidity and to sign 
multilateral credit lines commitments, specifying the conditions under which an illiquid bank 
would  be  allowed  to  draw  on  its  credit  line.  However,  the  risk  of  coordination  failures  is 
substantial and a purely private solution, by shifting inside liquidity around the system, does 
not address the aggregate liquidity need that arises in the case of systemic shocks.22 In such 
a situation, the public sector should intervene and provide outside liquidity ex-post. 
                                                
20  See Bindseil (2013, op. cit.). 
21  Rochet and Vives (2001) provide a theoretical foundation for rescuing Bagehot’s view; see J.-C. Rochet and 
X.  Vives  “Coordination  failures  and  the  lender  of  last  resort:  Was  Bagehot  right  after  all?”,  Journal  of  the 
European Economic Association, 2, 6, 1116–1147, 2004. 
22  See B. Holmström and J. Tirole “Private and public supply of liquidity”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, 
No. 1,1998. Tirole (2011) emphasises the role of macro-prudential policies to deal with shortages of aggregate 
liquidity; see J. Tirole “Illiquidity and all its friends”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 49, No. 2, 2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
In my remarks today, I have focused on new liquidity regulations and have argued that the 
interaction with monetary policy implementation is expected to be significant and complex. I 
would  therefore  conclude  that  liquidity  regulation  and  central  bank  operations  cannot  be 
looked at in isolation. 
The new set of liquidity requirements will provide for a better monitoring of risks on banks’ 
balance  sheets  and  will  limit  the  social  cost  of  liquidity  crises.  It  has  to  be  combined  with 
actions ensuring a proper functioning of the money market, such as reform and oversight of 
reference  rates.  It  should  be  seen  as  a  complement  to  regulatory  reforms  that  improve 
market discipline in other segments of the banks’ liability structure, such as capital buffers 
and the new bail-in rules for senior bond-holders and uninsured depositors. 
A  more  far-reaching  question,  which  I  did  not  address  in  this  speech,  is  whether  the 
increased risk-sensitivity of bank liabilities under the new regulatory regime will constrain the 
role  of  banks  as  providers  of  liquidity  services  to  the  economy,  or  as  creators  of  “quasi-
money”. If so, this could put undue pressure on central banks as producers of the only truly 
safe and liquid asset – bank reserves. This makes it even more important for governments to 
be  fiscally  responsible  so  that  Treasuries  can  keep  or  regain  their  role  as  safe  and  liquid 
instruments. 
Going forward, central banks will continue to act as lenders of last resort, but the crisis has 
helped  us  better  understand  the  conditions  for  it  to  be  socially  useful.  One  of  these  is  an 
effective  liquidity  regulation  that  constrains  the  business  models  of  banks  in  a  way  that 
ensures that liquidity risk is self-insured. If properly priced, instruments such as a Committed 
Liquidity Facility can complement liquidity regulation while protecting monetary policy. 
Another condition is that the resort to central bank liquidity should be expensive, bounded in 
time,  and  addresses  only  emergency  situations.  This  matters  particularly  in  the  euro  area, 
where  overreliance  on  central  bank  funding,  including  emergency  liquidity  assistance,  can 
delay the necessary restructuring and changes in banks’ business models. 
And finally, there should remain a strict separation between capital and liquidity assistance 
that reflects the division of tasks between central banks on the one hand, shareholders and 
fiscal  authorities  on  the  other  hand  and  avoids  that  monetary  policy  is  held  hostage  of 
financial  or  fiscal  dominance.  Liquidity  ought  to  be  provided  to  the  banking  system  as 
needed, but it should not be a substitute for a lack of capital. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
