Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance – financial stability, economic growth 
and development 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia),  at  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  (IDB)  Prize  Lecture  on  “Islamic  finance  – 
financial stability, economic growth and development”, Jeddah, 27 November 2013. 
 It  is  my  honour  to  be  invited  to  deliver  this  lecture  on  Islamic  Finance:  Financial  Stability, 
Economic  Growth  and  Development,  here  in  Jeddah.  I  wish  to  thank  the  Islamic 
Development  Bank  for  the  invitation.  The  Islamic  Development  Bank  has  been  pioneering 
and instrumental in the development of Islamic finance and has been an inspiration in driving 
its progress and evolution. It is indeed a privilege for me to be part of this journey, and to 
have  witnessed  the  increasing  dynamism  of  the  Islamic  financial  industry  amidst  a  highly 
challenging economic and financial international environment. 
Global financial and economic adjustments 
My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  relevance  of  Islamic  finance  in  modern  market 
economies, taking into account the knowledge that we have today about the vulnerabilities of 
finance,  its  causes  and  its  wider  economic  ramifications.  Five  years  on  after  the  global 
financial  crisis  erupted,  the  most  pressing  challenge  confronting  the  world  economy 
continues  to  be  securing  financial  stability  and  generating  growth  and  employment.  While 
regulatory reforms both at the global and national levels have been extensive to strengthen 
financial systems, there has been less progress on the recovery in growth. While conditions 
in  the  world  economy  have  improved,  the  growth  prospects  going  forward  is  expected  to 
remain modest for an extended period of time. 
Several  important  lessons  have  emerged  from  this  recent  global  financial  crisis.  The  first 
relates  to  the  exponential  expansion  of  the  financial  system  which  did  not  commensurate 
with the expansion in economic activity. This resulted in a significant disconnect between the 
financial sector and its role in serving the economy. A number of factors contributed to the 
weakening  of  the  link  between  financial  intermediation  and  productive  economic  activity. 
Deregulation had opened up new opportunities for financial institutions to expand the scope 
of their activities. Increased competition, reinforced by advances in technology intensified the 
pace of innovation. And, the extended period of low interest rates in an environment of low 
inflation also prompted greater risk taking which in turn contributed to the significant build up 
of financial imbalances. 
The role of leverage in the global financial crisis, both in the public and private sectors, was 
also  a  particularly  important  contributing  factor.  It  has  also  become  a  factor  that  is  now 
holding back growth. At the height of the global financial crisis, the total leverage in the major 
industrial  economies  increased  significantly.  In  the  US,  private  sector  leverage  alone  had 
reached  over  200  percent  of  GDP  in  2008.  Other  reports  place  the  average  debt  level  to 
GDP  of  major  advanced  economies  at  over  300  percent  in  2010.  The  current  process  of 
deleveraging in the private sector remains incomplete, while pressures on fiscal sustainability 
in these economies also continue to weigh on confidence and growth. Significant challenges 
continue  to  be  faced  in  the  implementation  of  the  structural  adjustments  which  in  turn  is 
affecting the process of fiscal consolidation. This has further restrained the policy flexibility to 
support  growth.  The  extraordinary  and  exceptional  monetary  measures  taken  by  central 
banks  in  these  economies  have  provided  support  to  their  economies,  but  they  have  also 
come at a cost to savers with growing risks of market distortions and financial imbalances the 
longer these measures are held in place. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In efforts to build stronger defences against a repeat of the events that precipitated the 2008 
global  financial  crisis,  the  global  regulatory  reform  agenda  has  placed  significant  focus  on 
addressing elements of the regulatory and supervisory systems that allowed the build-up of 
excessive leverage. These elements include the unfettered innovation by financial institutions 
and the prevailing incentive system. Financial engineering had led bankers and investors to 
lose focus on their risk exposures when they failed to understand the increasingly complex 
products that purported to reduce the risks. The weak regulatory regime and supervision also 
failed to rein in such unbridled innovation. Misaligned incentives then fuelled excessive risk 
taking both at the institutional and individual levels. The inadequate financial buffers held by 
banking institutions against risk, a growing disconnect between the creation of credit and its 
use  for  productive  economic  activity  and  a  highly  interconnected  system  of  financial 
intermediation  ultimately  combined  to  give  rise  to  risks  that  disrupted  credit  flows  to  the 
economy. Over time, these trends were substantially amplified. 
The global reform agenda has made important progress in efforts to reduce the fragility of the 
financial  system  and  to  strengthen  its  resilience.  Substantial  work  has  already  been 
advanced  and  largely  completed  on  the  development  of  global  liquidity  standards,  the 
adoption of leverage ratios, and the significantly strengthened capital regulations which are 
important  components  of  the  reform  effort.  Greater  focus  has  also  been  placed  on  strong 
supervision, effective resolution regimes and arrangements for the oversight of systemically 
important financial institutions. While the effective implementation of these reforms is crucial, 
the world continues to seek more enduring solutions that will place financial institutions firmly 
back in the service of society. In some countries, fundamental structural changes are being 
pursued  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  banking  and  to  protect  banking  services  from  such 
higher  risk-taking  activities.  The  challenge  however,  is  how  this  might  be  achieved  in  a 
sustainable manner without undermining growth and development, and erasing the important 
efficiencies in financial management. 
A model to reanchor finance to the real economy 
While  the  global  financial  stability  efforts  have  made  progress  in  generating  an  enabling 
environment  for  a  new  equilibrium  of  financial  stability,  a  key  consideration  as  we  move 
forward  is  the  need  to  redefine  the  fundamental  character  of  modern  finance  and  how  it 
would interface and interact with the economy and the broader society. New considerations 
that  prioritise  justice  and  fairness,  sustainability  and  inclusion  have  also  become  essential 
underpinnings of such a financial ecosystem. The recalibration of finance should aim to serve 
the  needs  of  the  real  economy  and  more  importantly  the  broader  society.  This  would 
generate  positive  externalities  that  would  in  the  medium  term  lead  to  more  sustainable 
financial systems, and in turn contribute positively to growth and development. 
A core underpinning of Islamic finance is the tenet that requires Islamic financial transactions 
to be supported by genuine productive economic activity. Islamic finance is also a financial 
regime that places emphasis on risk-sharing, thereby strengthening further the link of finance 
to  the  real  economy.  Thus,  it  provides  a  greater  understanding  on  the  fundamental 
relationship between the financial sector and the real economy. The concept of risk-sharing 
in  finance  is  not  new.  While  risk-transfer  activities  currently  dominate  the  conventional 
financial systems, risk-sharing in the form of equity has long been a cornerstone of capital 
markets  with  vibrant  stock  exchanges.  Techniques  used  by  venture  capital  financiers  also 
have  similarities  to  risk-sharing  contracts  in  Islamic  finance.  The  development  towards  a 
more equity-based financial system where risk-sharing takes place reduces the over-reliance 
on  debt  funding,  thus  avoiding  excessive  debt  and  speculation  and  thus  financial  system 
fragility.  In  Islamic  finance,  this  is  further  reinforced  by  Shariah  principles  that  strongly 
discourage excessive debt given its detrimental effects on society. 
The use of risk-sharing transactions and undertakings under participatory finance models in 
Islamic finance thus offers the potential to reinforce the links between finance and the real 
economy. The contractual arrangements between the financier and the entrepreneur place 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
strong emphasis on the value creation and economic viability of the enterprise. This results in 
a close link between the growth of the financial sector and real sector activities in which the 
expansion  or  contraction  of  credit  is  dependent  on  developments  in  the  real  sector.  This 
would  provide  a  restraint  on  financial  engineering  and  innovation  as  financial  transactions 
need  to  be  supported  by  real  assets,  thus  aligning  innovation  to  productive  economic 
activities. As a result, the dangers of unbridled innovation are also substantially reduced. 
The  move  to  embrace  the  risk-sharing  dimension  of  Islamic  finance  also  presents  new 
opportunities for financial management. The profit sharing and risk-sharing characteristics of 
Islamic  financial  transactions  strengthen  the  incentives  for  Islamic  financial  institutions  to 
undertake  the  appropriate  due  diligence  on  the  transactions  to  ensure  that  the  profits  are 
commensurate  with  the  risks  assumed.  The  explicit  risk-sharing  element  between  the 
financier and customer instils greater discipline and responsibility, given the obligation and 
economic incentives created for participants to the contract to evaluate the risk profile of the 
product or investment proposition, the underlying trends in earnings and cash flows, and its 
income-producing potential. Such a process strengthens safeguards against the widespread 
mispricing  of  risks. The  strong  incentives for financial  institutions  to  understand the  nature 
and level of risk and leverage that is embedded in the Islamic financial instruments would in 
turn lead to more responsible innovation. This ensures that the products offered are aligned 
in  delivering  real  benefits  for  the  investors.  Reinforced  by  a  combination  of  stronger 
governance,  enhanced  transparency  and  more  robust  risk  management,  the  trust-based 
relationship  that  underpins  Islamic  finance  is  therefore  strengthened,  thereby  promoting 
overall confidence in the intermediation process. 
More recently, in this decade, the greater use of equity-based models has been most evident 
in  the  sukuk  market,  with  Shariah  structures  evolving  from  predominantly  lease-based 
(Ijarah)  and  mark-up  sale  (Murabahah)  structures  to  profit  and  loss  sharing  partnerships 
(Musharakah),  as  well  as  convertible  and  exchangeable  trusts.  The  evolution  of  asset-
backed  and  asset-based  sukuk  provides  further  options  for  investors  to  diversify  their 
portfolio.  Asset-backed  sukuk,  has  profit  and  loss  sharing  elements  that  thus  offers 
investment  sustainability.  The  possibility  of  a  default  is  minimised,  as  investors  of  asset-
backed sukuk are not guaranteed to receive income or capital gains, and profits are paid by 
the issuers only when the underlying assets earn profits. 
Risk-sharing transactions and undertakings under the participatory finance models in Islamic 
finance  also  enhances  prospects  for  increasing  financial  inclusion  and  in  bringing  the 
financially unserved into the economic mainstream. In many IDB member countries, studies 
have  shown  that  economic  development  is  constrained  by  the  lack  of  access  to  finance, 
given that only about 30 percent of the adult population use formal financial intermediaries. 
Greater  outreach  to  small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs)  and  microenterprises  can  be 
achieved through the wider application of equity-based structures in financing for SMEs and 
Islamic microfinance given their strong emphasis on promoting entrepreneurship and value-
creating  activities.  This  contributes  towards  the  overall  objective  of  generating  inclusive 
growth that enhances the prospects for job creation. Integration with other financial products 
such as microtakaful and social welfare arrangements such as endowment (waqf) can also 
provide a total financial solution for the lower income groups and small businesses. 
Risk-sharing  in  Islamic  finance  also  extends  to  the  creation  of  a  more  equitable  and  just 
distribution  of  wealth.  Redistributive  instruments  such  as  obligatory  alms  giving  (zakat), 
endowment  (waqf)  and  charity  (sadaqah)  complement  risk-sharing  financing  tools  to  form 
part of a comprehensive approach to address poverty and promote social justice within the 
community,  aspects  that  are  important  in  increasing  the  potential  for  a  more  balanced 
economic growth. 
Another  important  dimension  of  risk-sharing  that  enhances  financial  inclusion  lies  in  the 
potential for Islamic finance to become a powerful tool that can enhance financial access for 
emerging economies, in particular the less developed countries that have been marginalised 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
by  modern  finance.  Debt  financing  or  risk-transfer  activities  are  heavily  dependent  on 
conventional measures of financial and economic performance. In contrast, equity financing, 
with  its  risk-sharing  elements,  can  provide  the  required  financial  solution  that  is  not 
dependent on such conventional assessments. This will allow those countries which are less 
developed  but  have  assets  and  resources  to  access  finance.  The  strong  emphasis  on 
governance and risk management in risk-sharing contracts will also have an important role in 
catalysing  broad-based  improvements  in  standards  of  oversight  and  financial  discipline  in 
these  countries  as  safeguards  against  irresponsible  practices.  Taken  together,  these 
elements of Islamic finance offer enormous potential for less developed countries, more so 
those  that  are  rich  in  resources,  to  mobilise  and  channel  economic  resources  to  finance 
growth and development, and significantly raise standards of living for their communities. 
In the sukuk market, sukuk structured in profit and loss sharing partnerships (Musharakah) 
represents one of the majority in global sukuk issuances and outstanding. The emergence of 
sukuk as an alternative fund raising and investment instrument has opened up an important 
new  source  of  funding  for  long  term  development  projects.  Many  Asian  countries  have 
leveraged  on  the  sukuk  market  to  raise  funds  for  infrastructure  development  in  the 
healthcare, transportation, telecommunications and education sectors that contribute towards 
generating  broad-based  growth.  There  is  a  seemingly  good  fit  between  sukuk  and 
infrastructure project financing that requires large capital outlays with long gestation periods. 
This can significantly benefit IDB member countries which can tap into the sukuk market to 
meet  the  strong  current  and  future  demand  for  infrastructure  financing,  particularly  for 
countries  that  face  large  funding  gaps  for  infrastructure  development.  Indeed,  it  is 
encouraging  that  developing  economies  in  Africa  have  already  begun  to  leverage  on  the 
sukuk  market  for  infrastructure  financing  particularly  those  that  have  progressed  further  in 
laying the legal groundwork to enable sukuk issuances. 
Globally,  the  performance  of  the  sukuk  market  has  exceeded  expectations.  From  an 
outstanding  amount  of  US$33  billion  in  2006,  the  sukuk  market  has  expanded  more  than 
eightfold  to  US$292  billion  by  December  of  2012.  Future  growth  prospects  for  the  sukuk 
market is supported by the positive growth prospects in both the GCC and Asian regions and 
the increasing funding needs for infrastructure projects in these regions. In the Asian region, 
it  is  estimated  that  US$8.3  trillion  is  required  for  infrastructure  development  until  the  year 
2020. Infrastructure spending has also been one of the key drivers of economic growth in the 
GCC  in  the  recent  decade.  In  the  MENA  region,  the  changing  energy  landscape  towards 
more renewable energy and clean, efficient technologies presents significant potential for the 
use of sukuk to meet such financing requirements. 
With  its  growing  international  dimension,  Islamic  finance  has  assumed  an  increasingly 
important  role  in  facilitating  regional  and  international  trade  and  investment  flows  thereby 
intermediating  significant  cross  border  financial  flows.  More  recently,  international  financial 
centres  such  as  London  and  Hong  Kong  have  been  increasing  their  connectivity  with  the 
Middle  East  and  Asian  regions,  two  important  growth  centres  in  the  global  economy.  The 
increased  international  dimension  of  the  sukuk  market,  in  particular  has  facilitated  the 
movement  of  funds  across  borders  from  jurisdictions  with  surplus  funds  to  regions  with 
investment opportunities thereby enhancing its potential as a vehicle to foster greater trade 
flows and investment and thus facilitating growth and development. 
The development of Islamic finance and its risk-sharing and equity financing aspects could 
be  significantly  rewarding  for  countries  that  venture  into  this  alternative  form  of  financial 
intermediation.  However,  to  fully  realise  its  potential,  different  elements  of  the  financial 
system must evolve in tandem to provide the enabling conditions for this to occur. In such a 
system, it is essential for both investors and entrepreneurs to embrace different approaches 
in  managing  risk  and  return  relationships  that  are  embedded  in  the  many  variations  of 
Shariah contracts. It is important that these relationships are well understood by the parties 
involved, and aligned with the clear contractual and operational requirements. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Islamic finance: financial stability issues and challenges 
It  is  imperative  that  the  lessons  of  the  global  financial  crisis  are  not  lost  as  the  growth  of 
Islamic  finance  gains  further  traction.  Having  already  achieved  remarkable  growth  and 
development over the recent decade, the continued success and viability of Islamic finance 
will  also  depend  critically  on  ensuring  focus  on  preserving  financial  stability.  While 
contractual  relationships  and  obligations  may  be  different  under  Islamic  finance,  thus 
requiring  different  risk  governance  arrangements  and  skill  sets,  both  conventional  and 
Islamic financial institutions are exposed to similar risks including credit, market, liquidity and 
operational  risks.  For  these  reasons,  the  relevance  of  reforms  to  strengthen  capital  and 
liquidity buffers such as that under Basel III also extends to Islamic financial institutions and 
their  universal  implementation  is  important  to  avoid  competitive  distortions  and  regulatory 
arbitrage. 
Beyond  prudential  standards  however,  ensuring  strong  adherence  to  Shariah  principles  is 
central  to  delivering  the  financial  stability  benefits  that  were  found  wanting  in  conventional 
financial systems prior to the global financial crisis. In addition, the agenda to promote fair, 
responsible and professional conduct by Islamic financial institutions and more empowered 
consumers  must  be  equally  advanced.  In  Malaysia,  the  new  legal  framework  for  Islamic 
banking and takaful that recently came into force is set to pave the way for the development 
of  an  end-to-end  Shariah  compliant  regulatory 
framework,  reinforcing 
the  effective 
application of Shariah principles in the conduct of Islamic financial institutions. 
It  is  encouraging  to  see  that  substantive  progress  has  been  made  in  respect  of  the 
development  of  prudential  standards  for  Islamic  financial  institutions  and  the  cooperation 
arrangements  that  are  taking  place  to  facilitate  the  implementation  of  these  standards  at 
national levels. Since its establishment in 2002, the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) 
has introduced prudential standards for the Islamic financial services industry in the areas of 
capital  adequacy,  risk  management,  corporate  governance  and  Shariah  governance.  Nine 
countries have implemented these standards and 19 more are expected to implement them 
within  the  next  few  years.  The  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organisation  for  Islamic  Financial 
Institutions (AAOIFI) has also contributed to the issuance of more than 80 standards in the 
areas  of  accounting,  auditing,  governance,  ethics  and  Shariah  for  the  international  Islamic 
financial industry. 
Further progress on two fronts remains important. The first is to continue to evolve a more 
refined distinction within prudential and financial reporting frameworks to reflect the different 
nature and profile of risks under risk-sharing contract arrangements. The second is the need 
to  accelerate  efforts  to  further  strengthen  the  infrastructural  underpinnings  for  the 
development  of  the  overall  Islamic  financial  system.  While  the  broad  regulatory  principles 
and standards developed in the aftermath of the global financial crisis can be applied to most 
Islamic finance transactions, a broad-brush application of these rules would limit the ability of 
Islamic 
risk-sharing  contract 
arrangements.  The  stage  of  development  of  the  overall  financial  system  in  which  Islamic 
finance operates must also be considered to ensure that the effective application of global 
standards  can  be  achieved  without  unintended  consequences,  given  the  prevailing 
associated constraints. Islamic banks today continue to be confronted with limitations in the 
availability of a sufficiently deep and diverse pool of Shariah compliant instruments – in both 
domestic  and  international  currencies  –  in  which  they  can  invest.  Under  the  strengthened 
international  capital  and  liquidity  standards,  this  can  result  in  higher  costs  of  compliance, 
inefficiencies in funding structures and increased risks of funding mismatches. 
Strengthening  prudential  standards  alone  would  therefore  be  an  incomplete  response  to 
building  a  strong  foundation  for  the  future  of  Islamic  finance.  Beyond  the  more  stringent 
capital and liquidity standards, a further response to strengthen the global Islamic financial 
system  should 
infrastructural 
underpinnings and building blocks of the industry. It is equally important that initiatives such 
the  more  unique 
include  measures 
therefore  also 
to  strengthen 
institutions 
implement 
financial 
the 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
as the establishment of the International Islamic Liquidity Management Corporation (IILM) to 
support  cross-border  liquidity  management  by  Islamic  financial  institutions,  continue  to  be 
pursued.  The  recent  sukuk  issuance  by  IILM  represents  a  major  breakthrough  in  global 
cooperation on Islamic finance which has made available short-term USD Shariah compliant 
instruments  in  the  global  market  to  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  facilitate  more  efficient 
management of their cross-border liquidity requirements. 
As  Islamic  finance  further  evolves  and  advances,  more  fundamental  questions  on  the 
framework for financial stability in the context of Islamic finance will need to be addressed. At 
a national level, such questions will include the relevance and design of financial safety nets 
such as deposit insurance and lender of last resort facilities in an Islamic financial system. To 
a  large  extent,  these  safety  nets  have  in  mind  the  traditional  roles  played  by  conventional 
banks – the acceptance of deposits which are payable on demand and which enjoy principal 
protection for the depositors. In a risk and profit sharing model with participatory or equity-
based  contracts  that  support  ventures  involving  entrepreneurship  endeavours,  savers  and 
fund  providers  stand  to  bear  the  losses  in  such  ventures,  similarly  to  gaining  profits  from 
such ventures. A main challenge would be in structuring financial safety nets which honour 
the true nature of Islamic contracts, while preserving confidence in the financial system given 
the  entrenched  expectations  of  consumers.  Consumer  protection  and  education  initiatives 
are also essential to further deepen the understanding and awareness of consumers on the 
associated  risks  and  rewards  in  the  Islamic  financial  contracts.  In  addressing  these 
questions,  there  is  much  to  be  gained  from  sharing  experiences  and  strengthening 
cooperation in research initiatives. 
At the global level, the framework for financial stability in the context of Islamic finance needs 
to  interface  with  the  arrangements  that  exist  for  the  conventional  financial  systems.  As 
conventional  frameworks  for  financial  stability  are  being  strengthened  and  in  some  areas 
being  fundamentally  revisited,  it  is  timely  to  take  the  opportunity  to  elevate  the  level  of 
engagement  and  coordination  between  global  standard  setting  bodies  in  international 
standard  setting  and  implementation  activities.  Closer  coordination  will  be  increasingly 
important  to  avoid  fragmentation  in  regulatory frameworks  and  improve  the  surveillance  of 
risks to global financial stability. As lessons from previous crises should teach us, we would 
be  well  served  to  ensure  that  the  growth  of  Islamic  finance  –  on  a  global  scale  –  is  well 
supported by the strengthening of our collective capacity to understand, monitor and manage 
the attendant risks. 
Conclusion 
In  concluding,  Islamic  finance,  through  its  emphasis  on  risk-sharing  for  the  attainment  of 
socio-economic  goals  based  on  the  objectives  of  Shariah,  provides  the  discipline  that 
enhances the prospect of strengthening the link between finance and the real economy, thus 
contributing towards overall financial stability. With the global economy now on the recovery 
path,  Islamic  finance  offers  enormous  potential  in  supporting  a  more  inclusive  and 
sustainable  economic  growth.  Developing  and  emerging  economies  in  particular  stand  to 
reap the largest benefits from this potential. To fully realise this potential, regulatory priorities 
in strengthening financial stability taking into consideration the specificities of Islamic finance 
will ensure its continued resilience and its potential to effectively service the functioning of 
economies and the economic wellbeing of societies.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
