Njuguna Ndung’u: Reflections on inclusive business in Africa 
Keynote speech by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
G20 Inclusive Business Workshop in Africa, Nairobi, 30 October 2013. 
 Representatives  of  the  German  and  Saudi  Arabian  Governments  who  are  the  Co-
Facilitators; 
The G20 Challenge Partners; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is my honour and pleasure to join you this morning at this very important Workshop where 
we  reflect  on  Inclusive  Business  in  Africa.  Before  making  my  remarks,  let  me  express  my 
gratitude to the G20 Challenge Partners, the Conveners of this workshop, for the invitation 
and choice of Nairobi as the venue for the Workshop. May I also take this early opportunity to 
welcome  our  distinguished  guests  from  all  over  the  world  to  this  beautiful  land  of  Kenya, 
which enjoys a diversity of stunning and captivating landscape, wildlife and culture? I kindly 
urge you to take part of your time during your stay to enjoy this diversity and to always come 
back to enjoy it. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The timing of this workshop could not have come at a better time 
for  our  continent.  Africa  is  composed  of  developing  economies  with  untapped  wealth,  a 
youthful population and low volume of trade with itself due to infrastructure gaps. The binding 
constraints that the infrastructure gaps have created has not turned around the rich potential 
that  exists  in  Africa.  But  most  of  its  economies  are  developing  into  a  class  of frontier  and 
emerging economies. 
The  G20  Challenge  on  Inclusive  Business  Innovation  is  a  global  entity  that  promotes 
employment through innovative, scalable and commercially viable ways of working with low-
income  people  in  developing  countries.  This  development  should  be  appreciated  in  this 
region. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Building  inclusive  businesses  holds  the  key  to  unlocking  Africa’s 
potential. This will integrate the poor into the businesses value chains in various capacities 
whether as producers, distributors, suppliers or employees. When the challenges of scaling 
and replicating the businesses are overcome, profitable and sustainable ways of engaging 
with the low-income segments of the population create sustainable livelihoods and contribute 
to  sustainable  poverty  reduction. Inclusive  business  models,  as  is  said,  aim  to “do  well  by 
doing good” through creation of more stable jobs that provide sustainable income flows, build 
technical skills and local capacity at the bottom of the pyramid. If we achieve this we will not 
only have created inclusive businesses, but also inclusive growth and shared prosperity. This 
is  the  dream  for  Africa  on  shared  growth  that  will  support  endogenous  growth  and  strong 
institutions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Kenya’s Vision 2030 development plan and the new Constitution 
aim to promote shared growth for the youthful population. The Government recognizes that 
her youthful population is a resource and has therefore been implementing various targeted 
interventions to harness this resource. These initiatives include: 
• 
Basic primary education – free and mandatory: To boost school enrollment and 
literacy  levels  and  continue  to  lay  proper  ground  for  skills  and  local  capacity 
development for inclusive businesses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Targeted  interventions:  Funds  like  the  Women  Enterprise  Fund  and  Youth 
Enterprise  Fund  to  enable  the  youth  and  women  engage  in  profitable  business 
ventures. 
Policy on Procurement: The Government has reserved 30% of public procurement 
for small enterprises owned by the youth, women and the disadvantaged to include 
them as suppliers of businesses. 
Development and promotion of financial inclusion and use of mobile phones and 
Agency banking has created a market and reduced costs of doing business. This 
has created a favourable environment and enhanced access in the financial sector 
as  well  as  creating  opportunities  for  the  youth  who  are  more  versatile  with 
technology. 
Ladies and gentlemen: Let me share with you some of the initiatives we have undertaken to 
tap the potential of the bottom pyramid by developing a market and creating market access: 
• 
Innovative delivery channels for financial products beyond traditional brick and 
mortar models, e.g. mobile-phone financial services (MFS). The number of mobile 
phone money agents has increased from 307 when M-Pesa was launched in March 
2007 to a network of small business units of more than 50,000. These businesses 
have become more inclusive and created thousands of stable formal sector jobs that 
pay regular incomes to Kenyans. 
Agency Banking Model, which has turned non-bank outlets into financial service 
providers, using technology to enable third parties to offer limited financial services. 
It is a low-cost delivery channel that reduces both the fixed costs of setting up and 
maintaining  bank  branches  and  the  high  variable  costs  of  small  transactions  and 
enables financial institutions to reach the unbanked and underserved segments of 
the  population.  Since  its  inception  in  2010,  nearly  20,000  agents  have  been 
appointed.  Not  only  has  financial  inclusion  been  expanded  through  this  model  to 
capture the excluded, most of who are poor, but new and sustainable formal sector 
jobs created paying sustainable incomes making banking business more inclusive. 
A principal Agent Model gives the regulator less challenges and encourages growth. 
Credit  Reference  Bureaus  have  been  introduced  to  enhance  access  to  credit 
based on financial identity through building information capital, which has benefited 
many low-income households and enterprises that lack traditional tangible collateral. 
Demand  for  tangible  assets  to  secure  loans  has  for  many  years  locked  out  the 
bottom pyramid from the more affordable credit market. Opening up this market to 
them enables them join the formal sector and engage in more inclusive businesses 
that generate better and sustainable incomes and benefit from inclusive growth. 
Expansion of bank branches and MFIs to reach the lower pyramid due to lower 
barriers to entry, enhanced competition and declining costs of maintaining accounts. 
The  numbers  of  branches  have  consequently  increased  exponentially  from  534  in 
2005  to  1272  in  2012.  The  expansion  in  bank  branches  is  not  only  enhancing 
financial inclusion, but also funding more inclusive businesses. 
   Ladies  and  gentlemen:  the  innovation  that  spurred  most  of  these  developments  has 
ensured increased financial inclusion, which is a sure way of tapping potential in the lower 
pyramid  into  inclusive  businesses  through  creation  of  stable  formal  sector  employment 
opportunities  that  pay  sustainable  incomes,  reduce  cost  of  operations,  enhance  inclusive 
growth and reduce poverty sustainably. The Bank will therefore continue to work with market 
players  and  stakeholders,  including  the  G20  Challenge  Partners  to  enhance  financial 
inclusion and build inclusive businesses that employ the poor. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
