Paul Tucker: The reform of international banking – some remaining 
challenges 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Member of the Financial Policy Committee and 
Member  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  Board,  at  the  Oliver  Wyman  Institute 
Conference, London, 1 October 2013. 
 Over the next few years the international regulatory authorities will move towards completing 
the  programme  of  reforming  the  global  financial  system.  Domestically,  that  will  mean 
implementing those reforms, as discussed in the Record of the Financial Policy Committee’s 
latest meeting published this morning. 
Today,  I  plan  to  sketch  a  few  of  the  issues  in  banking  regulation  that  I  think  will  confront 
policymakers as they take this forward. I should stress at the outset that these are my views 
and do not necessarily represent the views of any of the domestic or international bodies of 
which I am a member. 
Just  as  a  scene  setter,  let  me  recap  the  central  components  of  the  international  reform 
programme, led by the “G20” Financial Stability Board. They are essentially as follows.1 
To make banks more resilient to stress – the essential steps are, of course, new regulatory 
requirements for capital and liquidity. Second, to ensure that banks and other financial firms 
can fail in an orderly way without taxpayer solvency support – that’s the resolution agenda. 
Third,  to  simplify  the  network  of  counterparty-credit  exposures  amongst  banks  and  others 
that arises from derivatives transactions – central counterparties (CCPs). Fourth, to ensure 
that those CCPs are not themselves Too Important To Fail – resolution again, plus rules to 
allocate losses amongst bank clearing members and others so that a distressed CCP can 
recover without going into resolution. Fifth, to ensure that the reregulation of banks does not 
simply cause the systemic risks associated with excess leverage and liquidity mismatches to 
be reinvented outside banks – the shadow banking reforms. And sixth, to make securitisation 
safer and more efficient – a complicated raft of reforms, including overdue steps to remove 
mechanistic reliance on Credit Rating Agency ratings. 
Cumulatively,  those reforms  will  change the face  of global finance  – for  the  better.  But  no 
doubt there will also be effects that have not been anticipated, resulting in a need for running 
repairs – a point to which I will return. The work to produce the reforms has also revealed 
conceptual  gaps  and  flaws  in  the  inherited  regulatory  framework  that  will,  sooner  or  later, 
need to be addressed. That is where I shall begin.  
The capital framework: going concern v. gone concern loss-absorbency 
Perhaps most important, policymakers have focused more closely than ever before on what 
happens when a bank or dealer fails. Regulatory policy needs to work backwards from that, 
since banks are regulated in order to reduce the costs of failure. Policymakers are, therefore, 
now engaging with the crucial distinction between those parts of a bank’s capital structure 
that absorb losses in a going concern – namely, equity – and those that can smoothly absorb 
losses in resolution or liquidation. The recent G20 Leaders Summit called on the Financial 
Stability  Board  to  produce  plans  over  the  coming  year  for  the  level  and  location  of  gone-
concern loss-absorbing capacity (or GCLAC) in global banks and dealers. In a nutshell, this 
                                                
1  See Financial Stability Board (2013), ‘Narrative progress report on financial reform’; Tucker (2012), ‘Banking in a market 
economy - the international agenda’, published in AFME (2012), Investing in Change: A book of essays on financial reform 
in  Europe;  and  Tucker  (2013),  ‘Competition,  the  pressure  for  returns  and  stability’,  published  in  Dombret  and  Luciuis, 
Stability of the Financial System; Illusion or Feasible Concept.   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
will be a policy for the amount of term bonded debt issued by banks, and where in the group 
structure it is issued from. 
I believe that in time the Basel Capital Accord could usefully be recast so that it has distinct 
components for going-concern and gone-concern requirements. That would replace what to 
my mind is the fuzzy distinction between what are termed “Common equity tier 1”, “Additional 
tier 1” and “Tier 2” capital – not all of which is capital in the ordinary sense of the term that it 
can absorb losses outside of liquidation.2 
The other element of this policy – which, again, the FSB will be addressing – is where in a 
group  GCLAC  should  be  issued  from,  ie  whether  from  the  group  holding  company,  from 
intermediate regional or national holding companies, or from operating banks and dealers. 
This turns on the type of resolution strategy most appropriate for a particular group; ie top-
down  or  Single  Point  of  Entry  (SPE)  where  a  whole-group  resolution  is executed from the 
topco, or Multiple Point of Entry (MPE) where a group is split into parts which, as necessary, 
are resolved separately. 
Of course, it is in operating companies – banks and dealers – that life-threatening losses are 
generated. Where those losses exceed the equity base of an operating subsidiary, they need 
either to be absorbed by debt issued into the external market or to be passed up the group 
structure via intra-group debt or guarantees. The first – GCLAC, ie term debt, issued to the 
market – is associated with Multiple-Point-of-Entry resolutions. The latter, where losses flow 
to  the  top  of  a  financial  group,  are  associated  with  Single-Point-of-Entry  resolutions.3  The 
choice of how equity and gone-concern loss-absorbing capacity should be distributed across 
a group is, therefore, part and parcel of deciding its preferred resolution strategy. That was 
not understood as international banking policy was developed over recent decades, and sets 
up my next issue. 
Reconciling the Basel Concordat, the Core Principles of Banking Supervision, the 
Capital Accord, and resolution policy 
The  development  of  international  policy  on  resolution  is,  arguably,  exposing  an  underlying 
need  to  reconcile  the  provisions  of  various  international  agreements  in  banking  regulation 
and supervision. There are three that are relevant: the Concordat, the Core Principles and 
the Capital Accord. Bear with me for a moment while I set up the point I want to make. 
The Concordat4 establishes the division of labour amongst home and host authorities – the 
foundation  stone  of  international  co-operation  amongst  bank  supervisors.  First  agreed  in 
1975 in the wake of the failure Herstatt, updated after Banco Ambrosiano in 1983 and again 
in  1992 following  the closure  of  BCCI, the  Concordat  was  most recently  spring  cleaned  in 
1996. It is premised upon “consolidated supervision” of a banking group as a whole. What 
that means is that so long as the host supervisors of local outlets of an international banking 
group are satisfied that the home supervisor is capable of supervising the consolidated group 
as  a  whole,  the  distribution  of  capital  resources  across  the  group,  both  within  and  across 
jurisdictions,  can  be  unfettered.  In  principle,  legal  entities  within  the  group  can  be  lightly 
capitalised so long there is adequate capital in the group as a whole. 
                                                
2  See  Tucker  (2013),  ‘Banking  reform  and  macroprudential  regulation:  implications  for  banks’  capital  structure  and  credit 
conditions.’ 
3  See Financial Stability Board (2013), ‘Recovery and Resolution Planning for Systemically Important Financial Institutions: 
Guidance on Developing Effective Resolution Strategies’; and Tucker (2013), ‘Resolution and the future of finance’.  
4  For  the  most  recent  version  see  BIS  (1996),  ‘The  Supervision  of  Cross-Border  Banking’,  available  online  at: 
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs27.htm 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Meanwhile, the (1997/2006/2012) Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision5 set out 
minimum standards for prudential supervision. Supervisors are required to look at a bank on 
a solo basis; on a consolidated basis covering all related banking entities in a group; and on 
a  group-wide  basis,  ie  taking  into  account  non-banking  related  entities  as  well.  Under 
Principle  12,  a  home  supervisor  should  supervise  a  bank  on  a  consolidated  basis,  but  “in 
addition  ...  the  responsible  supervisor  supervises  individual  banks  in  the  group.  The 
responsible  supervisor  supervises  each  bank  on  a  stand-alone  basis  and  understands  its 
relationship  with  other  members  of  the  group.”  Under  Principle  16,  jurisdictions  may  –  I 
stress, may – also opt to be assessed by the IMF for compliance with the Principles against 
the “additional” criterion6 that a supervisor should ensure an adequate distribution of capital 
within a banking group. But, to repeat, that is not an obligation. So summing up, as with the 
Concordat,  a  country’s  prudential  regime  could  be  judged  as  complying  with  the  Core 
Principles  even  though  it  does  not  ensure  that  the  distribution  of  capital  across  a  banking 
group leaves its individual entities adequately capitalised. 
Finally, the Capital Accord7 – now in its third incarnation – applies to banking groups on a 
consolidated basis (or at a sub-consolidated basis for different tiers of a group). The Accord 
gives jurisdictions an option to apply capital requirements on a solo-basis to individual legal 
entities  as  an  alternative  to  applying  the  requirements  to  consolidated  groups  of  legal 
entities8, but there is no requirement to exercise that option. Again, then, there is no hard rule 
that ensures a sensible distribution of capital across individual entities within a group. 
If you cannot fit all that together, you can be excused! 
Here’s  an  attempt  to  make  sense  of  it.  There  appears  to  be  a  disconnect  between  the 
Concordat  (consolidated  supervision);  the  Core  Principles  (both  consolidated  and  solo 
perspective  recognised as  important,  but  no  mandated  solo  capital  requirements);  and  the 
Capital Accord (consolidated and sub-consolidated, with solo subject to deductions allowed 
but not required). 
Or, put another way, each of the three BCBS documents does an important job but none of 
them addresses the distribution of capital across a group. That is a gap.  
Do not assume that this is a theoretical point. It is one reason there have been attempts by 
regulators  to  shore  up  the  financial  soundness  of  local  subsidiaries  during  the  crisis.  In  a 
crisis, sovereign countries care about the international distribution of losses. Standard setters 
should look into this. 
They should do so in the light of the principles and policies that have been agreed on how to 
improve the resolvability of banks – at both the consolidated and solo level. Because, quite 
simply, it is legal entities that fail. 
                                                
5  For  the  most  recent  version  see  BIS  (2012),  ‘Core  principles  for  effective  banking  supervision’,  available  online  at: 
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs230.htm.   
6  Paragraph 33 of the foreword to the Core Principles states that “countries undergoing assessments by the IMF and/or the 
World  Bank  can  elect  to  be  graded  against  the  essential  and  additional  criteria.  It  is  anticipated  that  this  will  provide 
incentives  to  jurisdictions,  particularly  those  that  are  important  financial  centres,  to  lead  the  way  in  the  adoption  of  the 
highest supervisory standards. As with the essential criteria, any assessment against additional criteria should recognise the 
concept of proportionality.” 
7  See BCBS (2013), ‘Basel III: A global regulatory framework for more resilient banks and banking systems’, available online 
at: http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs189.pdf.  
8  To understand the difference of applying capital requirements on a solo basis relative to a sub-consolidated basis, imagine 
Bank A owns Bank B which in turn owns Bank C. Under both approaches, capital requirements apply to the group on a 
consolidated basis. Under the solo-approach, capital requirements are also applied to each of Bank A, Bank B and Bank C 
individually, after having deducted from Bank A’s capital, its investment in B, and from B’s capital its investment in C. Under 
the  sub-consolidation  approach, capital  requirements  would  be  applied  on  the consolidated  accounts  of  Bank B, ie  after 
adding the assets and liabilities of B and C and eliminating any intra-group exposures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
For groups for which Single-Point-of-Entry – broadly, bail in of debt issued through a holding 
company – is the preferred resolution strategy, local subsidies need a combination of equity 
and  intragroup  GCLAC  (ie  intragroup  bonds)  that  permits  losses  to  flow  smoothly  to  the 
topco.  By  transferring  losses  upwards,  an  ailing  subsidiary  is  recapitalised.  Whether  that 
suffices  for  the  host  authorities  will  depend  on  their  confidence  in  the  capacity  and 
willingness of the group’s home authorities to execute an effective resolution of the topco. By 
contrast, for groups for which Multiple-Point-of-Entry – breaking up a group – is the preferred 
resolution strategy, the host authorities of a subsidiary identified for “separation” must ensure 
that  it  has  a  capital  structure  and  sufficient  operational  independence  to  enable  them  to 
resolve it themselves with their particular set of powers. Put simply, for firms within a group 
for which SPE is the preferred resolution strategy, the group as whole is a source of strength 
on which local supervisors can place weight. That is less true for groups for which MPE is the 
preferred resolution strategy. 
Summing up, from a resolution perspective, the distribution of loss-absorbing capacity (the 
sum of going-concern and gone-concern loss absorbency) is crucial. Yet, from a regulatory 
and supervisory perspective, there is as yet no international standard that requires a banking 
group to ensure a sensible distribution of equity (and debt) within the group. The international 
standards on banking will need to catch up.  
The calibration of capital requirements: stress testing 
But  how  much  capital  (equity  and  gone-concern  loss-absorbing  capacity)  should  a  bank 
have,  and  how  should  regulators  decide?  I  will  conclude  by  saying  something  about  how 
stress testing can help.  
The  minimum  standard  set  in  the  Basel  Capital  Accord  is  just  that:  a  minimum  standard. 
There has to be provision for add-ons for individual banks’ particular circumstances; and also 
for  temporary  across-the-board  increases  when  the  environment  has  become  more 
threatening than anything envisaged when the Accord was calibrated, ie when the world has 
become extraordinarily risky. In the United Kingdom, the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) 
has the power to recommend, or direct, the micro-supervisors to vary capital requirements 
temporarily in order to protect against just such unusual threats to stability. 
But  in  order  to  use  those  degrees  of  freedom,  policymakers  need  a  good  framework  for 
assessing banks’ capital adequacy in different circumstances, both at the level of the system 
a  whole  and  for  individual  firms.  The  Bank  of  England  –  Financial  Policy  Committee  and 
Prudential Regulation Authority – believe that a regime of concurrent stress testing of banks 
is an important part of the answer.  
Following a recommendation from the FPC earlier in the year, the Bank has today published 
a  Discussion  Paper  setting  out  plans,  to  be  implemented  progressively  over  a  number  of 
years,  for  just  such  a  stress-testing  regime  for  the  United  Kingdom.  In  broad  terms,  each 
year the FPC would design a (set of) common scenario(s) that it judges the banking system 
needs  to  be  able  to  survive;  the  PRA  would  apply  those  scenarios  to  the  major  banks, 
dealers and building societies, alongside more firm-specific scenarios; drawing on analysis 
from  across  the  whole  institution,  Bank  staff  would  analyse  capital  adequacy  under  stress 
drawing  on  a  range  of  models,  including  firms’  own  models.  The  results  would  inform 
judgments by the FPC and the PRA Board on whether remedial measures were needed. In 
some degree, both the stress scenarios and the results would be published.  
That  very  brief  summary  leaves  a  lot  of  questions  unanswered,  but  suffice  to  say  that  we 
believe that a stress-testing regime can enhance the quality of the Bank’s macro and micro 
prudential supervision and, over time, underpin confidence in the banking system.  
In addition, I believe that a stress-testing regime will be very important for another reason: 
accountability to the public via Parliament. The Bank of England now has extensive powers 
as a micro supervisor of individual firms and a macro supervisor of the financial system as a 
whole. Parliament has set objectives for both – primarily, safety and soundness for the PRA, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and the resilience of the system for the FPC. But unlike in monetary policy, we do not have a 
quantified target – and, to be clear, we do not think that that would be possible. To have such 
power with limited transparency would be uncomfortable. If nothing else, it would leave the 
Bank in a position where supervision was of interest only when it obviously goes wrong. We 
need to engage society – public, Parliament – in debates about the resilience of the financial 
system and how we are supervising it in the good times as well as in bad times. The FPC 
and  PRA  have  already  taken  various  steps  to  help  with  this  –  the  six-monthly  Financial 
Stability Review, the published Record of FPC policy meetings, the Committee’s statement 
on the use of its directive powers, the PRA’s Approach document and annual report, and so 
on. But stress testing can provide a quantum leap in transparency and accountability. 
For example, the FPC will need to be able to defend its choice of stress against questions 
and criticisms that the scenarios are too extreme or not tough enough. That will implicitly be 
a healthy debate about objectives. At the micro-supervisory level, the PRA Board will need to 
explain some of its remedial measures using the published stress tests. This can make for a 
richer  public  discussion  of  prudential  supervision,  as  well  as  encouraging firms to  address 
latent vulnerabilities promptly.  
That brings me back to resolution. Occasionally a firm will be revealed to be so feeble that 
major surgery is needed. Sometimes recovery measures, overseen by the supervisors, will 
suffice. Sometimes they will not, with a firm having to go into resolution instead. A sensible 
stress-testing regime – indeed effective supervision in general – cannot work without a well-
designed  resolution  regime.  That  should  not  be  a  surprise,  but  is  in  fact  one  of  the  great 
lessons of the crisis. 
Conclusion 
Over past decades, banking, and banking supervision, somehow got detached from the most 
essential truth: that banks can fail. Thus, we have banks using brands that do not represent 
any legal entity, as if banks were simply trying to sell something, not running a business in 
borrowing  and  lending.  We  have  an  international  regime  that  encourages  but  does  not 
require adequate loss-absorbency in each and every entity within a banking group. We have 
had  a  regime  that  is  focused  on  the  capital  needed  in  a  going  concern,  but  not  on  the 
organisational and capital structures that would help the authorities to contain disorder in the 
face of chronic distress. All those issues are now, I believe, in the open. There is a clear way 
forward  on  resolution.  But  there  will  have  to  be  some  consequential  recasting  of  the 
international regulatory regime. 
Of course, none of the reforms will be fool proof. Mistakes will be made; mistakes we cannot 
see. In future, it has to be possible to make running repairs to the regime where faultlines are 
exposed. 
Stress testing – not only of banks but of CCPs and, in time, of other intermediaries – can 
help  to  expose  those  faultlines.  It  can  help  to  calibrate  macro  and micro  prudential  policy. 
And a good stress-testing regime will make it easier to explain and defend the standard of 
resilience that the Bank requires. And for that, the Bank can be held to account. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
