Thomas Jordan: Reconciling Switzerland’s minimum exchange rate and 
current account surplus 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, 8 October 2013. 
 Introduction 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  at  the  Peterson  Institute  for 
International Economics. Before we start, I would like to personally thank the President of the 
Peterson Institute, Adam Posen, for the invitation. 
I will begin by asking two questions: First, is Switzerland’s minimum exchange rate at odds 
with  its  longstanding  current  account  surplus?  Second,  is  such  a  policy  undermining  the 
adjustment of global imbalances? I will argue that, in both cases, the answer is no.  
The  Swiss  National  Bank  set  a  minimum  exchange  rate  of  CHF  1.20  against  the  euro  in 
September 2011. In so doing, it took action against an excessive strengthening of the Swiss 
franc that was threatening price stability and the Swiss economy. To illustrate the extent of 
the franc’s appreciation, let’s look at Figure 1, which shows the real trade-weighted exchange 
rate on a monthly basis. As we can see, right from the onset of the financial crisis in 2007, 
the Swiss franc strengthened significantly, and dramatically so in July 2011. Between early 
July and early August alone, the Swiss franc appreciated by roughly 20%.1  
With  interest  rates  close  to  zero  and  inflation  forecasts  signaling  deflationary  risks,  the 
minimum exchange rate helped us avoid a dangerous tightening of monetary conditions, in a 
situation where we had exhausted the options available under conventional monetary policy. 
It  also  provided  the  foreign  exchange  market  with  clear  guidance  at  a  time  of  enormous 
uncertainty.  
The  rationale  for  the  introduction  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  is  internationally 
acknowledged. As I have seen over the last two years, particularly central banks and the IMF 
understand the difficult situation facing Switzerland in 2011. They also recognize that we set 
the  minimum  exchange  rate  at  a  level  where  the  Swiss  franc  remains  highly  valued  even 
today. 
Over the last few years, exchange rate tensions between the major economies have flared 
up.  In  this  context,  some  observers  have  criticized  central  banks  for  influencing  exchange 
rates,  either  directly  through  foreign  currency  purchases,  or  indirectly  through  additional 
monetary easing measures such as the purchase of securities. It is claimed that these types 
of asset purchases generate spillover effects or constitute a beggar-thy-neighbor policy.2 In 
recent  weeks,  it  has  been  suggested  that  capital  flows  have  again  become  highly  volatile 
                                                 
1  Based on daily data. 
2  There are several event studies which show that asset purchases by the Federal Reserve and the Bank of 
England weakened their domestic currencies. See the following references: 
  Bauer, M. and C. Neely (2013): “International Channels of the Fed’s Unconventional Monetary Policy”, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper 2012-12.  
  Glick, R. and S. Leduc (2013): “The Effects of Unconventional and Conventional U.S. Monetary Policy on the 
Dollar”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper 2013-11. 
  Neely, C. (2010): “The Large-Scale Asset Purchases Had Large International Effects”, Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis, Working Paper 2010-018C.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
because  asset  purchase  programs  are  expected  to  be  scaled  back,  thereby  unleashing  a 
new round of currency tensions.  
Against  the  background  of  currency  fluctuations  and  weak  global  demand,  the  problem  of 
global imbalances still lingers. In the debate on global adjustment, there have also been calls 
for  countries  with  a  current  account  surplus  to  let  their  currencies  appreciate.  For  some 
observers,  this  includes  Switzerland.  Our  country’s  large  current  account  surplus  –  so  the 
argument goes – is a sure sign that the Swiss franc is too weak. The SNB should therefore 
abolish the minimum exchange rate and allow the Swiss franc to appreciate further. This in 
turn  would  allow  the  current  account  surplus  to  diminish,  thereby  contributing  to  global 
rebalancing.3 
I  would  like  to  point  out  that  such  a  critique  is  not  based  on  a  full  understanding  of 
Switzerland’s situation. For a comprehensive assessment of the Swiss current account and 
the Swiss franc, the following factors also need to be considered. First, large exchange rate 
appreciations have not resulted in external adjustment of the Swiss current account. Instead, 
key  components  of  the  Swiss  current  account  are  determined  by  structural  factors  that 
behave independently of the exchange rate. Second, there are good and legitimate reasons 
for  countries  to  have  current  account  deficits  and  surpluses  to  smooth  their  output  and 
consumption.  And  third,  independent  central  banks  need  to  fulfill  their  mandate  of  price 
stability  in  an  inter-dependent  environment  that  constrains  their  policy  choices.  More 
specifically, the SNB has had to – and still has to – ensure that monetary conditions do not 
become  restrictive  for  Switzerland  in  the  face  of  extreme  exchange  rate  appreciation  and 
deflationary risks. The critique does not take these three points into account. 
Structural factors and Switzerland’s surplus  
Let me first address the question of specific structural factors in the Swiss current account 
surplus, and why this surplus is not a reflection of Swiss franc weakness. In a nutshell, these 
factors are more closely correlated with external developments in real economic activity than 
with exchange rate movements. 
I’d like to highlight these structural factors with the help of three figures. Figure 2 shows the 
current account surplus and the real trade-weighted exchange rate of the Swiss franc. I have 
two observations here: In the short run, when the franc appreciates in real terms, the surplus 
in  the  current  account  does  not  automatically  decline.  Nor  does  the  surplus  automatically 
increase when the franc depreciates. In the long run, both the real exchange rate and the 
surplus increase over time. Thus, the theory that a stronger real Swiss franc automatically 
leads to a lower current account surplus does not hold empirically for Switzerland. 
Why  is  this?  Let’s  look  at  Figure  3,  which  shows  the  trade  account  and  current  account 
balances for selected countries. If a country’s current account surplus is primarily determined 
by  its  trade account in goods,  then  we  might  expect  an  appreciation to  result in  a smaller 
surplus,  through  lower  exports  and  higher  imports.  The  underlying  assumption  in  many 
economic  models  is  that  current  account  adjustment  comes  about  primarily  through  the 
trade-in-goods component. Switzerland is different to most other countries, in that its trade 
account  balance  in  goods  represents  only  a  small  fraction  of  the  large  current  account 
surplus. This stands in stark contrast to other economies such as China, where goods trade 
makes up more than 80% of the current account surplus. 
So, if the Swiss current account is not driven by the trade balance in goods, then what are 
the factors responsible for its surplus? As we can see from Figure 4, the large surplus in the 
                                                 
3  See, for example, Joseph E. Gagnon (2013): “The Elephant Hiding in the Room: Currency Intervention and 
Trade Imbalances”, Working Paper Series WP13-2, Peterson Institute for International Economics. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
current account is mainly attributable to two components: investment income and services. 
The figure shows just the net amounts for these components.  
In Switzerland, there is close co-movement between investment income and current account 
balances.  Historically,  surpluses  have  been  the  norm  for  Switzerland.  Our  current  account 
has recorded almost uninterrupted surpluses since 1960. Although official time series do not 
extend further back than 1947, unofficial current account estimates show that, even at the 
beginning of the 20th century, the Swiss were saving more than they invested domestically.4 
So,  already  then,  a  savings  surplus  was  being invested  abroad,  laying  the  foundations  for 
today’s international investment position, which is large by global standards. This took place 
against  the  background  of  an  ever-appreciating  Swiss  franc  during  the  post-World  War  II 
period.5 Most of the savings surplus is invested in securities, i.e. portfolio investment, and in 
production  facilities  abroad,  i.e.  direct  investment.6  In  this  way,  Switzerland  has  built  up  a 
strong net international investment position, most of which is held by multinational companies 
and pension funds.7 
Let's now turn to income from services. Here, there are two drivers of the current account 
surplus: cross-border financial services and merchanting. Again, both activities are primarily 
driven by international financial markets and global demand for raw materials, and are not 
sensitive to movements in the Swiss franc. 
I  don’t  think  I  need  to  say  much  about  receipts  from  cross-border  financial  services.  The 
importance of the financial sector for our country is well known. Receipts from Swiss banks’ 
and insurance companies’ foreign customer business flow into the current account. In these 
cross-border transactions, banks’ financial services are the largest contributor. 
By contrast, merchanting – which is less well known but has a long tradition in Switzerland – 
has  grown  significantly  over  the  past  ten  years.8  And  since  2010,  net  income  from 
merchanting has been higher than net income from banks’ financial services in the current 
account.  Merchanting  refers  to  trade,  denominated  primarily  in  U.S.  dollars,  that  does  not 
cross the domestic border.9 The dynamics of Swiss merchanting can be partially explained by 
the  relocation  of  commodity  houses  to  Switzerland  and  the  commodities  boom  before  the 
financial crisis. Over the past five years, merchanting has accounted for almost one-third of 
the current account surplus.  
Allow me to recap the main points regarding the Swiss current account. Switzerland’s large 
current account surplus is determined by three structural factors: the strong net international 
                                                 
4  Already then, the savings surplus was based on net income from capital investment abroad and net receipts 
from  trade  in  services  with  foreigners.  See  also  T.  Schlup,  “Zahlungsbilanz”,  in  Historisches  Lexikon  der 
Schweiz, electronic version (e-HLS). 
5  See Figure 1 in Fratzscher, M., A.J. Mehl, and I. Vansteenkiste (2011): “130 years of fiscal vulnerabilities and 
currency  crashes  in  advanced  economies”,  IMF  Economic  Review,  Vol.  59,  Issue  4,  2011,  pp. 683–716.  It 
shows  real  exchange  rates  from  1890  to  2009  for  Switzerland,  and  the  major  economies  and  emerging 
markets.  Switzerland  and  the  Netherlands  are  the  only  countries  whose  exchange  rates  have  appreciated 
continuously and uninterruptedly since 1950. 
In  the  case  of  portfolio  investment  and  direct  investment,  Switzerland  has  high  net  assets  abroad  which, 
together, make up 84%  of Swiss  net  wealth. However, in some  years, the  increase in the  net  international 
investment  position  attributable  to  current  account  surpluses  has  been  cancelled  out  by  currency-related 
losses on asset holdings abroad. 
6 
7  Since  2011,  reserve  assets  have  been  a  further  important  component  of  the  net  investment  position. 
Switzerland  has  a  net  liability  position  in  the  “other  investment”  category,  reflecting  the  strong  linkages 
between the Swiss financial center and the rest of the world. 
8  See “Merchanting in Switzerland”, in Swiss Balance of Payments 2012, Swiss National Bank. 
9  See  the  discussion  in  Beusch,  E.,  Döbeli,  B.,  Fischer,  A.,  and  Yesin,  P.  (2013):  “Merchanting  and  Current 
Account Balances”, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute, WP 140. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
investment position, the special role of our country as an international financial center, and 
merchanting  business.  Consequently,  Switzerland’s  current  account  surplus  did  not  arise 
because the Swiss franc was too weak. The real exchange rate does not play a decisive role 
in the structural factors responsible for this surplus. 
Narrow current account ranges: a bad idea 
In the context of resolving global imbalances, some would argue that each country’s current 
account should lie within a narrowly defined range. The Geithner plan, for example, calls for 
a range of +/–4%; others say it should be even narrower.10 While these ranges serve as a 
reference for locomotive countries that should contribute to global absorption, this argument 
falls  flat  when  a  country  of  8  million  people  is  asked  to  adjust  and  take  on  such  a  role. 
Furthermore, these ranges are arbitrarily defined and are not considered to be flexible over 
time.11 
On a more technical level, it must be borne in mind that current account balances are not 
free from accounting biases. This is especially true for countries with large net investment 
assets and large portfolio investments in equity. For these countries – Switzerland included – 
the  current  account  is  overstated  because  of  accounting  procedures  for  the  balance  of 
payments. The time-varying bias, which in some years has been estimated at more than 5% 
of  Swiss  GDP,  stems  from  the  fact  that  income  from  foreign  direct  investment  is  fully 
attributed  to  domestic  residents,  rather  than  its  corresponding  proportion  of  domestic  and 
foreign shareholders. In short, this accounting bias overstates our external wealth. A further 
statistical bias that overstates the Swiss current account surplus is cross-border shopping. It 
is unclear how current account ranges deal with such measurement issues.12 
Besides country size and accounting issues, from the investment and savings perspective, 
too,  there  are  good  reasons  to  run  a  current  account  surplus  that  exceeds  some 
predetermined  range.  An  aging  industrialized  society,  like  Switzerland,  needs  to  raise  its 
national savings, perhaps by more than it invests domestically. In so doing, it exports capital 
abroad  and  runs  a  current  account  surplus,  so  that  it  can  smooth  its  consumption  in  the 
future when the labor force shrinks. Similarly, a young emerging economy chooses to save 
less than it invests, attracting foreign investors, and running a current account deficit. It does 
this to increase its current consumption and its future output. Prescribing maximum levels for 
current  account  surpluses  and  deficits  completely  ignores  the  fact  that  countries  operate 
within  different  structural  environments.  If  we  do  not  allow  countries  to  smooth  their 
consumption over time, why do we allow individuals to smooth their consumption by letting 
them take out loans or invest in foreign companies? 
Certainly,  it  is  a  difficult  question.  What  is  considered  to  be  a  sustainable  current  account 
deficit  or  surplus?  One  thing  is  sure  –  forcing  countries  to  adhere  to  an  arbitrarily  chosen 
range  and  ignoring  their  structural  factors,  the  measurement  biases,  and  their  savings 
characteristics is not an appropriate strategy in an international economic order which is still 
based on the principle of free markets and free trade.  
                                                 
10  See  www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-10-22/geithner-push-for-g-20-trade-gap-targets-opposed-before-g-20-
talks-start.html. 
11  Between 1980 and 2012, the current account balances of the G20 countries were outside of the –4/+4 range 
23.4% of the time, while for OECD countries the range was exceeded 34.9% of the time.  
12  For  more  information  regarding  accounting  bias  in  the  Swiss  current  account,  see  IMF  (2011,  2012): 
Switzerland Article IV report. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Economic environment and the introduction of the minimum exchange rate 
Now I’d like to discuss the motivation for introducing the minimum exchange rate. The rate 
was not implemented to stimulate exports, but rather to ensure that the appropriate monetary 
conditions prevailed and that the SNB could fulfill its mandate of price stability. The European 
sovereign debt crisis escalated dramatically in the summer of 2011. It became increasingly 
evident  that,  in  addition  to  Italy  and  Spain  being  engulfed  by  the  crisis,  France  also  was 
potentially exposed. At the same time, the debt-ceiling negotiations in the United States and 
the consequent downgrade of the U.S. by Standard and Poor’s added to the tension. During 
these  months,  the  Swiss  franc  appreciated  rapidly  against  all  major  currencies.  This 
development is shown in Figure 5 for the exchange rate of the Swiss franc against the euro 
and  the  U.S.  dollar.  The  increase  in  the  value  of  the  franc,  which  reflected  market  panic 
rather than economic fundamentals, drastically tightened domestic monetary conditions. With 
annual inflation already close to zero, Switzerland risked falling into a deflationary trap. What 
policy options were available?  
The massive Swiss franc appreciation left the SNB with few options to combat the restrictive 
monetary conditions. As a result of the response to the global financial crisis of 2008/2009, 
our policy rate was already at the lower bound. In August 2011, in a first step to counter the 
excessively  tight  monetary  conditions,  we  announced,  almost  on  a  weekly  basis,  an 
expansion  of  the  monetary  base,  initially  from  CHF  30  billion  to  CHF  80  billion,  then  to 
CHF 120 billion and finally to CHF 200 billion. Even when the monetary base reached close 
to 40% of GDP, this was ultimately insufficient to halt the appreciation of the franc.  
As a consequence of these developments, on September 6, 2011, the SNB announced that 
it  was  introducing  a  minimum  exchange  rate  of  1.20  against  the  euro.  Since  the 
announcement, the franc has never traded below this minimum. At the zero lower bound, the 
minimum exchange rate has become an important monetary policy tool for us. Yet despite 
the  introduction  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  Switzerland  has  experienced  almost  two 
years of negative inflation. I just received the latest inflation data this morning: After having 
been at zero for two months, inflation turned negative again in September.  
In this context, it is also crucial to note that the introduction of the minimum exchange rate is 
not a beggar-thy-neighbor policy. It must be remembered that Switzerland has always had a 
negative goods trade balance with the euro area. The trade balance was negative before the 
implementation of the minimum exchange rate, and continues to be negative today. Swiss 
exports in goods have not gained market share in the euro area at the expense of others. 
Allow  me  to  perform  a  simple  thought  experiment  with  you.  Let’s  take  the  euro  area 
perspective for a moment: What would have happened to euro area exports to Switzerland if 
the  minimum  exchange  rate  had  not  been  introduced?  Given  that  Switzerland  is  the  euro 
area’s  fourth  largest  export  destination,  this  is  an  important  question.  Moreover,  European 
intermediate goods serve as an important input for Swiss exports worldwide. In the absence 
of the minimum exchange rate policy, the Swiss franc would have continued to appreciate 
strongly  in  an  extremely  volatile  environment,  and  the  risk  of  Switzerland  entering  a 
deflationary  trap  would  have  escalated.  This  would  have  depressed  Swiss  aggregate 
demand and European exports to Switzerland. In short, a policy of deflation avoidance had 
benefits for both sides in Swiss-European bilateral trade. In addition, given the broad use of 
the Swiss franc as a funding and credit currency in Europe, the introduction of the minimum 
exchange rate had a positive impact on financial stability beyond our country’s borders. 
Switzerland’s economic stability is not just important in the realm of international finance and 
trade.  It  should  be  remembered  that  Switzerland  is  the  second  most  important  provider  of 
international remittances, directly after the United States. Moreover, in terms of FDI, even the 
U.S. is a major beneficiary of Swiss investment. Over the past five years, Switzerland has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
been the sixth largest FDI investor and eight largest job provider through foreign investment 
in the U.S.13 
Conclusion: the current account and SNB monetary policy 
Let me return to the question of Swiss monetary policy and the current account posed at the 
beginning of my speech. I have argued that the key components driving Switzerland’s current 
account  surplus  –  notably  financial  services,  merchanting,  and  direct  investment  income  – 
are  not  closely  linked  with  either  the  exchange  rate  or  the  domestic  economic  situation.  I 
have  also  argued  that,  historically,  an  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  has  not  led  to  a 
reduction in Switzerland’s current account. Yet this disconnect between the exchange rate 
and the current account balance does not diminish the exchange rate’s importance for the 
Swiss  economy.  Given  the  high  degree  of  openness  of  our  economy,  the  exchange  rate  
– next to the interest rate – is the key definer of monetary conditions and thus has a strong 
impact on both prices and production.  
The Swiss economy has shown in the past that it can handle volatility and appreciation in the 
real exchange rate when these are based on fundamentals. However, excessive and abrupt 
appreciations  driven  by  financial  market  turmoil  have  a  disruptive  impact  on  prices  and 
production, resulting in deflation and recession. 
What, in practical terms, does this mean for the SNB’s monetary policy? It means that we do 
not gear our monetary policy to the current account. The current account is not an indicator 
of Swiss capacity utilization; in particular, it is not an indicator of price stability. Consequently, 
the  SNB  has  no  target  –  and  indeed  should  not  have  a  target  –  for  the  current  account. 
Rather, we need to take both the inflation outlook and capacity utilization into consideration, 
and must provide adequate monetary conditions in order to fulfill our mandate. 
Despite recent turbulence on foreign exchange markets in emerging economies, the Swiss 
franc  has  settled  against  the  euro  since  September  2012  at  slightly  above  the  minimum 
exchange rate of 1.20. Accordingly, the SNB did not have to enforce the minimum exchange 
rate for over a year now.  
Yet the risks in the world economy are still to the downside and the Swiss franc is still high. 
Therefore, the SNB is maintaining the minimum exchange rate. It is the right tool for ensuring 
price stability in Switzerland in the foreseeable future. With short-term interest rates close to 
zero,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  can  prevent  an  undesirable  tightening  of  monetary 
conditions in the event that upward pressure on the Swiss franc should intensify once again. 
Thus, as reiterated in our September monetary policy assessment, the SNB stands ready to 
enforce the minimum exchange rate and take further measures as required.  
 
                                                 
13  Source: U.S. Department of the Treasury. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
