Deepak Mohanty: Unconventional monetary policy – the Indian 
experience with crisis response and policy exit 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Reserve Bank Staff College (RBSC), Chennai, 26 December 2013. 
 The assistance provided by Binod B. Bhoi and Rajeev Jain in preparation of this paper is acknowledged. 
Accompanying charts can also be found on the Reserve Bank of India’s website: http://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/bs_ 
viewspeeches.aspx 
to 
this  opportunity 
thank  Principal  Uma  Subramaniam  for 
I 
interact  with  you  on 
unconventional monetary policy. The seminar is topical and timely. It is now 5 years since the 
collapse of the Lehman Brothers in September 2008, which evoked unprecedented monetary 
policy activism – both conventional and unconventional – across the advanced and emerging 
market  economies  (EMEs).  It  is  for  the  first  time  on  December  18,  2013  that  the  US  Fed 
announced  concrete measures  to  exit from  unconventional  monetary  policy  in  a  calibrated 
manner starting January 2014. 
The Indian economy like other EMEs  was affected both by the global financial crisis post-
Lehman and the announcement of likely exit by the US Fed in May 2013. We also resorted to 
both conventional and unconventional policies not only in response to the crisis but also to 
the announcement of exit, though there were qualitative differences in these responses. 
Against  this  backdrop,  I  will  begin  by  distinguishing  unconventional  monetary  policy  from 
conventional  policy,  highlight  the  contours  of  unconventional  policies  in  major  advance 
economies and review the impact of such policies. I will then turn to the impact on India and 
our monetary policy response. I will end by drawing a few broad conclusions. 
Conventional and unconventional monetary policy 
Conventional  monetary  policy  is  understood  as  central  banks  operating  with  a  short-term 
policy interest rate in the money market to signal the stance of monetary policy and in the 
process influence the term structure of market interest rates to achieve the objectives of price 
stability with sustainable growth. Price stability is not an end in itself. Price stability, defined 
as  a  low  and  stable  inflation,  is  considered  a  prerequisite  for  sustainable  growth  over  the 
medium-term. It is believed that there is no trade-off between growth and inflation over the 
medium-term. Even countries which have chosen inflation targeting framework try to stabilise 
output around its potential and inflation around its target level. Hence, normally in the event 
of a shock when either or both the parameters drift from their targets, the objective is to bring 
it back to target over the medium-term. However, conventional monetary policy has a limiting 
condition  of  “zero  lower  bond”.  For  example,  in  the  event  of  an  extreme  shock,  as  it 
happened  during  the global  financial  crisis,  when  policy  rates  were  brought  down  close  to 
zero, further monetary stimulus was not possible through conventional monetary policy. 
When central banks look beyond their traditional instrument of policy interest rate, monetary 
policy takes an unconventional character. It essentially means using quantity instruments for 
expanding  the  balance  sheet  of  the  central  bank.  It  can  take  different  forms:  quantitative 
easing (QE) through direct long-term asset purchase by the central bank, credit easing (CE) 
by the central bank directly intervening in a particular segment of the credit market. Both QE 
and  CE  can  be  accompanied  by  dilution  of  collateral  standards  by  the  central  bank 
expanding the list of collateral beyond its traditional preference for low risk sovereign bonds. 
Unconventional  monetary  policy  is  invariably  accompanied  by  forward  guidance  regarding 
the future path of monetary policy to work on the expectations channel. This is because the 
efficacies  of  asset  purchases  programme  depend  on  the  behaviour  of  market  participants 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
and financial entities. It is likely that market participants may not alter their behaviour without 
knowing what the central bank will do in the future with regard to these instruments. 
In the event of a crisis, it is not unusual for central banks to expand their balance sheets. The 
greatest  received  wisdom  in  central  banking  is  the  lender  of  last  resort  (LOLR)  function 
based  on  the  Bagehot  principle  that,  “the  central  bank  should  lend  freely  against  good 
collateral  at  a  penal  rate”1.  In  fact,  many  early  central  banks  including  the  US  Fed  were 
instituted  to  largely  discharge  this  function.  Monetary  policy  as  we  understand  today  was 
alien  then.  It  is  a  different  matter  that  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  tested  the  limits  of 
Bagehot principle as never before.  
Contours of unconventional monetary policy 
Let me now turn to how the US Fed, the European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of England 
(BoE) and the Bank of Japan (BoJ) unveiled their unconventional monetary policies. I may 
mention that the BoJ was using unconventional monetary policy much earlier as Japan went 
into prolonged deflation from the late 1990s. 
The  global  financial  crisis  which  erupted  with  collapse  of  major  financial  institutions  in 
advanced economies was unprecedented in its scale. Not only did it lead to a sharp decline 
in asset prices, freezing of credit markets, and the loss of confidence in the building blocks of 
the financial system, its impact was magnified through quick transmission to other economies 
as  well.  Monetary  authorities  in  the  advanced  economies  were  the  first  to  resort  to 
aggressive  monetary  easing  first  by  reducing  policy  rates.  However,  key  channels  of 
conventional monetary policy were severely impaired during the crisis as policy rates in most 
advanced economies approached zero lower bound (Chart 1). 
 
                                                 
1  Bagehot Walter  (1873),  Lombard  Street:  A  Description  of  the  Money  Market,  King  &Co.,  London;  reprinted 
Wiley, New York 1999. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Taking cognisance of the severity of the crisis and concerns of economic recession, central 
banks used their balance sheets in unconventional ways to augment liquidity (Table 1). The 
QE  programmes  initially  attempted  to  alleviate  financial  market  distress,  but  this  purpose 
soon  broadened  to  include  achieving  inflation  targets,  stimulating  the  real  economy,  and 
containing the European sovereign debt crisis (Fawley and Neely, 2013)2. Now let us discuss 
a little about the rationale for unconventional policies undertaken across major economies.  
Table 1  
                                                   
2  Fawley,  Brett W.  and  Christopher  J.  Neely  (2013  ),  “Four  Stories  of  Quantitative  Easing”,  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis Review, January/February, Vol. 95, No. 1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In the US, immediately after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, when slow growth and high 
unemployment  emerged  as  major  concerns,  the  Fed  announced  the  policy  of  quantitative 
easing (QE) in November 2008. The first two rounds of QEs reactivated financial markets, 
but failed to spur growth. Under “Operation Twist” instituted in September 2011, the Fed took 
initiative  of  buying  longer-term  Treasuries  and  simultaneously  selling  some  of  the  shorter-
dated securities to bring down long-term interest rates which continued till December 2012. 
With a view to putting in place a stronger version QE, it launched QE3 in September 2012. 
Under QE3, the Fed started purchasing US$85 billion of fixed-income securities per month. 
The Fed intended to keep QE3 in effect until unemployment falls to 6.5 per cent or inflation 
rises to 2.5 per cent. In addition to QE3, the Fed gave a forward guidance that it would keep 
short-term rates low through 2015. As economic parameters showed improvement, the Fed 
started  talking  about  exit,  popularly  known  as  the  tapering  of  bond  buying  in  May  2013. 
Subsequently, it announced to slow the pace of the bond buying program by US$ 10 billion 
per month from January 2014. 
In the UK, after reducing the policy rate (i.e., Bank Rate) to 0.5 per cent in March 2009, the 
Bank  of  England  (BoE)  started  its  asset  purchase  programmes  which  consisted  almost 
exclusively  of  government  bonds  from  the  non-bank  private  sector.  Subsequently,  the 
Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) was put in place in July 2012 with the aim of incentivising 
banks and building societies to boost their lending to the UK real economy3.  
Japan’s  economy  had  deteriorated  for  nearly  15  years  under  the  threat  of  deflation.  To 
overcome deflation, the Bank of Japan (BoJ) engaged in a wide range of monetary easing 
efforts − including the implementation of the zero interest rate policy, the quantitative easing 
policy and comprehensive monetary easing, but there have been no easily derived concrete 
results4. Following the crisis, the BoJ embarked on an ambitious asset purchase program to 
combat deflation. In October 2012, it announced purchase of Japanese government bonds 
(JGBs),  commercial  paper,  corporate  bonds,  exchange  traded  funds  (ETF),  Japanese  real 
estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITS).  In  April  2013,  BoJ  announced  Quantitative  and 
Qualitative  Monetary  Easing  Program  under  which  it  purchases  JGBs,  ETFs  and  J-REITs 
with the goal of increasing the monetary base by 60–70 trillion JPY annually, increasing the 
average maturity of JGBs held from three to seven years and meeting the 2 per cent inflation 
target in about two years. 
In  the  euro  area,  concerns  over  counter-party  risk  eventually  led  to  drying  up  of  interbank 
lending  by  early  2009.  The  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  responded  in  May  2009,  by 
reducing its main refinancing rate to 1 per cent and by introducing 12-month LTROs and the 
covered  bond  purchase  program  (CBPP).  The  ECB  substantially  extended  its  liquidity 
provision by offering unlimited longer-term refinancing operations. The ECB also purchased 
some securities outright in distressed markets through its securities markets program (SMP), 
which  was,  however,  later  replaced  by  the  pledge  to  intervene  more  decisively  through 
Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs). 
The unconventional measures undertaken have involved extraordinary central bank lending, 
expanding central bank balance sheets substantially (Chart 2). We learn from text books and 
the  inflation  experiences  of  the  1970s  that  a  sharp  increase  in  base  money  could  be 
inflationary. On the contrary, in the current episode inflation declined below target levels in 
many advanced countries. 
                                                
3  Bank of England (2012), “The Funding for Lending Scheme”, Quarterly Bulletin 2012 Q4. 
4  Kuroda, Haruhiko (2013), “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing”, Speech at a Meeting held by the 
Yomiuri International Economic Society in Tokyo, April 12. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Partly the explanation lies in the fact that despite such increase in the size of balance sheets, 
broad  money  supply  did  not  expand  significantly.  This  was  due  to  perceptible  decline  in 
money multiplier on account of banks building up cash reserves on being risk averse and to 
conserve on required capital rather than lending to the real economy (Chart 3). Moreover, with 
interest rates at near zero level, the opportunity costs of holding money for the money holding 
sector  also  fell.  Another  interesting  explanation  is  that  inflation  expectations  remained  well 
anchored, meaning once economic entities believe that inflation will not go up it does not go 
up. Further, with the economy operating below its capacity the scope for inflation from wage 
increase is not there. While consumer price inflation may not rise in the short run, it cannot be 
presumed that asset price inflation will not go up given the excess liquidity. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
The large scale economic downturn accompanying the financial crisis also led to activation of 
counter-cyclical fiscal policy of unprecedented magnitude. The fiscal measures focused on 
improving the balance sheet of the financial and corporate sectors as reflected in large scale 
bailouts in the US and other advanced economies. Reflecting such fiscal stimulus measures, 
advanced economies witnessed significant deterioration in their fiscal position as reflected in 
high public debt to GDP ratios (Chart 4). Let me now turn to the experience of EMEs. 
 
 Experience of EMEs 
Initially, it was viewed that EMEs would remain insulated from global financial meltdown on 
the back of the significant buffers they have built over the years, which included substantial 
foreign exchange reserves, improved policy frameworks and generally robust banking sector 
and  corporate  balance  sheets.  However,  as  the  crisis  deepened  following  the  failure  of 
Lehman  Brothers  and  resulted  in  heightened  risk  aversion  and  global  deleveraging,  the 
EMEs were also affected in varying degrees. 
The contagion from the global financial crisis also warranted swift monetary and fiscal policy 
responses  in  EMEs  with  a  view  to  ensuring  orderly  functioning  of  markets,  preserving 
financial stability, and moderating its adverse effects on growth. In the process, their policy 
responses became more synchronised with global efforts (Mohanty, 2011)5. 
While  both  developed  economies  and  EMEs  resorted  to  conventional  and  unconventional 
monetary  measures,  there  were  certain  differences  in  terms  of  their  timing,  types  and 
magnitudes. First, while  in the advanced economies the switchover was from conventional 
monetary tools to unconventional measures due to policy rates approaching zero, in many 
EMEs, unconventional foreign exchange easing and domestic liquidity augmenting measures 
                                                
5  Mohanty, Deepak (2011), “Lessons for Monetary Policy from the Global Financial Crisis: An Emerging Market 
Perspective”, RBI Bulletin, April. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
preceded  the  conventional  measures  of  policy  rate  cuts.  Second,  while  central  banks  in 
EMEs  relied  mostly  on  direct  instruments  such  as  reserve  requirements  to  ease  domestic 
liquidity,  central  banks  in  advanced  countries  resorted  to  various  liquidity  providing 
operations through relaxation of counter-parties, collaterals and maturity. Third, central banks 
in advanced countries extensively used credit and quantitative easing measures which led to 
large  expansion  of  their  balance  sheets  unlike  in  EMEs.  Fourth,  while  in  advanced 
economies fiscal support aimed at rescuing the financial sector from the crisis situation, in 
EMEs  they  were  generally  meant  to  address  the  deficiency  in  aggregate  demand.  Let  me 
now turn to some of the consequences of unconventional policy. 
Impact of unconventional policies 
As most of the unconventional monetary policy measures were undertaken keeping in view 
the domestic economies, the attendant increase in global liquidity appears to have impacted 
a  range  of  asset  classes  in  both  advanced  and  emerging  economies (Chart  5). There  are 
studies  which  find  significant  impact  of  QE.  They  suggest  reduction  in  US  treasury  yields 
around 100 basis points, corporate bond yields by 80 basis points, and reduction in the range 
of 20–80 basis points in other advanced economies6. In case of some EMEs, the evidence 
suggested  high  capital  inflow  pressure,  rapid  domestic  credit  growth  and  domestic 
inflationary pressures. 
                                                
6  Chen,  Q.,  A.  Filardo,  D.  He  and  F.  Zhu  (2012),  “International  Spillovers  of  Central  Bank  Balance  Sheet 
Policies”, in BIS Papers No. 66. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
Furthermore, indications about the possible withdrawal since the talk about US taper in May 
2013 has caused volatility in financial markets in EMEs and impacted currency valuations as 
capital  retreated  back  to  the  US  in  anticipation  of  higher  interest  rates.  EMEs,  particularly 
with  large  current  account  and  fiscal  deficits,  were  severely  impacted.  Let  me  turn  to  our 
experience with the crisis, and now with the talk of taper. 
Indian experience with the crisis and policy exit 
Until the emergence of the global crisis, India had experienced a phase of high growth along 
with low and stable inflation. Growth was largely driven by high domestic demand – growing 
domestic  investment  financed  mostly  by  domestic  savings  and  sustained  consumption 
demand.  Sequential  financial  sector  reforms,  rule-based  fiscal  policy  and  forward  looking 
monetary policy together contributed to the overall improved macroeconomic performance. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Following  the  emergence  of  the  crisis,  India,  initially  remained  somewhat  insulated  to  the 
global  developments,  but  eventually  was  impacted  significantly  through  all  the  channels  – 
financial, real and more importantly, the confidence channel (Subbarao, 2009)7. This could 
be attributed to the global nature of the crisis on the one hand and accelerated trade and 
financial integration of the Indian economy with the world on the other. 
The impact of the crisis was first visible on India’s financial markets in the form of tightening 
of  liquidity  and  higher  volatility  in  all  market  segments  along  with  sharp  decline  in  stock 
prices. Risk aversion on the part of global investors resulted in moderation in capital inflows 
and  exchange  rate  depreciation.  Credit  growth  decelerated  reflecting  weakening  business 
confidence. Growth, which was already on a cyclical moderation in the first half of 2008–09, 
decelerated significantly during the second half. As a result, growth declined to 6.7 per cent 
in 2008–09 from the preceding 5-year average of 8.7 per cent per annum (Table 2). 
Table 2 
  
Restoring normalcy in financial markets, ensuring normal flow of credit to productive sectors 
of  the  economy  as  well  as  limiting  the  adverse  impact  on  the  real  sector  of  the  economy 
assumed policy priority. The Reserve Bank, like most other central banks, took a number of 
conventional and unconventional measures to limit the adverse impact of the contagion on 
the  Indian  financial  markets  and  the  economy.  These  included  augmenting  domestic  and 
foreign exchange liquidity and a sharp reduction in the policy rate. The Reserve Bank used 
multiple instruments such as the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF), open market operations 
(OMO),  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  and  securities  under  the  market  stabilisation  scheme 
(MSS) to augment the liquidity in the system. 
These measures were supported by fiscal stimulus packages which raised the fiscal deficit of 
the Central Government by about 3.5 per cent of GDP to 6.0 per cent in 2008–09 (Chart 6). 
                                                
7  Subbarao,  D.  (2009),  “Impact  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  on  India:  Collateral  Damage  and  Response”, 
Speech delivered at the Symposium on “The Global Economic Crisis and Challenges for the Asian Economy 
in a Changing World” organised by the Institute for International Monetary Affairs, Tokyo, February 18. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 On  the  back  of  substantial  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus,  growth  bounced  back  quickly. 
However,  inflation  also  picked  up.  Consequently,  the  policy  focus  shifted  to  exit  from 
accommodative monetary policy in a calibrated manner starting in October 2009. To begin 
with all special liquidity measures were withdrawn which was followed by hikes in policy rate. 
As the real policy rate turned positive it started to have an impact on inflation. 
Going into the financial year 2012–13, growth declined and headline WPI inflation showed a 
clear  sign  of  moderation.  This  prompted  the  Reserve  Bank  to  reduce  the  policy  rate 
(Chart 7). 
10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As  the  economic  conditions  appeared  to  be  stabilising,  volatility  in  the  financial  market 
returned following the announcement in May 2013 of the Fed’s intention of likely tapering of 
QE. This prompted the Reserve Bank to resort to somewhat unconventional monetary policy 
measures  besides  drawing  down  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  to  meet  the  immediate 
shortfall (Chart 8). Let me give you the flavour of key measures. 
 
      In terms of monetary policy, the upper bound of the policy rate corridor (i.e., MSF 
rate)  was  raised  by  200  basis  points  and  the  quantity  of  central  bank  liquidity 
available  through  the  LAF  window  was  restrained.  This  had  the  desired  effect  of 
tightening the monetary conditions and raising the effective policy rate sharply to the 
MSF rate. 
In order to signal that the above measure is temporary so that the interest rates at 
the  longer  end  do  not  harden  a  form  of  operation  twist  was  tried  by  conducting 
outright  OMO  purchase  of  government  securities  alongside  sale  of  short-term 
government  cash  management  bills.  This  inverted  the  yield  curve,  though 
accompanied by some increase in long-term rates. 
With  a  view  to  containing  the  current  account  deficit  (CAD)  on  the  balance  of 
payments (BoP), gold imports were restricted. 
The  non-resident  deposit  schemes  and  banks’  borrowing  abroad  were  further 
liberalised with incentives for swapping these inflows directly with the Reserve Bank. 
This  substantially  augmented  foreign  exchange  reserves  despite  some  outflow  on 
account of directly meeting the foreign exchange requirement of oil imports.  
As  portfolio  capital  outflows  waned  and  BoP  improved,  stability  returned  to  the  foreign 
exchange  market.  This  prompted  the  Reserve  Bank  to  unwind  the  bulk  of  the  exceptional 
measures and normalise monetary policy by restoring the policy interest rate corridor to its 
original position and the repo rate to its signalling role of policy. Though the policy repo rate 
was increased by 25 basis points each in September and November 2013, this was more on 
considerations of emerging growth and inflation balance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
the 
impact  on 
it  did  have  significant 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
First, the global financial crisis triggered unprecedented policy activism by advance country 
central  banks.  They  resorted  to  unconventional  monetary  policy  of  the  nature  and  scale 
unthinkable hitherto. 
Second, as we complete over 5 years of unconventional monetary policy of QE and CE, the 
question is: did it succeed? While it is too early to say, opinion remains divided. Thus far, 
with unconventional policies, the central banks have been far less successful in stimulating 
growth8.  While  it  may  not  have  improved  general  monetary  transmission  and  prompted 
sustainable  recovery, 
financial  market.  The 
counterfactual of what would have happened without QE is not known? In any case, it seems 
to have prevented a deeper recession.  
Third,  the  spillover  effect  of  QE  on  commodity  markets  and  emerging  market  economies 
(EMEs)  has  been  significant.  This  has  resulted  in  increased  volatility  of  capital  flows  and 
elevated  asset  prices.  The  initiation  of  exit  from  QE  has  also  created  additional 
macroeconomic challenges for EMEs including India. 
Fourth, the Indian economy and financial markets were significantly impacted by the global 
financial  crisis  and  the  recent  signalling  of  exit  from  QE  by  the  Fed.  This  prompted  the 
Reserve Bank to resort to both conventional and unconventional monetary policy alongside 
other regulatory policies to stabilise markets. 
Finally,  while  the  exit  from  QE  increases  uncertainties  in  the  financial  market,  it  is 
increasingly  felt  that  continuation  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  for  long  could  create 
risks in the global economy it sought to address by preventing deleveraging and appropriate 
pricing  of  risks.  In  addition,  the  current  policy  response  has  increased  sovereign  risk  in  a 
number of countries which circumscribes the ability of policy to cushion further unexpected 
shocks. 
Thank you. 
                                                
8  Rajan,  Raghuram  (2013),  “A  Step  in  the  Dark:  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy  after  the  Crisis”,  Andrew 
Crockett Memorial Lecture delivered at the BIS on June 23. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
