Ardo Hansson: Nordic-Baltic financial linkages and challenges 
Opening remarks by Mr Ardo Hansson, Governor of the Bank of Estonia (Eesti Pank), at the 
conference “Nordic-Baltic financial linkages and challenges”, Tallinn, 13 December 2013. 
 I  am  honored  to  welcome  you  here  in  Tallinn  at  the  conference  Nordic-Baltic  Financial 
Linkages and Challenges jointly organized by the IMF, Riksbank and Eesti Pank. 
Jean Monnet once famously said that Europe will be the sum of the decisions taken in crises. 
We  hope  to  have  soon  put  one  of  these  crises  behind  us. We  now  know  that  inadequate 
assessment  of  risks  and  weaknesses  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  were 
among  the  causes  of  the  crisis.  We  hope  that  the  lessons  learned  from  the  crisis  will  be 
profound  and  lasting  enough  to  provide  the  energy  for  us  to  follow  through  with  the 
fundamental  reforms  we  have  initiated  in  the  EU.  We  also  now  understand  the  need  to 
remain vigilant and ready to act against possible new risks to financial stability. 
Today’s  conference  will  take  a  close  look  at  the  challenges  and  rewards  involved  in  the 
evolution of a new paradigm in the operation and regulation of the European financial sector. 
The financial sector in the Nordic-Baltic region is regularly used as an example of regional 
integration and cooperation. In my remarks, I would like to highlight the key features of the 
region and put them in the broader context of European developments. 
Taking care of the large Nordic-Baltic “home market” 
First  of  all,  we  should  keep  in  mind  that  the  Nordic-Baltic  region  is  characterized  by 
considerable  diversity:  diversity  in  monetary  policy  frameworks,  models  of  economic 
development and financial structures. 
The second key word of the Nordic-Baltic region is integration – the region is characterized 
by tight trade and financial ties within the region as well as with Europe and global markets. 
Therefore, the region’s competitiveness and growth potential are important to each country in 
the region. The bank groups that finance growth in the region are largely the same in every 
country.  All  these  groups  are  currently  highly  rated  and  well  capitalized  in  comparison  to 
others  in  Europe.  As  a result  of  mergers  and  natural growth, the total  assets  of  the  larger 
banks have risen to a high level compared to regional GDP, not to mention their very high 
level as a ratio to the GDP of their home countries. 
The combination of common economic interests and financial sector integration has fostered 
the  emergence  of  a  unique feature  of  the  Nordic  banking groups:  they have  extended  the 
concept of the “home market” well beyond their home country’s borders. For example, Nordic 
parent banks continued to provide liquidity to their Baltic affiliates even during the years of 
the  deepest  crisis  in  the  Baltic  economies.  In  today’s  slow  growth  environment,  it  remains 
important  for  competitiveness  and  growth  that  there  should  be  an  appropriate  level  of 
financing  in  the  whole  region.  The  broader  concept  of  the  “home  market”  should  be 
developed  further.  One  of  the  challenges  will  be  to  ensure  strong  competition  in  retail 
markets so that the benefits of integration could be felt by consumers across the region. 
Fostering  sustainable  growth  in  the  region  requires  us  to  take  a  systemic  view  when 
designing  harmonized  regulation  for  the  financial  sector,  and  this  is  where  the  quality  and 
proactivity  of  macro-prudential  supervision  becomes  so  important.  The  Nordic-Baltic 
dimension  adds  two  nuances  to  the  design  of  macro-prudential  policies.  First,  our  own 
experience of the past decade was a stark reminder of the particular challenges of managing 
capital flows in highly integrated economies and financial sectors. Second, most of the large 
Nordic banking groups have been considered as too big to fail in almost all countries in the 
region. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Diversity in the financial sector structures is a challenge for cross-border cooperation 
As I said earlier, the economies and financial sectors of the Nordic-Baltic region are diverse 
as well as closely integrated. Different countries in the region have opted for different policy 
frameworks; the structure of the financial sector also differs by country. It turns out that in a 
region of only eight countries, some of which are very small, one needs to tackle very much 
the  same  array  of  problems  that  make  the  coordination  of  financial  sector  policy  and 
supervision so challenging in Europe. There are home and host countries; there are non-EU 
member states, EU member states, and euro area member states. There are differences in 
economic, lending and asset price cycles, and there are also differences in economic history, 
crisis  experience  and  institutional  arrangements.  The  developments  in  recent  years  have 
exacerbated these dissimilarities and perhaps even created new ones. It appears to me that 
the success in combining the positive aspects of diversity and integration in the Nordic-Baltic 
region may serve as a model for the European Union. If cooperation and coordination has 
been possible in this region, there is reason to hope for the same in the European Union as a 
whole. 
Cooperation  between  the  institutions  responsible  for  financial  stability  in  the  region  has  a 
history  of  over  10  years.  This  cooperation  has  become  considerably  closer  since  the 
outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  reversal  of  capital  flows  in  our  countries. 
Routine work is done in supervisory colleges, and there are high-level multilateral groups for 
coordinating  macro-prudential  supervision  and  crisis  management.  It  has  been  very 
important that trust and open communication as well as mutual support and a willingness to 
take  responsibility  have  remained  in  place  when  the  financial  stability  of  a  Nordic-Baltic 
country is really at stake. A shared understanding of the need to deal with macroeconomic 
and financial stability risks at a national level has provided a solid foundation for Nordic-Baltic 
cooperation. 
2014 will bring new challenges for Europe 
The year 2014 will bring new challenges. New financial sector regulation (I am referring to 
the  CRR/CRD  and  the  forthcoming  BRRD)  and  single  banking  supervision  will  add  new 
aspects  and  new  partners  to  Nordic-Baltic  cooperation.  The  goal  of  harmonisation  of 
cross-border regulatory and supervisory practices is to create an operating environment for 
banks  and  other  financial  institutions  that  fosters  mutual  trust  and  helps  ensure  that  the 
provision of financial services is continuous and satisfies the needs of the real economy. 
When the SSM becomes operational, it will have important effects on the routine supervisory 
work  in  the  Nordic-Baltic  region.  The  home  countries  of  several  subsidiaries  that  will  be 
included  under  direct  supervision  by  the  SSM/ECB  will  probably  remain  outside  the  SSM. 
This presents a new challenge for the Nordic-Baltic cooperation framework. In the light of the 
success  of  our  regional  cooperation  it  is  rational  that  we  build  the  new  principles  of 
supervision on the existing foundation wherever possible. I hope and believe that in this new 
and more complex framework we will be able to preserve an important value – the spirit of 
cooperation. 
In view of the development of the single market it is also important that the building of the 
banking  union  be  completed  –  the  SSM  must  be followed  by  the  SRM.  Ideally,  this  would 
create the balance between rights and responsibilities which has been the guiding principle 
in safeguarding cross-border financial stability for nearly a decade. There is no doubt that the 
special 
joint  crisis 
management, and the design of cooperation in this matter will be crucial. 
*** 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great honour and privilege to host this conference on issues which are highly topical 
not just in our region but also in Europe and globally. The conference has brought together 
the  Nordic-Baltic  region  complicate  agreements  on 
features  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
prominent speakers and an audience who have great potential to provide different viewpoints 
in the discussions. In the light of today’s topic, let us also consider the values that have made 
the Nordic-Baltic region so successful. Let us consider how to preserve and build upon these 
values and possibly share them with the rest of Europe. 
And finally, let us not exaggerate the difficulties of cooperation; let us not underestimate the 
rewards of success or the risks that stem from inaction. Building the foundation for the future 
of Nordic-Baltic finance is not for the fainthearted.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
