Fabio Panetta: SEPA and its repercussions for Italy’s payment system 
Welcoming address by Mr Fabio Panetta, Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, at the 
SEPA Conference, organized by the Bank of Italy, Rome, 9 December 2013. 
 I would like to thank all the authorities, market players, associations and analysts for taking 
part in today’s meeting.  
SEPA plays a key role in the completion of the European financial system, by ensuring the 
provision  of  innovative,  reliable  and  affordable  payment  services  to  market  players  and 
users.  National  and  European  authorities,  the  banking  and  financial  sector,  trade  and 
consumer associations, and the public sector are all involved in the project. The Bank of Italy 
has committed resources and energies to drive this innovation forward.  
SEPA  plays  a  major  role  in  European  integration,  involving  as  it  does  a  myriad  of 
stakeholders  representing  very  different  activities,  interests  and  levels  of  technological 
development.  The  objective  is  not  just  to  introduce  new  payment  schemes  and  new 
procedures, for the project will also bring about positive changes in the habits of European 
citizens and in the organization and work methods of banks, firms and the public sector.  
Although considerable progress has been made in recent months, much remains to be done. 
The  project  must  continue  to  advance  apace,  if  necessary  with  a  sharp  spurt  in  the  last 
furlong, which will probably also be the most arduous. The work already completed and the 
results  achieved  to  date  justify  a  cautious  optimism  in  view  of  the  end  date  of  1  February 
2014.  
The  SEPA  is  important  on  two  levels:  it  heightens  integration  and  competition  in  the  retail 
payment market and it fosters an efficient and reliable payment system. These objectives are 
shared by the authorities and business milieus.  
The structure of the project, its aims and benefits are clearly and exhaustively described in 
the  publication  the  Bank  has  distributed  today;1  the  areas  covered  range  from  the 
standardization of credit transfers and direct debits to the adoption of harmonized schemes 
for payment cards. The technical solutions adopted in the past at the national level are being 
adapted  to  the  new  SEPA  framework  within  clearly  defined  limits  in  order  to  avoid 
perpetuating the fragmentation among member states.  
The context in which SEPA operates is based on two key elements for the evolution of the 
payment system: legislation and technology.  
Harmonized  European  legislation  on  payments,  centred  around  the  Payment  Services 
Directive  (PSD),  is  fundamental  for  the  success  of  SEPA.  The  proposed  new  Directive, 
PSD2,  will  further  converge  national  legislation  and  boost  competition  in  the  market  for 
payment services, improving the transparency and reliability of the products offered to firms 
and the public.  
By  standardizing  the  payment  instruments  made  available  by  SEPA  and  employing 
advanced  technology  for  e-commerce  and  mobile  and  Internet  communications  it  will  be 
possible to create a more modern payment market, in line with European and Italian policies 
to increase the spread of information technology.  
SEPA will bring substantial benefits to all concerned. Firms will be able to make and receive 
payments via a single account at any European bank. Using the ISO standard, which can be 
                                                 
1  See  “La  SEPA  e  i  suoi  riflessi  sul  sistema  dei  pagamenti  italiano”,  Tematiche  istituzionali,  Banca  d’Italia, 
November 2013 (http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/temist/sepa-riflessi-sistema-pagamenti/testo.pdf). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
integrated with banks’ own management software, will foster innovation in several ways, from 
integrating  the  collection  process  to  rationalizing  accounting  procedures.  There  will  be 
significant advantages for small firms as well.  
SEPA will also facilitate the use of Internet and innovative communication systems such as 
tablets  and  smartphones,  offering  consumers  flexibility  in  the  use  of  different  means  of 
payment at low costs. Users’ payments and collections with firms and the public sector will 
improve with the use of electronic instruments.  
From the banks’ point of view, retail payment services not only account for a large part of 
total expenditure and revenue,2 but they are an important route to customer loyalty through 
the  provision  of  high-quality  services  at  affordable  prices.  Although  European  market 
integration may entail a loss of position in the very short term, in a longer perspective it will 
enlarge  the  potential  supply  and  open  the  way  for  advanced  technology  products.  Similar 
benefits  await  non-bank  providers  of  payment  services  and  managers  of  retail  payment 
systems who are called on to create a Europe-wide network.  
I would like to make a final comment on the importance of SEPA for Italy. Non-cash means 
of payment  are used less in our country than elsewhere in Europe. Paper-based payment 
instruments  are  still  widely  employed,  although  they  are  more  costly  for  issuers  and  less 
secure for users.  
The characteristics of the Italian market and the payment habits of the population reflect the 
structural characteristics of the productive system, such as the limited use of more advanced 
means of communication, the small average size of commercial firms, and the rigidity in the 
supply of innovative services. In many areas of the country this backwardness is aggravated 
by the size of the underground economy and in some cases by widespread illegality.  
Modernizing Italy’s payment system and integrating it in the wider European market will bring 
benefits far beyond those directly deriving from the introduction of new instruments and new 
technical standards. The changes now under way, boosted by SEPA, will bring clarity and 
transparency to business relations throughout the 4  
economy  and  not  just  in  the  payment  sector.  Market  players  will  be  encouraged  to  revise 
their organization and code of conduct. The public sector will have the tools and procedures 
they need to improve payment transactions with firms and the public. In this way, the creation 
of  a  modern,  competitive  and  reliable  payment  system  in  Italy  will  help  to  build  a  more 
efficient and transparent productive system.  
In  the  1990s,  following  the  recommendations  of  the  White  Paper  on  Payment  Systems  in 
Italy, we successfully undertook a broad reform of interbank settlement procedures to bring 
the country into line with the most advanced European standards. Today, we must take the 
opportunity offered by SEPA to improve the supply of payment services in Italy, with benefits 
for the public, firms and the public sector.  
This  is  the  route  we  should  follow.  I  hope  that  this  conference  will  yield  suggestions, 
observations and ideas for mapping the future development of Italy’s payment system as part 
of the broader growth and modernization of Italy in Europe. Thank you. 
                                                 
2  Payment services represent 15 per cent of banks’ total operating costs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
