Haruhiko Kuroda: Overcoming deflation and after 
Speech  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Meeting  of 
Councillors of Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation), Tokyo, 25 December 2013. 
 Accompanying  charts  can  be  found  at  the  end  of  the  speech.  Original  presentation  is  on  the  Bank  of  Japan’s 
website: www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2013/ko131225a.htm/ 
Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  this  opportunity  to  address  such  a  distinguished  gathering  of 
business leaders in Japan today. 
There is only one week left this year. As for Japan’s economy this year, it has been following 
a recovery path as expected, due partly to the effects of both monetary and fiscal policies 
(Chart  1).  During  the  three  quarters  after  the  turn  of  the  year,  real  GDP  registered  an 
average  annualized  growth  rate  of  3  percent  on  a  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  which  was 
substantially  above  the  potential  growth  rate  that  is  estimated  to  be  around  0.5  percent. 
Business  sentiment  in  the  Tankan  survey  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in 
Japan)  released  last  week  has  continued  to  show  a  clear  improvement  and,  on  an  all 
industry and all-sized enterprise basis, it has gotten back to the level of a peak prior to the 
Lehman crisis. 
There has also been an improvement on the price front this year (Chart 2). The year-on-year 
rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI,  all  items  excluding  fresh  food)  turned 
positive in June, increased to 0.9 percent in October, and is likely to slightly exceed 1 percent 
by  the  end  of  the  year.  Not  only  a  rise  in  the  prices  of  energy-related  goods,  including 
petroleum products, has contributed to raise the index, but also an improvement has been 
spreading  in  a  wide  range  of  items  as  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  of  the 
economy has been improving. That can be confirmed by the fact that the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  excluding  food  and  energy)  turned  positive  at  0.3  percent  in 
October, the highest rate of increase in 15 years since August 1998. 
The  Bank  of  Japan,  with  the  aim  of  overcoming  deflation  at  the  earliest  possible  time, 
introduced  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE)  in  April  this  year.  Today, 
toward the year-end, I will express my views on what kind of economy and society we aim at 
by overcoming deflation while looking back at the developments in Japan’s economy from a 
medium- to long-term perspective. 
The problem of deflation 
I. 
The word “deflation” is generally understood as referring to a state in which prices decline 
persistently.  Since  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s,  Japan’s  economy  has  been  in  deflation  for 
nearly 15 years (Chart 3). 
During  that  period,  Japan’s  economy  was  caught  in  various  negative  shocks:  the 
nonperforming loan problem and the Asian currency crisis in the latter half of the 1990s, and 
a burst of an IT bubble in the United States, the Lehman crisis, and the Great East Japan 
Earthquake after the turn of the 2000s. In addition, there were many factors that put direct 
downward pressure on prices, such as an inflow of inexpensive import goods from emerging 
economies, 
intensified  competition  associated  with 
deregulation,  and  reduction  in  the  wage  level  due  to  an  increasing  use  of  non-regular 
employment. While it is not easy to specify the causes of deflation, what is important is that 
deflation  was  not  only  a  result  of  economic  stagnation  but  also  a  cause  that  protracted 
economic  stagnation.  Namely,  amid  nearly  15  years  of  deflation,  behavior  based  on 
low-price  strategy  amid 
firms’ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
recognition  that  “prices  would  not  rise”  or  “prices  would  moderately  decline”  has  been 
embedded in the economy. 
Let me explain somewhat in detail about that point. Viewed from firms’ side, under deflation, 
as they cannot raise the prices of their products and services, their sales will not increase 
and profits will hardly increase. Therefore, firms will restrain labor costs and business fixed 
investment as much as possible. For households, as wages will not increase, consumption 
will be restrained. In addition, if future prices are to decline, they will become more inclined to 
defer  consumption  as  much  as  possible.  They  will  be  better  off  if  they  buy  after  prices 
decline.  If  consumption  is  restrained  in  such  a  manner,  firms  will  be  forced  to  reduce  the 
prices  of  their  products  and  services.  As  a  result,  a  vicious  cycle  of  a  decline  in  prices,  a 
decrease in sales and profits, a restraint in wages, a slump in consumption, and a decline in 
prices will continue. 
What is important here is that both firms and households are acting rationally as respective 
economic entities. Notwithstanding each entity taking action considered rational, it leads to a 
bad result as a whole: that state is called a “fallacy of composition” or a “coordination failure” 
in terms in economics. Japan’s deflation since the latter half of the 1990s is a typical example 
of that. 
Let  us  confirm  that  point  in  terms  of  macroeconomic  indicators  since  the  1990s.  Nominal 
GDP  and  nominal  employee  income  have  not  been  able  to  get  out  of  the  long-term 
downtrend  since  their  peaks  in  1997  (Chart  4).  Namely,  amid  deflation,  Japan’s  economic 
activity  on  a  nominal  basis  has  been  consistently  contracting.  Such  situation  is  quite  rare 
among  advanced  economies.  In  the  United  States,  nominal  GDP  and  nominal  employee 
income  have  maintained  long-term  growth  trends,  albeit  a  temporary  decline  due  to  the 
Lehman crisis. Japanese firms have been in a situation in which they have not been able to 
pass  the  costs  related  to  production  on  to  sale  prices  because  of  intensified  competition 
(Chart 5). As for price conditions in the Tankan survey, since the latter half of the 1990s, the 
diffusion index of output prices has been consistently lower than that of input prices. As a 
reason for the difficulty in price pass-through, many firms have pointed out severity in price 
competition  with  rival  firms,  thus  suggesting  that  the  “fallacy  of  composition”  or  the 
“coordination failure” might have been taking place. At the same time, firms’ medium- to long-
term growth expectations have been on a declining trend for a protracted period since the 
1990s (Chart 6). Furthermore, the fact that the expected growth rate on a nominal basis was 
lower  than  that  on  a  real  basis  even  when  corporate  profits  increased  substantially  in  the 
mid-2000s tells us how persistent deflationary expectations were. 
Also  viewed  from  the financial  side,  protracted  deflation  has  deprived  Japan’s  economy  of 
vitality. First, when deflationary expectations were embedded, real interest rates obtained by 
subtracting  the  expected  rates  of  inflation  from  nominal  interest  rates  remained  high 
(Chart 7).  What  matters  for  firms’  decision-making  in  business  fixed  investment  is 
developments  in  not  nominal  but  real  interest  rates.  Even  though  nominal  interest  rates 
decline,  if  prices  are  expected  to  decline  as  a  trend,  investment  cost  on  a  real  basis  will 
remain  high  and  incentive  for  business  fixed  investment  will  wane.  In  order  for  firms  to 
transform innovative ideas into actual technologies and products, it is necessary to introduce 
new machines and build new factories. The fact that real interest rates remained high amid 
deflation has deprived firms of incentive to make growth-enhancing investment. 
Second, when deflationary expectations were embedded, holding cash and deposits became 
a  relatively  better  investment  even  if  nominal  interest  rates  were  zero  or  at  extremely  low 
levels  (Chart  8).  Deflation  reduced  the  rate  of  return  on  risk  assets  such  as  stocks  and 
investment trusts on the one hand, but on the other increased the real rate of return on cash 
and deposits, whose principals are guaranteed. Against such a backdrop and due partly to 
investors’  long-standing  preference  toward  safe  assets,  risk  money  backed  by  investors’ 
search for high returns was lacking in Japan’s financial market, and that weakened the power 
to support firms’ growth from the financial side. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
An aggregate flow of funds has substantially changed from the past amid a vicious cycle of 
deflation. The corporate sector had long been a “fund shortage” sector, in which investment 
exceeds  savings,  up  to  the  first  half  of  the  1990s.  Firms’  innovations  are  a  source  of 
economic  growth,  and  it  is  a  normal  state  of  the  economy  in  which  the  corporate  sector 
raises  funds,  conducts  business  fixed  investment,  and  makes  research  and  development 
investment.  However,  since  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s,  the  corporate  sector  drastically 
changed  to  a  “fund  surplus”  sector,  in  which  savings  chronically  exceed  investment.  And 
firms  have  channeled  most  of  their  savings  accumulated  every  year  to  relatively  safe  and 
better investment tools of cash and deposits (Chart 9). Viewed from the banking sector, that 
means an increase in the liability of deposits on the balance sheet, and, as firms’ appetite for 
business fixed investment remained stagnant, the banking sector could not easily increase 
its  asset  side  of  lending.  Therefore,  the  banking  sector  has  increased  investment  in 
Japanese government bonds (JGBs), which generates safe and certain returns even with low 
nominal interest rates (Chart 10). In the meantime, the government sector has been running 
substantial fiscal deficits due to a decline in tax revenue and repeated implementation of an 
economic  stimulus  and  to  an  increase  in  the  social  security  burden  stemming  from  a 
declining and aging population. Consequently, government debt outstanding has continued 
to  rise,  but  JGBs  were  issued  smoothly,  supported  by  buoyant  demand  from  the  banking 
sector. 
As deflation became protracted, a mechanism based on the assumption that prices will not 
increase has been embedded in Japan’s economic and social system. As I have mentioned 
earlier,  each  economic entity  has  been  acting  rationally  and  has  been  lacking  incentive  to 
change its behavioral pattern. In that sense, deflation has been in a state of equilibrium. That 
is  why  it  has  been  also  called  “deflationary  equilibrium.”  It  can  be  said  that  deflationary 
equilibrium has become protracted and become increasingly difficult to overcome precisely 
because  it  has  been  stable.  However,  such  state  of  equilibrium  will  not  continue  forever. 
Above all, one cannot expect the long-term development of Japan’s economy in the absence 
of  firms’  active  efforts  to  create  new  businesses.  For  the  sake  of  the  future  of  Japan’s 
economy, it is critical to overcome deflation at the earliest possible time and convert “bad and 
shrinking equilibrium” to “good and expanding equilibrium.” 
Ideas behind QQE – drastic change in expectations 
II. 
Then, how can the economy overcome deflation? The Bank’s answer to this question was 
nothing but the QQE introduced in April. 
As mentioned earlier, the essence of deflation is in that taking action on the assumption that 
prices will not increase has been rational for both firms and households. To get out of such 
“deflationary  equilibrium,”  the  economic  environment  needs  to  be  changed  so  that  taking 
action  on  the  assumption  that  prices  will  moderately  increase  becomes  a  better  option. 
Under deflation due to a “fallacy of composition,” raising prices and wages by only one firm 
will be a disadvantage. As many firms raising prices and wages simultaneously will have a 
positive effect on the economy as a whole, the policy authorities have to come up with bold 
policy measures that enable firms to change their mindset in such a manner. In sum, there is 
a need to change the rules of the game that prevailed in the “deflationary equilibrium.” 
To that end, the Bank is strongly and clearly committed to achieving the price stability target 
of 2 percent CPI inflation rate at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two 
years. Besides, to underpin the strong and clear commitment, the Bank has decided to enter 
a  new  phase  of  bold  monetary  easing  both  in  terms  of  quantity  and  quality  (Chart  11). 
Furthermore,  the  Bank  is  also  committed  to  continuing  with  the  QQE  as  long  as  it  is 
necessary to maintain the 2 percent target in a stable manner. In the process, the Bank will 
examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  make 
appropriate  adjustments.  The  Bank  is  totally  committed  to  achieving  the  2  percent  price 
stability target. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
As  specific  measures  for  monetary  easing,  the  Bank  will  purchase  JGBs  so  that  their 
holdings will increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion  yen, and double the monetary 
base in two years (Chart 12). The monetary base two years later will reach about 60 percent 
of nominal GDP. That size far exceeds that of the current 22 percent at the Federal Reserve 
(Fed) in the United States and 22 percent at the Bank of England in the United Kingdom, and 
thus the QQE is truly unprecedented monetary easing in modern history. 
The QQE anticipates various transmission channels, and what differs greatly from the Bank’s 
past  monetary  easing  policies  and  the  current  monetary  easing  policies  pursued  by  major 
central banks overseas is a particular focus on “a drastic change in expectations.” The QQE 
aims  at,  through  strong  and  clear  commitment  and  monetary  easing  that  underpins  the 
commitment, drastically changing the market’s and economic entities’ expectations, thereby 
working  directly  on  raising  inflation  expectations.  If  inflation  expectations  rise  and  a 
recognition that prices will rise in the future becomes embedded, stimulative effects through 
channels  such  as  a  decline  in  real  interest  rates  and  portfolio  rebalancing  will  be 
strengthened.  Namely,  first,  the  Bank’s  purchases  of  JGBs  put  downward  pressure  on 
nominal  long-term  interest  rates  through  directly  influencing  the  supply  and  demand 
conditions  of  JGBs,  and  if  a  rise  in  inflation  expectations  is  added  to  that,  real  long-term 
interest rates will further decline, thereby strengthening the effect of stimulating investment. 
Second, if inflation expectations rise, the relative attractiveness of holding cash and deposits 
will  decline  and  thus  it  is  expected  that  investors  and  financial  institutions  will  shift  their 
investment to risk assets such as stocks and foreign bonds or increase lending. 
Transmission channels of the effect of the QQE that focuses on influencing expectations are 
nothing but a process of reversing the vicious cycle embedded under deflation. Starting from 
dispelling deflationary expectations, the Bank aims at creating and embedding an economic 
virtuous cycle of a moderate rise in prices, an increase in sales and profits, an increase in 
wages, a boost in consumption, and a moderate rise in prices. 
Raising inflation expectations 
III. 
While the QQE focuses on raising inflation expectations, it seems that there have still been 
skeptical  views  among  market  participants  and  economists  about  the  feasibility  of  raising 
inflation expectations through policy measures. To begin with, we are thoroughly aware that 
a  central  bank  cannot  change  at  will  people’s  and  the  market’s  expectations.  Having  said 
that, here, I would like to make two points. 
First,  looking  at  history,  while  there  were  not  many  cases  in  which  people’s  inflation 
expectations shifted dramatically in a short period, those cases were underpinned by a bold 
policy regime change being implemented based on the policy authorities’ strong resolution. 
For  example,  in  the  United  States  during  the  Great  Depression  in  the  1930s,  President 
Roosevelt  clearly  showed  his  strong  resolution 
toward  overcoming  deflation  and 
implemented the New Deal Policy (Chart 13). By that, inflation expectations shifted upward in 
a  relatively  short  period,  and  severe  deflation  associated  with  the  Great  Depression  was 
contained.  Also  in  Japan  during  the  same  period,  a  combination  of  expansionary  foreign 
exchange, fiscal, and monetary policies, the so-called Takahashi Economic Policy, achieved 
a significant result in overcoming the Showa Depression. While it is an example of containing 
inflation,  it  is  well  known  that  Fed  Chairman  Paul  Volcker  succeeded  in  lowering  inflation 
expectations  through  aggressive  monetary  tightening  from  the  end  of  the  1970s  to  the 
beginning  of  the  1980s,  and  laid  a  sound  foundation  for  prosperity  of  the  U.S.  economy 
under low inflation (Chart 13). 
Second, in formulating inflation expectations, what is important is not only a forward-looking 
element,  which  is  the  Bank’s  commitment  and  actions,  but  also  an  adaptive  or  backward-
looking  element,  which  is  an  accumulation  of  achievements  that  the  actual  inflation  rate 
increases  as  monetary  easing  progresses.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI 
increased  to  0.9  percent  in  October  and  is  expected  to  hover  at  slightly  above  1  percent 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
through the first half of 2014. Given that deflation has continued for nearly 15 years, those 
are important changes. If people actually experience a rise in prices, inflation expectations 
are  supposed  to  change  substantially.  The  Bank  holds  the  view  that,  due  to  a  backward-
looking element together with a forward-looking element, inflation expectations will continue 
on a rising trend, gradually converging to around 2 percent – the price stability target. 
While I  have  said that  prices  are  expected to rise gradually,  the  Bank  has  been  aiming  at 
ensuring  price  stability  and  not  by  any  means  artificially  creating  inflation.  A  numerical 
definition  of  what  the  Bank  considers  price  stability  based  on  a  specific  price  index  is 
2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. There are several reasons 
why 2 percent might be desirable. First, the existence of upward bias that an inflation rate 
calculated from the CPI will become higher than the true inflation rate. In other words, when 
the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is 0 percent, that situation is in deflation to the 
extent of the bias. Therefore, to overcome deflation, it is necessary to aim at a somewhat 
positive inflation rate. Second, the idea of securing a “buffer” to reinforce monetary policy in 
responding to a price decline and economic deterioration. Nominal interest rates cannot be 
lowered to below zero percent. Since lowered to 0.5 percent in 1995, the short-term rate in 
Japan has been between 0 percent and 0.5 percent for about 20 years (Chart 14). Japan has 
been  in  a  situation  in  which  it  has  been  difficult  to  stimulate  economic  activity  by  lowering 
nominal short-term interest rates even if prices decline or economic activity deteriorates. In 
fact, even in response to an extremely large adverse shock of the Lehman crisis, the Bank 
was  only  able  to  reduce  about  0.4  percent  of  the  nominal  short-term  interest  rate.  In  the 
future,  when  about  2  percent  inflation  will  be  achieved  in  a  stable  manner  and  nominal 
interest rates will be formed at a somewhat high level reflecting the inflation rate, room will 
increase for flexibly responding to a price decline and economic deterioration by reducing the 
short-term interest rate. For similar reasons, many countries have set an inflation target at 
about 2 percent, and 2 percent has become a global standard. 
Concluding remarks 
As I have explained, the Bank has been aiming at creating a state in which 2 percent inflation 
rate will be maintained in a stable manner. It might be difficult to imagine such a situation 
because deflation has continued for a protracted period. I would like to conclude my speech 
today by briefly touching on an image of the economy and society after overcoming deflation. 
A state in which 2 percent inflation will be maintained in a stable manner is, to put it briefly, a 
state that each economic entity will act based on a recognition that prices will rise by about 
2 percent even when the economy is in a normal state. In other words, a state in which about 
2 percent inflation has been factored in price-setting and wage-setting. 
Such state has already been achieved in advanced economies such as in the United Stated 
and Europe, in which people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been stable 
at  about  2  percent.  As  about  2  percent  inflation  has  been  firmly  embedded  in  the  social 
system  and  practices,  those  economies  have  been  able  to  avoid  deflation  of  a  continued 
decline in prices and wages even when there was temporary downward pressure on prices 
and  wages  due  to  economic  deterioration.  Let  me  cite  one  unique  example.  In  wage 
negotiations between employees and employers in Sweden, a mechanism that the 2 percent 
inflation target set by the central bank serves as an important starting point for discussion to 
determine the wage increase rate was established as a common practice (Chart 15). In fact, 
in  Sweden,  as  wages  rise  stably,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  has  been 
around 2 percent over the business cycle. 
Japan’s economy is now seeing a wide range of positive developments in the real economy 
and the financial market, as well as an improvement in people’s mindset and expectations. It 
is a golden opportunity for overcoming deflation. Let me reiterate that the Bank is committed 
to pursuing the QQE and achieving the 2 percent price stability target at the earliest possible 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
time. I strongly expect that the favorable moves to achieve an economic virtuous cycle will 
spread in business and industrial circles. 
Thank you. 
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
