Erkki Liikanen: How to improve financial stability and resilience of 
systemically important financial institutions after the crisis? 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the Highlevel 
Expert  Group  on  reforming  the  structure  of  the  EU  banking  sector,  at  the  EBA  Policy 
Research  Workshop  “How  to  regulate  and  resolve  systemically  important  banks”,  London, 
14 November 2013. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website: Slides. 
[Slide 2 – Outline] 
[Slide 3 – Heeding the lessons of the crisis] 
Heeding the lessons of the crisis 
[Slide 4 – Substantial crisis impact on the real economy] 
The  vast  scale  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  and  its  ramifications  have  been  the  main 
motivator of the regulatory reform agenda; endorsed by the G-20. 
When the crisis began, the resulting economic downturn for a while resembled the pace of 
developments  in  the  Great  Depression.1  Only  the  liquidity  support  operations  by  central 
banks at different stages, and the explicit state guarantees to banks that were announced in 
different countries, changed the course of developments, compared to the 1930’s. 
Paradoxically, the success in averting the worst that could have happened, may be making 
some of us forget the lessons from the crisis too soon, or having us downplay the need 
for true reforms. 
However, it is crucial not to forget the crisis, and to properly implement the reform agenda. 
Have we done enough to solve the too-big-to-fail problem? 
In  response  to  the  crisis,  a  number  of  international  and  EU  wide  regulatory  reforms  have 
been launched. 
The  capital  requirement  framework  has  been  strengthened,  new  liquidity  requirements 
have been proposed and the recovery and resolution directive will enable orderly “failure” 
of banks. 
Now we need to assess whether we have done enough? I will argue that the regulatory 
reforms have taken us a long way, but not far enough. Banks will still be too complex to 
manage, supervise and resolve. 
Below I will argue that structural reforms are an essential complement to the new resolution 
regime,  because  structural  reforms  are  meant 
to  reduce  banks’  complexity  and 
interconnectedness.  We  need  these  reforms  to  make  orderly  resolution  of  systemically 
important  financial  institutions  a  credible  option,  even  in  the  midst  of  a  systemic 
crisis. Credibility of the resolution regime will be key to truly end the too-big-to-fail problem 
and get market discipline back to work. 
Before exploring these arguments further, let me start by reviewing the main lessons of the 
crisis a bit further. 
                                                
1   Rajan,  R.  (2013),  A  step  in  the  dark:  unconventional  monetary  policy  after  the  crisis.  Andrew  Crockett 
Memorial Lecture, BIS, 23 June 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Excessive financial expansion in the run-up to the crisis 
[Slide 5 – Rapid growth in the EU banking sector] 
One  important  lesson from  the  crisis  has been that  we  should  better  understand the  point 
when  and  why  the  expansion  of  the  financial  sector  turns  excessive.  Some  recent 
research  suggests  that  an  excessively  large  financial  sector  may  even  turn  from  being  a 
driver of additional economic growth to being an impediment to growth.2  
Surely, large-scale financial crises are very bad for the long-run accumulation of economic 
output, even if some crises might have a silver lining in the sense of promoting necessary 
“creative destruction”.3 It is essential that banks with unsustainable strategies are allowed 
to fail in an orderly fashion so that viable banks may compete and prosper on a level playing 
field. 
Especially  when  the  financial  sector  grows  rapidly  into  large  proportions,  the  risk  of  a 
serious crisis is heightened.4  
[Slide 6 – Shifts in focus of operations as illustrated by shifts in assets structures] 
Focus  on  trading-related  activities,  the  rise  of  new  complicated  financial  products,  and 
increasing  reliance  on  short-term  market  funding  by  financial  institutions  are  symptoms  of 
growing risks, as we saw in the years before the crisis. 
This  time,  the  ultimate  risk  stemmed  largely  from  the  US  housing  market,  but  it  had  been 
transferred  also  onto  European  banks’  balance  sheets.5  This  took  place  with  the  help  of 
securitizations  and  the  related  new  financial  intermediaries,  generally  dubbed  as  the 
shadow banking sector. 
As  a  result,  the  number  of  counterparty  relationships  and  the  ensuing  counterparty  risks 
increased. The global financial network became highly interconnected and complex. 
It  is  evident  that  many  of  these  developments  prior  to  the  crisis  did  not  benefit  the  real 
economy in a sustainable manner. Economic recovery from the crisis has been slow.6  
The  benefits  of  risk-taking  were  private  whereas  the  enormous  costs  of  the  crisis 
became the responsibility of the society as a whole. 
Regulatory and macroprudential failures and problems with management 
[Slide 7 – Increased leverage as illustrated by shifts in funding structures] 
Why  did  the  financial  sector  and  its  risks  grow  so  much?  And  why  were  they  funded  by 
increasing short-term leverage which added to the vulnerability? 
There  were  global  macroeconomic  reasons  behind  the  crisis  developments,  but  also 
failures of regulatory and macroprudential policies. 
Global  imbalances  provided  a  fertile  ground  for  the  development  of  financial  excesses. 
Moreover, the monetary policy stance was accommodative in much of the early 2000. 
                                                
2   Cecchetti and Kharoubi (2012), Reassessing the impact of finance on growth, BIS Working Paper 381. 
3   Schumpeter (1994), “Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy”, London. 
4   See  e.g.  Claessens,  Kose,  Laeven,  and  Valencia  (2013),  “Understanding  Financial  Crises:  Causes, 
Consequences, and Policy Responses”, CAMA Working Paper 05/2013. 
5   Shin (2012): “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium”, IMF Economic Review, 60. 
6   See  e.g.  Claessens,  Kose  and  Terrones  (2013),  “The  Recent  Global  Financial  Crisis:  How  Similar?  How 
Different? How Costly?”, in S. Claessens et al., eds., Financial Crises, Consequences, and Policy Responses, 
forthcoming, IMF. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There may also have been a false sense of security resulting from the successful track 
record of monetary and macroeconomic policies.7 As a result, the markets placed their 
trust  in  central  banks’  ability  to  take  care  of  liquidity  if  markets  were  to  be  hit  by  serious 
shocks. 
These expectations may also have contributed to imprudent risk-taking which, once the crisis 
started unfolding, led to real losses. 
These  experiences  underline  all  the  more  the  need  to  develop  macroprudential 
supervision  and  policy.  Macroprudential  tools  have  to  be  applied  when  necessary  to 
complement other policy areas in curbing excesses in the financial sector. 
Banks’ capital requirements and liquidity buffers did not keep pace with the growing risks. 
Serious  short-comings  in  risk  measurement  within  the  Basel  framework  became  apparent 
once  the  crisis  hit.  This  was  symptomatic  in  the  slower  growth  of  risk-weighted  assets 
relative to total assets in the years preceding the crisis. 
There was also a lack of sufficient systemic view of financial risks. Macroprudential tools 
and mandates to deal with such risks were largely missing.8  
Another important reason concerns market expectations of public support if a large-scale 
crisis hits. Leading European banks are very large in an international comparison, especially 
in relation to the size of their home countries. 
[Slide 8 – Implicit subsidies remain high] 
As  a  result,  many  large  and  complex  financial  institutions  appear  to  have  benefited  from 
cheap funding, thanks to such too-big-to-fail expectations.9 
Cheap  funding  which  is  insensitive  to  balance  sheet  risks  may  easily  spur  risk-taking, 
especially when banking competition gets tougher. Sheer ignorance by bank managements 
of the true risks may also have played a role.10 
[Slide  9  –  Market  discipline  vs.  structure  of  banks  –  a  “chicken-and-egg”  problem  to  be 
solved] 
The too-big-to-fail assumption weakened market discipline, as did the opacity of large, 
complex  financial  institutions.  As  a  result  the  banking  sector  has  not  been  renewed  or 
restructured in a way that might have happened in a  world  with efficient market discipline. 
Inefficient  business  models  have  not  been  outdated  in  the  same  way  as  they  have  been 
done in the corporate sector, where the conglomeration trend of the 1980s reversed already 
some  time  ago.  The  market  indications  of  a  diversification  discount  appear  to  be  too 
weak.11  
The challenge at hand is thus to implement regulatory reforms and policies which help steer 
the financial sector and banks towards a size and structure, which in a better way support 
economic growth while maintaining financial stability. No one really knows what the right size 
                                                
7   This refers to the era which is known as the Great Moderation. 
8   See  e.g.  Borio  (2003),  “Towards  a  macroprudential  framework  for  financial  supervision  and  regulation?”, 
CESifo Studies, 49(2) and the June 2013 IMF-report “Key aspects of macroprudential policy” on work to be 
done in the field. 
9   Davies & Tracey (2014), “Too big to be efficient? The impact of implicit funding subsidies on scale economies 
in banking”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (forthcoming). 
10   Rajan,  R.  (2013),  A  step  in  the  dark:  unconventional  monetary  policy  after  the  crisis.  Andrew  Crockett 
Memorial Lecture, BIS, 23 June 2013. 
11   Laeven  and  Levine  (2007),  “Is  there  a  diversification  discount  in  financial  conglomerates?”,  Journal  of 
Financial Economics 85(2). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
of the financial sector or banks is. But at least what we can do is to remove any perverse 
incentives  which  could  lead  to  an  excessive  growth  of  the  sector  and  its  risks. 
Eliminating  the  too-big-to-fail  assumption  by  making  resolution  of  systemically 
important financial institutions a credible option lies at the core of the solution. 
Finally, there was also problems in the management culture of banks. The culture of the 
customer focused retail and commercial banking is inherently different from the one of the 
transaction  based  trading  oriented  banking.12  The  transaction-oriented  management  and 
compensation culture of trading spread to more traditional banking. This provided incentives 
to risk-taking. 
The  former  Citigroup  architect,  Mr.  John  Reed,  has  recently  described  how  this  “cultural 
mixing” had an impact on risk-taking. In traditional banking risk officers might easily say “no” 
if they judged a proposed new loan not good enough. However, if the loan officer’s pay is 
linked  to  making  new  loans,  as  increasingly  happened,  then  saying  “no”  becomes  much 
more difficult in practice. 
Last days events and currency exchange manipulation incidents have once more brought the 
issue of corporate culture of banks to the surface. 
[Slide 10 – Policy reforms] 
Regulatory and macroprudential policy reforms 
[Slide 11 – Financial market liberalisation and governance must be complements] 
Before  the  crisis  the  benefits  of  deeper  financial  integration  were  pursued  via  market 
liberalization.  Improving  the  governance  of  financial  markets  was  lagging  behind, 
leaving the system vulnerable to crises. 
We  now  understand  that  liberalization  and  governance  are  complements.  We  need  them 
both to reap the benefits of financial integration in a sustainable manner. 
[Slide 12 – Focus of current regulatory reforms] 
Much  has  already  been  done  to  improve  financial  stability  and  resilience  of  financial 
institutions after the crisis, particularly of those seen as too systemically important to fail. 
In an ideal world the externality imposed on the society by large systemically important banks 
might be dealt with by a single optimally designed regulatory instrument. However, in the real 
world  subject  to  substantial  uncertainties  concerning  the  nature  of  risks  and  their 
measurement, it is better to rely on several regulatory instruments.13 
First,  Basel  III  agreement  which  is  implemented  here  in  Europe  through  the  capital 
requirement regulation and directive will strengthen banks’ capital and liquidity positions. 
This  is  a  major  step  to  improve  banks’  resilience,  but  will  also  reduce  incentives  to  take 
excessive risks across different banking operations. Basel III also tackles the too-big-to-fail 
problem  by  imposing  an  extra  capital  requirement  on  international,  systemically  important 
financial institutions. 
Liquidity requirements which previously did not exist bring additional important resilience 
as liquidity typically dries up when a systemic crisis starts. 
                                                
12   Boot and Ratnovski (2012), “Banking and trading”, IMF Working Paper 12/238. 
13   Cf.  Richardson  (2012),  “Why the  Volcker  Rule  is  a  useful  tool for managing systemic  risk?”  A  white  paper. 
New York University Stern School of Business. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Note that capital requirements also help maintain liquidity in the markets: when banks have 
higher capital buffers to absorb losses, there will be less need for fire sales of assets. Fire 
sales seriously undermined market liquidity during the crisis. 
Second, new recovery and resolution tools have been constructed. The key instrument is 
to make it possible to bail-in bank debt in a crisis, in order to avoid bail-outs with taxpayer 
money. Moreover, the resolution authority is given great powers to restructure a bank when 
the point of likely to fail has been reached. 
This will be a key in restoring private market discipline on banks, and thus to reduce the 
too-big-to-fail problem. The importance of implementing the Bank Recovery and Resolution 
Directive,  upon  which  political  agreement  was  achieved  in  the  summer,  cannot  be 
overstated. 
In Europe bank resolution (Single Resolution Mechanism, SRM) is part of the larger aim of 
forming a true banking union. The establishment of the SRM will facilitate the resolution of 
cross-border  banks.  The  other  element  of  the  banking  union  is  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism in connection with the ECB. 
The banking union project also includes a third element; the prospect of creating a common 
deposit insurance system. However, the first priority ought to be to harmonize the national 
systems, which currently vary greatly. 
There are also a number of regulatory initiatives that intend to increase transparency in the 
financial markets. For example, accounting standards and disclosure practices are reviewed, 
and banks are urged to improve risk management and corporate governance practices. 
Supervision  and  regulation  of  derivatives  markets  and  the  shadow  banking  system  are 
revised, including moves to central counterparties which will help address the contagion risks 
embedded in long counterparty chains in the OTC markets. 
[Slide 13 – Authorities should foster the stability of the entire financial system] 
Macroprudential analysis and tools are being developed mainly on the national basis, but 
also  in  accordance  with  Basel  III  (and  its  application  in  Europe;  the  capital  requirement 
directive) for the purpose of setting counter-cyclical capital buffers. Moreover, the European 
Systemic  Risk  Board  has  published  guidelines  on  the  implementation  of  macroprudential 
tools across the EU member states. 
This is a highly important but challenging area of work where we will see a lot more research 
to be done. 
The  challenge  is  to  find  indicators  which  are  able  to  warn  early  enough  of  looming 
vulnerabilities.  Potential  candidates  are  at  least  market  prices,  credit-to-GDP  ratios,  and 
changes  in  banking  sector  liabilities  as  emphasized  by  professor  Shin  of  Princeton 
University.14 
Finally, structural reforms of banks are already taking shape in some jurisdictions, such as 
the USA, the UK. 
These were the elements of the regulatory reform which were on the table as we in the High-
level expert group set out to evaluate the need for structural reform in the EU banking sector. 
The question we were encountered with was whether these regulatory reforms will take us 
far enough. 
[Slide 14 – HLEG proposal for structural banking reform in Europe] 
                                                
14   Shin  (2013):  “Procyclicality  and  the  search  for  early  warning  indicators”,  in  Claessens  Kose,  Laeven,  and 
Valencia, eds., Financial Crises, Consequences, and Policy Responses, forthcoming, IMF. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The work of the High-level expert group 
In  our  deliberations  we  considered  two  avenues  as  possible  ways  forward.  In  the  two 
avenues we put different emphasis on the most promising measures to end the too-big-
to-fail problem; capital requirements, resolution regimes, and structural reform. 
[Slide 15 – Two avenues as possible ways forward were considered] 
In  the  first  avenue,  additional,  non-risk-weighted  capital  requirements  on  trading  activities 
and credible recovery and resolution plans for banks would have been the main instruments. 
We  acknowledged  that  the  measurement  of  risks  inherent  in  trading  assets  is  prone  to  a 
significant  “model  risk”.  Robust  capital  requirements  which  do  not  rely  on  complicated 
models are one way to tackle this issue (as are limits on risk concentrations and counterparty 
exposures). Avenue 1 was based on this approach. 
The  possibility  of  structural  measures  did  enter  Avenue  1,  but  only  as  a  conditional 
instrument. The idea was that if a bank was not able to prove that the required recovery and 
resolution  plans  were  credible,  separation  of  trading  activities  was  to  be  imposed  by 
authorities. 
In the second avenue, by contrast, any significant trading activities would be required to be 
separated  from  retail  deposit  banking.  The  separation  proposal  outlined  in  Avenue  2  was 
based  on  the  notion  that  capital  requirements  are  not  by  themselves  sufficient  to  limit 
excessive risk-taking incentives induced by deposit insurance if risks are difficult to measure 
and risk profiles can be changed rapidly, as in trading activities. 
Avenue 2 also acknowledges the risk of heterogeneous application of tailor-made separation 
based  on  the  credibility  of  the  recovery  and  resolution  plans  of  individual  banks.  Thus 
avenue 2  includes  uniform  separation  ex  ante  in  order  to  facilitate  resolution  of  large  and 
complex banks without public funds and hence reduce the too-big-to-fail problem. 
Structural reform proposal for Europe 
[Slide 16 – Rationale for mandatory separation] 
Our  Group  came  to  the  conclusion  that  although  the  regulatory  reforms  already 
implemented or in progress take us a major step forward, not enough has been done to 
eliminate the too-big-to-fail problem. Structural measures aimed at the largest banks and 
banks with significant trading activity are thus needed to complement them.15 
I will also argue that structural reforms support the creation of the banking union. 
More precisely, we found that the benefits of separation are the following. 
Our Group’s proposal focuses much on limiting the spillover of benefits from safety nets 
such  as  the  deposit  insurance  to  outside  the  core  banking  activities  thus  reducing  the 
incentives for banks to become too-big-to-fail in the first place. Separation will restrict risk-
taking  opportunities  of  a  deposit  bank.  The  blending  of  the  commercial  and  investment 
banking  management  cultures  will  also  be  reduced,  which  reduces  the  risk-taking 
incentives in traditional banking, evident in the years preceding the crisis. 
Moreover,  limiting  the  spillover  of  benefits  from  safety  nets  to  outside  the  core  banking 
activities  will  reduce risk-taking incentives and incentives for excessive growth in the 
trading  entity.  This  is  because  the  funding  of  the  trading  entity  will  be  subject  to  more 
effective market discipline in the absence of insured deposits. 
                                                
15   Recall that the Group proposed an initial two-step threshold approach where the bank would advance to the 
second stage if its assets held for trading and available for sale exceed (1) a relative examination threshold of 
15–25% of the bank’s total assets or (2) an absolute examination threshold of EUR100bn. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in  a 
less  complex  organisation,  where 
Reducing  complexity  by  means  of  separation  facilitates  monitoring  by  outside 
stakeholders  such  as  shareholders,  bank  creditors  and  other  market  participants,  thus 
further reinforcing market discipline. 
Reduced complexity by means of separation also has benefits for stakeholders closer to the 
bank. In the Group we argued that it would facilitate the task of the management and the 
board as steering effort to the right direction by means of incentive schemes, for example, is 
easier 
the  organisational  units  are  more 
homogeneous. 
A  more  primitive  benefit  of  separation  is  that  reduced  complexity  makes  it  easier  to 
understand  the  bank.  This  is  a  line  of  thought  that  the  head  of  ECB’s  financial  stability 
division, Ignazio Angeloni, aired recently by stating that “... very often [the CEO’s] don’t know 
what’s going on, and they don’t understand because it is very, very complicated”.16 
The supervisors face similar challenges. I think it is safe to say that the simplification of the 
structure of the largest, most complex European banks would facilitate the task, not only of 
the national supervisors, but also of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
Finally and perhaps most importantly, I would once more like to emphasize that structural 
reforms are essential to make resolution of systemically important financial institution 
ex ante credible, even in the midst of a systemic crisis. If there is even a slightest doubt 
that  the  resolution  tools  will  not  be  applied,  the  adverse  implications  of  the  too-big-to-fail 
assumption on market discipline, funding costs and risk-taking incentives will prevail. 
A forthcoming Journal of Finance paper by Gandhi and Lustig show that a “tail-risk subsidy” 
can explain differences in equity returns of large and small banks.17 Interestingly this “tail-
risk subsidy” grew dramatically as the Glass-Steagall was dismantled. 
As  previously  noted,  we  have  often  seen  that  market  discipline  ultimately  enforces 
structural changes which promote efficiency in non-financial industries. Unfortunately, 
the  evidence  suggests  that  the  financial  industry  may  be  trapped  in  a  “bad  equilibrium”  of 
weak market discipline and inefficient structures. 
Hence  a  push  from  structural  regulatory  reforms  is  needed  to  move  the  financial 
industry to a “good equilibrium” with strong market discipline and efficient structures. 
[Slide 17 – HLEG proposal] 
Thus  we  in  the  Group  proposed  the  separation  of  core  commercial  banking  which  is 
allowed to take insured deposits from trading and market making activities which are not 
allowed to take deposits. 
Financial  linkages  between  the  separated  entities  need  to  be  limited  in  order  to  make  the 
separation effective. 
Trading and the bulk of market making should be moved together to the separate entity. This 
is because it is very difficult to make the distinction between the two and any rules would be 
prone to circumvention. 
Separation does not touch the universal banking model because the deposit bank and 
the  trading  entity  are  still  allowed  to  be  part  of  the  same  group.  Moreover,  mandatory 
separation  would  only  apply  to  the  largest  institutions,  consistent  with  the  aim  of 
tackling the too-big-to-fail problem. 
[Slide 18 – Stylised classification of structural proposals: activities and strength] 
                                                
16   ECB  official  prepares  to  perform  triage  on  Europe’s  banks,  interview  with  Ignazio  Angeloni  in  International 
New York Times 21.10.2013. 
17   Gandhi and Lustig, “Size Anomalies in U.S. Bank Stock Returns” doi: 10.1111/jofi.12119. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
On capital requirements 
Another  important  issue  which  has  been  much  discussed  also  recently  is  that  regulations 
need to be robust enough. Robustness of capital requirements is needed because there 
will  always  be  errors  in  risk  measurement,  and  managerial  incentives  to  manipulate  risk-
weights downwards will always be there.18 
One  answer  is  to  add  capital  requirements  which  are  not  based  on  risk-weights,  to 
complement the risk-based ones. An important example is the leverage ratio requirement of 
Basel III. 
Our  Group  also  considered,  although  did  not  directly  propose,  additional  robust  capital 
requirements on trading activities. If these were calibrated so that the robust requirements 
formed  the  bottom  and  the  risk-based  requirements  came  on  top  of  that,  then  banks’ 
incentives  to  keep  on  improving  their  risk  measurement  technologies  might  be  better 
maintained. 
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  is  still  considering  the  merits  of 
introducing  the  standardised  approach  as  a  floor  or  surcharge  to  the  models-based 
approach.19  Of  the  proposals  for  how  the  market  risk  framework  could  be  altered  recently 
presented  by  the  Basel  Committee,  I  particularly  welcome  two  key  features.  First,  the 
suggestion  of  revising  the  standardised  approach  to  be  sufficiently  risk-sensitive  thus 
creating  a  credible  alternative  to  the  internal  models.  And  second,  the  requirement  of 
mandatory  calculation  and  publication  of  the  standardised  approach  by  all  banks,  which 
would improve transparency and comparability. 
Note that separation of trading-based risks from deposit banking can also be seen as a 
form of robust regulation. If potential errors in the measurement of trading risks may prove 
fatal to core banking services, it may be better to move the risks elsewhere altogether. This 
is  what  separation  does:  it  compartmentalizes  risks  within  the  banking  group,  a  bit  like 
firewalls help restrict the spreading of fire. 
A combination of structural reforms with capital and liquidity buffers may be a cost-effective 
way of regulation in the long-run. 
Taking into account both public and private costs, bank equity capital is not as costly as 
one might deduce from banks’ preference to use very high levels of debt financing. 
This point has been carefully scrutinized by Admati and Hellwig (2013).20 
However, it is challenging to measure precisely how much bank equity would be socially 
optimal, although the crisis itself strongly suggests the levels of capital were far less than 
optimal before the crisis. 
Hence,  a  combination  of  higher  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  together  with 
restrictions  on  deposit  banks’  riskiest  activities  might  be  a  balanced  choice  of 
regulation. 
                                                
18   Cf. Admati, A. and M. Hellwig (2013): The bankers’ new clothes: What’s wrong with banking and what to do 
about it. Princeton University Press. 
19   Basel  Committee  of  Banking  Supervision,  Fundamental  review  of  the  trading  book:  A  revised  market  risk 
framework, Consultative Document, October 2013. 
20   They  emphasize  that  their  arguments  do  not  require  that  the  so  called  Modigliani-Miller  capital  structure 
irrelevance theorem holds literally. There are factors why banks have relative advantages from debt financing. 
But regardless of those, when bank debt to equity ratio (ie, leverage) increases, so does the risk of the holders 
of bank debt and equity (unless public support expectations distort this mechanism). Consequently, the risk 
premium  on  both  bank  debt  and  equity  should  go  up.  Conversely,  reducing  leverage  as  a  result  of  higher 
equity capital requirements should make the risk premium on equity (and debt) decline. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Structural reforms may also contribute to successful macroprudential policies. This is 
because  structural  measures  add  simplicity  and  transparency  of  financial  institutions,  and 
reduce their interconnectedness. As a result, the identification of good macroprudential risk 
indicators  becomes  easier,  and  they  can  be  measured  with  higher  precision.  The 
effectiveness of the respective macroprudential tools improves accordingly. 
As  a  counter-argument  to  separation,  some  have  argued  that  by  separation  we  lose  risk 
diversification benefits. However, the crisis itself suggests that we may have overestimated 
these benefits while underestimating the effects of risk contagion which separation helps to 
reduce. 
Regarding  banks’  recovery  and  resolution,  our  group  also  made  a  proposal  of  additional 
designated bail-in instruments. These could be triggered in a relatively early phase of a 
bank’s financial distress to provide for recovery. Their holding would be restricted to investors 
outside  the  banking  sector  in  order  to  avoid  contagion.  Similar  ideas  have  recently  been 
aired also by others.21 
In comparison with other structural proposals, our group’s proposal settles in the middle 
in terms of narrowing down the activities of the deposit bank and in terms of the strength of 
separation. 
Conclusions 
[Slide 19 – To conclude: On the role of banking] 
Banks serve central functions in a well-functioning economy. Their role in providing finance 
to the real sector is particularly important in Europe. 
The  regulatory  reform  agenda  to  prevent  future  banking  crises  is  very  ambitious,  and  it  is 
essential  to  take  it  into  completion.  There  are  short-term  adjustment  costs  to  the  banking 
sector, but as societies we must keep our focus on the long-run benefits. 
As regards the potential structural reforms in Europe, good implementation will be the key to 
achieve the intended goals. 
International coordination of the structural measures as called for by BIS and IMF would be 
highly welcome. 
                                                
21   See Paul Tucker’s keynote in the Bank of Finland-SUERF conference in Helsinki, 13 June, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
