Deepali Pant Joshi: Financial inclusion – journey so far and road ahead 
Speech by  Dr Deepali  Pant Joshi, Executive  Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Mint Conclave on “Financial inclusion”, Mumbai, 28 November 2013. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Shri  Ajay  Kumar  Misra,  GM,  Smt.  Sushma  Vij,  DGM,  and  Smt.  Mruga  M Paranjape, 
Manager is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Mr  Tamal  Bandopadhyay  Deputy  Managing  Director,  Mr  Sukumar,  Editor  Mint, 
distinguished guests ladies and gentlemen at the very outset let me say that I am extremely 
happy  to  be  here  with  you  this  beautiful  evening  and  thank  the  Editor  Mint  for  having  me 
here,  to  share  with  you  the  RBI  perspectives  on  the  Financial  Inclusion.  I  extend  warm 
congratulations  to  Mint  on  celebrating  a  decade  of  engagement  with  these  issues  which 
concern us all. 
Dr.  Raghuram  Rajan,  has  powerfully  enunciated  that  there  is  a  need  for  broad 
2. 
based  diversified  growth  lading  to  rapid  reduction  in  poverty.  Reserve  Bank  plans  its 
developmental initiatives over the next few quarters on five pillars, one important pillar is of 
Financial Inclusion i.e. “Expanding access to finance to small and medium enterprises, the 
unorganized  sector,  the  poor,  and  remote  and  underserved  areas  of  the  country  through 
technology,  new  business  practices,  and  new  organizational  structures;  that  is,  we  need 
financial inclusion.” 
3. 
The  expectations  of  poor  people  from  the  financial  system  are  principally  ease  of 
access,  security  and  safety  of  deposits,  low  transaction  costs,  convenient  operating  time, 
minimum paper work, ability to transact easily effect frequent deposits, avail quick and easy 
access  to  credit  and  other  products  including  remittances  suitable to  their  income  streams 
and  consumption  patterns.  The  provision  of  uncomplicated,  small,  affordable  products  can 
help bring low income families into the formal financial sector. Low-income households in the 
informal  or  subsistence  economy  often  have  to  borrow  from  friends,  family  or  usurious 
moneylenders. They have little awareness and practically no access to financial services that 
could  protect  their  financial  resources  in  exigent  circumstances  such  as  illness,  property 
damage  or  death  of the  primary  breadwinner  .Taking  into  account  their  seasonal  inflow  of 
income  from  agricultural  operations,  migration  from  one  place  to  another  seasonal  and 
irregular work availability and income, the existing financial system needs to be designed to 
suit their requirements and to be more responsive to their needs. The mainstream financial 
institutions like banks have an important role to play in this effort not as a social obligation 
but  as  a  pure  business  proposition.  The  push  for  financial  Inclusion  has  come  from  the 
financial regulator/Government at the level of macro policy the Banks have to translate this to 
concrete outcomes at ground level to spur financial deepening. 
4. 
Having said this let me now walk you through financial inclusion journey so far and 
the  way  forward.  “Financial  Inclusion”  was  formally  articulated  by  Dr  YV  Reddy  the  then 
Governor  RBI  in  the  annual  Policy  Statement  of  2005–06,  Governor  while  recognizing  the 
concerns  in  regard  to  the  banking  practices  that  tend  to  exclude  rather  than  attract  vast 
sections of population, urged banks to review their existing practices to align them with the 
objective  of  financial  inclusion.  The  main  features  of  the  approach  involve  “connecting” 
people with the banking system and not just credit. Financial exclusion is mainly in two ways 
one is exclusion from the payments system i.e. not having access to a bank account and the 
second  type  of  exclusion  is from formal credit markets requiring the  excluded  to  approach 
informal  and  exploitive  markets.  Taking  a  cue  from  the  Rangarajan  Committee  which  first 
studied the issue of Financial Inclusion in depth we have defined Financial Inclusion as the 
process  of  ensuring  access  to  financial  services  and  timely  and  adequate  credit  where 
needed by vulnerable groups such as weaker sections at an affordable cost from Mainstream 
Financial Institution,. As Dr Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor RBI explains only the mainstream 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
financial  institutions  have  the  capacity  to  provide  full  services  and  meet  the  SCRIPT  by 
extend in the complete breadth of services Savings, Credit, Remittance, Insurance, Pension, 
Payments  transactions.  Mainstream  Institution  i.e.  banks  must  fulfill  their  core  function  of 
intermediating  and  transferring  resources  from  surplus  to  deficit  units  but  both  deficit  and 
surplus  units  are  those  with  low  incomes  consequently  the  RBI  moved  swiftly  to  enforce 
multiple policy level changes ranging from provision of new products, relaxation of regulatory 
guidelines  and  other  supportive  measures  to  achieve  sustainable  and  scalable  financial 
inclusion, to ensure that customers who are linked to the banking system is provided with all 
the  basic financial  products  that  are required  to  enhance  their  income generation  capacity 
thus helping them to work their own out of poverty. 
Milestones of our journey so far 
I. 
Opening  of  No-Frills  accounts:  In  November  2005,  a  new  concept  of  basic 
banking “no-frills”  account  with  “nil”  or  very  low  minimum  balance  was  introduced  to  make 
such accounts accessible to vast sections of the population. In 2012 the nomenclature was 
changed  to  Basic  Savings  Bank  Deposit  Accounts  (BSBDAs)  for  all  individuals  with  zero 
minimum balance and facility of ATM card/ Debit card, there is no charge on deposits and up 
to  four  withdrawals  in  a  month  are  allowed.  To  summarize,  every  person  has  the  right  to 
open a basic account Banks have been advised to provide small overdrafts in such accounts 
to meet their emergency credit requirement in hassle free manner. 
II. 
Engaging  Business  Correspondents:  In  January  2006,  the  Reserve  Bank 
permitted banks to engage Business Facilitators (BFs) and Business Correspondents (BCs) 
as intermediaries for providing financial and banking services. The BC Model allows banks to 
provide door step delivery of services especially to do “cash in – cash out” transactions, thus 
addressing  the  “last  mile”  problem.  The  list  of  eligible  individuals/entities  who  can  be 
engaged  as  BCs  is  being  widened  from  time  to  time  we  have  adopted  a  test  and  learn 
approach  to  this  process.  In  September  2010,  RBI  has  allowed  for  profit  organisations 
excluding NBFCs to operate as BCs. Banks can now leverage on the penetrative network of 
mobile  companies.  Mobile  network  companies  have  joined  hands  with  banks  to  make 
available banking services to India’s unbanked population. The agents of mobile companies 
work as Customer Service Providers (CSPs) and provide BC services, thus expanding the 
outreach of banks. 
III. 
Use of Technology – Recognising that technology has the potential to address the 
issues  of  outreach  and  credit  delivery  in  rural  and  remote  areas,  in  a  viable  manner, 
commercial banks were advised to implement CBS so as to enable them to make effective 
use of ICT, to provide door step banking services through Business Correspondents Model 
wherein the accounts can be operated by even illiterate customers by using biometrics, thus, 
ensuring the security of transactions and enhancing the confidence in the banking system. 
RRBs, having proximity to rural area, have the inherent strength to scale financial inclusion, 
have also been roped in by bringing them to CBS platform. A robust payment system is an 
essential adjunct of Financial Inclusion this is an extremely important area. 
Relaxation  on  KYC  norms:  One  of  the  major  constraints  faced  by  the  common 
IV. 
people  all  along  in  getting  linked  to the formal banking  system  were  the  strict  KYC  norms 
prescribed  all  these  years.  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC)  requirements  for  opening  bank 
accounts were relaxed for small accounts in August 2005, thereby simplifying procedure. To 
facilitate  easy  opening  of  accounts  especially  for  small  customers,  Know  Your  Customer 
(KYC) guidelines have been simplified to such an extent that small accounts can be opened 
without any documentation by just giving a self certification in the presence of bank officials. 
Further,  in  order  to  leverage  upon  the  initiative  of  UIDAI,  RBI  has  allowed  “Aadhaar”,  the 
unique identification number being issued to all citizens of India, to be used as one of the 
eligible document for meeting the KYC requirement for opening a bank account. Recently in 
Sept  2013,  RBI  has  allowed  banks  to  provide  e-KYC  services  based  on  Aadhaar,  thus 
paving the way for account opening of all the people. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Roadmap 
for  providing  Banking  Services 
V. 
Simplified branch authorisation: To address the issue of uneven spread of bank 
branches,  in  December  2009,  domestic  scheduled  commercial  banks  were  permitted  to 
freely open branches in Tier 3 to Tier 6 centres with population of less than 50,000 under 
general  permission,  subject  to  reporting.  .In  the  second  quarter  review  of  Monetary  policy 
Branch  authorisation  has  been  relaxed  to  the  extent  that  banks  do  not  require  prior 
permission to open branches even in tier I centres, subject to reporting. 
VI. 
Opening of branches in unbanked rural centres: To further step up the opening 
of branches in rural areas, banks have been mandated to open at least 25 per cent of the 
branches in unbanked rural centres. To help facilitate in achieving this mandate, banks have 
been  advised  to  open  to  open  small  intermediary  brick  and mortar structures  between  the 
base  branch  and  the  unbanked  villages. The  idea  is  to  create  an  eco-system for  ensuring 
efficient  delivery  of  services,  efficiency  in  cash  management,  redressal  of  customer 
grievances  and  closer  supervision  of  BC  operations.  To  further  encourage  the  banks  in 
pursuing  this  mandate,  banks  have  been  advised  to  consider  frontloading  (prioritizing)  the 
opening of branches in unbanked rural centres over a three year cycle co-terminus with their 
FIPs. This is expected to facilitate quicker branch expansion in unbanked rural centres. 
VII. 
in  unbanked  villages  with 
population  more  than  2000:  With  financial  inclusion  gaining  increasing  recognition  as  a 
business opportunity and with all banks geared to increase presence, we adopted a phase-
wise  approach  to  provide  banking  services  in  all  unbanked  villages  in  the  country.  On 
completion  of  the  first  phase  where  nearly  74000  villages  with  population  more  than 
2000 were  provided  with  a  banking  outlet,  we  are  now  in  the  second  phase  where  the 
remaining unbanked villages, numbering close to 4,90,000, are identified in villages less than 
2000 population and allocated to banks, for opening of banking outlets by Match 2016. 
VIII. 
Direct  Benefit  Transfer  –  The  introduction  of  direct  benefit  transfer  validating 
identity through Aadhaar will facilitate delivery of social welfare benefits by direct credit to the 
bank accounts of beneficiaries. Government proposes to route all social security payments 
through the banking network using the Aadhaar based platform. In order to ensure smooth 
roll  out  of  the  Government’s  Direct  Benefit  Transfer  (DBT)  initiative,  banks  have  been 
advised to open accounts of all eligible individuals in camp mode with the support of local 
Government authorities, seed the existing and new accounts with Aadhaar numbers and put 
in  place  an  effective  mechanism  to  monitor  and  review  the  progress  in  implementation  of 
DBT. 
IX. 
Financial  Literacy  –  Financial  Literacy  is  an  important  adjunct  for  promoting 
financial  inclusion,  we  have  adopted  an  integrated  approach,  wherein  our  efforts  towards 
Financial  Inclusion  and  Financial  Literacy  go  hand  in  hand. Through  Financial  literacy  and 
education,  we  disseminate  information  on  the  general  banking  concepts  to  diverse  target 
groups, including school and college students, women, rural and urban poor, pensioners and 
senior  citizens  to  enable  them  to  make  informed  financial  decisions.  To  ensure  that  the 
initiatives on the supply side are supported by initiatives on the demand side, we have nearly 
800 financial  literacy  centres  set  up  by  banks.  In  addition  to  this  we  are  leveraging  the 
infrastructure  created  at  the  state  level,  comprising  of  State  Level  Bankers  Committee 
(SLBC)  at the  Apex  which  is  ably  supported  by  the  Lead  District  Managers  (LDMs)  at  the 
District level. We have designed a mass scale Financial Literacy Program with an objective 
to integrate the financially excluded population having low  level of income and low literacy 
level with the formal financial system. Financial Literacy Centres organize Outdoor Literacy 
camps  which  are  spread  over  a  period  of  three  months  and  delivered  in  three  phases 
wherein along with creating awareness, accounts are also opened in the Literacy camps The 
program  has  been  received  well  on  the  ground  as  an  integrated  approach  of  financial 
inclusion through creating awareness and providing access simultaneously. 
X. 
Financial  Inclusion  Plan  of  banks  –  We  have  encouraged  banks  to  adopt  a 
structured and planned approach to financial inclusion with commitment at the highest levels, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
through preparation of Board approved Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs). The first phase of 
FIPs was implemented over the period 2010–2013. The Reserve Bank has used the FIPs to 
gauge  the  performance  of  banks  under  their  FI  initiatives.  In  this  direction  we  have  put  in 
place  a  structured  and  comprehensive  monitoring  mechanism  for  evaluating  banks’ 
performance vis-à-vis their targets. To ensure support of the Top Management of the Bank to 
the FI process and to ensure accountability of the senior functionaries of the bank, one on 
one annual review meetings, chaired by the Deputy Governor, are held with CMDs/CEOs of 
banks. A snapshot of the progress made by banks under the 3 year Financial Inclusion Plan 
(April 10 – March 13) for key parameters during the three year period indicates that banking 
outlets  increased  to  nearly  2,68,000  banking  as  on  March  13  as  against  67,694  banking 
outlets in villages in March 2010. 7400 rural branches have been opened during this period 
of  3  years.  Nearly  109 million  Basic  Savings  Bank  Deposit  Accounts  (BSBDAs  have  been 
added  taking  the  total  no  of  BSBDA  to  182  million.  Share  of  ICT  based  accounts  have 
increased substantially – Percentage of ICT accounts to total BSBDAs has increased from 
25% in March 10 to 45% in March 13. About 4904 lakh transactions have been carried out in 
ICT based accounts through BCs during the three year period. 
After completion of the first plan period, we realized that there is a Access Usage conundrum 
a large banking network has been created along with the opening of large number of bank 
accounts.  However,  we  have  realized  that  simply  creating  the  banking  infrastructure  and 
opening banking accounts will not fulfill our objectives of achieving total Financial Inclusion. 
To  take  the  process,  forward  banks  have  been  advised  to  draw  up  fresh  3  year  Financial 
Inclusion  Plans  for  the period  2013–16.  ensure  involvement  of  all  the  stake  holders  in  the 
FI efforts  and  to  ensure  uniformity  in  the  reporting  structure  under  the  Financial  Inclusion 
Plan,  banks  have  are  to  ensure  that  the  FIPs  prepared  by  them  are  disaggregated  and 
percolated down upto the branch level. The focus under the new plan is to ensure that the 
large  banking  network  created  is  utilized  for  extending  other  products  viz.  credit  products, 
which  will  help  make the  business more  viable  for  banks. This  would  also  ensure  that the 
large number of accounts opened see an equally large volume of transactions taking place 
and people reap the benefits of getting linked to the formal financial institutions. 
XI. 
Robust Institutional Mechanism – Over the years one of our major achievements 
and strength has been the creation of a robust institutional mechanism which would support 
the roll out of banking services across the country. The Financial Stability and Development 
Council (FSDC)  which is headed by the Finance  Minister. Under the aegis of the FSDC a 
Sub-Group  of  FSDC  headed  by  the  Governor,  RBI  and  within  that  a  Technical  Group, 
headed  by  Deputy  Governor,  Dr  K.C.Chakrabarty,  exclusively  mandated  for  financial 
inclusion  and  financial  literacy.  In  order  to  gauge  the  performance  of  banks  and  to 
continuously  review  the  various  models  adopted  under  FI,  RBI  has constituted  a  Financial 
Inclusion Advisory Committee (FIAC), headed by a Deputy Governor, Dr K.C. Chakrabarty. 
Road ahead extending the frontiers of the formal financial system 
XII. 
XIII. 
For  growth  to  be  truly  inclusive  requires  broadening  and  deepening  the  reach  of 
banking.  A  wider  distribution  and  access  of  financial  services  helps  both  consumers  and 
producers increase welfare and productivity. Such access is especially powerful for the poor 
as it provides them opportunities to build savings, make investments, avail credit and more 
important, insure themselves against income shocks and emergencies. As the real economy 
is dynamic, it is imperative that the banking system is flexible and competitive to cope with 
multiple  objectives  and  demands  made  on  it  by  various  constituents  of  the  economy.  To 
address  the  issues  of  urban  poverty  we  have  brought  the  metropolitan  urban  areas  like 
Mumbai under the planning and review mechanism of the lead bank scheme 
Now to outline the way forward for meeting our possible dream of Financial Inclusion 
5. 
NEW  BANK  LICENSES  to  ensure  that  the  banking  system  grows  in  size  and 
sophistication to meet the needs of a modern economy and for improving access to banking 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
services,  we  are  in  the  process  of  evaluation  of  new  bank  license  applications  They  are 
expected to go beyond simply beefing up infrastructure like handheld devices, smart cards, 
better vendors and service providers, etc necessary to scale up the FI activities. These new 
banks are expected to bring new technology innovative models bring in new business and 
delivery  models  which  would  speed  up  the  roll  out  of  financial  services  to  remote  areas. 
Financial Inclusion will work on the ACTA model Accounts, Cash in Cash Out, Transactions 
and adjacencies which will help to build a revenue stream. 
6. 
BUSINESS  and  Delivery  Model  –  There  are  many  challenges  being  faced  while 
implementing financial inclusion. Of 2,68000 banking outlets nearly 221000 are BC ie nearly 
82%  percent.  Sustainability  and  scalability  of  the  BC  model  is  essential.  More  and  more 
innovative products will have to be introduced which would benefit both banks as well as the 
rural  people  and  at  the  same  time  make  the  BC  model  more  viable.  Review  of  the  cash 
management practices for delivery of banking services through the branchless modes need 
to be done for ensuring scaling up of the various models. 
7. 
Usage  of  banking  services  –  Using  the  first  phase  of  our  FI  initiative,  we  have 
successfully  opened  74000  outlets  in  the  rural  areas.  Going  forward  our  idea  is  to  enable 
more transactions in these accounts by providing more credit products, which will not only 
help rural people to avail of credit at comparatively lower rates of interest but at the same 
time  also  make  the  BC  model  viable  for  banks.  Skills  and  capacity  building  of  BC  is  as 
important 
8. 
Financial  Education  –  We  have  adopted  an  integrated  approach  for  financial 
inclusion  wherein  the  supply  side  initiatives  will  be  ably  supported  by  initiatives  on  the 
demand  side.  In  this  direction  banks  will  have  to  support  financial  literacy  and  awareness 
drives to make people understand the benefits of linking with the banking system. Including 
financial education in the school curriculum so as to educate children about the benefits of 
banks and banking services. Will go a long way in inculcating responsible banking habits at 
the young age. In this direction the Technical Group of the FSDC has already come out with 
a National Strategy on Financial Education. 
Collaborative efforts – Finally, financial inclusion cannot be achieved without the 
9. 
active 
involvement  of  all  stakeholders 
financial  regulators,  banks, 
governments, NGOs, civil societies, etc. The current policy objective of inclusive growth with 
financial  stability  cannot  be  achieved  without  ensuring  universal  financial  inclusion.  Banks 
alone will not be able to achieve this unless an entire support system would be partnering 
with them in this mission. All the stakeholders need to join hands and make it possible. The 
support of policymakers, regulators, governments, IT solution providers and public at large 
would bring a decisive metamorphosis in Indian banking. 
10. 
As  stated  by  our  Governor,  Dr.  Raghuram  Rajan,  we  have  to  reach  everyone, 
however  remote  or  small,  with  financial  services.  Financial  inclusion  does  not  just  mean 
credit for productive purposes; it means credit for healthcare emergencies or to pay lumpy 
school or college fees. It means a safe means of remunerated savings, and an easy way to 
make  payments  and  remittances.  It  means  insurance  and  pensions.  It  means  financial 
literacy  and  consumer  protection.  I  should  emphasize  the  need  for  banks  like  the  ones 
represented  in  this  room  to  move  beyond  simply  opening  bank  accounts  to  ensuring  that 
poor customers are confident and comfortable enough to use them. Innovation in reaching 
out to the underserved customer, rather than simply posting higher numbers in branches or 
bank  accounts  opened,  has  to  be  part  of  our  efforts.  We  need  a  frugal,  trustworthy,  and 
effective Indian model for financial inclusion. Our measure of success should be the jobs that 
are created, not by giving government subsidies or protections to labour-intensive industries 
or sectors but by developing a facilitating, though competitive, environment that will result in 
the emergence of the best solutions. This I would suggest the way forward for meeting our 
dream of Financial Inclusion. Some of the measures are already in pipeline. We are awaiting 
the forthcoming recommendations of the Dr. Nachiket Mor Committee, the Dr. Sambamurthy 
like  RBI,  other 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
committee will also guide us how to expand mobile banking in India through encrypted SMS 
based funds transfer in any type of handset. So in sum while several challenges do present 
themselves  they  catty  within  them  the  core  of  opportunities  which  will  spur  development 
impulses and lead to growth with equity. Thank you for a patient hearing. 
 
 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
