Ardian Fullani: Medium and long-term development priorities in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Joint Press Conference 
with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  Mission,  Tirana, 
27 September 2013. 
 Dear Minister of Finance, 
Dear Mr. Ilahi, 
Dear media representatives,  
The  past  two  weeks  have  seen  very  intensive  discussions  on  the  current  situation  of  the 
Albanian economy, the state of public finances, the developments in the financial system, as 
well  as  on  the  country’s  development  perspective  and  management  of  economic  policies, 
which  should  support  Albania’s  sustainable  and  long-term  growth.  As  the  Governor  of  the 
Bank of Albania, I am pleased to see convergence on a common and real diagnosis of the 
current  situation,  and  also  on  many  viewpoints  about  medium-term  and  long-term 
development priorities. I would like to share with the media several opinions of the central 
bank on these issues.  
Two days ago, at its monthly meeting on monetary policy, the Bank of Albania analysed the 
latest information on current and expected performance of the economy. I made public the 
conclusions  of  this  analysis  at  a  press  conference  following  the  meeting.  However,  I  will 
telegraphically re-present our main conclusions to put our suggestions for the future into the 
proper context.  
The Albanian economy is suffering from cyclical weaknesses, which appear in the form 
of  a  weak  aggregate  demand  and  are  reflected  in  low  and  below-potential  growth  of  the 
economy.  In  simpler  terms,  consumer  spending  of  Albanian  households,  private  sector 
investments, public spending and external demand for Albanian goods and services do not 
manage to fully use the productive capacities of the economy. The low aggregate demand 
leads to low increase in employment, wages and production costs, and hence to low inflation 
rates. Also, it poses difficulties for many businesses and is translated into increase in non-
performing loans in the banking system.  
In  this  context,  undoubtedly,  promoting  and  stimulating  the  economy  should  be  a 
priority  of  the  macroeconomic  policies.  The  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  besides  the 
classic instruments of the economic stimulus, monetary and fiscal policies, attention should 
be  paid  to  smoothing  uncertainties  in  the  economy.  I  will  briefly  address  three  of  these 
elements.  
First, in our opinion, the fiscal policy has limited space for economic stimulus. The rapidly 
expanding  public  debt  increases the  vulnerability  of the  Albanian  economy  and  may  make 
the  fiscal  stimulus  counterproductive.  We  deem  that  the  fiscal  policy  should  focus  on 
monitoring the public debt in the medium and long term. The Bank of Albania sticks to the 
opinion that the public finance consolidation should anchor to an effective and transparent 
fiscal rule. This rule would increase the short-term flexibility of public finances and reduce 
the fiscal adjustment cost.  
Second,  the  overall  economic  and  financial  stability  is  a  prerequisite  for  a  rapid  economic 
growth. The monetary policy has been and will remain oriented toward meeting our inflation 
target. In line with the cyclical situation, this policy has provided its stimulus through the key 
interest rate cut and ongoing liquidity injection into the banking system. We have also revised 
the  banking  system  regulatory  basis  from  the  viewpoint  of  easing  it,  in  order  to  stimulate 
lending by the banking system.  
I avail myself of the opportunity to reiterate that the banking system remains profitable, liquid 
and well-capitalised. Safeguarding the stability of this system will always be on our focus.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Third, reducing uncertainties and risk premiums in the economy is an important priority. 
As I have already stated, these uncertainties stem, to a great extent, from the foreign market, 
but a part of them stems from the Albanian economy. Without intending to make a list, I will 
mention just a few:  
• 
Reducing  informality  should  be  a  primary  objective.  Besides  outflows  in  public 
finances,  informality  brings  hidden  costs  in  terms  of  diminishing  competition, 
inefficiency in terms of lack of balance sheet transparency, and artificially increased 
financing costs to businesses.  
Fostering the financial system infrastructure protection is another aspect deserving 
attention. The Bank of Albania signed and has already made effective a cooperation 
agreement with the People’s Bank of China, which also provides for the possibility to 
obtain liquidity in case of need. An important step in this regard is the agreement 
between the Deposit Insurance Agency and the European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development to increase the deposit insurance coverage. We deem that there 
is  room  for  other  agreements  with  international  financial  institutions  specialised  in 
providing funds and assistance. Establishing collective public protection releases the 
financial  system  and  businesses  from  setting  up  individual  protection.  Besides,  it 
may be transformed into a necessary source of funds for the Albanian economy.  
Improving the business climate further and observing the contract enforcement. The 
business  climate  is  a  rather  complex  issue,  but I  would  highlight two  issues  here. 
First, the payment of deferred budget liabilities as a priority. In spite of the financial 
cost, it is an important step for easing the debt burden in the economy and signalling 
the political willingness to guarantee contract enforcement.  
Second,  the  improvement  of  by-laws  that  regulate  the  collateral  enforcement  and 
write-off  of  bad  debt  from  banks’  balance  sheets.  The  definitive  solution  to  this 
problem would signal to the banking system that Albania is a country where lending 
is safe.  
   All these steps would stimulate the economic activity and restore economic equilibrium.  
However, the Albanian economy is also suffering from structural weaknesses, which 
restrict  the  growth  rate.  I  would  not  like  to  examine  this  aspect  in  detail  but  I  think  it's 
reasonable to reiterate my message that Albania should speed up structural reform.  
It should be anchored to the EU convergence process and aim at adopting its best models 
and  rules.  Through  public  investment  and  economic  incentives,  it  should  aim  at  a  more 
effective and competitive economic structure, capable of generating a rapid and sustainable 
growth.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
