Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Forces of change profoundly influencing the 
Asia-Pacific region 
Speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at 
the Asian-Pacific Association of Banking Institutes Conference 2013, hosted by the Institute 
of Bankers Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, 7 October 2013. 
 the 
towards  accelerating 
region’s  growth  prospects.  Adding 
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you to the 2013 Asian-Pacific Association of Banking 
Institutes  conference  hosted  by  Institute  of  Bankers  Malaysia.  I  would  also  like  extend  a 
special  welcome  to  all  overseas  delegates,  Selamat  Datang,  as  we  say  in  our  national 
language. 
Given the greater economic and financial integration that is taking place today, it is indeed 
timely  for  institutions  of  learning  that  focus  on  the  financial  sector  to  come  together  to 
deliberate  on  contemporary  issues  and  trends  affecting  the  region,  and  its  implication  on 
talent needs and development going forward. My remarks today will focus on the forces of 
change  that  are  profoundly  influencing  the  economies  of  the  Asia  Pacific  region,  and  by 
extension,  our  financial  systems,  as  well  as  some  thoughts  on  the  implications  of  these 
changes to the banking industry, with a particular focus on human capital development. 
I want to touch on three forces that are reshaping the banking industry across Asia and the 
Pacific. The first is on emerging markets’ and in particular Asia’s emergence as a dynamic 
centre  for  the  global  economy. Whilst  risks  to  the  outlook  for  global  growth  continue,  with 
new  events  unfolding  daily,  Asia’s  economic  growth  remains  strong  and  transformation  is 
expected to expand well into the future. This growth is set to drive increasing trade in goods 
and services, as well as the flow of capital between the region and the world. At the same 
time,  Asia  is  also  intensifying  intra-regional  financial  and  economic  integration  that  would 
contribute 
these 
transformative  trends  is  the  march  towards  urbanisation  which  will  continue  to  stimulate 
demand for infrastructure development. All these factors will have an important influence on 
the way in which the financial services industry responds to new growth opportunities in the 
region. To support Asia’s growth, financial markets in Asia must continue to grow in size and 
sophistication  to  intermediate  capital  towards  productive  investments.  We  can  expect 
increasing demands being placed on Asian banks for services and expertise in trading, risk 
management, structured financing and loan syndication, infrastructural financing, and capital 
raising.  Equally,  recent  efforts  focusing  on  strengthening  regional  financial  integration  to 
facilitate  the  increasing  intra-regional  trade  and  investment,  such  as  the  ASEAN  Banking 
Integration Framework, will offer tremendous opportunities for banks with the right credential 
to establish their presence as regional players. 
On the retail side, there exists vast potential for growth – owing much to the demographic 
transformation in the region. Asia is now home to a growing middle income population, the 
number of which is projected to reach 3 billion by 2030. The region will also be faced with an 
ageing population in the years ahead. With rising affluence, coupled with the need to achieve 
higher levels of income to support the increasing longevity, Asian consumers will increasingly 
demand  innovative,  better  quality  financial  products  and  services.  At  another  end  of  the 
product spectrum is the scope for enhancing financial inclusion and reducing inequality for 
the  traditionally  underserved,  such  as  poor  households  and  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs). To unlock the potential of this segment as a driver of growth not only 
requires  product 
innovative 
instruments, but also the use of new business model and technology to expand the reach of 
financial services, especially in poor and remote areas. 
Second, the strong growth of Islamic finance across Asia in the recent years is another trend 
that is characterising the region. This dynamic segment will continue to offer strong growth 
that  delivers  cost-effective,  high-quality  and 
innovation 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
prospect going forward, backed by its increasing importance as a tool for enhancing financial 
inclusion and reaching out to the underserved segments, the growing demand for socially-
responsible investment and ethical financial services in this post-crisis era, and the increase 
in the wealth of individuals in Asia. Islamic finance has also proved to be a competitive and 
innovative  financial  intermediation  channel  that  could  strengthen  global  financial  and 
economic  linkages,  led  by  the  high  growth  segment  of  the  sukuk  market  which  has  now 
become an important avenue for international fund raising and investment activities. 
Third,  the  impact  of  global  regulatory  reform  in  response  to  the  global  financial  crisis  is 
another important force that would continue to drive change in the financial landscape. The 
Asian  financial  sector  was  resilient  throughout  the  crisis.  But  Asia  is  not  immune  to  the 
volatility and uncertainty that is constantly changing our financial and economic landscape. 
Some areas of the regulatory reforms, notably capital and liquidity requirements, have now 
progressed into the implementation phase. Integrating the new regulatory enhancements will 
have  a  fundamental  impact  on  how  banks  in  Asia  manage  risks  in  their  businesses, 
particularly in the context of optimising capital to support growth in the region. Banks that are 
able  to  develop  a  strong  governance  framework  to  link  business  and  regulatory  change 
effectively,  will  be  a  step  ahead  when  it  comes  to  managing growth  in  the  new  regulatory 
environment. 
This  requires  a  fundamental  change  in  mindset  –  from  treating  risk  management  for 
regulatory compliance – to being, a fundamental part of strategic executive decision-making. 
The regulatory change comes with the expectation for banks’ enhanced capabilities around 
stress  testing,  capital  and  liquidity  planning,  risk  governance  and  regulatory  reporting.  I 
believe  financial  institutions  with  foresight  will  take the  opportunity  to  turn  these  regulatory 
enhancements into sources of competitive advantage, by developing a comprehensive and 
deeper  level  of  awareness  of  their  business  and  risks from  the  data  aggregation,  analysis 
and reporting work, to evolve new, more risk-focused business strategies. 
This  brings  me  to  the  next  point  on  the  competitive  breakthrough  that  Asian  banks  can 
achieve  through  technological  innovations.  Since  the  onset  of  the  digital  revolution, 
information flows  and  networks  have  spread  across  borders. We  are  now  in  a  new  era  of 
technology since the advent of cloud computing. More than ever, technology pervades nearly 
every  aspect  of  our  lives.  Whilst  Asia  is  home  to  some  of  the  world’s  most  digitized  and 
innovative economies, I believe the potential of technology is yet to be fully realised in the 
region’s banking industry. With the constant challenge from the vast amount of data, banks 
that can successfully capitalise on rapid access to critical information and able to act quickly 
and effectively will distinguish themselves in the future. This challenge becomes magnified in 
post-regulatory  reform,  as  demand  is  growing  across  the  financial  services  industry  for 
greater 
risk 
management. 
There  is  also  increased  expectation  for  financial  institutions  to  tap  on  the  new  targeted 
segments  of  the  unbanked.  This  is  where  the  force  of  technology  can  come  into  play. 
Technological  advancement  such  as  business  analytics  and  mobility  solutions  can  be 
tailored to markets across Asia to access a wealth of data that can be used beyond strategic 
risk  management  to  open  up  the  previously  inaccessible  and  unprofitable  customer 
segments  –  in  reaching  new  customers  without  the  cost  of  establishing  extensive  branch 
networks, and in improving relationships and cross-selling prospects with existing customers. 
These  forces  of  change  present  immense  opportunities  for  Asia’s  banking  industry.  Asian 
banks  already  have  the  advantage  of  deep  understanding  on  local  and  regional  market 
conditions  and  are  relatively  well-capitalised,  an  outcome  of  comprehensive  reforms 
undertaken in the wake of the Asian financial crisis. They are therefore well-placed to seize 
new opportunities that emerge in the region. Financial institutions that can develop the right 
capability  to  execute  the  right  strategy  will  be  availed  with  the  potential  of  positioning 
information  and  analytics  and 
transparency,  better 
improvements 
to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
themselves  ahead  in  the  race  of  being  Asia’s  Premier  banking  player,  and  even  position 
themselves as global force. 
To  move  markets  into  the  next  phase  of  growth,  financial  institutions  must  be  willing  to 
innovate and improve offerings in new growth segments. This has to be supported by good 
risk and capital management practices, or even develop entirely new skills to embrace new 
technology and business models. Moreover, Asia’s local banks with the aspiration to expand 
their  regional  or  global  footprint  will  need  to  develop  talent  to  enhance  their  capacity  and 
capabilities  to  compete  beyond  borders.  This  changing  landscape  should  see  the  level  of 
technical expertise, and skilled resources in the industry advance to new heights. The rapid 
pace with which change is occurring is not only demanding shorter time to competence, but 
also heightening demand for professionals with a broader range of skills including leadership 
and interpersonal skills as well as global business acumen. 
It is with this in mind that we advocate for professional development standards to be raised. It 
is  clear  that  a  transformation  strategy  endeavor  for  any  nation,  industry  or  organization, 
cannot be achieved without the right quality of human capital. This is particularly the case for 
banking  as  a  knowledge  dominated  industry.  Capacity  building  programs  to  mould  and 
generate the right skills, mindsets and values consistent with changing market dynamics will 
be  the  key  success  factors.  It  is  therefore  imperative  for  learning  institutions  around  the 
region  to  continue  to  review  and  update  their  respective  syllabus,  contents  and  learning 
methodologies and ensure that education remain relevant and effective in meeting the talent 
needs in the region. 
On  this  note,  I  commend  the  commitment  of  the  Institute  of  Bankers  Malaysia  (IBBM)  to 
transform  from;  a  provider  of  courses  to  a  facilitator  of  professional  education,  from  a 
consumer to a producer of intellectual capital, and from a national to a regional, or perhaps 
as a global service provider. 
We are now looking at a new landscape for our banking education infrastructure and plan to 
announce soon on the developments and delivery of a broad range of industry programmes 
that will embrace professional standards that are more applied and reflective of the times. It 
might  include  multi-disciplinary  research  that  covers  areas  such  as  thought  leadership, 
publications and flagship conferences. We aspire the transformation of IBBM into a forward-
looking,  world-class  provider  in  the  development  of  professionals  for  the  dynamic  financial 
sector. 
The transformation of IBBM represents part of an overall capacity building and infrastructural 
development  efforts  to  raise  the  standards  on  education  in  financial  services.  Less  than  a 
month ago the FAA – Finance Accreditation Agency, an entity responsible for reviewing the 
quality  of  the  learning  programs  that  serve  the  industry  was  launched.  This  agency 
complements the initiatives by the International Centre For Leadership In Finance (ICLIF) to 
produce  capable  and  competence  leaders.  Taken  together,  these  efforts  reflect  our 
motivation  in  ensuring  comprehensive  talent  development  solutions  for  financial  sector 
professionals throughout their career progression from entry-level up to leadership positions. 
Equal emphasis is also given in the area of Islamic finance. Talent development has been 
identified as a key thrust to support industry growth and development, both domestically and 
globally. The role of several talent development institutions dedicated to serving the industry 
has been instrumental in contributing towards achieving this goal – the International Centre 
for Education in Islamic Finance (INCEIF) which is as a global university offering academic 
and  professional  qualifications  in  Islamic  finance,  the  International  Shari’ah  Research 
Academy for Islamic Finance (ISRA) which is a centre for applied research in Shariah and 
Islamic finance, as well as IBFIM or the Islamic Finance and Banking Institute Malaysia – an 
industry-owned training entity for Islamic finance professionals. Despite being relatively new 
in  existence,  these  institutions  have  now  become  increasingly  recognised  as  leading 
providers  of  expertise  in  Islamic finance,  providing  the Islamic finance global  community  a 
reference centre for knowledge and talent development. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
I  am  most  inspired  by  the  optimism  set  by  theme  of  this  year’s  conference  –  “Waves  of 
change, Oceans of opportunities”. The theme very aptly sums up the business conditions we 
face  today.  Rapid  change  is  the  new  normal  in  today’s  dynamic  world.  The  rise  and 
interconnectivity  of  Asia  as  well  as  its  demographic  changes,  the  impact  of  regulatory 
changes and new technologies are all combining to transform the financial landscape of the 
region. Survival and success in today’s challenging environment will depend on being able to 
exploit  new  growth  opportunities  that  come  with  change.  But  this  journey  will  not  happen 
without determined action to lay the foundation for future success of the industry. 
In closing, I wish you an insightful and productive deliberation and trust that your discussion 
will be useful and will leave you with additional insights to tackle the challenges that you face. 
To our overseas guests, I hope you will leave KL with pleasant memories of your brief stay 
here. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
