Mario Draghi: Euro area economic outlook, the ECB’s monetary policy 
and current policy challenges 
Statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  prepared  for  the 
Twenty-Eighth Meeting of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington 
DC, 12 October 2013. 
 I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  euro  area  economic  outlook,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  and 
current policy challenges. 
Economic activity in the euro area bottomed out in the first half of the year and is expected to 
strengthen  gradually  in  the  period  ahead.  Recent  economic  indicators,  which  have  been 
predominantly  positive,  support  expectations  of  a  modest  and  gradual  recovery.  Output  is 
expected to recover at a slow pace, driven by a gradual improvement in domestic demand 
supported by the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy stance and a gradual strengthening 
of external demand. Furthermore, the improvements in financial markets seen since August 
2012 appear to be gradually working their way through to the real economy, as should the 
progress  made  in  fiscal  consolidation.  The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the 
euro  area  continue  to  be  on  the  downside.  Developments  in  global  money  and  financial 
market conditions and related uncertainties may have the potential to negatively affect the 
economic  outlook. Other  downside  risks  include  higher  commodity  prices  in  the  context  of 
renewed geopolitical tensions, weaker than expected global demand and slow or insufficient 
implementation of structural reforms in euro area countries. 
Underlying price pressures in the euro area are expected to remain subdued, reflecting the 
broad-based weakness in aggregate demand and the modest pace of the recovery, as well 
as  subdued  monetary  and  credit  dynamics.  Medium  to  long-term  inflation  expectations 
continue to be firmly anchored in line  with price stability. The risks to the outlook for price 
developments are expected to be still broadly balanced over the medium term, with upside 
risks  relating  in  particular  to  higher  commodity  prices  as  well  as  stronger  than  expected 
increases  in  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes,  and  downside  risks  stemming  from 
weaker than expected economic activity. 
The ECB’s monetary policy stance continues to be geared towards maintaining the degree of 
monetary  accommodation  warranted  by  the  outlook  for  price  stability.  It  thereby  provides 
support  to  a  gradual  recovery  in  economic  activity.  Looking  ahead,  our  monetary  policy 
stance  will  remain  accommodative  for  as  long  as  necessary.  In  line  with  the  guidance 
provided  in  July,  the  Governing  Council  expects  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  to  remain  at 
present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  This  expectation  is  based  on  an 
overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, given the broad-based 
weakness in the economy and subdued monetary dynamics. In the period ahead, the ECB 
will monitor all incoming information on economic and monetary developments and assess 
any impact on the medium-term outlook for price stability. 
With  regard  to  money  market  conditions,  the  ECB  will  remain  particularly  attentive  to 
developments which may have implications for the stance of monetary policy and is ready to 
consider all available instruments. 
Further reducing fragmentation of euro area credit markets and improving confidence in the 
euro  area  banking  sector  are  essential  to  ensure  an  adequate  transmission  of  monetary 
policy to the financing conditions in the euro area countries and to further repair the credit 
channel.  Financial  stability  risks  have  diminished  in  the  euro  area.  Measures  taken  by 
European and national authorities have helped to ease the severe market stress that earlier 
weighed  on  sovereigns  and  banks.  The  euro  area  banking  sector  has  made  progress  in 
balance sheet repair by improving its regulatory capital ratios, by reducing its leverage since 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the outbreak of the financial crisis and by shifting its funding structure towards more stable 
funding sources. Net inflows of capital from abroad as well as a reduction in excess liquidity 
conditions  continue  to  be  observed,  reflecting  an  improvement  in  financial  market 
confidence.  Repayments  of  funds  taken  up  in  the  context  of  the  ECB’s  three-year  longer-
term refinancing operations conducted in December 2011 and February 2012 have resulted 
in a decline in the size of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet since end-August 2012. We will 
remain  attentive  to  all  developments  that  influence  an  adequate  transmission  of  monetary 
policy to the financing conditions in euro area countries. 
Further  decisive  steps  towards  establishing  a  genuine  banking  union  are  needed  so  as  to 
further  reduce  financial  fragmentation,  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  banking  sector  and 
strengthen the institutional framework of the euro area. The ECB welcomes the approval of 
the legal framework of the single supervisory mechanism (SSM) by the European Parliament 
on 12 September and we look forward to its urgent adoption by the EU Council in the course 
of October. The entry into force of the SSM legal framework will allow us to further speed up 
the preparation process, which is well under way. We are committed to delivering on our new 
supervisory responsibilities by November 2014. 
We also strongly support the envisaged timeline for the establishment by the end of 2014 of 
the single resolution mechanism (SRM), which is a necessary complement to the SSM. The 
Commission’s  proposal  for  the  SRM  contains  three  essential  elements  for  the  effective 
resolution of banks, namely: a single system, a single authority and a single fund. 
The ECB’s forthcoming comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets, which will take 
place  before  the  ECB  assumes  its  supervisory  responsibilities,  will  be  an  important 
confidence-building tool, and we are committed to ensuring its consistency and transparency. 
The  effectiveness  of  this  exercise  will  also  depend  on  the  availability  of  necessary 
arrangements for recapitalising banks, if and when needed, including through the provision of 
a public backstop, if private funds cannot be acquired. These arrangements must be in place 
before we conclude our assessment, in line with the declaration of the European Council of 
June  2013.  It  is  also  noteworthy  that  strong  efforts  to  repair  bank  balance  sheets  and 
enhance transparency have already been undertaken in all euro area countries, especially in 
those that have experienced severe stress. 
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  substantial  fiscal  adjustment  has  been  undertaken  by  the  euro 
area countries over the last few years. The average fiscal position of the euro area countries 
is much stronger than that of global peers. The authorities should not unravel their multi-year 
efforts  to  cut  deficits  but  should  reduce the  debt  ratios  without  delay,  in line  with  the  EU’s 
fiscal framework, which has been considerably reinforced over the past few years. As part of 
this enhanced framework, the draft budgetary plans that countries will now deliver for the first 
time under the “two-pack” regulations need to provide for sufficiently far-reaching measures 
to achieve the fiscal targets in 2014. 
Euro area governments must also decisively strengthen their efforts to implement the needed 
structural reforms in product and labour markets. These reforms are required not only to help 
the respective countries to regain competitiveness and to rebalance within the euro area, but 
also  to  create  more  flexible  and  dynamic  economies  that  will  generate  sustainable  growth 
and  employment.  As regards  intra-euro  area  imbalances,  there  has  been  a  major  external 
adjustment  in  euro  area  countries  with  previously  high  current  account  deficits.  Improved 
competitiveness indicators, in particular declining unit labour costs and the relatively robust 
export performance, point to a more lasting effect of the structural reforms undertaken so far. 
The  framework  of  the  European  Semester  and  the  macroeconomic  imbalance  procedure 
have provided additional tools to secure further progress in terms of structural adjustments in 
the euro area that will put the euro area in a position to make a positive contribution to global 
growth and employment creation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
