Fritz Zurbrügg: Monetary policy and financial markets – is a return to 
normal on the horizon? 
Speech by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Money Market Event, Geneva, 21 November 2013. 
 The  speaker  would  like  to  thank  Bettina  Simioni  for  her  valuable  support  in  preparing  this  speech.  I  am  also 
indebted to Marco Huwiler, Rita Kobel and Peter Kuster for their insightful comments. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Welcome to the Money Market Event of the Swiss National Bank (SNB) in Geneva. It is a 
great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  able  to  address  you  here  today  for  the  second  time.  I  am 
particularly  delighted  because  I  am  able  to  talk  to  you  today  with  a  good  deal  more 
confidence  than  I  could  a  year  ago.  The  situation  on  the  European  financial  markets  has 
calmed  perceptibly,  and  it  is  more  than  a  year  since  the  SNB  has  had  to  intervene  in  the 
foreign  exchange  market  to  defend  the  minimum  exchange  rate  of  CHF 1.20  against  the 
euro. 
But  let  us  turn  the  clock  back  to  2012  for  a  moment.  At  that  time,  a  great  many  market 
participants  feared  that  the  euro  area  would  collapse.  The  upward  pressure  on  the  Swiss 
franc was immense. As a result, our willingness to defend the minimum exchange rate with 
all  our  resources  was  put  to  a  severe  test.  In  2012,  we  purchased  foreign  currency  for  a 
value of almost CHF 190 billion. Consequently, my statements last year were devoted to the 
growth in foreign currency reserves and the associated challenges. 
Today I would like to discuss the question of whether a return to normal is on the horizon 
either  for  monetary  policy  –  initially  in  the  US  –  or  for  financial  markets.  Although  various 
signs  on  the  financial  markets  point  in  this  direction  –  including  the  calming  of  the  bond 
markets  in  Europe’s  peripheral  economies,  record  highs  on  stock  markets  and  the  rise  in 
long-term  interest  rates  since  mid-year  –  other  observations  are  less  encouraging.  Global 
economic  recovery  is  merely  sluggish  and  the  risks  for  growth  are  still  to  the  downside. 
Unemployment, particularly in the euro area, is very high and many structural reforms have 
been  postponed.  Against  this  background,  financial  markets  are  not  expecting  any  of  the 
major central banks to raise their reference rates before 2015. 
In  answering  the  question  above,  I  will  begin  by  talking  about  developments  in  financial 
markets, with a special focus on the Swiss franc. Then I will discuss monetary policy at the 
US Federal Reserve and its first attempt to bring about a restoration of normal conditions. 
Afterwards, I will give a brief presentation of the economic situation with a focus on Europe. 
In conclusion, I would like to draw your attention to the dangers associated with a prolonged 
period of low interest rates. 
European financial markets calmer thanks to monetary policy 
If  you  take  a  look  at  chart  1,  you  can  follow  the  movements  in  both  the  euro/Swiss  franc 
exchange  rate  and  the  average  risk  premium  for  the  government  bonds  of  five  peripheral 
euro area countries (Italy, Spain, Greece, Portugal and Ireland). The risk premium is drawn 
on  an  inverted  scale,  in  other  words,  a  movement  downwards  signifies  a  higher  risk.  This 
chart serves as an illustrative example for two developments. On the one hand, it shows that 
uncertainty in the euro area has decreased greatly over the past twelve months. At the time 
of the last Money Market Event in Geneva, the risk premium was almost 1,200 basis points; 
it is now below 400. On the other hand, the chart illustrates the fact that the upward pressure 
on  the  Swiss franc  has abated.  Following  a  long  period  last  year  when  the  exchange rate 
stuck  closely  to  the  minimum  exchange  rate  of  CHF 1.20,  it  moved  away  in  January  and, 
since May, has fluctuated within a relatively narrow range of CHF 1.22–1.26 per euro. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Here, the situation has calmed in two respects. In order to reduce the risk of the euro area 
collapsing, the European Central Bank (ECB) resorted to an unconventional measure in late 
summer  2012,  the  outright  monetary  transactions  programme.  Market  participants  were 
persuaded, and since then the risk premium for peripheral economies in Europe has declined 
steadily.  What  is  remarkable  is  how  persistent  this  trend  has  been.  The  positive  market 
sentiment on the European markets has defied both negative reports from the real economy 
and  various  political  crises,  even  those  in  major  member  states  such  as  Italy.  The  lower 
interest  rates  have  improved  the  growth  outlook  in  the  euro  area  and  opened  up  a  time 
window for structural reform. 
A  certain  degree  of  calming  also  occurred  for  the  Swiss  franc  exchange  rate.  Demand 
declined for investments which were seen as safe havens, such as the Swiss franc, with the 
result that foreign currency purchases to defend the minimum exchange rate have not been 
necessary for over a year. However, investors remain cautious, as can be seen in chart 1. 
First, the exchange rate did not perceptibly move away from the CHF 1.20 level until January 
2013, in other words, after many months of declining risk premia. Second, the Swiss franc 
has not weakened fundamentally against the euro during the course of this year, although 
risk premia have declined further. Nevertheless, many market participants expect a renewed 
depreciation  in  the  Swiss  franc  in  view  of  the  progress  in  the  euro  area.  The  value  of  the 
Swiss franc is still high at present. As can be seen in chart 2, the trade-weighted, inflation-
adjusted  exchange rate for the  Swiss  franc, for  instance,  is  currently  about  10% above  its 
long-term  average.  The  minimum  exchange  rate  continues  to  prevent  an  undesired 
tightening of monetary conditions should the upward pressure on the Swiss franc intensify 
once again in view of the current uncertainty. 
Exceptional circumstances still apply for monetary policy 
Clearly, exceptional circumstances still apply for monetary policy. This is the case not only 
for Switzerland and the euro area, but also for the US, Japan and the UK. As you know, the 
ECB reduced its refinancing rate by a further 25 basis points two weeks ago. In the US and 
Japan, current quantitative easing measures are giving rise to a further expansion in central 
bank balance sheets. The fact that monetary policy in the advanced economies is likely to 
remain  exceptionally  expansionary  for  some  time  to  come  can  be  seen  in  market 
expectations for reference rates (cf. chart 3). At the moment, the markets are assuming that 
the Federal Reserve will increase its key interest rate in the second quarter of 2015, the ECB 
in the fourth quarter of 2015 and the SNB in the first quarter of 2016. 
Last year, a number of central banks introduced the principle of forward guidance, in order to 
further increase the effectiveness of their expansionary monetary policy. Forward guidance 
involves the provision of information on the expected movement of short-term interest rates. 
To some extent, information of this kind has already been provided by central banks in the 
past. What is new with forward guidance is that some central banks give an explicit indication 
of how long they expect low interest rates to continue. For instance, the Federal Reserve and 
the  Bank  of  England  have  tied  the  assessment  of  their  respective  reference  rates  to  a 
threshold  for  the  unemployment  rate.  At  the  moment,  an  intense  debate  is  raging  as  to 
whether  forward  guidance  can  actually  increase  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  a 
zero interest rate environment. What is crucial for the effectiveness of forward guidance is 
that it is transparent and credible. 
In the case of the SNB, the inflation forecast provides implicit information about the expected 
interest rate path. At present, however, the minimum exchange rate against the euro is also 
in place. With short-term interest rates close to zero, the minimum exchange rate makes it 
possible, for the foreseeable future, to ensure monetary conditions that are appropriate for 
the Swiss economy. 
Irrespective  of  any  kind  of  forward  guidance,  international  monetary  policy  is  extremely 
expansionary. This has had a stabilising effect on international financial markets, as reflected 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
by the situation in spring, when long-term interest rates sank to a historically low level and 
risk  markets  benefited  from  strong  capital  inflows.  Various  stock  indices  recorded  new 
historical  highs  and  risk  premia  for  corporate  bonds  have  steadily  narrowed.  This  positive 
sentiment was also reflected in volatility measures which had returned to the levels prevailing 
before the financial crisis. 
First attempt to normalise monetary policy in the US 
Together with a revival of the economy in the US, this favourable environment resulted in the 
Federal Reserve making a first attempt to initiate the process of normalising monetary policy. 
On 22 May 2013, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke, first mentioned the 
possibility that the ongoing third quantitative easing programme might be tapered off. 
The  possibility  that  the  Federal  Reserve  might  announce  a  reduction  in  the  monthly  bond 
purchase programme sparked an increase in long-term US interest rates, which had risen by 
over 100 basis points by the beginning of September (cf. chart 4). All other major markets 
reacted in the same way – this included interest rates in Germany – despite the fact that the 
course  of  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  actually  pointed  to  sustained  expansion.  The 
tapering  debate  coincided  with  a  more  favourable  economic  outlook  in  the  advanced 
economies. This, in turn, increased uncertainty with regard to the future monetary policy path 
of  the  major  central  banks,  and  term  premia  –  which  form  part  of  bond  yields  –  rose. 
However,  at  the  same  time,  short-term  interest  rates  stayed  firmly  in  place.  Despite  the 
recent  increase,  bond  yields  in  advanced  economies  are  at  a  very  low  level  in  historical 
terms. 
The impact on foreign exchange markets varied. The currencies of the emerging economies 
reacted  particularly  strongly,  with  capital  outflows  exerting  very  substantial  downward 
pressure, as can be seen in chart 4. This shows that a number of emerging economies are 
still vulnerable to foreign portfolio investments, or hot money flows. The G4 currencies, by 
contrast, have been largely unaffected by the tapering debate (cf. chart 5). In trade-weighted 
terms,  the  US  dollar  has  gained  very  slightly.  The  euro  and  the  pound  sterling  also 
strengthened  somewhat  in  the  light  of  surprisingly  favourable  economic  data.  The  Swiss 
franc  is  almost  unchanged,  with  neither  the  tapering  debate  nor  the  ECB  interest  rate 
reduction two weeks ago triggering significant movements. 
This first attempt by the Federal Reserve to normalise monetary policy has made a number 
of things clear. First, the very expansionary monetary policy has made a major contribution to 
the  positive  sentiment  on  financial  markets.  Paradoxically,  stock  markets  are  reacting  to 
negative macroeconomic data with gains, since markets expect that expansionary monetary 
policies will be maintained as long as economic growth remains weak. If the data are good, 
the opposite will occur. Second, the hefty reactions of some markets point to the danger that 
an  exit  from  the  exceptionally  expansionary  monetary  policy  could  prove  to  be  bumpy. 
Uncertainty  about  future  monetary  policy  direction  is  predominant  in  the  current  market 
environment, and it is therefore vulnerable to abrupt changes in expectations on the part of 
investors.  Tapering  represents  a  challenge  for  the  Federal  Reserve.  However,  we  are 
working  on  the  basis  that  this  process  can  be  conducted  step  by  step,  without  major 
disruptions. 
Growth momentum in the global economy remains moderate 
Looking  at  the  global  economic  outlook,  there  is  little  to  substantiate  the  possibility  that  a 
return  to  normal  for  monetary  policy  has  moved  closer.  The  recovery  in  the  economy  is 
delayed and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has repeatedly reduced the 2013 growth 
forecast for the global economy during the course of the year (cf. chart 6). The latest World 
Economic Outlook by the IMF reports that “Global growth is in low gear (…) and downside 
risks persist.” The IMF now anticipates global growth of 2.9% for 2013 and 3.6% for 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
A  change  in  growth  momentum  is  becoming  evident  at  a  global  level.  Chart  7  shows  the 
purchasing managers indices (PMIs) for various countries. On the vertical axis we see the 
current  level  of  PMIs  and  on  the  horizontal  axis,  movements  over  the  past  six  months. 
Momentum  in  the  emerging  economies  has  declined  recently  (red  ring).  By  contrast,  the 
advanced  economies  are  picking  up,  in  particular  in  the  euro  area  (green  ring).  Moreover, 
PMIs for most of these economies are above the growth threshold of 50 points. Growth in the 
US,  especially,  is  very  robust  and,  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic,  the  UK  has  exceeded 
expectations (blue ring). 
Particularly important for Switzerland were the surprisingly favourable economic indicators in 
Europe this summer. In the second quarter of 2013, the euro area reported positive growth 
for the first time in six quarters. There are encouraging signs from the peripheral economies, 
especially.  Since  mid-year,  for  instance,  these  countries  have  again  been  recording 
surpluses on their current accounts. Nevertheless, these signs must be put into perspective. 
The improvement in the peripheral economies is beginning from a very low base level and 
the  unemployment  figures  are  oppressive.  The  banking  system  is  very  fragmented  and 
unhealthy  bank  balance  sheets  give  rise  to  declining  levels  of  lending.  This  hampers  the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  In  addition,  there  are  sustained  high  levels  of 
public and private debt. All of these factors are likely to hold back economic developments in 
the  peripheral  economies  for  some  time  yet.  Moreover,  the  euro  area  remains  extremely 
heterogeneous. Chart 8 shows the level of real gross domestic product (GDP) in the euro 
area  and  its  largest  members,  as  well  as  for  Switzerland.  In  Italy  and  Spain,  GDP  is  just 
under 10% below the maximum pre-crisis level, while in Germany it has been above the pre-
crisis figure since 2011. 
Given  the  subdued  developments  in  the  euro  area,  it  is  surprising  how  well  the  Swiss 
economy  has  performed.  In  Switzerland,  GDP  is  already  almost  5%  above  the  pre-crisis 
level. However, it should be borne in mind that, over the past few years, economic growth 
has  been  extensively  supported  by  the  increase  in  the  population.  In  terms  of  GDP  per 
capita,  Switzerland  has  not  yet  quite  returned  to  the  pre-crisis  figure,  unlike  Germany,  for 
instance,  where  per-capita  GDP  is  now  almost  3%  above  the  pre-crisis  level.  The  growth 
driver in Switzerland has thus been the domestic economy, while the contribution provided 
by  foreign  trade  has  been  relatively  modest.  There  are  substantial  differences  from  one 
industry  to  another.  In  general,  the  services  industries  are  growing  and  business  remains 
very  lively  in  construction.  In  manufacturing,  by  contrast,  which  is  traditionally  cyclical  and 
export-oriented,  developments  have  been  less  advantageous,  and  equipment  investment 
has  also  suffered  in  Switzerland.  The  output  gap  remains  negative,  so  that  there  is  no 
pressure on wages and prices in the foreseeable future. The outlook is favourable, since we 
expect that the gradual recovery of the economy in Europe will stimulate demand for Swiss 
exports. We anticipate growth of 1.5–2.0% for the current year. 
Dangers of a prolonged low-interest period 
What  do  these  tentative  global  economic  developments  mean  for  monetary  policy?  Most 
central  banks  maintained  their  very  expansionary  course  and  the  various  unconventional 
measures.  These  measures  were  largely  uncontested  as  long  as  they  served  to  stabilise 
financial markets and the banks and subsequently to stimulate the economy. However, the 
longer the current low interest rate period continues, the greater the associated risks can be. 
I would now like to talk about two of these risks – the increasing price distortions in various 
investment  categories  and  the  decreasing  motivation  to  undertake  structural  reform 
measures. 
Increasing price distortions: The  very  low  interest  rates  affect  aggregate  demand  in  the 
economy both directly and also via the wealth effect. One of the effects which expansionary 
monetary policy abroad encourages is the quest for yield and, with it, the transfer of assets 
into  more  risky  investments.  However,  low  interest  rates  can  result  in  misallocation  on 
financial markets, particularly when they persist for a long period of time. It is possible that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
risks  may  be  misjudged  and,  as  a  result,  relative  prices  distorted.  It  is  naturally  difficult  to 
establish the point at which price movements of this kind need to be considered as excesses. 
In  the  past,  long  periods  of  rising  prices  were  always  followed  by  corrections.  The  hefty 
reaction  of  risk  markets  to  the  tapering  debate  can  be  read  as  a  sign  of  the  instability  of 
certain asset prices. 
In Switzerland, for instance, the low interest rates have stimulated activity in the mortgage 
and  real  estate  markets,  where,  for  a  number  of  years  now,  we  have  seen  considerable 
momentum which can only be partially explained by movements in fundamental factors. As a 
result, imbalances have built up. For example, mortgage volumes have grown significantly 
faster than GDP for many years, as can be seen in chart 9. The SNB has issued repeated 
warnings  about  the  risks for financial  stability  associated  with  these  developments. This  is 
the background to the Federal Council’s activation of the countercyclical capital buffer (CCB) 
at the beginning of this year, upon the proposal of the SNB. The CCB has been in force since 
the end of September and its primary aim is to increase the resilience of the banking system 
against these risks and to combat excessive credit growth. Since low interest rates can be 
expected to persist in Switzerland for some time yet, we are keeping a very close watch on 
developments in the mortgage and real estate markets. 
Waning  motivation  for  reform  measures:  Lower  interest  rates  mean  more  favourable 
refinancing  costs  for  banks,  companies  and  governments.  Expansionary  monetary  policy 
following a financial crisis and recession can therefore open up a welcome time window for 
carrying  out  consolidation  measures,  cleaning  up  bank  balance  sheets  and  implementing 
structural  reform  measures.  However,  if  decision-makers  have  reason  to  believe  that  low 
interest rates will probably remain in place for a long time yet, their motivation to undertake 
reform measures is likely to flag. This is particularly the case in countries where reforms have 
been under way for many  years now, but are still insufficient, and where resistance at the 
political level is now on the increase. Here the temptation to depend on low interest rates – or 
even to increase political pressure on the central bank to keep interest rates low for longer 
than necessary – is especially pronounced. 
In  this  context,  it  is  important  not  to  forget  that  central  banks  cannot  do  everything.  They 
cannot  restructure  public  sector  budgets  and  they  cannot  carry  out  structural  reforms.  Nor 
can they provide substitutes for sensible fiscal policies. This area is the responsibility of other 
economic agents. A prosperous economy requires favourable conditions. In this respect, the 
contribution of central banks is to secure one of the major conditions – price stability. 
And inflation? 
This raises the question of whether the exceptionally expansionary monetary policy will lead 
to inflation in the long term. In most financial systems, surplus liquidity has reached historical 
dimensions. Under normal circumstances, monetary developments of this kind would point to 
a rise in inflation. Yet at the moment, rates of inflation in advanced economies are trending 
downwards.  As  the  recent  reduction  in  the  ECB  reference  rate  shows,  concerns  about 
deflationary trends are more predominant in the euro area at present. 
Neither  can  any  inflationary  threats  be  identified  for  Switzerland.  The  SNB’s  conditional 
inflation forecast from  September  (cf.  chart  10)  shows  a  very  small  increase  in  inflation  to 
2015,  despite  the  assumption  that  the  three-month  Libor  remains  at  zero  over  the  entire 
period. Explanations for this low level of inflation include the fact that the output gap is still 
negative in Switzerland, the Swiss franc is strong, and commodity prices are stable or even 
declining.  We  are  keeping  a  very  close  watch  on  price  developments,  and  we  have  the 
necessary instruments to correctly assess any inflation or deflation risks and counter them 
with appropriate measures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Concluding remarks 
Is  a  return  to  normal  on  the  horizon?  Yes,  but  much  more  slowly  than  expected.  Overall, 
financial  markets  have  calmed  and  risk  markets  have  strengthened  considerably.  The 
exceptional  measures  taken  by  the  central  banks  made  a  major  contribution  to  these 
developments,  and  in  most  cases,  these  measures  are  still  in  place.  Thus  it  is  clear  that 
monetary  policy  is  still  far  from  returning  to  normal.  The  fact  that  international  monetary 
policy is still very expansionary is not surprising, in view of the slow recovery of the global 
economy. 
As  far  as  Switzerland  is  concerned,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  will  remain  a  necessary 
instrument for the foreseeable future. Even today, the value of the Swiss franc remains high, 
and  there  are  no  inflation  risks.  With  interest  rates  at  zero,  the  minimum  exchange  rate 
prevents  an  undesired  tightening  of  monetary  conditions  in  the  event  that  the  upward 
pressure on the Swiss franc should intensify once again. 
Thus we remain prepared to enforce the minimum exchange rate by buying foreign currency 
in unlimited quantities if necessary, and to take further measures as required. Consequently 
the monetary policy we have conducted to date will continue to apply without any restrictions. 
 
 
 
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
