Philip Lowe: Investment and the Australian economy 
Address by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the CFA 
Australia Investment Conference, Melbourne, 24 October 2013. 
 I would like to thank Gareth Spence and Leon Berkelmans for valuable assistance in the preparation of this talk. 
I would like to thank the CFA Institute and CFA Societies Australia for the invitation to speak 
this afternoon. 
I  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  the  work  that  the  CFA  and  its  members  have  done  in 
promoting the integrity of capital markets and the provision of ethical investment advice. Over 
recent years we have seen too many ethical lapses in the global financial services industry 
and the bonds of trust between investors and institutions have been strained. Strengthening 
these bonds is critical to the financial services sector playing its important role in promoting a 
strong and vibrant global economy. I wish you all the best in pursuing this important task. 
Confidence  is  also,  of  course,  an  important  factor  influencing  business  decisions  to  invest 
and  to  expand.  Indeed,  a  lack  of  confidence  has  been  one  of  the  factors  holding  back 
investment  in  many  countries  over  recent  years.  So  given  that  this  is  the  CFA’s  Australia 
Investment Conference, I thought it appropriate to focus my remarks today on the topic of 
investment. I would first like to spend time discussing recent investment trends in Australia, 
particularly  the  investment  outcomes  in  the  non-mining  sector.  I  would  then  like  to  look 
forward and discuss what the outlook might hold. 
Recent developments 
It is worth starting off with the global context. 
As you are no doubt aware, over recent years the Australian economy has performed much 
better than the economies of most other developed countries. We avoided a recession during 
the global financial crisis, although growth has been below average recently. Our banks have 
remained sound. Public debt levels are comparatively low. The Reserve Bank has not had to 
expand its balance sheet massively. And inflation has been close to target. Very few other 
countries can make such claims. 
But my focus today is the story on investment. 
Since 2008, the developed economies have been in an investment drought. Indeed, the four 
years  from  2008  to  2012  saw  the  lowest  level  of  investment,  relative  to  GDP,  in  the 
developed  economies  for  many  decades  (Graph  1).  For  the  world  as  a  whole,  investment 
has also been very low. 
In Australia, the investment picture is very different. Rather than experiencing an investment 
drought,  we  have  had  an  investment  boom,  particularly  in  the  private  sector.  Recently, 
business  investment  peaked  at  over  18  per  cent  of  GDP,  its  highest  level  in  more  than 
50 years (Graph 2). And the nation’s overall capital stock (including both private and public 
capital)  has  been  expanding  at  around  5  per  cent  per  annum,  the fastest  rate  of  increase 
since  the  early  1970s.  In  contrast,  in  some  other  developed  economies,  the  level  of 
investment has barely been enough to offset the depreciation of the existing capital stock. 
The reasons for this difference are well understood. Most of the advanced economies have 
been dealing with the fallout of the severe banking and debt problems of the late 2000s. In 
contrast, we avoided these problems and have been benefiting from the growth in Asia. This 
growth has pushed up the prices of many commodities, which has encouraged investment in 
the extraction of Australia’s natural resources, particularly iron ore, coal and natural gas. This 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
investment  has  boosted  our  resource  exports,  and  will  provide  an  important  source  of 
national income for many years to come. 
This  aggregate  picture,  however,  hides  some  large  differences  across  sectors.  Mining 
investment has been extraordinarily strong; last year, it was equivalent to around 8 per cent 
of GDP, which is much higher than in any previous mining boom, at least for over a century 
(Graph 3). In the non-mining sector, however, investment has been quite weak. Indeed, as a 
share  of  nominal  GDP,  non-mining  private  business  investment  is  currently  around 
3 percentage points lower than its average over the period from 2005 to 2008 and it is not 
much  above  levels  seen  in  the  early  1990s  recession.  And  if  we  take  into  account  public 
investment, which is also low, then total non-mining investment, as a share of GDP, is below 
the  trough  that  was  recorded  in  the  early  1990s.  In  this  sense,  the  profile  for  non-mining 
investment in Australia is not dissimilar to the profile for overall investment in many of the 
developed economies. 
This weakness in investment outside the resources sector is widespread across industries. 
According to the most recently available Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) data, in 16 of 
the  18  individual  non-mining  industries,  the  level  of  investment  (relative  to  GDP)  is  at,  or 
below, the average level of investment for the years from 2005 to 2008. The two exceptions 
are  the  utilities  sector,  where  there  has  been  significant  private  investment  in  electricity 
distribution  and  water  supply,  and  agriculture,  which  has  benefited  from  high  global  food 
prices. 
The  low  level  of  overall  non-mining  investment  has  occurred  despite  corporate  balance 
sheets being in generally sound shape and firms having significant holdings of liquid assets. 
It has occurred despite financial institutions reporting that they are willing and able to lend. 
And  it  has  occurred  despite  lending  rates  being  at  record  lows  for  both  large  and  small 
businesses (Graph 4). 
So the obvious question is: why is this happening? As usual, there is no single answer, but I 
would like to highlight four factors. 
The first is a technical point, but a relevant one nevertheless. 
The investment figures I have quoted are for nominal investment relative to nominal GDP. 
Most of the time, this provides a reasonable guide as to what is going on. But over recent 
years, the price of capital equipment has fallen markedly, partly due to the appreciation of the 
exchange rate, which has reduced the price of imported goods. The lower prices mean that 
for  a  given  amount  of  capital  spending,  the  economy  obtains  more  units  of  capital.  As  a 
result,  while  total  non-mining  investment  as  a  share  of  GDP  is  lower  than  it  was  in  the 
recession of the early 1990s, the non-mining capital stock is increasing a little more quickly 
than it was at that time. In a sense, we are getting more bang for our buck. 
The second, and ultimately more important factor, is the exchange rate. 
As I have talked about on previous occasions, Australia’s floating exchange rate regime has 
played  an  important  role  in  stabilising  the  Australian  economy.1  The  appreciation  of  the 
Australian dollar since the mid 2000s is perhaps the single most important reason why the 
Australian  economy  has  digested  a  boom  in  mining  investment  without  overheating  and 
without developing the imbalances that typically accompany such booms. 
That  is  the  good  news.  But  in  playing  this  stabilising  role,  there  is  also  a  downside.  The 
exchange rate appreciation has taken pressure off domestic capacity by making it cheaper 
for Australians to buy imported goods and by reducing the competitiveness of firms in export 
markets. In so doing, it has reduced the return on capital in those traded sectors that are not 
                                                
1   See  Lowe  P  (2013),  “Internal  Balance,  Structural  Change  and  Monetary  Policy”,  Address  to  the  Australian 
Industry Group 13th Annual Economics Forum, Sydney, 19 March. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
benefiting  from  high  commodity  prices,  and  thus  reduced  the  incentive  to  invest.  This  is 
perhaps  most  obvious  in  the  manufacturing  and  tourism  sectors,  where  the  level  of 
investment,  as  a  share  of  GDP,  is  very  low  by  historical  standards  (Graph  5).  Indeed,  in 
these industries, the current rate of investment is at, or below, the depreciation of the existing 
capital  stock.  The  low  level  of  investment  in  the  manufacturing  sector  is  particularly 
noteworthy,  as  manufacturing  has  historically  accounted  for  around  one-fifth  of  total  non-
mining investment. 
The third factor that I would like to discuss is the general lack of confidence by business. This 
lack of confidence can be seen in the various business surveys over recent years and has 
been  clearly  apparent  through  the  Reserve  Bank’s  regular  program  of meetings  with  firms 
across the country (Graph 6). This reported lack of confidence is consistent with firms being 
uncertain about the future and risk averse in their decision making. 
So the logical question here is: why has business confidence and the willingness to take risk 
been so subdued? 
Again, there is no single answer. But many of the businesses that we have talked with over 
the past couple of years have cited the uncertainty associated with the structural changes in 
the  economy,  including  as  a  result  of  the  high  exchange  rate.  They  have  also  cited  the 
political  environment,  particularly  the  previously  hung  parliament.  And  they  have  cited  an 
increased regulatory burden. While we cannot be sure, it is likely that each of these factors 
has  affected  the  willingness  of  some  firms  to  expand.  A  common  message  from  business 
has been that they thought it was worth waiting a while to see how things worked out before 
they made decisions that were costly to reverse. In the parlance of economists, the “option 
value” of waiting has been high. 
Beyond  these  Australian-specific  factors,  I  suspect  there  is  also  a  deeper  global  factor  at 
work – and that is the legacy of the financial crisis. Recall that prior to the crisis, there was 
the  Great  Moderation.  During  that  earlier  period,  the  additional  compensation  that 
businesses required for taking a risk was quite small. Confidence was high and volatility was 
low. The financial crisis changed all this. It reminded us all that bad outcomes were possible. 
And since then, the frequent news about the problems in the euro area and the possibility of 
political stalemate preventing the US government from meeting its financial obligations have 
only served to reinforce this idea. 
This scarring from the financial crisis is still with us and I suspect it will be with us for some 
time yet. It not only helps to explain why investment is weak outside the resources sector in 
Australia,  but  also  why  investment  is  very  low  in  many  advanced  economies  despite 
generally  healthy  corporate  balance  sheets,  very  low  interest  rates  and  large-scale 
quantitative easing by central banks. 
While recently we have seen some return to risk taking in financial markets, potential owners 
of  real  capital  in  the  developed  economies  have  not  yet  been  prepared  to  step forward  in 
significant numbers and take a risk. Consumer demand has been soft and businesses have 
wanted  to  wait  and  to  see  what  happens.  They  have  felt  more  comfortable  leaving  their 
money in bank accounts earning very low rates of interest, rather than taking the chance and 
investing in new capital. This change in corporate attitudes is, I suspect, one of the enduring 
but  underappreciated  consequences  of  the  financial  crisis.  At  the  aggregate  level,  the 
Australian  economy  has  been  shielded  from  its  effects  by  developments  in  the  resources 
sector, but some areas of the economy are clearly feeling the impact. 
Finally, a fourth factor that has had an effect on the overall level of investment in Australia is 
the  change  in  household  spending  behaviour.  Unlike  in  earlier  years,  growth  in  household 
consumption is no longer running ahead of growth in household income. The step-down in 
the  rate  of  growth  of  retail  spending  in  particular  has  reduced  pressure  on  capacity  and 
affected  rents  for  retail  properties.  There  has  also  been  some  reassessment  of  the 
appropriate  model  of  retailing.  The  result  can  be  seen  in  the  ABS’s  estimates  of  total 
investment in the retail industry which, as a share of GDP, is at the lowest level for many 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
years  (Graph  7). The  ABS  data  also  suggest  that  there  has  been  some  flow-on  effects  to 
investment in the wholesaling industry, which is also at quite a low level. 
So,  in  summary,  the  high  exchange  rate,  uncertainty,  risk  aversion  and  the  changes  in 
household  spending  behaviour  have  all  weighed  on  non-mining  investment  over  recent 
times. As a result, non-mining investment has made little contribution to growth in the overall 
economy (Graph 8). This is at a time when mining investment is no longer increasing, with 
the mining boom transitioning from one based on investment to one based on production. As 
best  we  can  tell,  mining  investment  declined  over  the  past  year,  while  net  exports  rose 
strongly  due  to  lower  capital  imports  and the  higher  production  of  bulk  commodities made 
possible by the earlier investment. 
Looking forward 
So having looked back at what has happened so far, I would now like to look forward. 
Over  the  period  ahead,  the  level  of  mining  investment  is  likely  to  decline  substantially  as 
existing projects are completed. The exact profile remains difficult to determine, but it would 
not be surprising if mining investment, relative to GDP, declined by 3 percentage points or 
more over coming years. 
A decline of this magnitude should be manageable, just as the earlier rise was manageable. 
It  will,  however,  require  a  further  rebalancing  of  the  economy.  As  part  of  this  rebalancing, 
exports  are  set  to  grow  strongly,  particularly  when  the  large  LNG  projects  come  on  line. 
There will also be slower growth in imports of capital goods as projects are completed. But 
these adjustments on the trade side will not be enough, by themselves, to ensure that growth 
in output and employment is satisfactory. This means that other forms of spending will need 
to pick up. 
One of these other forms of spending is residential construction, and the modest rise that is 
underway here is a welcome development. Some lift in consumption growth is also expected, 
although a return to consumption growth faster than income growth for an extended period is 
unlikely.  It  would  also  be  unwelcome  given  the  relatively  high  levels  of  existing  household 
debt. 
So this means that a pick-up in non-mining investment is an important part of the story in the 
return of the Australian economy to trend growth. Indeed, our expectation is that this will take 
place, with growth in non-mining investment predicted to pick up to at least high single-digit 
rates within the next couple of years. 
This  is,  of  course,  a  forecast  and  there  is  the  usual  wide  range  of  uncertainties.  These 
include  uncertainty  as  to  the  appropriate  steady-state  capital-output  ratio  for  the  economy 
and the associated investment ratio. These important structural variables are influenced by a 
whole  range  of  considerations,  including  the  rate  of  total  factor  productivity  growth, 
population growth, the rate of depreciation and the industry structure. 
But from a more cyclical perspective, there are a number of factors that support the outlook 
for a steady pick-up in non-mining investment. The three factors I want to list – and they are 
clearly  interrelated  –  are  some  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate,  an  improvement  in 
business confidence and the very low level of interest rates. 
While  the  Australian  dollar  has  appreciated  over  the  past  couple  of  months,  on  a  trade-
weighted basis, it is around 8 per cent lower than the peak in April this year. It is still too early 
to see the impact of this on investment, although the depreciation has improved prospects in 
some areas of the economy. In particular, there are parts of the tourism and manufacturing 
industries where the outlook is now a bit more positive, especially for firms that had earlier 
responded  to  the  high  exchange  rate  by  doing  whatever  they  could  to  make  themselves 
more competitive. The more positive outlook in the tourism industry is also being supported 
by the steadily increasing number of visitors from China. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This depreciation of the Australian dollar since April is a welcome development, and a further 
depreciation  would  be  helpful  in  rebalancing  growth  in  the  economy.  Ultimately,  floating 
exchange rates adjust to the relative returns on capital across countries. When investment in 
Australia  was  very  high  and  rising,  and  investment  elsewhere  in  the  world  was  very  weak 
and falling, it was not surprising that the Australian dollar was at quite a high level. This was 
a textbook response to an investment boom. But the textbook would also predict that as the 
mining  investment  boom  in  Australia  unwinds  and,  hopefully,  investment  in  the  developed 
economies  picks  up,  some  realignment  of  the  relative  value  of  the  Australian  dollar  would 
occur. This process has started, although it has been interrupted recently, partly due to the 
changed outlook for US monetary policy. Whether we will see a further realignment remains 
unclear, but, from today’s perspective, a lower value of the Australian dollar would assist in 
lifting investment and activity in the sectors that have been constrained during the years of 
the mining investment boom. 
The second factor on my list is an improvement in business confidence over recent months, 
which  is  evident  in  a  graph  that  I  showed  earlier  (Graph  6).  This  improvement  is  also 
apparent  in  our  discussions  with  businesses,  and  there  has  also  been  a  lift  in  consumer 
confidence.  These  are  positive  developments.  Just  as  a  lack  of  confidence  about  the 
economy  can  be  self-fulfilling,  so  too  can  be  a  recovery  in  confidence.  If  businesses  are 
prepared  to  spend,  jobs  tend  to  get  created,  incomes  tend  to  rise  and  people  see 
opportunities where previously they saw none. 
So an important issue here is whether this improvement in confidence will be sustained. A 
fair  amount  depends  upon  international  events.  If  global  growth  is  in  line  with  most 
forecasters’  central  outlook,  it  is  quite  possible  that  confidence,  both  overseas  and  in 
Australia,  will  be  sustained  at  a  higher  level  than  it  has  been  in  recent  times.  There  are, 
however, a range of things that could go wrong, with the latest wrangling over the US debt 
ceiling providing just the latest example of developments that damage confidence. 
But beyond international events, domestic policy choices also matter. Business confidence 
– and thus the preparedness to take risk – is likely to be higher if the policy environment is 
predictable  and  there  is  strong  commitment  to  ongoing  reform  to  make  markets  work  well 
and to boost productivity. Ensuring that regulation is fit for purpose is also important. So too 
is ensuring that the general business environment promotes innovation. These are all difficult 
areas to get right, but doing so is key to creating an environment where business is confident 
enough to take a risk, buy some new capital, hire a new worker or expand their operations. 
The third factor on my list is the low level of interest rates. The impact of these low rates is 
evident across a range of indicators and it has further to run. In the housing market, prices 
and turnover have risen and, as I noted earlier, dwelling investment is increasing. There are 
also signs of an increased appetite for borrowing, most notably among those purchasing a 
property to rent out. More generally, households seem prepared to move out a little along the 
risk spectrum in an effort to increase their expected returns. 
These developments are creating new business opportunities. So too is the steady growth in 
the  Australian  population,  which  remains  considerably  faster  than  in  almost  all  other 
advanced countries; at the current pace of growth in five years’ time, the population will be 
around 10 per cent higher than at present. When businesses are deciding today whether to 
take  advantage  of  these  opportunities,  they  face  a  low  cost  of  borrowing  and  finance  is 
available for sound projects. In time, this should underpin a rise in investment across a range 
of industries. 
Of course, none of this is locked in. But, together, a lower value of the Australian dollar, an 
improvement in business confidence and low interest rates provide the basis for our outlook 
of a gradual lift in the non-mining economy over the next couple of years. 
Thank you very much for listening and I look forward to your questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Graph 1 
Graph 2 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 3 
Graph 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Graph 5 
Graph 6 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 7  
Graph 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 