Njuguna Ndung’u: The General Principles for Credit Reporting – how 
they pertain to Kenya 
Closing remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
First  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Association  of  Kenya  Credit  Providers,  Kenya  School  of 
Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 19 November 2013. 
 Mr. Habil Olaka, Chief Executive Officer, Kenya Bankers Association;  
Ms.  Marianne  Ndegwa  Jordan,  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Kenya  Tourist  Development 
Corporation;  
Mr. Timothy Tiampati, Acting Chief Executive Officer, IDB Capital  
Ms. Mercy Njeru, Chief Executive Officer, Kenya Rural Sacco Societies Union;  
Chief Executive Officers of licensed Credit Reference Bureaus;  
Representatives of FSD Kenya and USAID FIRM;  
Representatives of SASRA;  
Representatives of various credit provider institutions;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I am pleased to note that you have just concluded the first Annual General Meeting of the 
Association of Kenya Credit Providers (AKCP). I wish to congratulate the entire membership 
and particularly the Secretariat and the newly appointed Governing Council for this milestone 
in the evolution of the credit information sharing program. Indeed it is gratifying to note that 
since  the  launch  of  the  Association  at  the  CIS  Regional  Conference  slightly  over  a  month 
ago, some progress has already been made. The new Association is already settling in well 
at KSMS, which attests to the commitment of the Central Bank in playing its part in this very 
important initiative of sharing credit information by more credit providers.  
As  you  embark  on  implementing  the  objectives  for  which  you  have  been  set  up,  I  wish  to 
challenge you to strive to observe, from the very outset, the General Principles for Credit 
Reporting developed by an internationally representative taskforce of the World Bank and 
the Bank for International Settlements. The report issued jointly by the two bodies describes 
the nature of credit reporting elements of a credit reporting system that is safe, efficient and 
reliable.  The  report  which  consists  of  5  General  Principles,  5  Roles  of  Key  Players  and  5 
Recommendations for Effective Oversight are a good reference for credit reporting systems’ 
policy  and  oversight.  I  encourage  you  to  familiarise  yourselves  with  those  principles  and 
strive  to  achieve  full  compliance.  But  in  addition,  there  are  country  specific  or  peculiar 
characteristics that could be added to reflect our country characteristics and environment. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  allow  me  to  lay  some  emphasis  on  the  first  of  the  5  General 
Principles that I believe speaks well to the mandate of AKCP. It states that:  
Credit  reporting  systems  should  have  relevant,  accurate,  timely  and  sufficient  data  
– including positive – collected on a systematic basis from all reliable, appropriate and 
available sources, and should retain this information for a sufficient amount of time.  
Achievement of this principle will call for the collective contribution of all parties here today. 
The  Governing  Council  and  the  Secretariat  will  need  to  work  together  to  support  various 
credit  providers  who  sign  up  to  share  data.  Good  quality  data  will  guarantee  that  the  risk 
management tools and models developed from the data trends are robust and reliable. This 
way, the credit granting process will become more refined and more efficient. Lenders will 
soon  move  away  from  mere  use  of  ‘gut  feeling’  or  other  rudimentary  forms  of  information 
gathering that are unreliable and costly to assemble.  
By  paying  attention  to  maintaining  high  quality  data  in  the  credit  reference  bureaus,  the 
players will also minimise contentions by borrowing customers as every effort must be made 
to  address  customer  complaints  on  data  accuracy.  All  lenders  need  to  appreciate  that  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
first port of call in resolving customer complaints must always be within the lending institution 
itself.  Where  disputes  cannot  be  settled  internally,  institutions  must  bring  them  to  the 
attention of an industry mediation process. In this connection, I am pleased to note that the 
AKCP  Secretariat  has  put  in  a  lot  of  work  towards  developing  a  CIS  Dispute  Resolution 
Handbook.  The  AKCP  Secretariat  will  soon  be  ready  to  conduct  a  public  launch  of  its 
Alternative  Dispute  Resolution  Mechanism  and  create  awareness  on  the  out-of-court 
settlement  process.  This  will  mark  an  important  step  towards  adding  credibility  to  the  CIS 
process.  Central  Bank  is  ready  to  provide  required  support  needed  to  make  this  launch  a 
success.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: I now wish to turn to the important role of AKCP in contributing to 
policy and legal reform. The 4th of the General Principles for Credit Reporting states that:  
The  overall  legal  and  regulatory  framework  for  credit  reporting  should  be  clear, 
predictable,  non-discriminatory,  proportionate  and  supportive  of  data  subject  and 
consumer rights. The legal and regulatory framework should include effective judicial 
or extrajudicial dispute resolution mechanisms.  
While  we  recognise  that  the  role  of  formulating  a  robust  legal  and  regulatory  framework 
remains with the Regulators, the Central Government and Parliament, we would like to forge 
a  partnership  with  industry  players  in  achieving  this  important  function.  We  therefore 
encourage you to form relevant committees that will consult with, and make proposals to, the 
Regulators  in  matters  of  CIS.  Due  to  the  multiplicity  of  Regulators  involved,  I  urge  the 
Secretariat of AKCP to liaise with the Domestic Regulators Forum using CBK to introduce 
CIS as an agenda item in the Forum’s meetings.  
With these few remarks, I wish to once again congratulate the officials of AKCP that have 
been elected today and assure you of the support of the Central Bank.  
Thank You! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
