Mario Draghi: Interview in Le Journal du Dimanche 
Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in  Le Journal du 
Dimanche, published on 15 December 2013. 
 Is Europe finally returning to growth? 
Growth  has  returned,  but  it  is  certainly  not  very  strong.  It  is  modest,  fragile  and  unequal. 
Germany is doing well; France, Italy and Spain are improving; things are not going so well in 
the Netherlands; and Greece and Portugal remain under pressure. Unemployment is still too 
high, but it seems to have stabilised at an average of around 12%. We forecast that growth in 
the euro area will be 1.1% next year and 1.5% in 2015. 
What is driving the recovery? 
Looking  at  the  figures,  we  can  see  that  exports  are  picking  up  again  and  –  this  is  a  new 
development – consumption is recovering. Various factors have played a role in that. First of 
all, our monetary policy, which has remained accommodative since 2011, is in the process of 
bearing  fruit.  The  commitments  that  we  have  made  regarding  the  future  direction  of  our 
monetary policy and our decision in November to reduce the rate on our main refinancing 
operations to 0.25%, the second reduction in 2013, have also contributed to that. Uncertainty 
is  receding,  which  should  help  to  stimulate  investment  and  encourage  banks  to  lend. 
Purchasing power has also improved as a result of declines in energy and food prices.  
Do you think that a line needs to be drawn under Greek debt in order for the country to 
get out of its current situation? 
The reform programme put in place with the aid of the IMF and the Commission in liaison 
with the ECB seems to be bearing fruit. We will examine Greece’s budgetary situation and its 
development at the start of the year. The Greek people have already made a large number of 
sacrifices  and  I  hope  that  the  country  will  achieve  budget  surpluses  (excluding  its  debt 
burden) as of next year. Nevertheless, the reforms have to continue. 
Do you believe that the bitter pill of austerity that was imposed on the countries of the 
euro area in order to tackle the debt crisis was the right solution, the only acceptable 
response? 
Austerity was essential, as it was the necessary solution to one of the most serious financial 
crises  that  we  have  ever  seen.  Prior  to  2010,  the  world  we  were  living  in  was  somewhat 
unreal. Our creditors, institutional investors, were not differentiating between credit to Greece 
and credit to Germany. When people began having doubts regarding Greece’s solvency, all 
of that came to an end. Institutional investors began re-evaluating the risk profiles of all the 
countries  of  the  EU.  We  know  what  happened  next:  spreads  on  lending  rates  began  to 
increase,  distinguishing  between  countries  that  were  judged  to  be  safe  (and  therefore 
creditworthy) and the rest. This crisis has taught us a lesson. It has taught us that we cannot 
generate either sustainable growth or a fair distribution of prosperity by amassing debt. It has 
also forced us to focus on the fundamentals in order to check the solidity of each individual 
economy. That was when we realised that the time for structural reforms had come. Without 
the crisis, we could have given ourselves more time to implement them, and we could have 
accompanied the austerity plans with stimulus measures. But as that was not done when we 
had  time,  reforms  have  had  to  be  implemented  as  a  matter  of  urgency  and  in  a  painful 
manner. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Pierre Moscovici, our Minister for the Economy, believes that France is the victim of 
“French bashing”, as it has reduced its deficit and undertaken fundamental reforms. 
What do you think? 
Major efforts have been made, but it is important that France continues along the path of the 
reforms  already  undertaken.  The  government  and  the  French  people  are  aware  of  this. 
Competitiveness remains insufficient, and improvements to public finances must stop being 
based on tax rises. France needs to return to fiscal stability so that firms start to invest again. 
Should Germany, the true engine of European growth, not share the fruits of its 
growth with its neighbours in order to foster a broad-based recovery? 
The real issue here is slightly different. We need to try to understand why Germany is doing 
better  than  its  neighbours.  The  answer  is  that  Germany  has  given  itself  the  means  to  be 
more competitive thanks to its bold structural reforms. In the early 2000s, Germany launched 
labour  market  reforms.  It  remains  an  example  for  the  other  EU  countries  to  follow.  Its 
performance  is  based  on  the  great  strength  of  its  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
(SMEs),  which  are  exporting  and  innovating.  That  platform  needs  to  be  preserved.  But 
Germany  should  not  rest  on  its  laurels  and  needs  to  foster  investment,  particularly 
investment in infrastructure. 
What are the prospects for Europe, given that growth is no longer creating jobs? 
Unemployment  is  indeed  the  number  one  problem  for  the  governments  of  EU  countries  – 
starting with youth employment. We are too inclined to think that industry remains the key 
driver of employment, when in reality it is services that create the most jobs. That is partly 
because services have been less exposed to competition than the industrial sector.  
Banks are being criticised for ceasing to finance the economy. What are you doing to 
encourage them? 
Two years ago we provided them with €1,000 billion in the form of three-year loans, some of 
which  has  already  been  repaid,  and  since  then  we  have  reduced  our  key  interest  rates 
several times. Banks are able to refinance their loans to firms using funds obtained from the 
ECB. That has given them breathing space. Some of them have been given assistance, and 
they have been able to increase their capital.  
We now have to convince them to take the kinds of risk that are beneficial to the economy, 
notably  by  lending  to  SMEs.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  demand  for  credit  has  declined. 
Some firms, having experienced falling sales and a lack of visibility regarding the future, are 
hesitant about investing, while large firms are increasingly turning to the markets, financing 
themselves  by  issuing  bonds.  Last  year,  bond  issuance  by  such  firms  totalled  €34  billion, 
offsetting a contraction in loans of around €20 billion. 
Will the banking supervision work that the ECB has been tasked with reveal the 
presence of a Lehman Brothers among Europe’s banking groups? 
It  is  difficult  to  say  at  this  stage.  Countries  such  as  Greece,  Portugal,  Ireland  and  Spain, 
which  have  been  given  financial  assistance,  have  already  taken  steps  to  consolidate  their 
banking  networks.  In  addition,  regulators  have  asked  their  banks  to  make  provision  for 
non-performing loans and to increase their capital in order to ensure their solvency. But yes – 
we need to ascertain the precise situation, and in 2014 that will be the priority of the new 
European banking supervision mechanism, which will be headed by Danièle Nouÿ. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Has the ECB done all it can to stimulate growth? 
In the context of our mandate, yes. And we are always ready and able to act at a later stage. 
We  have  already  deployed  some  of  our  instruments  in  the  context  of  our  accommodative 
monetary  policy,  despite  the  fact  that  certain  people  accused  us  of  taking  enormous  risks 
and  endangering  price  stability.  We  have  seen  nothing  of  the  sort.  On  the  contrary,  our 
actions  have  had  the  desired  effect.  We  remain  just  as  determined  today  to  ensure  price 
stability and safeguard the integrity of the euro. But the ECB cannot do it all alone. We will 
not  do  governments’  work  for  them.  It  is  up  to  them  to  undertake  fundamental  reforms, 
support innovation and manage public spending – in short, to come up with new models for 
growth.  
Is the ECB not a prisoner of German budgetary orthodoxy in terms of the 
interpretation of its mandate? 
The ECB acts under the Treaties, which have been ratified by all European countries. The 
Treaties require each country to ensure the sustainability of its public finances. And this is a 
question of common sense. Look at what happened when the credibility of certain countries’ 
public finances deteriorated to the point where their access to the market was compromised. 
They had to undergo the painful adjustment programmes that you have just been referring to. 
It is the unsustainable debt and deficit levels that render countries prisoners of the markets. 
Some people would like to see the ECB fight to combat unemployment, like the 
Federal Reserve. Why do you refuse to do that? 
Our  main  task  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  Of  course,  insofar  as  our  actions  stabilise  the 
economy,  they  help  to  reduce  unemployment.  However,  we  cannot  reduce  the  structural 
level of unemployment, which is dependent on the smooth functioning of the labour market 
and its ability to better integrate those who have been excluded from it. Taking the example 
of German growth, that has not come from the reduction of our interest rates (although that 
will have helped), but rather from the reforms of previous years.  
The euro has strengthened considerably against the US dollar. What are you doing to 
counter that and make the euro more competitive? 
I have no desire to speculate regarding the right euro/US dollar exchange rate. We have no 
objectives in terms of exchange rates. However, I recognise that a high exchange rate has 
consequences for growth and inflation in Europe.  
Which is to be feared more: deflation or a return to inflation? 
Neither  one  nor  the  other.  We  are  not  experiencing  deflation.  Prices  are  not  falling  in  a 
sufficiently  strong  or  generalised  manner  to  entail  the  postponement  of  purchases  and 
investment, and thus the kind of economic slowdown that we saw in Japan. Inflation is at a 
low level, well below the 2% threshold, and should remain weak until 2015. That was why we 
decided to reduce our key interest rates, in order to have a buffer to curb the decline. 
What answer do you have for the growing number of Europeans who no longer want 
the euro? 
I would tell them that the euro is the basis for our future. The euro is a sound currency, and 
one that is entirely fulfilling its role, but it is suffering from the fact that our monetary union is 
incomplete  and  imperfect.  We  need  to  complete  our  monetary  union  if  we  want  to  truly 
achieve lasting stability and prosperity in Europe. First of all, we need to move forward with 
the banking union and complete the reform and deficit reduction programmes that we have 
embarked  on.  The  populist  argument  that,  by  leaving  the  euro,  a  national  economy  will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
instantly benefit from a competitive devaluation, as it did in the good old days, does not hold 
water. If everybody tries to devalue their currency, nobody benefits. Ultimately, the road to 
prosperity always goes via reforms and the search for productivity and innovation. 
Do you dread an anti-European vote in the elections in May? 
I  am  expecting  a  stronger  anti-European  presence  in  the  European  Parliament  relative  to 
today.  We  have  to  be  conscious  of  that  and  respond  to  the  distrust  that  has  become 
entrenched in public opinion when it comes to the European project and its institutions. There 
is  no  doubt  that  populist  movements  are  capitalising  on  that  sentiment,  but  there  are  also 
people who are genuinely disappointed. It is up to us to explain why the euro has been and 
remains a mark of progress, a currency for the future. It is up to us to point out that European 
integration has proved to be the best way of safeguarding peace. However, we also need to 
give our community a renewed sense of purpose – to explain that more Europe and greater 
integration can contribute to progress, economic recovery and prosperity. We have to give 
people fresh hope. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
