DeLisle Worrell: Reflections on financial stability analysis in the 
Caribbean 
Address by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the conference 
on  “Financial  risk  assessment  in  an  integrating  region  –  the  Caribbean”,  Bridgetown, 
25 November 2013. 
 Through the Caribbean network of economists, established by the region’s central banks and 
UWI, and centred at CCMF, the Caribbean nations have kept themselves at the forefront of 
changing international currents in economic and financial analysis. Financial stability analysis 
has been no exception. We were early in the field, and we have kept abreast of analytical 
developments over the years. As a result, three of our central banks now publish financial 
stability reports with in-depth analysis which is comprehensive, sophisticated and is designed 
to address the principal areas of potential vulnerability we face. That includes some analysis 
of  regional  risks,  because  our  national  financial  systems  are  intimately  linked,  and  it  is 
necessary  to  assess  regional  (and  international)  risk  exposures,  in  the  search  for 
completeness of national financial risk policy. 
Among the earliest papers on financial risk in the Caribbean (or anywhere else) were working 
papers  by  Theatin  and  Polius,  under  my  supervision  and  in  association  with  Professor 
Roland Craigwell, which may be found among working papers on the website of the Central 
Bank of Barbados. We were among the earliest to attempt estimation of the factors affecting 
risks of financial failure, when such research was in its infancy. 
We  also  have  a  history  of  regional  financial  surveys,  reflecting  the  fact  that  our  financial 
systems within the region have been interlinked by ownership and financial transactions for 
generations:  the  regional  financial  survey  which  has  for  two  decades  been  a  standard 
reference on Caribbean financial systems, has recently been updated under the guidance of 
Professor  Ramesh  Ramsaran.  Caricom’s  investment  surveys  have  included  enlightening 
chapters on regional finance, and there have been surveys by the IMF and others. In my own 
paper  with  Cherebin  and  Polius  on  regional  financial  systems,  we  included  quantitative 
analysis of regional financial risk exposures. 
Leah  Sahely  and  Tracy  Polius  have  recently  published  a  multivariate  analysis  of  banking 
soundness  in  the  ECCU;  while  Sahely  at  the  ECCU  developed  a  sophisticated  and  user-
friendly template for stress testing. The financial stability department of the Bank of Jamaica, 
under  the  entrepreneurial  leadership  of  Dr.  Brian  Langrin,  has  produced  an  impressive 
stream  of  technical  studies  in  the  area  of  macroprudential  analysis.  I  have  myself  made 
contributions in the field, in collaboration with regional colleagues. 
The IMF sponsored two regional workshops on financial risk analysis in the years I worked 
for that institution, where we were able to bring together the research that had been done in 
the Caribbean with leading international expertise which the Fund was able to provide. 
Out  of  this  effort  we  now  have  increasingly  sophisticated  Financial  Stability  Reports  being 
published  by  Jamaica,  Barbados  and  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  They  all  have  a  regional 
dimension,  because  the  intra-Caribbean  linkages  are  so  pervasive  that  a  meaningful 
assessment of financial stability must take account of risk exposures from around the region, 
as well as those arising locally. 
The  regional  financial  architecture  is  built  on  this  foundation  of  analysis,  as  well  as  the 
network  of  cooperation  which  financial  supervisors  have  established  within  the  Caribbean 
region.  We  now  have  regional  associations  for  the  supervision  of  banking,  insurance, 
securities trading and pensions, as well as a regional group on anti-money laundering. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The task before you is to stitch together the operational and informational arrangements for 
regional assessment and monitoring of financial stability on an ongoing basis. The outlines of 
the way forward are set down in the project document on the basis of which the IDB agreed 
to provide funding for this effort. It envisages that each country (or sub-region, in the case of 
the ECCU) will have established an overarching framework for financial stability, led by the 
central bank. The regional architecture then becomes the mechanism which binds together 
the national and sub-regional financial stability functions. At its apex sits the Committee of 
Central  Bank  Governors,  with  each  Governor  in  their  capacity  as  head  of  the  financial 
stability function in the area under their jurisdiction. It is the task of the current conference to 
advance the process of putting that system in place. This is a high priority for the Caribbean 
region, and we look forward to a speedy conclusion of your work. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
