Peter Praet: Household heterogeneity and the transmission mechanism 
Dinner speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the ECB Conference on Household Finance and Consumption, Frankfurt am Main, 
17 October 2013. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Sébastien  Pérez-Duarte  and  Jirka  Slacalek  for  their  contributions  to  this  speech;  all  views 
expressed remain my own. 
Distinguished members of academia, dear colleagues: 
Thank you for contributing to the ECB Conference on Household Finance and Consumption. 
As  you  know,  the  Eurosystem  has  recently  released  the  Household  Finance  and 
Consumption  Survey  (HFCS)  to  researchers,  a  new  dataset  which  gives  detailed, 
household-level  information  on  the  cross-sectional  distribution  of  assets,  liabilities,  income, 
indicators of financial pressure, etc. By covering 62,000 households, it is representative of 
15 euro area countries, and I understand that plans to conduct the HFCS in the next wave 
are well advanced in the two, and soon three, remaining euro area countries. We hope the 
new dataset will encourage research on household heterogeneity and household finance, in 
particular from a cross-country perspective. 
The  central  theme  of  this  conference  –  already  the  third  on  the  topic  that  the  ECB  has 
organised over the past five years – is that individual households are heterogeneous in many 
respects and that it is important to measure and analyse this heterogeneity because it can 
have important implications for aggregate figures. 
Some of these implications are of interest not only to the research community, but also to 
policy-makers  at  central  banks.  This  is  because  the  interplay  between  the  heterogeneity 
across households and differences in institutions and shocks can affect the functioning of the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy. It is also of relevance for financial stability. 
Of key interest to central bankers is the question as to how shocks – including unexpected 
changes in incomes, interest rates and asset prices – are transmitted in the overall economy. 
The survey can bring new insights into how individual households are affected by economic 
shocks, with due consideration of their demographic and socio-economic characteristics, as 
well as of the current phase of their life cycle, their income, assets or liabilities, etc. 
The onset of the Great Recession in many developed countries was marked by an increase 
in  the  personal  savings  rate,  which  was  more  marked  and  persistent  than  those  in  the 
previous  recessions.  The  corresponding  weak  dynamics  of  aggregate  consumer  spending 
were driven not only by the response of the “representative” consumer to aggregate shocks, 
but  also  by  the  different  responses  of  individual  households  to  these  shocks,  and  by  the 
response  of  households  to  household-specific  shocks.  I  will  now  elaborate  on  how  these 
different shocks, in particular wage shocks and interest rate shocks, may affect individual 
households and the overall economy. 
Tomorrow’s keynote speech will address the question of what mechanisms households use 
to protect themselves against wage shocks and how the adjustment both of their spending 
and  of  the  labour  supply  depends  on  demographic  and  economic  characteristics.  A  key 
finding in Blundell et al. (2012) is that the response of household spending varies over the life 
cycle and depends on the amount and structure of available assets. Households with more 
assets,  in  particular  those  with  more  liquid  assets,  are  better  able  to  protect  their 
consumption expenditure against adverse shocks. However, even  wealthy households can 
find it difficult to sustain their spending if the shocks persist for a longer period of time. 
This finding is in line with a number of similar recent results, including those of Anderson et 
al.  (2013)  who  estimate  that  households  respond  to  shocks  very  differently  depending  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
their income and wealth: while the wealthiest households respond to government spending 
and  tax  policy  shocks  as  predicted  by  standard  real  business  cycle  models,  poorer 
households act in a non-Ricardian way, on account of e.g. the existence of credit constraints. 
In  today’s  keynote  address,  Professor  Carroll  has  proposed  a  realistically  calibrated 
economic model with precautionary saving.1 This model matches the uneven distribution of 
wealth in the data and it is able to replicate the size and the differences across households in 
the  marginal  propensity  to  consume  out  of  transitory  income,  as  reported  in  the  existing 
literature,  to  which  some  participants  of  this  conference  have  contributed.  In  particular, 
households  with  low  wealth  and  few  or  not  sufficiently  liquid  assets  are  not  able  to 
adequately  smooth  income  shocks  and  are  particularly  likely  to  increase  their  spending  in 
response to a fiscal stimulus. 
Of crucial importance for the economy’s response to shocks is the structure of households’ 
balance  sheets,  on  both  the  asset  and  the  liability  side  –  we  have  seen  insightful 
presentations on these topics using data from euro area countries this morning. Much of the 
recent  research2  has  stressed  the  importance  of  liquid  assets,  as  opposed  to  measures 
such as net wealth, which include illiquid asset types, most importantly housing wealth. 
A robust fact across developed countries is that a substantial proportion of households have 
an only modest buffer of liquid assets that they can readily use if they experience adverse 
economic shocks. For example, the median value of net liquid assets in the euro area is 19% 
of  households’  annual  income,  as  shown  in  an  extensive  report  on  the  results  of  the  first 
wave of the HFCS (HFCN (2013)). Consequently, many households may have to cut their 
spending  quite  substantially,  especially  when  faced  with  large  and  persistent  shocks  like 
those that occurred during the Great Recession, a finding that would be in line with much of 
the research undertaken by Richard Blundell. 
Of course, the response of households also depends on the availability of financial products 
that make it possible to extract equity from illiquid assets (housing wealth). This availability is 
limited in many European countries and, accordingly, the response of consumption to wealth 
shocks – the wealth effect – seems to be more modest than in the United States (as much of 
the literature has found).3 
However, in any case, households in many countries may currently find it difficult to smooth 
consumption because of the combination, size and persistence of the adverse shocks they 
have recently experienced: significant declines in house and stock prices, negative shocks to 
labour  income  and  the  substantial  accumulation  of  debt.  Much  of  the  evidence  available, 
based on US data,4 suggests that households which had accumulated a large stock of debt 
before  the  crisis  respond  disproportionately  to  adverse  shocks,  also  because  many  are 
endeavouring to deleverage and reduce their debt burdens. The HFCS data document that 
debt  participation  and  debt  holdings  vary  substantially  across  countries,  and  seem  to  be 
related  to  institutional  settings,  such  as  the  length  of  repossession  periods,  as  again 
documented  in  the  report  on  the  HFCS  (HFCN  (2013)).  This  implies  that  the  dynamics  of 
aggregate  spending  and  output  vary  across  countries,  depending  not  only  on  the  size  of 
shocks and their distribution across households, but also on the institutional settings, which 
may have affected the accumulation of debt and house price dynamics to a varying extent 
before the crisis. 
                                                
1   See Carroll et al. (2013). 
2   See,  for  example,  Blundell,  Pistaferri  and  Preston  (2008),  Broda  and  Parker  (2012),  Kreiner,  Lassen  and  Leth-
Petersen (2012) and Jappelli and Pistaferri (2013). 
3   See, for example, Slacalek (2009). 
4   See, for example, Dynan (2012) and Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
factors, 
together  with 
tighter  credit  constraints,  depressed 
Additional  evidence  from  the  HFCS  also  suggests  that  low-income  households  may  be 
financially  particularly  vulnerable  to  economic  shocks,  as  they,  for  example,  typically  face 
higher debt-assets and debt service-to-income ratios than households with higher incomes. 
In  summary,  research  and  evidence  from  available  data  thus  suggest  that  all  of  the 
aforementioned 
income 
expectations and heightened perceptions of uncertainty, are likely to contribute to a sluggish 
recovery of household spending from the recession. These additional factors also likely vary 
across  households  and  geographic  regions;  for  example,  estimates  from  the  HFCS  data 
suggest  that  younger,  less  educated  households  and  households  living  in  Mediterranean 
countries face tighter credit constraints. Similarly, lower-income and less wealthy households 
may  have  been  affected  by  larger  adverse  income  shocks,  and  may  also  have  cut  their 
spending more sharply in response to these shocks. 
Monetary policy, in turn, has responded to the crisis by lowering nominal interest rates to 
levels  close  to  the  zero  lower  bound.  This  monetary  policy  easing  has  quite  substantially 
alleviated the financial burden on holders of mortgages.5 In addition, as documented in Hurst 
and  Stafford  (2004),  reductions  in  mortgage  rates  stimulate  the  economy  substantially  as 
households with accumulated home equity can refinance their mortgages at a lower rate in 
order to reduce their stream of mortgage payments, or to access accumulated home equity, 
which may be particularly relevant in times of distress. This can be partially offset by the fact 
that the income and spending of net savers will be negatively affected by a decline in interest 
rates.  However,  the  offsetting  effect  is  likely  to  remain  moderate  because  a  substantial 
proportion of households (50% – 80% in most countries) are not able to save and because 
the savings of those who do may be less sensitive to interest rates, as the latter tend to be 
wealthier and to have more diversified assets. 
Among  many  other  factors,  two  key  parameters  which  affect  the  economy’s  response  to 
interest rate changes are the mortgage participation rate, i.e. the proportion of households 
holding  a  mortgage,  and  the  fixation  periods  of  mortgage  rates.  As  we  know,  both 
parameters  vary  substantially  across  euro  area  countries  –  for  example,  the  proportion  of 
households holding a mortgage on their main residence varies between around 9% (in Italy 
and Slovakia) and more than 30% (in Cyprus, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Finland). 
Similarly,  the  share  of  variable  rate  mortgages  ranges  from  less  than  20%  in  France  and 
Germany  to  more  than  80%  in  Luxembourg,  the  Netherlands,  Portugal  and  Slovakia  (see 
Ehrmann and Ziegelmeyer (2013)). 
The great variety of households revealed by household-level data stands in sharp contrast to 
the stark representation of consumers in many DSGE models (especially those of the first 
generation),  in  which  consumption  smoothing  or  intertemporal  substitution  is  typically 
governed by a single parameter that is often calibrated in an ad hoc manner. The experience 
of  the  Great  Recession,  in  which  individual  households  were  subject  to  different  income, 
interest rate and wealth shocks that generated responses that differed from those recorded 
in previous recessions, suggests that we should take household heterogeneity seriously. 
To  conclude,  the  Eurosystem’s  Household  Finance  and  Consumption  Survey  provides 
researchers with an invaluable source of information that will make it possible, by way of a 
cross-country perspective, to enhance our knowledge about the effects of specific monetary 
policy measures on the financial and economic decisions taken by households. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
5   For example, Ehrmann and Ziegelmeyer (2013) estimate that a 300 basis point cut in interest rates would result in a 
substantial reduction of the median debt-service burden, in particular for households in the lowest income quintile 
where the ratio of median debt service to income would otherwise have been 44%, rather than the observed 32%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
References 
Anderson, E., Inoue, A. and Rossi, B. (2013), “Heterogeneous Consumers and Fiscal Policy 
Shocks”, CEPR Discussion Papers, No 9631, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Blundell,  R.,  Pistaferri,  L.  and  Preston,  I.  (2008),  “Consumption  Inequality  and  Partial 
Insurance”, American Economic Review, No 98(5), pp. 1887–1921. 
Blundell, R., Pistaferri, L. and Saporta-Eksten, I. (2012), “Consumption Inequality and Family 
Labor Supply”, NBER Working Papers, No 18445, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Broda,  C.  and  Parker,  J.  (2012),  “The  Economic  Stimulus  Payments  of  2008  and  the 
Aggregate Demand for Consumption”, mimeo, Northwestern University. 
Carroll, C., Slacalek, J. and Tokuoka, K. (2013), “The Distribution of Wealth and the Marginal 
Propensity to Consume,” mimeo, Johns Hopkins University. 
Dynan, K. (2012), “Is a Household Debt Overhang Holding Back Consumption?”, Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity (Spring 2012), pp. 299–344. 
Ehrmann,  M.  and  Ziegelmeyer,  M.  (2013),  “Household  Risk  Management  and  Actual 
Mortgage Choice in the Euro Area”, mimeo. 
Household Finance and Consumption Network (2013), “The Eurosystem Household Finance 
and  Consumption  Survey  –  results  from  the  first  wave”,  Statistics  Paper  Series,  No  2, 
European Central Bank. 
Hurst, E. and Stafford, F. (2004), “Home Is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing and 
Household  Consumption”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  Vol.  36(6),  Blackwell 
Publishing, December, pp. 985–1014. 
Jappelli,  T.  and  Pistaferri,  L.  (2013),  “Fiscal  Policy  and  MPC  Heterogeneity”,  CEPR 
Discussion Papers, No 9333, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Kreiner, C.T., Lassen, D.D. and Leth-Petersen, S. (2012), “Heterogeneous Responses and 
Aggregate Impact of the 2001 Income Tax Rebates”, CEPR Discussion Papers, No DP9161, 
Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Mian, A.R., Rao, K. and Sufi, A. (2013), “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the 
Economic Slump”, mimeo, Princeton University. 
Slacalek, J. (2009), “What Drives Personal Consumption? The Role of Housing and Financial 
Wealth”, The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, Vol. 9(1), De Gruyter, October, pp. 1–37. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
