Benoît Coeuré: Savers aren’t losing out 
Opinion piece by Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, published in Handelsblatt on 11 November 2013. 
 Complaints about the European Central Bank (ECB) favouring borrowers over savers with its 
low-interest-rate policy are getting ever louder. In countries such as Germany there is even 
talk  of  a  “cold  expropriation”  of  those  who  save  money  for  their  old  age.  I  don’t  think  this 
assumption is appropriate. The current low returns for savers are mainly an ongoing result of 
the recent deep recession and of the fragmentation of the financial market in the euro area. 
Against  this  background,  low  interest  rates  are  a  tool  to  maintain  price  stability.  And  price 
stability is a pre-requisite to bring the economy back onto a sustainable growth path. Higher 
key  interest  rates  would  have  exacerbated  the  recession,  delayed  the  recovery  and 
contributed to deflationary risks. Higher interest rates would therefore hurt savers. They are 
not the losers under the ECB’s monetary policy, as many are claiming. 
It’s true that the ECB’s interest rates have never been as low as they are today. The main 
refinancing rate – the rate at which banks can borrow money over the short term from the 
central bank and which is perceived by the public as the “key rate” – now stands at 0.25%. 
What  matters  more  to  German  savers,  however,  is  that  interest  rates  for  long-term 
investments that are considered safe have fallen to their lowest level since the establishment 
of the monetary union. Investors in ten-year German bonds currently get an interest rate of 
around  1.76%.  The  main  reason  for  this  is  that  because  of  the  European  sovereign  debt 
crisis investors prefer investments which they consider to be particularly safe. In the end, it 
can be said that the ECB with its monetary policy has, above all, kept the interest rate low for 
very  short-term  loans.  But  the  returns  on  longer-term  investments  considered  safe  have 
fallen so much primarily as a result of the increased demand. 
There remains the question of whether the key rates in the euro area are unreasonably low. 
What would be the level if interest rates could freely form on the market, without monetary 
policy  intervention?  This  so-called  “natural”  interest  rate  would  fall  in  a  shrinking  economy 
over a prolonged period and rise again during a recovery. Because a recession allows the 
expected yields to decline the returns fall in almost all forms of investment. At the same time, 
in  periods  of  uncertainty,  people  want  to  save.  Then  there  is  significantly  more  liquidity 
available overall than is sought for investment. And interest rates come under pressure. In 
other words, in those circumstances the remaining borrowers who are willing to invest would 
benefit from the situation, while savers would suffer from falling interest rates. 
This finding corresponds to a remarkable extent to the development we have seen in recent 
years. With higher interest rates savers would not have been favoured, as those rates would 
have  contributed  to  downward  risks  to  price  stability,  deepened  the  recession  and 
endangered jobs in Germany as well. And if you are jobless you can hardly save for your old 
age. 
In  the  current  environment,  a  more  expansionary  monetary  policy  is  thus  the  necessary 
reaction of the central bank to maintain price stability. The ECB’s monetary policy, which will 
always rigorously fight inflation that is too high or too low, is therefore appropriate. 
The prosperity of savers in Germany in the future depends mainly on the success of reform 
efforts at the political level throughout the euro area. 
Because  –  as  I  said  –  if  the  interest  rates  for  savers  in  Germany  are  in  part  so  low,  it’s 
because  German  government  bonds  are  in  demand.  Other  countries  in  the  euro  area, 
however,  can  only  place  their  securities  with  investors  at  relatively  high  interest  rates. 
Although monetary policy can reduce this fragmentation of the markets in the euro area, it 
cannot  completely  eliminate  it.  This  can  only  be  done  at  the  political  level.  Europe  has  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
establish a functioning banking union which restores the confidence of markets and savers in 
all  credit  institutions.  The  countries  have  to  return  to  a  sustainable  fiscal  policy  and  make 
efforts  to  create  growth.  And  then  the  savings  of  Germans  will  earn  higher  interest  rates 
again. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
