Vítor Constâncio: Banking union and the future of banking 
Speech by  Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the IIEA 
Conference on “The future of banking in Europe”, Dublin, 2 December 2013. 
 Minister Noonan, 
Ladies and gentleman, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak here today in Dublin, which is an apt place to discuss the 
future of banking. 
People  in  this  country  need  no  reminding  of  the  dangers  that  an  over-leveraged  banking 
sector  can  pose  to  the  real  economy.  And  I  expect  you  need  no  persuading  of  the 
importance  of  fundamentally  strengthening  our  common  approach  to  supervising  and 
resolving banks in Europe. 
Nevertheless,  I  would  like to  begin my  remarks  today  by  reiterating  why  we  need  banking 
union. Governments are in the midst of crucial negotiations about the shape and structure of 
banking union, and I think it is important to keep in mind the big picture of why this project is 
so important for our common future. 
Thereafter, I will discuss two aspects about the future of banking. 
The first is how the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) will affect the supervision and the 
practice of banking in the euro area. 
The second is how the process of structural change in euro area banking sector will affect 
intermediation, and what this will mean for Europe’s traditional universal banking model. 
The rationale for banking union 
Let me begin by briefly recalling why banking union – which includes the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  –  is  an  essential  complement to 
monetary union. There are three main reasons. 
First,  monetary  union  implies  increasing  integration  between  financial  institutions  and 
markets, be it through internationally active banking groups, bilateral trading exposures, or 
presence in the same market segments. We saw this process unfold in the euro area over its 
first decade. But such financial integration also creates what Dirk Schoenmaker has termed a 
“financial trilemma”: it is impossible to maintain the level of integration required for monetary 
union  while  practicing  national  supervision,  without  putting  European  financial  stability  at 
risk.1 
Why? Because national supervisors have a national mandate and so it is rational that they 
take  less  account  of  externalities.  This  leads  to  the  under-provision  of  European  financial 
stability  as  a  public  good.  One  example  of  this  is  the  promotion  of  so-called  “national 
champions”, which may increase national welfare but whose failure can create spillovers for 
other countries. The incentives of a European supervisor, on the other hand, are fully aligned 
with its European financial stability mandate. 
A  second  reason  why  banking  union  is  essential  to  monetary  union  is  that  it  supports  the 
implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  The  even  transmission  of  monetary  policy 
across  all  member  countries  of  the  euro  area  requires  a  level  of  financial  integration  that 
                                                
1   Dirk Schoenmaker (2011) “The financial trilemma” in Economic Letters, 111, pp. 57–9. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
ensures  well-functioning  cross-border  money  markets.  Yet  we  have  seen  during  the  crisis 
that without a euro area-wide approach to financial governance, financial markets can end up 
re-nationalising. 
A  strong  banking  union  can  help  mitigate  several  sources  of  this  fragmentation.  A  single 
supervisor  should  enhance  transparency  and  thus  increase  trust  in  cross-border  lending, 
while supervisory ring-fencing or national asset-liability matching would no longer be relevant 
given the SSM’s European focus. In addition, an effective single resolution mechanism would 
help  attenuate  the  infamous  bank-sovereign  nexus.  Sovereigns  would  have  less  ability  to 
intervene in failing banks, thus allowing bank risk to be better separated from sovereign risk. 
The third reason that justifies the banking union has to do with the effects of unsupervised 
cross-border lending on real economic developments. Contrary to the “it’s mostly fiscal” view 
of  the  crisis,2  financial  sector  developments  largely  explain  the  build-up  of  unsustainable 
current account and competitiveness positions in peripheral countries before the crisis. 
The  current  account  deficits  in  most  peripheral  countries  were  in  fact  led  by  huge  capital 
inflows implying capital account surpluses. The exposures of banks from core to peripheral 
countries  more  than  quintupled  between  1999  and  2008.  Competitiveness  losses  were 
simply the mechanism that connected the capital surplus and the current account deficit – 
that is, an appreciation of the real exchange rate caused by economic over-heating. As John 
Williamson explained long ago it is impossible to have “an immaculate transfer” from capital 
inflows to current account deficits.3 
National supervisors found it impossible to contain these developments because they had to 
respect the single market rules and lacked the macro-prudential tools to offset the effects of 
large capital inflows. But by creating supervision at the level of market, banking union offers 
a  possibility  to  better  pre-empt  such  developments  in  the  future  –  and  therefore  to  better 
protect the real economy, growth and employment. 
The SSM and the practice of banking in Europe 
Let me now turn to the SSM in more detail and how I expect it to affect the supervision and 
practice of banking in Europe. There are six points I would like to highlight. 
First, I expect the SSM to implement the most advanced supervision of banks. This means, 
of course, using all the modern methods to be forward-looking and risk-based, focusing on 
the viability of banks’ business models, the robustness of their balance sheets to shocks and 
the evolution of their liquidity and funding positions over time. 
This is the basis on which we are currently designing the single supervisory model which will 
apply to all banks in the SSM – not only to those that are directly supervised by the ECB. 
Second, the SSM will have to address the problems created by the heterogeneity in the way 
that  banks  calculate  risk-weighted  assets.  Even  though  euro  area  banks  have  a  healthy 
median Core Tier 1 capital ratio of above 12% of risk-weighted assets, investors seem to still 
have concerns about their robustness due to lack of transparency on how they calibrate their 
internal risk models, as well as differences in how models are validated across jurisdictions. 
The SSM should create more homogeneity by imposing common principles about methods 
and  models’  parameters  in  order  to  improve  the  reliability  of  banks’  internal  models.  The 
Basel  Committee  is  also  discussing  how  to  address  this  issue  and  some  countries  have 
                                                
2   See “The European Crisis and the role of the financial system” speech by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of 
the  ECB,  at  the  Bank  of  Greece  conference  on  “The  crisis  in  the  euro  area”  Athens,  23  May  2013. 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2013/html/sp130523_1.en.html. 
3   See Williamson, J., “Comment”, in Bergsten, F. (ed), International Adjustment and Financing: The Lessons of 
1985–1991, Institute for International Economics, 1991, p. 243. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
recently introduced minimum floors to risk weights of some types of assets. The ECB/SSM 
will ensure that, both within and across countries, the same types of risks are given similar 
weights. 
Third,  the  SSM  will  lead  to  a  harmonised  treatment  of  non-performing  exposures  and 
provisioning  rules,  which  at  present  vary  between  jurisdictions  and  are  not  directly 
comparable for investors. 
The  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  has  recently  released  technical  standards  on 
supervisory  reporting  on  non-performing  exposures  and  forbearance,  which  will  provide 
consistent indicators of asset quality for the whole EU. However, as it will take some time for 
banks  to  implement  these  standards,  the  SSM  will  adopt  its  own  simplified  standards,  in 
particular  for  use  in  our  forthcoming  comprehensive  assessment.  We’ll  go  as  far  as  the 
timeframe allows towards the full EBA definitions. 
Fourth, as a result of these changes, I see that the SSM will create the conditions for further 
integration of the European banking market. 
Unified supervision should create greater trust among banks, thus reducing the risk aversion 
related to cross-border lending. And it should alter the environment within banks, as cross-
border  banking  groups  will  be  able  to  optimise  their  internal  management  of  capital  and 
liquidity and reduce compliance costs. 
On liquidity and capital, we expect liquidity to be more fungible within cross-border groups 
than in the past, and for capital needs related to stress test outcomes, macroeconomic and 
systemic buffers to be able to be met at the consolidated level, provided that capital is freely 
transferable between the group and individual institutions. 
Capital needs related to idiosyncratic risks may still need to be met at the subsidiary level, 
but  our  approach  is  likely  to  leave  some  flexibility  to  the  Joint  Supervisory  Teams  that 
oversee each significant bank to tailor the approach to the relevant bank’s business model 
and statutory arrangements. A movement to subsidiarisation that we observe in other parts 
of the world has no justification inside the SSM perimeter. 
On the cost of doing business, compliance costs for cross-border banks should be reduced 
by the development of the EU single rulebook and the single supervisory model within the 
SSM. This could mean, for example, that regulatory compliance functions no longer need to 
be duplicated in different euro area countries. 
This potential to deepen banking market integration leads me to the fifth point, which is that I 
would  not  be  surprised  if  the  SSM  would  open  a  period  of  restructuring  in  the  European 
banking sector, in particular through more mergers and acquisitions. 
M&A activity has been very weak in the euro area since the crisis – from 2008 to 2012 the 
overall value of deals decreased fourfold to just €10 billion, with cross-border deals the most 
affected. Nevertheless, the weak profitability and excess capacity of the European banking 
sector  suggests  that  efficiency  gains  could  be  achieved.  The  Herfindahl-Hischman 
concentration indicator for the euro area banks is at the 690 level, well below the range of 
1000 to 1600 of acceptable concentration. 
Naturally  I  expect  this  process  of  restructuring  to  be  driven  first  and  foremost  by  the 
incentives of the private sector to raise profitability and increase returns on assets. However, 
there may be collateral effects of the change in the institutional environment that may favour 
that movement. 
Looking further ahead, a single resolution mechanism in Europe will create more possibilities 
to  use  consolidation  as  a  resolution  strategy.  We  see  this  in  the  US  where,  of  the 
approximately 500 banks that the FDIC has taken into receivership since 2008, around 450 
were  resolved  through  “Purchase  and  Assumption”  transactions  –  that  is,  selling  parts  of 
banks to other banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
That said, there are also frictions that create obstacles to closer bank market integration. 
These include different legal systems, corporate governance structures and tax regimes that 
exist in Europe, as well as different insolvency procedures. Further integration is needed in 
these areas if we are to gravitate towards a true single market in capital in the euro area. 
Finally,  the  new  SSM  Regulation  introduced  an  important  change  a  change  in  macro-
prudential policy-making, both in terms of instruments and decision-making. 
As  part  of  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  IV/Capital  Requirements  Regulation,  the 
ECB/SSM  will  gain  a  series  of  new  macro-prudential  instruments.  These  include,  among 
others, the counter-cyclical capital buffer, the systemic risk buffer and the macro-prudential 
elements from Pillar 2. I am confident that they can play a role in curbing pro-cyclicality in 
credit developments where needed. 
In  terms  of  decision-making,  a  European  authority  will  be  able,  if  necessary,  to  apply 
prudential  measures  to  banks  in  both  borrowing  and  lending  countries.  This  is  important 
because,  to  the  extent  that  macro-prudential  measures  mitigate  credit  booms  by  raising 
banks’ cost of equity, this effect can be offset if there are large inflows from abroad that lower 
banks’ cost of debt. In other words, the ECB/SSM has the tools to address such situations as 
we  saw  before  the  crisis,  where  supervisors  lacked  the  tools  to  tame  domestic  financial 
booms being largely financed from banks in other euro area countries. 
The future of intermediation in the euro area 
Looking further ahead, I expect this period of structural change in the banking sector to also 
have a permanent effect on the structure of intermediation. 
In  the  euro  area,  banks  have  historically  played  an  important  role  in  financing  the  real 
economy.  Banks  loans account for  most  of  household  borrowing  and  around  50%  of  non-
financial firms’ external financing, which is very different from the US where around 75% of 
firms’ financing comes from capital markets (equity and debt securities). The importance of 
bank-based intermediation in the euro area explains the relatively large size of the euro area 
banking sector compared with the US – at 270% and 72% of GDP, respectively. 
Overall,  I  expect  the  future  of  banking  to  involve  some  rebalancing  away  from  such  high 
levels of bank-based intermediation and towards more capital market-based intermediation. 
On the banking side, I anticipate that over time there will be a gradual decline in the size of 
the  euro  area  banking  sector.  Indeed,  such  a  process  of  consolidation  and  resizing  has 
already been on-going since 2008. In net terms the number of credit institutions has fallen by 
9% since 2008, or around 600 institutions, while the total assets of the euro area banking 
sector have declined by almost 12%. The second largest reduction in the value of assets was 
recorded here in Ireland. 
This  process  has  seen  euro  area  banks  become  significantly  less  leveraged,  with  the 
average loan-to-deposit ratio falling from 144% in 2008 to 120% in mid-2013. I expect that 
this  ratio  will  continue  to  fall  and  converge  towards  100%  as  banks  seek  to  further 
consolidate their balance sheets and develop safer, more sustainable business models. 
And  as  a  natural  response  to  this,  firms  are  likely  to  pursue  new  avenues  for 
disintermediation. This brings me to development of capital markets. 
The crisis has already boosted disintermediation in the euro area, in particular for larger firms 
and  those  located  in  countries  with  more  developed  corporate  bond  markets,  such  as 
Germany  and  France.  Our  data  shows  that  these  firms  have  been  able  to  offset  reduced 
access  to  bank  finance  with  bond  issuance  in  the  last  12  months.  Going  forward,  we  can 
predict that the European capital markets will develop further. 
The first area will be the deepening of corporate bond and equity markets. This has obvious 
advantages in terms of diversifying the financing mix for euro area firms and allowing them 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
access to a larger pool of non-bank investors. At the end of June 2013 insurers, occupational 
pension funds, money market funds and investment funds together had assets worth almost 
16 trillion euros – that is only a trillion euros less than the sum of euro bank deposits. 
Moreover, deeper capital markets integration has been shown to dissipate the impact of local 
shocks  by  spreading  losses  across  the  market.  In  an  old  seminal  paper,  this  risk  sharing 
mechanism  is  estimated  to  explain  the  absorption  of two-thirds  of  shocks  in  the  US  in the 
nineties.4 
A  second  area  where  improvements  can  be  expected  relates  to  securitisation  markets  in 
Europe, in particular asset-backed securities (ABS) for SME lending. SMEs are particularly 
vulnerable  to  banking  sector  stress,  and  as  they  employ  nearly  70%  of  EU  workers  and 
contribute  around  60%  of  EU  value  added,  this  creates  a  concomitant vulnerability  for  the 
European economy. 
Securitisation  may  be  one  way  to  stimulate  credit  to  SMEs,  as  banks  would  feel  more 
confident that they could shift risks to non-bank investors. However, we all know about the 
risks  potentially  related  to  extreme  cases  of  securitization.  After  all,  the  “originate  and 
distribute”  model  was  one  the  proximate  causes  of  the  crisis.  The  function  of  monitoring 
borrowers and managing credit risk that justifies the existence of financial intermediaries was 
lost in the process. Also, complex products with multiple layers led to significant losses and, 
therefore,  we  should  not  allow  the  repetition  of  that  same  experience.  Nevertheless,  it  is 
useful to recall that the default rate of ABSs in the EU was just 1.4% from mid-2007 to the 
first quarter of 2013, compared 17.4% in the US. For senior tranches of European SME ABS, 
there have been no defaults. 
Third, the euro area would greatly benefit from deepening debt capital markets for long-term 
financing, in particular for infrastructure projects. Investment in the euro area is currently still 
lower than in 2007, and there are signs that this may have reduced the euro area’s growth 
potential.  This  means  that  developing  new  ways  to  structure  investment  financing  –  for 
example, through the Commission’s project bonds initiative – must be a priority to avoid that 
the crisis leaves lasting damage to the euro area economy. 
However, while I see some advantages for more disintermediation in the euro area, I do not 
think  we  should  go  too  far  in  the  opposite  direction  and  replicate  the  US  model.  A 
predominance  of  capital  markets  in  financing  the  economy  opens  opportunities  but  brings 
also more volatility. A balanced funding mix between banks and capital markets is best for 
financial stability – and close bank-firm relationships in several countries are simply part of 
the fabric of the euro area economy. But this implies that we need to have profitable, viable 
and stable banks in the euro area. 
For  this  reason, I  expect  Europe  to keep  its  universal  banking  model,  with  some  limits  on 
high-risk proprietary trading as we have seen in the recent German and French legislation, 
inspired  by  the  Liikanen  Report.  Radical  separation  of  retail  and  investment  banking 
functions, eliminating the European concept of balanced universal banks would go too far, 
especially when we know that Europe’s universal banks have faired relatively well throughout 
the crisis and returned to profitability more quickly than others. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
                                                
4   B.  Sørensen  and  O.  Yosha  (1996),  “Channels  of  interstate  risk  sharing:  United  States  (1963–1990)”,  The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, pp. 1081–1111. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
I  have  outlined  today  some  of  the  changes  that  I  expect  banking  union,  and  the  SSM  in 
particular, to prompt in the supervision and structure of euro area banking. These will have 
fundamental importance for the future of our economies. 
As we are a bank-based economy, there are few issues that are more vital to growth and job 
creation in the euro area than a well-supervised and stable banking sector. In passing this 
responsibility to the European level, we are therefore taking a major step towards common 
ownership of our economic outcomes. 
In this way, banking union can be seen as the first step in developing a real EMU – that is, a 
union  where  banking,  fiscal,  economic  issues  are  decided  in  common,  backed  by  the 
democratic mandate of the people of Europe. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
