Jörg Asmussen: Interview in Il Sole 24 Ore 
Interview with Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  in  Il  Sole  24  Ore,  conducted  by  Mr  Alessandro  Merli  and  published  on  25  October 
2013. 
 Why did you choose Italy for your MBA? Not an obvious choice for a German student. 
And a very Northern German! I was born just two miles from the Danish border. It was part 
logic, part gut feeling. The logic was to learn a new language, besides English and French. I 
thought about going to Spain or Italy. And then the gut feeling said: go to Italy. The emotional 
relationship between the two countries goes back centuries: to Goethe’s trip to Italy on one 
side; on the other there is Italy’s admiration for how Germany functions. 
What did you learn in your MBA that was useful in your future career, as you went into 
public service, in a different direction from the typical MBA? 
The MBA was very useful, even if one worked in the public sector: you learnt management 
tools,  about  project management,  personnel  issues, marketing. What  I really  learnt  was  to 
value diversity, to deal with cultural diversity. In my MBA class there were people from almost 
30 countries. And I learnt the value of cooperation and work in a team: you work on projects 
and case studies, solve problems, and in the end you only get one mark, as a team. I also 
learnt to live abroad. From the beginning people in Italy were very helpful, even when I only 
knew three words in Italian, and they encouraged me to speak Italian. We speak Italian, from 
time to time, with Mario Draghi. 
The structure of the economy in Germany and Italy has similarities, in terms of the 
weight of manufacturing, the export orientation, and yet Germany is doing well and 
Italy is doing badly. Why? 
There are clear similarities: the importance of manufacturing (although this has increased in 
Germany in recent years while in Italy it has decreased), the great importance of small and 
medium-sized enterprises. The key difference when it comes to SMEs,  which may explain 
some of Italy’s current problems, is that on average Italian manufacturing SMEs are much 
smaller  than  in  Germany.  It  makes  you  more  flexible,  but  it  also  makes  it  more  difficult  to 
finance innovation and exploit export markets. For sure, the fiscal situation is very different, 
and so are developments in competitiveness. One piece of data is really striking: between 
1999  and  2012  nominal  unit  labour  costs  in  Italy  increased  by  a  bit  more  than  36%,  in 
Germany by less than 10%. 
How do you explain that and how should it be addressed? 
No  single  explanation.  The  relatively  smaller  size  of  firms,  as  I  said,  is  one:  smaller  firms 
have difficulties in exploiting new markets, such as those in South-East Asia. But there are a 
number of reasons: adverse price and cost developments; demographics, which are worse 
than  in  Germany;  lack  of growth  in  total factor  productivity.  And  there  is  an  issue  with  the 
education system. Since 1999 Italy has lost 30% of its export market share, while Germany 
has  gained  20%.  On  the  fiscal  side,  a  lot  has  been  achieved,  especially  under  the  Monti 
government, which should not be unravelled. He also started a labour market reform. But the 
focus in Italy now should be on structural reforms: the need to foster innovation and improve 
competitiveness. That is the agenda that lies ahead of the country. But, having lived there for 
two years, even if it was 20 years ago, I am optimistic this can be done. I would not be as 
pessimistic as many analysts are. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The political system being dysfunctional is often cited as the main hindrance, leading 
to instability and uncertainty. 
A The European Central Bank is totally neutral politically. If one looks at the creativity here in 
Italy, there is high potential for finding solutions. You have real entrepreneurship. But if you 
look at the Doing Business report of the World Bank, which looks at how easy it is to conduct 
a  business,  Italy  is  73rd.  It’s  one  of  the  best  global  indicators. Greece is  climbing,  even  if 
from a very low ranking, and non-European countries are improving. 
Italian entrepreneurs lament the lack and the cost of credit, especially for SMEs. 
President Draghi has said many times he that he is aware of the problem. What can 
the ECB do about it? 
There  are  a  number  of  reasons  why  banks  don’t  lend  to  companies.  When  the  business 
cycle is weak, companies demand less credit. But there are also constraints on credit supply. 
What will be very important is the coming major exercise led by the ECB, the comprehensive 
assessment of banks – the asset quality review and the stress test. Europe is lagging behind 
in  balance  sheet  reform  after  the  crisis,  compared  with  the  United  States,  and  in  my  view 
lending to the real economy will only return to the levels at which we want to see it if we have 
clean  bank  balance  sheets.  If  you  have  banks  sitting  on  a  substantial  amount  of  non-
performing loans or suffering from a lack of capital, they  will not lend. This element of the 
banking union is key. The ECB will do this before assuming banking supervision and it is the 
precondition for lending to revive. 
Is this, do you think, your most important contribution, rather than lowering interest 
rates or providing more liquidity through another longer-term refinancing operation? 
In general terms there are three reasons banks don’t lend: a lack of liquidity – and that is not 
the  case  on  average  in  the  euro  area  today,  with  the  banks  repaying  the  two  three-year 
LTROs; a lack of capital, which cannot be addressed by the ECB but is a matter for bank 
shareholders and, if that is not possible, fiscal backstops; and heightened risk aversion. We 
provide liquidity as needed and will do the comprehensive exercise. 
There are very different perceptions in Italy and your own country about the respective 
other country and about what the ECB should do. 
I now look at this question as a European with a German passport. This is what makes our 
job interesting and difficult at the same time: the European perspective. I travel a lot around 
Germany and talk to people and hear that we at the ECB are doing too much, exceeding our 
mandate. Someone even took us to the Constitutional Court on that. In Italy, people ask: why 
don’t you do more? I take note of both perceptions, but we do what is needed to ensure price 
stability in the euro area as a whole. We are the central bank to all 17 countries. 
Lack of growth remains a huge issue. Where will growth come from in the euro area? 
In the second quarter the euro area came out of recession after six quarters. That is good 
news, but it’s very, very gradual, fragile, uneven and with downside risks. The major source 
of future growth is growth-enhancing structural reforms. We always look a bit inward: what is 
Germany doing, versus Italy, versus France? But the key question is: how can we Europeans 
compete globally in the economy of the 21st century, where we have new competitors, which 
are much stronger than 10 or 20 years ago? We need to cooperate much more, deepen the 
Internal Market, join forces with cross-border mergers – even in banking, where they are very 
rare (notwithstanding UniCredit-HVB). The aim in the end is to create jobs. Unemployment at 
this level is unacceptable. One in four young people in Europe are out of a job. As structural 
reforms take time, we need to resort to active labour market policies, like vocational training. 
Otherwise, we risk a lost generation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The little growth there is comes from exports. German and Italian companies meeting 
in Bolzano this week raised the question of the strength of the euro. 
Our answer does not change. We don’t have an explicit exchange rate target. The exchange 
rate is factored into our inflation and growth forecasts. 
But is it too high, is it overvalued, does it worry you? 
A In nominal terms and in real effective terms, which is more important, it is within the band 
we have seen for the last ten years. I don’t have any specific worry on the exchange rate. It 
only concerns me as it factors into our inflation forecast. 
You are directly involved in the negotiations on the banking union. Single supervision 
was agreed, but on single resolution there are still wide differences. Time is running 
short, because of the end of the legislative term of the European Parliament in the 
middle of next year and the uncertainty in Germany about the next government 
coalition, which will delay decisions. 
We want a banking union with all its elements, which includes a single resolution mechanism 
with its three components: a European resolution regime, a European resolution fund and a 
European resolution authority. And we want it in place close to the time single supervision 
starts in November next year. It is ambitious but doable. The European Parliament will stop 
working  in  April.  That  means  finishing  the  law-making  beforehand.  That  is  why,  from  a 
European perspective, it so important that a major Member State will form a new government 
soon. Then we can have a European Council position that will pave the way for legislation. 
This is in my view the biggest task ahead of us in the next few months. It is of the utmost 
importance,  because  it will  provide  a  key  contribution  to  reducing the fragmentation  in  the 
euro area. 
The German government has said that Treaty revision is needed for a single resolution 
authority and it doesn’t agree on the use of the European Stability Mechanism for the 
recapitalisation of banks. 
We  want  a  joint  regime,  a  joint  fund  and  a  joint  agency.  The  ECB  lawyers  agree  with  the 
legal basis of the European Commission proposal for a European resolution regime. This is 
disputed by the German government and will have to be resolved. It is related to the question 
of  who  the  resolution  agency  is:  it  cannot  be  and  should  not  be  the  ECB,  as  it  is  the 
supervisor. The most difficult question, because it is about money, is the resolution fund. We 
should have a joint fund, financed by a levy on banks. But it will take time to build up, say ten 
years.  In  the  meantime,  there  should  be  a  fiscal  backstop.  And  it  could  be  the  ESM. 
Compare  this  with  the  United  States,  where  the  resolution  agency  is  the  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance Corporation, which has a permanent credit line at the Treasury. The ESM could be 
the fiscal backstop to the European resolution agency. This would require a revision of the 
ESM  Treaty;  it  is  a  lower  hurdle  than  changing  the  European  Treaty.  I  think  it  is  feasible 
before the European Parliament is out. 
You may soon be on the other side of the negotiating table, as finance minister in a 
”grand coalition”. 
My term at the ECB ends in 2019. My intention is to fulfil that term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
