Yves Mersch: Interview in Frankfurter Allgemeiner Zeitung 
Interview  with  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, in Frankfurter Allgemeiner Zeitung, published on 14 October 2013. 
 Mr Mersch, you are responsible for setting up banking supervision at the ECB. That is 
a huge task. Are you looking forward to it, or do you also have some concerns about 
whether it will all work out? 
In the course of my life, I’ve regularly been involved in such pioneering projects. It’s gratifying 
when one can look back afterwards and see that it has been successful. Presently, there are 
of course moments when we have some concerns about the future. 
You  don’t  have  much  time.  The  first  acid  test,  the  comprehensive  balance  sheet 
assessment, will be held as part of the preparations. Will the process be less rigorous 
for being swift? 
We had a longer run-up period when we were setting up the monetary union. When I was 
involved in founding Banque centrale du Luxembourg in 1998, the run-up period was even 
shorter, but the current task is far greater. However, we have the advantage of an excellent 
cooperation  with  the  national  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities.  And  we  can  also 
build on the experiences of the European Banking Authority (EBA)…. 
..which were not altogether positive, however... 
I  don’t  want  to  make  an  assessment,  but  we  have  learned  from them.  First  and foremost, 
communication  will  be  essential.  Last  week,  at  a  meeting  with  the  heads  of  the  national 
supervisory  authorities,  we  agreed  on  key  cornerstones,  including  core  elements  of  the 
comprehensive balance sheet assessment. 
And how will it proceed? 
This plan must first be approved by the ECB’s Governing Council. You will be let in on all the 
details on 23 October: what form the balance sheet assessment will take; how it ties in with 
the  portfolio  selection,  which  we  will  examine  in  more  detail;  and  how  the  balance  sheet 
assessment in turn relates to the subsequent stress tests. It should all lead to a single result, 
that will be published in October next year. 
What benchmark will this single result represent? 
We are not primarily aiming to quantify a capital gap. The main purpose of sifting through the 
banks’  balance  sheets  is  to  restore  international  market  confidence  in  them.  The  balance 
sheet  assessment  will  hence  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  uniform  guidelines.  All 
institutions  will  be  examined  by  the  same  methods.  That  is  why  we  also  have  external 
consultants on board. Moreover, the supervisory teams in the countries will be linked to each 
other. 
The benchmark will not be a capital gap, the capital requirement? What else will it be? 
We  will  have  a  benchmark  for  the  balance  sheet  assessment.  That  will  be  derived  from 
European regulations, the Capital Requirements Regulation/Capital Requirements Directive 
IV (CRR/CRD IV). 
Those are the technical names. What do they refer to? 
The main issue is the definition of capital that a bank is required to keep on deposit. That is 
set down in the CRD IV. 
…which is based on the Basel III guidelines . 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
It contains a minimum percentage of common equity capital that banks, under Basel III, must 
keep  in  proportion  to  their  risk-weighted  assets.  It  also  states  that  banks  must  maintain  a 
capital conservation buffer as a further cushion against risks. And since we are dealing with 
the most important banks in all Member States, the "significant credit institutions" require an 
extra buffer to reflect this significance in a European context. If you add that up, you arrive at 
the benchmark that we will use for orientation. 
In  the  final  analysis,  the  most  interesting  point  is  the  gap  between  a  banks’  capital 
adequacy requirement and the capital that it has available. 
We must apply uniform rules in Europe. It may emerge that a bank does not have adequate 
reserves or has not made sufficient provisions. That gap may need to be filled with capital, 
but it may also be removed through balance sheet shrinking. 
How? 
The situation will improve if we restore confidence: a bank will find it easier to raise funds in 
the market if there is transparency and certainty about its balance sheet. 
It will be difficult if many banks turn to the markets all at once. 
Most bankers are forward-looking and are already looking for capital. If private capital does 
not suffice, then the European guidelines state that the shortfall must be made up through a 
bail-in, with shareholders and creditors bearing losses. The state may not provide any funds 
before a bail-in has been carried out. Before any public money flows, however, a decision 
must have been taken on whether a bank is viable or not. A bank that is only able to keep 
afloat with sustained public support does not belong in our concept of a market economy. If 
the bank, or perhaps just one part of it, does have a chance of survival, public funds may be 
used  as  the  third  line  of  defence;  first  at  national  level,  and  then  –  as  an  ultimate  line  of 
defence – at international level. If a country is unable to cope, a European safety net would 
be the last option. So we have a cascade of backstops. 
Many taxpayers in Germany already fear that, in the last instance through a European 
safety net, their money, too, will be used to rescue banks. 
The European backstop is the absolute final stage. If a country does not provide the funds, it 
must enter into an aid programme. The need to activate the European safety net, the last 
backstop, will not readily arise. 
But you understand that many taxpayers are concerned. 
People in some countries are more nervous than in others. In the “creditor countries”, people 
now feel that they are being made to pay up. We need to take these fears seriously, while 
not failing to appreciate that the interest rates in these countries have been lowered by the 
crisis and the flow of capital from the stressed countries. That facilitates investment. 
The low interest rates are not welcome to savers in Germany. 
No, they are not welcome to savers. 
Savers would at least like a real return on their savings. 
Real  rates  come  from  the  real  economy.  Long-term  real  interest  rates  will  increase  again 
when the European economy has re-established a sustainable dynamic. 
Getting back to banking supervision in the hands of the ECB. Surely that will lead to 
dilemmas  and  conflicts  of  interest  if,  say,  the  supervisors  ascertain  the  number  of 
sovereign  bonds  held  by  troubled  banks.  An  increase  in  interest  rates  could  put 
pressure on the prices of these bonds and thereby on the banks. The ECB would have 
a conflict and could postpone an interest rate increase that may be warranted from a 
monetary perspective. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It would be naïve to deny that conflicts might arise in some cases. But in 90% of cases, the 
interests of financial stability are identical to those of price stability. To be clear: in the 10%, 
5% or 1% of cases in which a conflict arises, our price stability objective will take precedence 
in line with our mandate. 
The  intention  is  to  publish  the  test  results  of  the  balance  sheet  assessment  next 
October. Isn’t there a danger that provisional results regarding capital gaps might leak 
out in advance and unsettle the markets. 
That  is  true,  that’s  why  we  want  to  consistently  manage  the  process  through  effective 
communication. We want to prevent people from drawing the wrong conclusions from partial 
or inaccurate results. Publication of the final results is the only approach that makes sense. 
Constant reports on the status quo are of little value. However, a bank’s business model will 
also be accorded great significance in a dynamic stress test, which will follow the rather static 
balance sheet assessment. 
The main promise of euro area policy-makers is that taxpayers will no longer have to 
foot the bill for ailing banks. 
Some politicians say no more taxpayers’ money will flow at all. That seems very optimistic to 
me, but I am not a politician. It will be our task to minimise the likelihood that banks run into 
difficulties in the first place. 
The policy-makers’ argument is that there should be no bail-out in future, but rather a 
bail-in.  But  these  rules  do  not  take  effect  until  2018.  What  will  happen  in  the 
meantime? 
For the interim period the Commission has drawn up rules for national state aid, which also 
follow the principle of bail-in. Besides, the European Parliament is doing all it can to advance 
the  resolution  rules  governing  the  bail-in.  In  addition,  individual  countries  may  bring  these 
forward independently. 
The bank resolution fund should also bear the costs of resolving banks. But this fund, 
which  should  be financed  by  banks’  contributions,  so  far  only  exists  on  paper.  The 
ECB and the EU Commission have suggested that the European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM) crisis fund might provide a loan. Does that mean taxpayers may end up paying 
for bank crises after all? 
A credit line is conceivable; it would give security. However, that should certainly not be a 
permanent loan: it may only be interim financing that will not cost taxpayers anything in the 
long run. The credit should be extended on market terms; that might even be a good deal for 
taxpayers. 
If it is such a good deal, why can’t other funding sources be found in the market? 
That option is also contained in the Commission’s proposal. If the ESM provides a credit line, 
the  ESM  rules  would  have  to  be  changed.  In  Germany  that  would  require  parliamentary 
approval, in other countries that would not be necessarily be the case. 
A  final  question  on  international  monetary  policy.  In  Janet  Yellen,  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  will  have  a  Chairperson  who  is  known  as  a  “dove”  and  who  will  probably 
pursue an accommodative monetary policy for some time to come. Are you pleased 
that  you  will  hence  not  come  under  pressure  from  across  the  Atlantic  to  tighten 
monetary policy any time soon? 
I doubt that Ms Yellen fits into all the slots that people put her in. At the Fed, too, decisions 
are taken by a committee. Ms Yellen is highly experienced and has an excellent professional 
and academic background. The good cooperation with the ECB will be continued. We, as the 
ECB, will fulfil our mandate in line with our established strategy for the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
