Miroslav Singer: Central Bank Governor of the Year for Emerging Europe 
2013 
Acceptance  speech  by  Mr  Miroslav  Singer,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the 
Central  Bank  Governor  of  the  Year  for  Emerging  Europe  2013  awards,  Washington  DC, 
12 October 2013. 
 Let me start by thanking you for this award. I see it not so much as personal recognition, but 
more as recognition of the team of people that make up and define the Czech National Bank 
that I have the pleasure to represent here. Special thanks go to those I work with directly, 
among others to my colleagues on the board for their unlimited patience with my generally 
awful manners and attempts to claim leadership. Whenever I meet a group of investors or 
analysts,  I  always  start  by  noting  that  any  issues  and  questions  requiring  knowledge  and 
wisdom  would  be  better  addressed  by  our  experts,  those  requiring  only  wisdom  would  be 
better be fielded by my colleagues on the board, and those requiring neither knowledge nor 
wisdom can be safely left to me. So, let me share some of my knowledge- and wisdom-free 
observations with you. 
Ten years ago, when I was working in restructuring, I could never have imagined that I would 
join the central bank in less than two years and later rise to the top job there. But the offer 
came, and it was one I truly could not refuse. I owe a big debt of thanks to my predecessor 
Zdeněk  Tůma,  who  steered  the  bank  to  a  position  where  its  reputation,  which  had  been 
severely tarnished before his arrival, was growing steadily. He achieved this by, among other 
things, imposing his own highly developed sense of self-control and restraint on the bank. As 
the  Czech  National  Bank  started  communicating  less  on  general  topics  and  more  on  its 
areas of expertise, it became recognized as an institution of true independence and authority 
– to such an extent that the Czech political system allocated all supervisory competences to 
it and continues to broaden its responsibilities. 
I believe that the crises from which a significant part of the developed world is still emerging 
have – at least for smaller economies – justified a scheme in which some or all supervisory 
roles are allocated to the central bank, which holds responsibility for stability issues anyway. 
But I also have to warn against the trend where the public sees central banks gaining more 
and  more  competences  and  mandates  and  starts  to  overestimate  their  ability  to  deal  with 
crises. Central banks are far from omnipotent, and this trend may harm them. After all, their 
independence  is  only  a  product  of  the  political  system  in  which  they  operate.  And  such 
independence  depends chiefly  on  their  reputation.  A  central  bank’s  reputation  is  based  on 
qualities  such  as  accountability,  transparency,  and  proper  management  of  its  own 
operations, as well as on its ability to make good choices and good decisions. As its mandate 
broadens, the likelihood that its actions will be seen as the right ones lessens. We are hardly 
able to cure all the ills of modern economies, let alone whole societies. So, we should keep 
on  practicing  restraint,  both  in  the  scope  of  the  mandate  we  wish  for,  and  in  our 
communication on more general issues lying outside our direct responsibilities and outside 
the time frame over which we can influence the position of the economy in the business or 
financial cycle. 
Such restraint also enables us to communicate convincingly and effectively without needing 
to resort to strong words. At a time when even the central bank’s core mandate – monetary 
policy  –  has  become  quite  a  challenge  to  implement,  such  quality  of  communication  is  of 
utmost importance. As we head toward the ZLB, as we ponder or carry out unconventional 
monetary policy measures, and as we address the consequences of similar moves made by 
our colleagues, we must be sure that our words are read carefully and taken seriously. In 
such a world, we must also carefully scrutinize whether we are overestimating our ability to 
forecast the fundamentally uncertain economic system and identify its crucial elements, and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
consequently  whether  we  are  overcommitting  ourselves  in  our  efforts  to  reduce  the 
uncertainty  felt  by  economic  agents.  Because  if  we  are,  the  instant  effectiveness  of  some 
forward-looking commitments and guidance that should never have been issued at all, will 
give way to a much longer-lasting decrease in our ability to guide the markets in the future, 
and thus to an increase in the risks faced by each and every economic agent. 
Our  mandates  and  institutional  frameworks  may  develop,  but  our  primary  objective  of 
assisting  economic  development  and  growth  by  preventing  abrupt  changes  in  economic 
indicators – be it the price level or broad measures of the stability of financial systems – will 
very  likely  stay  unchanged  for  quite  some  time  to  come.  Generally  speaking,  the  goal  of 
central  banks  is  to  provide  some  certainty  in  fundamentally  uncertain  economies,  the 
uncertainty being based largely on the workings of their monetary systems. In pursuing this 
goal, we will need three things. First, we will need external recognition of the importance and 
usefulness  of  our  independence.  Second,  we  will  need  to  nurture  good  relations  with  our 
colleagues;  we  have  made  great  strides  in  this  area,  but  much  remains  to  be  done.  And 
finally, in our inner circles we will need the support of our nearest and dearest. So, let me 
end by thanking my wife for being such a rock of support in my life, my parents for teaching 
me that things should be done properly or not at all, and my kids for being such a joy every 
time I am with them. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
