Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustaining growth through insolvency reforms 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  9th  Forum  on  Asian  Insolvency  Reform,  Manila, 
3 December 2013. 
 Distinguished  resource  persons  and  participants  to  this  9th  Forum  on  Asian  Insolvency 
Reform, special guests from the government and the private sectors, our co-organizers from 
the World Bank, the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), 
and  the  International  Association  of  Restructuring,  Insolvency  &  Bankruptcy  Professionals 
(INSOL) good morning and welcome to the Philippine International Convention Center. 
And to all our Forum participants from overseas, I welcome all of you to our country on behalf 
of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and other Philippine institutions represented here today. 
Ladies and the gentlemen, this is the first time the Philippines is hosting this Forum on Asian 
Insolvency Reform, and we are privileged to do so. 
We thank all of you for joining this important event where experienced policy makers, legal 
luminaries, thought leaders from the academe and experts from the government and private 
sectors come together to address the need to strengthen our insolvency systems as a means 
to foster and sustain growth and development in our constituencies. 
Indeed, weak insolvency systems have been identified as one of the key shortcomings of the 
Asian  markets. The  Asian  financial  crisis  of  1997–1998  focused  a  glaring  spotlight  on  this 
weakness. Unprecedented expansion fuelled speculation that eventually led to a collapse of 
institutions,  compelling governments  to  step  in  and  putting  a  drag  on  economies  that took 
years to shake off. 
In  its  aftermath,  many  Asian  jurisdictions  carried  out  reforms  to  improve  their  insolvency 
mechanisms.  However,  most  of  the  initiatives  eventually  ended  up  promoting  the  pace  of 
restructuring rather than the quality of restructuring. 
This  had  unintended  consequences.  Primarily,  the  widespread  financial  restructuring  that 
followed  resulted  in  masking  underlying  long-term  weaknesses  that  were  not  immediately 
given the attention these deserved. 
A  decade  later,  what  initially  started  as  a  home  mortgage  crisis  that  adversely  affected  or 
displaced homeowners in the US eventually developed into a global financial crisis. 
The  lesson  is  clear:  efficient  and  effective  insolvency  systems  are  necessary  in  ALL 
constituencies, no matter their level of economic development. 
Having  a  well-developed  insolvency  law  is  important  for  the  development  of  an  effective 
insolvency  system.  But  this  is  not  enough,  as  we  have  seen  in  countries  that  have 
modernized their laws. We need to ensure its proper, effective and timely implementation. 
It is equally important therefore to focus on developing strong institutions that would interpret 
and implement the laws. Combined, a well-developed insolvency law and strong institutional 
capabilities provide a good foundation for a smoothly functioning insolvency system. 
Among  others,  we  need  appropriate  accounting  and  auditing  standards;  transparent  and 
accountable  court  systems  and  better  insolvency  administrators;  enhanced  corporate 
governance in corporations and financial institutions; and effective regulatory oversight. 
In this connection ladies and gentlemen, we will highlight in this Forum the key stakeholder 
roles  in  insolvency  reforms  as  part  of  the  development  of  a  strong  institutional  insolvency 
infrastructure. It is structured around two basic themes which are critical goals of modern and 
efficient insolvency systems: these are financial stability and responsible access to finance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In this Forum, therefore, discussions will cover the following: 
• 
• 
• 
the design of an optimum financial institutions resolution regime; 
the development of modern insolvency systems for natural persons; 
the  determination  of  whether  special  treatment  in  insolvency  for  state-owned 
enterprises is warranted; 
the  on-going  international  dialogue  concerning  recovery  and  resolution  framework 
for non-bank financial institutions; 
loan reclassification and restructuring practices in various jurisdictions; 
market conduct regulation; 
consumer protection measures to mitigate the risks of consumer over-indebtedness 
and consumer insolvency; 
treatment of SMEs in distress; 
resolution proceedings for financial institutions; 
the role of the court in insolvency proceedings; and 
national updates on insolvency systems. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Ladies and gentlemen. We have a full and rich agenda for this gathering. And with everyone 
here  actively  participating  in  the  discussions,  I  am  confident  that  this  9th  Forum  on  Asian 
Insolvency Reform will be successful in helping us move toward a strong insolvency regime 
that  promotes  sustainable  growth  and  development,  financial  stability  and  investor 
confidence. 
Finally, in the spirit of ensuring a healthy balance in everything that we do, I also invite our 
foreign  delegates  to  take  the  time  to  get  to  know  our  people,  our  culture  and  our  country 
better after our Forum. I hope you will have fond memories of your stay here. 
Thank you all and Mabuhay! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
