Jörg Asmussen: The costs and benefits of unorthodox monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the European Conference 2013, organised by UBS, London, 12 November 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure to participate in this panel on unorthodox monetary policy. 
I  admit  that  for  central  bankers  ‘unorthodox’  is  not  the  preferred  attribute  to  describe  our 
policy actions. 
Unorthodoxy  means  deviating  from  established  behavioural  patterns.  It  means  departing 
from the received body of technical knowledge. It means forgetting about rules. 
All  of  this  violates  one  key  consensus  principle  in  the  economics  profession:  namely,  that 
monetary  policy  should  be  based  on  a  predictable  course  of  action  with  a  clearly 
communicated policy objective. 
Such  clarity  and  predictability  allows  economic  actors  to  form  expectations  about  future 
monetary  policy  and  to  anchor  their  expectation  around  the  price  stability  objective  of  the 
central bank. This ensures central banks’ ability to appropriately steer monetary conditions to 
ensure a stable macroeconomic outlook with price stability and balanced growth. 
So did we forget this crucial lesson? 
The answer is: no. 
In  fact,  when  talking  about  “unorthodox”  monetary  policy,  we  have  to  clearly  distinguish 
between two different dimensions of monetary policy, the objective and the instruments. 
As  to  the  dimension  of  the  policy  objective,  the  ECB  pursues  price  stability,  defined  as 
positive inflation rates below 2 per cent. In its pursuit of the objective, and within that range, 
the Governing Council has clarified that it will aim for inflation rates below but close to 2%. 
This quantification of our objective was the anchor of all our policy actions before the crisis; it 
has remained the anchor during the current crisis; and it will remain the anchor as the euro 
area economy proceeds towards recovery. 
Accordingly, we have clearly followed the orthodox prescription of a predictable and steady 
monetary policy with regard to our objective. 
The second dimension is the toolkit by which central banks seek to meet their objectives. 
Along this dimension, the ECB – like many other central banks – has indeed left the well-
trodden paths – for good reasons. 
Indeed, it was necessary because the scale and complexity of challenges during this crisis 
fundamentally impacted the way monetary policy transmits through the economy and, hence, 
threatened to overwhelm our standard toolkit. In particular, amidst financial turbulence, our 
standard monetary policy lost some potency in steering money market rates. And these rates 
are of prime importance not only for the refinancing costs of the banking sector, but for the 
pricing of loans to households and firms and, hence, crucially determine the wider financing 
conditions in the economy. 
This doesn’t mean that our standard toolkit played no role in our crisis response: confronted 
with downside risks to price stability after the Lehman collapse, we swiftly cut our main policy 
rates to record lows. 
But further action was necessary to confront impairments to monetary  policy transmission. 
Here, three measures have taken a prominent role. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
First,  we  provided  term-funding  support  to  euro  area  banks  through  long-term  refinancing 
operations. This measure avoided a major credit crunch when interbank lending dried up. 
Second, we removed unwarranted and self-reinforcing fears of euro breakup by announcing 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions.  This  measure  mitigated  major  impairments  in  monetary 
policy  transmission  when  sovereign  bond  spreads  spiralled  to  fundamentally  unjustified 
levels. 
Third,  we  provided  more  explicit  communication  on  the  likely  future  orientation  of  our  key 
monetary  policy  rates,  including  on  the  deposit  facility,  through  forward  guidance.  This 
measure  aligned  market  expectations  more  closely  with  our  policy  intentions  when 
disturbances  from  within  and  outside  the  euro  area  interfered  with  our  monetary  policy 
stance. 
Especially in extraordinary situations when, for example, policy rates are at, or close to, their 
effective  lower  bound,  or  when  the  normal  channels  of  monetary  policy  transmission  are 
impaired, or when there is exceptional uncertainty on the state of the economy, there is extra 
value in making central bank communication more explicit. 
So  do  these  rather  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  mean  the  ECB  has  become 
more unorthodox during the crisis? 
Again, the answer is: no. 
We have employed non-standard – not un-orthodox – monetary policy instruments precisely 
for the reason to achieve our orthodox monetary policy objective of price stability. In fact, the 
described  challenges  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  during  the  crisis  have  required  a 
more expanded set of tools to fulfil our price stability mandate. 
Hence,  they  were  an  expression  rather  than  a  renunciation  of  our  predictable  monetary 
policy strategy with a medium-term orientation. 
Vice  versa,  the  anchor  established  through  our  price  stability  objective  has  allowed  us  to 
tailor our toolkit to the challenges at hand – without unanchoring inflation expectations. 
Going forward, we must ensure that our policies continue to complement the adjustment in 
the  euro  area  economy.  At  the  same  time,  it must  be  clear that they  are  no  substitute for 
structural adjustment. 
For the banking system, the upcoming Asset Quality Review and Stress Test will be a crucial 
catalyst in this regard. 
First,  the  AQR  will  foster  transparency  by  providing  a  realistic  assessment  of  the  balance 
sheet situation in euro area banks. 
Second, in the specific cases deemed necessary, the AQR will induce balance sheets repair 
by prescribing certain adjustment measures to individual banks. 
And third, as a result of the first two, the AQR will foster confidence in the banks among all 
the major stakeholders. 
Overall, these measures will help to restore confidence, contribute to integration and stability 
and  therefore  support  a  normal  functioning  of  the  banking  system  and  monetary  policy 
transmission.  The  goals  of  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  will, 
therefore,  crucially 
complement our monetary policy objectives. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
