Yves Mersch: Interview in Het Financieele Dagblad 
Interview  with  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, in Het Financieele Dagblad, conducted by Mr Oene van der Wal and Mr Rik Winkel 
and published on 12 September 2013. 
 Any signs of fragmentation diminishing? 
Certainly.  It  is  visible  in  the  sovereign  spreads.  There  is  less  divergence.  The  number  of 
banks  accessing  markets  is  going  up.  But  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go.  We  think 
establishing a complete banking union would help along that way. 
Will there be a new round of 3-year LTRO’s? 
There is a difference between banks that otherwise have trouble attracting money and banks 
asking for ECB-financing. At the same time we see improved access for banks to markets in 
southern Europe, their own funding and that of their sovereigns becoming less problematic. 
So a new round of 3-year LTRO’s might not be necessary? 
Possibly. All options are open and we have a very extensive toolbox. We still have to monitor 
the situation very closely. But as a central bank we are not with our back against the wall. 
The message to the markets is: we will do everything that is needed to execute our monetary 
policy objective with conventional and unconventional measures. 
Isn’t the monetary environment in the world much too loose? 
Opinions differ. I hear complaints from emerging markets, sometimes from banks, in some 
countries  also  from  politicians.  But  I  would  not  say  that  our  accommodative  policy  is 
inefficient  or  toothless.  We  can  observe  that  in  the  broader  economy  and  in  the  balance 
sheets of banks in different countries. Low rates are not always beneficial for banks. 
So the policy will not change until all balance sheets have been sanitised? 
We are determined to use forward guidance (the message that rates will be kept low for an 
extended  period  of  time)  to  overcome  the  shortcomings  in  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy resulting also from fragmentation. We will do this as long as necessary. But we will not 
wait for the slowest boat to reach the harbour. 
Banking union is the magic bullet to end fragmentation? 
It  is  an  important  element,  because  it  entails  not  only  supervision  but  also  an  orderly 
resolution of insolvent banks. I cannot tell you exactly when it will be over. Unfortunately, we 
don’t have a stop button to push.  
Are you optimistic about competitiveness? 
Yes, we see progress in all programme countries. It’s visible in trade balances and real price 
adjustments. It vindicates economic theory. Ireland will soon be able to raise money on its 
own.  Spain  will  probably  not  need  more  support  for  its  banks.  We  will  see  in  six  months 
whether Portugal needs a follow-up programme. Although the decisions of the Constitutional 
Court there remain an unknown. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
What makes you so optimistic about Spain? 
Unemployment is no longer going up; the current account is in surplus. We see at least a 
bottoming out, a turnaround. 
You don’t mention Greece? 
The  Eurogroup  currently  discusses  whether  there  is  a  financing  gap  and  whether  a  third 
programme  is needed. Obviously, it does not help to ask for debt restructuring. But at the 
same time we are far away from the size of the first two support programmes. Some mention 
a single digit figure. It is important that Greece reaches a primary surplus in the first quarter 
next year, on an annual basis. 
What do you make of the Netherlands? 
It set a good example. It got into a difficult situation and reached a national consensus on 
how to get out of it while sticking to the European rules. I am not happy it got into the bad 
situation in the first place. But it is important that it did not follow the example of some bigger 
neighbours in 2003 and 2004.  
But it is set to miss the 3% -threshold again in 2015? 
The rules allow for some flexibility. That is ok in a crisis. 
The ECB will take up supervision from next year and will review the books beforehand. 
Do you already know exactly which bank will fall under your remit? 
No bank will be completely absent from our radar. The most important ones with assets of at 
least €30 billion will be supervised directly. We will also look at the size in relation to GDP, 
but we will cover at least three banks from each euro area country. The final list will only be 
made up when the new Supervisory Board takes up its duties next year. In the sample of 
banks  subject  to  the  comprehensive  assessment  we  built  in  some  safety  margin  of  10%, 
because  balance  sheet  totals  can  fluctuate.  So,  not  all  the  banks  that  are  assessed  will 
necessarily end up being directly supervised by us. Other banks will remain under national 
supervision. Not with the amount of national discretion we see at present, but according to 
harmonized  standards  and  rules.  A  Dutch  bank  will  be  scrutinized  in  the  same  way  as  a 
Greek bank will be scrutinized. 
What do you mean by national discretion? 
Supervision has its fashions too. Like skirt length going up or down, supervisory practices go 
back  and  forth  between  quality  and  quantity.  In  the  mix  sometimes  one  thing  dominates, 
sometimes the other thing.  
Is that a difference between Northern and Southern Europe? 
No. In all countries we have seen changes towards more quality or quantity. On top of that 
there is an enormous amount of options and exceptions in the European guidelines. Every 
article has formulations that open up possibilities of a deviation from the rules. This has led to 
divergence  and  absence  of  a  level  playing  field.  Even  in  the  present  capital  requirements 
directive (in CRD IV) more than a hundred deviations are possible. The future Supervisory 
Board  is  obliged  to  publish  within  six  months  a  complete  set  of  harmonized  rules  and 
procedures. A public consultation on this framework regulation is also foreseen.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
And until then? 
While  the  competences  are  still  with  the  national  authorities,  a  so-called  “Comprehensive 
Balance Sheet Assessment” is done. Of course we do not want to buy a cat in the bag. At 
the moment, we still have all sorts of accounting differences, in valuations, in the treatment of 
non-performing  loans,  etc.  But  we  want  balance  sheets  to  be  comparable,  sound  and 
repaired. The assessment takes place in three stages. First we determine, together with the 
national  authorities,  the  riskiest  portfolios  per  country  and  bank.  Then  we  will  thoroughly 
analyse  the  samples  in  a  point-in-time  analysis.  That  is  the  asset  quality  review.  Then  we 
have the stress test, which we do together with the EBA (European Banking Authority). That 
stress test takes care of the “dynamic element”. 
And what about banks from outside the euro area? 
We cover 85% of the balance sheet total of banks in the euro area. Non-European banks 
that are active in the euro area through large subsidiaries are screened on their European 
activity, although we cannot access their main headquarters.  
And at the end you know per bank how much capital is missing?  
At the end you have one figure. The question is what you do with that figure. That’s why we 
keep on stressing all the time that credible backstops need to be put in place in time. We 
want to create certainty, transparency and credibility. That in itself will already help banks to 
attract capital. But they might not be able to attract everything they need from the markets. 
That’s  why  extra  backstops  are  necessary.  The  first  one  that  comes  to  mind  is  a  national 
backstop because we’re dealing with legacy burdens. Some countries however do not even 
have a national resolution system. And there are countries that have limited means. Should 
we then jeopardise the whole exercise, an exercise which is supposed to restore confidence 
in the system? 
Germany is very clear about this… 
The  banking  union  is  also  about  democracy.  The  voters  say:  we  do  not  want  to  save  the 
banks for a second time with taxpayer money. And that’s why we also need a bail-in system 
where  it  is  first  and  foremost  the  banks’  shareholders  and  creditors  that  foot  the  bill.  We 
should  not  wait  until  the  bail-in  instruments  are  available  in  2018.  The  Commission  can 
already impose it now when state aid is given. Everything is linked: bail-in is important but 
also bail-out. But a European bail-out – now only possible via an indirect bank recap through 
the ESM – only comes as the last line of defence and is rather hypothetical. But because of 
its  availability  it  will  provide  an  element  of  certainty  to  the  markets  and  that’s  why  it’s 
important.  In  such  a  case,  the  European  emergency  fund  ESM  can  lend  indirectly  to  a 
country for a bail-out. 
Direct recapitalisation is not available? 
That  is  only  possible  if  supervision  by  the  ECB  has  started.  The  problem  of  indirect 
recapitalisation is that the debt of the country in question would increase. Not every country 
can  afford  this.  However,  the  European  Commission  has  already  said  that  countries  can 
increase  their  deficit  for  this  purpose  without  being  sanctioned.  This  is  a  step  in  the  right 
direction.  
Are the national authorities cooperating? 
The relations are excellent. The motivation is very big. And the capacity to deliver results is 
there. We will continue to use the expertise of national authorities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
And the banking sector, is there resistance there?  
It would be strange if there wasn’t. Some banks are afraid of the eyes of strangers. But that 
is  exactly  what  this  is  about:  breaking  the  sometimes  too  cosy  relations  between  national 
supervisors and banks. That’s what we want to do. For that reason we will have multinational 
supervisory teams. Banks will be checked by the ECB and by experts from third countries. 
But around half of the teams will still be national. 
Do you expect unpleasant surprises? 
I am too old to exclude that. But don’t forget that the banks in the programme countries have 
already  been  assessed  extensively.  From  that  perspective  we  should  expect  only  few 
surprises.  However,  some  portfolios  are  very  complicated  and  require  specific  expertise. 
Take for example the shipping sector. Then there is the question of how you value non-liquid 
assets.  Those  are  difficult  discussions.  But  we  have  a  European  perspective  in  the  Asset 
Quality Review. The biggest surprise could come from the number of assets that has been 
classified incorrectly. They will then have to be revalued.  
Will the ECB in case of capital shortfalls wait till the end of the review or try to work 
out a solution right away? 
The supervisory role of the ECB sets in only in one year’s time. What you see is that banks 
are already anticipating and cleaning up their balance sheets. 
How firm will this exercise be compared to the two previous ones by the EBA? 
You  refer  to  the  Stress  Test,  the  third  stage  of  the  Comprehensive  assessment.  We  are 
discussing this with the EBA. We have already decided what the buffer requirements are for 
the second stage, the asset Quality Review. They are pretty tough. Banks need to have 4.5% 
in  common  equity  tier  one  (CET1).  We  added  a  capital  conversation  buffer  of  2.5%.  For 
significant banks 1% is added. Then we are at 8%, which is in substance comparable to the 
old capital definition. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
