Michael Gondwe: Developing economic and banking opportunities in 
Zambia 
Speech by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official launch of First 
Capital Bank Zambia Limited and opening of its Head Office, Lusaka, 26 November 2013. 
 The Chairperson, First Capital Bank Zambia Ltd, Mr Bornwell Chiyabi; 
The Vice Chairperson and members of the Board 
Her Excellency, the High Commissioner of Kenya to Zambia, Professor Rono 
His Excellency, the High Commissioner of Malawi to Zambia, Mr Bandawe 
His Excellency the Assistant Secretary General of COMESA 
The Chief Executive Officer, First Capital Bank Zambia Ltd, Mr. Lalit Tewari; 
Management and Staff of First Capital Bank Zambia Ltd; 
My Senior Colleagues from the Bank of Zambia 
Distinguished Clients and Invited Guests; 
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It is an honour and privilege to be amongst you at this important occasion this evening. Firstly, 
allow me to express my gratitude to the Chief Executive Officer of First Capital Bank Zambia 
Limited for extending an invitation for me to come and officiate at this landmark event. 
This evening’s occasion marks the official launch of First Capital Bank (FCB) Zambia Ltd as 
well as the opening of its new head office. Please allow me to congratulate FCB (Z) Ltd on this 
important  occasion.  First  Capital  Bank  Zambia  Limited,  as  some  of  you  may  be  aware,  has 
emerged  from  the  former  International  Commercial  Bank  (ICB).  This  followed  a  100% 
acquisition of the share-holding of ICB from ICB Financial Group holdings AG of Switzerland by 
a consortium led by First Merchant Bank Ltd (FMB) of Malawi. Afility Investment Ltd, a Zambian 
controlled  investment  holding  company,  is  part  of  this  consortium.  I  am  informed  that  First 
Capital Bank will be a local bank with 51% shareholding to be held by Zambians. As a matter of 
fact, First Capital Bank is among seven foreign owned banks which have sought and received 
approval from the Bank of Zambia to convert to locally owned banks following the new capital 
requirements.  This  is  a  welcome  development  as  it  is  in  line  with  our  Government’s  goal  of 
ensuring that Zambians actively participate in the development of the economy. 
With the launch of FCB at Kwacha Pension House, the two branches of former ICB situated at 
the corner of Washama and Great North Roads, and Cairo Road will automatically become part 
of the First Capital Bank. This means that FCB will evolve with three branches in Lusaka. 
Chairperson 
I am glad that the transition from ICB to FCB has taken place very smoothly without any loss of 
jobs. The members of the Board and the new shareholders deserve special commendation for 
this. I also commend the existing customers of the bank who were steadfast and reposed their 
confidence in the new shareholders. As I understand, First Capital Bank has plans to increase 
its foot  prints  in  Zambia  and  I  hope  that  the  bank  will  open  up  branches  in  other  districts of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Zambia.  This  will  enable  it  to  enhance  financial  inclusion,  which  is  among  the  country’s  key 
priorities. 
Chairperson 
I  have  been  informed  that  FCB  has  initiated  the  process  of  acquiring  new  state  of  the  art 
banking software, and is in the process of introducing a full range of IT related products like 
internet banking, mobile banking and visa card. This demonstrates the bank’s strong and long- 
term commitment to becoming an important player in the development of our financial sector. 
This is no doubt driven by the confidence FCB has in the Zambian economy. 
Ladies and gentleman 
Zambia’s economy has continued to show resilience in the midst of a slowdown in the global 
economy as a result of the on-going Euro zone debt crisis and the sluggish growth in the United 
States  of  America  and  some  leading  emerging  market  countries  including  the  BRICS. 
Economic  performance  has  been  strong  with  GDP  growth  in  2012  at  7.3%.  Inflation  has 
continued to be in single digits and was 6.9% in October this year. Although the exchange rate 
of the Kwacha against major international currencies has been under pressure, it has remained 
relatively stable, while the country has maintained a positive account balance over the last four 
years. 
that  FDI 
inflows  rose 
Ladies and gentleman 
Investors  continue  to  show  heightened  confidence  in  the  Zambian  economy  reflected  in 
stronger performance in foreign direct investment (FDI). For instance, the 2013 Foreign Private 
Investment  and  Investor  Perceptions  Survey  report  shows 
to 
US$1.7 billion in 2012 from US$1.1 billion in 2011, the highest in the past 12 years. Similarly, 
FDI stocks increased to US $12.4 billion from US$10.8 billion over the same period. Data for 
the first two quarters of this year already indicate a strong performance in 2013. 
It  is  therefore,  my  expectation  that  the  banking  sector  will  continue  to  take  advantage  of 
opportunities arising from the conducive macroeconomic environment in the country to create 
wealth and contribute to the country’s development. 
We view increased private investment such as FCB as a stimulus for job creation, technological 
and skills transfer, as well as wealth creation. This investment by FCB is important given the 
fact that deposit-taking corporations (banks) have recently become among the top three sectors 
in  the  country  with  respect  to  FDI.  FDI  inflows  to  banks  were  US$184.4  million,  third  to 
manufacturing  and  mining  at  US$469.6  million  and  US  $933.7  million  in  2012,  respectively. 
Consistently,  in  terms  of  FDI  stocks,  banks  were  in  third  place  with  US$601.2  million  while 
manufacturing and mining were second and first at US$1.3 billion and US$9.0 billion in 2012, 
respectively. 
Distinguished clients and invited guests 
Private  investment  is  a  critical  source  of  long-term  capital  for  spurring  sustained  economic 
growth  and  diversification  while  promoting  innovation  by  supporting  the  micro,  small  and 
medium sized enterprises (MSMEs). 
Chairperson 
In order for the financial sector to fully satisfy the credit demands of the productive sector in 
Zambia, commercial banks must not be overly conservative in terms of their risk appetite for 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 MSMEs. Rather, Banks should seek to better understand the risks associated with lending to 
these enterprises. 
Further,  it  is  important  that  banks  better  understand  the  risk  associated  with  lending  to 
specialized  and  growth  sectors  such  as  agriculture,  tourism,  manufacturing  and  mining  by 
deliberately developing relevant human resource skills in these sectors. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
In its quest to see the financial sector take up an active role in financing the productive sector 
and  facilitating  the  flow  of  investment  into  the  economy,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  continues  to 
undertake a number of policy and structural reforms. 
Among  these  reforms  is  the  new  increase  in  the  minimum  capital  requirement  for  banks  to 
K520 million and K104 million for foreign and local banks respectively. These capital levels are 
expected among other things to: 
i.  
Make  the  banking  system  strong  enough  to  withstand  shocks  and  instability  in  the 
economy should they occur; 
Enable banks to underwrite big ticket transactions; 
Make banks contribute more to the growth of the economy; and 
Improve  access  to  loanable  funds  among  local  entrepreneurs  and  thereby  enable 
them  to  partner  with  foreign  investors.  This  should  enhance  their  economic 
inclusiveness or participation in the development of the country. 
ii.  
iii.  
iv.  
Ladies and gentlemen 
As  I  conclude,  allow  me  to  remind  you  of  the  plight  of  so  many  of  our  people  living  in  rural 
districts.  Despite  the  high  economic  and  business  potential  in  these  areas, financial  services 
are non-existant. 
This means that income earning citizens in the informal sector such as fishermen, bee-keepers, 
handcraft makers and farmers cannot deposit their earnings in a safe savings account due to 
the  absence  of  bank  branches.  In  addition,  those  with  good  business  ideas  cannot  access 
loans to actualize their projects and create wealth. These people have to devise unconventional 
means of keeping their money such as hiding it in their homes, burying or indeed moving with 
the money where ever they go. 
Furthermore,  civil  servants  and  other  citizens  in  formal  employment  have  to  travel  long 
distances and in some instances for a number of days before they can access their salaries. A 
number of them end up losing their hard earned income in thefts and other calamities. This has 
to  change,  and  banks  working  in  partnership  with  the  Government  can  make  this 
happen. 
I  therefore,  wish  to  challenge  Commercial  banks  including  First  commercial  Bank  (Z)  Ltd  to 
consider  opening  branches,  in  the  unbanked  districts.  Banks  should  take  advantage  of  the 
attractive economic opportunities obtaining in Zambia to improve financial inclusion and thereby 
attract new customers and a higher deposit base. I am certain that over time these places will 
be their most profitable centers as places like Lusaka will only yield narrow margins due to stiff 
competition. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Allow me to again extend my gratitude to the Chief Executive Officer of the First Capital Bank 
for inviting me to this auspicious occasion. 
It is now my honour and privilege to officially declare the First Capital Bank Zambia Limited and 
its head office officially opened. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
