Yves Mersch: Intergenerational justice in times of sovereign debt crises 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Minsky  Conference  in  Greece,  organised  by  the  Levy  Economics  Institute,  Athens, 
8 November 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  last  time  I  gave  a  speech  here  in  Athens  was  in  early  January  2008.  How  much  the 
world has changed since then. 
Yet it has not always changed in the ways that observers predicted. I still remember clearly, 
in the early weeks of May 2010, the prophetic claims that Greece would leave the euro area 
within weeks, that other countries would follow within months, and that the collapse of the 
euro would be complete before the year was out. 
Those claims were wrong – and the Greek people have played an important part in proving 
them so. 
Since the loss of market access in early 2010, the Greek people have made extraordinary 
efforts to refute the naysayers and turn the economy around. They have executed a fiscal 
adjustment  of  historic  proportions  and  embarked  on  the  difficult  road  of  structural  reforms. 
The results of these actions have accrued first and foremost to Greece – but they have also 
accrued to the wider euro area. 
However, this turnaround is still only half complete. There is still much work to do. And what I 
would like to emphasise in my remarks today is that staying on the path of reform is essential 
not only for the citizens of today. It is also essential for those of tomorrow. 
Like all Western societies, and some rapidly ageing Eastern ones, Greece faces long-term 
fiscal  challenges  linked  to  high  public  debt  levels  and  demographic  developments.  These 
challenges  raise  profound  questions  about  intergenerational  justice.  And  it  is  only  through 
reforms that they can be answered in a fair way. 
For all ageing societies, this implies, first, ensuring sustainable public finances and, second, 
achieving  stronger  economic  growth.  Both  are  necessary  because  they  are  mutually 
reinforcing:  fiscal  sustainability  creates  the  stability  and  confidence  necessary  for  future 
growth; and higher growth creates the revenues and debt-to-GDP ratios necessary for fiscal 
sustainability. 
Let  me  therefore  deal  with  each  in  turn,  starting  with  what  is  being  done  to  ensure  fiscal 
sustainability in the context of intergenerational justice. 
Strengthening sustainability 
The  fiscal  challenges  that  Greece  is  facing  today,  while  more  severe  than  others,  are  not 
unique  to  this  country.  All  Western  societies  are  being  confronted  with  difficult  questions 
about the distribution of consolidation and spending between current and future generations. 
A  first  question  is  how  the  burden  of  high  public  debt  levels  in  Western  societies  will  be 
shared between generations. This question is particularly pertinent in the euro area because 
all  countries  are  bound  by  law  to  start  reducing  their  debts  to  below  60%  of  GDP  –  and 
average public debt levels in the euro area are currently in excess of 95% of GDP. 
If fiscal  consolidation starts  today,  then the  generation  which  has  benefited most from this 
debt  will  play  the  largest  role  in  reducing  it.  But  if  consolidation  is  delayed,  then  future 
generations  will  have  to  bear  the  burden  of  debt  reduction  –  this  would  constitute  a  direct 
transfer from our children and grandchildren to ourselves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
And it is only us who are taking the decision. Our children and grandchildren have no power 
to raise their objections. 
A  second  question  with  intergenerational  consequences  is  how  to  spread  the  costs  of 
demographic change. In the EU, it is projected that by 2060 there will be just two working-
age  people  for  every  person  over  65, compared  with  a  ratio  of  4:1  today.  This  means  the 
weight of supporting an ageing population will rest on ever fewer shoulders. 
If current generations are proactive in reforming pension systems, they can reduce the load 
that  the  shrinking  working  age  population  will  have  to  carry.  But  if  they  choose  instead  to 
preserve their entitlements, then they make the lives of future generations commensurately 
harder. They would be effectively sacrificing their descendants’ quality of life for their own. 
In  other  words,  all  Western  societies  are  facing  choices  about  the  distribution  of 
responsibility.  Do  we,  the  current  generation,  take  responsibility  for  the  long-term  fiscal 
challenges  that  we  have  played  a  large  part  in  creating?  Or  do  we  delay  and  pass  the 
consequences  of  our  choices  onto  our  children  and  grandchildren?  I  think  it  is  fairly  clear 
what a perspective of intergenerational justice would imply. 
This  perspective  is  of  course  not  new.  The  so-called  “demographic  time  bomb”  has  been 
predictable for many years. Indeed, I pointed to this issue when I spoke here in Greece in 
early 2008. But what has changed today is the urgency for action. The crisis has meant that 
these  difficult  choices  can  no  longer  be  delayed.  One  might  say  it  has  pressed  the  fast-
forward button and brought the challenges of the future into the present. 
This is the broader context for the ongoing consolidation process in Greece. Certainly, it is 
about increasing spending control and tax collection. But it is also about putting Greece on a 
sustainable path for the future; limiting the load that is bequeathed to our descendants; and 
ensuring that those that created fiscal problems take responsibility for them. 
What Greece has achieved 
And indeed, this is what is happening in Greece today. The commitment the Greek people 
have shown to fiscal consolidation has been remarkable, even in international comparison. 
The primary deficit has declined by almost 10 percentage points of GDP between 2009 and 
2012.  Taking  into  account  the  deep  and  prolonged  recession,  the  underlying  fiscal 
adjustment has been even larger. The OECD estimates that structural adjustment was nearly 
14 percentage points of GDP in this period. 
As  Greece  is  one  of  the  smaller  euro  area  Member  States,  the  scale  of  its  efforts  is  not 
always appreciated appropriately. If the level of expenditure consolidation we have seen in 
Greece were applied in Germany, it would be equivalent to a permanent reduction in public 
spending of 174 billion euro. That is more than the total sum of social spending. 
Greece  has  also  made  important  progress  in  addressing  the  long-term  fiscal  challenges 
linked to its ageing population. There is little doubt that before the crisis the Greek pension 
system was unsustainable. In the Commission’s 2009 Ageing Report, age-related spending 
in Greece was projected to increase from 22% of GDP in 2007 to a staggering 38% of GDP 
in 2060. By contrast, the average for the euro area would be under 30% of GDP in 2060. 
But thanks to the pension reforms the authorities have introduced, the Greek system is now 
comparable  to  others.  In  the  2012  Ageing  Report,  age-related  spending  in  Greece  was 
projected  to  increase  to  just  under  30%  of  GDP  in  2060  –  so  around  than  8  percentage 
points lower than the previous estimate. This is almost identical to the euro area average. If 
we take into account as well the recently legislated increase in the pension age, Greece may 
even be ahead of others. 
In  short,  the  Greek  people  have  taken  vital  measures  to  ensure  long-term  fiscal 
sustainability.  This  will  reduce  the  burden  that  will  be  passed  to  future  generations.  And  I 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
recognise  that  in  doing  so,  current  generations  have  made  considerable  sacrifices.  Real 
earnings have fallen by over 20% between 2009 and 2012, undoing the gains made since 
adopting  the  euro.  Far  too many  people  are  currently  without  work,  with  unemployment  at 
over 27% and youth unemployment reaching 57%. For so much potential to be lying idle is a 
tragedy. 
the 
instalment  schemes 
the  continuing  underperformance  of 
What remains to be done 
Nevertheless, this is the painful cost of reversing the misguided economic policies and lack 
of reforms in the past. And fiscal sustainability – and hence intergenerational justice – is not 
yet assured. While the government appears to be on track to meet its 2013 primary balance 
target, Greece still has some way to go to reach the primary surplus targets of 1.5% of GDP 
in 2014, 3% of GDP in 2015 and 4.5% of GDP in 2016. This means that fiscal consolidation 
has to continue. 
Based  on  current  projections,  a  fiscal  gap  has  emerged  for  2014.  It  comes  mainly  from 
delayed gains from the tax administration reform, shortfalls in the collection of social security 
contributions  and 
for 
outstanding tax obligations. Measures will have to be identified to close it. 
Looking forward, failure by the authorities to proceed with tax administration reform and to 
accelerate the fight against tax evasion will unavoidably widen the fiscal gap – and imply the 
need for higher savings on the expenditure side. This simple truth should provide sufficient 
incentives for stepping up the pace of tax administration reform. 
To put tax collection in Greece in context, according to the most recent OECD data, the tax 
debt in Greece as a share of annual net tax revenue was almost 90% in 2010, compared 
with an OECD average of under 14%. Fighting tax evasion now is therefore key to enhancing 
social fairness – both on an intra-generational and an inter-generational basis. 
To this effect, the recently legislated semi-autonomous tax agency will need to become fully 
operational and be shielded from political interference. 
Beyond  that,  accelerating  the  implementation  of  public  administration  reform  is  key  to  the 
success  of  the  wider  reform  agenda.  Significant  delays  have  occurred  in  finalising  staffing 
plans and transferring employees to the new mobility scheme, and this is slowing down the 
identification of redundant positions and the necessary modernisation of the public sector. 
Of course, consolidation would be made easier by higher rates of growth. But we should not 
treat growth as an exogenous variable. On the contrary, it depends critically on the decisions 
of  the  Greek  authorities  –  namely  on  their  willingness  to  implement  the  growth-enhancing 
measures in the programme. The relatively closed and rigid nature of the Greek economy is 
both a challenge and an opportunity: it makes the process of reform harder, but it also means 
that the potential for reforms to raise growth is commensurately greater. 
Let me therefore turn to the subject of growth, which forms the second part of my remarks 
today. 
Strengthening growth 
The  economic  situation  in  Greece  has  started  to  pick  up  this  year,  with  the  economy 
stabilising  and  seasonally-adjusted  real  GDP  increasing  by  0.2%  quarter-on-quarter  in  Q2 
2013. Overall, GDP growth is expected to turn positive next year at 0.6%. 
But while these are welcome developments, they still represent a relatively weak recovery, 
especially given the depth of the recession that preceded it. In my view, to add momentum to 
this  recovery  and  lay  the  foundations  for  medium-term  growth,  the  authorities  need  to 
address three challenges. First, increasing the economy’s external competitiveness; second, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
ensuring  the  banking  sector  can  fund  the  recovery;  and  third,  attracting  productive  foreign 
investment. 
this 
is  by 
improving 
Increasing external competitiveness 
As  Greece  is  undergoing  a  simultaneous  deleveraging  in  its  public  and  private  sectors, 
sectoral accounting tells us that its external sector must go into surplus. The key for growth is 
to ensure that this happens as much as possible through higher exports rather than import 
compression.  The  best  way  Greece  can  achieve 
its  price 
competitiveness. 
Price  competitiveness  is  particularly  important  for  Greek  firms  as  their  exports  are  largely 
concentrated in low-tech products. At the end of the last decade, high-tech or intermediate-
tech  products  represented  only  28%  of  total  exports,  compared  to  nearly  50%  for  the  EU 
average.  Yet  since  euro  entry  price  competitiveness  in  Greece  has  actually  been  on  a 
worsening trend. According to the Commission, the real effective exchange rate (on an HICP 
basis) in Greece was still rising until 2011. 
To facilitate an export-led recovery, this trend has to be corrected and there is no way this 
can  be  achieved  in  the  short  run  other  than  by  adjusting  prices  and  costs.  I  know  the 
difficulties that such adjustment creates and the criticisms that are levelled against it. But we 
are  in  a  monetary  union  and  this  is  how  adjustment  works.  Sharing  a  currency  brings 
considerable microeconomic benefits but it requires that relative prices can adjust to offset 
shocks. 
This  process  has  already  begun  in  Greece  today.  Thorough  labour  market  reforms  have 
reduced labour costs significantly. costs have now fallen by around by 18% since 2009, with 
wage adjustment being the main driver of that fall. Indeed, compensation per employee has 
fallen by about 20% in this period. 
But  the  translation  of  cost  competitiveness  gains  into  prices  has  been  too  slow  – 
notwithstanding the encouraging recent trend of disinflation. This is largely because reforms 
in product markets have not kept pace with those in labour markets. And this not only limits 
the  potential  for  the  external  sector  to  generate  growth,  but  also  lowers  citizens’  real 
incomes. 
Speeding up the pace of product market reforms is therefore a priority. The authorities have 
introduced several recent reforms, for example removing barriers to entry in transportation 
services,  repealing  restrictions  in  the  retail  sector  and  removing  mandatory  recourse  to 
services  for  a  number  of  regulated  professions.  However,  as  of  today  product  market 
regulations  are  still  among  the  most  restrictive  in  Europe.  Further  reform  will  help  remove 
unjustified privileges and the related excess profits, and by helping prices adjust, this will in 
turn strengthen social fairness. 
Funding the recovery 
While product market reforms are an essential part of building a more competitive economy, 
their  ability  to  generate  growth  depends  also  on  other  developments  –  in  particular,  the 
condition of the banking sector. 
If  banks  do  not  make  new  loans,  this  impedes  the  entry  of  new  players  into  liberalised 
sectors, which then reduces competitive pressures and price adjustments. And if banks do 
not write off loans to insolvent debtors, in particular “zombie” companies, this slows down the 
necessary reallocation of resources toward exports and higher-productivity sectors. 
In  other  words,  cleaning  up  bank  balance  sheets  and  ensuring  a  well-functioning  bank 
lending channel is an equally important part of the adjustment process. This is the second 
challenge for growth. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The authorities in Greece have taken important steps to preserve the stability of the banking 
sector.  The recapitalisation  of the  four  core  banks  was  completed  in  June  2013,  while  the 
consolidation of the banking sector has continued through the resolution of non-viable banks 
and the absorption of Greek subsidiaries of foreign banks. Deposit inflows have continued, in 
part offsetting the deposits lost between the end of 2009 and the middle of 2012. 
But despite these improvements, credit growth to the private sector remains very weak, in 
particular  for  the  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  that  make  up  about  60%  of 
business  turnover  in Greece.  The  last  ECB  survey  on  SME  financing  showed  that  31%  of 
SMEs had applications for bank loans rejected, well above the euro area average of 11%. 
Moreover,  the  sectoral  allocation  of  credits  has  not  substantially  shifted  towards  export-
oriented sectors since 2010, suggesting that banks are not facilitating internal rebalancing. 
To some extent, these developments are cyclical: the weak economic environment means 
banks  are  attaching  higher  credit  risk  to  SMEs.  But  there  is  also  a  more  structural 
explanation. Non-performing loans (NPLs) increased from 16% at the end of 2011 to 29% of 
total loans in the first quarter of 2013. This is acting as a barrier to new lending to higher- 
growth sectors. 
Unfortunately,  this  problem  is  in  part  being  created  by  government  policy.  The  ongoing 
moratorium on auctioning the properties of debtors in default has slowed down resolution of 
NPLs  and  balance  sheet  restructuring.  Moreover,  suggestions  by  policy-makers  about 
horizontal debt relief for bank debtors are leading to a steep rise in strategic defaults, with 
banks estimating that 25% of NPLs in the mortgage and SME sectors are now strategic. 
This  deterioration  in  the  payment  culture,  even  if  it  helps  individuals  on  a  micro  level,  is 
deeply damaging to the economy as a whole. If it continues, it will ultimately lead to higher 
costs for banks, new recapitalisation needs and further constrictions in bank lending. In my 
view, to restart lending to the real economy, this self-fulfilling cycle must be broken. 
I welcome the fact that the Greek authorities have established an inter-agency working group 
to identify ways to improve the effectiveness of debt resolution processes. Its priority should 
be to establish a time-bound framework to facilitate the settlement of borrower arrears using 
standardised protocols. This would help to remove expectations about future debt relief, and 
as such, remove the debilitating moral hazard this is creating. 
Otherwise, the ultimate result would be that excessively high risk premia become structural 
and  choke  off  investment  and  job  creation  –  thus  punishing  the  whole  of  society  for  the 
actions of those in strategic default. 
Attracting productive foreign investment 
The third challenge for growth is to attract higher foreign investment. This is important to add 
momentum to the recovery in the short term, while also increasing the capital and knowledge 
base of the Greek economy over the medium term. Indeed, before the crisis, investment in 
knowledge-based capital in Greece was among the lowest in the euro area. 
From the available signals, there seems to be significant investor interest in Greece. While 
total  investment  in  Greece  has  fallen  by  around  43%  from  2008–2012,  foreign  direct 
investment  (FDI)  flows  have  recently  been  positive,  driven  largely  by  investment  in  the 
banking sector. But anecdotal evidence suggests that foreign interest in the real economy is 
also growing, with several multinational companies announcing plans to increase their output 
at Greek units in the coming years. To maximise such investments, I see three actions as 
key. 
First,  the  authorities  need  to  redouble  their  efforts  to  improve  the  business  environment. 
Product  and  labour  market  flexibility  is  certainly  a  part  of  this,  but  there  is  also  a  wider 
challenge  related  to  reducing  bureaucracy,  red  tape  and  corruption.  Progress  has  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
made in these areas but Greece still ranks second to last among euro area countries on the 
World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Index. 
Second, foreign investment would naturally rise if privatisation were increased. In 2012 only 
0.1  billion  euro  was  derived  from  privatisation  receipts,  instead  of  the  3.6  billion  euro 
originally  forecast.  Yet  the  example  of  the  Port  of  Piraeus  shows  what  well-targeted 
privatisation  can  achieve.  Since  the  transfer  of  management  of  part  of  the  port  to  the 
company  COSCO  in  2009,  container  traffic  has  tripled  and  its  market  share  in  the 
Mediterranean has risen from 2% to 6%. 
Third, it is crucial for foreign investors that uncertainty about Greece’s medium-term outlook 
is  dispelled.  The  greatest  source  of  such  uncertainty  in  the  past  was  persistent  questions 
about Greece’s place in the euro area, but thanks to the joint efforts at the European and 
national levels, this seems to have significantly declined over the last year. The main source 
of  uncertainty  today  is  the  continued  commitment  of  the  authorities  to  the  programme.  I 
therefore trust that the authorities will do everything possible to remove such doubts. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Greece  has  made  tremendous  progress  in  recent  years  to  close  its  fiscal  deficit.  By  any 
standards, what has been achieved is remarkable. 
But the process of restoring sustainability and growth in Greece is not yet complete – and 
neither  is  the  progress  so  far  secured.  If  the  authorities  fail  to  address  the  remaining 
challenges, they will put at risk what has already been achieved. 
In other words, Greece today stands at a crossroads. 
In the one direction lies the path of difficult choices. This is the steep and thorny way, and it 
requires great commitment to negotiate, but it is the one that will lead to a reformed state, a 
sustainable economy and justice between generations. 
In  the  other  direction  lies  the  path  of  easy  answers.  This  path  is  littered  with  false 
alternatives, such as recurrent proposals for debt restructuring. 
To  some,  debt  restructuring  or  larger  haircuts  on  government  bonds  may  seem  politically 
attractive. But such practices can only be a last resort. They are by no means a sustainable 
option  to  ease  a  government’s financial  obligations.  They  would  not  help  to  promote  fiscal 
discipline  and  could  create  higher  costs  in  the  long  run.  And  they  would  do  nothing  to 
address the fundamental weaknesses in the Greek economy. 
In short, the path of easy answers leads to stagnation, decline and an over-burdening of the 
young and future generations. 
From what I see today, I trust that the Greek people know which path they need to take. A 
recent  poll  shows  that  69%  of  the  public  supports  the  euro  –  and  being  part  of  the  euro 
means taking tough but necessary decisions. 
Responsible choices and reliability are the preconditions for solidarity. Greece has already 
received support from other euro area countries equivalent to 17,000 euro per Greek citizen. 
And,  provided  that  it  complies  with  the  programme,  those  countries  are  committed  to 
supporting Greece until it regains market access. 
In short, all the conditions are present for Greece to return to prosperity – and for the sake of 
both current and future generations, I trust that Greece will make the most of them. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
