Carlos da Silva Costa: Portugal – Progress on financial stability 
Address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, to OMFIF (Golden 
Series Lecture), London, 30 October 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you today. I would like to take this opportunity to 
talk about progress made on financial stability in Portugal over the last three years.  
Safeguarding  financial  stability  is  one  of  the  three  pillars  of  the  Economic  and  Financial 
Adjustment  Programme  of  Portugal  –  in  place  since  June  2011  –  together  with  fiscal 
consolidation and structural reform.  
The safeguarding of financial system stability is one of Banco de Portugal’s core missions. 
To  achieve  this goal,  we  have  put  in  place  a  comprehensive  strategy  aimed  at reinforcing 
bank  solvency,  protecting  banking  system  liquidity,  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  the 
supervision of the financial system, and improving the regulatory framework.  
This strategy has been implemented over the last three years and has delivered on several 
fronts. Today, the Portuguese banking system is more capitalized, more transparent and in a 
more  favourable  liquidity  position.  Today,  we  benefit  from  improved  supervision  and  a 
stronger  regulatory  framework.  This  was  achieved  in  the  context  of  a  very  demanding 
domestic  and  external  environment,  characterized  by  the  structural  rebalancing  of  the 
Portuguese economy and the persistence of financial fragmentation and economic weakness 
in the euro area.  
Thus,  let  me  outline  the  steps  taken  so  far  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  Portuguese 
financial system.  
Strengthening solvency and liquidity  
The core Tier 1 ratio of the banking system increased from 8.1% at the end of 2010 to 11.9% 
at the end of the second quarter of 2013.  
From  2010  on,  Banco  de  Portugal  has  adopted  several  measures  towards  preserving 
adequate capital ratios. In particular, we have imposed more stringent capital requirements: 
a Core Tier 1 ratio of 9% by the end of 2011 and of 10% by the end of 2012. This is well 
above the 8% benchmark in the EU legislation. In addition, we have recommended the sale 
of assets and set limits to the distribution of dividends.  
The more stringent capital ratios aimed at strengthening the resilience of the banking system 
in  the  context  of  a  very  strong  adjustment  of  the  Portuguese  economy.  This  resilience  is 
especially important at times of economic adversity, where the recognition of impairments is 
a dynamic exercise with a powerful impact on banks’ net income and capital positions.  
The  recapitalisation  operations  undertaken  by  the  main  banking  institutions  in  2012  
–  financed  largely  by  the  Bank  Solvency  Support  Facility  of  the  Economic  Adjustment 
Programme – made a key contribution to boosting solvency in the system.  
Besides  solvency,  the  liquidity  position  of  the  main  banking  institutions  has  also  improved 
considerably.  
At the end of 2010, the loan-to-deposit ratio of the Portuguese banking system was around 
160%. At the end of 2012 it has come down to 128%, decreasing further to 123% in June 
2013.  
The shutdown of capital markets to Portuguese banks in 2010 put pressure on the banking 
system’s  liquidity.  In  this  context,  banks  had  no  option  but  to  embark  on  a  deleveraging 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
process  towards  a  more  sustainable  funding  structure  –  a  funding  structure  that  would  be 
less sensitive to changes in the risk perceptions of international investors.  
Deleveraging has been continuously monitored by Banco de Portugal so as to ensure that it 
takes  place  in  an  orderly  and  gradual  manner.  We  have  emphasised  that  deleveraging 
strategies should concentrate on the sale of non-strategic assets, on increasing recourse to 
stable funding (notably in the form of customer resources) and on capital increases.  
The positive trend in the loan-to-deposit ratio reflects the behaviour of households’ deposits – 
which, after growing sharply in 2011, remained relatively stable from 2012 onwards – and a 
fall in credit granted by banks. The behaviour of bank deposits contrasts with developments 
in other Programme countries. It is a sign of depositors’ confidence in the soundness of the 
Portuguese banking system, something that we must absolutely preserve.  
The  more  comfortable  liquidity  situation  was,  of  course,  greatly  facilitated  by  the  non-
standard monetary policy measures adopted by the European Central Bank. These have led 
to  a  significant  increase  in  assets  eligible  for  use  in  monetary  policy  operations  and  to  an 
extension of maturities in financing operations.  
In addition, to encourage the distribution of liquidity among the Portuguese banks, Banco de 
Portugal has also launched a new platform for processing secured and unsecured interbank 
money market operations.  
In the interim, two large Portuguese banks initiated a return to the bond markets. This is also 
an encouraging sign, even if the cost and volume of bond issues held do not yet allow these 
operations to be seen as a relevant alternative source of financing.  
Strengthening the regulatory framework and the supervisory model  
The improvement in the banks’ solvency and liquidity position was accompanied by a major 
upgrade in both the regulatory framework and the supervision approach.  
Let me highlight three points.  
First,  the  legal  framework  of  supervision  was  considerably  enhanced  in  parallel  with 
developments  at  the  European  level.  In  particular,  Banco  de  Portugal  has  been  entrusted 
with  an  explicit  mandate  for  macroprudential  policy  and  has  been  designated  resolution 
authority.  Also,  a  comprehensive  and  coherent  legal  framework  for  the  recapitalization  of 
banks,  the  deposit  guarantee  system  and  the  prevention  and  management  of  arrears 
situations was adopted.  
Second, a major reorganization of the supervisory function within the central bank has taken 
place, and the resources devoted to supervision are being considerably enhanced, both in 
terms of headcount and qualifications.  
In line with international best practice, we have attributed responsibilities for macroprudential 
policy,  prudential  supervision,  conduct  supervision  and  legal  enforcement  to  different 
departments within the bank. At the same time, internal coordination mechanisms among the 
different  areas  were  created,  with  the  highest  instance  of  coordination  –  the  so-called 
Specialized  Commission  for  Supervision  and  Financial  Stability  –  being  headed  by  the 
Governor.  
As far as resources are concerned, the number of staff devoted to these different supervisory 
areas increased from 255 in 2009 to 358 estimated for the end of 2013. At the same time, in 
order  to  enhance  qualifications  on  a  lasting  basis,  Banco  de  Portugal  has  entered  into  a 
partnership with Nova School of Business and Economics to create a new Major in Banking, 
Financial  Regulation  and  Supervision  as  part  of  the  Nova’s  MSc  in  Finance,  which  by  the 
way is ranked 21st by the Financial Times amongst the best Master’s degrees in Finance in 
the  world  (pre-experience). It  is  worth  noting that  Nova  was  chosen  through  a  competitive 
process  in  which  the  most  significant  business  schools  in  the  Lisbon  area  took  part.  The 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
second edition of this Major in Banking, Financial Regulation and Supervision is now running, 
and  we  are  already  benefiting  from  the  competencies  acquired  by  those  students  that 
attended the first edition.  
Third,  the  range  of  instruments  was  considerably  expanded  in  tandem  with  a  complete 
overhaul of the conceptual and operational approach to supervision. This led to micro and 
macroprudential functions interacting more closely. The traditional static analysis focusing on 
individual  institutions has been complemented with a forward-looking and systemic view in 
order  to  better  appraise  the  existence  of  financial  imbalances  with  systemic  impact. 
Moreover, there was a shift towards a more risk-focused and intrusive supervision approach. 
The more intrusive supervision involves the presence of permanent inspection teams in the 
larger institutions and the conduct of various on-site inspections.  
The  new  approach  has  relied  on  a  new  set  of  instruments,  of  which  I  would  highlight  the 
banks’ funding and capital plans, the stress tests and the horizontal inspections carried out 
by Banco de Portugal.  
Let me explain these instruments in a little more detail.  
Banks  now  submit  medium  term  funding  and  capital  plans  to  Banco  de  Portugal  on  a 
quarterly  basis.  Underlying  such  plans  is  a  set  of  principles  and  restrictions,  including  the 
need for a gradual and orderly deleveraging process that does not compromise – but rather 
redirects – funding towards the economy’s more competitive sectors and firms. These plans 
are  important  instruments  for  evaluating  the  adjustment  of  the  banking  sector  and  the 
economy  in  general,  as  they  contain  detailed  information  on  the  medium  and  long-term 
projections  for  the  banks’  balance  sheets  and  profit  and  loss  accounts.  We  have  also 
conducted  quarterly  stress  tests  on  the  biggest  banking  institutions,  based  on  a  common 
macroeconomic  scenario.  The  results  of  the  tests  have  pointed  to  the  resilience  of  the 
institutions against particularly adverse macroeconomic scenarios.  
In  2011,  Banco  de  Portugal  launched  a  wide-ranging  on-site  inspection  programme  under 
the  Economic  and  Financial  Adjustment  Programme,  which  came  to  be  known  as  the  SIP 
(Special Inspections Programme). This involved an external assessment of the banks’ credit 
portfolios,  verification  of  the  risk  assessment  methods  used  by  the  institutions  and 
assessment  of  the  methodologies  used  in  the  stress  tests.  The  credit  portfolio  assessed 
amounted  to  €281  billion,  representing  65%  of  total  assets.  The  results  of  the  exercise 
revealed the need to reinforce impairments by €838 million euros. This amount corresponds 
to 0.3% of the total of such credits.  
The SIP provided a snapshot of the quality of the banks’ assets. As the situation is dynamic, 
Banco  de  Portugal  decided  to  include  in  its  regular  banking  system  supervision  periodic 
horizontal  monitoring  of  the  overall  credit  portfolio,  or  of  specific  asset  classes  particularly 
exposed to macroeconomic or market developments. The goal is to ensure that at any given 
moment banks’ balance sheets accurately reflect the real value of their assets.  
In 2012, Banco de Portugal ran a detailed assessment of the construction and real estate 
sectors’ credit portfolios. The exercise covered exposure to entities operating directly in the 
construction and real estate sectors, exposure to holdings of those entities, to tourism sector 
entities, to entities whose activities have close links to the construction sector and to entities 
belonging  to  the  same  economic  group.  The  credit  portfolio  assessed  amounted  to 
€69 billion, representing 16% of total assets. The results of the exercise pointed to a need to 
reinforce  the  value  of  impairments  by  €861  million,  around  2.2%  of  the  overall  amount  of 
exposures assessed.  
In  2013,  Banco  de  Portugal  ran  a  new  exercise  focused  on  credit  portfolio  impairment 
assessment and on the fair value calculation of the participation units held in restructuring 
funds.  It  was  directed  to  credit  granted  by  banks  to  all  segments,  with  the  exception  of 
mortgage and consumer credit (which are assessed by collective impairment models) and of 
credit  to  public  sector  entities.  The  credit  portfolio  assessed  amounted  to  €93  billion, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
representing 23% of total assets. As a result of the exercise, it was considered necessary a 
reinforcement of €1.1 billion of the value of impairments, approximately 2.1% of the overall 
amount of exposures assessed.  
In all exercises, the valuation of the credit portfolio was performed by independent external 
auditing  firms  (Ernst  &  Young  Audit  &  Associados  –  Sociedade  de  Revisores  Oficiais  de 
Contas, S.A. and PricewaterhouseCoopers & Associados – SROC, Lda) without any relation 
with the inspected institution. Moreover, a strict governance structure was defined to monitor 
the  exercises.  A  Steering  Committee  was  created,  chaired  by  the  Banco  de  Portugal  and 
comprising  experts  appointed  by  the  EC,  ECB  and  IMF,  by  three  euro  area  supervisory 
authorities (Banco  de  España,  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  Banque  de  France/ACP)  and  by 
Banco de Portugal.  
It  goes  without  saying  that  all  these  exercises  have  been  subject  to  close  scrutiny  by  the 
Troika. It is also worth mentioning that the asset quality review of European banks recently 
announced by the ECB will follow the same type of approach that we have followed in our 
horizontal inspections.  
Other instruments worth mentioning include:  
• 
The adoption of a new, more stringent, non-performing loans (NPL) ratio, based on 
international  best  practice.  It  is  more  comprehensive  than  the  concept  used 
previously,  as  it  incorporates  the  possibility  of  debtors  with  payments  in  arrears 
continuing to fail to meet their credit commitments. It is in line with the NPL definition 
used by the IMF, reinforcing the comparability and transparency of information on 
credit quality. The new non-performing loans concept is more conservative than the 
European average (collateral is not deducted from the NPL ratio).  
The  adoption  of  measures  to  discourage  evergreening.  In  particular,  Banco  de 
Portugal required banks to earmark and report any changes in the terms of a loan 
triggered by financial difficulties of the borrower.  
The  adoption  of  measures  to  increase  the  robustness  of  credit  institutions’ 
governance  models  (in  particular  related  to  internal  controls  and  remuneration 
policies).  
  Main challenges ahead  
These developments are encouraging and show that significant progress has already been 
achieved.  I  have  no  doubt  that  we  are  now  much  better  equipped  to  deal  with  emerging 
financial strains then we were at the outset of the current financial crisis. Nevertheless, there 
are still major domestic and external challenges facing the future evolution of the Portuguese 
banking system.  
Domestically the main challenge to the banking system is profitability.  
As you know, the banks’ profitability has been under great pressure. The RoA declined from 
0.48%  in  December  2010  to  –0.55%  in  June  2013.  In  the  same  period,  the  RoE  declined 
from 6.7% to –7.19%. This is due to a variety of factors.  
Firstly,  default  in  the  credit  portfolio  has  been  increasing  due  inter  alia  to  the  prolonged 
economic  recession,  even  though  the  flow  of  new  defaults  has  been  declining,  consistent 
with the signs of recovery in the real economy. The decline of NPL was accompanied by an 
increase in impairments and as a consequence the NPL coverage remained relatively stable 
throughout the period.  
Secondly, net interest income has narrowed (from 1.5% in December 2010 to 1.05% in June 
2013) due to various causes, of which I would like to stress the following five:  
• 
The  low  level  of  short-term  interest  rates,  which  reduces  spreads  on  demand 
deposits. Of course this also means that the return to normal interest rates values 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 will  contribute  to  the  improvement  of  the  net  interest  income  of  the  Portuguese 
banks.  
High  financing  costs  related  to  the  increase  in  the  deposit  base  and  the  costs  of 
hybrid instruments;  
Decreasing activity in the credit market;  
Increasing defaults in the credit portfolio;  
The low profitability of the mortgage credit granted in the past.  
• 
• 
• 
Thirdly, despite the adjustment achieved to-date, banks currently bear operating costs that 
are  out  of  step  with  the  “new  normal”,  in  which  the  economy  will  be  less  leveraged  than 
before the financial crisis.  
This low profitability, coupled with the increasing application of Basel III rules, will continue to 
force institutions to manage their capital levels with particular care and pro-activity.  
To respond to these challenges, the institutions must take action on various fronts:  
• 
On the one hand, they need to find ways to reduce the proportion of legacy assets 
with  low  interest  rate  spreads,  thereby  freeing  liquidity  for  new  activity.  In  this 
respect I would like to point out that, when Portuguese banks benefit from a more 
adequate rating (for example, if acquired by an institution with a high-quality rating), 
they will automatically benefit from a re-rating of their mortgage portfolio and realize 
gains.  
On  the  other  hand,  they  need  to  execute  their  rationalisation  plans  with 
determination, in order to bring about structural cost reduction.  
Lastly, they need to actively seek out strategic investors that can bring new capital 
to the institutions.  
  At European level, the negative interaction between sovereigns and banks has to be credibly 
and effectively broken, and the normal functioning of the money and debt markets in the euro 
area must be re-established. The creation of the Banking Union is key in this process.  
With the Banking Union, the European Central Bank becomes responsible for the prudential 
supervision  of  euro  area  credit  institutions,  through  the  so-called  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism. From November 2014, the ECB will be responsible for direct supervision of the 
credit  institutions  which  are  deemed  to  be  “significant”  and  the  national  supervisory 
authorities  will  directly  supervise  all  the  other  institutions,  always  following  a  common 
framework.  
Over the past few months, detailed preparatory work has been undertaken to put the Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  into  operation.  Banco  de  Portugal  has taken  an  active  role  in this 
process.  
In the context of the preparatory work, the next big challenge is the comprehensive balance 
sheet  assessment  of  “significant”  institutions  by  the  ECB  and  the  participating  national 
competent  authorities.  This  exercise,  which  starts  in  a  few  days,  will  comprise  an 
assessment  of  key  risks,  an  asset  quality  review  and  a  stress  test.  As  pointed  out,  this 
approach is very similar to the one followed by Banco de Portugal over the last three years. 
Four Portuguese institutions will be included in the comprehensive assessment: Banco BPI, 
Banco Comercial Português, Caixa Geral de Depósitos and Espírito Santo Financial Group.  
This  exercise  is  very  important  for  ensuring  transparency  and  enhancing  investors’ 
confidence  in  the  euro area  banks  and the quality  of  their  balance  sheets.  From the  SSM 
perspective, the exercise is like “due diligence” before the start of the banking union.  
In  my  view,  to  enhance  credibility  in  the  system  the  comprehensive  assessment  exercise 
should be based on three main principles:  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  First, the appropriate course of action should follow a “going concern” approach;  
Second, the methodologies used in the asset quality review and in the stress test 
exercise should be well tested and proven.  
Finally,  backstops  must  be  established  before  they  are  needed.  In  Portugal,  we 
have already in place a backstop mechanism to provide temporary capital injections 
for banks that might not be able to reach the requirements on time through market-
based solutions.  
By way of conclusion, I would like to come back to where I started. The Portuguese banking 
system  is  currently  more  capitalized,  more  transparent  and  in  a  more  favourable  liquidity 
position. We benefit from improved supervision and a stronger regulatory framework. I am 
sure that we are now in a much better position to handle financial strains then we were at the 
outset of the current financial crisis.  
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
