Andreas Dombret: What is “good” regulation? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 16th Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 19 November 2013. 
 What is “good regulation”? 
1. 
I would like to thank the hosts of the Euro Finance Week for raising this important topic of 
“good  regulation”  –  even  though  fifteen  minutes  is  not  very  much  time  to  give  a 
comprehensive report on the topic. The first question that occurs to me in this context is: who 
is  regulation  supposed  to  benefit  in  the  first  place?  Regulated  parties  are  likely  to  have  a 
different take on the matter to supervisors and society at large. Instead of focusing on the 
theory, I therefore want to take a pragmatic approach to the topic, and to explain three key 
aspects from the regulators’ point of view – although I cannot, of course, give an exhaustive 
account in this speech. 
First, “good regulation” of financial markets pursues a clear objective, in my opinion: to create 
a sound framework for the financial system and thus ensure its stability. A stable financial 
system ought to be able at all times to fulfil its core task of allocating capital efficiently. In 
other words: efficient funding of the real economy should be constantly assured. That is the 
main yardstick we should use to measure regulation. 
To keep the financial system stable, it is therefore important to apply a fundamental principle 
of  market  economies  –  incentive  and  punishment  mechanisms  –  to  regulation:  risk-taking 
and liability have to be consistent with one another. This means that those who take risks in 
order  to  make  profits  also  have  to  shoulder  the  risks  involved  –  irrespective  of  their 
institutional form or size. 
 Put an end to “too-big-to-fail” 
2. 
This  principle,  however,  was  nullified  during  the  crisis.  Several  banks  facing  the  threat  of 
bankruptcy  had  to  be  bailed  out  by  governments  with  taxpayer  funds.  These  banks  were 
regarded as too complex, too interconnected or simply “too big” to fail. There were fears that 
their  failure  would  have  a  dramatic  effect  on  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy. 
Regulatory  policy  considerations  took  a  back  seat,  and  taxpayers  were  ultimately  on  the 
hook  for  risks  on  banks’  balance  sheets.  The  implied  government  guarantees  for  such 
institutions, which were already thought to exist before the financial crisis, were thus de facto 
confirmed. 
That goes against the principles of a market economy. Private funds should be used for the 
recovery of a distressed bank. If shareholders are not willing to take that step, the institution 
should  be  resolved  –  without  destabilising  the  entire  financial  system  in  the  process.  The 
option of a credible resolution is the only way to eliminate implied government guarantees for 
systemically important banks. 
We are on the right track with regard to dealing with the systemic importance of banks, but 
the finish line is still a long way off. The new international agreements on resolution regimes 
developed by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) are a crucial step. Applying them globally 
will make the orderly resolution of a big bank a more realistic option and thus also a more 
credible  threat.  Intensive  work  is  being  carried  out  at  the  European  level  on  the 
implementation of these principles. Negotiations on the European Recovery and Resolution 
Directive are scheduled for completion by the end of this year. 
In Germany, the Bundestag already adopted a restructuring act in 2010 which anticipated the 
European rules. That was followed up by German lawmakers with the passage of the Act to 
Strengthen German Financial Supervision  in 2012. Not only the new resolution regime but 
also,  for  instance,  higher  capital  requirements,  or  the  obligation  to  trade  derivatives  via 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
central counterparties, represent a distinct improvement on the situation before the failure of 
Lehman Brothers. These are all key first steps, but they are not enough to make the financial 
system a safer place. 
However, it is not only banks that can be systemically important. In July 2013, the Financial 
Stability Board published a list of global systemically important insurers, or G-SIIs. Much like 
systemically  important  banks,  these  nine  institutions  will  be  made  subject  to  recovery  and 
resolution planning requirements and capital surcharges. These measures, too, are designed 
to strengthen market economy principles. 
It is clear that we have to shape and transpose the new rules agreed at the international level 
consistently  across  national  borders  and sectors  alike. This  is  not  such a  simple  matter  in 
practice. However, it is the only way to create a “level playing field” and prevent regulatory 
arbitrage. And that is also the only way we can make progress in containing the “too-big-to-
fail” risks. 
The banking union – an important and welcome step 
3. 
In  my  opinion,  strong  institutions  are  the  second  component  of  good  regulation.  Good 
regulation requires more than just well-thought-out legislation; good institutions are crucial. 
And  this  brings  me  to  the  European  banking  union.  The  single  supervisory  mechanism 
(SSM) has finally been adopted, and the European Central Bank (ECB) has begun to set up 
the  necessary  structures  –  including  recruiting  the  staff  required.  The  Bundesbank  is 
supporting the ECB in these efforts. 
The aim of joint supervision is for banks everywhere to be supervised according to the same 
high  standards.  In  addition,  cross-border  effects  can  be  covered  better  through  joint 
supervision  than  by  national  supervisors.  The  financial  system  is  likely  to  become  more 
stable  under  European  supervision.  But,  if  push  comes  to  shove,  banks  supervised  at  the 
European level will have to be resolved at the European level, too. 
For this, we need a centralised European resolution authority for banks which is based on 
sound  legal  foundations.  The  debate  on  this  single  resolution  mechanism  (SRM)  is  in  full 
swing, and several proposals are on the table. I believe the best solution is one that promises 
to  be  effective  and  enforceable  in  a  crisis  event  while  at  the  same  time  avoiding  potential 
conflicts of interest on the part of the resolution authority from the outset. It is clear to me, 
too, that the SRM for banks should be launched as soon as possible after the SSM. I am for 
the beginning of 2015 as the kick-off date. 
Strengthen macroprudential supervision 
4. 
The  third  and  final  aspect  of  “good  regulation”  I  wish  to  mention  is  the  macroprudential 
perspective.  After  all,  “good  regulation”  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  “big  picture”.  The 
financial  crisis  swept  away  any  lingering  doubts  that  we  need  to  broaden  our  regulatory 
perspective  beyond  individual  banks.  This  means  that  we  need  macroprudential  oversight 
alongside microprudential supervision. 
This has now been enshrined in German law: the Financial Stability Act has been in force 
since  the  beginning  of  this  year.  The  institutional  framework  for  macroprudential  oversight 
has  thus  been  established  in  Germany.  The  newly  formed  Financial  Stability  Committee 
started its work at the beginning of the year. The Bundesbank is a member of this committee 
and has been tasked with the ongoing analysis of developments relevant to financial stability 
and  with  identifying  threats. Where  appropriate,  we  can  propose  that  the  committee  issue 
warnings and, if necessary, specific recommendations for action. 
5. 
The “cobra effect” and the preferential regulatory treatment of sovereign debt 
Having mentioned these, to my mind, important three aspects of “good regulation”, I would 
like to touch briefly on a core problem: complexity. In my opinion, complexity is one of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
central challenges in both the design and the implementation of new – and, hopefully, good – 
regulation.  And  nobody  would  dispute  the  fact  that  financial  markets  and  their  participants 
have become very complex. 
There are many levers which supervisors and/or lawmakers can pull. In some cases, pulling 
only one single lever the wrong way is enough to threaten the stability of the system. This 
can lead to unintended consequences such as regulatory gaps, duplication or arbitrage. 
Let  me  discuss,  at  this  juncture,  a  phenomenon  known  as  the  “cobra  effect”.  The  cobra 
anecdote  goes  back  to  colonial  India.  In  order  to  contain  a  plague  of  cobras,  the  British 
colonial administrators offered a bounty for every dead cobra. The plan initially seemed to 
work;  the  colonial  administrators  were  presented  with  a  large  number  of  dead  cobras. 
Unfortunately,  however,  this  failed  to  bring  the  plague  under  control.  Most  of  the  snakes 
delivered  were  actually  not  wild  animals,  but  had  instead  been  bred  by  entrepreneurial 
Indians in order to collect the bounty. Once the governor caught wind of it, he cancelled the 
premium,  and  the  breeders  then  released  the  now-worthless  snakes  into  the  wild  –  thus 
making the plague worse than before... 
Regulatory  measures,  too,  can  have  undesired  and  unintended  consequences.  When  the 
first  Basel  Capital  Accord  was  introduced  25  years  ago,  industrial  countries´  government 
bonds,  for  instance,  were  classified  as  safe  because  nobody  thought  a  government  could 
default. Bank regulators thus regarded government bonds as an anchor of stability for banks’ 
balance  sheets.  As  a  result,  banks  today  do  not  need  to  hold  capital  against  the  risks  on 
OECD countries’ government bonds. In addition, rules to limit concentration risk do not need 
to be applied to government bonds. 
It  is  therefore  no  big  surprise  that  this  exception  in  the  Basel  Framework  had  unintended 
consequences. Banks poured massive funds into government bonds – especially domestic 
bonds.  This  created  a  kind  of  “doom  loop”  between  the  solvency  of  sovereigns  and  the 
solvency of domestic banks. We have to break this dangerous loop by ending the preferential 
regulatory treatment of government bonds. 
However,  as  the  story  of  the  cobra  effect  shows,  abrupt  changes  carry  dangers  too. 
Immediately  prescribing  that  a  certain  amount  of  capital  be  held  to  back  the  risks  on 
government bonds could lead to another set of unintended consequences. But that does not 
alter the fact that the existing rules need to be changed in order to break the “doom loop” 
between sovereigns and banks. Such change will never be popular, and it is clear that we 
need an appropriate transitional phase, such as by gradually phasing in new rules. Additional 
measures may be needed in order to avoid adverse effects on banks and sovereigns alike. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Let me conclude by summing up what I believe to be the indispensable elements of “good 
regulation”. The aim of “good regulation” is to maintain the stability of the financial system, 
thus ensuring that the financial sector has the tools it needs to completely fulfil its role for the 
real economy. It is therefore important that market economy principles – such as the unity of 
liability  and  control  –  also  apply  to  the  financial  sector.  Moreover,  strong  institutions  are 
needed  to  implement  and  apply  regulation.  Lastly,  a  macro  perspective  is  needed.  This 
means  that  we  need  not  only  the  existing  microprudential  regulation  but  also  a  new, 
systemically-oriented regulatory framework. The two must go hand-in-hand. 
On top of all this, we need to be highly vigilant towards potential design flaws and unintended 
consequences  in  all  of  these  regulatory  projects.  And  we  also  need  the  wisdom  to  make 
corrections  if  need  be.  After  all,  the  financial  system  is  evolving  relentlessly.  “Good 
regulation” will thus always be a work in progress. 
This marks the end of my introductory remarks. I look forward to our discussion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
