Andreas Dombret: Global currency blocs – is the euro a burden or a 
competitive advantage? 
Opening address by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Europe  Symposium  of  the  CDU  Economic  Council,  Brussels, 
3 December 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Thank you very much for inviting me to the CDU Economic Council’s Europe Symposium. I 
am delighted to be here and to have the opportunity to talk to you. As regards the theme of 
the symposium – global currency blocs – there is one thing we can state with some pride, 
and that is that the euro has become the second pillar of the international currency system. 
The euro as the second pillar of the international currency system 
2. 
For practically all purposes, the euro is the second most important currency in the world – a 
role  it  took  over  from  the  Deutsche  Mark.  In  some  respects  it  has  even  surpassed  the 
Deutsche Mark, for instance in its share of global currency reserves. 
Obviously, the US dollar remains the world’s leading currency. Jeffrey Frankel from Harvard 
University did recently point out that the US dollar’s leading role is not a law of nature and that 
the day may come when it would have to succumb to a rival. However, in his words, “today is 
not that day.” 
It would probably be presumptuous, in fact, to believe that the euro might steal a march on 
the dollar in the medium term. Nonetheless, as the second pillar in the international currency 
system it fulfils an important role – it provides support and stability. At the same time, the 
euro gives international investors additional options in a very liquid market. 
However, one thing is undeniable, and that is that the problems in the euro area at present 
have weakened the euro’s standing. We need to deal with these problems if the euro is to 
play a lasting role as a stabilising factor in the international currency system. 
The  reforms  in  the  individual  euro-area  countries  are  an  important  step  in  this  direction. 
Another step is the reforms in the institutional framework of monetary union, principally the 
work on a banking union. These measures put the euro area well on the way to rendering 
itself less vulnerable and remaining an attractive destination for international investors. 
After all, in the final analysis robust economic health in the euro-area countries is crucial to 
the future role of the euro. 
Competitiveness in Europe 
3. 
And  one  thing  which  is  pivotal  to  economic  health  is  competitiveness.  In  and  of  itself,  a 
common currency is in the first instance an opportunity for greater competitiveness. A single 
currency area provides enterprises with a wider market, and one in which foreign exchange 
risks are eliminated. In turn, this creates a solid footing for international expansion. 
What is more: the more prominent a domestic currency and the economic area from which it 
originates, the easier it is for exporters or importers to use their own currency for transactions 
outside the currency area. In addition, enterprises benefit from a broad and well-developed 
financial  market,  and  this  kind  of  market  is  more  likely  to  exist,  the  larger  and  more 
successful  the  relevant  currency  area  is  and  the  more  trustworthy  the  currency.  It  is  also 
easier in a single currency area for enterprises to achieve the critical mass required to be 
competitive in international trade outside the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
On the other hand, a large currency area represents a challenge for enterprises, too. They 
are  exposed  to  stiffer  competition  on  account  of  the  larger  number  of  market  players. 
However,  from  a  macroeconomic  point  of  view,  greater  competition  is  to  be  welcomed, 
because it spurs innovation and promotes necessary reforms. 
Against this backdrop, how are we to explain the lack of competitiveness in some euro-area 
countries? This does not primarily have to do with the single currency. The causes are to be 
found,  rather,  in  excessive  credit  growth,  deficient  labour  market  regulation,  and  pay 
increases not backed by productivity growth. 
These  are  factors  which  were  also  clearly  a  national  rather  than  a  supranational 
responsibility. Expectations that introducing the euro would automatically exert pressure to 
reform  and  bring  about  greater  harmonisation  between  the  economies  of  all  euro-area 
countries have not been fully met. 
The crisis has shifted attention back to the competitiveness of euro-area economies – with 
the focus on countries which have lost some of their competitiveness. If the crisis is to be 
overcome,  it  is  vitally  important  that  these  countries  become  more  competitive  again.  And 
that,  in  turn,  requires  that  work  continue  on  the  reforms  which  have  begun.  Some  initial 
success can be seen already, and this should encourage governments to stay the course of 
the path they have embarked upon. 
The German current account surplus 
4. 
Apropos competitiveness: in recent weeks Germany’s current account surpluses have come 
under fire again. These, too, are often linked to the currency. 
Germany’s  large  current  account  surpluses  may  be  partly  accounted  for  by  the  euro’s 
relatively weak external value in German terms. However, other factors are more significant. 
These  include  the  global  focus  of  German  enterprises  stretching  back  over  decades,  and 
high growth in the markets outside Europe. 
We need to keep in mind that Germany’s current account balance is the result of a market 
process and not of planned policy. The balance on current account reflects the investment 
and savings decisions of millions of households and enterprises. A high household savings 
ratio and a current account surplus also make good sense in macroeconomic terms in view 
of the future demographic challenges which Germany faces. 
Furthermore, the demand for German products from the rest of the world is of benefit to other 
euro-area countries, as it boosts German imports. As the Spanish economy minister recently 
told the Financial Times, “for Spain, the main help we can receive from Germany in these 
times is that the rhythm of their exports continues.” 
Ultimately, then, neither the other euro-area countries nor the euro area as a whole would 
benefit if Germany were to artificially weaken its own competitiveness. 
And  if  we  look  at  the  figures,  we  see  that  an  adjustment  is  already  under  way  –  in  fact, 
Germany’s current account surplus with the other euro-area countries halved between 2009 
and 2012. Furthermore, and contrary to widespread belief, the current upturn in Germany is 
being driven principally by strong domestic demand, not by exports. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the euro offers many opportunities for the European economies to 
achieve competitive advantages. However, to sustain these opportunities on a lasting basis, 
everyone  must  contribute  to  ensuring  that  the  euro  remains  a  stable  and  trustworthy 
currency. Then, the euro itself will continue to contribute to a stable global currency system. 
Thank you very much for listening. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
