Fritz Zurbrügg: Financial markets, the management of Swiss currency 
reserves and interest rate benchmark reforms 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Fritz  Zurbrügg,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Media  News  Conference  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Berne, 
12 December 2013. 
 I will begin today by looking at the situation on the financial markets. Then I will talk briefly 
about developments in our foreign exchange holdings. I will close with a few comments on 
the progress that has been made in reforming interest rate benchmarks at both international 
and national level. 
Situation on financial markets 
Since  our  last  media  news  conference  in  June,  the  positive  risk  sentiment  on  financial 
markets  has  been  largely  maintained,  as  is  evident  from  the  soaring  share  prices,  among 
other  things.  In  the  past  few  weeks,  the  key  US  indices  Dow  Jones  and  S&P  500  have 
reached new record levels, thereby exceeding the peaks attained prior to the global financial 
crisis.  In  addition,  Japan’s  Nikkei  Index  and  the  most  important  western  European  stock 
exchange indices, including the Swiss SMI, have again recorded significant gains in recent 
months. 
Despite all the euphoria on the stock exchanges, we must not forget that it is not only the 
improvement  in  the  economic  outlook  but  also  the  continuation  of  the  very  expansionary 
monetary  policy  around  the  world  which  is  behind  this  positive  risk  sentiment.  In  May  and 
June  we  saw  what  could  happen  if  expectations  of  a  less  expansionary  monetary  policy 
course become widespread in the market. At that time, the announcement by the US Federal 
Reserve of a possible reduction in its bond purchase programme caused share markets to 
plunge temporarily. The wave of selling did not recede until the beginning of July, when the 
Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the Bank of England reassured markets 
that key rates would remain at very low levels until the recovery of the individual economies 
was on a firm foundation. 
On  bond  markets,  interest  rates  continued  rising  in  June  and  July.  Since  then,  they  have 
largely moved sideways. This applies to US, UK, German and Swiss government bonds, in 
particular. Until the beginning of September, yields on ten-year Confederation bonds rose to 
almost  1.2%.  They  are  currently  at  around  1%,  which  means  that  they  have  increased  by 
about  half  a  percent  year-on-year.  Government  bonds  in  the  emerging  economies  were 
particularly  strongly  affected  by  the  rise  in  interest  rates,  since  the  expectation  of  an 
impending  monetary  policy  normalisation  in  the  US  led  to  significant  capital  outflows  from 
these countries. 
By contrast, risk premia on government bonds for the peripheral euro area economies did not 
increase very much. Moreover, these risk premia have fallen again in the meantime so that 
returns on government bonds in the peripheral economies are now in fact lower than at the 
beginning of the year. This is probably due, not least, to progress in overcoming the crisis as 
well as encouraging economic data from the euro area. However, investors are still cautious, 
so  that  demand  is  still  high for  investments  seen  as  safe  havens.  Consequently,  in  recent 
months, the Swiss franc has moved in a narrow range above the minimum exchange rate of 
CHF 1.20. Nevertheless, in view of the progress in the euro area, many market participants 
expect that the Swiss franc will depreciate. 
Despite this progress, it is still too early for an all-clear. Conditions on financial markets could 
change  again  rapidly.  In  order  to  counteract  possible  tensions  on  financial  markets  and 
lessen their potential impact on the economy, six leading central banks including the Swiss 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
National  Bank  (SNB)  converted  their  reciprocal  swap  lines  into  a  standing  arrangement  in 
October. These swap lines had initially been arranged on a temporary basis at the height of 
the financial crisis, in order to secure access to liquidity. 
Developments in foreign exchange reserves 
At  the  end  of  September  2013,  our  holdings  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  stood  at 
CHF 443 billion. I would now like to make a few comments on income from foreign exchange 
reserves. I should begin by stressing that monetary policy has priority over investment policy, 
and that generating income is not the primary objective of investment policy. We are guided, 
first of all, by the criteria of security and liquidity. The criterion of security covers primarily the 
reduction of risks such as market, credit and concentration risks. In addition, it is important 
for  us  to  maintain  the  real  value  of  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  the  long  term. 
Consequently, the long-term return on investment must match the average rate of inflation. If 
the  criteria  of  security  and  liquidity  are  fulfilled,  our  investment  policy  aims  to  achieve  an 
additional return over and above the real maintenance of value. 
The return on foreign exchange reserves is made up of current income plus changes in the 
value of the investments. The income takes the form of interest and dividend payments on 
the  bonds  and  shareholdings.  In  view  of  the  current  low  interest  rate  environment,  these 
amount to only around 2% of foreign exchange reserves per year. Just like investments that 
fall due, income is generally reinvested. Therefore, foreign exchange reserves tend to rise 
even when we do not need to purchase additional foreign exchange. 
The other component of returns is changes in the value of foreign exchange reserves. We 
value  all  investments  at  market  prices  and  in  Swiss  francs.  Consequently,  changes  in  the 
prices  of  interest-bearing  paper  and  shares  as  well  as  exchange  rate  movements  have  a 
direct  impact  on  the  net  result  for  investment.  If  the  Swiss  franc  strengthens  against  the 
investment currencies, this results in a valuation loss on the foreign exchange reserves. The 
chart shows the net investment result since the first quarter of 2010 for the foreign exchange 
reserves,  as  well  as  for  the  individual  components.  The  dominant  role  of  exchange  rate 
movements is clearly evident. In the past, too, exchange rate movements have posed by far 
the  greatest  risk  to  our  portfolio.  Taking  a  long-term  view,  exchange  rates  have  been 
responsible for about 80% of the total risk on the foreign currency reserves. 
Reform of interest rate benchmarks 
Following  last  year’s  revelations  that  Libor  interest  rates  had  been  manipulated,  various 
activities to reform the Libor and other interest rate benchmarks are under way. The SNB is 
involved in these reform activities at both international and national level. The objective is to 
improve  the  credibility  and  acceptance  of  the  existing  interest  rate  benchmarks  or,  where 
appropriate,  to  take  steps  to  ensure  the  provision  of  robust  alternative  interest  rate 
benchmarks. 
International efforts are being coordinated by the Financial Stability Board on behalf of the 
G20 countries. They involve not only central banks and supervisory authorities but also an 
international group of private sector financial market participants. They are examining, first, 
the  extent  to  which  the  existing  Libor  interest  rates  fulfil  the  requirements  laid  down  by 
securities  supervisors  last  July  (the  IOSCO  standards).  Second,  they  are  investigating 
whether there are alternative interest rate benchmarks which would better meet the needs of 
the market and the requirements of supervisory authorities in the longer term. Alternatives to 
the  Libor  are  being  developed  by  the  private  sector  group,  which  also  includes  Swiss 
representatives. The Financial Stability Board plans to present the results of its work in the 
middle of next year. 
At  the  international  level,  activities  are  also  under  way  to  regulate  the  interest  rate 
benchmarks  as  well  as  other  important  reference  variables  on  the  financial  markets.  In 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
London, the Libor is already now subject to a supervisory regime. In Brussels, a bill has been 
proposed which would regulate all interest rate benchmarks used in the EU. In Switzerland, 
too, a need for regulatory action is likely to emerge in this area. 
At the national level, the SNB and FINMA are talking to financial market participants about 
ensuring  a  more  robust  construction  of  the  interest  rate  benchmarks  which  are  fixed  in 
Switzerland. The aim is to widen the data pool and improve the calculation methods, and the 
focus is on reference interest rates for very short-term Swiss franc transactions, specifically 
one-day terms. These transactions form the basis for the Swiss franc yield curve. The two 
benchmarks involved are, first, the TOIS fixing, which is used for interest rate derivatives in 
the Swiss franc money market, and second, SARON, which serves as the basis for the yield 
curve on the Swiss franc repo market. Progress has already been achieved on both interest 
rate  benchmarks.  Although  the  level  of  activity  on  the  money  market  remains  persistently 
low, they continue to be available to the market as a basis for interest rate transactions in 
Swiss  francs.  However,  the  Libor  retains  its  position  as  the  most  important  interest  rate 
benchmark in the money and capital markets. 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
