Sabine Lautenschläger: Deutsche Bundesbank’s 2013 Financial Stability 
Review 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Deputy  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at 
the  presentation  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  2013  Financial  Stability  Review,  Frankfurt 
am Main, 14 November 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  am  delighted  to  welcome  you  to  the  Bundesbank  today.  The  presentation  of  the 
Bundesbank’s  Financial  Stability  Review  has  become  a  firm  fixture  in  the  calendar.  And, 
looking around, I can see some familiar faces. And, today, I will also be raising issues with 
which you are familiar. 
For example, although the tensions in the financial system have eased since mid-2012, the 
side effects of the crisis policy are now coming into focus. Long-term low interest rates and 
abundant liquidity have a knock-on impact and weigh, for instance, on banks’ profitability. 
Crisis  policy  has  given  us  breathing  space  that  now  has  to  be  used  for  adjusting  bank 
balance sheets and for consolidating public finances. This is because the debt crisis is by no 
means over. And, for that reason, I will begin with this topic. The second main point of my 
remarks will be the situation of German banks and, third, I shall, of course, be going on to 
talk about the banking union, which is connected with the two preceding issues and currently 
the dominant topic in the world of the European supervisors. 
After that, I shall be handing over to Dr Andreas Dombret. One of the things he will be talking 
about  is  how  insurers  are  getting  on  in  the  current  low-interest-rate  setting  and  what 
implications the low interest-rate has for the property markets.  
European sovereign debt crisis 
2. 
Let us first take a look at the European sovereign debt crisis. 
As I already mentioned earlier: since the middle of last year we have been seeing a certain 
easing  in  the  markets  for  European  government  bonds.  The  crisis  measures  taken  by 
European  governments  and  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  have  certainly  played  their 
part.  Apart  from  that,  though,  some  member  states  have  been  making  progress  with  their 
reforms.  As  a  result,  in  crisis  countries  we  note  a  considerable  decline  in  current  account 
deficits, falling structural budget deficits and, for the most part, shrinking unit wage costs. 
The calm that has set in is deceptive, however. Despite the consolidation measures, levels of 
public debt have been continuing to climb. We have to interpret the current development as a 
kind  of  advance  expression  of  confidence  which  now  has  to  be  redeemed  by  means  of 
further reform measures. This fragility revealed itself, for instance, when a government crisis 
in  Portugal  in  the  middle  of  2013  led  to  a  sudden  rise  in  the  yields  on  Portuguese 
government bonds. 
The  strains  due  to  debt  are  not  confined  to  the  public  sector.  The  liabilities  of  private 
enterprises and households, too, remain at a high level. The risks emanating from this should 
by no means be underestimated. After all, the US subprime crisis – in other words, private 
sector  debt  problems  in  the  United  States  together  with  real  estate  bubbles  –  formed  the 
nucleus from which the financial crisis grew. A high level of debt in the private sector is by no 
means  solely  a  US  phenomenon,  but  one  that  also  affects  Europe.  Although  the  private 
sector  has  successfully  reduced  debt  in  some  euro-area  countries,  the  overall  level  of 
liabilities remains high. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The situation of the private sector is reflected in the high levels of banks’ problem assets. For 
example,  without  exception  the  percentage  of  banks’  non-performing  loans  to  countries  in 
crisis has risen over the past few years, in some cases dramatically. 
The situation of German banks 
3. 
But how are German banks getting on? 
The critical situation of both public and private debtors in some crisis countries is still one of 
the key risks to the German banking sector. 
German banks’ exposure to debtors from the four programme countries as well as Spain and 
Italy has dropped from €432 billion to €234 billion since the end of 2009. Although the default 
and contagion risks have declined, they are still considerable. 
Considerable risks of default exist not just with regard to individual countries. Some German 
banks  still  have  notable  exposure  to  sectors  that  are  cyclically  vulnerable  and  marked  by 
overcapacity, such as shipping loans, securitisations and loans funding foreign commercial 
real  estate.  These  business  segments  will  play  a  key  role  in  the  upcoming  balance  sheet 
assessment by the ECB and the national supervisors. 
In these business segments, the picture is mixed. While an end to the slump in the shipping 
markets  is  not  in  sight,  the  swings  in  the  valuation  of  securitisation  portfolios  have  eased 
somewhat.  It  is  not  possible  to  make  a  blanket  assessment  of  the  commercial  real  estate 
markets,  either.  While  the  markets  in  Germany  and  the  United  States  are  in  a  relatively 
non-critical situation or have recovered perceptibly, the situation in some European countries 
such as the United Kingdom, Spain, but also the Netherlands, remains difficult. 
It would especially cause problems for some banks if failures were to occur simultaneously in 
more than one of these cyclically dependent sectors. It is encouraging, however, that banks 
have continued to strengthen their ability to absorb losses. 
We note a steady improvement in German institutions’ capital ratios over the past few years. 
As  at  June  2013,  the  12  largest  German  banks  showed  an  average  tier  1  capital  ratio  of 
15.3%.  That  represents  a  year-on-year  increase  of  more  than  2  percentage  points.  The 
leverage ratio, too, has fallen on average from 33 to 28. 
That is a gratifying development on the whole. It shows that future regulatory requirements 
are being anticipated. For us, this creates a good starting point for the forthcoming balance 
sheet assessment, which I shall go into later. 
However,  this  should  not  detract  from  the  fact  that  some  banks  still  have  to  undertake 
considerable efforts to meet the requirements of Basel III. 
Quite a few banks will therefore continue to shrink their balance sheets. This is because the 
increase in the capital ratios of the major German institutions over the past few years has 
been achieved less through the retention of profits than by reducing holdings of risky assets. 
Thus, the capital increase between June 2012 and June 2013 was more than €3 billion in net 
terms; since December 2008 it has been almost €20 billion. By contrast, the large German 
banks have reduced their risk-weighted assets by more than € 150 billion since June 2012; 
over the past four and a half years, the figure is as high as nearly €600 billion. This means 
that these 12 banks have reduced their risk assets by more than one-third in this four-and-
half  year  period. I  nevertheless  basically  take  a positive  view  of  this  deleveraging,  since  it 
principally affected the cutback portfolios that were not part of the banks’ core business. 
At the current end, the profitability of the large banks has stabilised. Recently, this has been 
underpinned mainly by the trading result and low risk provisioning – two income components 
which  tend  to  be  rather  volatile  and  cyclically  dependent.  The  most  important  source  of 
earnings,  especially  for  the  German  universal  banking  system  –  net  interest  income  –  is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
declining, however. That is also due to the current low-interest-rate setting, which is exerting 
extra pressure on the interest margin. 
What specific impact does the low-interest-rate environment have on banks? 
The  low-interest-rate  setting  lastingly  reduces  banks’  profitability  since  net  interest  income 
shrinks.  Net  interest  income  falls  if,  for  instance,  asset-side  high-interest-income  legacy 
business  runs  out  or,  on  the  liability  side,  the  interest  contributions  for  savings  and  time 
deposits are reduced. At the same time, there is uncertainty as to whether a potential interest 
rate  shock  could  impact  on  institutions’  profitability  and  balance  sheets. We are  looking  at 
this development closely. In the interests of a preventive supervision, we are analysing what 
medium-  and  long-term  impact  stems  from  sudden  interest  rate  changes  as  well  as  the 
income effects of a persistently low interest rate level. 
A closer look reveals that German banks have structural profitability problems. 
The interest margin has been decreasing almost continuously over the past three decades. 
You can see quite clearly from the chart that the interest margin was around 2% up to the 
mid-1990s. It  has fallen by  100  basis  points since  then  to  just  under  1%. There  are many 
reasons for this. The provision of banking services in Germany is above average compared 
with other European countries; there are signs of overcapacity in the German banking sector. 
In  addition,  there  have  also  been  technological  developments  such  as  the  internet,  which 
have  facilitated  market  access  for  banks  without  a  network  of  branches.  Many  banks  are 
nonetheless competing for the same groups of customers in Germany – the Mittelstand and 
retail customers alike. Banks are also facing growing competition from non-banks. They not 
only offer loans, but are also successfully attracting investment capital. 
For German banks, lack of profitability means two things in particular in the medium term. 
One, owners and investors have to prepare for lower returns in the long run. Given a lack of 
profitability, cost structures have to be come under scrutiny and business models have to be 
adapted. And if there are no earnings, there is no basis for staying in business. Market exits 
should therefore not be a taboo subject. 
The European banking union 
4. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  situation  in  the  financial  markets  has  unquestionably  calmed 
down  compared  to  2012.  However,  we  must  not  let  this  divert  our  attention  from  the 
structural problems besetting the banking sector. On the contrary – the recovery phase has 
to be used to implement the needed adjustments and reforms. After all, the challenges that 
lie  ahead  are  enormous.  And  that  goes  not  just  for  the  financial  markets  but  also  for  us 
supervisors and regulators. This brings us to a topic that has been making more and more 
headlines in the past few months: the European banking union. Let us look ahead to the next 
12 months. What is on the agenda? 
The legal basis for the new European Single Supervisory Mechanism, or SSM for short, has 
just been created. It is now time for its implementation. We will regulate cooperation between 
the ECB and the national competent authorities within a set framework and press ahead with 
our work on the new joint supervisory approach. We will also assemble teams of supervisors 
from  the  ECB  and  the  national  supervisory  authorities  and  prepare  them  to  take  on 
supervisory functions. 
The greatest  challenge  in  the  coming months  will  be  the  comprehensive  assessment. The 
first step of the comprehensive assessment has already been launched. Supervisors have 
begun selecting the particularly critical balance sheet items of the 128 banks affected. The 
assets  contained  in  the  items  will  then  be  subjected  to  closer  scrutiny.  For  instance,  the 
recoverable  value  of  the  posted  collateral  and  the  valuation  of  illiquid  assets  will  be 
assessed.  The  ECB  will  conduct  a  quality  assurance  check  together  with  the  national 
competent  authorities  at  all  stages  of the  assessment  in  order to  ensure  the comparability 
and robustness of the results. This appraisal of the present situation will be augmented by a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
joint  ECB  and  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  stress  test  which  is  designed  to  expose 
potential future risk as well. 
The Balance Sheet Assessment will be a true “acid test” – for the banks as well as for the 
ECB and the national competent authorities alike. The comprehensive assessment is likely to 
cause  some  unease  since  the  ECB  will  hardly  be  able  to  meet  the  market’s  sometimes 
unrealistic expectations. For example, it will not be possible to assign a specific euro amount 
to capital needs until the entire process – that is, BSA and stress test – has been completed. 
The comprehensive assessment also represents a major opportunity, however. A thorough 
balance  sheet  cleansing  can  free  banks  of  legacy  problems  and  enhance  the  functional 
viability and stability of the European banking sector. What is important is that, at the national 
level, provisions should be made to cover potential capital needs. The ECB will additionally 
benefit  from  having  a  precise  insight  into  the  risk  situations  of  those  banks  which  will  be 
under its supervision in future. 
I see the BSA as an opportunity – for supervisors and banks alike. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) is the furthest-advanced element of the banking 
union. By contrast, the single resolution mechanism (SRM) is still in its infancy. Time is short. 
The banking union requires not only an SSM but also a European SRM in order to strike the 
proper  balance  between  liability  and  control.  It  makes  little  sense  to  shift  supervision  of 
European  banks  to  the  European  level  only  to  then,  in  the  matter  of  resolution,  to  give 
responsibility back to a national body. And we supervisors need an instrument for resolving 
banks smoothly without impairing the markets, one which bails in owners and investors, in 
order to put the bite back into our demands for consolidation and balance sheet cleansing. 
A proposal from the European Commission is on the table. In my view, however, there are 
both  conceptual  and  legal  problems  in  this  regard.  A  true  European  resolution  authority 
needs a watertight foundation; bank resolution will invariably involve a wave of lawsuits by 
third  parties  –  in  this  case,  bank  investors.  Primary  law  needs  to  be  amended  in  order  to 
create such a watertight foundation. Until that happens, we have to settle for a network of 
national  authorities  and 
funds,  supported  at  best  by  cross-border  burden-sharing 
agreements. 
I  am  also  critical  of  the  idea  of  the  European  Commission  having  a  strong  position  in 
resolution, since the Commission is also responsible for state aid procedures, which would 
create a conflict of interest that would be impossible to resolve cleanly.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
