Pentti Hakkarainen: Threats to operational and policy effectiveness? 
Key talking points by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the 
panel  discussion  “How  real  is  a  threat  to  policy  capacity  arising  from  financial  outcomes? 
What  are realistic  options for  threat management?”, Workshop  on  the  Finances  of  Central 
Banks, organised by the Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 12 November 2013. 
 When considering potential threats to the policy effectiveness of the central banks, the key 
concept is credibility. Credibility of the central bank is almost synonymous with its ability to 
make  its  actions  effective  in  the  market.  This  is  equally  important  for  the  effectiveness  of 
policy commitments as for the effectiveness of actual monetary policy operations.  
Credibility has at least the following components: 
• 
The financial position of the central bank: Sound finances are important for the de 
facto independence of the central bank. The reason for this is clear. An independent 
central  bank should  be able  to fund  its  operations  independently  and  not  become 
dependent on the government discretion for its financial resources. 
The institutional position of the central bank as a public institution, its prerogatives 
and  its  legal  independence.  Independence  protects  the  bank  from  political 
influences and makes it possible for the bank to pursue its mandate in a consistent 
way. Only consistent policy can be fully effective. 
The quality of the bank’s operations and communications. To be able to influence 
the market, the central bank’s policy intentions must be transparent and the practical 
implementation  of  the  policy  must  be  perceived  as  professional.  Otherwise  the 
market reactions to policy may not be as desired. 
  So, a sound financial position is not the only condition for policy effectiveness. There seems 
to  be  a  mutually  reinforcing  relationship  between  these  three  factors  of  credibility  which  I 
mentioned. They tend to support each other, and to a degree they can substitute for each 
other,  too:  for  example,  a  central  bank  with  a  solid  institutional  position  and  an  excellent 
professional  record  may  remain  effective  even  if  its  finances  are  relatively  weak  in  the 
medium term.  
The three factors of credibility are not independent either. For example, political tolerance for 
the central bank’s financial losses may be quite small and therefore a more immediate threat 
to policy effectiveness than the loss of capital itself.  
Large financial  losses  if  not  well  understood  and  justified  might  undermine  the  institutional 
position of the central bank and also endanger its professional reputation as a high-quality 
institution. My point is then that central bank finances must be considered in the context of 
political  and  market  perceptions.  The  financial  requirements  for  effective  policy  are 
conditional on our communications and the stability of our institutional position. 
As  stated  in  the  paper,  the  central  banks  have  considerable  loss-absorbing  capacity  even 
over  and  above  their  book  equity  and  provisions,  if  only  the  present  value  of  future 
seigniorage income is sufficiently high.  
So it is not only credit and market risks which are of consequence but the income stream as 
well. In this sense, a prolonged state of ultra-low interest rates might prove to be a challenge 
to central bank profitability in the long run, and reduce the risk bearing capacity of the central 
banks.  
The Bank of Finland routinely uses the VaR (including expected shortfall) methodology and 
also stress scenarios to assess the soundness of its financial position, and publicly reports 
summary statistics from its VaR calculations. These calculations show that the bank is able 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to absorb considerable losses with its provisions and reserves without endangering its capital 
position.  
Which alternative financial structures might be desirable and feasible? 
The  paper  pinpoints  the  asymmetry  of  profit  distribution  as  a  major  source  of  concern  for 
central banks, especially if the volatility of profits (including capital gains and losses) is large 
compared to the average expected profit flow.  
The  Bank  of  Finland  suffered  heavy  losses  during  the  Finnish  banking  crisis  of  the  early 
1990s. In the ensuing two decades, the bank has been very successful in achieving a sound, 
well capitalized financial position which now after the international financial crisis is broadly 
appreciated in the Finnish society.  
There have been both financial and political factors behind the favourable experience.  
• 
Flexible rules on provisioning. We are able to book above-the-line provisions from 
unrealized  capital  gains  which  can  then  be  used  to  cover  future  capital  losses. 
Moreover, the law allows us to book above-the-line provisions also for maintaining 
the real value of equity capital. 
Sensible rules on profit distribution. The basic scheme according to law is that 
half of the accounting profit of the Bank be transferred to the reserve fund and the 
other half paid to the state. However, the law also says that exception can be made 
from this rule if the financial condition of the Bank warrants such exception. It is the 
Supervisory Council of the Bank, composed of parliamentarians, which makes the 
ultimate  decision.  After  the  Finnish  Banking  crisis  of  the  early  1990s,  it  took  until 
2000 before any profits were transferred to the state.  
The governance structure. The Bank of Finland is institutionally not subordinate to 
the government, but instead to the parliament. The supervisory Council which wields 
the ultimate financial powers over the bank is a parliamentary body separate from 
the  government  ministries.  It  has  proven  to  give  a  high  priority  to  the  financial 
soundness of the Bank of Finland, and has not reflected the occasional pressures 
arising from the Ministry of Finance for example. 
Institutional support by the ECB. The ECB’s opinions give powerful support to the 
financial  independence  of  the  National  Central  Banks  of  the  eurosystem.  For 
instance,  when  there  was  political  discussion  in  Finland  in  2003  about  extracting 
capital from the central bank, the institutional support from the ECB was important in 
avoiding that action. 
   Ultimately however, all of these pillars of central bank financial soundness are dependent on 
the  general  understanding  of  the  tasks  and  responsibilities  of  the  central  bank,  and  on  a 
broad  trust  and  acceptance  on  its  activities  and  operations.  If  these  are  undermined,  the 
provisioning  and  distribution  rules,  governance  structures  and  other  safeguards  of  central 
bank  soundness  are  not  on  a  durable  basis.  The  central  bank  must  therefore  strive  to 
demonstrate by acts and words that it serves a public purpose. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
