Jens Weidmann: The German economy – dealing with structural shifts 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  hail  and 
farewell  ceremony  at 
in  North  Rhine-Westphalia,  Düsseldorf, 
25 September 2013. 
the  Regional  Office 
 Economic policy challenges facing Germany 
1. 
When asked recently whether or not it was possible to slowly but surely wrap up the topic of 
structural  reform,  the  president  of  the  Bundesbank’s  Regional  Office  in  North  Rhine-
Westphalia  replied,  “We’re  not  done  yet.”  One  such  item  of  unfinished  business  for  the 
Bundesbank in North Rhine-Westphalia is the building of the new superbranch in Dortmund, 
which,  as  the  largest  branch  in  Germany,  will  take  over  cash  operations  from  five  other 
branches in North Rhine-Westphalia. 
“We’re not done yet” – let me take up this slogan and refer it to the German economy. On the 
surface, the situation is quite pleasing: Germany’s economy is in infinitely better shape than 
just  ten  years  ago,  when  Germany  was  regarded  by  many  as  “the  sick  man  of  Europe”. 
Germany came through the crisis better than other countries: whereas real German GDP in 
the last quarter was 2¼% above its pre-crisis level, it was only ¼% higher in France, and in 
Italy and Spain, it was even just under 9% and 7½% below pre-crisis levels respectively. And 
this is despite the fact that, in 2009, Germany’s GDP dropped by over 5%, one of the most 
severe slumps among the major advanced economies. 
And  it  is  precisely  this  experience  and  the  evidence  it  provides  of  the  success  of  earlier 
reforms  as  well  as  of  the  employment-oriented  cooperation  between  the  social  partners 
which has made Germany a model for many abroad – a model whose competitiveness is so 
high that some even see it as part of the problem. 
To be sure, central bankers do have the reputation of regularly pouring water into the wine 
whenever the economic situation puts policymakers and the public in a partying mood. 
I  do  believe,  though,  that  there  are  good  reasons  for  a  more  level-headed  assessment  
– especially when looking through the cycles as perceived by the public and reported on in 
the news and seeing some years into the future. 
Advancing  globalisation,  shifts  in  energy  policy,  high  government  debt  and  aging  societies 
will also – or even specifically – present challenges to Germany – even if the current crisis 
and its burdens are overcome rapidly. 
Let  us  look  at  globalisation:  the  emerging  market  economies’  share  of  global  economic 
output  rose  from  37%  to  50%  between  2000  and  2012.  This  trend  will  continue,  and 
enterprises  in  those  countries  will  continue  to  catch  up  in  terms  of  technology,  thus 
increasing competitive pressure on the established market leaders in the industrial countries. 
That will be all the more so since Germany has been traditionally strong in terms of patent 
activities  in  high  technology  but  not  in  cutting-edge  technology,  where  emerging  market 
economies are, in some cases, slower to catch up. 
Now to energy policy: the desired massive upgrading of renewable energy will initially cause 
high macroeconomic and fiscal policy costs while, at the same time, new technologies such 
as “fracking” have made international competition a whole new ballgame worldwide. 
And now to government debt: this year, German general government is likely to present a 
more  or  less  balanced  budget,  with  structural  surpluses  planned  for  the  coming  year. 
However, the debt ratio, at over 80% of nominal GDP, is still very high in Germany, too – not 
just  compared  with  the  Maastricht  reference  ratio  of  60%  but  also  when  looking  at  the 
implications of an ageing society for public finances and growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
According to estimates by the OECD  in  its report entitled “Looking to 2060”, Germany will 
show  the  second  slowest  growth  of  all  42  countries  in  the  study  by  2030, followed  by  the 
slowest  growth  up  to  2060  –  mainly  owing  to  demographic  trends.  Per-capita  growth  is 
looking somewhat better because of the falling population; however, here too, Germany is 
mired in mediocrity by European standards, according to the OECD.  
Not accounting for migration, there will already be one and a half million people fewer on the 
labour  market  in  2020.  This  is  a  decline  of  2.5%.  Such  a  decline  would  reduce  annual 
potential growth by nearly 0.3 percentage points, causing potential losses to accumulate over 
time. In 2020, economic output will thus be nearly €70 billion lower than if this demographic 
effect had never occurred. 
That is the problem facing us. However, if we set the right wheels in motion, we can master 
these challenges. And this is not only in the interests of Germany, but also in the interests of 
the Bundesbank and European monetary policy – and that is why I am discussing this topic 
as President of the Bundesbank. 
Germany  is  the  anchor  of  stability  in  the  euro  area,  without  which  many  of  the  efforts  to 
stabilise  the  euro  area  would  have  no  credibility.  Germany  is  campaigning  for  stability-
oriented fiscal and economic policy. The strength of its voice also rests on the strength of its 
economy.  It  is  in  the  interest  of  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  for  euro-area  fiscal 
policymakers  to  be  in  a  position  to  fulfil  their  responsibility  to  the  euro.  We  must  also  not 
permit the build-up of any new macroeconomic imbalances which could sow the seeds of the 
next crisis. 
To  achieve  this,  the  ability  to  adjust  and  innovate  has  to  be  improved;  sustainable 
government finances and social security systems have to be secured on a long-term basis; 
and, in order to reverse the age-related growth slowdown, additional growth forces have to 
be  mobilised  –  both  regarding  the  labour  potential  and  also  regarding  public  and  private 
capital stock and productivity growth. 
There are ultimately numerous starting points in order to achieve those objectives. I wish to 
proceed by picking out four areas where I see a particular need for action: labour markets 
and immigration, education and infrastructure, reforms to federal financial relationships, and 
corporate  taxation:  more  specifically,  differences  in  the  tax  treatment  of  investment 
depending  on  the  method  of  financing  and  the  legal  form.  I  am  well  aware  that  I  am  only 
scratching the surface of these topics and omitting other important areas entirely – such as 
the energy U-turn or financial market regulation. 
Labour markets and immigration 
1.1. 
I have just outlined how demographic trends will place a burden on future growth. There are 
two ways to combat this – by increasing the labour force or by increasing productivity. 
Let  me  begin  by  going  into  detail  on  how  labour  market  policy  measures  or  a  targeted 
immigration policy could be used to halt the decline in the labour force. Demographic trends 
will tend to lead increasingly to shortages of skilled labour. However, this development was 
halted  briefly  because  labour  force  participation  has  grown  strongly  and  more  and  more 
people have immigrated to Germany in the past few years to work here. 
This is the path for the future. There are labour force reserves, particularly among women 
and  the  elderly.  A  further  expansion  of  childcare  and  care  for  the  elderly  could  improve 
options for women to take up or increase their paid employment. The system of taxes and 
transfers can also get in the way of higher labour force participation. On the other hand, the 
increase in labour force participation among older workers following the elimination of early 
retirement shows the potential impact of targeted reforms. 
The discussion that is still ongoing in some quarters – about raising the retirement age to 67 
–  also  shows  how  politically  charged  the  matter  is.  Measures  to  make  employment  more 
attractive to women are no less charged: the childcare supplement, splitting income taxation 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
between couples and non-contributory inclusion in statutory health insurance and long-term 
care insurance cover mean that having a job is less worthwhile. On the other hand, separate 
political  objectives  are  being  pursued  by  means  of  these  instruments,  which  have  to  be 
weighed against the foregoing. 
Only policymakers can strike this balance. However, my point is to remind people that these 
measures  make  it  less  attractive  to  take  on  paid  employment  and  thus  can  cost  us 
macroeconomic growth. This price has to be borne in mind. 
Whatever decision is made by policymakers and society at large, simply making family life 
and  work  life  more  compatible  is  not  enough  to  maintain  or  even  improve  the  standard  of 
living in an ageing society. 
An important step towards stabilising labour force participation is the raising of the retirement 
age to 67, which I mentioned earlier. Compared to a pension age of 65, this will mean that 
2.7 million more people will be of working age in 2030. Calls to reverse this reform therefore 
worry  me.  It  is  a  fact  that  we  cannot  do  without  the  expertise  of  older  members  of  the 
workforce. We therefore  have  to  go  to  even greater  lengths  to  integrate  them  more  tightly 
into the economic process. 
The fact  that  employment  in  Germany  has  reached  a  new  all-time  high  is  due  not  only  to 
greater  labour force  participation  but  also  to  immigration.  A  systematic approach  to  attract 
skilled  labour  from  abroad,  whose  expertise  is  needed  here,  would  represent  a  major 
contribution to helping cushion the impact of an ageing society on the labour market. 
Yet  it  is  just  as  important  not  to  surrender  any  of  the  progress  that  has  already  been 
achieved on the labour market. This applies, for instance, to the current debate on the wider 
application  of  minimum  wages.  The  academic  literature  is  quite  divided  on  whether  a 
minimum  wage  will  increase  unemployment,  especially  as  the  answer  to  that  question  will 
depend decisively on the size of the wage and the rest of the framework, such as the social 
safety net for unemployment or job protection. 
However, even if a minimum wage does not affect unemployment directly, it may still have a 
negative impact on employment trends There is a risk that enterprises will take on fewer new 
staff  in  periods  of  economic  upturn.1  That  primarily  affects  those  sections  of  the  labour 
market  that  a  minimum  wage  would  actually  be  intended  to  help.  It  will  worsen  the 
opportunities  for  low-skilled  workers  and  the  long-term  unemployed  to  find  work  and  will 
make it more difficult for those who do not yet have strongly-developed professional skills to 
obtain access to the labour market. 
In  order  to  improve  the  opportunities  of  low-skilled  workers  and  the  long-term  employed, 
there is another, more promising path. The goal must be to reduce the gap between  well-
protected regular jobs subject to social security contributions and other types of employment 
and  to  channel  the  demand  for  labour  more  towards  jobs  subject  to  social  security 
contributions than before. 
In principle, the role played by special forms of employment such as temporary employment 
in  a  functioning  labour  market  which  “breathes”  over  the  business  cycle  should  not  be 
underestimated. These forms enable rapid adjustments to be made on both the supply and 
the demand sides: job-seekers are given the chance to re-enter the ranks of the employed 
quickly, and enterprises can cope with peaks in orders in a flexible and low-cost manner. 
Yet it is particularly the favourable treatment, particularly with regard to taxes and levies or to 
job  protection,  which  can  make  the  transition  to  regular  employment  considerably  more 
difficult.  There  is  a  similar  problem  in  the  rules  for  additional  earnings  alongside 
                                                
1   See also Meer, J and West, J (2013), Effects of the minimum wage on employment dynamics, NBER Working 
Paper No 19262. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
unemployment benefit II which make it very unattractive for “income boosters” to segue from 
low-paid  part-time  work  to  regular  jobs  subject  to  social  security  contributions.  It  would 
therefore be a good idea to eliminate these distortions, for instance, along the lines of the 
proposal already put forward in 2006 by the German Council of Economic Experts.2  
The  previous  flexibility-increasing  measures  taken  both  by  policymakers  and  the  social 
bargainers  have  made  enterprises,  in  particular,  more  resilient  to  temporary  slumps  in 
demand, such as during the economic crisis – when it makes sense to retain experienced 
workers and their expertise. 
That  was  surely  a  major  contribution  to  enabling  Germany  to  overcome  the  economic 
consequences of the financial crisis comparatively quickly. But the challenges that lie before 
us are about more then that: they are about the ability of the German economy to deal with 
structural  shifts.  They  are  about  enabling  workers  from  shrinking  industries  to  migrate  as 
smoothly as possible to new growth industries. However, this is possible only if the labour 
market is flexible in the mainstream and not just at the margins. 
Education and infrastructure  
1.2. 
Only  a  well-functioning  labour  market  can  mitigate  the  economic  burdens  of  demographic 
trends,  too.  However,  if  we  want  to  not  only  slow  down  the  decline  in  growth  but  even 
accelerate growth, more needs to be done. 
When,  in future, fewer  workers  will  be  at  our  disposal,  it  will  be  all  the  more  important for 
them to be trained as well as possible. This will require an education system that meets high 
standards  which  are  comparable  across  Germany  and  which  will  give  children,  youth  and 
young adults the breathing room and the assistance necessary to develop their talents to the 
fullest. 
Studies show that adolescent educational achievement in Germany is closely correlated with 
social  background,  which  also  impacts  on  subsequent  chances  of  success  in  the  labour 
market. Educational achievement is often decided, in particular, in pre-school education. It 
therefore  makes  sense  to  push  support  for  infants  and  pre-school  students  more  into  the 
focus  of  public  financing.  I  believe  this  focus  is  justifiable  because  academic  education 
programmes often culminate in high-skilled and well-paid employment. This will enable those 
affected to foot a larger share of the costs of their own education. 
However,  education  is  just  one  element  of  public  investment.  An  effective  infrastructure  is 
also  decisive  for  economic  development.  Although  international  comparisons  usually  show 
that Germany has a good infrastructure on the whole, particularly in transport, the bird’s-eye 
view  for  a  closer  look  reveals  regional  gaps  or  shortages  –  which  possibly  contrast  with 
overcapacity elsewhere. 
Local governments are the main investors in fixed assets. Those that require a large volume 
of  investment  are  not  always  able  to  raise  the  requisite  financial  resources.  It  is  therefore 
necessary to strengthen the ability of hitherto particularly afflicted local governments to make 
investments. 
In order to ensure prudent use of resources and to maximise the value added for society, 
new scope for spending should be used only after a thorough weighing-up of the costs and 
benefits and only to fill current gaps in a targeted manner. New spending projects should not 
be allowed to lead to an increase in government debt. 
The demographic burdens on public budgets will soon grow sharply. Reducing the debt ratio 
is therefore a matter of urgency in order to combat this. After all, to quote German politician 
                                                
2   Arbeitslosengeld 
II 
Bundesministers für Wirtschaft und Technologie, September 2006. 
reformieren:  Ein  zielgerichtetes  Kombilohnmodell,  Expertise 
im  Auftrag  des 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Kurt  Biedenkopf:  “New  debt  is  tantamount  to  issuing  bills  of  exchange  which  my 
grandchildren will pay off.” However, many tend to agree more with Groucho Marx, who is 
reputed to have asked himself, “Why should I care about posterity? What has posterity ever 
done for me?” 
Reform of federal financial relationships 
1.3. 
Sound finances are important not only for central government but also for state governments. 
The debt brake will enter into force for the federal states, too, in 2020. The rules for the state 
government revenue-sharing scheme will also expire at the same time – at least if the motion 
by  Hesse  and  Bavaria  before  the  Federal  Constitutional  Court  is  struck  down.  Follow-up 
provisions will have to be adopted pursuant to the Basic Law. 
The discussion about reforming the states’ financial relationships is very complex. It should 
therefore begin early, especially in order to achieve genuine structural improvement and not 
to get stuck at questions purely relating to distribution, which are at the forefront of short-term 
reforms.  What  is  important  is  the  creation  of  better  incentives  to  increase  regional  tax-
generating capacity, in terms of transferring less from additional tax receipts. 
Equal taxation of debt and equity capital  
1.4. 
Targeted  public  investment  in  education  and  infrastructure  can  strengthen  the  forces  of 
growth.  In  the  area  of  private  investment,  the  government’s  most  important  job  is  to  set 
suitable  framework  conditions  that  minimise  distortion.  Here,  too,  there  is  room  for 
improvement. 
On  the  topic  of  corporate  taxation,  the  focus  is  mostly  on  tax  avoidance  and  the  use  of 
accounting options by multinational groups. I do believe this to be an important point. And it 
is  clear  that  economic  returns  on  entrepreneurial  activity  should  be  properly  taxed. 
International  cooperation  is  of  central  importance  in  order  to  avoid  undesired  evasion  and 
distorting accounting options. 
However, I do wish to bring to mind another aspect which has been on the agenda for quite a 
long time – in both academia and the policymaking world – for which a solution has not yet 
been found: differences in the taxation of investment depending on the type of funding and 
legal form. 
This  runs  counter  to  the  fundamental  principle  of  like  taxation  of  like  economic  quantities. 
Entrepreneurial  decisions  should  be  oriented  to  economic  criteria  irrespective  of  the 
enterprise’s legal form and funding. Therefore, we need to work more on limiting the current 
tax  treatment  favouring  debt  financing  over  equity  financing  and  thus,  at  the  same  time, 
encourage enterprises to strengthen their capital base. 
Strengthening  the  capital  base  is,  naturally,  also  a  central  theme  in  the  banking  sphere. 
Insufficiently capitalised banks, in a pinch, can be an even greater hazard than insufficiently 
capitalised enterprises since this can pose considerable risks to financial stability as a whole. 
This  became  painfully  clear  during  the  crisis.  However,  the  task  of  ensuring  that  financial 
institutions’  capital  adequacy  is  primarily  a  regulatory  task.  Although  progress  has  been 
made, much surely remains to be done.  
Conclusion 
2.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the euro crisis has drawn attention away from Germany and to other 
countries. Those who are currently thinking of Germany are not thinking of the sick man of 
Europe. 
However, an economic advantage can dissipate very quickly. This has been demonstrated 
by  the  experience  of  current  euro-area  crisis  countries  such  as  Ireland  and  Spain,  once 
hailed as model euro-area economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Unlike those two countries, Germany is not suffering from the fallout of a burst real-estate 
bubble and ailing banks. However, the demographic burden and the economic catch-up in 
other  countries  could  lead  to  a  creeping  erosion  in  the  competitiveness  of  the  German 
economy. 
As a central banker, I cannot be unconcerned about such a scenario, for the euro area can 
only be strong and economically productive if its individual member states are, too. 
In keeping with the bonmot that “a speaker should exhaust the topic, not the audience”, I am 
aware that I have asked a lot of you. 
I would therefore like to thank you especially warmly for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
