Salvatore Rossi: Post-crisis challenges to central bank independence 
Speech  by  Mr  Salvatore  Rossi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  LBMA/LPPM 
Precious Metals Conference 2013, Rome, 30 September 2013. 
 First,  let  me  thank  the  London  Bullion  Market  Association  and  the  organizers  of  this 
conference for their invitation to take part in such an important event. I was asked to speak 
about  “post-crisis  challenges  to  central  bank  independence”.  This  is  certainly  a  key  issue, 
especially in these particular days. My speech will draw on some of the recent work of my 
colleagues at the Bank of Italy, and in particular from Franco Passacantando’s remarks at 
the World Bank last April on a similar topic.1 
the  circumstances,  however, 
Central bank independence yesterday and today2 
Over  the  past  two  centuries  reflection  on  the  nature  of  central  banks  has  been  incessant, 
proceeding hand-in-hand with the spread of these peculiar institutions. 
Today,  nearly  every  country  has  a  central  bank,  but  scholarly  opinions  still  differ  over  the 
actual  needs  that  central  banks  were  intended  to  address.  Whatever  these  needs  and 
whatever 
independence  has  been  almost  universally 
considered as the economic and legal heart of central banking. The idea that paper money 
must  be  issued  by  an  institution  that  is  independent  and  distinct  from  the  sovereign  is  an 
ancient  one:  explicit  and  still  highly  topical  passages  were  penned  two  centuries  ago  by 
Henry Thornton and David Ricardo. 
Though contested occasionally by advocates of all-embracing political sovereignty, this idea 
became rooted in economic thought and was incorporated, in varying ways and to varying 
extent, in the statutes of many central banks. 
In 
independence  of  central  banks. 
Economists,  politicians  and  ordinary  citizens  had  been  frightened  by  the  inflation  of  the 
1970s, and also highly impressed by the differing ability of the leading countries to quell it. A 
special  strain  of  economic  literature  emerged  as  part  of  the  broader  theoretical  school  of 
“new classical macroeconomics” associated with Robert Lucas and Thomas Sargent. It was 
based on the concept of “time consistency” of economic policy, i.e. the idea that if a policy is 
to be credible in the eyes of private agents with rational expectations, it must be consistent 
over time. Since policy-makers may have incentives to deviate from their policies, some sort 
of institutional straitjacket is required to constrain them to time consistency. 
The theory quickly came to be applied to monetary policy. It was argued that the only way to 
prevent  policy-makers  from  exploiting  the  short-run  trade-off  between  output  and  inflation 
and  so  to  preserve  price  stability  was  to  delegate  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
permanently to an independent central bank. 
This  line  of  thought,  lately  labeled  the  “Jackson  Hole  consensus,”3  exerted  a  profound 
influence on the reform, or initial design, of a number of old and new monetary institutions, 
theory  “rediscovered” 
the  1980s  monetary 
the 
                                                 
1   Franco  Passacantando,  “Challenging  Times  for  Central  Bank  Independence”,  http://www.bancaditalia.it/ 
interventi/altri_int/2013/Passacantando_23042013.pdf, April 2013. 
2   Based  in  part  on  Salvatore  Rossi  and  Eugenio  Gaiotti,  “Theoretical  and  institutional  evolution  in  economic 
policy: the case of monetary regime change in Italy in the early 1980s”, Storia del Pensiero Economico, 2004. 
3   The tenets of the Jackson Hole consensus are summarized in C. Bean et al., “Monetary Policy after the Fall”, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Annual Conference, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 2010. See also 
Robert Barro and David Gordon. “Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy”, Journal of 
Monetary  Economics,  July  1983,  pp.  101–22;  Alberto  Alesina  and  Lawrence  H.  Summers,  “Central  Bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
first and foremost the European System of Central Banks. No one would have questioned it 
until the outbreak of the global financial crisis and the ensuing Great Recession. 
Challenges from policies for financial stability 
Now, in the post-crisis era, the independence of central banks may be threatened first of all 
by their increasingly important role in the pursuit of financial stability. 
Until five years ago the vast majority of agents and commentators in the advanced world had 
never actually seen a systemic financial crisis; what knowledge of them they had came from 
history books. Almost everyone was firmly convinced that in advanced economies with well-
developed financial markets the optimal course of action for central banks was to sit on the 
fence and then “mop up” after a financial bubble had burst. Five years after the collapse of 
Lehman  Brothers,  however,  nobody  still  thinks  that  a  “mop-up”  strategy  alone  can  be  the 
best approach. The monetary policy authorities simply cannot ignore financial stability. 
Price  stability  and  financial  stability  are  now  seen  to  be  complementary  objectives:  the 
achievement of one not only facilitates but actually requires the attainment of the other. Any 
short-term  trade-off  between  them  can  be  attenuated  by  macroprudential  action.4  Indeed, 
preventing  the  build-up  of  systemic  risk  through  the  use  of  both  microprudential  and 
macroprudential regulation and supervision is among the tasks assigned to central banks. 
How deeply the central bank should be involved in such matters remains an open question, 
however. 
There are naturally pros and cons, but in speculating on the issue, in my view one crucial fact 
must  be  borne  in  mind:  financial  instability  can  impair  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy 
and prevent the central bank from achieving its price stability objective. This risk materialized 
in the euro area with the sovereign debt crisis. There are other fundamental arguments for 
central  banks  being  fully  involved  in  banking  regulation  and  supervision.  First  of  all  their 
lender-of-last-resort  function:  only  supervisory  powers  can  enable  the  central  bank  to 
determine correctly and promptly whether a bank is illiquid or insolvent, as the Northern Rock 
case in the UK made dramatically clear in 2007.5 
At the same time, putting more power in the hands of central banks is likely to increase the 
political pressure on them. And this is a serious challenge for these venerable institutions. 
Influencing  asset  prices  and  credit  flows  throughout  the  financial  system  makes  them  the 
perfect target for both lobbies and governments – and, of course, the ideal culprit if things go 
wrong. 
It was argued in the past that an institution in charge of both monetary policy and banking 
supervision may be tempted to be softer in setting the monetary stance in order to avert a 
banking crisis. The global financial crisis has dispelled this argument. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  historical  experience  of  countries  like  Italy,  where  monetary  policy 
and banking supervision were concentrated in a single institution – the central bank – shows 
that the independence attributed to the two functions by law and by social norms tends to be 
mutually  reinforcing  when  the  two  are  put  under  the  same  roof.  The  monetary-policy 
independence  of  a  central  bank  –  enshrined  in  statute,  confirmed  in  practice  and 
strengthened  by  hard-earned  reputation  –  can  powerfully  support  the  independence  of 
                                                                                                                                                      
Independence  and  Macroeconomic  Performance:  Some  Comparative  Evidence,”  Journal  of  Money,  Credit 
and Banking, Vol. 25, No. 2, May 1993, pp. 151–162. 
4  Paolo  Angelini  et  al.  “Monetary  and  Macroprudential  Policies,”  Banca  d’Italia  Working  5  Papers,  No.  801, 
March 2011. 
5   BIS, Central bank governance and financial stability, May 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
banking  supervision,  which  is  essential  to  its  effectiveness  according  to  international 
principles.6 
Another challenge to central bank independence comes from the resolution of banks that are 
no longer viable. If the central bank is in charge of banking supervision it obviously cannot 
abstract from bank resolution. But more often than not resolving a bank implies the use of 
taxpayers’  money,  and  a  non-elected  institution  dealing  with  it  may  find  itself  in  an 
uncomfortable position, unless proper institutional arrangements are in place. 
This  is  why  the  Banking  Union  in  Europe  is  not  a  threat  to  central  bank  independence.  A 
well-designed Banking Union will break the perverse feedback loop between sovereigns and 
banks,  not  undermining  but  strengthening  the  independence  of  the  ECB  and  the  national 
supervisory  authorities.  The  Banking  Union  must  contain  both  ingredients:  a  single 
supervisory  mechanism  and  a  single  resolution  mechanism,  flanked  by  a  single  deposit 
insurance scheme. The recent proposal by the European Commission points precisely in that 
direction.7 
The  Banking  Union  will  be  an  important  step  towards  the  completion  of  fully  integrated 
European Union. 
Challenges from unconventional monetary operations 
The global financial crisis prompted central banks in most of the advanced countries to adopt 
a wide range of unconventional monetary measures, ranging from purchases of public and 
private  assets  to  currency  swaps  and  much  more.  While  these  measures  undoubtedly 
avoided the collapse of the financial system and a devastating depression, in the perception 
of public opinion there was, and there still is, a risk of undesirable side-effects. Compared to 
standard monetary instruments, unconventional operations may have substantial fiscal and 
re-distributional  effects.  A  technocratic  institution  engaging  in  such  operations  may  be 
perceived as lacking in democratic legitimacy, and its independence may be challenged. 
In a democracy the constant support of public opinion is the ultimate safeguard for a central 
bank. On this, I would like to quote Paul Volcker: 
 
In  concept  and  practice,  an  informed  citizenry,  acting  through  a  constitutional 
process and its elected representatives, can and does assign certain of its sovereign 
powers  to  a  duly  constituted  authority.  The  corollary  of  that  provision  is  also 
relevant: that delegation of authority can be withdrawn. In other words, the exercise 
of  important  governmental  powers  is  ultimately  dependent  on  maintaining  the 
consent of the body politic.8 
Central  banks  must  accordingly  pay  increasingly  close  attention  to  defining  and  explaining 
the objectives of their action. Communication to the public and to political institutions is far 
more important today than in the past. 
Another  possible  unintended  consequence  of  unconventional  monetary  policies  is  fiscal 
dominance. It is sometimes argued that large-scale purchases of government bonds by the 
central  bank  could  blur  the  distinction  between  fiscal  policy  and  monetary  policy  and  so 
undermine  central  bank  autonomy,  which  rests  on  the  Ricardian  notion  of  separation 
between the power to create money and the government’s power to spend it. But in gauging 
                                                 
6  
Independence is also a requirement for the supervisor, as is stated in the IMF’s Financial Sector Assessment 
Program: “The supervisor possesses  operational independence, transparent processes, sound  governance, 
budgetary processes that do not undermine autonomy  and adequate resources, and is accountable  for the 
discharge of its duties and use of its resources.” 
7   European Commission, COM/2013/520/FINAL, July 2013. 
8   Paul Volcker, Il centenario della Banca d’Italia, (Milan, Libri Scheiwiller, 1994), p. 126. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  risk  that  a  central  bank  making  unconventional  bond  purchases  is  actually  creating 
money  to  finance  the  public  sector,  one  must  attentively  consider  motivations  and 
institutional safeguards.9 
In the 1970s a number of central banks, including the Bank of Italy, acted as buyers of last 
resort of government bonds on the primary market. In that case there was no possible doubt 
that  among  the  central  bank’s  motivations  price  stability  had  a  good  deal  less  importance 
than  other,  more  properly  governmental  objectives,  or  that  institutional  safeguards  were 
scant. Italy eliminated these anomalies in 1980 with what was dubbed the “divorce” between 
the Treasury and the Bank of Italy. Today, by contrast, it is clear that the Fed and the ECB, 
which have both made substantial recourse to unconventional measures, though differing in 
scale  and  modalities,  were  simply  pursuing  their  own  statutory  objectives,  by  providing 
stimulus  when  shortterm  interest  rates  were  at  the  zero  lower  bound  or  by  restoring  the 
viability of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
Future exit, when it is decided (but it is not yet time in the euro area, as the President of the 
ECB has recently made clear), will have to be cautious not only for macroeconomic reasons 
but also in order to reduce the risks to financial stability. 
Cooperation  among  central  banks  will  be  crucial,  as  it  was  in  other  phases  of  the  global 
financial crisis. 
Challenges from asset management 
Financial autonomy is an essential pillar of central bank independence. The unconventional 
measures  have  expanded  central  banks’  balance  sheets  enormously;  the  exposure  to  risk 
inherent in these asset purchases has increased accordingly. 
Central banks need to preserve their loss absorption capacity, but the very fact of suffering 
protracted financial losses, even though the reserves remain ample and can easily absorb 
them,  implies  reputational  risks  that  could  undermine  the  confidence  of  the  public  in  the 
central bank’s ability to deliver on policy targets, and could lead to government interference.10 
Central banks have deployed a broad set of tools to safeguard their financial autonomy and 
credibility.  However,  the  objectives  of  portfolio  management  for  pure  investment  purposes 
and  for  monetary  policy  functions  may  conflict  with  one  another,  especially  in  times  of 
financial  turmoil.  For  instance,  the  liquidation  of  assets  in  order  to  reduce  the  risk  of  the 
investment  portfolio  may  exacerbate  market  stress  and  be  procyclical  from  the  monetary 
policy standpoint. 
In order to deal with procyclicality, risk management techniques should focus on longer time 
horizons and be extended to the central bank’s entire balance sheet. This is one of the main 
recommendations  of  the  IMF’s  new  Reserve  Management  Guidelines  published  in  April 
2013.11 
Probably  the  most  common  response  is  diversification.  Foreign  reserve  managers  are 
increasingly interested in market segments and currencies that until recently would not have 
been  considered.  The  value  of  central  banks’  foreign  assets  other  than  gold  has  now 
reached $11 trillion, roughly 15% of world GDP. 
I  don’t  need  to  remind  you  of  the  special  role  that  gold  plays  in  central  banks’  official 
reserves.  Not  only  does  it  have  the  valuable  characteristic  of  allowing  diversification,  in 
                                                 
9   Eugenio Gaiotti and Alessandro Secchi, “Monetary Policy and Fiscal Dominance in Italy from the 1970s to the 
adoption of the euro,” Banca d’Italia Occasional Papers, No. 141, November 2012. 
10   David. Archer and Paul Moser-Boehm, “Central bank finances,” BIS Papers, No. 71, April 2013. 
11   IMF, Revised Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Reserve Management, February 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
particular when financial markets are highly integrated. In addition it is unique among safe 
assets owing to the fact that it is not “issued” by any government or central bank, so its value 
cannot be influenced by political decisions or by the solvency of any institution. 
These features, coupled with historical, political and psychological reasons, tell in favour of 
gold’s  importance  as  a  component  of  central  bank  reserves,  both  in  developed  and  in 
emerging countries. As an element that enhances the resilience of reserves to abrupt falls in 
value in times of stress, gold underpins the independence of central banks and their ability to 
act as the ultimate guarantor of domestic financial stability. 
implies  greater 
Conclusion 
One lesson the history of central banking is teaching us, applicable to the precrisis years of 
the  “great  moderation”  as  well  as  to  the  Great  Recession,  is  that  monetary  policy  works 
better when it follows a well-defined strategy, since the economy feeds on both its current 
and  its  expected  future  stance.  To  attenuate  time  inconsistency,  central  banks  need  to  be 
independent  but  at  the  same  time  accountable  and  transparent.  These  two  requisites  are 
mutually  self-reinforcing:  a  well-defined  strategy 
transparency  and 
accountability, and viceversa. 
The  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  announced  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council  last 
September are an excellent case in point. Communication was essential: we had to explain 
that  the  OMTs  were  legitimate  and  compatible  with  the  Treaty,  since  their  aim  was  to 
preserve  the  functionality  of  markets  and  thus  restore  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism. The conditionality and enforcement mechanisms were such as to prevent moral 
hazard for both borrowers and investors. Effective communication and the sound design of 
the programme helped to confirm the regime of monetary dominance that is at the heart of 
the Treaty.12 Had OMTs been considered the prelude to debt monetization and the loss of 
independence by the Eurosystem, the market reaction would have been dire indeed; instead, 
it was promptly positive. 
Why are clear strategies, transparency and accountability crucial? Because they are the key 
features of the most valuable asset that a central bank can produce: trust.13 
Ultimately, a central bank’s independence is in jeopardy when it no longer satisfies the public 
need for trust. Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, in a recent lecture at the Imperial 
College  in  London  quoted  Curzio  Giannini,  a  brilliant  Bank  of  Italy  economist  who  passed 
away prematurely nine years ago, who said: “The legitimacy of central banks does not lie in 
their policy activism, or the ability to generate income, or even […] their efficiency. Rather, 
[…] it derives from competence, moderation, the long-term approach, and the refusal to take 
any tasks beyond their primary role”.14 
In August 2012, in London, a central banker said: “Within our mandate, the ECB is ready to 
do whatever it takes to preserve the euro. And believe me, it will be enough”. A few days 
later the Governing Council of the ECB decided to launch OMTs. The public believed them. 
They had produced trust. 
 
                                                 
12   Benoît  Cœuré,  Outright  Monetary  Transactions,  one  year  on,  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/ 
date/2013/html/sp130902.en.html, September 2013. 
13   Ignazio  Visco,  “The  Financial  Sector  after  the  Crisis”,  5  March  2013,  http://www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/ 
integov/2013/05032013/Visco_05032013.pdf. 
14   Curzio Giannini, The Age of Central Banks, Cheltenham, UK, Edward Elgar, 2011, pp. 258–59. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
