Jörg Asmussen: Europe 2014 – an outlook from the ECB 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Council on Foreign Relations, New York, 21 November 2013. 
 The latest economic data suggest that the euro area is gradually advancing on the road to 
recovery – but doubts remain about where that road is leading. Some commentators think 
that  the  road  will  be  so  long  and  difficult  that  Europe  will  face  a  “lost  decade”,  like  Japan 
experienced in the 1990s. Yet this is not my view.  
I would like to us my remarks today to argue that the changes taking place in the euro area 
today will allow us to take a different path from Japan – although we need to persevere to 
ensure that a “lost decade” is definitively avoided. 
At the same time, observers should understand that the process of restructuring and reform 
this  entails  has  certain  economic  consequences  –  namely  a  period  of  current  account 
surpluses.  I  see this  as part  of  a  healthy  adjustment  that  will  help  the  euro  area  to  play  a 
constructive role in global demand in the future. 
Learning the lessons of Japan 
1. 
Let me start by illustrating how the euro area is learning the lessons of Japan. 
The term a “lost decade” came to be applied to Japan not just because economic outcomes 
were  poor,  but  also  because  little  was  done  to  address  its  structural  challenges.  In  other 
words, what was “lost” was not only current growth, but the opportunity to fix its underlying 
problems and lay the foundations for future growth. 
This is not at all the picture that I see in the euro area today – and precisely because we 
have the Japanese experience to guide us. Certainly, our growth and employment outcomes 
are  currently  weak.  But  below  the  surface  fundamental  reform  and  restructuring  is  taking 
place. We are determined not to let our crisis go to waste. 
A  key  lesson  we  have  learnt  from  the  Japanese  experience  is  the  importance  of  banking 
sector  repair  and  structural  reform.  Indeed,  a  recent  paper  on  the  Japanese  experience 
identified  delays  in  these  areas  as  the  main  factors  retarding  Japan’s  recovery  from  the 
crisis.1 On both fronts, the euro area is now making progress. 
First, substantial bank balance sheet repair has taken place since 2008. By October this year 
banks  had  raised  around  €225  billion  of  fresh  capital  and  a  further  €275  billion  has  been 
injected by governments – equivalent in total to more than 5% of euro area GDP. As a result, 
the median Tier 1 capital ratio of euro area banks currently stands above 12%.  
Nevertheless, we can see that investors are not yet convinced that the banking sector has 
fully healed – as evidenced by euro area banks’ price-to-book ratios of less than 1. This is 
why  the  ECB’s  is  now  undertaking  a  rigorous  and  comprehensive  assessment  of  banks’ 
balance sheets. We want to make sure that investors have all the facts they need. 
Such  transparency  should  dispel  investor  doubts  where  they  are  not  warranted.  It  should 
encourage proper pricing of risk where it is misaligned. And it should encourage corrective 
actions  where  they  are  needed.  As  such,  we  trust  that  it  will  have  a  similar  effect  to  the 
Federal Reserve’s stress test in 2009 that helped lift the fog over the US banking sector. 
                                                
1  T. Hoshi & A. Kashyap (2013), “Will the U.S and Europe Avoid a Lost Decade? Lessons from Japan’s Post 
the  14th  Jacques  Polak  Annual  Research  Conference, 
Crisis  Experience”,  paper  presented  at 
November 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Looking further ahead, next year we will have a new European supervisor in place and the 
year  after  a  new  resolution  framework  and  potentially  a  single  resolution  mechanism. This 
will allow for tougher supervision on weak banks, and ensure that non-viable banks can be 
wound down safely and effectively.  
Though I expect most banking sector repair to be complete by then, this banking union gives 
us the powers to ensure that banks contribute to the recovery rather than hold it back.  
We have also seen a good deal of structural reform in the euro area, in particular in countries 
under  stress. Thanks to  early  labour  market  reforms,  according to the OECD  index  labour 
market institutions in Portugal, Spain and Greece are now more flexible than those in France, 
Germany and the Netherlands. 
Reforms to increase competition and improve the business environment have been slower, 
but  in  several  countries  we  are  now  seeing  movement  in  the  right  direction.  Governments 
have improved regulatory frameworks, reformed judicial systems, removed protections from 
regulated professions and raised the quality of public administration.  
For comparison, in Japan attempts at structural reform did not start in earnest until around 
2001. Even then, the paper I referred to earlier finds that the Japanese reform programme 
had 35 initiatives out of which only 8 were directly growth-enhancing. In terms of reform, the 
euro area is therefore clearly on a different trajectory. 
What role about the role of monetary policy? 
Monetary  policy  is  clearly  not  the  solution  to  structural  problems.  Yet  maintaining  price 
stability through a period of adjustment is essential. Otherwise, real debt burdens rise and, in 
the euro area, rebalancing between countries becomes more difficult. 
Japan was unable to avoid deflationary pressures, but this is not a scenario that we foresee 
for the euro area. Inflation expectations are firmly anchored and we see no risks of deflation 
in the medium-term.  
We recently cut our main interest rate to ensure that we maintain inflation at below but close 
to 2% over the medium-term. This objective was the anchor of all our policy actions before 
the crisis; it has remained the anchor during the current crisis; and it will remain the anchor 
as the euro area economy proceeds towards recovery. 
The economic consequences of adjustment 
2. 
A comprehensive process of restructuring and reform such as we are seeing in the euro area 
naturally  has  economic  consequences.  Let  me  turn  to  those  consequences  in  the  second 
part of my remarks. 
As the public sector is consolidating, and the private sector is deleveraging and rebalancing 
towards exports, the external sector has to go into surplus for a period of time. The euro area 
current account surplus is expected to rise above 2% this year.  
There  have  been  some  claims  recently  that  this  constitutes  a  “beggar-thy-neighbour” 
approach  as  Europe  is  importing  global  demand.  I  find  this  quite  contradictory.  Observers 
cannot call on the one hand for Europe to avoid the mistakes of Japan, and then on the other 
hand criticise Europe for the inevitable consequences of doing so.  
It is also a very short-term view. Europe’s contribution to global demand in the years before 
the crisis came largely through governments, firms and households taking on too much debt. 
This  had  to  change. The  ongoing  process  of  reform  and  restructuring will  allow  Europe  to 
support global demand in the future – but in a sustainable and stable way.  
I  would  add  that  ensuring  balanced  growth  between  major  economies  would  be  greatly 
helped by efforts to accelerate regional free trade agreements, in particular the Transatlantic 
Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between Europe and the US. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It has been estimated that a comprehensive and ambitious TTIP would create 400,000 new 
jobs  in  the  EU  and  raise  EU  GDP  by  €119  billion  a  year.  The  economic  gains  for  the 
US economy would be around €95 billion a year. And these benefits would also accrue to the 
rest of the world by increasing its income by almost €100 billion a year. 
Such  efforts  on  a  regional  level  would  in  turn  create  momentum  to  revive  the  stalled 
multilateral agreements. 
Looking  within  the  euro  area,  the  main  focus  has  recently  been  on  the  German  current 
account  surplus.  There  are  various  negative  claims  made  about  this,  for  instance  that 
German  competitiveness  hinders  intra-euro  area  adjustment  and  the  return  of  stressed 
countries to growth. 
I think we need a more nuanced view. 
First, at a macroeconomic level Germany is already contributing to euro area rebalancing.  
Its surplus with the euro area has more than halved since 2007 – falling from 4% of GDP to 
2% of GDP  – and with  stressed countries it has virtually disappeared  – falling from 2% of 
GDP in 2007 to 0.5% of GDP. This is being driven in a large part by higher domestic demand 
which is structural, not cyclical in nature. 
Second,  at  a  microeconomic  level  Germany’s  export  performance  supports  both  upstream 
producers and downstream producers in the rest of Europe.  
Germany  is  at  the  centre  of  the  European  value  chain  and  is  a  gateway  to  global  value 
chains.  So  it  is  simplistic  to  assume  that  Germany  becoming  less  competitive  would 
automatically help others – it may indeed harm them. 
The  solution  to  rebalancing  is  for  other  countries  to  become  more  competitive,  not  for 
Germany to become less so. We need to maximise competitive pressures within Europe to 
achieve higher efficiency, innovation and productivity growth. 
And thanks to the structural reforms that are taking place, this is actually what we are seeing. 
For  example,  since  2011  Portugal’s  export  market  share  has  increased  by  11  percentage 
points and Spain’s by 8 percentage points.  
At  the  same  time,  I  see  a  vital  need  for  new  investment  in  Germany.  Investment  is  still 
around  1  percentage  point  of  GDP  lower  than  it  was  in  2007,  and  in  that  year  Germany 
already  had  the  lowest  investment  ratio  in  the  euro  area.  To  raise  investment  we  need 
structural reforms in Germany as well – for instance to liberalise the services sector – thus 
creating a virtuous circle of higher potential growth and better investment opportunities. 
And  by  definition,  if  more  German  savings  were  invested  at  home,  the  current  account 
surplus would also fall.  
To conclude, I do not see the current decade in the euro area as “lost” – I think it is being 
used well.  
The  decade  of  adjustment  we  are  facing  now  is  to  correct  the  mistakes  of  the  previous 
decade. But in the process, I trust we are fixing our problems at the root. 
Looking  forward  to  2014,  the  key  challenge  is  to  stay  on  this  path  to  create  the  fastest 
possible rebound in growth and job creation. 
This entails building a genuine banking union with a strong single resolution mechanism; it 
entails  finding  new  ways  to  support  structural  reform  implementation,  for  instance  through 
so-called  reform  contracts;  and  it  entails  deepening  our  political  union  to  ensure  full 
legitimacy in the eyes of citizens. 
All this requires effort and determination to achieve – but it is well within our reach. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
