Norman T L Chan: Focus in Hong Kong on treating customers fairly 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the Treat Customers Fairly Charter Launching Ceremony, Hong Kong, 28 October 2013. 
 Welcome  to  the  Treat  Customers  Fairly  Charter  Launching  Ceremony.  I  am  pleased  that 
representatives from 22 retail banks in Hong Kong gathered here today to sign the Charter, 
pledging to implement the five high-level principles set out therein. 
2. 
A customer-based, customer-oriented corporate culture is what we always applaud 
and hope for. This is true regardless of industry. However, not every industry or company is 
able  to  achieve  this,  particularly  when  they  are  under  the  pressure  of  increasing  market 
competition and the need for profit-maximisation, it is not uncommon for some companies to 
adopt  sales  and  marketing  practices  that  may  undermine  consumers’  interests.  It  has 
therefore  led  to  the  development  of  different  consumer  protection  mechanisms  in  modern 
societies  to  address  such  issues,  for  instance,  Hong  Kong  has  established  the  Consumer 
Council in this context. Nevertheless, the international community is increasingly concerned 
about the interests of financial consumers in recent years. In late 2011, the Organisation for 
Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD)  has  announced  a  set  of  high-level 
principles  for  protection  of  financial  consumers.  It  is  now  in  the  process  of  developing 
effective approaches for implementing the principles with a view to promoting the principles 
to G20 members. 
3. 
Benchmarking  against  the  OECD  principles  and  the  practices  of  some  advanced 
economies, the HKMA is of the view that Hong Kong has been doing quite well in protecting 
bank customers’ interests. We also strive to make changes and improvements from time to 
time. Yet, I believe there is a need and room for further improvements as to how banks deal 
with their customers. This is because bank customers are essentially entrusting most of their 
liquid assets or funds with banks that they trust. Trust between banks and their customers is 
beyond that between general service providers and their customers. Also, as compared to 
other financial institutions, it is indeed easier for banks to earn confidence and trust of their 
customers.  In  addition  to  bringing  business  opportunities  and  profit  to  banks,  customers’ 
confidence and trust in banks are also the cornerstone for banking and financial stability. 
4. 
Let me borrow a famous quote and put it simply that with “great trust” comes great 
responsibility. First, banks should ensure their prudential operation and risk management are 
in place to safeguard customer deposits. Second, banks should treat their customers fairly 
when  providing  various  services  and  financial  products  to  them,  and  should  stand  in 
customers’ shoes in pursuing profit. But how can we achieve this? In the past few months of 
discussion with the industry, we found that the basic principles of fair treatment to customers 
are indeed not so complicated. Mr Benjamin Hung, Chairman of the HKAB, will brief us on 
the five principles in the Charter. 
5. 
Some  people  wonder  why  don’t  we  simply  make  the  Charter  part  of  the  HKMA’s 
regulatory requirements for banks given the importance of fair customer treatment? My reply 
to this is that: banks have to deal with tens of thousands of customers every day to provide a 
great variety of services and conduct countless transactions. While imposition of regulatory 
rules would bring about some effects, no external rules could possibly be all-pervasive, more 
difficult  still  about  transforming  the  corporate  culture  or  long-standing  values  in  workplace. 
Fair treatment of customers ought to be firmly embedded in the corporate culture of banks 
that all personnel – from board of directors, chief executives, senior management, to frontline 
employees  –  will  accept,  defend  and  uphold  treating  their  customers  fairly  as  a  guiding 
principle. Banks’ incentive mechanism must also promote and support this culture in every 
aspect of the banks’ operations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
6. 
Bank  customers,  as  consumers  of  various  types  of  bank  products  and  services, 
should  receive  appropriate  protection.  While  banks  should  treat  their  customers  fairly,  the 
latter should also be responsible and smart. The most basic requirement is that customers 
should try their best to understand the products and services provided by banks, including 
credit  cards,  personal  loans,  home  mortgages  and  wealth  management  products,  their 
relevant risks, costs and expenses, and whether the products and services are suitable for 
them. Bank customers cannot and should not blindly blame banks every time an investment 
loss is incurred or when they get into financial troubles due to excessive borrowing. Banking 
customers ought to be responsible and smart. Only then could there be a sustained win-win 
situation for all concerned. In this regard, the HKMA will shortly launch a consumer education 
programme to help the public learn more about how to become a “smart and responsible” 
financial consumer. 
7. 
This  is  why  the  HKMA  has  been  working  with  the  industry  in  the  past  months  in 
developing the Charter. I am pleased to see that the Charter has received the full support of 
22 retail banks in Hong Kong. These banks are here today to sign and launch this Charter, 
pledging to provide bank customers with better and stronger protection. It also marks a new 
era  for  Hong  Kong  as  Asia’s  premier  international  financial  centre  in  the  enhancement  of 
consumer protection in the financial realm. 
8. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
