Luis M Linde: Key issues on today’s banking industry 
Closing speech by  Mr Luis  M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 6th Santander 
International Banking Conference, Madrid, 5 November 2013. 
 I would like first to give my thanks to Banco de Santander for inviting me to take part in this 
final session of your 6th International Banking Conference, an excellent opportunity to review 
and assess key issues on today’s banking industry, which has to face, in the next few years, 
important regulatory and operational changes. 
I  will  comment  on  several  elements  of  the  new  Basel  III  capital  framework  that  remain 
contentious or are still open to discussion. Among those, the leverage ratio, the liquidity ratio 
and the very important issue of consistency in implementation. Then, I will move on to the 
Financial  Stability  Board’s  work  on  resolution  strategies  and, finally,  I  will  comment  on  the 
European  Union  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD),  and  one  of  the  most 
important elements it contains, the bail-in tool.  
First,  the  leverage ratio,  the  ratio  between  Tier  1  capital  and  total  balance-sheet  and  off-
balance-sheet  exposures  not  deducted  from  the  calculation  of  Tier  1.  This  ratio  is  set,  in 
principle, at a minimum of 3%. Its entry into force as an obligatory Pillar 1 ratio is foreseen to 
be in 2018. 
This  new  tool  has  been  designed  as  a  simple,  transparent  measure,  not  linked  to  risk, 
complementing and acting as a floor with respect to the risk-based minimum capital ratio. It 
seeks to reduce excess leverage in the banking system, and to afford an additional measure 
of protection against the so-called “model risk”, i.e. against the risks associated with the use 
of sophisticated models allowed under Basel III.  
There are still doubts about this ratio as a Pillar 1 measure. I understand that the doubts do 
not  concern  the  concept,  but,  rather,  its  final  calibration  and  how  it  will  impact  on  specific 
business models, in particular, those most focused on retail activity.  
Moreover, it is not fully clear whether the best option will be a single percentage for all banks, 
irrespective of their size or business model; or whether it would be better to opt for different 
percentages,  depending  on  the  type  of  business  or  activity  of  the  bank;  or  to  establish  a 
range within which the supervisor would have discretion to decide which figure applies best 
to specific institutions.  
We believe that this new ratio can be a good prudential tool, once it is correctly calibrated. 
European regulations envisage that countries may apply the leverage ratio as they consider 
best until its harmonization in 2018, but the Banco de España does not consider necessary 
to bring forward its entry into force.  
With  regard  to  liquidity  regulation,  Basel  III  has  included,  for  the  first  time,  a  short-term 
liquidity ratio (LCR) which seeks to ensure that banks have a buffer of high-liquidity assets 
equal to 100% of foreseeable liquidity requirements for, at least, 30 days.  
The  initial  design  of  this  ratio  was  too  demanding  and,  perhaps,  not realistic.  2015  for full 
implementation was clearly too early a date. Another controversial element was the definition 
of the “high-quality liquid assets” to be included in the numerator. However, after the review 
agreed by the Basel Committee in January, the ratio definition should be now fairly stable.  
It should be noted that, rather than a minimum ratio that has to be met at each point in time, 
such as the capital or the leverage ratios, what is involved with this new liquidity ratio is the 
setting  up  of  “liquidity  buffers”  that  can  be  used  in  times  of  need.  Hence,  although  the 
minimum  level  is  set  at  100%,  a  bank  could  maintain  a  lower  level  at  stressed  times,  but 
should inform the supervisor, in order to agree on a plan to restore the required minimum 
level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
As in the case of the leverage ratio, the short-term liquidity ratio does not come into force 
immediately. We are now – the present year and next – in an observation period that needs 
to  be  used  for  its  fine  tuning.  At  the  end  of  this  period,  the  ratio  will  be  phased  in  from 
2015 – when it will be required at the 60% level – to 2018, when it will fully apply. However, 
this timetable may be accelerated at national discretion. 
In  this  regard,  Banco  de  España  does  not  consider  necessary  to  accelerate  the 
implementation timetable, although we believe that banks should make reasonable efforts to 
comply with the liquidity ratio as soon as possible. 
To sum up: We support banking prudential regulations incorporating liquidity ratios such as 
those proposed. We are aware that this will entail a major effort for banks, mainly because it 
demands  changes  in  their  management  of  this  risk.  Spanish  banks  must  be  active  in 
improving balance sheet structures.  
I would like to conclude my comments on Basel III by referring to the importance of ensuring 
that it is implemented in a consistent way across institutions and across countries.  
This objective is framed in a project undertaken by the Basel Committee to ensure that the 
benefits of having risk-sensitive regulation, like Basel III, are not achieved at the cost of an 
extremely complex legislation which, apart from other problems, brings about results that 
are not comparable across banks.  
The  Banco  de  España  agrees  with  this  initiative.  We  are  in  favor  of  simplifying  current 
regulations, seeking an appropriate balance – indeed, always a difficult balance - between 
simplicity, comparability and risk sensitivity. 
So, we view very positively the transparency exercise carried out by the Basel Committee, 
with the publication of the results of the comparative analysis of banks’ calculations of risk 
weighted assets, both in the banking and in the trading book.  
These exercises have identified significant differences which would not cause concern if they 
were due to real factors, meaning different type of business or risk profiles. There would be a 
cause  for  concern  if  the  conclusion  of  such  work  still  undergoing,  together  with  other 
initiatives  taken  by  the  European  Banking  Authority,  showed  that  those  differences  were 
largely due to differences in the application of the internal models approved by supervisors. 
In this vein, I think that the Single Supervisory Mechanism, once fully operational, will bring a 
higher degree of harmonization across the euro zone. 
The  results  of  this  exercise  demand  for  the  Basel  Committee  taking  measures  to  reduce 
those  differences,  so  that  the  credibility  of  the  solvency  ratios  is  not  called  into  question. 
However,  these  measures  should  not  go  to  such  an  extreme  as  to  abandon  the  use  of 
internal  methods  for  calculating  capital  requirements:  these  models  have  been  useful  for 
improving banks’ internal management of risk. We think that the solution may lie along the 
line  of  using  as  a  reference  for  the  internal  models  more  standardized  models,  based  on 
parameters determined by supervisors.  
Let me now move on to the debate on Resolution of financial institutions. I will first refer 
to the Financial Stability Board’s work, dealing with resolution strategies and loss absorbing 
capacity.  
The  FSB  has  developed  a  framework  to  address  the  “too-big-to-fail”  (TBTF)  problem 
associated  with  “global  systemically  important  financial  institutions”  (G-SIFIs).  As  we 
know,  this  framework  is  based  on  four  pillars:  an  enhanced  supervisory  intensity;  the 
requirement  of  a  higher  loss  absorption  capacity;  the  existence  of  effective  resolution 
regimes; and an improved resilience of market infrastructures. 
Substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  implementing  this  framework.  In  particular,  the  so 
called “Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions” have 
been endorsed by the G-20 as a new international standard.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Substantive reform has been implemented or is going to be implemented soon in the main 
jurisdictions in which G-SIFIs operate. In Spain, Law 9/2012 adopts and implements many of 
the principles set forth in the “Key Attributes”. In the European Union, the Bank Recovery and 
Resolution  Directive  is  expected  to  be  adopted  later  this  year.  It  will  be  an  important  step 
towards full implementation of the “Key Attributes” in all EU Member countries. 
The two main new elements of this new framework are, first, planning for orderly resolution; 
and,  second,  the  scope  of  the  resolution  tool  known  as  “bail-in”,  which  is  linked  to  the 
existence of an adequate level of loss absorbing capacity in each G-SIFI. 
Work  on  resolution  planning  is  currently  under  way  within  Crisis  Management  Groups 
(CMGs), now set up for all the G-SIBs. There has been considerable progress in developing 
resolution  strategies  and  identifying  conditions  relating  to  the  firms’  legal,  operational  and 
financial structures and their impact on resolvability. 
I would now like to comment on the resolution strategies being developed for global banking 
groups. These strategies are broadly based on two approaches:  
• 
The one called “single point of entry resolution” (SPE groups), in which  resolution 
powers are applied at the top of the group by a single resolution authority;  
And  the  one  called  “multiple  point  of  entry  resolution”  (MPE  groups),  where 
resolution tools are applied to different parts of the group by two or more resolution 
authorities acting in a coordinated way.  
 Of course, the choice of the strategy needs to take into account the structure and business 
model of each banking group.  
A “Single Point” strategy may be better suited to a firm that operates in a highly integrated 
manner (through, for example, centralised liquidity, trading, hedging and risk management). 
On the other hand, an “Multiple Point” strategy may be suitable for financial groups with a 
decentralised structure and greater financial, legal and operational separation along national 
or  regional  lines,  with  sub-groups  of  properly  capitalised,  self-funded  subsidiaries,  which 
have enough managerial resources as stand-alone businesses. 
The  feasibility  and  credibility  of  the  “Multiple  Point”  strategy  will  mostly  rely  on  two  main 
issues:  
• 
First, an effective cross-border coordination based on the cooperation agreements, 
the  resolution  plans  and  with  the  involvement  of  the  resolution  authorities  of  the 
main jurisdictions in which the groups operate.  
Second, a balanced loss absorbing capacity allocation across the group, according 
to local business risk profile in each jurisdiction. 
 Both  elements  will  mitigate  the  risk  of  financial  fragmentation  due  to  non-coordinated 
measures taken by the different authorities, namely, “ring fencing” initiatives. 
Spanish G-SIBs fully comply with the pre-conditions to be considered “Multiple Point” 
groups:  they  are  organised  through  local  retail  banking  subsidiaries;  critical  economic 
functions,  e.g.  payment  systems,  are  organized  at  the  local  level;  subsidiaries  are  self-
sufficient in capital and funding; and they rely on separate firms detached from the bank for 
operational support, for instance, on information systems.  
So,  although  there  are  still  many  issues  to  be  clarified,  we  think  that  the  most  realistic 
resolution  approach  for  the  Spanish  international  banking  groups  is  the  “Multiple  Point” 
strategy, provided that, in the event of resolution, their organisational and financial structures 
are suitable for healthy parts to be sold or maintained as a surviving group, split from their 
distressed sister  companies,  using  other resolution  tools  such  as  asset transfers  or  bridge 
banks.  
Now, I will go to the second main element of the new framework, the bail-in instrument.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Next  year,  most  of  the  FSB  work  on  resolution  will  focus  on  preparing  proposals  on  the 
adequacy  of  G-SIFI  loss  absorbing  capacity  in  resolution,  namely,  what  we  call  “gone 
concern  loss  absorbing  capacity”  or  GLAC.  This  concept  is  similar  to  the  Minimum 
Requirement of Eligible Liabilities (MREL) set up in the EU Bank Recovery and Resolution 
Directive. 
This  G-SIFIs  loss  absorbing  capacity  is  a  complex  matter,  involving  the  need  to  clarify  or 
determine  a  long  list  of questions, for  instance: its  characteristics, minimum  amount,  intra-
group  distribution  and  triggers  for  it,  enforceability  of  bail-in;  regulatory  limits  on  loss 
absorbing holdings, and disclosure.  
Let me underline that a shared view on the characteristics and levels of this “loss absorbing 
capacity”  is  critical  for  a  “level  playing  field”  among  G-SIFIs.  Also,  we  must  avoid  any 
approach  that  might  be  considered  as  an  additional  layer  of  differentiated  capital 
requirements, a sort of differentiated “Tier 3” requirement.  
As I mentioned before, determination of the appropriate levels of GLAC must be dependent 
on  the  complexities  and  risk  of  the  activities  developed  by  each  institution.  The  approach 
currently  being  worked  out  in  the  European  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive,  in 
terms of both identifying characteristics and specific levels or of “eligible liabilities” is, in our 
opinion, a correct approach to the problem. 
Now, my last point, the discussion in Europe regarding the European Union bank recovery 
and resolution directive and the entry into force of the bail-in arrangements included in that 
directive. 
Although still under discussion, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive bail-in is to be 
introduced  in  a  sequenced  way.  Bail-in  of  regulatory  capital  instruments  will  be  applicable 
from  the  moment  the  Directive  is  transposed,  while  bail-in  of  senior  creditors  can  be 
postponed to 2018, depending on each Member State. 
Since we are also moving forward in setting-up a Single Resolution Mechanism [SRM] for the 
17 Member States that share the Euro, an agreement has to be reached on the moment in 
which  bail-in  of  senior  creditors  becomes  applicable,  as  rules  have  to  be  the  same  to  all 
Euro-members.  
In this regard, it is important to note that, while sharing the main objective of bail-in, many of 
the  Eurosystem  Central  Banks,  including  Banco  de  España,  have  shown  concerns  on  the 
early application of bail-in tools for senior creditors, due to its potential destabilizing effects. 
We would advice against too short a sequencing. 
I will finish my address of today saying that my guess for 2014 related to banking regulation 
and supervision, is that it is going to be a “fully loaded” year for the industry, and for national 
authorities and supervisors.  
I wish all of you good luck and good courage, and for all our visitors, a happy stay in Madrid. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
