Njuguna Ndung’u: Enhancing the reach and coverage of financial 
services to Kenyans 
Keynote speech by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, during 
the launch of the FinAccess Survey Report 2013, Nairobi, 31 October 2013. 
 Hon. Henry Rotich, the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury; 
Hon.  Aden  Mohamed,  the  Cabinet  Secretary  to  the  Ministry  of  Industrialization  and 
Enterprise development; 
The Chief Executive Officers of the Domestic Financial Sector Regulators; 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is my honour and pleasure to join you this morning to formally  launch the results of our 
third national survey on access to financial services in Kenya. Before making my remarks, let 
me take this opportunity to thank all the collaborating partners under the Financial Access 
Partnership (FAP), FinAccess Management comprising of Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) and 
the Financial Sector Deepening (FSD) Kenya as well as the FinAccess Secretariat based at 
the  Research  and  Policy  Analysis  Department  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  for  making 
today’s  launch  possible.  Let  me  also  appreciate  our  technical  partner,  the  Kenya  National 
Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), for providing critical support to the initiative. 
On a solemn note, we recall the loss of Mr. Ravindra Ramrattan of FSD Kenya, following 
the  terrorist  attack  at  the  West  Gate  Mall  on  21st  September  2013.  Ravi  was  a  devoted 
member  of  the  FinAccess  Secretariat  and  contributed  immensely  to  the  survey.  Let  us 
observe a minute of silence in honour of those we lost in the West Gate Mall Tragedy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The Government recognizes the vital role the financial system plays 
in  the  economy.  In  this  regard  Kenya’s  development  blue  print,  Vision  2030,  covering  the 
period 2008–2030, envisages the financial services sector being transformed into a vibrant 
and globally competitive sector that will drive high levels of savings to finance the country’s 
investment  needs.  The  transformation  entails  doubling  deposits  mobilization  from  44%  to 
80% of GDP and enhancing growth of savings channelled into productive investments from 
14%  to  over  30%.  This  goal  can  be  achieved  by  addressing  the  Vision’s  three  core 
objectives,  namely:  enhancing  financial  system  stability,  efficiency,  and  expanding 
financial access and usage. 
• 
theme 
this  morning, 
there  would  be  no  meaningful 
Regarding the objective of Expanding Access to Financial Services, which is our 
main 
financial  sector 
development, if it is not accessible. There is, therefore, a case for expanding access 
of  quality  and  affordable  financial  services  and  products  to  majority  of  the 
population.  Access  to  finance  will  encourage  savings  and  credit.  This  will  effect 
savings/investments  cycle,  allowing  for  capital  accumulation  and  asset  building 
which  enables  the  poor  to  escape  poverty.  Safe  havens  for  savings  by  the  poor 
reduce their vulnerability to periodic economic and social shocks. Access to finance 
will expand the level of participants and so lower unit costs. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Our efforts to ensure expanded financial access have been 
measured  by  three  national  financial  access  surveys  for  2006,  2009  and  2013. 
These  surveys  have  clearly  demonstrated  that  Kenya’s  financial  landscape  has 
considerably  changed  over  the  period  2006–2013.  The  financial  system  is  now 
offering a wider range of financial services and products to more Kenyans, covering 
a  wider  geographical  spread,  and  even  going  beyond  Kenyan  borders.  This  has 
strengthened  the  banks  and  created  a  wider  market.  These  developments  are  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  testimony  to  the  strength  and  vibrancy  of  our  banking  sector  it  has  contributed  to 
Kenya’s financial development. 
Enhancing the Efficiency of the financial system has an immediate impact on the 
welfare  of  its  customers  and  the  wider  real  economy  through  the  consequent 
reduction  of  costs  of  financial  services.  Competition  is  essential  in  ensuring  that 
financial  institutions  are  incentivised  to  invest  in  improving  productivity,  efficiency 
and  cost  effectiveness.  The  CBK  has  acted  to  encourage  greater  transparency  in 
pricing of financial services and products to foster effective competition and delivery 
of services to majority of Kenyans. 
On  the  Financial  Stability  Front,  the  Government  has  continued  to  implement 
necessary  reforms  designed  to  strengthen  the  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework in to ensure stability of the financial system. Lessons from the 2008–2009 
global  financial  crisis  call  for  regulators  to  invest  in  better  regulation.  Better 
regulations is characterised by a regulatory framework with ability to: 
− 
− 
− 
readily identify weaknesses and emerging vulnerabilities; 
analyse and price risks; 
provide appropriate incentives (and penalties) to induce prudent behaviour 
in the market place; and 
encourage innovations and develop strong institutions of the regulators and 
the regulated – strong institutions enforce the rules of the game and define 
appropriate incentives. 
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  I  am  delighted  to  note  that  the  FinAccess  Survey,  2013  results 
bears  witness  to  the  above  gains  made  in  enhancing  the  reach  and  coverage  of  financial 
services  to  Kenyans.  It  shows  that  the  proportion  of  the  adult  population  using  formal 
financial  services  rose  to  66.7%  in  2013  from  27.4%  and  41.3%  in  2006  and  2009, 
respectively.  The  proportion  of  the financially  excluded  on  the  other  hand  has  been falling 
steadily  from  39.3%  in  2006  to  31.4%  in  2009  and  now  stands  at  25.4%  of  the  adult 
population.  Equally  and  more  striking,  the  proportion  of  the  population  using  informed 
financial  services  has  declined  to  7.8%  from  35.2%  in  2006  and  26.8%  in  2009.  These 
findings  demonstrate  impressive  achievements  and  vindicate  policy  strategies  and  reforms 
undertaken by Government and initiatives and innovations by the financial sector players’ as 
having helped expand financial inclusion. It is even more interesting to note from the results 
that  many  more  people  are  now  accessing  and  using  financial  services  and  products 
supplied  by  diverse  providers.  This  shows  that  people  are  now  moving  towards  using  a 
broader  portfolio  of  financial  services  and  products  to  satisfy  their  needs.  The  use  of 
combinations  of  all  formal  prudential,  formal  non-prudential,  other  formal  and  informal 
financial services except the excluded has been rising from 16% in 2006 to 25% in 2009 and 
to 29% in 2013. These patterns demonstrate that financial sector participants require choices 
and therefore the need to maintain diversity and encourage competition amongst providers of 
the different financial products in different market segments. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  survey  results  we  are  releasing  today  are  as  a  result  of 
developments  in  the  wider  economy,  policy  and  regulatory  reforms,  increased  competition 
and  innovation  and  advances  in  information  and  communication  technology.  These 
developments  have  set  off  a  dramatic  shift  away  from  the  traditional  delivery  of  financial 
services. In the banking industry, the introduction of Automatic Teller Machines (ATM) a few 
years ago already moved customers out of the physical branches. And now more than ever, 
access through point-of-sale (POS) devices, the internet and mostly through mobile phones 
platforms  have  accelerated  and  are  still  poised  to  accelerate  the  swing  to  branchless 
banking.  We,  however,  still  have  some  ground  to  cover  in  expanding  access  to  financial 
services, given that about 25% of the population remains totally excluded. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The information generated by the past three FinAccess surveys will 
help  financial  service  providers  identify  where  opportunities  exist.  I  am  delighted  that  the 
sector now has such useful information resource at its disposal. 
In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me also observe that the FinAccess studies have 
been  championed  and  driven  by  a  partnership  between  public  and  private  institutions.  I 
commend  and  support  such  initiatives  and  hope  that  this  lays  the foundation for  a  deeper 
and sustained partnership between the public and private sector in tackling the challenges 
and  taking  advantage  of  opportunities  that  arise.  In  this  regard,  I  thank  all  the  institutions 
under  the  FAP  that  have  contributed  in  various  ways  towards  these  FinAccess  surveys, 
particularly the 2013 survey – notably the FSD, Kenya, Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 
(KNBS),  Kenya  Bankers  Association,  the  research  house  TNS-RMS,  Kenya  Institute  for 
Public  Policy  Research  and  Analysis  (KIPPRA),  Kenya  Commercial  Bank  (KCB), 
Development Alternative International (DAI) and the CBK. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Beside  the  FinAccess  studies  that  provide  us  all  with  valuable 
information  as  to  where  we  should  focus  our  efforts  most  in  order  to  achieve  our  goal  of 
providing  affordable  and  accessible  financial  services  and  products  to  majority  Kenyans.  I 
wish  to  inform  you  that  FAP  is  also  working  with  CBK,  FSD,  Kenya  and  Bill  and  Melinda 
Gates Foundation on the spatial mapping of all financial access touch points, the findings of 
which will improve our understanding on how to enhance financial inclusion.  
With these few remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, I welcome you to this breakfast event and 
look forward to the Launch. 
THANK YOU.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
