Mark Carney: The spirit of the season 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, to the Economic Club of New York, New York City, 9 December 2013. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
It is always a pleasure to be in New York during the festive season. At this time of year in this 
city everything seems possible. However for some time now, appearances have deceived. 
The  hopes  and  dreams  of  the  holiday  season  have  gone  unfulfilled  as  the  bright  lights  of 
December have given way to the grim realities of January. 
Around this time every year policymakers, investors and economists take stock. For four of 
the past five years, perhaps caught up in the seasonal spirit of goodwill, they have rendered 
the  same  verdict:  the  outgoing  year  was  disappointing  but the  incoming  one  will  be  better 
(Chart 1). This year is no different. The IMF, the Bank of England and private forecasters all 
predict faster growth in the advanced and global economies in 2014. Will such hopes again 
be dashed once the New Year dawns? 
More  profoundly,  as  the  string  of  disappointments  lengthens,  some  are  raising  deeper 
questions. It is being suggested that a malign spirit, a spectre of Christmases past, haunts 
our future. In  particular,  no  less  an  authority  than  Larry  Summers  has  raised  the  prospect 
that “secular stagnation” could be the root cause of past excess and current weakness. 
Today, I want to explore those deeper questions and what they mean for policy. But before 
raising  the  pessimists’  challenge,  let  me  first  keep  with  recent  practice  by  setting  out  this 
year’s reasons for optimism. 
Grounds for optimism 
The news from the UK is positive. Inflation has fallen, from more than 5% in 2011 to 2.2% 
now, jobs are being created at a rate of 60,000 per month, and growth is – for the moment – 
the  strongest  in  the  advanced  world.1  This  recovery  is  relatively  recent,  having  started  in 
earnest during the second quarter of the year. Its timing and pace caught most unawares. 
Certainly,  the  cumulative  run  of  economic  surprises  has  dwarfed  those  of  the  other  major 
advanced economies (Chart 2). 
With  the  wisdom  of  hindsight,  there  were  three  main  drivers  of  the  recovery:  a  marked 
reduction in extreme uncertainty (Chart 3); significant progress on repairing the core of the 
financial  system,  with  risk-weighted  capital  ratios  doubling  in  recent  years;  and  a  marked 
improvement in household balance sheets, where debt to income ratios have fallen by about 
30 percentage points. 
Together, improved access to finance and raised expectations of future prospects led to a 
reduction in precautionary savings by households, a modest recovery in consumer spending, 
a revival in housing investment from very low levels and an increase in business confidence 
to a 15-year high. 
The  American  and  British  experiences  underscore  that  recovery  is  not  possible  without  a 
meaningful  and  transparent  re-capitalisation  of  the  banking  system,  and  that  households 
need to de-lever before they have the confidence to consume again. 
                                                
1  60,000 jobs per month in the UK is roughly the equivalent of monthly increases in US non-farm payrolls of 
300,000. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  question  now  is  whether  such  progress  is  sufficient  for  durable,  strong  and  balanced 
recoveries over the medium term. 
Growing pessimism 
The pessimists would argue that it isn’t. Their case starts from the observation that advanced 
economy growth rates remain below pre-crisis trends, despite the scale of the fall and years 
of  emergency  monetary  stimulus.  More  fundamentally,  pessimists  point  to  the  pre-crisis 
period  when  (retrospectively)  loose  financial  conditions  did  not  generate  a  boom  in  output 
and associated inflation. 
They ask: could stagnation be the new normal? 
Today I want to consider two possible explanations for why advanced economies may have 
entered a low growth phase. First, on the demand side, they could be in a persistent liquidity 
trap, making it difficult for resources to be fully utilized, and second, there may have been a 
persistent deterioration in the supply side such that full utilisation of resources is consistent 
with slower growth. 
Persistent liquidity trap 
1. 
A liquidity trap occurs when the short-term nominal interest rate hits the zero lower bound. 
Typically in a liquidity trap, the equilibrium real interest rate is negative, creating a persistent 
inability to match aggregate demand and supply. 
Before  proceeding,  I  should  make  clear  what  I  mean  by  the  equilibrium  (or  natural)  real 
interest rate. Let me use Roger Ferguson’s definition: it is the level of the real policy rate that, 
if allowed to prevail for several years, would place economic activity at its potential and keep 
inflation low and stable. 
For small open economies, like the UK, that equilibrium real rate is determined at the global 
level by the balance of the supply of savings and demand for investment. In the run-up to the 
crisis, that balance had shifted decisively as what Chairman Bernanke christened a “savings 
glut” from emerging economies developed. The flipside of that was low demand for advanced 
economy  exports  and  low  domestic  demand  in emerging  economies.  Only  very  low  global 
real interest rates could spur sufficient domestic demand in advanced economies to maintain 
activity at its potential level. 
The  problem  of  course was  that  the  expansion  of  demand  in  advanced  economies  largely 
took the form of unsustainable consumption rather than business investment. 
The ensuing financial crisis pushed the equilibrium real interest rate down further and, with 
nominal interest rates stuck at zero and inflation low, monetary policy  was unable to push 
actual real rates to a level low enough to maintain full employment. 
The  danger  in  such  a  situation  is  that  it  can  become  unstable  as  weak  demand  and 
uncertainty cause companies to hold back investment and households to postpone spending. 
With the balance of savings and investment deteriorating, the equilibrium real interest rate 
falls even further. At the same time, wages and prices are forced down, pushing actual real 
interest rates higher. A deflationary spiral results. 
That is not the only danger. Attempts to reach a very low or negative equilibrium real interest 
rate  –  both  through  conventional  reductions  in  short-term  interest  rates  and  through 
unconventional asset purchases – can risk generating unbalanced, unsustainable demand. 
In particular, as my predecessor Mervyn King has emphasised, by encouraging spending to 
be  brought  forward  from  the  future  and  debt  to  be  accumulated  in  the  present,  a  greater 
shortage of demand tomorrow will develop unless the income of those who have taken on 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  debt  picks  up.2  If  it  does  not,  monetary  policy  will  have  to  “double  down”  in  order  to 
sustain demand. Such compounding stimulus could promote financial vulnerabilities through 
an indiscriminate search for yield, a compression of risk premia to unsustainable levels or via 
extrapolative expectations of future asset prices. Perceptions of a “central bank put” – where 
the market interprets all bad news as good news because it will be met with more central 
bank stimulus – can reinforce these risks. When the inevitable correction finally occurs, the 
shortfall in demand and scale of the liquidity trap is insurmountable. 
To what extent does this sketch resemble the current situation in the UK? 
As  its  policy  stance  reflects,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  judges  that  the 
equilibrium  real  interest  rate  has  been,  and  continues  to  be,  negative.  Despite  very  low 
interest rates, resources are not fully employed. 850,000 more people are out of work than in 
the years before the crisis and GDP is around 20% below an extrapolation of its pre-crisis 
trend. 
As  bad  as  these  figures  are,  the  scale  of  the  mismatch  between  aggregate  supply  and 
demand  has  not  been  large  enough  to  generate  a  deflationary  spiral.  Despite  persistently 
weak nominal  wage growth, rising import prices and  weak productivity  growth have meant 
that the UK’s problem has been the need to bring inflation back to the target from above. In 
this  regard,  there  has  been  welcome  progress.  Headline  inflation  has  fallen  back  much 
sooner than we expected at the start of the year, and core inflation measures are running 
close to but slightly below the 2% target. 
What  then  of  the  risks  of  unbalanced  growth?  This  is  more  delicate.  Despite  admirable 
progress by British households in recent years, aggregate debt levels remain high at 140% of 
incomes. In addition, housing activity is picking up and price growth appears to be gaining 
momentum. Moreover, the UK current account deficit is near record levels. 
These developments merit vigilance but not panic. The housing recovery could reflect higher 
future income expectations, prompted by the nascent recovery, and better credit conditions. 
Although  the  current  account  position  underscores  the  need  for  the  recovery  to  shift  over 
time towards investment and export growth, it would be unreasonable to expect that to have 
happened already. Recoveries are seldom led by investment and strong demand from the 
UK’s  major trading  partners,  including the  euro  zone,  appears  some  way  off.  Ultimately,  a 
sustained recovery in the UK will require a more robust and balanced global recovery. 
In summary, the UK has been in a situation where the equilibrium real rate of interest has 
been  negative,  but  with  monetary  policy  gaining  traction,  there  is  early  evidence  that  the 
liquidity trap will be escaped over time. That is not to suggest the warnings are without merit, 
that interest rates can return to normal soon, that the risks to financial stability arising from 
the  emergency  stance  of  monetary  policy  are  not  real,  or  that  escape  would  bring  the 
freedom to grow at historic rates. 
It  is  in  this  last  respect  that  the  second  story  for  a  “secular  stagnation”,  persistently  weak 
supply, is most relevant. 
Supply pessimism 
2. 
In  many  advanced  economies,  despite  persistently  disappointing  output  growth, 
unemployment rates have remained surprisingly low. Based on a simple Okun relationship, 
the current UK unemployment rate would be expected to be closer to 14% and the US rate to 
be around 10%. In fact, they are 7.6% and 7.0% respectively (Chart 4). 
                                                
2  A  point  emphasised  by  Mervyn  King,  for  example  here:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/ 
Documents/speeches/2012/speech613.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
These discrepancies have reinforced the worries of some that weak potential supply growth 
will  constrain  the  pace  of  recovery.  Possible  explanations  for  such  weakness  range  from 
demographics to a slowing in the rate of technological progress. 
It seems unlikely that communicating in 140 characters – useful discipline though that is – 
represents the apex of human progress. Nor should central banks always and everywhere 
take supply as exogenous. Central banks can affect people’s decisions about how much to 
work  and  firms’  decisions  about  how  much  to  invest.  When  the  outlook  is  particularly 
uncertain, as it is in the wake of a major financial crisis, this influence could affect potential 
supply. Monetary policymakers must consider the extent to which their decisions affect, not 
just depend on, the path of output.3 
In  the  US  this  question  has  been  the  subject  of  much  debate.  A  recent  Federal  Reserve 
Board  paper  argues  that  potential  supply  growth  is  likely  to  respond  to  demand  as  the 
economy recovers, for example through capital deepening, as well as the behaviour of the 
labour market.4 
The rise in unemployment here in the US has been tempered by a fall in the rate of labour 
force participation and a slowdown in productivity growth (Charts 4 and 5). It is quite possible 
that, with a recovery in demand, those discouraged from looking for work will return to the 
labour  force.  Given  the  risks  of  hysteresis,  that  is  more  likely  to  happen  the  more  quickly 
demand  recovers.  This  dynamic  suggests  scope  for  a  strong  recovery  in  which  falls  in 
unemployment are much more limited than usual. 
Potential growth in the UK could also be pro-cyclical but for different reasons. In Britain, the 
employment rate has fallen only a third as much as in the US (Chart 6). The flipside of that 
strength  has  been  exceptionally  weak  productivity  growth  (Chart  7).  Will  UK  productivity 
growth pick up alongside demand? The fundamentals are promising. Given the flexibility of 
its labour market, the continued openness of the economy and the credibility of macro policy, 
it is hard to think of any reason why there should have been a persistent deterioration in the 
rate of potential growth in Britain. 
This hypothesis holds particularly now that the UK financial system is beginning to function 
more effectively. Until recently, the weakness of the banking system limited the reallocation 
of  capital  and  labour  from  less  to  more  productive  activities.  Indeed,  whereas  half  of  all 
productivity growth at the economy-wide level in the years prior to 2008 occurred through this 
channel, reallocation appears to have made no contribution to productivity growth in recent 
years.5 
There are other reasons to think that growth itself should bring a supply side improvement. 
As the economy recovers, investment should pick up and part-time workers should shift into 
more productive full-time work. With the sharp fall in real wages during the recession (Chart 
8),  employees  effectively  priced  themselves  into  low-productivity  work  at  a  time  of  weak 
demand. To the extent that this allows skills to be retained and reduces costs of replacing 
                                                
3 
In economists’ jargon, the extent to which potential supply is endogenous. This opens the possibility of there 
being “multiple equilibria”, something my colleague David Miles has reminded us was a central message of 
Keynes but that has been lost to much of the latest generation of New Keynesian modelling. See “Monetary 
Policy  and  Forward  Guidance 
speech  by  David  Miles,  available  at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech681.pdf. 
the  UK”,  a 
in 
4  David  Reifschneider,  William  L.  Wascher,  and  David  W.  Wilcox  (2013).  “Aggregate  Supply  in  the  United 
States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy”, Finance and Economics 
Discussion  Series  2013–77.  Board  of  Governors  of 
(U.S.). 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2013/201377/201377abs.html. 
the  Federal  Reserve  System 
5  See  Alina  Barnett,  Maria  Barriel,  Adrian  Chiu  and  Jeremy  Franklin.  “The  Productivity  Puzzle:  Firm-Level 
Perspectives”, Bank of England Working Paper, forthcoming. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
particularly  skilled  employees  as  the  recovery  takes  hold,  the  recovery  could  generate 
greater supply capacity and real wage growth as it proceeds. 
It  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  these  positive  outcomes  to  materialise  immediately. 
Weak  growth  may  have  meant  that  companies  have  missed  out  on  productivity  advances 
that  would  otherwise  have  been  made  through  learning  by  doing.  Skills  have  atrophied 
through underemployment rather than unemployment. The recovery will therefore need to be 
sustained for a period before productivity – and real wage – gains can resume in earnest. 
That picture is borne out in the latest UK data, which show that the early phase of recovery 
has  been  accompanied  by  some  productivity  gains  but  also  by  further  strong  employment 
gains. 
In summary, while the UK’s experience does not rule out the possibility that supply growth 
has  slowed,  the  thesis  is  only  beginning  to  be  tested.  And  the  nature  of  the  slowdown, 
particularly  in  the  labour  market,  suggests  that  supply  will  likely  increase  with  demand  for 
some time. 
Policy implications 
The risks to supply and the risks associated with the liquidity trap imply that central banks 
need to deploy a wide range of policies in a coordinated fashion. 
The  most  obvious  implication  is  that  monetary  policy  should  respond  aggressively.  To 
prevent the liquidity trap from becoming a coffin, central banks have set monetary policy at 
emergency  levels  by  reducing  short-term  interest  rates  to  their  lowest  feasible  levels, 
undertaking  large-scale  asset  purchases,  and  pursuing  targeted  interventions  to  ease 
funding  and credit  conditions. The  possibility  that  potential  supply  will  itself  depend  on the 
speed of recovery reinforces this policy bias. 
Forward  guidance  is  integral  to  the  response.  It  reduces  uncertainty  by  providing 
reassurance  that  monetary  policy  will  not  be  tightened  prematurely  before  the  recovery  is 
sufficiently entrenched to sustain higher rates. This helps give households and businesses 
the confidence to spend and invest. And, by setting a threshold for the unemployment rate, 
guidance  helps  us  to  test  the  endogeneity  of  supply.  If  supply  responds  to  recovering 
demand, unemployment will fall more slowly than otherwise and the point at which  we  will 
re-evaluate the stance of monetary policy will come later. 
What of unbalanced growth? The Bank of England is alive to the risks of extended stimulus, 
and  given  its  responsibility  for  macro-prudential  policy,  it  can  act  in  a  timely  fashion  to 
mitigate them. The  Bank  demonstrated this flexibility  recently  with  a  package  of measures 
targeted at the housing market, and it has outlined a broad range of additional tools if further 
action were required. 
The synergies of combining the monetary and macro-prudential authorities in one institution 
could  be  considerable.  By  sharing  analysis  and  clearly  assigning  a  hierarchy  of 
responsibilities between them, the Bank’s MPC and its financial policy equivalent, the FPC, 
are ensuring that measures are timely, proportionate and targeted. For example, the Bank’s 
Funding  for  Lending  scheme,  originally  put  in  place  for  monetary  policy  purposes,  was 
refocused from household to small business lending for financial stability purposes. Similarly, 
both committees have made it clear that monetary policy is the last line of defence against 
financial stability risks, thereby establishing clear lines of responsibility and accountability. 
This  coordination  is  particularly  important  if  either  of  the  “secular  stagnation”  stories  is 
relevant.  By  addressing  risks  to  financial  stability,  the  Bank’s  FPC  helps  ensure  that 
monetary policy can remain as stimulative as necessary for as long as necessary to achieve 
its  objectives.  In  doing  so,  it  reduces  the  risk  of  a  deepening  liquidity  trap  caused  by 
compounding debt-fuelled consumption. And it helps to lay bare more clearly the underlying 
growth potential of the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The third aspect of the policy response is better financial regulation and supervision. In both 
the US and UK, the repair of the financial sector was a prerequisite for recovery. Indeed, one 
of  the  reasons  behind  a  persistently  negative  equilibrium  real  interest  rate  has  been  the 
restricted supply of credit from a damaged banking system. Going forward, financial reforms 
will  help  guard  against  excessive  pro-cyclicalities  that  could  emerge  in  a  “low  for  long” 
environment. 
But financial reform is about much more than fixing the failings in advanced economies; it is 
one of the keys to rebalancing the global economy. The global savings glut will not disappear 
in the absence of further financial liberalisation in China. That will only proceed if there is a 
transparent,  resilient  global  financial  system  worth  joining,  and  will  only  be  completed  by 
further internationalisation of the renminbi. Those realities are key reasons why the Bank of 
England is so engaged in the work of the Financial Stability Board and has moved to support 
London as a hub for renminbi clearing. 
Conclusion 
For the first time in a long time it seems reasonable to expect the hopes and dreams of the 
holiday season to be fulfilled. 
The  Ghost  of  Christmas  Present  is  a  cheerful  spirit.  As  uncertainty  diminishes,  credit 
conditions improve and balance sheet repair progresses, monetary policy is gaining traction. 
The  strength  of  the  UK  recovery  and  the  fall  in  its  unemployment  rate  suggest  that  the 
equilibrium real interest rate is now rising gradually back towards zero. 
The Ghost of Christmas Past should not be forgotten. A recovery may be gaining pace but 
our  economies  are  a  long  way  from  normal.  Leverage  is  still  high  and  weak  demand  for 
advanced economy exports could persist for some time. 
The Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come suggests that it is unlikely that equilibrium interest rates 
will  return  to  historically  normal  levels  any  time  soon.  This  prospect  puts  a  premium  on 
macro-prudential  policies  and  financial  reforms  to  manage  the  associated  risks  without 
abandoning the need to keep interest rates in line with the equilibrium level. 
So while it is unsurprising that the ideas behind secular stagnation are being revived, it would 
be a mistake to rush to a more extreme macroeconomic response. There is a long history of 
pessimism  in  economics,  from  Thomas  Malthus  through  Alvin  Hansen  to  Robert  Gordon. 
Such  worries  have  proven  misplaced  in  the  past  and  scepticism  is  warranted  now.  Don’t 
forget that the US economy is more than 13 times larger than when Hansen first formulated 
his ideas. 
Similar  performance  must  again  be  possible.  Central  banks  are  playing  a  catalytic  role  to 
help deliver it but their contribution will ultimately be limited. The most important drivers of 
long  term  prosperity  will  be  measures  taken  by  others  to  increase  the  growth  of  supply, 
particularly those that reinforce an open, global economy. Such good deeds will truly merit 
the goodwill of all men and women. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Annex 
 
Chart 1: 
Chart 2: 
Persistent disappointment in advanced 
economies’ GDP growth 
Outturns1
 Calendar year growth (%)
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
IMF October WEO forecasts:
2008
2011
2009
2012
2010
2013
2012
2013
2009
2010
2011
 
1  Outturns are taken from October 2013 WEO, 2013 
point is a forecast. 
Source: IMF 
2014
Cumulative surprise in UK activity indicators 
since May 2013 has dwarfed that of US and 
euro area1 
Standard deviations from mean
United Kingdom 
Euro Area
United States
Sep
Nov
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
May
Jul
2013
 
1  Shows  the  cumulative  sum  of  normalised  differences 
between selected indicators of economic activity and their 
expected value as surveyed by Bloomberg, divided by the 
square root of the number of releases.  
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations 
Chart 3: 
Chart 4: 
Measures of uncertainty in the UK have 
fallen sharply1 
US unemployment rate has fallen by more 
than UK 
Standard deviations from mean (1985-2012)
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009 2012
Swathe of uncertainty indicators
First principal component
 2000
2004
2008
2012
 UK Unemployment Rate
US Unemployment Rate
1  For  further  details,  including  of  the  indicators  used  and 
sources, see  Haddow,  A,  Hare, C,  Hooley,  J  and Shakir,  T 
(2013), “Macroeconomic uncertainty: what is it, how can we 
measure  it  and  why  does  it  matter?”,  Bank  of  England 
Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 2, No. 2, pages 100–109. 
Source: ONS, BLS 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 7 
Chart 5: 
Chart 6: 
US employment rate has fallen by more 
than UK rate 
US participation rate falling, UK rate rising 
 2000
2004
2008
2012
 68
67
66
65
64
63
62
 67
66
65
64
63
62
61
60
59
58
57
2000
2004
2008
2012
UK Participation rate
US Participation rate
 UK Employment Rate
US Employment Rate
 Source: ONS, BLS 
Source: ONS, BLS  
Chart 7: 
Chart 8: 
UK productivity exceptionally weak 
UK real wages have fallen 
£ at 2010 prices
40
£ at 2010 prices
600
35
30
25
20
15
10
1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012
Output per hour worked
Trend
 550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012
Real wages per week
Source: ONS, Bank of England calculations 
Source: ONS, Bank of England calculations 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
