Ishrat Husain: Key issues in managing Pakistan’s economy  
Inaugural address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Seminar on 
Management  of  Pakistan  Economy,  organised  by  the  Lahore  School  of  Economics,  Lahore, 
28 April 2005. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Pakistan was one of the few developing countries that had achieved an average growth rate of over 
5 percent  over  a  four  decade  period  ending  in  1990.  Consequently,  the  incidence  of  poverty  had 
declined from 40 percent to 18 percent by the end of 1980s. But the 1990s proved to be a lost decade 
for Pakistan; growth in per capita income dropped to slightly over 1 percent. Poverty resurfaced and 
about  one-third  of  the  population  now  lives  below  the  poverty  line  of  $1  per  day.  Social  indicators 
became worse than those of other countries with comparable incomes. The country became one of 
the heavily indebted countries and was declared as one of the most corrupt countries in 1996. The 
challenge facing the government which assumed power in October 1999 was to put the economy back 
to its pre-1990 track. 
Pakistan has come a long way since the 1998/99 crisis when the country was on the brink of default 
and  international  reserves  had  been  depleted,  economic  growth  was  anemic,  debt  ratios  were 
alarmingly  high,  confidence  of  the  investor  community  was  at  its  lowest  ebb  and  credibility  among 
international  financial  institutions  was  eroded.  Economic  growth  rate  has  reached  a  solid  6  percent 
plus, inflation has been contained to 5 percent which has only recently started rising, exchange rate 
has been stabilized, fiscal deficit has been drastically reduced, domestic interest rates have declined 
dramatically, international reserves have jumped twelve times their 2000 level, debt ratios have fallen 
significantly  and  investment  is  booming.  Pakistan’s  creditworthiness  has  been  upgraded  to  B+  by 
S&P. It is one of the few developing countries that have graduated from a successful completion of an 
IMF program to directly accessing international financial markets. 
I would start off with an overview of the economic reforms and policies put in place by the government 
since 2000, examining their main components, their aims and objectives and the degree of success 
achieved.  I  will  then  offer  an  assessment  of  the  experience  during  this  period  and  then  offer  some 
concluding remarks. 
Economic management since 2000 
2. 
The turnaround witnessed in the economy has not occurred all of a sudden but is the outcome of a 
deliberate and carefully designed program of economic reforms undertaken over the last five years; 
some  of  them  still  ongoing.  The  comprehensive  strategy  announced  by  President  Musharraf  in 
December 1999 consisted of four key elements: 
(a) 
Restoration  of  Macroeconomic  Stability  and  Pakistan’s  relationship  with  the  International 
Financial Institutions. 
Structural Reforms to remove distortions. 
Improving Economic Governance and reviving key Institutions. 
Poverty Alleviation through targeted interventions and Social Safety Nets. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
The  interconnection  between  economic  growth,  poverty  reduction,  structural  reforms  and  improved 
governance is fairly strong in the case of Pakistan. Macroeconomic stability and the consequent rapid 
economic  growth  help  reduce  poverty  in  conjunction  with  investment  in  social  sectors,  targeted 
interventions and social safety nets. Structural reforms are needed to strengthen the underpinning of 
macroeconomic  policies  and  to  remove  microeconomic  distortions  affecting  key  sectors  of  the 
economy  thus  paving  the  way  for  accelerating  economic  growth.  Improved  governance  affects  the 
quality  of  growth  by  allowing  realization  of  higher  returns  on  investment  and  is  also  conducive  to 
poverty reduction through better delivery of social services to the poor. Poverty reduction, as we know 
by now, can be achieved with rapid economic growth, structural reforms and improved governance. 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 1
Macroeconomic stability 
2.1. 
Macroeconomic stability has been achieved through reduction in fiscal deficit, acquiring a surplus on 
the current account balance of payments, lowering of inflation, and a transformation of external debt 
profile.  These  have  been  brought  about  partially  through  the  support  of  international  financial 
institutions  and  the  Paris  Club  bilateral  creditors  which  significantly  eased  the  external  payments 
position that had been a major and consistent risk to the economy since 1998. 
Fiscal  deficit  was  reduced  by  pursuing  a  combination  of  four  sets  of  policy  measures  (i)  mobilizing 
additional tax revenues (ii) reducing subsidies to public enterprises and corporations and (iii) bringing 
about a significant decline in debt servicing payments and (iv) containing defence expenditures. 
Monetary  policy  was  kept  reasonably  tight  during  the  first  two  years  with  money  supply  growth  at 
about  9  percent.  Expansion  in  private  sector  credit,  in  the  subsequent  years,  did  not  put  much 
pressure as the government borrowing was limited to a manageable level. As the monetary conditions 
improved,  the  interest  rate  came  down  gradually  to  a  single  digit  and  demand  for  credit  by  private 
businesses picked up resulting in higher capacity utilization in manufacturing and increased industrial 
production. However, with the mounting of inflationary pressures in recent months, the State Bank is 
taking measures to tighten its monetary policy; the interest rates are expected to go up gradually in the 
coming months so as not to hurt the growth of the economy. 
External  debt  management  focused  on  (a)  reprofiling  of  the  stock  of  official  bilateral  debt,  (b) 
substituting  concessional  loans  for  non-concessional  from  international  financial  institutions,  (c) 
pre-paying expensive loans and (d) liquidating short-term liabilities. Debt ratio was thus reduced from 
100 percent of GDP to 60 percent in five years time. 
Trade  policy  in  Pakistan  has  been  categorized  by  the  World  Bank  as  one  of  the  least  restrictive  in 
South  Asia  along  with  Sri  Lanka  and  this  policy  has  gradually  provided  incentives  to  exporters  to 
increase  their  market  share  in  the  global  markets.  Exchange  rate  policy  was  pursued  to  maintain 
stability  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets  while  at  the  same  time  keeping  the  competitiveness  of 
Pakistani exports intact. Large accumulation of foreign reserves played an important role in stabilizing 
the exchange rate. 
2.2.  
Structural reforms 
Financial sector reforms 
Financial sector has made the farthest progress by transforming itself into a market oriented, private 
sector  dominated  sector  performing  efficient  intermediation.  Reforms  that  have  been  successfully 
implemented since 2000 spanned over a whole range of initiatives. Prominent among them were (a) 
privatization of nationalized commercial banks and fostering competition, (b) strengthening regulatory 
supervisory and enforcement capacity of the SBP, (c) lowering the cost of capital by dealing with non 
performing loans, reducing corporate tax burden and bringing cost-income ratios down, (d) revising the 
legal  structure  particularly  the  foreclosure  laws  (e)  broad  basing  access  to  the  middle  income  and 
lower income groups by opening up provision of credit for agriculture, SMEs, consumer financing and 
micro  credit  (f)  introducing  and  enforcing  stringent  corporate  governance,  internal  controls, 
transparency and enhanced disclosure standards (g) liberalizing the foreign exchange regime and (h) 
promoting technological upgradation of the banking industry through Ebanking, ATMs etc. 
A  financial  sector  assessment  carried  out  jointly  by  the  World  Bank  and  the  IMF  conclude  that 
Pakistan had been able to establish a sound, efficient financial system that can withstand exogenous 
shocks.  The  restructured  financial  system  has  responded  well  to  the  expansionary  monetary  policy 
that was pursued during the period 2001/02 – 2003/04 to stimulate aggregate demand and kick-start 
the economy. 
Tax reforms 
Tax  reforms  have  attempted  to  widen  the  tax  base,  strengthen  tax  administration,  promote 
self-assessment, eliminate whitener schemes, reduce multiplicity of taxes and tackle the culture of tax 
evasion and corruption. A new Income Tax Ordinance has been introduced in 2001, which allows for 
universal self-assessment, uniform tax rates, removal of non-adjustable withholding taxes, elimination 
of exemptions and detailed audit. Moreover, the tax survey and documentation drive during 1999-2000 
has allowed the CBR to bring in additional income tax payers and new sales tax payers into the tax 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2005
net.  It  has  also  profiled  600,000  tax  payers  which  will  help  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  tax 
assessment, and help detect tax evasion and under-reporting. 
Tariff reforms 
Pakistan made significant efforts in liberalizing its trade regime during the 1990s. The maximum tariff 
rate  has  declined  from  225  percent  in  1990-1  to  25  percent;  the  average  tariff  rate  stands  at  just 
11 percent compared to 65 percent a decade ago. The number of duty slabs has also been reduced to 
four.  Quantitative  import restrictions  have  already  been eliminated  except  those relating  to  security, 
health, public morals, religious and cultural concerns. The number of statutory orders that exempted 
certain  industries  from  import  duties  has  been  phased  out  by  June  2004  and  import  duties  on 
4,000 items were reduced. These measures have brought down effective rate of protection, eliminated 
the  anti-export  bias  and  promoted  competitive  and  efficient  industries.  A  number  of  laws  have  also 
been promulgated to bring the trade regime in conformity with World Trade Organization regulations. 
These  include  antidumping  and  countervailing  measures  and  strengthening  of  intellectual  property 
rights. 
Privatization 
Public  sector  corporations  have  been  a  constant  source  of  burden  on  the  budget  as  well  as 
quasi-fiscal accounts. As much as one-third of the fiscal deficit could be directly attributed to the losses 
of public corporations. In addition, nationalized commercial banks had been carrying a large burden of 
these corporations. A new law was promulgated under which privatization can take place. This step 
was  necessary  to  ensure  transparency,  provide  an  institutional  and  legal  framework,  avoid 
unnecessary delays and litigations, and outline the process through which the transactions are to be 
carried out. 
Four major banks along with several other key public sector units have already been sold to strategic 
investors  in  the  private  sector.  Shares  of  large  companies  such  as  Oil  and  Gas  Development 
Company Ltd. and Pakistan Petroleum Ltd. have been divested through public offerings. Plans to sell 
the Pakistan Telecommunications Co. Ltd. (PTCL) and Pakistan State Oil (PSO) – the two giants - are 
under implementation. 
Deregulation 
As Pakistan has embarked on the process of creating competitive markets and eliminating direct or 
implicit consumer and producer subsidies, a number of steps have been taken to deregulate prices 
and trading in various sectors. The most far-reaching reform has taken place in the oil and gas sector. 
Imports and pricing of petroleum products have been deregulated and the private sector is now free to 
import  and  fix  prices.  An  automatic  price  adjustment  formula  for  consumer  prices  of  petroleum 
products linked with international prices has been adopted. Price distortions in natural gas have also 
been eliminated and new pricing framework has been put in place. 
The government has freed up agricultural prices by moving towards market based pricing. With a view 
towards allowing farmers to receive international prices for their produce, all restrictions on the import 
and export of agricultural commodities have been removed. Wheat procurement and trade, which was 
until recently an exclusive monopoly of the state, has been opened up to the private sector. Exports of 
wheat and wheat products have also been allowed to the private sector. 
Deregulation  and  liberalization  of  the  economy  have  given  rise  to  an  interesting  by  product  – 
weakening  of  the  public  functionaries’  power  to  collect  rents,  extort  bribes  and  exhibit  arbitrary 
behaviour. This has a positive impact on the quest for improved governance in the country. 
Governance and institutions 
2.3.  
The  cornerstone  of  the  governance  agenda  is  the  devolution  plan  which  transfers  powers  and 
responsibilities, including those related to social services from the federal and provincial governments 
to  local  levels.  This  plan  was  put  into  effect  in  2001.  The  development  effort  at  the  local  level  is 
expected  to  be  driven  by  priorities  set  by  elected  local  representatives,  as  opposed  to  bureaucrats 
sitting  in  provincial  and  federal  capitals.  Devolution  of  power  will  thus  strengthen  governance  by 
increasing  decentralization,  transparency,  accountability  of  administrative  operations,  and  people’s 
participation in their local affairs. 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 3
Other  essential  ingredients  for  improving  economic  governance  are  the  separation  of  policy  and 
regulatory functions, which were earlier combined within the ministry. Regulatory agencies have been 
set up for economic activities such as banking, finance, aviation, telecommunications, power, oil, gas 
etc. The regulatory structures are now independent of the ministry and enjoy quasi judicial powers. 
The Chairman and Board members enjoy security of tenure and cannot be arbitrarily removed. They 
are  not  answerable  to  any  executive  authority  and  hold  public  hearings  and  consultations  with 
stakeholders. 
The National Accountability Bureau (NAB) has been functioning quite effectively for the last five years 
as  the  main  anti-corruption  agency.  A  large  number  of  high  government  officials,  politicians  and 
businessmen have been sentenced to prison, subjected to heavy fines and disqualified from holding 
public office for twenty-one years on charges of corruption after conviction in the courts of law. Major 
loan  and  tax defaulters were  also  investigated,  prosecuted  and  forced  to  repay  their overdue  loans 
and taxes. 
Transparency  in  public  policy  making,  the  watchdog  role  of  a  fierce  and  independent  media  and 
vigilance by an emerging set of civil society organizations are also beginning to make a contribution 
towards better governance. Freedom of Information Act has provided the legal basis for dissipating the 
opacity of the decision making process. 
The nascent role of the Parliamentary Sub-committees on various ministries and the strong and visible 
role  of  the  Public  Accounts  Committee  (PAC)  are  also  acting  as  a  brake  on  the  whimsical  and 
discretionary  behaviour  of public  officials.  But  it  has to  be  realized  that  most of  the  accounting  and 
financial rules are outdated and do not meet the requirements of modern management. This tension 
between  strict  observance  of  antiquated  rules  and  the  imperatives  to  take  timely  actions  and 
implement policies can only be resolved if an exhaustive review of the rules is undertaken. The fear of 
the PAC and NAB will otherwise end into a paralysis of decision making by the bureaucracy. 
Institutional reforms 
Civil  service  reforms  aimed  at  improving  recruitment,  training,  performance  management,  career 
progression,  right  sizing  of  ministries  and  attached  departments,  and  improving  compensation  for 
government employees are the reforms that have been initiated for building strong institutions in the 
country. In order to depoliticize recruitment, promotions and career development, the independence 
and  responsibilities  of  the  Federal  Public  Service  Commission  (FPSC)  have  been  enhanced  and  is 
now  fully  in  charge  of  merit  based  recruitment  and  promotions.  The  Civil  Service  Act  has  been 
amended to reflect performance based career progression and would enable the government to retire 
civil servants who are inefficient and/or corrupt. The public sector educational training infrastructure is 
also being restructured to strengthen skill based training of civil servants at all levels. 
The reforms in some of the most important federal institutions – the Central Board of Revenue (CBR), 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  of  Pakistan  (SECP),  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  (SBP)  and 
Pakistan Railways – initiated some years ago - are already beginning to take some hold and making a 
difference as far as governance is concerned. 
Reforms  in  access  to  justice  will  deal  with  delays  in  the  provision  of  justice,  case  management, 
automation,  and  court  formation  systems.  In  addition,  human  resources,  management  information 
systems and the infrastructure supporting judicial system are being revamped and upgraded. Small 
Causes Courts have been established to provide relief to the poor who have small claims. 
Extensive  police  reforms  have  been  introduced  to  separate  the  law  and  order,  investigation,  and 
prosecution functions of the police and promote functional specialization. Public Safety Commissions 
have  been  set  up  at  the  federal,  provincial  and  district  levels,  which  will  institutionalize  public 
accountability of Pakistan’s Police Force. To improve the overall performance of the policy, enhancing 
efficiency,  logistics,  communication,  mobility  and  training  are  to  be  given  greater  emphasis.  The 
example of motorway police in this respect is illustrative of the quick turnaround that can be brought 
about through better incentives and logistic support. 
The  progress  on  institutional  reforms  in  Pakistan  has  not  made  any  serious  strides  with  a  few 
exceptions  such  as  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  of  Pakistan 
(SECP),  Auditor  General  and  more  recently  the  Central  Board  of  Revenue.  Devolution  to  local 
government  which  started  off  very  well  on  a  good  footing  in  2001  has  got  stuck  in  sorting  out  the 
provincial - local government relationships. 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2005
Similarly, the reforms of Civil Service, Police and judiciary have to be intensified as part of the second 
generation reforms in the next five years. As these are quite tough to implement and cut across many 
structure and boundaries, a suitable mechanism has to be put in place to manage this process. 
Poverty reduction 
2.4.  
Reducing poverty is a medium-to-long term phenomenon and it is unrealistic to expect a significant 
decline in the incidence of poverty in the short term. It took almost 12 years for poverty to rise from 
18 percent  in  1988-89  to  33  percent  in  2000-01.  It  will  take  at  least  another  decade  to  halve  it  to 
16 percent,  if  appropriate  strategy  is  pursued.  Therefore,  it  becomes  essential  to  examine  the 
elements of this strategy and come to a conclusion whether this objective is attainable or not. 
The medium term strategy for poverty reduction enunciated in the Poverty Reduction Strategy paper 
consists of four elements 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Accelerated Economic Growth 
Increased Public Expenditures 
Poverty Targeted Interventions 
Social Safety Nets. 
Accelerated economic growth 
(a)  
From a low of 1.8 percent GDP growth recorded in 2000-01 the growth rate picked up gradually to 
5.5 percent  in  2002-03,  6.4  percent  in  2003/04  and  most  likely  to  reach  7.5  percent  this  year. 
Therefore the key is to sustain this high rate of economic growth over the next ten years. Investment 
ratios have to rise from the present level of 19 percent to 25 percent by 2009-10 and the productivity of 
investment  has  to  improve  at  the  same  time.  The  drivers  of  growth  identified  in  the  PRSP  are 
agriculture, SMEs, construction and housing, oil and gas and information technology. While the first 
three  will  certainly  accentuate  the  pro-poor  pattern  of  growth  and  help  in  poverty  reduction  energy, 
security will be attained from oil and gas exploration and productivity gains from extensive use of I.T. 
Increased public expenditures 
(b)  
Agriculture  sector  growth in  Pakistan  is  highly  correlated with  availability  of  water  for  irrigation.  The 
reservoirs built in the 1960s and 1970s have made a huge difference to food security of Pakistan. But 
these reservoirs are getting silted while the requirement for water is on rise. Thus public expenditure 
will  give  priority  to  water  resource  development  through  new  reservoirs,  rehabilitation  of  existing 
canals  and  barrages,  lining  of  water  courses  and  conservation  of  water.  Public  expenditure  on 
education have to be doubled from 2 percent of GDP to 4 percent in the next five years and similarly 
health, water supply and sanitation will be given higher allocations. 
Poverty targeted interventions 
(c) 
Economic growth is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for poverty reduction. Where poverty is 
endemic,  high  economic  growth  must  be  accompanied  by  direct  poverty  alleviation  measures. 
Towards  this  end,  poverty  targeted  intervention  programs  consisting  of  several  major  elements  are 
being introduced. These elements include: (i) integrated small public works program in both urban and 
rural  areas  (Khushal  Pakistan  Program),  and  the  (ii)  development  of  microfinance  sector  to  help 
improve credit access of the poor. 
Public works 
Khushal Pakistan Program had generated economic activity in the country through local public works. 
The provinces, in close collaboration with the local authorities and communities, completed almost half 
a  billion  dollars  of  small  projects  creating  about  1  million  job  opportunities  along  with  essential 
infrastructure  in  rural  and  low  income  urban  areas.  The  program  has  resulted  in  construction  of 
farm-to-market  roads,  rehabilitation  of  water  supply  schemes,  repair  of  existing  schools,  small  rural 
roads, streets, drains, and storm channels in villages. Moreover, the program has been supplemented 
with the schemes for lining of watercourses and laser land leveling, desilting canals, and provision of 
civil amenities in towns, municipal committees, and metropolitan corporations. 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 5
Microfinance 
The role of microfinance in poverty alleviation and employment generation has been widely accepted. 
The  government  has  established  a  micro-credit  bank  (Khushali  Bank),  as  a  prototype  institution  for 
providing  credit  access  to  poor  households.  This  bank  has  so  far  reached  out  to  200,000  poor 
households  throughout  the  country.  The  work  of  this  bank  has  been  reinforced  by  the  Pakistan 
Poverty Alleviation Fund, which through a network of partner organizations in non-governmental sector 
has reached out to another 300,000 poor families. 
Education and health 
Pakistan’s  poor  educational  outcomes  have  become  a  major  constraining  influence  on  its  quest  for 
integration in the global economy. High rates of illiteracy, particularly among women, low educational 
attainment of the labour force, and lack of qualified technical and scientific manpower have impeded 
economic growth. 
The strategic thrust of Education Sector Reforms (ESRs) consists of (a) achieving universal primary 
education and adult literacy; (b) improving the quality of education; (c) renewed focus on technical and 
vocational  education.  Higher  education  and  Science  and  technological  research  capacities  are  also 
being  bolstered  in  the  country.  Madarassahs  are  being  brought  into  the  mainstream  educational 
system so that their products can find gainful employment in the economy. The National Commission 
on Human Development is mobilizing community volunteers to bring out-of-the school children into the 
system. Female educational enrolments have jumped in the province of Punjab since the girl students 
were awarded monthly stipends to support their education. 
The  new  health  policy  follows  a  “health  for  all”  approach  based  on  accessibility,  affordability  and 
acceptability of health services by the general population. The health strategy places greater focus on 
a continuous shift from curative services to preventive health services by improving the primary health 
care system. Improvements in health status are taking place mainly through maternal and child health, 
communicable and infectious disease control and elimination of nutrient deficiencies. The budget for 
the Expanded Program of Immunization has been increased and coverage is being expanded in rural 
areas  as  well  as  among  women.  A  sound  tuberculosis  control  program,  HIV/AIDS  program,  and 
antimalaria program are also under implementation. The shift of public expenditures from tertiary to 
primary  and  secondary  health  care  and  devolving  and  decentralizing  financial  and  administrative 
powers to local tiers form the crux of the health sector reforms. This new approach provides a clear 
signal  that  preventive  rather  than  curative  health  care  will  be  given  priority  in  allocation  of 
expenditures. 
Poor access to water supply and sanitation are often associated with poor health outcomes. At present 
only  63  percent  of  the  country’s  population  has  access  to  safe  drinking  water,  whereas  proper 
sanitation facilities are available to only 39 percent of the total population. The government is planning 
to increase water supply facilities and sanitation facilities to reach 100 percent of population as part of 
Millennium Development Goal. Construction of drinking water supply and sanitation facilities is already 
receiving prime importance under the Khushal Pakistan Program. 
Social safety nets 
(d) 
As part of Social Safety Net Program, the government has launched direct cash-transfer programs for 
poor  families  through  medical  assistance,  and  educational  stipends  from  the  Bait-ul-Maal  (a  public 
welfare  program).  The  Food  Support  Program  covers  1.2  million  of  the  poorest  households  with 
monthly incomes of up to Rs2,000 per family (US$35). A system of needs testing has been adopted 
for the identification of beneficiaries by linking the program with the zakat system. 
The zakat program that targets widows, orphans and the disabled has been strengthened. About two 
million beneficiaries received assistance from the Zakat Fund, of which 0.5 million receive assistance 
on  a  regular  basis.  It  is  envisaged  that  an  additional  1.5  million  will  be  added  to  the  list  of  zakat 
recipients  through  rehabilitation  schemes,  which  will  provide  micro  loans  of  Rs10,000  (US$160)  to 
Rs50,000 (US$800) each for starting up small businesses. An allocation of Rs5 billion (US$80 million) 
has been made for these schemes in addition to the normal stipends to mustahqeen (the needy) out of 
the  Zakat  Fund.  It  is  estimated  that  zakat  contributes  10-15  percent  to  the  government’s  poverty 
reduction program. 
The school feeding program for female students (Tawana Pakistan Program), which was successfully 
piloted  in  a  few  districts,  will  be  replicated  throughout  the  country.  This  program  will  help  address 
6 
 BIS Review 30/2005
malnutrition in female students as this has resulted in low enrolment, high absenteeism/dropout rate 
and low cognitive achievement. It is estimated that community mobilization will strengthen ownership 
of this program and lead to a 30 percent decrease in the dropout rate. 
The Employees Old-age Benefits Institutions (EOBI) and provincial social security institutions provide 
pension  and  medical  care  benefits  to  private  sector  employees.  Sindh  and  Punjab  provide  medical 
care benefits to about 700,000 beneficiaries and their dependents. The Workers Welfare Fund also 
provides support to workers and their families. 
3.  
Assessment and conclusion 
Assessment 
3.1 
In making the assessment of the last five years. I will address two questions that are uppermost on the 
minds of most Pakistanis within or outside the country. 
The first question that arises in the discussion of Pakistan’s economic turnaround is as to how much of 
this can be attributed to the favourable external environment created as a result of 9-11 and how much 
is due to better economic management. 
My own assessment of the situation is that while the favourable external environment has definitely 
helped  and reinforced  the  thrust  of  the  economic  policies  and  reforms,  its  impact would  have  been 
short lived and transitory in absence of the reforms and policies and improvement in governance that 
have been undertaken during the last five and a half years. The macroeconomic indicators had started 
looking  good  even  before  Sept.  11  but  the  removal  of  sanctions,  resumption  of  assistance,  and 
diversion of remittances through the banking channels did definitely provide an impetus. I would argue 
that the reprofiling of Paris Club Debt would have taken place in any event as the IMF had agreed on 
the  three-year  PRGF  and  debt  reprofiling  upon  the  successful  completion  of  the  9-month  Stand-by 
Program before Sept. 11. It should be kept in mind that the impact of Sept. 11 upon the Pakistan’s 
economy  has  not  been,  by  any  means,  an  unmitigated  blessing.  Export  orders  were  cancelled  and 
export  target  for  that  year  was  missed  by  $1  billion.  Shipping  freights  and  insurance  premia  were 
raised  substantially,  foreign  investors  and  buyers  stopped  visiting  Pakistan  and  the  fledgling  I.T. 
industry suffered a severe set back. Some of the consequences of that shock are still lingering on in 
form of a negative perception of Pakistan in the Western media. 
The quantum of assistance from the U.S. accruing to Pakistan does not form a significant proportion of 
our foreign exchange receipts. If we combine all the bilateral official flows from the U.S. they do not, on 
average, exceed $1 billion annually. Pakistan’s foreign exchange earnings will amount to $25 billion 
this  year.  Thus,  contrary  to  the  popular  belief  that  Pakistan’s  economy  will  collapse  if  the  U.S. 
withdraws  its  official  assistance,  the  truth  of  the  matter  is  that  the  amounts  involved  are  too 
insignificant. What we really need from the U.S. is better market access to our exports on the same 
terms as allowed to the Central American, Caribbean and African States. Pakistan can earn twice as 
much as it will receive in official assistance from the U.S., if this market access is allowed. 
The second popular view that is commonly prevalent is that we do not have independent economic 
policies and that we follow the policies dictated to us by the IMF and the World Bank. It is true that 
when we needed the IMF’s assistance to reprofile our Paris Club Debt we had no choice at that time 
but to comply with the conditionalities set by them. But once we had achieved that objective and had 
set our own house in order, it was no longer necessary to agree to all their conditionalities. We did 
agree and implement those which were beneficial to our own interests. 
Most of the policies prescribed by them e.g. fiscal discipline, mobilizing tax revenues, removing tariff 
barriers,  privatizing  public  enterprises,  maintaining  low  inflation,  etc.  all  make  perfect  sense  and  no 
economist  in  his  right  mind  could  take  an  issue  with  them.  Where  the  shoe  pinches  is  that  these 
policies  are  reduced  to  quantifiable  targets  and  performance  criteria  for  each  quarter  and  for  any 
slippages or deviations, however, legitimate they may be during that particular quarter, the country is 
penalized  and  its  reputation  is  put  in  jeopardy.  This  sort  of  micromanagement  is  resented  by  the 
economic managers of the developing countries. I would argue that as long as the country is moving 
on  the  right  path  in  implementing  the  desirable  set  of  reforms,  the  speed,  phasing  and  sequencing 
should be left to the economic managers and not controlled by the IMF. As you are all aware that we 
have said good-bye to the IMF since September 2004 and did not draw down the last two tranches to 
which we were entitled to on the basis of our performance. In the past, if we were confronted with the 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 7
oil  price  shock  that  we  are  facing  today,  we  would  have  certainly  run  to  the  IMF  for  balance  of 
payments support and enter into a program. But, the resilience of our economy has been tested in the 
wake of this large oil price increase and we have been able to maintain a stable exchange rate, high 
reserve accumulation and low external debt ratios. 
Going forward, Pakistan is faced with several major challenges. In the short term, as the inflationary 
pressures have become quite intense in the last 9 months, serious efforts have to be made to bring 
inflation under control. The poor, vulnerable and fixed income groups are the worst affected by this 
menace. On the demand side, monetary policy is being tightened and interest rates have been raised. 
On the supply side, the new wheat crop should be able to quell the food inflation. There is still great 
uncertainty about oil prices. If they start receding from the peak levels this will have a favourable effect 
on the general price level and help in moderating inflationary expectations in the coming months. 
The other challenge is the management of balance of payments situation. As imports of machinery 
and  equipment  along  with  the  higher  oil  bill  have  pushed  the  level  of  imports,  trade  deficit  has 
widened.  So  far,  increased  flow  of  workers’  remittances,  foreign  direct  investment  and  other 
concessional flows have been able to finance this deficit but, in the long run, widening of our export 
base, penetration in new markets and increasing the productivity of textile exports are the only safe 
ways to minimize trade imbalances. 
Pakistan’s Tax-GDP ratio has remained stagnant at low levels and the tax net is limited to 1.1 million 
tax  payers  of  which 0.45 million  are salaried  workers.  Thus,  the  dependence  on  regressive  indirect 
taxes  has  created  a  disproportionately  high  burden  on  the  middle  and  lower  income  groups.  Tax 
reforms underway should aim to increase the buoyancy and elasticity of the tax system. 
The  biggest  problem  that  has  retarded  equitable  growth  in  Pakistan  has  been  low  investment  in 
human development, particularly the female education. 
More recently the active participation of private and non-governmental sector has given rise to some 
hope that quality of education will improve. But the critical question of access to education by the poor 
quintiles still has not been satisfactorily addressed. Government has the responsibility to finance the 
poor  households’  education  and  health  needs  but  it  can  provide  these  services  through  other 
providers rather than itself. 
As  the  economy  moves  on  the  path  of  7  to  8  percent  sustained  growth  over  the  next  decade,  the 
shortages,  congestion  and  inadequacy  of  physical  infrastructure  will  become  quite  apparent.  Under 
the  given  fiscal  envelope  the  public  sector  development  program  can  only  finance  one  half  of  the 
annual  requirements.  The  other  half  has  to  come  through  the  private  sector  or  privatepublic 
partnership. For the latter, we have to work out contractual arrangements whereby the end users can 
easily afford to pay the cost of these services. 
Finally  and  the  most  important  bottleneck,  in  my  view,  is  the  way  of  rapid  economic  growth  and 
poverty  reduction  will  be  the  lack  of  capacity  of  Civil  Service,  Police  and  Judiciary  to  function  as 
effective institutions in implementing the policies and programs, treating the citizens equitably and with 
respect and redressing their grievances in a just manner. The politicization of these institutions has 
ingrained an attitude of risk aversion and apathy, an instinct of survival and an indifference towards 
competence  and  merit.  Unless  comprehensive  reforms  of  these  institutions  are  undertaken,  we  will 
have serious difficulty in maintaining the speed of growth and spreading its benefits to the poor. 
Conclusion 
3.2 
Pakistan  has  achieved  macroeconomic  stability,  introduced  structural  reforms,  improved  economic 
governance and resumed the path for high growth rates. But there is no room for complacency as we 
are  confronted  with  challenges  of  poverty  reduction,  employment  generation,  balanced  regional 
growth, upgrading social indicators and containing inflation. 
The second generation reforms aimed at strengthening the country’s institutions and their capacity to 
deliver  basic  services  along  with  the  continuation  of  sound  and  consistent  economic  policy  and 
investment  in  human  development  and  infrastructure  will  be  able  to  steer  the  country  on  the  right 
course. 
8 
 BIS Review 30/2005
