I J Macfarlane: Some recent economic developments in Australia  
Opening statement by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House of 
Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration, Melbourne, 
12 August 2005. 
 I  would  like  to  start  by  saying  how  pleased  I  am  to  be  back  in  Melbourne  in  these  familiar 
surroundings.  Since  these  half-yearly  hearings  started  in  May  1997,  this  is  the  sixth  time  we  have 
appeared  in  Melbourne,  and  the  seventh  time  in  Victoria  –  the  other  time  being  in  Warrnambool  in 
2002.  I  hope  that  the  discussions  are  as  fruitful  and  informative  as  they  have  been  on  the  earlier 
occasions.  
On Monday we released our quarterly Statement on Monetary Policy, and you will not be surprised to 
hear that what I have to say today is very similar to it. In fact, what I have to say is also very similar to 
a speech I gave on 14 June. The past couple of months or so has been a particularly stable period 
and we have not felt the need to change our views much, if at all. Rather than going over all the recent 
developments at this time, I will concentrate on a few that I think are important.  
The first, as always, is the world economy. It would be possible for someone reading the newspapers 
to get the impression that the world economy is in a parlous state – rising oil prices, large US current 
account deficit, China on a knife edge, Japan still stagnating, the US dollar about to plunge, etc. You 
will  be  pleased  to  hear  that  we  are  not  of  that  view.  In  fact,  we  have  for  quite  a  long  time  been 
relatively optimistic about the outlook for the world economy.  
When  looked  at  region  by  region,  there  is  good  growth  nearly  everywhere.  Obviously,  the  United 
States, China, India and East Asia are doing well, but the places we tend to overlook are also doing 
well  –  for  example,  Latin  America,  the  Middle  East  and  the  former  Soviet  Union.  Even  Africa  has 
picked  up,  and  so  has  Japan.  The  only  area  that  continues  to  disappoint  is  continental  Europe, 
particularly the big three – Germany, France and Italy.  
Oil price increases are a source of concern, but their rise is primarily due to strong world demand, not 
to  supply  restriction  as was  the case  in  OPEC  I  and  II.  They  also  do  not  appear  to  have added  to 
inflation  or  inflationary  expectations,  and  so  have  not  required  a  policy  response.  Much  discussion 
recently has focused on the US current account deficit as a source of risk to the world economy. It has 
been argued that the United States might encounter difficulty financing its deficit and that this would 
put downward pressure on the US dollar and upward pressure on world interest rates. In fact, the US 
current account deficit has been financed relatively easily, and the US dollar has risen over the past 
year. More importantly, long-term real interest rates around the world have stayed exceptionally low, 
which  indicates  a  more-than-adequate  supply  of  world  savings,  rather  than  a  shortage.  Although 
China has been cited as a third source of risk to the global expansion, it continues to power ahead, 
and the recent changes to its exchange rate regime, although small, will improve its prospects at the 
margin.  
The most reasonable assumption is that the current world expansion, which has been going for almost 
3½ years, will continue for a good while yet. Most private forecasts for global economic growth for the 
rest of this year and the next show above-average rates, although not as strong as in 2004.  
The second subject I would like to say a few words about is the interaction between developments in 
the  housing  market  and  household  spending  and  saving.  Recent  evidence  from  several  countries, 
including Australia, shows that during periods where house prices are rising rapidly, households tend 
to react to this by increasing their consumption expenditure faster than their income. They can do this 
by either reducing discretionary savings, or by borrowing against the equity in their house to finance 
non-housing expenditure, a process referred to as 'housing equity withdrawal'. This process occurred 
in Australia, particularly in 2002 and 2003.  
Over the past eighteen months, during which Australian house prices on average have not risen, this 
process seems to have stopped, and so consumption and borrowing have slowed noticeably. In the 
eighteen months to the December quarter of 2003, real retail trade rose by 10 per cent, whereas in the 
most  recent  eighteen  months  it  has  risen  by  4½  per  cent.  These  developments  have  not  been  a 
concern to us because: 
   The  pace  of growth  in  domestic  demand  had  been  clearly  unsustainable,  averaging 6  per 
cent per annum in 2002 and 2003. This needed to be brought back to a more sustainable 
pace, and this necessarily involved some slowing in consumption.  
Other  parts  of  the  economy  are  still  showing  good  growth,  particularly  employment  and 
investment.  The  external  sector  is  also  exerting  an  expansionary  influence  through  higher 
demand for exports and higher export prices.  
After periods of rapid borrowing and rising interest servicing costs, a period of consolidation 
is welcome. The corporate sector did this in the early 1990s and is now in excellent shape; 
the  household  sector  will  be  in  a  better  position  in  the  long  run  if  it  also  consolidates  its 
balance sheet.  
Nevertheless,  we  are  taking  a  great  interest  in  the  relationship  between  housing  and  household 
spending,  as  it  has  been  and  will  probably  continue  to  be  an  important  influence  on  economic 
developments. One area where it has been influential has been in explaining the different economic 
performance  of  the  different  states.  We  have  also  recently  undertaken  a  survey  of  a  sample  of 
households to study the extent to which they have engaged in mortgage equity withdrawal and to see 
how the funds were used. We will soon be reporting on the results of that survey.  
The third subject I would like to cover is inflation and inflation prospects. This is particularly important 
given that our monetary policy is based on inflation targeting. That is, we want to ensure that the rate 
of inflation averages somewhere between 2 and 3 percent. We aim for this – not because inflation is 
all we care about – but because the maintenance of low inflation is a necessary condition for having a 
long economic expansion in output and employment.  
Over the past two years, inflation in Australia has been restrained by the appreciation of the Australian 
dollar which took place between mid 2001 and the beginning of 2004. However, there have been a 
number of influences which have pointed to a rise in inflation further ahead: 
• 
• 
• 
the fact that after a long expansion we were encountering some capacity constraints;  
the rising prices of oil and some other important industrial inputs; and  
the fact that the downward influence on prices from the exchange rate appreciation would 
eventually fade away.  
The likely extent of the upward pressure has been difficult to assess as the signals have varied quite a 
bit.  When  I  was  last  before  you  in  February,  the  signals  were  quite  strong.  We  had  received  two 
quarters of large rises in producer prices at all stages of production and the increase in the CPI in the 
fourth quarter of 2004 had exceeded everyone's expectations. There was also some evidence that the 
slowdown in credit had run its course and was picking up again. Shortly after we met last time, the 
Bank raised the cash rate by 25 basis points.  
Since that time we have had more reassuring news on inflation. There is also some evidence that the 
monetary policy tightening itself may have had a quicker effect than normal. I do not want to make too 
much of this point, but the saturation coverage of the event in the print and electronic media must have 
had  some  dampening  effect  on  expectations,  as  some  surveys  have  suggested.  It  would  not  be 
surprising if the household sector had become more sensitive to news about interest rates, given the 
increased debt and debt servicing loads that it is now carrying.  
To cut a long story short, the next set of producer and consumer price inflation data that we received 
was more reassuring. True, it was only one quarter's information and that was not enough to change 
our numerical forecast of inflation, but it did lead us to conclude in our May Statement on Monetary 
Policy that there was no longer an upward risk to our inflation forecast. The subsequent set of data 
confirmed a similar picture. With two quarterly sets of more reassuring price data now behind us, we 
were  able  in  our  recently  released  August  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  to  conclude  that  the  CPI 
increase will peak at 3 per cent per annum in the second half of next year. As was widely noticed, we 
also  refrained  from  making  the  point  we  have  been  making  for  the  past  year  or  so  about  it  'being 
unlikely that there would be no further rises in the course of the expansion'. That does not mean that 
further rises could not happen; it only means that in our present estimation there is no longer a more 
than 50 per cent possibility of it happening.  
This is a pretty comfortable position in which to be. We are not expecting to change monetary policy in 
the  near  term,  and  when  we  look  further  into  the  future  we  no  longer  see  a  clear  probability  of  it 
moving in one direction rather than the other. Importantly, this is also the collective view of the market, 
as shown by the yield curve and by economists' forecasts. Of course, individuals do not all share this 
view, but on average that is the collective forecast.  
I do not intend to say any more about the economy or monetary policy at this stage, but, of course, am 
happy  to  answer  any  questions  that  you  have  on  these  subjects.  I  am  also  happy  to  answer  any 
questions on the other important area of the Bank's responsibilities, namely financial system stability. 
Within  that  general  area,  the  subject  that  has  attracted  the  most  recent  attention  has  been  the 
regulation  of  the  retail  payments  system  by  the  Bank's  Payments  System  Board.  I  know  that 
Committee members have met with the various industry participants, including members of the Bank's 
Payments Policy Department, to discuss the main issues, and, of course, I would be happy to address 
any questions members have on that subject. 
