Alan Greenspan: The economic outlook 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Joint Economic Committee, US Congress, Washington DC, 9 June 2005. 
 Chairman Saxton, Vice Chairman Bennett, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear 
once again before the Joint Economic Committee. Over the past year, the pace of economic activity in 
the United States has alternately paused and quickened. The most recent data support the view that 
the  soft  readings  on  the  economy  observed  in  the  early  spring  were  not  presaging  a  more-serious 
slowdown  in  the  pace  of  activity.  Consumer  spending  firmed  again,  and  indicators  of  business 
investment became somewhat more upbeat. Nonetheless, policymakers confront many of the same 
imbalances and uncertainties that were apparent a year ago. 
Our  household  saving  rate  remains  negligible.  Moreover,  modest,  if  any,  progress  is  evident  in 
addressing  the  challenges  associated  with  the  pending  shift  of  the  baby-boom  generation  into 
retirement that will begin in a very few years. And although prices of imports have accelerated, we are, 
at best, in only the earliest stages of a stabilization of our current account deficit - a deficit that now 
exceeds 6 percent of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP). 
A  major  economic  development  over  the  past  year  has  been  the  surge  in  the  price  of  oil.  Sharply 
higher prices of oil imports have diminished U.S. purchasing power. The value of petroleum imports 
rose from 1.4 percent of nominal GDP in the first quarter of 2004 to 1.8 percent in the first quarter of 
this  year.  The  alternating  bouts  of  rising  and  falling  oil  prices  have  doubtless  been  a  significant 
contributor to the periods of deceleration and acceleration of U.S. economic activity over the past year. 
Despite the uneven character of the expansion over the past year, the U.S. economy has done well, 
on net, by most measures. Real GDP has grown by 3.7 percent over that period, the unemployment 
rate  has  fallen  to  5.1  percent,  and  core  personal  consumption  expenditure  prices  have  risen  a 
historically  modest  1.6  percent.  But  the  growth  of  productivity,  though  respectable  at  2-1/2  percent 
over the year ending in the first quarter, is far less than the extraordinary pace of 5-1/2 percent during 
2003. Excluding a large but apparently transitory surge in bonuses and the proceeds of stock option 
exercises  late  last  year,  overall  hourly  labor  compensation  has  exhibited  few  signs  of  acceleration. 
Thus, the rise in underlying unit labor costs has been mainly the result of the slower growth of output 
per  hour.  At  the  same  time,  evidence  of  increased  pricing  power  can  be  gleaned  from  the  profit 
margins  of  nonfinancial  businesses,  which  have  continued  to  press  higher even  outside  the  energy 
sector. Whether that rise in unit costs will feed into the core price level or will be absorbed by a fall in 
profit margins remains an open question. 
Among the biggest surprises of the past year has been the pronounced decline in long-term interest 
rates on U.S. Treasury securities despite a 2-percentage-point increase in the federal funds rate. This 
is clearly without recent precedent. The yield on ten-year Treasury notes, currently at about 4 percent, 
is 80 basis points less than its level of a year ago. Moreover, even after the recent backup in credit risk 
spreads,  yields  for  both  investment-grade  and  less-than-investment-grade  corporate  bonds  have 
declined even more than Treasuries over the same period. 
The unusual behavior of long-term interest rates first became apparent almost a year ago. In May and 
June of last year, market participants were behaving as expected. With a firming of monetary policy by 
the Federal Reserve widely expected, they built large short positions in long-term debt instruments in 
anticipation of the increase in bond yields that has been historically associated with a rising federal 
funds rate.  But  by  summer,  pressures emerged  in  the  marketplace  that drove  long-term rates  back 
down. In March of this year, market participants once again bid up long-term rates, but as occurred 
last  year,  forces  came  into  play  to  make  those  increases  short  lived.  There  remains  considerable 
conjecture among analysts as to the nature of those market forces. 
That said, there can be little doubt that exceptionally low interest rates on ten-year Treasury notes, 
and hence on home mortgages, have been a major factor in the recent surge of homebuilding and 
home turnover, and especially in the steep climb in home prices. Although a “bubble” in home prices 
for the nation as a whole does not appear likely, there do appear to be, at a minimum, signs of froth in 
some local markets where home prices seem to have risen to unsustainable levels. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 1
The housing market in the United States is quite heterogeneous, and it does not have the capacity to 
move  excesses  easily  from  one  area  to  another.  Instead,  we  have  a  collection  of  only  loosely 
connected  local  markets.  Thus,  while  investors  can  arbitrage  the  price  of  a  commodity  such  as 
aluminum  between  Portland,  Maine,  and  Portland,  Oregon,  they  cannot  do  that  with  home  prices 
because they cannot move the houses. As a consequence, unlike the behavior of commodity prices, 
which varies little from place to place, the behavior of home prices varies widely across the nation. 
Speculation in homes is largely local, especially for owner-occupied residences. For homeowners to 
realize accumulated capital gains on a residence - a precondition of a speculative market - they must 
move. Another formidable barrier to the emergence of speculative activity in housing markets is that 
home sales involve significant commissions and closing costs, which average in the neighborhood of 
10 percent of the sales price. Where homeowner sales predominate, speculative turnover of homes is 
difficult. 
But  in  recent  years,  the  pace  of  turnover  of  existing  homes  has  quickened.  It  appears  that  a 
substantial  part  of  the  acceleration  in  turnover  reflects  the  purchase  of  second  homes  -  either  for 
investment or vacation purposes. Transactions in second homes, of course, are not restrained by the 
same forces that restrict the purchases or sales of primary residences - an individual can sell without 
having to move. This suggests that speculative activity may have had a greater role in generating the 
recent price increases than it has customarily had in the past. 
The  apparent  froth  in housing markets  may  have spilled  over  into  mortgage markets.  The  dramatic 
increase in the prevalence of interest-only loans, as well as the introduction of other relatively exotic 
forms  of  adjustable-rate  mortgages,  are  developments  of  particular  concern.  To  be  sure,  these 
financing  vehicles  have  their  appropriate  uses.  But  to  the  extent  that  some  households  may  be 
employing these instruments to purchase a home that would otherwise be unaffordable, their use is 
beginning to add to the pressures in the marketplace. 
The U.S. economy has weathered such episodes before without experiencing significant declines in 
the national average level of home prices. In part, this is explained by an underlying uptrend in home 
prices.  Because  of  the  degree  of  customization  of  homes,  it  is  difficult  to  achieve  significant 
productivity gains in residential building despite the ongoing technological advances in other areas of 
our  economy.  As  a  result,  productivity  gains  in  residential  construction  have  lagged  behind  the 
average productivity increases in the United States for many decades. This shortfall has been one of 
the reasons that house prices have consistently outpaced the general price level for many decades. 
Although we certainly  cannot  rule  out home price declines,  especially  in some  local  markets,  these 
declines,  were  they  to  occur,  likely  would  not  have  substantial  macroeconomic  implications. 
Nationwide  banking  and  widespread  securitization  of  mortgages  make  it  less  likely  that  financial 
intermediation  would  be  impaired  than  was  the  case  in  prior  episodes  of  regional  house  price 
corrections.  Moreover,  a  substantial  rise  in  bankruptcies  would  require  a  quite-significant  overall 
reduction in the national housing price level because the vast majority of homeowners have built up 
substantial equity in their homes despite large home equity withdrawals in recent years financed by 
the mortgage market. 
In  conclusion,  Mr.  Chairman,  despite  some  of  the  risks  that  I  have  highlighted,  the  U.S.  economy 
seems to be on a reasonably firm footing, and underlying inflation remains contained. Accordingly, the 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  in  its  May  meeting  reaffirmed  that  it  “...  believes  that  policy 
accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured. Nonetheless, the Committee 
will  respond  to  changes  in  economic  prospects  as  needed  to  fulfill  its  obligation  to  maintain  price 
stability.” 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2005
