Antonio Fazio: Economic developments and the banking system 
Address by Mr Antonio Fazio, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Italian Bankers’ Association Annual 
Meeting, Rome, 13 July 2005.  
 The expansion of economic activity in the euro area is proceeding slowly. 
In 2004 euro-area output rose by 2 per cent, compared with 5 per cent for the world economy; GDP 
growth was 2.3 per cent in France, 1.6 per cent in Germany and 1.2 per cent in Italy. Euro-area growth 
this year will be lower than in 2004. 
Germany’s economy is suffering from the weakness of domestic demand, Italy’s from a progressive 
loss of competitiveness. 
In the early months of this year the euro-area index of industrial production continued to waver. In the 
spring  the  cyclical  indicators  signaled  the  persistence  of  a  very  cautious  attitude  among  firms  and 
households.  Incipient  signs  of  recovery  have  appeared  recently;  in  France  and  in  Germany,  the 
climate of confidence among industrial firms improved in June for the first time since the start of the 
year; the euro-area index based on surveys of purchasing managers has risen. 
The  Italian  economy  faces  the  second  half  of  the  year  starting  out  from  conditions  that  are  less 
favourable that those of the other main countries of the area. The fall in output in the fourth quarter of 
2004 and again in the first three months of this year has made the fragility of our productive system 
more evident. By comparison with 2000, in January the negative gap between Italy’s index of industrial 
production and the euro-area average was equal to 8.1 percentage points, the widest in the last four 
years. 
The  erosion  of  competitiveness  in  the  international  markets  under  way  since  the  middle  1990s  is 
continuing. Since 2000 Italian exports have contracted by 4.9 per cent, while the exports of the other 
euro-area countries have grown by 17.2 per cent. The problems of competitiveness have continued to 
weigh especially on firms in the Centre and North and on smaller firms. 
Price strains have not emerged. Inflation has benefited from wage moderation and the appreciation of 
the euro; it has also been influenced by the weakness of demand. Looking ahead, the rise in oil prices 
and  the  performance  of  the  euro  could  have  a  negative  impact.  Household  spending  is  being  held 
down by uncertainty about the outlook for income and employment; the propensity to save 
has been rising since 2000. 
In the first quarter of this year investment in construction fell further. After declining in the second half 
of 2004, productive investment staged a slight recovery. 
In April industrial production picked up sharply from the low levels to which it had fallen in March; the 
estimates for the subsequent two months indicate that the index has fallen, but not enough to cancel 
out the April rise. 
The progressive decline of production levels in industry appears to have come to an end. After the 
pronounced fall recorded in the first quarter, GDP is expected to return to growth, albeit modest, in the 
second. 
The banking system 
Italian banks are continuing to ensure an ample supply of credit. 
Bank lending rates are very low. In May the cost of short-term credit for businesses was 4.9 per cent in 
nominal terms, and 1.2 per cent net of the change in producer prices. The overall effective interest rate 
on loans to households for house purchases was 3.8 per cent, or 1.9 per cent net of inflation. In the 
middle of the 1990s lending rates were above 10 per cent and more than 6 per cent in real terms. 
Despite growing concern about the evolution of the business cycle, the periodic surveys of the leading 
banking groups have not picked up signs of a tightening of credit disbursement standards. Lending is 
expanding rapidly. In the first few months of 2005, accommodating the strong demand of households 
and the more moderate demand of firms, it grew at a rate of more than 8 per cent, about 
BIS Review 52/2005 
 1
two percentage points higher than the euro-area average. 
Fueled by low interest rates, the increase in credit to households has stabilized at around 15 per cent 
since mid-2004. A decisive factor in all the regions of Italy has been the expansion in loans for house 
purchases. In 2004 new mortgage loans amounting to €49 billion were granted; disbursements in the 
first quarter of this year were 11 per cent up on the corresponding period of 2004. 
Households’ access to credit is also facilitated by the marketing policies banks are pursuing; under the 
stimulus of competition, they have diversified supply, adapting it to the needs of customers. Fixed-rate 
mortgage  lending  is  relatively  underdeveloped  by  international  standards:  about  80  per  cent  of 
outstanding  loans  for  the purchase of  houses  are  at  variable  rates  or  rates  renegotiable within  one 
year. 
In addition to real-estate lending, consumer credit granted by banks and financial companies is also 
expanding rapidly. 
Italian households’ debt is very low by international standards. The risks to the financial system from 
the rapid growth in lending to households are limited. At the end of 2004 household debt was equal to 
28 per cent of GDP in Italy, compared with a euro-area average of 55 per cent and about 90 per cent 
in the United States and the United Kingdom. 
Partly as a consequence of subdued investment, the financial conditions of firms have remained good 
on the whole. In 2004 firms’ operating profits were higher in relation to value added than during the 
cyclical downturn of the early 1990s. However, the data for the sample of around 40,000 non-financial 
corporations  surveyed  by  the  Company  Accounts  Data  Service  show  a  fall  in  profits  in  the  period 
2000-03, notably in the textile, clothing and transport equipment sectors. 
Firms’  interest  expense  has  diminished  thanks  to  the  reduction  in  interest  rates,  due  in  part  to  the 
lengthening of the average maturity of corporate debt. Leverage is seven percentage points below the 
level  of  the  1990s;  the  average  maturity  of  Italian  firms’  bank  debt  is  gradually  approaching  that 
prevailing in the other European countries. 
There  continues  to  be  rapid  growth  in  financing  to  categories  of  firms  that  in  the  past  encountered 
greater obstacles in gaining access to credit during cyclical downturns; credit to firms resident in the 
South of Italy increased by 8.5 per cent, two points more than the national average. 
In the period 1996-2004 the value of mergers and acquisitions between banks in Italy accounted for 
27  per  cent  of  the  euro-area  total,  compared  with  the  Italian  banking  system’s  roughly  14  per  cent 
share of euro-area bank assets. 
The far-reaching transformation of the banking system since the middle of the 1990s has had positive 
effects on operations. Since 2001 loan quality has remained unchanged despite the weakness of the 
economy.  At  about  1  per  cent  the  ratio  of  new  bad  debts  to  outstanding  loans  is  very  low  by 
comparison with the past. 
Households and firms have benefited from part of the banking system’s efficiency gains through more 
favourable rates on deposits and loans. 
In 2004 banks’ profits amounted to €11 billion, or 10.7 per cent of capital and reserves, compared with 
6.7 per cent in 2003. Contributing to the improvement in the results for the year were the decline in 
value  adjustments  to  loans  and  a  significant  increase  in  net  non-recurring  income.  Operating  costs 
diminished by 0.5 per cent with respect to 2003. The ratio between costs and revenues was in line 
with the European average. 
The  growth  in  self-financing  and  capital  increases  have  strengthened  the  banking  system’s  capital 
base. 
At the end of 2004 Italian banks’ supervisory capital amounted to €149 billion. The ratio of capital to 
risk  assets  was  11.6  per  cent;  the  difference with  respect  to  the  average  ratio  for  banks of  the  EU 
countries has narrowed in recent years to about one percentage point. For the largest banking groups, 
the ratio of supervisory capital to risk assets has increased significantly since 2001. 
Italy’s banking system, like those of the other advanced countries, is adapting to the principles of the 
new Basel rules on capital. 
In its supervisory capacity the Bank of Italy is evaluating whether banks’ risk management systems 
satisfy  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  requirements  established  by  the  new  rules.  Evaluation  and 
validation  are  carried  out  by  means  of  examination  of  the  statistical  documentation  submitted  by 
banks, meetings with corporate officers and direct examination of the state of progress of the project 
and the organizational processes. 
At our request, the main banking groups performed simulations of the impact of the new international 
accounting standards on their balance sheets. On average for the system, the results indicate larger 
writedowns  of  bad  and  doubtful  debts  and  capital  gains  on  buildings  and,  to  a  lesser  extent, 
shareholdings. The total capital of the groups concerned would not be significantly affected. This April 
the Bank of Italy began a survey extended to all banking groups, with the aim of estimating the impact 
of the new rules on supervisory capital, on the basis of a rigorous hypothesis regarding the prudential 
regulations that will enter into force at the end of the year. 
The supervisory action of the Bank of Italy is increasingly oriented towards forward-looking analysis 
whose compass includes an evaluation of the solidity of individual banks and of the system in the face 
of  adverse  events  which,  though  highly  improbable,  are  nonetheless  possible.  It  proceeds  through 
exercises designed to check the income and capital margins in case of increases in credit and market 
risks deriving from major negative shocks. 
Economic policy 
Public-sector  net  borrowing  looks  set  to  exceed  4  per  cent  of  GDP  this  year.  The  negative 
performance of the public finances reflects the slow growth of the economy together with difficulties in 
implementing some of the planned budgetary measures. 
Owing in part to the lapsing of one-off measures, net borrowing in 2006 will be equal to about 5 per 
cent of GDP in the absence of corrective action; the primary surplus will fall to nil. 
The persistent contraction of the primary surplus affects the process of bringing down the ratio of debt 
to GDP. 
The structural situation of our public finances requires continual adjustment measures, which threaten 
to create distortions in the management of resources and to fuel uncertainty; the scope for stabilization 
policies is limited. Negative effects on the cost of the debt must be averted. 
It is important that the Government and Parliament decide, on the basis of the Economic and Financial 
Planning Document, measures for the next four years able to reduce current expenditure in relation to 
GDP, increase public investment and gradually diminish firms’ tax burden. 
As requested of Italy by the Council of Finance Ministers of the European Union, it is necessary to 
reduce the deficit below the threshold of 3 per cent by 2007. 
A return to higher rates of growth that are compatible with the available resources cannot be achieved 
without  a  renewed  and  effective  commitment  of  economic  policy  to  changing  the  structure  of 
production. 
The  reduction  of  the  tax  burden  on  businesses  should  facilitate  the  growth  in  size  of  firms, 
technological  innovation  and  investment.  The  efforts  to  make  the  operation  of  public  services  more 
efficient and to create a more stable legislative framework need to be intensified. Competition must be 
strengthened. 
Firms  must  expand  their  scale  of  production,  increase  the  professionalism  of  their  managements, 
orient their specialization towards more dynamic and innovative sectors, and increase their presence 
in some technologically mature but high-quality segments of the international market. 
The  financial  system  must  assist  firms  in  this  difficult  phase  of  transformation,  directing  resources 
towards the companies and projects with the greatest potential. 
The growth of pension funds will be of great importance for the financial market and for the supply of 
capital to the banking sector. 
The outlook 
Economic  activity  probably  reached  a  low  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  The  figure  for  GDP  is 
expected to show an increase, albeit modest, for the three months from April to June. 
It is necessary that the still hesitant recovery gain momentum in the second half of the year. 
If it does, we will be able to avoid a contraction in GDP this year with respect to 2004, and to achieve 
growth of more than 1 per cent in 2006. 
The performance of GDP this year and next must be along these lines in order to give substance and 
credibility to the scenario projected for the public finances. 
As we underscored on 31 May to the General Meeting of Shareholders of the Bank of Italy, investment 
is  finding  it  hard  to  gain  momentum,  consumer  demand  remains  weak,  and  the  outlook  for  exports 
remains uncertain even in a favourable international context. 
There is a need for a commitment by the Government, the social partners and firms not to lose the 
opportunity to reverse our economy’s negative trend. 
Thanks  to  the  progress  made  in  the  last  decade,  banks  are  in  a  position  to  finance  the  growth  of 
production and investment. When the difficulties of businesses are cyclical and transitory, banks can, 
indeed must, contribute to safeguarding production capacity. 
Recourse  to  the  Wage  Supplementation  Fund  in  industry  covered  a  number  of  hours  equivalent  to 
about 26,000 full-time employees in the first half of 2001; it rose rapidly in 2003 to 48,000 employees. 
In the early months of this year it rose further, to 58,000 employees. Use of Wage Supplementation 
has increased especially in the machinery and textile sectors. 
Where  it  is  possible  and  appropriate,  banks  must  work  for  the  restructuring  and  reorientation  of 
production  capacity  and  assist  the  business  sector  in  the  process  of  consolidation  aimed  at 
augmenting the average size of firms. 
A major banking merger at European level has as its protagonist an Italian bank that had previously 
completed  its  own  restructuring  and  consolidation  in  the  context  of  the  general  reorganization  of 
banking that began in the middle of the 1990s. 
Market transactions are under way for the acquisition of control of two important banks. 
Once the authorization procedures are concluded, it will be the shareholders, the market, that decide 
the  outcome  of  the  initiatives,  which  envisage  different  paths,  instruments  and  objectives.  We  are 
following the developments in scrupulous observance of the law and supervisory regulations, bearing 
in mind the general interest and reporting on the necessary procedures in the competent fora. In any 
event, the transactions will lead to significant further strengthening of our banking system. 
Banks  are  called  upon  to  address  the  problems  of  customer  relationships  more  effectively  and 
systematically. Initiatives to contain the costs of services and the amount of fees are necessary and 
they must spread. The image banks project is fundamental for their reputations. 
As we recently had occasion to argue at length, the problem of the Italian economy lies primarily in the 
competitiveness of industry. 
But there is also a weakness of domestic demand. 
According to the Bank of Italy’s surveys, investment in public works in the first half of this year was at 
the same level as in the first half of 2004. The rise in the number of contracts and the opening of sites 
have yet to show up in an increase in investments actually implemented. 
According  to  the  construction  firms  in  the  sample,  the  outlook  for  the  second  half  of  the  year  is 
uncertain. 
The efforts at both central and local government level must be intensified, and with urgency, to step up 
activity, to avert a slowing of investment that could jeopardize the recovery. 
According to the legislative innovations introduced by Parliament and those now being adopted, the 
implementation and management of public works does not necessarily have to be totally entrusted to 
government; it is possible and advisable to leave room for private enterprise, on the basis of rigorous 
and transparent criteria. The role assigned to banks is that of giving impetus to operations in the sector 
and carefully evaluating the quality of investment projects. 
There are signs that the world economy is slowing down with respect to its exceptional expansion last 
year, but growth remains robust. Its course must not be affected by the recurrence of terrorism. This 
requires a coordinated, effective response in the various fields, including at European level, and the 
continuation of the initiatives for détente and peaceful coexistence. 
The  present  phase  of  the  cycle  is  a  difficult  one.  A  favourable  opportunity  for  recovery  could  take 
shape and must be seized. It is necessary to restore a climate of confidence. This depends on what 
actions are taken but also on the manifestation of a harmonious will to act for our country’s economic 
and civil progress. 
