Tarisa Watanagase: Supervisory concerns in an IT environment 
Speech  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  2nd SEACEN/ 
Federal Reserve System Course on Electronic Banking and Technology Risk Supervision, Bangkok, 
12 May 2005. 
 Financial  institutions  increasingly  rely  on  technology  to  do  their  businesses,  as  a  result,  improper 
management and operation of IT will bring risks to financial institutions. Also, issues associated with IT 
including  technological  changes,  new  threats  and  vulnerabilities  will  no  doubt  affect  financial 
institutions' performance and risk profile. Therefore, it is necessary to integrate IT risks with risk-based 
supervision in order to obtain a comprehensive risk profile of a financial institution. Today is a good 
opportunity for me to share with you our thoughts and experiences on Supervisory Concerns in an IT 
Environment. 
1.  
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
Overview of current IT environment in the banking sector 
The Thai financial institutions have been using IT in their businesses for decades. Initially, IT 
was used as a supporting tool for banking operations, helping staff do their work faster, more 
conveniently and with less human errors. Then, along with more advanced technology, many 
financial institutions now offer their products and services through electronic channels such 
as internet banking, mobile banking, ATM, etc. These alternative banking channels provide 
customers much easier and more time-saving ways to do their transactions with banks. 
In addition to offering alternative banking channels, financial institutions currently also take 
advantage  of  IT  to  innovate  financial  products  and  services.  For  example,  through 
system-integrated  capability,  financial  institutions  can  offer  a  wider  range  of  services 
including bill payment and tax payment. Electronic money (E-money) is a new product that is 
now  offered  by  many  institutions,  both  banks  and  non-banks.  All  of  the  aforementioned 
products and services delivered with the help of IT and the effort on core-banking system 
integration require much more complex technology infrastructure which raises tendency to 
the  use  of  IT  Outsourcing  services  from  external  expertise.  As  a  consequence,  financial 
institutions can fully focus on core activities and become less concerned with not having a 
sophisticated level of IT expertise. However, financial institutions must be aware that risks 
from  outsourced  operations  still  fall  under  their  responsibility  even  though  they  may  not 
undertake IT operations by themselves. 
As  the  use  of  IT  becomes  widespread,  it  appears  that  most  Thai  financial  institutions  are 
adopting international best practices as a framework to create a controlled environment and 
manage risks that might occur from IT related operations. As new security threats emerge, it 
becomes  necessary  to  have  adequate  control  mechanism  to  protect  banks'  information 
assets including hardware, software and data. 
As  we  all  know,  after  9/11,  this  issue  has  become  a  global  concern.  Most  financial 
institutions are aware of the need to have Business Continuity Management. The business 
continuity plan has to be established on an enterprise-wide basis with a thorough business 
impact analysis and risk assessment. It is more than just the recovery of technology; it is the 
recovery and continuity of business. 
With the widespread use of IT, it is important that the legal framework is in line with the new 
environment.  Thailand  has  started  to  legislate  five  new  Information  and  Communication 
Technology  (ICT)  Laws  to  embrace  information  technology  since  1998.  They  are  the 
Electronic Transactions Law, Computer Crime Law, Data Protection Law, Electronic Funds 
Transfer Law, and the National Information Infrastructure Law. The Cabinet has appointed 
the National Electronics and Computer Technology Center (NECTEC) to take charge of the 
drafting of these laws. The Electronic Transactions Law was promulgated on April 3, 2002 
while the others arc in the process of enactment. 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 1
E- banking products in Thailand and supervisory concerns 
2.  
What I would like to do next is to give you some examples of IT-related financial products and services 
currently offered in Thailand and the pertinent risk issues that bring up supervisory concerns. Let me 
start by briefly showing you our data on e-banking service usage by category. 
In the first four rows of the table, the figures show customers' e-banking transactions that have high 
transaction volumes but low average values. 
In the remaining rows, you will find that the Bank of Thailand is the sole service provider facilitating 
wholesale payment transactions between financial institutions and the central bank. Even the number 
of transaction is much smaller, the value is certainly much higher. This type of transaction of course 
has different risk implications from that with higher transaction volume in smaller amount of money. 
Internet banking in Thailand can be classified into two categories, informational and transactional 
websites.  The  informational  website  provides  banking  information  including  products,  services, 
interest rate, foreign exchange rate, etc. On the other hand, the transactional website is a channel 
for  customer  transactions  such  as  money  transfers  and  bill  payments  as  well  as  inquiries  such  as 
balance inquiries and statement download. 
Since  internet  is  ubiquitous  and  global  in  nature,  it  is  an  open  network  accessible  from  unknown 
sources. Messages are routed through unknown locations. Therefore, internet significantly magnifies 
the  importance  of  security  control  and  protection  against  fraud,  hacking  and  other  possible 
internet  security  threats.  A  financial  institution  needs  to  have  a  strong  authentication  process  to 
prove  the  identity  of  the  person who  logs  onto  the service  before  any  transaction  is allowed.  Since 
transaction  via  internet  does  not  require  face-to-face  contacts,  non-repudiation  becomes  another 
major  issue  as  the  ability  to  prove  that  a  customer  did  request  a  transaction  on  service.  As 
supervisors, we need to encourage FIs to implement strong security and control measures as well 
as provide mechanisms to keep abreast with emerging threats. 
E-Money, or known otherwise as Multipurpose Stored Value Card, E-Purse, E-Wallet, or Smart 
Card has three major characteristics. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Pre -paid: Consumer pay money in advance to e-money issuer. 
Store value: Amounts of advance are stored in electronic media such as plastic card. 
Multipurpose: Consumer can use money paid in advance to purchase goods and services 
from different retailers determined by the e-money issuers 
E-money  can  be  categorized  into  network-based  and  card-based  depending  on  how  the  value  is 
stored. 
- 
Storing value in a network basis requires no physical item to store value but is kept in the 
service providers' system. 
Storing  value  in  a  card-basis  is  the  use  of  a  plastic  card  with  embedded  chip  to  store 
value. 
 E-money  is  regarded  as  non-traditional  financial  services which  lead  to  new ways  of  security 
and  control  implementation.  Furthermore,  it  may  facilitate  money  laundering  activities.  That  is 
why  in  Thailand,  we  prohibited  the  transfer  money  among customers without  going  through  service 
providers' data system. In addition, the system must be able to trace all activities. A bank should set a 
maximum limit of e-money that can be used . And, it can only be issued in Thai Baht currency and 
used in Thailand. 
IT outsourcing means allowing other service providers to perform on behave of a financial institution 
IT  functions  which  are  normally  done  by  the  institution  itself.  By  the  advent  of  rapid  changes  in 
technology and competition, financial institutions tend to reduce costs and to improve their services by 
outsourcing  some  technology-related  functions  to  third  parties  both  within  and  across  borders.  In 
Thailand, we see a few distinctive characteristics of IT outsourcing services. 
- 
Full scope of IT operations. This is to outsource the entire IT resources and operations 
including location, equipment, hardware, software, staff, facilities, communication and other 
necessities to the third-party service providers. By that, financial institutions will not involve in 
those operations but rather assign a coordinator to monitor the performance of the provider. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2005
 Selective  areas  of  IT  operations.  With  this,  a  financial  institution  may  acquire  a  certain 
service  of  a  provider,  for  example,  renting  the  facility  of  a  service  provider  to  operate  its 
back-up hardware and software. 
Both  full  and  selective  scopes  of  outsourcing  can  be  carried  out  with  a  third-party  service  provider 
residing  domestically  or  abroad.  This  raises  supervisory  concerns.  Since  financial  institutions'  data 
including customer  and  transaction  data  are  processed  by  other  parties,  A  financial  institution  must 
ensure  its  data  integrity,  security  and  confidentiality  to  prevent  data  leakage  and  mishandling. 
Moreover,  though  operated  elsewhere  -  whether  domestically  or  abroad,  system  reliability  and 
availability  still  fall  under  the  financial  institutions'  responsibilities.  All  of  these  issues  can  in  fact 
impact the institution's reputation, image and credibility. 
E-banking frauds in Thailand 
E-banking,  unfortunately,  also  brings  about  electronic  frauds.  There  are  two  major  kinds  of  frauds 
thriving in electronic payment environments in Thailand: card-based and networks-based frauds. 
Card-based  frauds  include  counterfeited  ATM  and  Credit  cards,  and  Skimming,  which  involves 
copying the magnetic stripe encoding from debit or credit cards to forged cards The network-based 
fraud  is  called  "Phishing".  This  is  an  identity  theft  whereby  Internet  hackers  trick  some  naïve 
customers into revealing their sensitive information such as User ID and password through fake email 
addresses,  through  social  engineering,  or  spy  ware.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  has  recently  issued 
notifications to address these issues and encourage financial institutions to raise customer awareness 
of such frauds through education. 
As  stated  earlier,  financial  institutions  now  take  advantage  of  IT  to  innovate  financial  products  and 
services. Such innovation brings to a financial institution new dimensions to traditional risks, 
which include strategic risk, credit risk, market risk, liquidity risk and operational risk. Therefore, the 
lack of efficient and appropriate controls may amplify the likelihood of each risk and its impact. Internet 
banking,  e-money  and  IT  outsourcing  are  good  examples  that  highlight  the  importance  of  IT 
supervision.  At  this  point,  may  I  draw  your  attention  to  the  next  topic  which  is  IT  risk-based 
supervision. 
IT risk-based supervision 
3. 
BOT has adopted risk based supervision for the past several years.  
Supervision objectives: 
The primary objective of BOT supervision is to encourage FIs in Thailand to conduct banking business 
in a safe and sound manner and consistent with related laws, rules and regulations. It is also our 
duties to ensure that supervisory framework is keeping up with demand from the financial community 
as well as with market innovation, international best/ sound practice; finally, to protect customer 
rights as well. 
IT risk-based supervision helps ensure the safety and soundness as well as legal compliance of a FI. 
As already mentioned, IT does not trigger new type of risks but brings in new dimensions to traditional 
banking risks. At this point, I would like to first give you the definitions of risks directly associated with 
IT. May I begin with strategic risk. 
Scope of IT risk-based supervision: 
Strategic risk 
1. 
Strategic  risk  arises  from  adverse  business  decisions  or  improper  implementation  of  those 
decisions. Use of technology can create strategic risk when management does not adequately plan 
for, manage, and monitor the performance of technology-related products, services, processes, and 
delivery channels. 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 3
Operational risk 
2. 
Operational  risk  is  the  risk  in  the  areas  of  security,  data  confidentiality,  data  and  system 
integrity, and outsourcing causing problems with product and service delivery. This type of risk 
often  results  from  failure  to  establish  adequate  security  measures,  contingency  plans,  testing,  and 
auditing  standards.  Operational  risk  can  increase  when  a  financial  institution  hires  outside  service 
providers  to  design  products,  services,  delivery  channels,  and  processes  that  do  not  fit  with  the 
financial institution's systems or customer demands. Deficiencies in system design, implementation, or 
maintenance of systems or equipment also tamper with data integrity. 
The  IT  exposure  usually  does  not  limit  to  just  these  two  risk  types.  Improper  IT  management  and 
operation can lead to compliance risk and reputational risk. 
Compliance risk 
3. 
Compliance risk is arises from violations of, or non-conformance with, laws, rules, regulations, 
or  ethical  standards.  Some  new  technologies  raise  unexpected  compliance  issues.  For  example, 
transactions conducted through the internet can also raise questions regarding jurisdictional authority 
over those transactions. Cross border activities raise a number of concerns to supervisors on how to 
supervise banking businesses with no physical presence in the country, and also how to effectively 
manage risks involved in cross-border transactions. 
Reputational risk 
4. 
Reputational  risk  arises  whenever  technology-based  banking  products,  services,  delivery 
channels, or processes generate adverse public opinion. For example, breaches of security and 
disruptions  to  the  system's  availability  can  damage  financial  institutions'  reputation.  Also,  system 
disruptions or doubts about the integrity of the system or data could result in a loss of confidence in 
electronic delivery channels as a whole, and can potentially affect other e-banking providers. 
IT risk-based supervision focuses on strategic and operational risks.  
Strategic risk 
Supervisory objective 
In  strategic  risk  supervision,  supervisors  have  to  ensure  that  Financial  institutions  have 
efficiently  managed  their  IT  resources  and  are  prepared  for  the  future  development  of  core 
businesses. 
Supervisory areas 
Therefore,  to  achieve  such  objective,  supervisors  will  assess  risks  that  may  arise  in  the  following 
areas. 
Policy perspectives 
Since  enterprise  activities  require  information  from  IT  to  meet  business  objectives,  effective  IT 
strategic  planning  is  mandatory.  The  strategic  plan  refers  to  how  to  utilize  IT  in  an  organization.  IT 
must  be  aligned  with  and  enable  the  enterprise  to  take  full  advantage  of  its  information,  thereby 
maximizing benefits, capitalizing on opportunities and gaining a competitive advantage. As such, IT 
policy,  plan  and  procedure  are  the  concentrated  areas  for  supervisors  to  examine.  We  anticipate  a 
financial institution's policy to cover all necessary areas pertaining to IT activities including contingency 
plan, security, and out/in-sourcing. In addition, the policy should cover new product issuance such as 
internet  banking  and  e-money.  The  process  of  formulating,  implementing  and  maintaining  of  such 
policies should be considered. A continuous risk assessment and monitoring should also be part of an 
area of examination. 
Management support and oversight 
It is ultimately a responsibility of a financial institution's board and management to extend governance 
to  IT  and  provide  the  leadership,  organizational  structures  and  processes  to  direct  and  control  the 
enterprise. Management must monitor to ensure that IT resources are properly managed to promote 
business objectives. 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2005
IT governance 
During the last few years, financial institutions have increasingly invested in technology infrastructure 
to improve their internal processes and servicing capabilities. Investment in technology infrastructure 
normally involves huge amount of funds and other resources. Technology also carries risks, which can 
adversely affect financial institutions if not properly managed. Financial institutions need to understand 
the strategic importance of IT, manage IT to effectively deliver value to business, and mitigate risks 
arisen from the use of IT. 
IT governance focuses on how financial institutions make the best use of their invested technologies. It 
is a high-level IT control framework related to the formulation of IT strategies, the management of IT 
processes to deliver value, the performance measurement, and the management of IT-related risks. 
We believe that effective IT governance process will enable financial institutions to effectively utilize 
their technologies to meet business' expectations and to add value to their business. In that way, IT 
will  truly  help  the  organizations  to  improve  competitive  advantage,  customer  satisfaction,  cost 
efficiency, and ability to grow and innovate the business. Eventually, it will help financial institutions to 
realize better return on investment in technology infrastructure. 
Independent audit and review 
A financial institution is required to have IT independent audit and review all IT related areas to ensure 
that the board and management emphasize IT as a key business driver. IT controls are evaluated and 
those having a material impact on financial processes are specially focused. The assessment of these 
controls  should  be  conducted  on  a  regular  basis.  In  Thailand,  we  require  financial  institutions  to 
perform  IT  audit  at  least  once  a  year.  In  addition,  we  also  require  an  independent  assessment  of 
internet security. 
Now, let's turn to operational risk.  
Operational risk 
Supervisory objective 
In  operational  risk  supervision,  supervisors  have  to  ensure  that  financial  institutions  have 
adequate security measures, data integrity process and contingency plans in place. 
Supervisory areas 
The  focal  point  when  we  evaluate  operational  risk  regarding  IT  is  to  ensure  a  financial  institution 
establish adequate control mechanisms in IT process and procedure. The control can be done either 
technically or manually, or both. Segregation of duties is an example of manual control which should 
be  maintained  especially  for  critical  functions  or  processes  to  prevent  fraud.  Additionally,  controls 
should  be  embedded  in  the  system  to  ensure  integrity  of  input,  processing  and  output.  Adequate 
physical and logical access controls are important since they can protect data, system and resources 
from  unauthorized  persons.  Finally,  a  financial  institution  should  provide  alternative  resources  for 
backup  and  recovery,  and  ensure  that  they  can  be available  during  an  event  of  a  disruption.  All  of 
these  matters  are  about  security  and  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  which  will  be 
elaborated more in the next slide. 
Security and confidentiality 
Supervisory objective 
An objective  of  IT supervision  in security and confidentiality  areas  is to ensure of IT activities 
being conducted in a secure and control environment and of data confidentiality and integrity 
by laws, rules and regulations. 
Supervisory areas 
To achieve such objectives, the following points should be addressed by supervisors. 
Physical security: It is about control for environmental exposures due primarily to mother-nature 
events  such  as  lightning,  storms,  flood  and  etc.  Others  may  be  caused  by  human  acts  such  as 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 5
terrorist,  fire,  electronic  shock  and  equipment  failure.  The  result  of  such  conditions  can  damage 
computer system, equipment and facilities which in turn cause an interruption. Another type of physical 
security is physical access controls which aim to prevent unauthorized access to computer system, 
equipment and facilities as well as data. Examples of this type of controls are electronic door locks, 
biometric door lock, video camera, etc. 
Logical security: It is data, system and network access control. Lack of adequate logical security 
may  be  prone  to  technical  exposure  to  unauthorized  implementation  or  modification  of  data  and 
program at either the network, platform, database or application level. A classic example of this type of 
controls is the use of user ID and password. 
Supervisor  should  be  able  to  analyze  and  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  both  physical  and  logical 
access control in accomplishing financial institution's information security objectives. 
Integrity 
Supervisory objective 
An  objective  of  IT  supervision  in  an  integrity  area  is  to  ensure  reliability  and  completeness  of 
system functionality in order to verify that data is processed in an accurate and timely manner. 
Supervisory areas 
Therefore,  supervisors  need  to  review  and  assess  whether  financial  institutions  have  sound 
application  control  in  place.  In  this  regard,  they  should  have  control  built  in  the  procedure  and 
programmed in the system to ensure the integrity of input, process and output. In a large financial 
institution using various applications, a sample of applications including core banking applications and 
management  information  system  (MIS)  would  be  examined  for  control  adequacy.  Data  and  system 
integrity  can  reflect  the  effectiveness  of  system  development,  acquisition  and  change  control 
procedure. Therefore, it is necessary to cover those areas in the scope of supervision. 
Availability 
Supervisory objective 
An objective of IT supervision in an availability area is to ensure financial institutions' readiness 
for being able to run business without interruption during an occurrence of disruption. 
Supervisory areas 
In  this  regard,  supervisor  must  review  and  assess  the  scope  of  business  continuity  plan  which 
should be established in an enterprise-wide basis. Also, the best way to determine how well the plan 
works  or  which  portions  of  the  plan  need  improvement  is  through  testing.  We  encourage  financial 
institutions to test the disaster recovery plan at least once a year. Finally, financial institutions should 
have a procedure in place to update the plan regularly. 
4. 
IT examination and risk assessment 
Objective 
The  objective  of  IT  examination  and  risk  assessment  is  to  assess  a  financial  institution's  IT 
management and operation to ensure accuracy and reliability of information system as well as 
its alignment with the financial institution's business objectives which can eventually bring in 
the safety and soundness. 
IT examination process 
There are three main steps to be taken when performing IT examination.  
6 
 BIS Review 35/2005
Pre -examination 
1. 
This step is the process of gathering the information about the financial institution on which we will 
conduct  examination.  The 
IT 
infrastructure and organization chart can be obtained from previous examination reports, internal 
database and external sources. At this step, IT examiners will coordinate with Onsite examiners 
to share information and identify areas of concerns. With all of the gathered information, examiners 
can preliminarily assess IT role in supporting FI business and prepare scope of examination. 
including  business  nature,  objective,  policy,  plan, 
information 
Onsite examination 
2. 
The next step is to conduct onsite examination at a financial institution. Normally, IT and Financial or 
Safety and Soundness examinations are performed concurrently where their examination results are 
integrated together for an overall risk assessment. At this stage, examiners gather information through 
a variety of examination techniques such as interview, observation, review of documents to summarize 
the findings. 
Post examination 
3. 
After the findings, examiners will assess the risks of those findings and report on significant issues. 
The risks regarding IT are assessed and assigned to IT risk rating which is divided into three 
levels,  high,  medium,  low  with  respect  to  the  probability  of  occurrence  and  the  degree  of 
impact  to  a  financial  institution.  For  significantly  high  risk  issues  which  indicate  serious 
control weaknesses which then need an immediate correction, we could enforce the FI to take 
corrective  action  within  a  predetermined  period  of  time.  And,  it  is  our  duty  to  monitor 
compliance with such an enforcement action. This is a process of follow-up 
The  risk  assessment  is  performed  not  only  when  conducting  IT  examination  but  also  when 
considering  new  products  and  services'  applications.  Currently,  the  products  and  services  that 
need BOT's IT risk assessment prior to approval are internet banking and e-money. 
IT Risk Assessment Factors, at a minimum, include: 
Security: The financial institutions have to prove that they have adequate security measures in place 
to  ensure  that  information  is  protected  against  harm  from  threats  leading  to  different  types  of 
vulnerabilities such as loss, inaccessibility, alteration or wrongful disclosure. 
Risk  management:  Risks  of  new  products  and  services  must  be  thoroughly  considered  by  the 
financial institution. There should be a policy and procedure in place to manage the risks. 
Internal control: The financial institutions should set up preventive, detective and corrective control 
mechanisms that may be built in the operating procedure or programmed in the system involving new 
product and service delivery. 
Contingency plan: The financial institutions should formulate the contingency plan to carry on the 
business under unexpected events. 
Staff development: The financial institutions should establish a staff development plan to enhance 
personnel capabilities to conduct new product and service operations. 
Last topic of presentation is new challenges for BOT supervision and ways to overcome. 
5. 
(1) 
New challenges for BOT's IT supervision and ways to overcome 
While  the  financial  industry  is  moving  fast  with  innovations  and  new  developments, 
supervision  needs  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Supervisors  need  to 
encourage financial institutions to operate their businesses in a safe and sound manner as 
new  delivery  channels  or  services  could  exacerbate  some  of  the  same  risks  inherent  in 
traditional banking. 
However,  the  prudential  regulatory  framework  has  to  be  congruent  to  the  evolution  of  the 
e-banking business. Therefore, we need to strike a balance between the need to maintain 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  to  foster  developments,  competition,  and  a 
level playing field. 
There are ways to overcome this challenge. 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 7
     (2) 
(3) 
Regulators  need  to  keep  up  with  the  development  of  the  market  while  being  proactive  in 
formulating the regulatory framework. In the case of Thailand, BOT takes an active role in 
meeting regularly with financial institutions and IT companies to exchange views and 
experiences on the development of the businesses and IT environment. 
In the process of drafting policies, we often seek out the view from our fellow regulators 
to ensure that our policy are in line with market and international practices, as well as to 
help us anticipate problems that may arise in implementation. 
The final drafts of policies are sent out for comments from key stakeholders in and outside 
the Bank of Thailand, especially the industry, to ensure that the policies are practical and not 
posing any undue burden on financial institutions. 
We also make sure that revision of regulations and guidelines is conducted regularly to 
ensure that e-banking policies are keeping with demand from the financial community as well 
as with market innovation and international best practices. 
To  maintain  proactive  supervision,  the  IT  risk-based  supervision  is  conducted 
continuously,  updating  each  of  bank's  IT  risk  profile  on  a  regular  basis  and  performed 
overall assessment in certain areas. In case of getting a report of any incidents, we have to 
thoroughly  analyze  the  impact  on  the  financial  institution  system  and  consumer.  And,  to 
prevent  recurrence  of  such  incidents,  we  may  urgently  issue  notification  to  financial 
institutions  to  provide  preventive,  detective  and  corrective  control  measures  in  self 
and customer protections. 
With the rapid development in technology, in the near future, apart from the known internet 
banking, we will see more of the "non-traditional" banking products. The providers of these 
services will not only be limited to banks, but also non-banks. Of course, the extent to which 
a non-bank provider can offer these new products and services depends on the rules and 
regulations  of  each  country.  To  promote  a  fair  competition  between  service  providers  that 
are banks and non-banks is a challenge for the authorities. 
BOT  is in course of shifting from supervision by institutional basis to transactional 
basis which will enable us to overcome such a challenge. 
After the financial crisis, the need for strengthening supervision of financial institutions has 
been  stressed  as  a  major  priority  to  BOT.  The  monitoring  of  financial  institution  systems 
becomes both more critical and more challenging for supervisors. The "Core Principles for 
Effective  Banking  Supervision"  have  become  the  most  important  global  standard  for 
prudential  regulation  and  supervision.  They  are  developed  by  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision in cooperation with supervisors from noiQ-10 countries, providing the 
international financial community with a benchmark against which the effectiveness of bank 
supervisory regimes can be assessed. IT supervision is also included in the Core Principles 
such as CP9 (MIS), CP 11 (Information System to comply with Country Risk and Transfer 
Risk), CP13 (Contingency Plan, MIS, Business Resumption Plan) and CP21 (verification of 
information  from  bank  records  by  on-site  examination  and/  or  external  audits).  Therefore, 
How to achieve full compliance with the Core Principles becomes another challenge 
for BOT supervision. 
The  BOT,  with  the  assistance  of  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank,  has  finished  our 
self-assessment of our compliance with the Principles. Weaknesses in the existing system of 
supervision  and  regulation  have  been  identified,  and  will  form  a  basis  for  future  remedial 
measures. 
The other two challenges involve the creation of internal expertise for IT supervision in order 
to be more responsive with technological evolution. 
The  first  is  to  enhance  supervisors'  technical  know-how.  The  way  to  overcome  this 
challenge  is  to  provide  regular  training  to  supervisors.  Some  in-depth  technological 
knowledge  is  necessary.  The  supervisors  should  be  given  tools  to  keep  up  with  new 
technology, vulnerability, threats and other forces. Research and development for IT 
supervisors should be considered. 
Another challenge is to formulate policy with flexibility, forward-looking and reflecting 
changing business nature. One way to overcome this challenge is to broaden the view 
and knowledge of supervisors which can be accomplished by all aforementioned matters. 
8 
 BIS Review 35/2005
Conclusion 
6.  
In conclusion, technology is still changing and financial institutions tend to depend more on it. BOT 
has  no  intention  to  interfere  with  financial  institutions'  innovation;  however,  while  technology  is 
becoming more and more complex, so are the threats. A financial institution needs to have active IT 
management to provide secure and reliable services to customer. Supervisors need to keep updates 
with those new issues. In addition, it's not only a supervisor's job to maintain the stability of banking 
industry  but  also  banker's.  Both  sides  should  put  efforts  together  to  create  a  safe  and  sound 
environment  and  should  always  recognize  the  significance  and  effects  of  technology  towards  the 
banking industry. So, working in a proactive and more collaborative manner is the solution for 
today's supervisors'. 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 9
