Sunil Mendis: Economic performance, prospects and challenges  
Speech  by  Mr  Sunil  Mendis,  Governor of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the  Donor  Conference, 
Kandy, 15-17 May 2005. 
 Introduction 
Honourable Minister of Finance, representatives of the donor community and friends, 
Sri Lanka has achieved considerable economic progress in the past few decades. Per capita income 
has  increased,  taking  Sri  Lanka  into  the  category  of  a  low  middle  income  country.  Many  years  of 
government  focus  on  meeting  the  social  needs  of  the  people  have  enabled  Sri  Lanka  to  achieve 
human development indicators well beyond countries with comparable levels of income, in fact, similar 
to  those  of  more  developed  middle  income  countries.  The  structure  of  the  economy  has  been 
diversified  from  its  earlier  concentration  on  primary  agricultural  commodities,  making  the  economy 
more  resilient  to  internal  and  external  shocks.  Overall  macroeconomic  management  has  been 
reasonably  sound,  although  achieving  a  better  balance  has  sometimes  been  a  challenge  due  to 
external and internal shocks.  
However, despite these positive developments, many weaknesses remain, posing strong challenges 
to  policy  makers.  Poverty  still  remains  at  significant  levels;  marked  disparities  in  regional  economic 
activity  are  clearly  evident;  unemployment,  although  declining,  is  still  high,  particularly  among  the 
youth; agricultural productivity is low, resulting in low farmer income and higher prices for consumers; 
despite some diversification of the economy, exports are concentrated in a few commodities and a few 
markets,  thereby  increasing  the  vulnerability  of  the  economy;  the  fiscal  deficit  has  remained  high, 
resulting  in  inflationary  pressures  and  increasing  public  debt;  and  essential  economic  infrastructure 
remains  inadequate.  These  concerns  have  been  aggravated  by  the  tragic  consequences  of  the 
tsunami that resulted in the loss of so many lives and extensive destruction of property. 
Today,  the  challenge  is  to  consider  how  to  achieve  a  balanced  growth  with  economic  and  social 
stability. 
Let me now highlight some of the specifics on recent economic developments and policy challenges. 
Macroeconomic developments 
Sri Lanka was able to maintain an annual average economic growth of around 5 per cent in the post 
liberalization  era.  The  country’s  resilience  to  adverse  shocks  has  improved  with  a  significant 
diversification  of  economic  activity,  particularly  in  the  export  structure.  This  enabled  Sri  Lanka  to 
achieve  a  growth  of  5.4  per  cent  in  2004,  in  spite  of  several  major  shocks,  such  as  the  surge  in 
international oil prices, a severe drought in the early part of the year and floods later in the year and 
finally, the tsunami disaster. Per capita income has increased to US dollars 1,030 in 2004. However, 
overall  economic  progress  has  been  below  the  desired  level  for  a  sustainable  reduction  in 
unemployment and poverty in Sri Lanka.  
Sri  Lanka’s  inflation  has  averaged  11  per  cent  in  the  post  liberalization  era.  This  has  the  adverse 
consequence  of  eroding  the  living  standards  of  people,  particularly  vulnerable  groups  such  as 
pensioners, other fixed income earners and the poor. Supply side factors, including sharp increases in 
the price of oil imports, have contributed to cost-push inflation. Sri Lanka’s vulnerability to the vagaries 
of  weather,  and  relatively  low  agricultural  productivity  have  been  causal  factors.  Monetary 
management has been able to contain demand-pull inflation to a degree. The increase in inflation in 
2004 over 2003 was perhaps typical - caused by a prolonged drought in certain areas of the country, a 
rise in international prices of key commodities, especially fuel, a somewhat higher growth in money 
supply and an increased budget deficit. 
Investment and savings ratios have been moderate; not sufficient to raise economic growth to the level 
necessary to improve the standards of living to the desired degree. Investment improved in 2004 to 25 
per cent of GDP. However, a level of about 30 – 35 per cent of GDP is required on a sustained basis 
over the next five to ten years to improve essential infrastructure, to promote a higher and regionally 
balanced growth.  
BIS Review 36/2005 
 1
The  external  sector  has  been  developing  rapidly  since  1977  with  a  significant  degree  of  export 
diversification.  External  trade  expanded  considerably  in  2004  with  an  increase  in  both  exports  and 
imports, benefitting from the fastest global economic growth recorded in the past few decades.  
Trade deficits have been mitigated by increased worker remittances, and inflows from services, mainly 
tourism  and  port  services.  The  flexibly  managed  exchange  rate  regime  has  helped  to  maintain  Sri 
Lanka’s external competitiveness.  
Throughout the post liberalization era, fiscal deficits have been high due to heavy public investment in 
the early eighties and high defence expenditure from the mid eighties until the signing of the ceasefire 
in  2002.  This  has  led  to  the  public  debt  rising  to  over  100  per  cent  of  GDP,  a  cause  for  concern. 
Recognising this, the government made a commitment to strengthen the fiscal consolidation process 
with  the  enactment  of  the  Fiscal  Management  (Responsibility)  Act  (FMRA)  in  2002,  designed  to 
reduce the budget deficit and outstanding debt in the medium term. The Economic Policy Framework 
of  the  new  government  emphasises  the  need  to  increase  government  revenue,  in  the  fiscal 
consolidation  effort,  while  maintaining  an  adequate  public  investment  programme  to  improve  the 
quality of the infrastructure in the country. 
The framework of monetary management has continued to be improved since 1977 to increase the 
effectiveness of monetary policy. Indirect policy instruments are now the primary means of monetary 
management. In order to make the operations of the Central Bank more focussed, the twin objectives 
of  economic  and  price  stability,  and  financial  system  stability,  were  designated  as  the  primary 
objectives of the Bank in 2002. Monetary policy operations were made more market based and active, 
especially after the introduction of the independent float of the exchange rate in 2001. Monetary policy 
has concentrated on stability, while promoting economic growth. However, monetary expansion was 
somewhat above the expected path in 2004. The relatively higher monetary expansion during 2004 
was mainly driven by the higher expansion in credit to the private sector as well as to the public sector. 
Responding to these developments, the Central Bank tightened its monetary policy by raising policy 
rates in the fourth quarter of 2004. The policy focus was on market stability in the immediate aftermath 
of the tsunami. Subsequently, after ensuring market stability, the Central Bank has conducted open 
market operations aggressively to mop up excess liquidity. The Central Bank will continue to mop up 
liquidity in the coming months. Monetary growth is expected to be contained to 15 per cent in 2005. 
Monetary policy will focus on restraining inflationary pressure.  
An area that has experienced rapid growth since liberalisation is the financial sector. This has not only 
contributed to economic growth in its own right, but has also facilitated growth in other sectors. The 
Central  Bank  has  actively  promoted  financial  sector  stability  and  development  by  assisting  in  the 
deepening of markets, creation of new instruments and strengthening of the regulatory framework.  
Prospects and challenges 
The foregoing forms the background for the economic policies of the government. I would now like to 
highlight  several  challenges  that  have  to  be  faced.  Perhaps,  the  greatest  challenge  is  to  achieve  a 
lasting  peace.  Economic  growth  and  peace  are  interlinked.  Therefore,  the  process  to  accelerate 
economic growth and the peace process need to move in tandem. Further, structural reforms have to 
be continued. In this connection it is necessary to convince all stakeholders of the need for reforms to 
enhance the efficiency in the economy. Macroeconomic management has to be strengthened further 
to  contain  macroeconomic  imbalances.  In  this  regard,  we  have  had  the  benefit  of  considerable 
assistance from international financial institutions, in particular, the IMF, World Bank and the ADB. Not 
only  have  they  provided  funds  at  critical  times,  but  they  have  also  been  most  helpful  in  providing 
technical  assistance  and  advice.  Sound  macroeconomic  management  requires  that  the  fiscal 
consolidation  process  be  continued  as  required  in  the  Fiscal  (Responsibility)  Management  Act,  to 
enhance public investment, attain a sustainable level of public debt, and reduce inflationary pressures. 
This has to be accompanied by the continuation of a monetary policy that would maintain price stability 
and  avoid  the  emergence  of  inflationary  pressures  that  are  highly  injurious,  particularly  to  the  most 
vulnerable groups in society. The Central Bank will continue to focus on this area. In addition, reforms 
in  the  financial  sector  need  to  be  pursued  vigorously  to  ensure  a  vibrant  and  stable  financial 
environment that would be able to take advantage of the links to the international markets and support 
growth. The high international price of fuel is a major concern. Competitiveness of the economy has to 
be improved through productivity and technological improvements, especially in the agriculture sector. 
The tsunami related relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction have to be accelerated to restore normalcy 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2005
to economic activities throughout the country. Finally, the economy has to be further diversified so that 
it is better able to withstand internal and external shocks. 
I  have  highlighted  the  main  economic  challenges  that  face  Sri  Lanka  and  the  broad  policy 
requirements. I hope that today’s discussions would shed further light on how to move forward with a 
coherent  policy  package  that  will  have  the  broadest  support  in  Sri  Lanka,  as  well  as  from  all  other 
stakeholders and well wishers.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 36/2005 
 3
