Y V Reddy: Overcoming challenges in a globalising economy - managing India’s 
external sector 
Lecture  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  India  Programme  of  The 
Foreign Policy Centre, London, 23 June 2005. 
 Dear Friends, 
I am thankful to the Foreign Policy Centre for giving me this opportunity to be with you this evening 
and  share  India’s  experience  in  regard  to  managing  its  progressive  integration  with  the  world 
economy. I would like to confine myself to the issues relating to the external sector. Perhaps one of 
the most successful aspects of India’s structural reforms is the strength and dynamism in the external 
sector. The memories of June 1991, when the foreign exchange reserves fell to a level equal to barely 
a week’s imports, are way behind us. Our journey from these problems to the position of comfort that 
we enjoy today has been exciting.  
Today,  I  propose  to  dwell  on  how  we  have  been  benefiting  from  a  globalising  economy  while 
minimising the attendant risks. The focus is on specific areas relating to the balance of payments and 
financial integration which transformed a hitherto inward-looking nation into a vibrant, internationally 
competitive economy, gradually integrating with the rest of the world. 
Merchandise trade 
A key objective of structural reforms instituted in the aftermath of the crisis of 1991 was to correct for 
the implicit anti-export bias built up during the first three and a half decades of planning and to reap 
the competitiveness and efficiency gains for the economy from a more open trade regime. What were 
the major elements of the reforms? 
First,  arrangements  were  put  in  place  for  the  move  towards  a  market-determined  exchange  rate. 
Second, since 1992 the trade policy imbibed a medium-term perspective. Third, a key aspect of the 
trade reforms has been a substantial reduction in import tariff rates and a drastic rationalisation of the 
tariff structure, including their dispersion. Fourth, concerted efforts have been made to dismantle the 
panoply  of  non-tariff  barriers  that was predicated  upon  the  balance  of  payments reasons  under  the 
GATT.  Fifth,  the  Reserve Bank  of  India  has  undertaken  several  measures  to  ensure  adequate  and 
timely availability of bank credit for trade finance at competitive interest rates. Sixth, there has been a 
policy thrust for creating appropriate institutional arrangements for supporting a vigorous export drive. 
These  include  export  processing  zones,  special  economic  zones,  overseas  banking  units  and 
technology parks.  
India has engaged herself constructively in multilateral trade negotiations under the WTO. Within its 
multilateral commitments, India has forcefully articulated its position which reflects the concerns of the 
developing  countries.  In  tune  with  the  worldwide  spread  of  regional  trading  arrangements  and  our 
belief that such arrangements act as prelude to progressive multilateral trade liberalisation, India has 
entered into several preferential trade agreements. 
These reforms in the trade policy regime have unlocked entrepreneurial energies. India’s merchandise 
exports have been rising at a rate of over 20 per cent per annum, in US dollar terms, in recent years. 
As a result, the secular decline in India’s share in world exports from two per cent in 1950 to 0.5 per 
cent in the 1980s has been halted. This share began rising in the 1990s and is currently at 0.8 per 
cent.  The  export  strategy  envisages  a  doubling  of  India’s  share  in  the  world  merchandise  trade  by 
2008-09.  
Services 
Trade  policy  reforms  undertaken  since  the  1990s  have  shed  their  traditional  focus  on  merchandise 
trade and encompassed a wide range of tradable services, reflecting India’s competitive advantage in 
business  services,  technical  and  professional  services.  The  EXIM  policies  of  recent  years  have 
selected  services  for  special  focus.  India  accepted  the  obligations  under  Article  VIII  of  the  IMF’s 
Articles of Agreement and instituted current account convertibility in 1994. Besides, there has been a 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 1
progressive  liberalisation  of  the  exchange control  regime.  Foreign  direct  investment (FDI) has  been 
permitted in a host of services in order to take advantage of modern technology, with some restrictions 
on  financial  services,  taking  into  account  the  current  stage  of  development  and  openness.  Further, 
increasing availability of speedier and cost-effective money transfer arrangements through the banking 
channels  and  post  offices  has  resulted  in  significant  increase  in  the  use  of  formal  channels  for 
remittance transfers.  
Exports  of  services  have  risen  consistently  by  over  20  per  cent  per  annum  in  recent  years.  Within 
services exports, software and IT-enabled services have been growing at an average rate of 46 per 
cent annually since the mid-1990s. Over the years, skill content of Indian labour has been rising and 
the traditional markets of the Middle East have given way to the US, Europe and other industrialised 
countries. For the external sector, this natural advantage has translated into significant inflows in the 
form  of  remittances  from  Indians  working  abroad.  Workers’  remittances  are  nearly  four  per  cent  of 
India’s  GDP  now  and  have  provided  considerable  and  sustained  support  to  India’s  balance  of 
payments.  
Trade and current account  
A  discussion  on  the  recent  trends  in  trade  and  current  account  will  perhaps  be  in  order.  A 
distinguishing feature of India’s external sector developments during the fiscal year 2004-05 was the 
expansion of the merchandise trade deficit to more than five per cent of GDP from an average of a 
little below three per cent of GDP during 1990-2004. Underlying this expansion in the trade deficit was 
a  surge  in  oil  imports  on  the  back  of  the  soaring  international  crude  oil  prices  and  the  pick  up  in 
investment demand as well as the growing strength of domestic industrial activity. This trend in imports 
may continue in view of the possible strengthening of upturn of activity in the economy. However, an 
intrinsic link between merchandise imports and exports has emerged and become entrenched so that 
the large expansion in imports is also spurring vigorous export growth. Given the recent experience, 
this order of the trade deficit appears to be manageable at this stage and is consistent with our growth 
aspirations.  
Despite the large trade deficit, the current account recorded only a modest deficit of less than one per 
cent of GDP in 2004-05 after a continuous run of surpluses over the three-year period, 2001-2004. 
The high trade deficit during 2004-05 was to a large extent accommodated by the net invisible surplus 
at  five  per  cent  of  GDP,  supported  by  buoyant  services  exports  and  sustained  remittances  from 
migrant workers overseas. In fact, invisible surpluses have traditionally provided valuable support to 
India’ s balance of payments and in recent years, they have taken on the character of a permanent 
component in the current account. It is in this context that we believe that the current account deficit is 
sustainable  with  enough  headroom  available  for  accommodating  even  higher  levels  of  investment 
activity.  
From a cross-country perspective, the Indian experience with managing the current account reveals 
some unique features. First, the lessons of the 1991 crisis brought forth policies which ensured a low 
current account deficit in the ensuing years. This approach stood us in good stead in warding off the 
contagion  from  the  Asian  crisis  of  1997-98.  Second,  the  sustainability  of  the  current  account  was 
ensured  by  a  policy  choice  for  non-debt  flows  and  emphasis  on  the  consolidation  and  reduction  of 
external  debt.  Third,  the  low  current  account  deficit  was  underpinned  by  shifts  in  international 
competitiveness  favouring  software,  IT  exports  and  workers’  remittances  over  traditional  exports. 
Fourth, although the fiscal deficit remained somewhat inflexible, it was not allowed to spill over into the 
current account. Finally, the current account deficit being the mirror image of the absorptive capacity, it 
is best assessed over the business cycle rather than at discrete points. 
Capital account 
Since the initiation of gradual liberalisation of the capital account in 1991, capital flows have been in 
excess of current account deficit (CAD) except, in 1992-93 and 1995-96, adding to the reserves. It is 
interesting to note that the stock of external debt came down steeply from 28.7 per cent of GDP at the 
end of March 1991 to 17.4 per cent by March 2005. The decline in debt reflected the policy-induced 
shift in the composition of the capital account in favour of non-debt flows. The level of short-term debt 
continues to be low at US$ 7.5 billion as at the end of March 2005. As regards the composition of 
capital  flows,  there  is,  of  late,  almost  a  total  shift  in  favour  of  private  flows.  The  foreign  direct 
investment increased from less than one per cent of net capital flows in the 1980s to 20 per cent of net 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2005
capital flows in 2004-05. Total portfolio investment flows on account of FIIs, GDRs and others were 
US$ 8.9 billion in 2004-05 on top of net inflows of US$ 11.4 billion in the preceding year.  
In brief, given the adverse international experience with unfettered capital account liberalisation, we 
have been risk averse and have adopted a policy of active management of the capital account. The 
compositional shifts in the capital account have been consistent with the policy framework, imparting 
stability to the balance of payments. The sustainability of the current account is increasingly viewed as 
consistent  with  the  volume  of  normal  capital  flows.  The  substitution  of  debt  by  non-debt  flows  also 
gives  us  room  for  manoeuvre  since  debt  levels,  particularly,  external  commercial  borrowings,  have 
been  moderate  and  can  be  raised  in  the  event  of  a  sustained  pick  up  in  the  demand  for  external 
resources. There is also the cushion available from the foreign exchange reserves.  
Since non-debt creating flows are dominating, the emphasis is on encouraging inflows through foreign 
direct  investment,  and  enhancing  the  quality  of  portfolio  flows  by  strict  adherence  to  what  may  be 
described  as  ‘Know  Your  Investor’  principle.  Further,  in  view  of  entrepreneurial  skills  in  India  and 
evolving synergies in a global economy, overseas investment by Indian corporates has been receiving 
a  positive  response.  Further,  prudential  regulations  over  financial  intermediaries,  especially  over 
banks, in respect of their foreign exchange exposures and transactions are a dynamic component of 
management of capital account as well as financial supervision.  
Reserve management 
The  adequacy  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  is  a  relevant  consideration  in  the  management  of  the 
capital account. First, adequacy has to be viewed not only in terms of trade needs but also other short-
term liabilities. Second, it is not merely the long-term or short-term debt in terms of original maturity 
that  is  relevant  for  reserves,  but  the  profile  of  external  debt  in  terms  of  residual  maturity.  A  trade-
related debt which is in the nature of collateralised debt may be less severe on reserve requirements. 
Third, any addition to portfolio flows may warrant comfort through some additions to reserves. In fact, 
there  is  merit  in  presuming  that  the  flows  are  temporary  till  there  is  reason  to  judge  them  to  be 
permanent.  Fourth,  it  is  necessary  to  recognise  that  reserves  provide  cushion  to  manage  real  and 
external sector shocks like oil prices. Fifth, there is usually an opportunity cost of maintaining foreign 
exchange reserves, but this must be weighed against the financial and non-financial costs associated 
with  volatile  and  adverse  exchange  rate  movements.  Finally,  while  the  optimal  level  of  reserves  is 
difficult to quantify, attention to level of reserves as a means of self-insurance is essential. In the final 
analysis,  the  adequacy  of  reserves  needs  to  be  assessed  in  terms  of  a  medium-term  perspective 
taking into account the possible levels of the current account deficits, the composition of capital flows, 
the  level  of  international  confidence  in  the  ability  of  the  country’s  payment  position  and  pace  and 
quality  of  growth.  Viewed  from  all  these  perspectives,  the  current  level  of  reserves  continues  to  be 
comfortable.  
The  essence  of  portfolio  management  of  reserves  by  the  RBI  is  to  ensure  safety,  liquidity  and 
optimisation of returns. The reserve management strategies are periodically reviewed by the RBI in 
consultation with the Government. In deploying reserves, attention is paid to the currency composition, 
duration  and  selection  of  instruments.  While  there  is  no  set  formula  to  meet  all  situations,  the  RBI 
applies sound portfolio management principles and risk management.  
Exchange rate management 
A  major  success  in  external  sector  management  has  been  the  transition  from  an  administered 
exchange  rate  regime  to  a  more  flexible,  market-based  system.  Under  the  new  arrangements 
instituted in early 1993, the day-to-day movements in exchange rates are market determined. India’s 
current exchange rate policy focuses on management of volatility without a fixed target, while allowing 
the  underlying  demand  and  supply  conditions  to  determine  the  exchange  rate  movements  over  a 
period,  in  an  orderly  way.  To  this  end,  the  RBI  monitors  closely  the  developments  in  the  financial 
markets at home and abroad, and takes such monetary, regulatory and other measures as considered 
necessary from time to time.  
The  conduct  of  exchange  rate  policy  is  guided  by  three  major  purposes:  first,  to  reduce  excessive 
volatility in exchange rates, while ensuring that the movements are orderly; second, to help maintain 
an adequate level of foreign exchange reserves and third, to help eliminate market constraints with a 
view  to  developing  a  deep  and  liquid  foreign  exchange  market.  The  policy  is  aimed  at  preventing 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 3
destabilising speculation in the market while facilitating foreign exchange transactions at market rates 
for all permissible purposes.  
There is a wide consensus that India’s exchange rate policy has stood the test of time, despite several 
domestic  and  external  developments,  including  the  severe  currency  crises  which  characterised  the 
1990s. Recent international research on viable exchange rate strategies in emerging markets has lent 
considerable support to the exchange rate policy followed by India. 
Global economy and India 
The  debate  in  India  has  customarily  been  on  the  contours  of  the  public  policy  in  the  context  of 
increasing global economic integration. More recently, however, a debate in the rest of the world has 
been  in  evidence  on  the  challenges  likely  to  be  faced  by  the  global  economy  on  account  of 
progressively increasing global integration of the Indian economy. Hence, there is merit in looking at, 
perhaps illustratively, some of the global challenges of our integration while we move forward in this 
regard.  
Over the next half-century, the population of the world will age faster than during the past half-century 
as fertility rates decline and life expectancy rises. In Europe, the demographic profile is already tilted 
towards  the  higher  age  group  and  by  2050,  this  is  projected  to  accelerate.  Projections  suggest  a 
turning  point  between  2010  and  2030  when  the  European  Union,  North  America  and  Japan  will 
experience a substantial decline in savings rate relative to investment which may be reflected in large 
current account deficits. Most of the high performers of East Asia and China are in the second stage of 
the demographic cycle. Elderly dependency is expected to double in these countries by 2025. Their 
working age populations will increase modestly first and then shrink. These projections suggest that 
East  Asia  could  increasingly  become  an  important  supplier  of  global  savings  up  to  2025;  however, 
rapid population ageing thereafter would reinforce rather than mitigate the inexorable decline of global 
savings.  India  is  entering  the  second  stage  of  demographic  cycle  and  over  the  next  half-century,  a 
significant increase in both savings rate and share of working age population is expected. The share 
of the labour force in population in India is expected to overtake the rest of Asia, including China, by 
2030. Looking ahead, the rest of the world may increasingly rely on China and India for supplies of 
both labour and capital and this could significantly influence the evolution of the global economy. It is 
evident  that  China  and  India  will  have  to  give  high  priority  to  generating  employment  and  both  are 
poised for substantial increases in productivity.  
The  global  economy  will  have  to  contend  with  the  implications  of  these  developments  on  prices, 
exchange  rates,  wages  and  structures  of  employment  in  industrialised  countries.  Over  the  medium 
term,  it  is  felt  that  outsourcing  will  grow  rapidly  and  may  also  cover  high-end  research  and 
development  activities.  In  manufacturing,  China  has  emerged  as  a  leader  and  India  is  catching  up 
rapidly. Though agriculture is heavily subsidised in major industrialised countries, such subsidisation 
would  be  difficult  to  sustain  from  a  fiscal  point  of  view,  since  many  of  the  countries  concerned  are 
poised  to  meet  the  mounting  pension  liabilities  not  to  speak  of  burgeoning  health  care  costs  of 
maintaining the deteriorating demographics. One sector where the industrialised economies continue 
to  show  considerable  strength  and  dominance  is  the  financial  sector,  partly  attributable  to  the 
confidence  factor  in  financial  markets  that  favours  the  industrialised  economies  and  traditional 
international financial centres. It is essential for India to carefully monitor the developments in both real 
and financial sectors, and to frame the policies in tandem with the global developments so that global 
integration continues to be a positive sum game for all countries.  
Financial integration 
On  the  path  of  integrating  the  Indian  financial  markets  with  the  global  financial  system,  we  have 
chosen  to  proceed  cautiously  and  in  a  gradual  manner,  calibrating  the  pace  of  capital  account 
liberalisation  with  underlying  macroeconomic  developments,  the  state  of  readiness  of  the  domestic 
financial system and the dynamics of international financial markets.  
Unlike  in  the  case  of  trade  integration,  where benefits  to  all countries  are  demonstrable,  in  case of 
financial integration, a "threshold" in terms of preparedness and resilience of the economy is important 
for a country to get full benefits. A judgmental view needs to be taken whether and when a country has 
reached  the  “threshold”  and  the  financial  integration  should  be  approached  cautiously,  preferably 
within  the  framework  of  a  plausible  roadmap  that  is  drawn  up  by  embodying  the  country-specific 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2005
context  and  institutional  features.  In  India,  we  have  been  adhering  to  a  cautious  and  sure-footed 
approach  in  our  reforms  so  far  and  there  is  merit  in  doing  so  since  it  enables  us  to  avoid  policy 
reversals on the one hand and build on the past strengths on the other. 
The experience of the 1990s has shown that our approach to financial integration has stood the test of 
time. Even as we have embarked on a measured pace of financial liberalisation, we have ensured that 
we  have  a  well-capitalised  financial  system  by  international  standards,  with  low  levels  of  loan 
delinquency. Our financial markets are orderly and smoothly functioning and the ability of our financial 
intermediaries  to  deal  in  various  segments  of  the  financial  market  spectrum  is  improving  almost 
continuously.  
The  optimism  generated  by  the  recent  gains  in  macroeconomic  performance  warrants  a  balanced 
consideration  of  further  financial  liberalisation.  Undoubtedly,  it  contributes  to  growth  through 
enhancement of allocative efficiency in the use of resources, by promoting financial deepening and by 
expanding the volume of resource flow to the economy. At the same time it is important to recognise 
the risks to the financial system emanating from stressed macroeconomic fundamentals such as those 
associated with fiscal deficit, inflation and uncertainties in international financial markets. Turbulence in 
the  domestic  financial  systems  tends  to  amplify  related  distortions  and  generates  undesirable 
fluctuations  in  economic  activities.  Further,  it  also  exposes  the  economy  to  external  shocks  and 
fluctuations in international business cycles. There could, therefore, be a trade-off in the initial stages 
while considering financial liberalisation and in policy terms, the trade-off takes the form of a choice 
between measured and premature financial liberalisation as also appropriate sequencing, the choice 
being contextual and often judgmental. In general, the downside of a premature financial liberalisation 
would  be  in  the  form  of  financial  instability  and  associated  social  costs  of  disruption  which  are 
significantly higher for a developing economy like India. 
India  has  made  significant  progress  in  financial  liberalisation  since  the  institution  of  financial  sector 
reforms  in  1992  and  this  has  been  recognised  internationally.  External  financial  liberalisation,  in 
particular, has expanded at a fairly rapid pace. At this stage, the optimism generated by impressive 
macroeconomic performance accompanied with stability has given rise to pressures for significantly 
accelerating the pace of external financial liberalisation. It is essential to take into account the risks 
associated with it while resetting an accelerated pace of a gradualist approach.  
First, India’s public debt and fiscal deficit as a proportion of GDP is currently among the highest in the 
world, but it has been financed almost entirely from domestic savings. There is a commitment to fiscal 
consolidation  in  the  medium  term  with  the  implementation  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget 
Management  Act,  2003.  In  the  interim,  however,  before  embarking  on  any  faster  pace  of  external 
financial liberalisation, the possible spill-over effects of fiscal deficits into external sector need to be 
carefully evaluated.  
Second, it is widely recognised that financial instability can lead to high variability in real activity and, 
as  the  Asian  financial  crisis  has  tellingly  demonstrated,  even  cause  interruptions  in  the  growth 
process.  Financial  distress  has  resulted  in  macroeconomic  and  welfare  losses.  Resilience  and 
flexibility  in  the  real  sector  of  the  economy  are  essential  to  deal  with  surges  of  capital  flows,  large 
reversals  and  associated  fluctuations  in  financial  prices  that  become  inevitable  with  accelerated 
liberalisation of financial sector. At present, some inflexibilities in pricing policies and restrictions on 
domestic  trade  constrain  the  response  of  the  real  sector.  In  general,  therefore,  low  level  of  system 
flexibility  at  the  current  juncture  is  a  major  constraint  on  economic  agents  and  financial  market 
participants in responding to highly accelerated financial liberalisation and dealing with its downside 
risks.  
Third,  the  adequacy  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  is  often  cited  as  a  consideration  for  significantly 
accelerating the pace of financial liberalisation. Foreign exchange reserves are, in the final analysis, a 
cushion to withstand both cyclical and unanticipated shocks. Therefore, reserve adequacy may be a 
necessary condition but not a sufficient one for speeding up financial liberalisation. There is a clearer 
recognition today that the net benefits from financial liberalisation in respect of any developing country 
would be enhanced only if complementary policies in non-financial sectors are followed.  
Finally,  the  existing  international  financial  architecture  is  not  adequate  to  prevent  or  mitigate  the 
domestic and external effects of financial crisis in large economies like India. The impact of instability 
in times of crisis appears largely to be borne by the home or domestic public sector rather than the 
global private sector. The issue of setting the pace of financial liberalisation revisits the issue of trade-
off between sustained growth and a growth rate that could potentially turn volatile and unstable. While 
it  is  necessary  to  add  to  the  pace  of  growth,  it  is  also  equally  important  to  minimise  the  risks  of 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 5
instability  and  experience  shows  that  more  than  desirable  pace  of  financial  liberalisation  was  often 
followed by financial instability and crises.  
Thus,  the  recent  experience  in  many  countries  shows  that  periods  of  impressive  macroeconomic 
performance generate pressures for speedier financial liberalisation since everyone appears to be a 
gainer from further liberalisation, but the costs of instability that may get generated are borne by the 
country, the government and the poorer sections. Avoiding crises is ultimately a national responsibility. 
The  approach  to  managing  the  external  sector,  the  choice  of  instruments  and  the  timing  and 
sequencing of policies are matters of informed judgment, given the imponderables.  
Conclusion 
Over  the  years,  India’s  commercial  and  financial  linkages  with  the  rest  of  the  world  have  been 
increasing  with  trade  liberalisation  and  openness  on  the  capital  account.  This  is  reflected  in  the 
transmission  of  international  impulses  to  the  real  sector  and  domestic  financial  markets.  Trends  in 
international  prices  have  now  significant  influence  on  domestic  prices.  Indian  corporates  and 
institutions are increasingly accessing international markets with consequent diversification benefits. 
While  this process  has provided  important  opportunities,  it  has  also  brought  in  new  challenges and 
risks, necessitating fine-tuning of macro policies in a much broader canvass and context. India is, thus, 
moving from a focus on managing external sector to implementing an optimal integration of domestic 
and external sectors, with the global economy. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 49/2005
