Jean-Claude Trichet: Reflections on the international financial system 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Bundesbank 
Lecture, Berlin, 21 June 2005. 
 It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  be  invited  to  give  this  year’s  Bundesbank  lecture  and  address  such  a 
distinguished audience. It is a particular pleasure for me to speak in Berlin, which symbolises more 
than any other city the historic peaceful re-integration of Europe. I would therefore like to extend my 
warm gratitude to President Axel Weber and the Board of the Bundesbank for the invitation to Berlin 
this evening. 
In my lecture, I will try to take stock and look ahead at the challenges our economy is facing today, 
focusing on the challenges from global financial integration for the international financial system, its 
architecture and its functioning. 
In my view, international financial integration and the state of the international financial system are far 
less  abstract  topics  than  one  might  think  at  first  glance.  They  reflect  one  of  the  most  complex, 
intriguing and powerful aspects of the phenomenon that is generally referred to as globalisation. This 
phenomenon represents a key issue that policy-makers in Europe and beyond have to deal with. It is 
therefore  of  utmost  importance  that  we  understand  the  significance  of  this  issue  for  our  role  as 
economic policy-makers, and it is against this background that I would like to reflect on international 
financial integration and the international financial system today. 
Policy-makers often face very specific concerns about economic uncertainty and the risk of instability, 
and we need to address these concerns. Monetary policy also has to play its part. We have created a 
stable  currency  for  307  million  people.  We  have  created  confidence  in  this  currency.  We  have 
anchored inflation expectations below, but close to, 2%. We have ensured monetary stability on our 
continent.  In  the  same  way,  other  policies  have  to  contribute  to  addressing  the  challenges  of  the 
future. They have to boost confidence and ensure that the opening-up of borders turns into something 
that is ultimately worthwhile in terms of economic development and institutional cooperation. 
In my reflections today I will describe the recent developments in the international financial system and 
how  they  have  shaped  the  institutional  setup  of  this  system  in  recent  years.  I  will  then  turn  to  the 
current challenges facing both the international community and Europe, and the implications of those 
challenges. 
International financial integration 
The clearest example of global economic integration is trade, and this is certainly true for this country. 
The  label  “Made  in  Germany”  is  recognised  the  world  over  as  standing  for  high  quality.  But 
international  trade  is  not  a  process  in  which  only  one  party  gains.  Each  export  corresponds  to  an 
import, and economies benefit mutually from each other. Many goods that are bought in the euro area 
are  made  in  other  countries,  far  away  from  their  consumers.  Transport  costs  have  decreased, 
technology has become universal, information is readily available at low cost, and tastes have been 
converging. During the last three decades tariffs have halved and over 230 trade agreements between 
various countries have entered into force. All these developments have resulted in a steady opening of 
markets in Europe and worldwide. In the early 1970s global exports accounted for only one tenth of 
world  GDP,  but  they  have  increased  to  one  quarter  of  world  GDP  today.  This  is  a  reflection  of  the 
dramatic deepening of global economic interlinkages in recent years. In my view, it is important to bear 
in mind that regional trade integration does not hinder global integration, but is in fact one efficient way 
of fostering it. 
There is also a more recent phenomenon that is less visible, but even more dynamic, namely global 
financial integration. By this I mean the integration of local and national financial markets into a more 
unified international financial market. Only a few decades ago, the realisation of an investment project 
was largely contingent on the availability of capital in the local economy. Today the opportunities to 
raise finance as well as to invest capital are truly global. The substantial number of bilateral investment 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 1
treaties and the liberalisation of capital accounts have further encouraged cross-border investment.1 
While in the 1970s over 80% of all countries restricted access to foreign capital, today only 60% of 
developing countries and no industrialised countries have capital accounts which are still more or less 
closed.2 In the 1970s, worldwide cross-border holdings of assets amounted to only one tenth of world 
GDP.  Since  then,  cross-border  capital  flows  have  steadily  increased,  and  countries  have  now 
accumulated foreign assets in an amount equivalent to the annual GDP of the entire world. In 2003, 
euro area residents held foreign capital with a total value of 7.6 trillion euro, a figure that is somewhat 
higher than the euro area’s annual GDP. 
But financial integration is also intrinsically linked to the real economy. Over the past 30 years, annual 
foreign direct investment (or FDI) worldwide grew from around 8.5 billion euro (10 billion US dollars) to 
almost  one  thousand  billion  euro  (about  1200  billion  US  dollars).  The  value  of  foreign-owned 
companies around the world - the stock of FDI - is equal to the annual GDP of the euro area. Taken 
together, these companies would make up an economy approximately one third of the size of the euro 
area. Each year they produce goods and services of a value equivalent to German GDP and employ 
one and a half times the German workforce. For Europe, these international linkages are of particular 
importance.  European  corporate  businesses  are  among  the  most  dynamic  in  the  world,  as  they 
provide half of world FDI. At the same time, half of world FDI is invested in Europe.3 Foreign-owned 
companies contribute between 10% and 20% of euro area GDP.4 As a consequence, the relationship 
between the euro area and the global economy is today characterised more by financial linkages than 
by  trade.  We  as  policy-makers  have  to  be  aware  of  these  linkages  because  they  can  be  a  very 
powerful and fast transmission mechanism for shocks. 
The benefits of this integration are obvious - a greater variety of goods and downward pressure on 
prices  benefiting  consumers  and  households.  But  the  benefits  are  even  more  substantial,  as 
production  requires  both  human  and  financial  capital.  A  skilled  workforce  cannot  unleash  its  full 
potential  without  financial  capital.  Europe’s  impressive  economic  recovery  after  World  War  II  would 
have been inconceivable without its integration into the global economy and its concentration on high-
quality exports. 
Today,  many  Asian  economies  are  benefiting  from  global  economic  integration.  Investment  in  the 
appropriate  technologies  enables  these  countries  to  compete  on  the  world  market  and  increase 
welfare substantially. This is by no means a phenomenon which only appears in national accounts. 
Income disparities across the world have declined significantly.5 Not surprisingly, the benefits of this 
financial  integration  are  particularly  clear  for  open  economies,  which  have  recorded  higher  average 
growth rates in recent years.6 
How should we assess these recent developments in the international financial system? We realise 
that  the  benefits  outweigh  the  costs.  But  there  are  costs  of  adjustment,  often  front-loaded  and 
concentrated on specific regions and sectors, which need to be taken into consideration. The change 
in  the  structure  of  the  global  economy  also  requires  structural  adjustments  to  be  made  in  local 
economies. We know that the ability of a country to benefit from global financial integration very much 
depends  on  the  quality  of  its  institutional  and  structural  environment.  All  economies,  including 
advanced ones, such as the euro area, have to adapt to the changing needs of the world economy. 
The European economy has undergone and will continue to undergo substantial structural changes, 
which are necessary and beneficial because they will secure Europe’s place in the global economy. 
This structural adjustment has been and will continue to be a major phenomenon in the coming years. 
                                                      
1  According  to  the  United  Nations  Commission  for  Trade  and  Development  (UNCTAD)  Bilateral  Investment  Treaties 
Database, the number of bilateral investment treaties rose during the 1990s from around 500 to over 2000. 
2  See:  M.  Ayhan  Kose  and  Eswar  Prasad:  “Liberalizing  Capital”,  International  Monetary  Fund,  Finance  and  Development, 
September 2004. 
3  For a thorough report on the role of foreign direct investment in the global economy, see the UNCTAD World Investment 
Report 2004. 
Jos  Jensen  and  Ad  Stockman:  “Foreign  Direct  Investment  and  International  Business  Cycle  Comovement”,  European 
Central Bank, Working Paper No 401, 2004. 
4 
5  Xavier Sala-i-Martin: “The Disturbing ‘Rise’ of Global Income Inequality”, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working 
Paper No 8904, 2002. 
Jeffrey  Sachs  and  Andrew  Warner:  “Fundamental  sources  of  long-run  growth”,  American  Economic  Review,  papers  and 
proceedings, 1997. 
BIS Review 47/2005
6 
2 
 As the world’s largest exporter, Europe clearly has a major interest in global economic integration and 
is well placed to benefit from it. 
Sceptics  are  concerned  about  the  sustainability  of  global  financial  integration.  They  argue  that 
financial  integration  has  gone  too  far,  that  market  turnover  has  reached  levels  that  are  unhealthy. 
Each day, foreign exchange transactions are carried out to a value equivalent to the annual GDP of 
France.  Financial  integration  is  regarded  by  some  as  having  the  potential  to  destabilise  the  global 
economy. 
But  there  is  also  an  opposing  view.  This  view  states  that  global  financial  integration  not  only 
contributes  to  higher  growth  but  also  reduces  the  risks  to  the  global  economy.  It  states  that  the 
availability of finance and opportunities to invest are crucial for the stabilisation of economic outcomes. 
Let me give you just two examples. 
The preference of investors for investing in local assets rather than diversifying internationally, known 
in the economic literature as “home bias”, has not yet disappeared. In a world without transaction and 
information  costs,  all  countries  should  hold  the  same  portfolio.  Each  country  should  diversify  its 
investment in all other countries relative to the size of their financial markets. This would provide the 
best insurance against shocks to any economy in the world, including the economy of the country in 
question, and at the same time it would increase the returns for all countries. During the last decade 
countries have indeed been reducing their risk positions through this mechanism. However, the world 
economy is still far away from a theoretically optimal portfolio and, as yet, there is no strong empirical 
evidence for economic stabilisation resulting from risk-sharing. This should be taken as an indication 
that there is still scope for further reduction of risk and stabilisation of income.7] 
The  second  example  relates  to  the  fact  that  most  developing  countries  cannot  yet  borrow 
internationally in their local currencies, and have to resort to foreign currency. Foreign currency debt 
makes these countries more vulnerable to exchange rate movements. For example, the positive effect 
of depreciation on international competitiveness may be outweighed by the government’s higher debt 
service  on  foreign  currency  bonds  and  by  deteriorating  economic  conditions.8  Recent  trends  in 
domestic  and  international  financial  markets  point  to  developing  countries  also  having  improved 
access  to  different  types  of  finance.  Therefore,  further  development  and  integration  of  financial 
markets may contribute to a stabilisation of economic outcomes in these countries, which would also 
benefit the industrial economies as their trading partners. 
Overall,  I  consider  the  recent  developments  in  international  financial  integration  to  be  welcome, 
because  they  reflect  trends  towards  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources  and,  in  this  way,  support 
growth and promote welfare in the global economy. They do not only benefit the recipient economies, 
but  also  the  countries  of  origin,  where  they  facilitate  international  risk  sharing  and  participation  in 
returns abroad. However, the rapid integration of financial markets across borders is not without new 
risks.  These  risks  include  adverse  market  dynamics,  unwarranted  spillovers,  and  challenges  for 
international financial stability. And this brings me to the second part of my reflections, which concerns 
the institutional governance of the international financial system. 
The international financial architecture: is it up to the task? 
Potential  risks  stemming  from  international  financial  integration  should  be  addressed  with  firm 
governance, requiring solid institutional foundations and policies. These institutional foundations, often 
referred to as the international financial architecture of the system, will help prevent adverse financial 
pressure and deal with it when it arises.9 Therefore, the key questions for policy-makers are whether 
the international financial architecture is at present sufficiently well-equipped to deal with this task, and 
whether it is adjusting sufficiently fast to the ongoing changes in international financial integration. 
                                                      
7  Bent  E.  Sørensen,  Yi-Tsung  Wu,  Oved  Yosha  and  Yu  Zhu:  “Home  bias  and  international  risk  sharing:  Twin  Puzzles 
Separated at Birth”, 2005. 
8  Barry  Eichengreen  and  Ricardo  Hausmann:  “Other  People’s  Money:  Debt  Denomination  and  Financial  Instability  in 
Emerging Market Economies”, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2005. 
9   With regards to the international financial architecture, see for example P. Kenen, The International Financial Architecture: 
What’s new? What’s missing?, November 2001. 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 3
the  authorities, 
first,  considerable 
information  gaps  between 
These  are  clearly  not  trivial  questions,  and  definite  answers  can  be  given  only  with  the  benefit  of 
hindsight. It is easy to count the crises that have occurred, but impossible to count those that have 
been averted. However, without forgetting the necessary note of caution, I consider the adjustments 
implemented  in  the  international  financial  system  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis 
altogether sufficiently important that they now constitute a system that is significantly different from the 
one  prevailing  before  the  crisis.  Indeed,  I  would  classify  some  of  the  changes  implemented  in  the 
international  financial  architecture  since  the  Asian  crisis  as  major  ones.  Let  me  expand  on  this 
hypothesis. 
The Asian crisis was indeed severe. It is estimated that 600 billion dollars’ worth of national income 
was  lost  within  the  first  year  of  the  crisis  (1997-98).10  It  is  important  to  realise  that  significant 
weaknesses in the various national financial systems and a lack of market orientation were at the roots 
of the crisis. These weaknesses included balance sheet mismatches, banking sector vulnerabilities, 
and inadequate supervision. The Asian crisis was triggered by a shift in market sentiment which led to 
massive reversals of capital flows.11 This change in market sentiment spread rapidly across the region, 
and then into other regions, making contagion a major factor in the development of the crisis. 
With  hindsight  it  turned  out  that  both  national  authorities  and  international  institutions  were 
insufficiently aware of the risks and perhaps also insufficiently equipped to deal with them once they 
had  materialised.  The  subsequent  diagnosis  of  the  origins  of  the  crisis  exposed  three  major 
shortcomings: 
financial  market 
participants and the international community; second, insufficient attention to financial sector issues in 
macroeconomic  surveillance;  and  third,  the  inadequate  involvement  of  emerging  countries  in 
international  fora.  These  shortcomings  have  been  addressed  in  recent  years,  which  has  led  to 
important  changes  in  the  approach  of  international  financial  institutions,  national  authorities  and 
market  participants.  The  main  thrust  of  these  changes  has  been  to  strengthen  market  orientation 
through  an  improved  international  financial  architecture.  Let  me  briefly  discuss  these  three  sets  of 
changes in turn. 
First,  concerning  the  provision  of  information,  the  IMF  has  made  large  strides  towards  increased 
transparency in recent years. The bulk of its bilateral consultation reports are now published and the 
Fund  has  pushed  for  greater  dissemination  of  key  economic  and  financial  data.  The  fact  that, 
nowadays, data on foreign exchange reserves, external debt, and balance of payments flows as well 
as other key data are reliable and available with little lag has been an important part of the transition 
towards a more market-led international financial system.12 It has allowed market participants to price 
value and risk regarding each particular borrower in a reliable and effective fashion and to help stem 
spillovers across markets. 
National  authorities  have  also  made  considerable  progress  in  increasing  transparency,  including  in 
displaying their fiscal policies and data. All major central banks have made great efforts to increase the 
transparency of their monetary policy frameworks and they consider clear communication essential for 
effective  monetary  policy-making.  Nowadays,  more  than  15  of  the  20  major  central  banks  publish 
bulletins or inflation reports, often with detailed explanations of policy decisions and background data. 
Importantly,  many  countries  that  have  been  hit  by  a  crisis  in  recent  years  are  now  publishing  their 
inflation  reports,  including  Mexico,  Korea,  Thailand  and  Brazil.  This  too  leads  to  a  more  informed 
decision-making process in the markets, reducing adverse market dynamics and contagion. 
Market participants themselves also embarked on a process aimed at strengthening the international 
financial  system,  including  through  the  provision  of  information.  In  my  view,  an  important  recent 
milestone has been the agreement between sovereign bond issuers and private market participants 
on  a  voluntary  code  of  behaviour  to  keep  channels  of  communication  open  in  good  times  and  to 
facilitate collaborative solutions in cases of distress for a sovereign issuer, and a possible restructuring 
of its debt. I myself launched this idea in a speech in Washington in September 2001. This agreement 
has resulted in the “Principles for stable capital flows and fair debt restructuring in emerging markets”, 
previously known as the “Code of Conduct”, and it was endorsed at the end of last year by the G20 
                                                      
10   Javad K. Shirazi: The East Asian Crisis: Origins, Policy Challenges, and Prospects, June 1998. 
11 
In 1997 net private capital flows to Asia declined by almost 100 billion dollars compared with 1996. The 1996-97 swing in 
flows to the Asian countries represented about 11% of their GDP. 
12  See T. Padoa-Schioppa and F. Saccomanni: Managing a market-led global financial system, in P. Kenen (ed.): Managing 
the World Economy: Fifty Years After Bretton Woods, 1994. 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2005
ministers and governors, when we met here in Berlin.13 We welcomed the fact that sovereign issuers 
and  market  participants  have  developed  a  pragmatic  and  voluntary  approach  to  reinforce  the 
international financial system and have in that way taken ownership of an important strengthening of 
the present financial system. 
The second important change since the Asian crisis concerns the focus of the international community 
on financial issues, as it was felt that not enough attention was given to financial sector surveillance. In 
the meantime, the IMF has brought financial sector issues to the forefront of its work, and they are 
now  regularly  included  in  consultations.  Global  market  surveillance  has  been  established,  and 
analytical tools for the understanding of crisis detection have been strengthened. The IMF has also 
established  the  so-called  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program,  which  aims  to  promote  the 
soundness of financial systems in the IMF’s member countries. An important part of the Program is the 
IMF’s assessment of observance of financial sector standards and codes, which have been endorsed 
by  the  international  community.  In  fact,  the  IMF  is  producing  separate  reports  on  Observance  of 
Standards and Codes as a by-product of the Program. The IMF’s nearly universal membership makes 
it  well-placed  to  carry  on  this  important  work,  and  I  think  the  fact  that  around  120  countries  have 
already  participated  in  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  since  its  launch  in  1999,  or  are 
planning to participate in it, is clear evidence of this. 
In  order  to  further  examine  the  linkages  between  financial  and  macroeconomic  stability  and  across 
sectors of the financial system on a global scale, the Financial Stability Forum was created in 1999. 
The purpose of the FSF is to promote international financial stability and reduce the risks stemming 
from  the  international  financial  system.  The  FSF  is  uniquely  positioned  to  fulfil  this  task,  as  its 
members include, in particular, the major international financial institutions, the international groupings 
setting  standards  for  accounting  and  for  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions  (by 
which  I  mean  banks,  securities  firms  and  insurance  companies),  the  international  committees  of 
central bank experts in the fields of financial markets and payment and settlement systems, as well as 
the executive, monetary and supervisory authorities of the major financial centres. In my view, it has 
been  the  first  serious  attempt  to  consider  the  global  financial  system  as  a  truly  single  system,  an 
integrated structural entity where it is of major importance for each institution or authority - whether the 
IMF or the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision or the International Accounting Standards Board, 
for instance - to be fully aware of the systemic implications of its own orientations and decisions. From 
that standpoint, I consider the Financial Stability Forum as a global conceptual clearing house, whose 
role is likely to be more and more important to the extent that the global financial system itself - driven 
by technology and globalisation - is more and more complex, universal and integrated. 
The  third  shortcoming  that  was  detected  in  the  international  financial  architecture  during  the  Asian 
crisis  was  the  inadequate  involvement  of  emerging  countries  in  international  fora.  During  the 
development of the Asian crisis, emerging market participation was addressed by the setting up of the 
G20, which saw its inaugural meeting here in Berlin in December 1999. The G20 was established in 
order to fully reflect the new nature of the global economy, an economy in which emerging economies 
were  playing  a  very  important  role  from  a  systemic  standpoint.  The  G20  is  a  truly  global  forum.  It 
enhances the dissemination of information by bringing together key industrial and emerging countries 
in an informal setting with the aim of reaching a consensus on a number of topical issues related to the 
international financial architecture. Since its establishment in 1999, the G20 has been instrumental in 
implementing standards and codes that are applied at the global level, as it has led by an example by 
carrying  out  the  IMF’s  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programs  and  Reports  on  the  Observance  of 
Standards and Codes at an early stage. By now, two thirds of the IMF membership has participated in 
these reports, assessing their compliance with internationally recognised standards and codes. The 
G20  also  contributed  to  the  identification  of  12  major  standards,  on  which  global  efforts  are  now 
concentrating.  These  major  standards  include  banking  supervision,  corporate  governance,  fiscal 
transparency, monetary and financial policy transparency, and securities regulation. Without the kind 
of  global  ownership  of  new  concepts  of  the  best  practices,  without  reinforced  transparency  and 
voluntary  implementation  of  the  Principles  for  stable  capital  flows  and  fair  debt  restructuring  in 
emerging  markets  that  the  G20  has  delivered,  our  present  financial  architecture  would  not  be  as 
strong as it is today. 
                                                      
13  See  the  Institute  of  International  Finance  (IIF)  et  al.,  Principles  for  Stable  Capital  Flows  and  Fair  Debt  Restructuring  in 
Emerging Markets, November 2004. 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 5
These three major improvements - namely fostering transparency as a major strategic driver, focusing 
on  a  more  systemic  conceptual  approach,  in  particular,  through  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  and 
developing  improved  global  ownership,  in  particular,  through  the  establishment  of  the  G20  -  have 
contributed to an international financial system which is more resilient than before. The international 
financial system is today better equipped to detect vulnerabilities and deal with shocks than it was in 
1997  or  1998.  Although  the  success  of  crisis  prevention  can  only  be  assessed  with  hindsight,  the 
absence of international financial contagion over the past few years is an important observation. 
One important lesson from the recent crises has been that the private sector needs to play its role in 
crisis management. Private sector involvement is needed in order to avoid the moral hazard problem 
that is inherent in large financial assistance provided by the official sector.14 Furthermore, the role of 
the private sector in crisis management is essential because official support is likely to be insufficient 
to cover the financing needs of a crisis country at a time of increasing capital flows. There have been 
some  concrete  achievements  in  the  area  of  private  sector  involvement,  most  notably  the  increased 
use of collective action clauses in sovereign bonds. 
There remain a number of open issues in the international financial system that need further reflection. 
One such issue is the role of the official sector in crisis resolution. Here, the international community 
started to emphasise the importance of clearer rules for official sector support. This was done in order 
to strengthen incentives for prudent risk management on the part of both policy-makers and private 
sector investors. The IMF has established a framework, which is called the exceptional access policy, 
for  large  financial  assistance  programmes  that  sets  guidelines  in  order  to  make  IMF  lending  more 
predictable. It is now up to the international community to follow these rules. Another open issue is the 
lack of clear guidelines for IMF involvement in the process of sovereign debt restructuring in the event 
of a country facing an unsustainable debt situation. The case of Argentina is an example of a very 
difficult debt restructuring process, which has taken a long time to complete and which has caused 
uncertainty  for  all  parties  concerned.  Argentina’s  debt  restructuring  process  has  shown  that  the 
international  community  still  needs  a  better  framework  for  crisis  resolution.  Authorities  have  to 
cooperate with the IMF and international creditors. The IMF, for its part, has to remain closely involved 
in the process, and it needs to take an active role in providing information. 
The IMF is currently undertaking a strategic review of its activities, which should set a roadmap for the 
Fund for the coming years. In this strategic review, the IMF is contemplating measures to make its 
surveillance more effective. I support the recent efforts to put more emphasis on regional surveillance, 
in order to reflect the strong regional focus of trade patterns that is visible not only in Europe and Asia, 
but also in other parts of the world. I also support attempts to review the functioning of the international 
monetary system and the Fund’s role in it. Specifically in this context, the IMF is well-placed to analyse 
issues like reserve accumulation and the evolution of exchange rate regimes in emerging markets, to 
take due account of their global implication. Finally, it is important to review the financial position of the 
IMF and the implications of lower lending activities on the Fund’s operational budget. 
Current macroeconomic challenges 
My reflections on the current state of the international financial system would be incomplete without 
putting them into the context of the current global economic situation. First of all, I have to note that 
this is no time for complacency and that we currently find ourselves in a challenging situation. 
The global economy is expanding at a comfortable pace, but there are large global imbalances, which 
have  actually  widened  in  recent  years.  These  imbalances  involve  the  industrialised  countries  as  a 
whole, which have a large aggregate current account deficit and amongst them, more particularly, the 
United States, whose current account deficit has reached levels not seen before. The increase in the 
current account in recent years has occurred against the background of a decline in national savings, 
in turn attributable to rising budget deficits and a household savings rate that has fallen to levels not 
far above zero. The financing of the current account deficit, which calls for inflows of the magnitude of 
around two billion US dollars every working day, takes place largely through Asia. Central banks in the 
region  have  been  intervening  heavily  for  various  reasons,  such  as  to  prevent  their  currencies  from 
                                                      
14  See  “Managing  Financial  Crises  in  Emerging  Market  Economies:  Experience  with  the  Involvement  of  Private  Sector 
Creditors”, ECB Occasional Paper 32, 2005, for an overview of the instruments for private sector involvement and of recent 
experience. 
6 
 BIS Review 47/2005
appreciating,  and  they  have  become  large-scale  purchasers  of  US  debt  securities  in  recent  years. 
While the current situation is rationalised by some observers, in particular as it supports strong growth 
in  both  regions  and  smoothes  the  adjustment  path,  it  clearly  raises  questions  regarding  the 
sustainability of recent developments and associated policies. 
Japan and Europe are also in the picture, Japan because it is posting a large current account surplus 
and is growing slowly, and Europe because, although it has a balanced current account, it should also 
contribute to increasing global growth - through raising its potential rate of growth - thereby alleviating 
global imbalances. The orderly and effective correction of global imbalances is one of the major goals 
for the international community. These imbalances represent a major risk to financial stability around 
the world and, therefore, to global growth. There is no individual national or continental solution to that 
issue. I trust that there is an absolute need to embark on a cooperative strategy comprising all four 
major partners. The United States has to tackle its structural lack of savings both by reducing public 
dissaving and by increasing household savings. Europe has to augment its growth potential through 
structural  reforms  in  order  to  deliver  growth,  contributing  more  effectively  to  global  growth.  Japan 
should also increase its growth potential by implementing structural reforms. And, as a fully-fledged 
member of this collective, cooperative, global endeavour, the emerging Asian economies would need 
to accept an orderly realignment of their currencies. I would underline that all four partners together 
would not only have a winning strategy for tackling global imbalances but they would also individually, 
each of them, do what is in their best interest. This is true for China and emerging Asia, this is true for 
America, this is true for Japan. 
This  is  also  true  for  Europe.  We  have  to  convince  people  that  structural  reforms  are  necessary  to 
revitalise  our  economies  and  make  them  fit  for  global  competition.  Moreover,  they  can  enhance 
resilience  to  the  shocks  inherent  in  open  economies.  Structural  reforms  are  essential  for  Europe’s 
ability to respond to the challenges arising from the ongoing deepening in the global division of labour, 
the rapid pace of technological change, and the ageing of the population. In my view, all the conditions 
to benefit from such integration are there, and we should make the necessary structural adjustments 
with full confidence in their long-term benefits for our economy. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion I would like to stress three points. First, in my view it is remarkable that the current global 
imbalances have again brought to the fore the importance of monetary and exchange rate issues in 
the global economy, namely issues of exchange rate configurations, reserve accumulation and global 
liquidity.  This  underscores  the  fact  that  the  focus  on  financial  sector  and  market  institution  issues 
should not be at the expense of macroeconomic and exchange rate surveillance. This is particularly 
true for IMF surveillance. 
Second, the scientific and technological revolution, the phenomenon of globalisation and the structural 
changes that are ongoing on all continents, not the least in Europe, are calling for utmost vigilance and 
for a permanent adaptation of the international financial architecture. We must keep a constant check 
on whether we have taken the systemic interactions between the various pillars of the international 
financial  architecture  into consideration  in  an appropriate  manner.  Much remains  to  be done  in  this 
regard and, as I already said, this is no time for complacency. The ECB is keen to play its role fully in 
this respect, not only by participating actively in the G7, the G20 and the Financial Stability Forum, and 
by  being  fully  dedicated  to  the  G10  group  of  governors,  but  also  by  calling,  when  necessary,  for  a 
larger,  more  comprehensive,  more  systemic  view  in  a  number  of  important  fields.  For  instance,  we 
suggested additional considerations of financial stability in the context of the International Accounting 
Standards Board, and these have now been done to our satisfaction. 
Third, further work also remains to be done to achieve full inclusiveness of emerging economies and 
economies in transition in the international financial architecture. The G20, as I said, is an emblematic 
illustration of this new feature, which was overdue. In the field of central banking, the global economy 
meeting gathering central bank governors of systemic industrialised and emerging economies all over 
the world is another major example of the new inclusive handling of issues that are both systemic and 
global. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 7
