Svein Gjedrem: The macroprudential approach to financial stability 
Keynote address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
conference  entitled  “Monetary  Policy  and  Financial  Stability”,  hosted  by  the  Oesterreichische 
Nationalbank (Austrian National Bank), Vienna, 12 May 2005.  
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Introduction 
First of all I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to this conference. It’s a great pleasure to 
be given the opportunity to share with you some views on financial stability issues.  
Financial  stability  has  become  an  increasingly  important  objective  in  economic  policymaking  during 
recent decades.  
In the 1980s, direct regulation of credit markets and capital flows was dismantled in many countries. 
This  has  prepared  the  ground  for  an  expansion  of  the  financial  system  at  a  faster  pace  than  other 
parts  of  the  economy.  In  this  process,  the  financial  system  has  gone  through  important  structural 
changes and become more complex. The instruments have become more intricate, the activities more 
diversified  and  the  risks  more  mobile.  As  a  result  of  increasing  cross-industry  and  cross-border 
integration, financial systems have also become more interwoven, both nationally and internationally.  
In parallel with the strong growth of the financial system, we have seen more frequent instances of 
widespread financial distress. The resulting macroeconomic costs have often been sizeable. Financial 
crises have typically been associated with boom and bust cycles in asset prices and credit. Due to 
sharp growth in house prices and household debt in several countries in recent years, the question of 
whether  monetary  policy  should  be  used  to  mitigate  such  developments  has  received  increased 
attention.  
In the light of these developments, I would like to address four main questions. What do we mean by 
financial stability, how do we analyse it, how do authorities cooperate in order to support it, and finally, 
what instruments are available to secure financial stability?  
What do we mean by financial stability? 
Despite increasing focus during the last decades, uncertainty about how best to define the concept 
‘financial stability’ remains1.  
In order for households and enterprises to obtain optimal consumption and investment over time there 
has to exist a well-functioning financial system that can intermediate between savers and borrowers, 
carry out payments and redistribute risk in a satisfactory manner. This promotes an efficient allocation 
of real economic resources across different activities and over time. From this point of view, financial 
stability can be defined as a situation where the financial system is able to meet these requirements, 
and thereby enhance economic performance and wealth accumulation  
A more narrow approach is to define financial stability in terms of what it is not, that is a situation in 
which financial instability impairs the real economy. This definition is more passive in terms of implying 
how one should act under normal circumstances, but has the advantage of focusing on the situations 
we attempt to avoid.  
The latter definition is related to the high costs of financial instability in the last few decades. Costs in 
terms of loss of GDP can be substantial. A study of the economic costs of banking crises concluded 
that  even  though  such crises  have  been  less  frequent  in  high-income countries  than  in  low-income 
                                                      
1 
 See for example Schinasi, Garry J. (2004). ”Defining Financial Stability”. IMF Working Paper No. 04/187 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 1
countries, they have persisted over a longer period and average total output losses have thus been 
higher.2 
The  preferred  definition  of  financial  stability  varies  across  countries.  Recognising  the  need  for  a 
relevant operational definition regardless of the current situation in the financial system, the Central 
Bank of Norway has chosen to adopt the broad definition of financial stability.  
How do the authorities analyse financial stability? 
Given an understanding of what financial stability should imply, the authorities can analyse potential 
threats to financial stability. There are two complementary approaches:  
In  the  first  approach,  we  need  to  focus  on  risk  factors  originating  within  the  financial  system. 
Institutions, markets and infrastructures are continuously faced with risk factors such as credit, liquidity 
and  market  risks.  Analyses  have  become  even  more  challenging  in  recent  years  as  the  financial 
system has become more complex and interwoven both across industries and borders.  
The increased complexity of the financial system is illustrated by the rapidly expanding market of credit 
derivatives. This is a relatively new financial instrument that comes in many and complicated forms. 
While contributing positively to greater flexibility in risk management, there is also the possibility that 
risk is more easily concentrated, and that economic agents can take on risks without being fully aware 
of their ramifications.  
Analysing risk originating inside the financial system, it can be useful to divide the approach into two 
areas.3 The microprudential analysis focuses on the developments within individual institutions, and 
is  concerned  with  limiting  the  distress  of  individual  institutions,  thereby  protecting  depositors.  The 
macroprudential  analysis  focuses  on  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  and  aims  at  limiting 
system-wide distress and avoiding output costs. An important concept here is systemic risk; the risk 
that  liquidity  or  solvency  problems  in  a  bank  may  cause  liquidity  problems  or  insolvency  in  other 
institutions.  Thus,  correlation  and  common  exposures  across  institutions  are  important  in  the 
macroprudential approach.  
The  second  approach  deals  with  risks  originating  from  outside  the  financial  system.  This  field  has 
increasingly been recognized by researchers and policymakers in later years. Strong growth in debt 
and  asset  prices,  as  well  as  macroeconomic  disturbances  like  a  surge  in  commodity  prices  or  the 
unwinding  of  large  imbalances  in  the  world  economy,  can  ultimately  affect  financial  stability  in  a 
negative way.  
To identify potential sources of instability, we need indicators that contain useful information. With an 
estimate of the equilibrium values of debt ratios or asset prices, for example, we can study the gap 
between their current value and their equilibrium value.4 If the gap is wide, the danger of a significant 
consolidation  is  present.  However,  the  results  must  be  interpreted  carefully.  Equilibrium  values  are 
inherently difficult to determine, and it is not obvious that there is a stable and significant relationship 
between  gaps  and  future  economic  activity.  In  addition,  decisive  factors  in  the  judgement  of  the 
financial situation, like agents’ confidence in the financial system, are also difficult to incorporate in the 
analysis.  
A related approach is to analyse the potential impact of adverse macroeconomic shocks on financial 
stability.  Stresstests  are  commonly  used  for  this  purpose.  Such  tests  investigate  banks’  ability  to 
withstand  different  types  of  shocks  under  various  economic  conditions  and  with  different  monetary 
policy responses. When conducting stresstests, macroeconomic models have proven to be valuable. 
However, considerable work remains to be done in order to capture the behaviour of economic agents 
in the case of extreme macroeconomic events.  
                                                      
2   Hoggarth,  Glenn,  Ricardo  Reis  and  Victoria  Saporta  (2001).  “Cost  of  banking  system  instability:  some 
empirical evidence” Bank of England Financial Stability Review, Issue 10, Article 5, June 
3   See for example Borio, Claudio (2003). “Towards a macroprudential framework for financial supervision and 
regulation?” BIS Working Paper No. 128 
4   See  for  example  Borio,  Claudio  and  Philip  Lowe  (2004).  “Whither  monetary  and  financial  stability?  The 
implications of evolving policy regimes” BIS Working Paper no. 147 
2 
 BIS Review 34//2005
Financial  markets  and  institutions  have  become  more  interdependent.  The  possibility  of  contagion 
across borders thereby increases.  
Cross-border  capital  flows  have  increased  considerably  in  recent  decades.  Equity  markets  have 
moved more in tandem, particularly since the mid-1990s. This also applies to bond markets. Investors 
are  increasingly  spreading  their  investments  across  countries.  They  are  both  diversifying  risk  and 
seeking high returns. In parallel, governments, banks and companies are issuing more debt externally.  
The  corresponding  development  in  financial  institutions,  towards  an  increasing  share  of  large 
cross-border banks, makes it essential to go beyond a purely national analytical focus. However, this 
can be a difficult task, as cross-border banks are complex and often part of an even more complex 
financial conglomerate.  
Examples:  
(cid:131) 
The Iceland-based Kaupthing Group is present in 10 countries and the group’s total asset 
holdings at the end of 2004 were almost twice the size of Iceland’s GDP.  
The Sweden-based Nordea Group has substantial market shares in all four Nordic countries. 
While Nordea’s home country is Sweden, Nordea has its largest market share in Finland.  
The HSBC Group has 110 million customers world-wide.  
Citigroup is present in about 100 countries and territories. 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
The central bank has a special responsibility for analysing and monitoring the financial system. The 
examples of cross-border integration show how important it is to have a strong international focus in 
financial stability analysis. Generally, the increasing range of analytical challenges has forced central 
banks  to  be more  innovative.  This  is  reflected  in  the  increasing  number  of  financial  stability  reports 
published world wide.  
(cid:131) 
How do authorities cooperate in order to support financial stability? 
Closely connected to the question of analytical focus, is the question of division of responsibility for 
maintaining  financial  stability,  both  on  a  domestic  level  as  well  as  between  authorities  in  different 
countries. The task of ensuring financial stability within a country is in most cases divided between the 
ministry of finance, the central bank and a financial supervisory authority, with the ministry of finance 
having the overall responsibility. To promote efficient cooperation, the regular exchange of information 
between  these  authorities  is  crucial  and  some  formal  framework  for  cooperation  should  be 
established.  
The evolution towards larger cross-border banks makes the issue of responsibilities more complicated. 
In the event of a crisis, central banks, supervisory authorities, political authorities as well as deposit 
guarantee funds in several countries will be involved.  
In contrast to the national banking crises in Norway, Finland and Sweden in the early 1990s, a similar 
crisis  today  would  most  likely  involve  authorities  from  all  four  Nordic  countries.  Therefore,  it  is 
important  to  establish  guidelines  in  advance  to  ensure  effective  crisis  management.  A  special 
challenge  will  be  to  establish  leadership.  With  four  ministries  of  finance  involved,  the  choice  of 
leadership will not be straightforward.  
The  traditional  view  is  that  the  host-country  authorities  are  responsible  for  subsidiary  banks,  while 
home-country  authorities  are  responsible  for  branches.5  This  view  is  closely  linked  to  the  legal 
difference  between  subsidiaries  and  branches.  Subsidiaries  are  independent  legal  entities,  while 
branches are not legally independent from their parent bank.  
However, host country authorities have little influence over foreign banks’ crisis management. One of 
the key issues is whether the home country authorities, in a crisis situation, should be obliged to take 
into  account  the  effects  of  the  crisis  in  other  countries  where  a  bank  has  branches  with  extensive 
activities.  
                                                      
5   Borchgrevink, Henrik and Thorvald Grung Moe (2004). ”Management of financial crises in cross-border banks” 
Norges Bank, Economic Bulletin, no. 3/04, pp. 157-164 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 3
There are arguments to suggest that home-country authorities should have more responsibility for host 
banks  also  in  a  subsidiary  bank  structure.  This  would  reduce  the  number  of  authorities  that  banks 
have  to  relate  to.  It  is  also  in  line  with  developments  in  banking  where  an  increasing  number  of 
cross-border  banks  are  organised  as  global  firms  with  subsidiary  structures  under  central 
management.  
The question of coordination is far from being solved. One possible way forward is to transfer some 
responsibility to supranational institutions. As transfers of responsibilities imply transfer of control, this 
solution is not a simple one in political terms. In the EU, the idea of a European supervisory authority 
has so far met resistance. A fundamental problem – especially in the case of a financial crisis – is the 
lack of a corresponding supranational fiscal institution. Today, any financial support must be granted 
by national authorities. Without formal supranational solutions in place, it is all the more important to 
ensure cooperation between the central banks and supervisory authorities involved. The fact that a 
large share of the financial institutions in the new EU member countries are foreign-owned makes this 
issue even more relevant.  
In June 2003, the governors of the Nordic central banks signed an agreement on the management of 
a  potential  financial  crisis  in  a  Nordic  bank  with  activities  in  two  or  more  Nordic  countries.  The 
agreement contains procedures for the coordination of crisis management between the central banks. 
The Nordic supervisory authorities have drawn up a similar cooperation agreement.  
One  particular  problem  in  the  Nordic  region  is  the  differences  in  the  countries’  deposit  guarantee 
schemes.  The  different  schemes  vary  both  with  respect  to  guaranteed  amount  and  type  of  deposit 
covered. However, these differences are also widespread across Europe and some convergence of 
rules and operating procedures is certainly long overdue.  
What instruments are available to secure financial stability? 
Monitoring  and  analysis  of  the  financial  system  result  in  an  assessment  of  the  current  situation 
regarding financial stability. This leads to the question: what instruments are available to enforce and 
secure financial stability? We can distinguish between preventive measures and measures for crisis 
resolution. Of relevance to the latter is the role of the central bank as the lender of last resort. In some 
countries this role was the main reason for establishing the central bank in the first place. Today it 
remains an important task of central banks, but is reserved for very special situations where financial 
stability may be threatened. In this address, I will focus on preventive measures.  
As  a  general  measure,  the  authorities  use  surveillance  and  regulation  in  order  to  enforce  financial 
stability.6  Surveillance  of  markets,  institutions  and  infrastructure  may  in  itself  contribute  to  sound 
financial risk management.  
Effective  and  appropriate  prudential  regulation  will  reduce  risks  and  promote  sound  financial 
institutions.  For  instance,  an  important  motivation  behind  the  Basel  II  agreement  is  to  increase  the 
efficiency  of  financial  institutions  by  revising  existing  standards  of  capital  requirements  for  banks. 
Prudential regulation can also be used by the authorities as a special measure to curb undesirable 
developments.  Countercyclical  variations  in  capital  requirements  (or  collateral  requirements)  can 
respond to potential imbalances. However, there are several arguments against using this instrument.  
First,  it  is  very  difficult  to  decide  the  appropriate  timing  and  size  of  a  policy  response.  Also,  while 
authorities may regulate financial institutions, market outcomes are difficult to control. Risks may be 
transferred through the market, away from the regulated institutions, only to show up somewhere else.  
Financial agents need to operate on a level playing field. In many countries, branches and subsidiaries 
of  foreign  banks  have  large  market shares.  If  one  country  decides  to  increase  the  domestic  capital 
requirements for banks, this creates competitive distortions in the national markets between domestic 
banks and branches of foreign banks, the latter complying with the regulation of their home country 
authorities.  
Clear  and  concise  communication,  verbally  or  in  writing,  from  the  authorities  to  the  public  on  risk 
factors  they  consider  to  be  the  most  pressing  could  also  be  used  as  an  instrument  in  the  event  of 
                                                      
6   For further discussion, see Houben, Aerdt, Jan Kakes and Garry Schinasi (2004). “Toward a Framework for 
Safeguarding Financial Stability” IMF Working Paper, No. 04/101 
4 
 BIS Review 34//2005
rising financial imbalances. For central banks, a suitable arena could be financial stability reports, an 
increasingly  common  publication.  These  reports  can  be  described  as  a  signalling  device.  However, 
there are limits to how effective signalling and information can be in curbing financial imbalances.  
Fiscal  policy  also  contributes  to  financial  stability,  for  example  through  a  stable  tax  system  built  on 
well-founded economic principles. Some have argued in favour of counter-cyclical changes in the tax 
system, for example adjustments in tax deduction on interest rate expenses or property tax. However, 
such changes can prove to be difficult to adopt and implement for institutional and political reasons.  
Financial stability and monetary policy 
In recent years, the relationship between monetary policy and financial stability has received increased 
attention.  Monetary  and  financial  stability  are  two  intermediate  goals  for  public  policy.  In  my  view, 
these goals are often mutually reinforcing.  
Financial stability has a positive influence on price stability. First, it promotes a stable credit supply and 
capital flow, which is crucial to balanced economic development. Second, financial stability supports 
the transmission mechanisms of monetary policy. A stable financial system ensures that changes in 
the monetary policy instrument have the intended effects on market rates. Hence changes in monetary 
policy will affect the behaviour of consumers and enterprises and, eventually, inflation and economic 
activity.  
Moreover, price stability has a positive influence on financial stability. A successful monetary policy will 
support financial stability by removing distorted price signals associated with high and volatile inflation. 
Low  and  stable  inflation  provides  households  and  enterprises  with  a  clear  indication  of  changes  in 
relative prices. Allocation of resources will then be more effective.  
It is easy to identify situations where the objectives of price stability and financial stability imply the 
same  medicine.  For  instance,  expansionary  periods  are  often  accompanied  by  stronger  inflationary 
pressures  and  asset  price  increases,  both  implying  a  need  for  tighter  monetary  policy.  There  are, 
however, examples of situations where the consideration is more complex.  
As the chart illustrates, surges in asset prices and a low and stable general price level of goods and 
services can appear simultaneously. There can be several reasons for this.  
First, a highly credible monetary policy results in low inflation expectations among economic agents. 
Explicit or implicit long-term price and wage contracts can be more common. It may then take more 
time for higher demand to translate into higher inflation. Asset prices on the other hand, will not be 
constrained  by  expectations  such  as  those  for  consumer  prices  and  may  well  react  strongly  to 
changing economic activity.  
Second,  periods  of  higher  productivity  growth  may  lay  the  basis  for  high  corporate  earnings, 
heightened optimism and reduced risk awareness. At the same time, with strong productivity growth, 
inflation  remains  low.  Banks  that  record  low  losses  and  solid  results  can  increase  lending  without 
eroding their capital. Debt-financed investments may then lead to a faster rise in property prices.  
Third,  strong  international  competition  may  contribute  to  curbing  inflation  during  a  period  of  strong 
economic expansion.  
Given  that  a  conflict  between  the  two  goals  may  arise;  how  are  financial  stability  considerations 
incorporated into monetary policy decisions?  
There  seems  to  be  widespread  agreement  among  central  banks,  that  extreme  events  which  could 
threaten  financial  stability  should  be  met  by  resolute  use  of  monetary  policy.  For  example,  leading 
central  banks  made  an  effort  to  ensure  continued  liquidity  in  the  markets  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
terrorist  attack  on  the  World  Trade  Centre  on  September  11,  2001.  As  a  consequence,  the  risks 
confronting the financial system were limited.  
However, risks to financial stability due to evolving financial imbalances are likely to develop over a 
long  period of  time.  From  this  perspective,  the  question  of  whether  financial stability  considerations 
should be explicitly included in monetary policy is heavily debated, both in academia and within central 
banks. The answers diverge and international consensus has not yet been reached.  
One view is that an explicit and proactive monetary policy response to financial imbalances is neither 
desirable nor feasible. A number of concerns have been raised to explain this view.  
BIS Review 34/2005 
 5
First,  it  is  well  documented  that  asset  price  bubbles  and  financial  imbalances  are  very  difficult  to 
identify  ex  ante.  Second,  the  appropriate  timing  of  a  proactive  monetary  response  is  likely  to  be 
difficult to determine, given the lags in the impact of monetary policy. Third, even in the case where the 
central bank knew that financial imbalances were building up, the size of the interest rate rise needed 
to reduce the imbalances might be so large that it could lead to a severe economic downturn.  
A  more  general  concern  is  the  potential  moral  hazard  risk  of  a  systematic  proactive  response  of 
monetary policy to financial imbalances. For example, investors may “undervalue” the risks they take 
on if they expect that the central bank will act to offset future financial instability concerns.  
In  later  years,  the  idea  of  using  monetary  policy  to  prevent  a  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  has 
received increased attention.  
Several  central  banks  can  be  seen  as  supporters  of  taking  into  account  the  impact  of  financial 
imbalances  on  future  output  and  inflation.  The  selected  quotes  on  the  chart  are  examples  of  the 
attention  given  to  financial  imbalances  in  conducting  monetary  policy,  based  on  slightly  different 
justifications.  Mr.  Bernanke’s  quote  recognises  the  channel  between  the  stock-market  boom  and 
incipient inflationary pressures.7 Mr. Issing focuses attention on financial imbalances on the grounds 
that strains in the financial system may conflict with price stability in the long run.8 Mr. Heikensten calls 
attention  to  the  possible  repercussions  of  financial  imbalances  on  the  real  economy  in  a  situation 
where the household debt burden is high and interest rates are increasing rapidly.9 
Seen from an institutional perspective, flexible inflation targeting is becoming an increasingly common 
monetary  policy  regime.  With  a  target  horizon  that  is  forward-looking  and  sufficiently  flexible,  it  is 
possible to take into account the impact of potential financial imbalances on future inflation and output. 
However,  it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  unwinding  of  financial  imbalances  may  lay  many 
years ahead, well outside the horizon for the inflation target. Some situations may require a careful 
weighting  of  the  probabilities  and  costs  of  not  reaching  the  inflation  target  within  a  medium-term 
horizon against possible economic turbulence further ahead. In the worst case, this turbulence may 
result in the actuation of a financial crisis.  
Another interpretation of the role of monetary policy is that it demands that financial instability is taken 
into account beyond its impact on inflation and output. For instance, structural costs may arise as a 
result  of  incorrect  decisions  by  economic  agents,  based  on  incorrect  information  in  the  period 
characterised by financial imbalances. The Reserve Bank Act in New Zealand explicitly states that the 
Bank,  in  formulating  and  implementing  monetary  policy,  should  "have  regard  to  the  efficiency  and 
soundness of the financial system".  
In  Norway,  a  flexible  inflation-targeting  country,  we  have  chosen  to  incorporate  financial  stability 
considerations into the monetary policy decision process. This is partly because financial balances are 
important  for  inflation  and  output  and  partly  because  this  will  secure  sufficient  attention  to  potential 
risks to financial stability. In addition, departments dealing with financial stability gather structural and 
empirical  information  about  the  financial  system  and  the  financial  position  of  households  and 
enterprises. In my view, these are important inputs to the monetary policy process.  
Challenges ahead 
There has been substantial development in the way we think about financial stability. From viewing it 
as a state merely distinguished by the absence of a financial crisis, we now see it as a state where the 
financial system’s favourable qualities are allowed to function in an efficient and proper manner.  
At  the  same  time,  the  financial  system  in  itself  has  changed.  Its  instruments  have  become  more 
numerous and more sophisticated. Positive welfare effects are gained because of greater efficiency 
                                                      
7   Bernanke, Ben (2002). “Asset price “bubbles” and monetary policy” Remarks before the New York Chapter of 
the National Association of Business Economics, New York, 15 October 
Issing,  Otmar  (2003).  “Monetary  and  Financial  Stability:  Is  there  a  Trade-off?”.  Speech  at  conference  on 
"Monetary  Stability,  Financial  Stability  and  the  Business  Cycle",  March  28-29,2003,  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, Basle 
8  
9  Heikensten,  Lars  (2005).  “Introduction  on  monetary  policy”  Speech  to  the  Riksdag  Committee  on  Finance, 
Stockholm, 15 March 2005  
6 
 BIS Review 34//2005
and more opportunities in the market. The flip side of the coin is that increased complexity makes the 
system less transparent and harder to follow.  
This development is bound to influence the way authorities pay attention to financial stability issues. 
New  challenges  have  been  brought  to  our  attention,  new  questions  have  to  be  raised  and  new 
scenarios have to be analysed. As a consequence, new solutions may be required.  
We  should  use  the  opportunity  to  plan  ahead  now,  while  the  outlook  for  financial  stability 
internationally is benign.  
BIS Review 34/2005 
 7
