Sir Andrew Large: A framework for financial stability 
Speech  by  Sir  Andrew  Large,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  International 
Conference on Financial System Stability and Implications of Basel II, Istanbul, 18 May 2005. 
1.  
Introduction 
 Vulnerabilities in Financial Stability 
i) 
It is clear that rapid growth in size, complexity, and diversity of global financial markets has added new 
dimensions and challenges to the process of maintaining financial stability.  
Traditional  concerns  remain  that  unwise  credit  exposure  can  result  in  insolvency,  and  systemic 
instability. But today there are a new series of hazards. Credit risk transfer has introduced new holders 
of  credit  risk,  such  as  hedge  funds  and  insurance  companies,  at  a  time  when  market  depth  is 
untested.  Systemically  significant  issues  could  increasingly  arise  from  market  related  risks,  or  from 
single point of failure risks in the market infrastructure as ever greater volumes of transactions pass 
through.  Equally  the  growth  of  derivative  instruments  and  advent  of  a  range  of  new  asset  classes, 
despite  added  dispersion  and  better  risk  management,  have  added  to  the  risk  of  instability  arising 
through leverage, volatility and opacity. No wonder that those involved in financial stability work have 
much to think about! 
Introducing a Framework for Financial Stability 
ii) 
The purpose of my remarks today is not to analyse these threats. Instead I want to discuss how to 
approach some of the challenging issues faced by many central banks as we seek to decide how best 
to organise our work and to allocate resources in order to promote financial stability.  
We need to be clear, accountable and transparent as to how we devote our resources in this area. 
And just as the financial system becomes more complex, so the judgements as to what we do and 
what we do not do are increasingly difficult. That is why we need a framework – a set of organising 
principles  –  that  enables  us  to  provide  context  and  understanding  to  our  endeavours,  to  provide  a 
source of focus and rigour to our approach, and to motivate our people. 
The  issues  are,  I  believe,  of  general  application.  Though  you  will  forgive  me  I  am  sure  if  I  start  by 
looking at the framework within which the Bank of England, as a non-regulatory central bank with a 
remit for system-wide stability, addresses the vulnerabilities.  
2. 
Challenges in Creating a Framework 
Monetary Policy  
i)  
I want to start by considering the governance of the Bank’s accompanying mandate, the conduct of 
monetary policy. This highlights the clarity of our accountability in the monetary policy arena. In line 
with  many  central  banks,  we  have  a  mandate  in  statute  –  the  Bank  of  England  Act  –  to  conduct 
monetary policy. The Government sets a target inflation level which we are required to meet.  
Importantly  we  –  and  you  –  can  see  how  we  are  performing  month  by  month  in  relation  to  our 
mandate. We also have a tested analytical framework. We model possible future outcomes and we 
look at the balance of risks around a central view. We can rely on experience and judgement to make 
regular policy decisions. And we can alter our policy decision on interest rates each month as the data 
and circumstances evolve. 
Financial Stability and why it is different 
ii) 
If  financial  instability  occurs,  costs  to  society  may  be  high.  Damage  to  our  reputation  could  be 
potentially  high  too.  Yet  judging  the  optimal  amount  of  resources  to  devote  to  prevent  crises  is 
problematic.  What  degree  of  resilience  do  we  want?  And  what  should  we  be  prepared  to  pay  for 
BIS Review 36/2005 
 1
insurance? This is a familiar problem in public policy – what is the optimal size of the fire brigade or 
army?  
The  challenges  we  face  in  seeking  to  maintain  financial  stability  are  very  different  to  those  in  the 
monetary policy arena.  
• 
Firstly there is neither a clear over-arching analytical framework nor a commonly agreed set 
of indicators of incipient financial instabilities.  
Secondly the task is made harder because we are dealing with tail events – low probability 
scenarios – rather than central projections. It is about aberrant rather than normal behaviour 
and situations: less predictable and harder to model. 
Thirdly  there  are  a  number  of  different  potential  policy  instruments  that  can  affect  the 
financial environment in various, sometimes conflicting, ways. And by no means are all in the 
hands of central banks 
Fourthly national financial stability responsibilities are often shared. In the UK we work with 
Her Majesty’s Treasury (HMT) and the Financial Services Authority (FSA). For cross-border 
activities we operate alongside overseas central banks and supervisors. 
Fifthly although the roles of the UK authorities are outlined and published in a Memorandum 
of Understanding (MoU), this gives little guidance as to what financial stability is or a clearly 
identifiable target. 
And  lastly  it  is  harder  to  get  motivational  feedback  –  unless  in  unwelcome  form  should  a 
crisis occur. 
     Defining Our Role in Financial Stability Oversight 
3.  
These factors pose a number of challenges in defining our role in financial stability oversight – what 
activities should we as a central bank undertake? To make these decisions, firstly we should identify 
the main functions that need to be performed in each jurisdiction to promote financial stability. Then 
we  can  look  at  the  Bank’s  own  institutional  mandate.  And  finally  we  can  determine  the  most 
appropriate way to fulfil it. 
The Three Essential Functions for Public Authorities 
i) 
There seem to me to be three essential functions to be carried out in securing financial stability: I think 
this  is  the  case  in  most  jurisdictions.  Firstly,  there  are  the  roles  relating  to  supervision  of  firms  and 
markets where financial instability could arise.  
Secondly, there is the oversight of the financial system as a whole - the systemic issues which could 
impinge on society. And thirdly there is the fiscal underpinning which may exceptionally be required to 
restore confidence in the event of failure. 
The  fiscal  underpinning  is  a  role  for  Ministries  of  Finance.  The  other  roles  can  either  be  combined 
institutionally  or  separated.  I  am  sure  each  model  is  represented  here  today.  In  the  UK,  HMT  has 
responsibility for the fiscal underpinning, FSA for the supervision of firms and market regulation, and 
the Bank of England for the stability of the system as a whole. 
The “Must Dos” for the Bank of England 
ii) 
The roles as such are set out with slightly more precision in the MoU, and it is from there that we start 
on our quest to decide what initiatives we – the Bank of England – should undertake, and how far we 
go  with  each.  The  MoU  highlights  three  “must  dos”  for  the  Bank.  I  expect  that  these  are  similar  in 
many central banks. They really define our mandate.  
Assessment of Threats to Financial Stability  
a) 
Firstly we need to assess the threats to the financial system. We need to be in a position to inform 
ourselves and to advise HMT at all times on the implications for UK financial stability of developments 
in both the domestic and international market places. We do this by continually assessing threats to 
the system as a whole – “oversight of the systemic conjuncture” if you like.  
2 
 BIS Review 36/2005
So we look beyond the risks in relation to individual institutions, to the aggregate problems that can 
arise: through networks and single points of failure; through dependencies and interdependencies of 
firms and markets. In other words to areas where, if market forces and market participants are left to 
their own devices, problems could threaten the stability of the system. This means that we need to 
have  our  finger  on  the  pulse  and  to  maintain  regular  contact  with  key  firms  and  infrastructure 
providers. Market intelligence is vital in this area: it is not enough to read about issues, we need to be 
learning about them first hand from key players and analysing our findings from a financial stability 
perspective. 
The  FSA  also  shares  responsibilities  in  this  area.  They  too  will  be  asked  for  advice by  HMT.  Their 
starting  point  is  the  assessment  of  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  in  the  individual  institutions  and 
markets  they  supervise,  and  the  potential  consequences  of  problems  or  failures  at  individual 
institutions.  
An important factor for the Bank relates to London’s position as a major financial centre. Although our 
specific focus and interest is the systemic conjuncture as it affects the UK, possibilities of contagion in 
an increasingly global market mean that we have to be alert equally to developments in global capital 
and  financial  markets.  And  it  means  we  have  to  understand  the  dynamics  and  interrelationships  of 
markets;  how  new  products  work;  and  the  possible  behaviour  patterns  of  intermediaries,  investors, 
and borrowers. Above all we need to be focused on where major risks are most likely to emerge and 
the  market  dynamics  if  those  risks  start  to  crystallise.  And  we  need  to  distinguish  those  which  are 
systemic from a myriad of fascinating developments, many of which are just “noise” but which could 
otherwise distract us.  
Risk Reduction: Oversight of Payment Systems 
b) 
The second area where we, and typically other central banks, are required to perform is oversight of 
payment systems. Payment systems facilitate economic transactions of goods, services and financial 
assets and are an essential component of a well functioning financial system. So reduction of risks in 
these  systems,  for  example  through  the  introduction  of  our  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  system,  is 
clearly a priority from a systemic perspective.  
Provision of Liquidity and Preparation for a Financial Crisis  
c) 
And  thirdly  the  MoU  stipulates  that  we  need  to  be  in  a  position  to  inject  liquidity  at  all  times.  This 
means that we must be able to provide liquidity in normal times, as well as in times of stress or crisis. 
This puts an increased onus on well developed and tested crisis management plans, and a particular 
focus on ensuring that we are able to undertake a range of official financial operations in exceptional 
circumstances.  
Financial Stability: Parallel Processes 
4. 
Recognition of these three “must do” areas is a starting point in deciding the scope of our financial 
stability work and in enabling us to fulfil our MoU mandate. But it does not provide a clear steer on 
what we actually have to do to carry out our functions efficiently and effectively. Regarding long term 
thinking, which might one day lead to an analogue to monetary policy, we are undertaking a research 
project. This is separate from our day to day activities where a set of organising principles can be used 
operationally to handle today’s issues. 
Research and Development: Creation of an Analytical Framework 
i) 
The  research  project  is  an  attempt  to  devise  an  analytical  framework  as  an  analogue  to  that  in 
monetary  policy:  to  help  clarify  some  of  the  differences  I  outlined  earlier  and  to  provide  greater 
certainty and focus. As with the development of monetary frameworks, this will be a medium to long-
term  endeavour.  This  may  sound  overambitious.  But  even  modest  achievements  towards  it  would 
enhance understanding of what financial stability oversight is about, and what our priorities should be 
in seeking to ensure it. And so it could assist our quest for clearer accountability and more transparent 
governance arrangements. 
This  quest  gets  to  issues  such  as  how  to  define  our  financial  stability  objective,  how  to  articulate 
indicators  of  financial  stability,  and  how  they  relate  to  each  other.  It  provides  the  possibility  of 
BIS Review 36/2005 
 3
calibrating systemic risk and developing tools that could potentially be deployed to reduce such risk, 
and will include scenario analysis and macro-stress testing.  
In reality, it is unlikely we will converge on a single model which captures systemic risk in its entirety. 
But by developing and calibrating a suite of models we hope to make some progress towards gauging 
fragilities  and  frictions  in  the  financial  system  better  –  how  likely  they  are  to  arise;  on  what  they 
depend; and, ultimately, what pre-emptive mitigating action might be feasible. This could put financial 
stability analysis on a more similar analytical footing to monetary policy – albeit with a greater amount 
of uncertainty regarding eventual outcomes. 
With time we can review the outputs of this research work. We can then operationalise those that are 
relevant  and  robust  to  help  decide  our  ongoing  activities.  In  other  words,  the  outputs  of  this  R&D 
activity could become inputs to prioritising our day-to-day risk reduction activities.  
Ongoing Activities: Organising Principles 
ii) 
In the meantime we have to address the real risks of today. How are priorities to be set? Financial 
stability  is  an  area  where  there  are  so  many  things  we  could  do.  So  we  need  to  have  a  set  of 
organising principles to help us prioritise and focus. I’d like to describe the process we go through in 
addressing the difficult decisions – how much to do, and how far to go.  
One could make a case for a huge empire of threat assessment on the basis that seemingly remote 
events or threats could crystallise into a financial crisis. For example, what resources would it have 
taken to foresee that default of the Russian government on its debt in 1998 would, through a complex 
chain of events, eventually result in the failure of the hedge-fund Long Term Capital Management in 
New  York?  A  failure  which  importantly  was  judged  as  having  wider  significance.  Equally  what 
resources could it be wise to devote to assess what implications, if any, the downgrades of GM’s and 
Ford’s debt this month might mean for the financial sector and ultimately for financial stability.  
Alternatively one might take a hardline view that unless an activity falls fairly and squarely, in the short 
run, into one of the “must do” categories, it should be discontinued. For example, we could in theory 
simply ignore risk emanating from overseas – even in an international financial centre like the UK – on 
the expectation (or hope) that others would take care of these risks on our behalf. 
Common sense suggests that the answer lies somewhere between the two. But difficult judgements 
are involved. So we have to devise a rigorous process to scrutinise our actions. A valuable approach 
is to set out the practical actions we intend to achieve – the “outcomes” or “deliverables” – and then to 
challenge them. We do this from two points of view. 
Firstly we need to be clear why we are pursuing a particular deliverable. Is it a market failure justifying 
any  intervention  at  all?  What  real  impact  will  the  work  have  on  fulfilling  our  mandate?  How  closely 
does it relate to the “must dos”? 
Secondly we need to think through the costs, benefits and risks associated with the action from the 
points of view of both likelihood and impact. What will be the risks to society, the economy and even 
the Bank if we do not do it? How might these risks be reduced if we do do it? How well placed are we 
to  do  it  as  opposed  to  others?  How  confident  are  we  of  achieving  the  intended  deliverables  – 
particularly when we need to rely on others? Do we have influence to ensure action is taken?  
The answers – difficult as they may be to define – help us in prioritising and resource allocation; and 
provide sunset provisioning in deciding whether to continue with particular strands of work.  
5. 
Ongoing Activities: The Matrix 
Uses for the Matrix 
i) 
There are many types of activity, and many sources of threat where we could be active. So we need 
organising principles to make sense of where particular actions fit into the landscape of our financial 
stability work. It is only then that we can evaluate competing priorities, by subjecting each “bid” to a 
common set of challenges. To do this we find it helps to use a simple matrix. This adds objectivity to 
what is in many senses a subjective process. Here is an example: 
 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2005
MATRIX: ORGANISING PRINCIPLES FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY 
 
 
 
Activities  
 
Credit Risk 
Assessment  of  Threats 
Financial Stability 
Risk Reduction 
to 
     Sources of Threat 
 Market  and 
Liquidity 
Risk 
Infrastructure 
(including 
Payment 
Systems) 
 
 International  
Architecture 
      Preparation  for  and  Managing 
a Financial Crisis 
 
The matrix is a common sense map, which enables us to visualise why something is being done, and 
where  it  fits  into  the  overall  financial  stability  effort.  The  specific  activities  and  deliverables  that  are 
located in each of the boxes can be scrutinised to see if they meet our objectives or if they should be 
discontinued. 
This helps us decide on the level of resource and the nature and qualities of people we need. It also 
helps with budgeting, and provides a basis for motivating good performance. 
To explain the relevance of the boxes let us look first at the columns: sources of threat. Our desired 
end objective is to promote financial stability by seeking to prevent threats from crystallising, or at 
least  to  reduce  their  impact.  Then  we  will  look  at  the  rows  –  the  different  types  of  activity  we 
undertake: the means if you will to achieve our ends.  
Sources of Threat 
ii)  
First, the columns: the sources of threat.  
Credit Risk 
a) 
Financial  crises  have  traditionally  arisen  where  the  solvency  of  one  or  more  institutions  either 
crumbles, or is perceived to be in danger of doing so, in a way that threatens the financial system. So 
we need to focus on credit concentrations, credit aspects of prudential standards, credit pricing and 
terms  etc.  We  need  data  and  intelligence  to  do  that.  Understanding  credit  conditions  and 
vulnerabilities  is  quite  well  developed  territory.  But  new  threats  have  arisen,  particularly  from 
sophisticated credit transfer instruments. This is a tricky and opaque arena. It is hard to know where 
concentrations of credit risk actually reside and even where credit risk ends and market risk begins. In 
addition there is the increasing range of participants who are also taking on credit risk. Of course in 
addition  to  this  we  can  –  and  do  –  think  about  credit  risk  standards  like  Basel  II.  We  focus  on  the 
systemic aspects of prudential design since in the UK FSA focuses on supervisory issues.  
Market and Liquidity Risk 
b) 
As  the  global  capital  market  has  expanded  on  the  back  of  securitisation  and  derivatives  increasing 
vulnerabilities arise. Change has been so rapid and development so fast that it has been hard for any 
of us to keep up. Given the multitude of new instruments and new markets that have appeared and 
the resulting increase in risk, this is a significant area of work for us.  
There  is  of  course  much  to  be  done  in  understanding  the  complex  interdependencies  and 
concentrations, and how these might impact on financial stability. 
So we need data and market intelligence in this area. And we need to improve our ability to make ex-
ante  judgements  about  the  possible  behaviour  of  both  investors  and  intermediaries,  as  well  as  the 
potential  depth  of  markets.  Equally  we  need  to  be  sure  we  would  have  relevant  information  and 
understanding of markets and agents should problems arise. 
BIS Review 36/2005 
 5
Infrastructure (Including Payment Systems) 
c) 
Focus is also important in the field of payment, clearing and settlement systems. Historically payment 
systems were primarily domestic entities, but as markets have become more globalised so too has the 
underlying infrastructure. This has helped to enhance efficiency, but leads also to added network or 
“single point of failure” risks. As 9/11 showed, when problems arise in this area liquidity injection may 
be needed to prevent market or institutional failure, and risks of instability to the financial system could 
mount swiftly.  
This brings us to one of our “must dos” – oversight of payment systems. Based on adequate data and 
understanding  we  work  here  on:  enhancing  interoperability,  strengthening  risk  management, 
strengthening business continuity resilience, and improving governance.  
International Architecture 
d)  
International  architecture  and  emerging  markets  exposures  are  a  broad  arena  where  there  are 
particular  risks  and  complexities  which  lead  us  to  look  at  it  separately.  In  response  to  the  wider 
environment, constant adaptation is needed both of the architecture itself and the institutions within it, 
such as the IMF. In terms of our quest for financial stability, this focuses specifically on sovereign debt, 
crisis prevention and resolution. Progress has been made since the Asian Crisis, but significantly more 
is  needed  to build  on  the  emerging  elements  of  the  exceptional access  framework,  and  the  Fund’s 
lending-into-arrears policy, but also Collective Action Clauses, and the recently devised Principles for 
Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring in Emerging Markets.  
In using the matrix to categorise sources of threat there are of course a number of ways one could cut 
the cake. Credit exposure to emerging sovereign debtors for example can appear in the “credit” and 
“international architecture” boxes. 
Activities 
iii) 
Now we can move to the rows. To use the matrix as a location device to focus our efforts, decide on 
deliverables and enhance our resource allocation, we need to create the “boxes” by considering the 
types of activity we could undertake to address each main source of threat – the rows.  
Assessment of Threats  
a) 
Firstly  we  need  to  evaluate  threats  to  the  system.  We  need  a  process  of  data  collection  and 
assessment  to  analyse  information  and  market  intelligence  from  multiple  sources.  This  “horizon 
scanning” enables us to get early warning of how and where threats could appear.  
We cannot do all this without knowing how markets work. Typically we obtain intelligence about what 
is going on from a number of sources, including a group of experienced staff who are operationally 
active in financial markets. We then evaluate and assess the threats from this intelligence. This needs 
people who are motivated to think through and identify new aspects of risk and threats, who can move 
with  intellectual  agility  and  flexibility  between  risks  as  they  arise.  This  enables  in  turn  high  level 
management  to  judge  the  risk  and  allocate  resources  accordingly  for  risk  reduction  –  as  well  as 
stopping work if threats no longer seem relevant. 
A key challenge here is distinguishing between slow burn issues (such as a gradual shift towards more 
exotic financial instruments) and the more immediate issues relating to, say, the prospect of a major 
market default. In each case it is important to understand the potential threats to financial stability: but 
the timescales and tools are different. The matrix helps to start the process.  
Above all we have to clarify the types of threats we are looking for. An issue here is the risk of “missing 
something”. Not acting on something seemingly minor may have significant consequences for financial 
stability and costs compared to the resource saved by ignoring it. So the stakes are high in getting this 
right  –  though  we  need  here  to  be  realistic  as  particularly  in  the  early  stages  the  significance  of 
developments can be hard to read.  
Risk Reduction 
b) 
Secondly, risk reduction or mitigation. Here we seek to make the financial system more resilient. This 
is  the  world  of  risk  management,  prudential  standards,  liquidity  standards,  resilience  of  payment 
6 
 BIS Review 36/2005
systems  etc.  It  can  involve  the  promotion  of  codes  and  standards  over  a  wide  field  ranging  from 
accounting to improving legal certainty, and management of countries’ external balance sheets.  
Decision making about priorities is particularly challenging because we cannot be clear ex-ante how 
well the mitigation techniques will work, and we often need to rely on others to implement them. In 
addition we need to ask whether we are the right party to act.  
We also need to think about the relevance of our activities to our mandate – or “must dos”. In some 
areas, for example payment systems – one of our “must dos” – it is clear that we have a responsibility 
to  reduce  risks.  In  this  case  the  questions  we  need  to  answer  relate  to  the  degree,  methods  and 
resource implications.  
But in other areas whether we should act is less clear cut. What particular contributions can we make 
and are there any areas where we can sensibly act alone? We need to ascertain areas where we can 
achieve results both domestically with HMT and FSA, and internationally with organisations such as 
the Basel Committee, the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the Financial Stability 
Forum.  
Perhaps  I  can  mention  one  area  to  which  the  challenge  process  suggests  we  should  devote 
considerable resources – global institutional liquidity. As I have said before this is an area of potential 
vulnerability  that  has  developed  alongside  the  rapid  globalisation  of  markets  and  of  firms  operating 
within  them.  I  personally  feel  that  it  has  been  somewhat  overshadowed  in  recent  times  by  work  in 
other areas such as capital adequacy. We feel that we can make a particular contribution here – both 
owing to our position in such a major global financial centre and because, in sterling at least, we are a 
potential  provider  of  liquidity.  So  we  justify  devoting  significant  resources  to  the  analysis  of  liquidity 
issues,  and  the  development  of  potential  risk  reduction  strategies  for  liquidity  problems  –  nationally 
and in particular internationally.  
At  the  other  extreme,  whilst  we  feel  strongly  about  the  desirability  of  robust  and  widely  applied 
accounting standards – and are prepared to express our views on the big picture aspects of this from 
time to time – we do not devote significant resource to analysis, or lobbying in this area.  
Preparation for a Financial Crisis 
c) 
And finally, tail event territory though it may be, we need to undertake preparation for financial crises. 
We need to think forward to being “in-event” where instability has actually been triggered, whether by 
a business failure of a firm or firms or by a terrorist or other disruptive event. We need to prepare now, 
in advance, to enhance predictability at what would be a time of great uncertainty. We need to know 
how we will work with and communicate with public authorities and with the private sector.  
There is a different set of factors which impact our decisions in this area. First, our “must do” roles are 
dependent on crisis preparation and an adequate general understanding of how the financial system 
operates, with all the complexities entailed. 
Second,  while  each  national  authority  has  its  specific  responsibilities  to  fulfil,  the  speed  with  which 
decisions  would  then  need  to  be  made  and  actions  implemented  make  it  also  essential  to  act 
effectively  as  a  single  operational  unit.  In  the  UK  the  FSA,  HMT  and  the  Bank  have  developed 
mechanisms designed to turn this into reality and to provide necessary confidence to the market.  
And third through testing programmes, we can obtain feedback as to whether our efforts are likely to 
prove successful and to refine preparation as we go along. 
The  costs  to  the  economy  of  failure  would  be  high  and  the  expectation  is  that  we  would  be  well 
prepared.  This  puts  a  strong  onus  on  collecting  in  advance  up  to  date  information  on  firms  and 
markets,  or  being  confident  of  its  availability  and  source.  And  also  of  regular  and  exacting  testing 
programmes – working with other authorities and with the private sector.  
Conclusion  
6.  
So in conclusion, the field of financial stability oversight presents us with plenty of challenges. Not only 
is the world more complex, but we need to devote real thought as to how best to operate and organise 
ourselves so as to contain risks. 
Defining the resources you need, and how to deploy them is challenging in itself. My prediction is that 
as the system’s complexity increases we will all find ourselves asking the same questions: 
BIS Review 36/2005 
 7
Just what should we do? Why? And what effect will it have? 
8 
 BIS Review 36/2005
