Philipp M Hildebrand: Developments in the hedge fund industry 
Speech by Dr Philipp M Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Swiss Finance Conference 2005, Zurich, 4 February 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me begin by thanking the organizers of the Finance Forum for the opportunity to be on today’s 
outstanding program. It is not often that a Swiss central banker gets to speak after a Nobel laureate. 
Both the gratification and the risks involved in doing so are self-evident. I will enjoy the former and try 
to ignore the latter. 
Adding value to the rich debate about hedge funds is a difficult task. It is generally recognized that 
hedge  funds  have  made  an  important  contribution  to  the  transfer  and  diversification  of  risk  through 
innovative  asset  management  skills  and  techniques.  They  are  a  positive  force  in  rendering  global 
financial  markets  more  liquid  and  therefore  more  flexible.  My  comments  today  will  focus  on  those 
aspects of the hedge fund industry that strike me as particularly relevant with regard to the need to 
preserve and enhance liquid financial markets.1  
After  some  general  remarks  about  hedge  funds  and  the  hedge  fund  industry,  I  will  explore  the 
question of whether hedge funds can materially influence market volatility. I will also refer to one of the 
key  characteristics  of  hedge  funds  –  the  use  of  leverage  –  and  examine  how  such  leverage  might 
affect overall financial market stability. Finally, I will offer some reflections on the regulation of hedge 
funds. 
Definitions surrounding hedge funds and the hedge fund industry can give rise to confusion. In many 
ways, the word “hedge” has little definitional value.2 Hedge funds are best understood as potentially 
leveraged  private  investment  vehicles  deploying  a  wide  range  of  largely  unconstrained  investment 
strategies with the aim of achieving high absolute rates of return.  
Hedge fund managers typically invest a share of their personal wealth in their own funds in order to 
align their incentives with the interests of the external investors. Hedge funds usually have a dual fee 
structure. The investor pays an annual management fee of 1% to 5%. In addition, most hedge fund 
managers charge incentive fees on capital gains. These incentive fees vary between 20% and 50%. 
Many  hedge  funds  impose  investment  lock-in  periods  of  anywhere  from  one  to  three  years.  During 
these lock-in periods, principal and in many cases profits cannot be withdrawn. 
During the last decade, the hedge fund industry has steadily grown in size. In 1990, there were an 
estimated 2000 hedge funds managing around USD 40bn. In less than 15 years, these numbers have 
increased  dramatically.  Current  estimates  suggest  that  approximately  7500  hedge  funds  manage 
assets totaling close to USD 1000bn (graph 1).3 Remarkably, according to the CSFB/Tremont Hedge 
Fund  Index,  there  have  been  only  a  few  quarters  with  net  outflows  since  1994.4  These  figures 
demonstrate that the hedge fund industry has matured at an extraordinary rate and today constitutes a 
non-negligible component of the global asset management industry.5 
                                                      
1   A more detailed study on hedge funds will be published in the forthcoming Quarterly Bulletin of the Swiss National Bank 
(March 2005). 
2   Alfred Winslow Jones is credited for the creation of the first hedge fund in 1949. His strategy consisted in combining long 
positions in undervalued stocks and short positions in overvalued stocks, in an attempt to minimise the influence of overall 
stock market moves. To magnify his portfolio’s return, Jones added leverage. 
3   According to Hedge Fund Research Inc., 7436 Funds managed USD 973bn of assets at the end of 2004. Other sources 
may come up with different figures. 
4   The CSFB/Tremont Hedge Fund Index is the largest asset-weighted hedge fund index. The CSFB/Tremont Index is broadly 
diversified, encompassing around 400 funds across ten style-based sectors, and representative  of the entire hedge fund 
industry.  Assets  included  within  the  CSFB/Tremont  Hedge  Fund  Index  amounted  to  USD  615bn  in  September  2004. 
Performance is calculated net of fees. 
5   Not  included  in  these  figures  are  significant  pools  of  capital  held  in  privately  managed  accounts  run  by  hedge  fund 
managers as well as capital managed by the proprietary desks of global investment banks. Though typically not formally 
structured around hedge fund vehicles, these assets closely mirror the investment activities of hedge funds. 
BIS Review 8/2005 
 1
Until the second half of the nineties, the hedge fund industry capital base was largely one of high net 
worth fortunes. Part of the acceleration of inflows throughout the second half of the nineties can be 
attributed to pension funds, endowments and other institutional investors who have begun to allocate 
small percentages of their asset base to hedge funds. More recently, funds of funds have become an 
important source of new inflows to the industry. The largest share of the industry’s total client base 
continues to be private wealthy individuals either as direct investors or through funds of funds. Industry 
flows data suggest, however, that assets from institutional investors have recently grown more rapidly 
than the overall industry asset base.  
A  major  factor  contributing  to  the  flows  of  new  money  into  hedge  funds  has  been  the  high  relative 
rates of return (graph 2). The average return on the CSFB/Tremont hedge fund index over the past 
10 years  is 11%.  Dividing the  excess return  over cash by  the  realized  return volatility,  hedge  funds 
achieved  a  Sharpe  ratio  of  0.8.  This  is  high  compared  with  the  0.2  achieved  by  equities  and  the 
0.5 achieved by US bonds since 1994. Admittedly, such aggregate return data need to be interpreted 
carefully.6 Nonetheless, the available industry databases are useful in identifying broad trends within 
the hedge fund industry.  
Hedge funds and market volatility  
Throughout the last twenty years, it has become conventional wisdom to associate hedge funds with 
extreme market volatility. The premise is that hedge funds push market prices temporarily away from 
their equilibrium, either in the short- or the medium-term. The traditional counter-argument sees hedge 
funds fundamentally as stabilizing market participants who identify arbitrage opportunities, take profits 
as these inefficiencies get eliminated and provide the market with liquidity. 
A survey of available analytical work suggests it is difficult to conclude that hedge funds decisively and 
adversely affect market volatility. This raises the question of whether direct observation of market price 
action can provide us with additional clues. One area worth examining is the macro and the managed 
futures segment of the hedge fund industry where recent inflows have been substantial. A number of 
markets  that  hedge  funds  in  these  strategies  are  typically  engaged  in  have  recently  become  more 
liquid as demonstrated, for example, by the increase in turnover and rise in non-commercial positions 
in the gold and oil futures markets (graphs 3 & 4).  
Market  observations  also  suggest  that  many  technically  driven  hedge  funds  appear  to  hold  similar 
positions on the basis of trading systems, driven by related trigger points. At least ex-post, one might 
therefore expect to be able to identify crowded technical points in the market. Analytically, such points 
reflect moments of extreme market tension. An acceleration of an upward trend in prices, or a sharp 
reversal, can be a potential precursor to a new market equilibrium.  
A combined review of speculative positions in the market place, news flows and various hedge fund 
performance  figures  provides  tentative  evidence  that  heightened  market  volatility  can  at  times  be 
related to clustering patterns in the hedge fund industry. The following example provides a potential 
illustration of this dynamic. 
During the May to June 2003 period, speculative positioning in the US bond market appears to have 
been very long, based on the assumption that the Federal Reserve would have to cut interest rates 
below  1%  because  of  deflationary  risks.  Long  positions  were  further  encouraged  by  market 
speculation that convexity hedgers such as Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac would eventually be forced to 
buy more duration and therefore drive interest rates lower. Ten-year Treasury yields promptly rallied 
more  than  80  basis  points  until  mid-June.  This  strongly  trending  market  helped a  number  of hedge 
fund  strategies  generate  exceptional  returns  during  the  month  of  May  2003.  The  combination  of  a 
smaller-than-expected  25  basis  point  interest  rate  cut  by  the  Federal  Reserve  on  24  June  2003, 
together with a discernible turn in language in the accompanying FOMC statement, took the market by 
surprise.  A  sharp  sell  off  in  the  bond  market  followed  immediately.  Generally  negative  hedge  fund 
performance  figures  during  the  month  of  June  are  testimony  to  the  gapping  nature  of  the  price 
movements following the Fed’s interest rate decision. 
                                                      
6   There is no definitive source for hedge fund data. Most vendor databases collect data that hedge funds voluntarily disclose. 
Many large hedge funds that are closed to new investors do not report to the data vendors. In addition, hedge funds that 
perform poorly often stop reporting to the vendor databases as their performance deteriorates, leaving the series exposed to 
the problem of ‘survivor’ bias. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2005
It is important to point out that extreme care needs to be exercised when interpreting such examples. 
First of all, any number of factors can cause markets to move to new equilibrium points. Second, price 
action  is  often  shaped  by  overall  liquidity  conditions  in  a  specific  market  segment.  Sharp  price 
movements  are  more  likely  to  occur  in  markets  where  trading  activity  is  light.  Third,  the  nature  of 
market participants engaged at any particular time will impact the nature of price movements.  
Analyzing price action is not a precise science. Indeed, I strongly suspect it never will be. Nonetheless, 
the  previous  example  suggests  that  in  some  specific  cases,  it  is  at  least  plausible  that  large  asset 
pools have recently been deployed in related strategies which have contributed to cases of heightened 
market  volatility.  Performance  correlation  figures  in  some  hedge  fund  market  segments  lend  some 
support to such a hypothesis.  
The obvious counter-argument is that despite recent inflows, no hedge fund segment is large enough 
to  materially  affect  price  action  in  today’s  vast  global  market  place.  This  argument  may  be  too 
simplistic for two reasons: First, hedge funds across different strategy segments are often involved in 
similar trades. Second, it is not sufficient to evaluate the potential impact of various segments of the 
hedge fund industry by looking at the nominal size of the invested capital base. Market information, as 
well as survey data, suggests that the managed futures segment, for example, is significantly more 
leveraged than the overall hedge fund industry. As a result, the capital deployed in a number of hedge 
fund segments can exceed by a wide margin what is suggested by the various providers of flow data. 
Merely considering the nominal asset base of a hedge fund strategy may significantly underestimate 
its potential impact. Leverage is therefore an important issue in any assessment of how hedge funds 
affect overall market conditions.    
Hedge funds and leverage 
In the aftermath of the 1998 LTCM crisis, the use of leverage by hedge funds was one of the central 
points in a wide range of industry and policy discussions. The basic premise was a simple one: The 
use of leverage is an important investment tool for hedge funds in their quest to generate absolute 
returns commensurate with their fee structure. At the same time, leverage can magnify market risk, 
credit risk and liquidity risk.  
Given the rapid growth of the hedge fund industry, a natural focal point is the nature of the relationship 
between  record  industry  inflows,  diminishing  returns  and  the  potential  use  of  excessive  leverage. 
Again, the basic argument is a simple one: Elevated hedge fund investment returns in the past have 
tended to attract a large number of new entrants into the hedge fund industry. Increasingly, these new 
entrants  and  their  activities  tend  to  eliminate  market  inefficiencies  which  had,  to  a  large  extent, 
accounted  for  the  past  high  returns.  With  diminished  returns,  hedge  funds  are  finding  it  difficult  to 
justify  their  elevated  fee  structure.  In  an  attempt  to  preserve  returns  commensurate  with  their  fees, 
hedge fund managers might be driven to resort to increasingly elevated levels of leverage.  
The data on flows and returns suggest that at least some components of such a dynamic are currently 
at work. Record inflows to the hedge fund industry during the first quarter of 2004 have indeed been 
followed  by  unsatisfactory  performances  throughout  most  of  the  hedge  fund  industry  during  the 
second quarter of 2004. Leverage figures are much harder to assemble and to interpret than flow and 
performance data. The Bank of England recently concluded that overall leverage in the hedge fund 
industry had not markedly increased and remained moderate compared with the 1997-1998 period. 
On balance, however, it is not particularly useful to put too much stock in such cursory assessments of 
industry  leverage.  First,  the  data  aggregation  problem  is  significant.  Second,  leverage  can  evolve 
greatly over a short period of time. Third, and perhaps most importantly, there are different forms of 
leverage, some of which are unlikely to be captured reliably by any aggregate industry data. 
The most basic form of leverage pertains to financial intermediaries such as global investment banks 
extending credit facilities to hedge funds to allow them to invest funds in excess of their own capital 
base.  Such  credit  facilities  are  usually  at  the  root  of  industry-wide  or  strategy-specific  estimates  of 
leverage  in  the  hedge  fund  industry.  Following  the  collapse  of  LTCM,  much  of  the  regulatory 
discussion  focused  on  this  type  of  leverage  by  attempting  to  strengthen  the  relationship  between 
financial intermediaries and hedge funds to improve counterparty risk management. 
A second, more recent form of leverage in the hedge fund industry is related to the rapidly growing 
fund of funds industry. A number of fund of funds managers have begun to leverage their products by 
either using their own balance sheet or, alternatively, borrow credit facilities from other financial firms 
with large balance sheets. 2:1 leverage ratios are typical. In some cases, leverage ratios can be as 
BIS Review 8/2005 
 3
high  as  4:1.  This  form  of  leverage,  though  probably  still  limited,  is  unlikely  to  be  captured  by  any 
industry leverage figures. 
Finally,  the  most  complex  form  of  leverage  that  hedge  funds  employ  is  what  I  would  refer  to  as 
instrument  leverage.  This  type  of  leverage  is  embedded  in  the  use  of  most  kinds  of  derivative 
instruments.    Extreme  leverage  could  conceivably  have  systemic  repercussions.    The  hedge  fund 
industry  and  the  investment  banks  trading  with  hedge  funds  no  longer  calculate  and  apply  the 
leverage concept in the form it is traditionally used.7 Hedge funds define a target value at risk (VaR) or 
capital  allocation  to  each  position.  Similarly,  investment  banks  trading  with  hedge  funds  control  the 
risks involved with the hedge funds by allocating to the fund a VaR limit. All open positions to the fund 
- mainly derivatives like futures, swaps, swaptions or forwards - are taken into account in the VaR limit. 
Offsetting positions are usually netted out. The size of the total position the hedge fund can build up is 
a function of the variables that determine the VaR, such as the volatility of the underlying asset or the 
correlation with other instruments.  As a measure of risk control the VaR of the fund has to be covered 
with margins, mostly in the form of securities. Generally speaking, the investment banks apply the well 
known  margin  system  of  futures  exchanges  to  the  overall  business  with  hedge  funds.  There  exist 
additional safety procedures. As a result of a large draw down in the net asset value the VaR limit can 
be reduced automatically, forcing the fund to reduce or close out its positions. Nonetheless, it should 
be kept in mind that VaR measures have limitations – they reflect price behavior in normal markets 
and  are  not  well  suited  for  a  stressed  market  environment.  Moreover,  many  of  the  VaR-based 
margining models are highly sensitive to recent market data. In an extreme low volatility environment, 
collateral limits can therefore drop to very low levels which could ultimately impair the bank’s credit 
position. 
Hedge fund regulation 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  rapid  growth  of  the  hedge  fund  industry  has  been  accompanied  by  a 
noticeable increase in calls for additional regulatory oversight of hedge funds. Prior to engaging in a 
regulatory discussion, it is important to recognize two aspects: First, hedge funds are already subject 
to  a  wide range  of  indirect  regulations.  They  operate  in  regulated  financial  markets,  they  utilize  the 
infrastructure of regulated financial centers, and - most importantly - they deal with regulated financial 
institutions. Second, many hedge funds are already subject to direct regulatory requirements. 
As far as the necessity for further direct regulation goes, it strikes me as useful to distinguish between 
three potential regulatory arenas: prudential matters, position reporting and leverage. 
Prudential regulation is concerned with the commendable goal of eliminating fraud. Many hedge funds 
are already subject to registration with regulatory authorities. For instance, efforts undertaken by the 
FSA in London to ensure proper business structures as well as control and pricing processes have 
arguably  diminished  the  fraud  risks  in  the  industry.  For  many  institutional  investors,  registration 
appears to have become an important criterion in selecting hedge funds. I suspect there will ultimately 
be some need to clarify hedge fund managers’ prudential responsibilities vis-à-vis different regulatory 
agencies operating in different jurisdictions.  
Regulatory initiatives in the arena of position reporting strike me as misguided. Position reporting is at 
best  an  unrealistic  proposition.  At  worst,  it  could  undermine  the  integrity  of  financial  markets.  It  is 
unrealistic  because  the  timeliness  and  aggregation  problems  are  virtually  insurmountable  in  an 
industry which  today represents nearly  25% of  the total  mutual  funds  industry  in  the United  States. 
More  importantly,  it  is  potentially  counterproductive  because,  amongst  other  things,  position  leaks 
could  encourage  behavior  by  market  participants  which  is  fundamentally  incompatible  with  a 
market-based price finding mechanism. 
The most complex potential regulatory arena concerns leverage in the hedge fund industry.  Extreme 
levels of leverage are an obvious source of concern for central banks in light of the credit risk nexus 
between hedge funds and the global banking system. This credit risk nexus could become particularly 
precarious  if  a  large  scale  credit  crisis  were  to  coincide  with  a  global  capital  market  liquidity  crisis. 
Regulatory initiatives directed at assessing the degree of leverage in the hedge fund industry should 
therefore not be dismissed ex ante. 
                                                      
7  
I.e. the value of the positions as a multiple of the equity value. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2005
the  credibility  of  regulation. 
Ineffective  regulation  can  ultimately  undermine 
Nonetheless,  meaningful  efforts  to  measure  leverage  in  the  hedge  fund  industry  are  bound  to  be 
undermined by complex aggregation problems not dissimilar to those prevalent in the arena of position 
reporting.  Misguided  regulatory  initiatives  will  fail  to  accomplish  what  they  set  out  to  do  and  thus 
undermine 
the 
competitiveness of financial centers.  
These problems notwithstanding, the question of leverage in the hedge fund industry deserves further 
study.  The  primary  focus  should  continue  to  be  directed  at  the  risk  management  operations  and 
processes of the world’s major investment banks. They are the primary trading partners of the hedge 
fund industry. They are also the most important providers of leverage to the industry. Since the LTCM 
crisis, the global investment banks have clearly strengthened their risk management operations. On 
the other hand, the hedge fund business has become a significant source of profit for the big banks. 
Competition in providing lending and brokerage services to the hedge fund industry is fierce. Some 
erosion of lending standards is a likely consequence of such an intensely competitive environment. In 
light  of  the  previously  discussed  difficulties  in  measuring  leverage,  senior  bank  executives,  risk 
managers  and  bank  supervisors  should  be  particularly  vigilant  in  ensuring  disciplined  lending 
frameworks,  fierce  competition  notwithstanding.  If  the  leading  global  investment  banks  maintain 
adequate  counterparty  risk  and  liquidity  risk  management  systems  and  operations,  leverage  in  the 
hedge fund industry should represent but a marginal risk to the stability of the global financial system.  
Fortunately,  the  global  investment  banking  community  is  a  small  and  concentrated  one.  Moreover, 
adequate bank supervisory structures exist and are currently being modernized. This should facilitate 
further study of the nexus between the risk taking of individual hedge funds and the risk management 
systems and processes within the world’s most important financial institutions.  
Conclusions 
Free of narrow constraints embedded in traditional investment guidelines, hedge funds have been an 
important source of innovation in the asset management industry. Lucrative compensation structures 
have played an important role in attracting talented individuals to the industry. Admittedly, these same 
financial  incentives  have  encouraged  many  lesser  talents  to  disguise  themselves  as  hedge  fund 
managers. I suspect, over time, investors will only be willing to pay prevailing hedge fund fees for truly 
outstanding managers. 
Hedge funds have rendered financial markets more liquid, more efficient and, ultimately, more flexible. 
Nonetheless, market observation suggests that in some specific cases, certain segments of the hedge 
fund industry may have recently had some impact on market volatility, either by accentuating existing 
market trends or by causing sharp price reversals or gapping price movements.  
The use of leverage is a central characteristic of the hedge fund industry. Overall industry leverage is 
extremely  difficult  to  measure.  Market  and  survey  evidence  suggests  that  it  is  currently  moderate. 
However, such leverage estimates must be interpreted with great caution. They are unlikely to capture 
the real extent of leverage embedded in the hedge fund industry. Leverage matters in a number of 
ways. One particular concern is that diminishing hedge fund returns in the aftermath of large capital 
inflows  might  motivate  hedge  fund  managers  to  use  extreme  leverage  to  generate  returns 
commensurate with the prevailing hedge fund fee structure. Systemic risks could conceivably result 
from  such  elevated  levels  of  financial  leverage,  primarily  through  large  credit  risk  transfers  to  the 
global banking system.  
Ultimately, leverage combined with inept asset management strategies will lead to hedge fund failures. 
These  are  likely  to  occur  in  the  future  as  they  have  in  the  past.  It  is  not  inconceivable  that 
expansionary monetary policy and the resulting global liquidity boost provide fertile grounds for the rise 
and  fall  of  hedge  funds.  In  the  event  of  hedge  fund  failures,  investors  –  for  the  most  part  wealthy 
individuals – will lose money. In some cases, these amounts could be vast. Nonetheless, such losses 
have no bearing on the stability of the financial system and should be of no concern to policy makers. 
What financial and economic policy makers must be concerned with are hedge fund failures or hedge 
fund activities that undermine the stability of the global financial system. Prudent and disciplined risk 
management  methods,  operations  and  processes  in  the  global  investment  banks  provide  the  most 
reliable defense against an erosion of lending standards and the potentially hazardous consequences 
of the use of excessive leverage in the hedge fund industry.  
 
BIS Review 8/2005 
 5
Graph 1 
Number of Hedge Funds and Assets under Management 
s
d
n
u
f
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
No. of  Hedge Funds
Assets under Management 
Source: HFRI 
 
Graph 2  
All Hedge Fund Assets Flows and Returns 
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
 n
b
D
S
U
n
 i
 
M
u
A
50'000
40'000
30'000
20'000
10'000
0
-10'000
-20'000
-30'000
-40'000
-50'000
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
-10%
-20%
-30%
-40%
-50%
Mar-94 Mar-95 Mar-96 Mar-97 Mar-98 Mar-99 Mar-00 Mar-01 Mar-02 Mar-03 Mar-04
Asset Flows (LHS)
MSCI World $ Return (YoY, RHS)
All Hedge Funds Return (YoY,RHS)
Source: CSFB-Tremont 
 
  6 
 BIS Review 8/2005
Graph 3 
Crude Oil Price and Futures Contract Volume (NYMEX) 
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 1996 
300'000
250'000
200'000
150'000
100'000
50'000
 1997 
 1998 
 1999 
 2000 
 2001 
 2002 
 2003 
 2004 
0
 2005 
Non-Commercial Long Contracts (rhs)
WTI Crude Oil (US$/ Barrel) (lhs)
Non-Commercial Short Contracts (rhs)
 
Graph 4 
Gold Price and Futures Contract Volume (CMX) 
300'000
250'000
200'000
150'000
100'000
50'000
0
 1996 
 1998 
 1997 
 2000 
Non-Commercial Long Contracts (lhs)
Gold Spot (US$/ Ounce) (rhs)
 1999 
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
 2001 
 2002 
 2003 
 2004 
 2005 
Non-Commercial Short Contracts (lhs)
  BIS Review 8/2005 
 7
