Joseph Yam: Basel II - back to the future 
Opening remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
HKMA Seventh Distinguished Lecture: “Basel II: Back to the Future”, Hong Kong, 4 February 2005. 
 Let me first extend a warm welcome to all of you to this seventh HKMA Distinguished Lecture. It is a 
great  pleasure  for  me  to  introduce  our  speaker,  Governor  Jaime  Caruana,  and  our  discussant,  Mr 
David Eldon.  
Basel II, or the New Capital Accord, or whatever we might call it, has been on the minds of bankers 
and  regulators  for  around  five  years  now.  This  new  framework  of  capital  adequacy  standards  for 
banks, issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, is an important step forward in the 
field  of  regulation.  By  making  capital  requirements  more  risk-sensitive,  Basel  II  will  bring  banking 
regulation more into line with the way that banks themselves manage risk. It will also give banks the 
incentive  to  improve  their own risk  management.  Basel  II  will help  make  banks stronger, and  it  will 
improve the safety, stability and efficiency of financial systems. 
The  title  of  Governor  Caruana's  lecture  today,  "Back  to  the  Future",  might  for  a  moment  give  the 
impression that Basel II is the stuff of science fantasy. There is no doubt that it is a highly complex 
matter, and that it has – literally – required the recruitment of physicists and rocket scientists by the 
regulators and banks tasked with its implementation. There were, I think, times when the pessimists 
among us wondered whether there would be the resources, and the will, for this initiative to get off the 
ground. But, thanks to the enormous effort and co-operation among those involved, implementation, 
over the course of the next few years, appears now to be very much a certainty. Over the past few 
months,  regulators  around  the  world,  including  those  in  this  region,  have  been  setting  out  the 
approaches they intend to adopt in implementing Basel II, and banks have been preparing themselves 
energetically for implementation. 
Approaches vary from one jurisdiction to another: one of the key features of Basel II is its flexibility. In 
Hong Kong, our aim is to switch over to Basel II at the start of 2007, in line with the approach being 
adopted  in  other  major  international  financial  centres,  and  of  the  Basel  Committee  members 
themselves.  We  see  value  in  being  among  the  first  in  adopting  Basel  II,  not  only  because  of  the 
intrinsic merits of the New Accord, but also because this city has one of the highest concentrations of 
banking institutions in the world, with a strong presence of international banking groups. 
Many people all over the world have been involved in Basel II. But there is no-one more qualified to 
speak on the subject than our guest today. Governor Caruana is the current Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision. He is also Governor of the Banco de Espana, and a Member of 
the Governing Council of the European Central Bank. Governor Caruana has extensive experience in 
both the private and public sector in Spain, and is the author of several publications on the Spanish 
financial system. We are greatly honoured that he has accepted our invitation to speak on Basel II 
today. 
The Basel II project was already several years old when Governor Caruana took over its leadership, 
as Chairman of the Basel Committee, in May 2003. But he has put his own stamp on this project, and 
has  made  three  special  personal  contributions.  First,  he  has  brought  the  formulation  process  to  a 
successful  conclusion  with  the  publication  last  June  of  the  definitive  document  on  the  revised 
framework.  Producing  this  necessary  road-map  was  no  easy  achievement  given  the  differing  views 
that had to be taken into account, and the considerable degree of scepticism in the industry. Secondly, 
he  has,  through  persuasion  and  advocacy,  managed  to  convert  scepticism  towards  Basel  II  into  a 
positive  and  constructive  attitude.  He  has  done  this  in  particular  by  stressing  that,  when  you  look 
beneath  the  surface,  Basel  II  is  not  so  much  about  how  capital  adequacy  ratios  are  calculated,  as 
about how banks can improve their risk management and, thereby, how the efficiency of the banking 
system can be improved. He has also placed emphasis on the point that Basel II applies not just to 
advanced banking systems but to banking systems in all stages of development – an observation of 
particular relevance to this region. 
Thirdly, and of no less importance to us in Hong Kong, Governor Caruana has personally supported 
greater involvement by non-G10 members in the Basel II process. Within this region, central bankers 
have been increasingly active in recent years in trying to ensure that our voice is heard in the process 
of policy formulation and standard-setting in Basel. Governor Caruana has on a number of occasions 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 1
spoken out on the need to ensure that our voices are indeed heard, and that our views are actually 
taken  into  account.  And  there  are  signs  that  this  practice  is  turning  into  a  tradition:  it  has  been 
extended  to  other  areas,  such  as  the  review  of  the  Basel  Committee  Core  Principles  for  Effective 
Supervision, in which Hong Kong is heavily involved. 
Successful implementation of Basel II depends not just on the standard-setters and the regulators, but 
also on  the  banks  themselves.  The  enthusiasm  with  which  the  Hong  Kong  banking  community  has 
taken to Basel II has been impressive. As a senior member of this community, our discussant today is 
particularly  well  equipped  to  provide  the  perspective  from  the  banks.  We  are  fortunate  in  having 
secured David Eldon’s presence today. After more than 40 years in banking, many of them in Hong 
Kong, he is about to retire from the field. He is thus currently much in demand among his many friends 
within the financial community, who wish to fete him on his retirement. He is also receiving bookings in 
his  new,  risk-taking  career  as  popular  singer  and  entertainer  –  a  field  in  which  we  wish  him  every 
success. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to David for his outstanding contributions to Hong Kong 
during difficult and challenging times, not just in the financial sphere, but also in the many community 
and charitable activities in which he is involved. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is an honour to welcome Governor Jaime Caruana as speaker, and Mr David 
Eldon as discussant. I now have much pleasure in inviting Governor Caruana to deliver the seventh 
HKMA Distinguished Lecture.  
2 
 BIS Review 9/2005
