Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Stimulating the growth of microfinance in the 
Philippines 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, at the National 
Capital Region (NCR) Stakeholders’ Forum on Microfinance, Manila, 19 September 2005. 
 Introduction  
Good morning.  I am happy and honored to be part of this Stakeholders’ Forum which aims 
to look at the role of microfinance in job generation and entrepreneurial growth, specifically in 
the National Capital Region (NCR). The NCR continues to have the highest unemployment 
rate nationwide, resulting in poverty and inequality.  It is indeed an opportune time to conduct 
a forum such as this to address these pressing problems.   
that  demonstrate  microfinance  as  an  effective 
Microfinance: Benefits beyond one household  
In  the  face  of  these  problems,  one  possible  intervention  is  the  provision  of  microfinance 
services.  Although microfinance is not a panacea, it has been proven, here and around the 
world, to be a powerful intervention in tackling the various facets of poverty. 
As most of you already know, the practice and provision of microfinance has been growing in 
the  Philippines.  This  increase  is  driven  by  the  numerous  empirical  evidence  and  many 
success  stories 
for  economic 
development.  
Microfinance  provides  the  necessary  push  for  microenterprises  to  help  them  grow.    This 
bears significance for the Philippines where micro, small and medium enterprises make up 
99.6%  of  our  total  industries  and  employ  70%  of  our  workforce.  It  becomes  even  more 
significant  when  we  learn  that  around  4.1  million  families  belonging  to  the  lowest  income 
strata are engaged in microenterprise activities.  Without access to financial services, these 
microenterprises  are  forced  to  rely  on  more  expensive  sources  of  credit  such  as  informal 
money lenders which limits their capacity to grow their businesses.  It is clear therefore that 
by  invigorating  these  microenterprises,  microfinance  can  have  a  direct  contribution  and 
impact for economic development and poverty alleviation.  Microfinance can then empower 
the many Filipinos living in poverty to increase their economic activity and income, build up 
assets,  prepare  against  emergencies  and  better  invest  in  education,  health,  and  housing 
thereby improving the overall quality of their lives.  In addition, the benefits go beyond the 
client’s  household.    These  microbusinesses  generate  the  much  needed  employment  and 
increase the economic activity in local economies.    
tool 
Growth of the microfinance industry  
Given these benefits of microfinance and its potential for far reaching gains, the question that 
is asked of us today is how we can further develop and stimulate the growth of microfinance 
in the country.  
Growth in the microfinance industry may be characterized by an increase in the breadth and 
depth  of  outreach  of  existing  microfinance  institutions,  heightened  competition  among 
microfinance  service  providers,  diversification  of  product  and  service  offerings,  and  the 
presence of private and commercial funds for microfinance activities.  
There is no standard blueprint to show us how to achieve these characteristics and to ensure 
the growth of the microfinance industry.  To a large extent, the growth will be, and should be, 
   1/4 
market driven.  But there are some enabling factors and necessary conditions that must be 
present to achieve such growth.  
Necessary conditions for growth  
First  and  foremost,  there  must  be  an  enabling  policy  and  regulatory  environment  that 
supports and promotes the development of sustainable and viable microfinance institutions 
that will best serve the microfinance clients.  The Philippines is among the few countries in 
the world with a national strategy for microfinance.  
The national strategy envisions a viable and sustainable private microfinancial market with 
the  main  objective  of  providing  low  income  households  and  microenterprises  access  to 
financial services.  Anchored on the national strategy, a policy framework was created and 
several  laws  and  issuances  were  passed  to  promote  greater  involvement  of  the  private 
sector, the non-participation of government line agencies in credit programs and the adoption 
of market oriented financial and credit policies.  These are the Social Reform and Poverty 
Alleviation  Act,  Agriculture  and  Fisheries  Modernization  Act,  Executive  Order  138  which 
rationalized government directed credit programs, the General Banking Law of 2000 and the 
Baranggay Micro Business Enterprise Act.  
The General Banking Law in particular has paved the way for the flourishing of microfinance 
within the banking sector.  The Bangko Sentral was mandated to recognize microfinance as 
a legitimate banking activity and we have, since then, taken a pro-active stance in developing 
a “microfinance-friendly” policy environment, in increasing the capacity of the BSP and the 
banking sector as well as in engaging in promotion and advocacy efforts.  
I am happy to note that these initiatives have played a catalytic role for banks to engage in 
microfinance.    Before  the  year  2000,  there  were  about  55  banks  claiming  that  they  had 
microfinance  operations.  Today,  we  have  187  banks  engaged  in  microfinance  covering  all 
the regions of the country.  That is well over a 200% increase in just less than five years. 
With  this  increase  in  banks  providing  microfinance,  we  will  see  more  of  the  unbanked  yet 
bankable receive the much needed access to financial services.  
The BSP is committed to continue to support this development with the primary objective of 
creating  a  policy  environment  that  will  allow  banks  to  have  a  wider  scope  for  their 
microfinance operations, while protecting their depositors and the financial system.  In some 
cases, it may entail more flexible provisions, while in other cases it may entail more rigorous 
standards. What is essential is that the policies and regulations seriously consider the needs 
of banks with microfinance operations in order to increase in outreach and sustainability.  
Aside from the laws, issuances and national strategy, the Philippines also boasts of a clear 
regulatory framework for microfinance institutions. This framework focuses on the key areas 
of  transparency,  portfolio  quality,  efficiency  and  outreach.  The  regulatory  framework  was 
established  to  support  the  diverse  set  of  microfinance  institutions,  whether  bank,  NGO  or 
cooperative,  recognizing  the  strength  of  each  type  of  institution  in  delivering  quality 
microfinance services.  
This  enabling  policy  and  regulatory  environment  has  led  to  a  burgeoning  interest  in 
microfinance and an ever-growing number of microfinance institutions.  This brings us to the 
second necessary condition to ascertain that the growth of microfinance can be a sustainable 
and viable one.  
This  second  factor  is  the  need  for  microfinance  institutions  to  adopt  and  subscribe  to 
performance standards in their operations.  
The  Bangko  Sentral  as  a  member  of  the  National  Credit  Council  worked  very  hard  in 
finalizing a set of performance standards that can be used by microfinance institutions across 
the  banking,  non-governmental  and  cooperative  sectors  to  facilitate  assessment  and 
   2/4 
evaluation of their performance. The standards go by the acronym P.E.S.O., which stands for 
Portfolio Quality, Efficiency, Sustainability and Outreach.  
As  the  microfinance  industry  develops,  these  standards  become  more  relevant.  A  recent 
study of the Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest (CGAP), a consortium of 29 donors, 
have  shown  that  world  capital  markets  have  been  challenged  in  recent  years  and  that 
investors  are  increasingly  searching  for  alternative  ways  of  boosting  their  returns  and 
spreading their risks. They have identified that microfinance fits neatly into this trend.  With 
clearer  standards,  and  possibly  industry  benchmarks  and  rating  systems  in  the  future, 
interested investors will be better equipped to evaluate microfinance institutions as potential 
partners  for  growth.    This  will  be  beneficial  for  the  microfinance  industry.    Oikocredit 
International,  a  social  investor  increasingly  engaged  in  microfinance,  expressed  that 
channelling  commercial  capital  to  microfinance  institutions  is  key  in  establishing  the 
conditions for sustainability and for the scaling-up of microfinance institutions.  Commercial 
capital  pushes  microfinance  institutions  to  have  more  rigorous  financial  discipline  and 
management.  
The challenge now is for practitioners, regulators and policy makers to uphold and adhere to 
these  standards  to  ensure  a  more  transparent  and  sustainable  commercial  microfinance 
industry in the country. At the end of the day, only commercially viable institutions are able to 
expand  their  reach  to  wider  geographical  areas  and  provide  a  more  extensive  range  of 
financial services to their clients. With more of these institutions in play, the ultimate benefit 
goes to the microenterprises because there will be more responsive products and services, 
innovative methodologies and competitive prices.  
The third necessary condition is the presence of a comprehensive credit information system.  
With  more  and  more  players  engaged  in  microfinance,  the  problem  of  credit  pollution  and 
multiple  borrowings  is  also  increasing.    The  sharing  and  disseminating  of  credit  related 
information will be able to address this problem.  
Credit bureaus are useful in reducing risks in lending and in encouraging a more responsible 
attitude towards credit by borrowers which will ultimately lower delinquency and strengthen 
the credit and financial system. In addition, the presence of a credit bureau will foster lending 
to the previously neglected sector such as the micro, small and medium enterprises due to 
less reliance on collateral based credit decisions.  
Despite the many benefits of having a credit bureau, many have not participated or availed of 
these  services  due  to  fear  of  losing  clients  to  competition,  confidentiality  issues  and 
effectiveness of current credit bureau services. At present, there is a proposed bill in both 
houses  of  congress  which  aims  to  fully  institutionalize  a  credit  information  system  in  the 
country. 
Conclusion  
The continuous growth of the microfinance industry presents us with promising opportunities. 
It  is  important  that  we  seize  these  opportunities  as  there  still  remains  a  large  and  unmet 
demand for microfinance services in our country.  
As long as there remains nearly 40% of our population living in poverty, there is an urgent 
need for microfinance to provide them with opportunities to increase their economic activity, 
foster their spirit of entrepreneurship, facilitate employment and improve the quality of their 
lives and that of their community. 
As some microfinance practitioners say, one microfinance loan can change the future on an 
entire  family.  Several  loans  can  change  a  community.  Thousands  of  these  loans  can 
transform an entire economy.  Let us remain focused and unrelenting in our commitment to 
see this become a reality.  
   3/4 
On our part, we at the Bangko Sentral will continue to be an active advocate of microfinance 
in our country.   
Thank you and good day to all of you.    
 
   4/4 
