Peter Pang: Recent financial and economic developments in Asia 
Statement by Mr Peter Pang, Temporary Alternate Governor of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the 38th Asian Development Bank Annual Meeting, Istanbul, Turkey, 4-6 May 2005. 
 Mr President, let me first of all congratulate you on your election as President of the Bank. I must next 
thank Turkey for graciously hosting this year's Annual Meeting. I also join other Governors to thank the 
Bank's management and staff for the excellent arrangements. 
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the successful conclusion of the 8th replenishment of 
the Asian Development Fund. This would enable the Bank to continue with its programme in offering 
much needed relief to the poorest people in Asia. However, while real GDP growth in the region has 
been impressive, up 7.3% in 2004, income distribution remains highly uneven. The toll on human lives, 
and  the  massive  destruction  left  behind  by  the  Tsunami  attack  last  December,  reminded  us  that 
fighting poverty remains both a continuing – and daunting – task for the Bank. 
While the Bank has done a commendable job in reducing poverty in the low-income economies, those 
members who have attained a reasonable level of development have a different set of needs. With 
global financial markets awash with liquidity, many of them have ready access to private capital, and 
have less of a need to turn to the Bank for lending. The greatest challenge to these emerging markets 
is  how  to  achieve  a  more  balanced  and  sustainable  growth  in  the  midst  of  globalisation.  As  more 
economies in the region move to the middle-income category, I urge the Bank to proactively consider 
ways and means to help them meet the new challenges of changing times. 
Sustainability of the region’s future growth seems to lie in the growing trend of intra-regional trade and 
economic interdependence. Asia is highly integrated in trade. Propelled by vertical integration of the 
production  process,  intra-regional  trade  grew  by  14%  a  year  between  1995  and  2003,  while  world 
exports  increased  only  7.5%.  Compared  to  trade,  integration  in  the  financial  sector  has  been 
progressing  at  a  much  slower  pace.  As  a  result,  the  very  substantial  volume  of  foreign  reserves 
accumulated  in  the  region,  of  some  US$500  billion  last  year  alone,  goes  mainly  to  the  developed 
rather  than  the  regional  markets.  When  some  of  the  capital  from  the  developed  market  is  recycled 
back to the region, it is of a more volatile and repercussive nature, and can be difficult to cope with as 
we saw it in the late 1990s. 
To  reduce  the  reliance  on  the  recycling  of  domestic  savings  through  the  developed  markets,  Asian 
governments  have  put  in  place  several  initiatives  to  strengthen  financial  intermediation.  A  notable 
example  is  the  Asian  Bond  Markets  Initiative  under  the  ASEAN+3  forum.  The  Initiative  includes 
studies on issues such as new securitised debt instruments, issuance of debt by international financial 
institutions, regional credit guarantees and enhancement facilities, and the establishment of local and 
regional credit-rating and credit-enhancement agencies. 
Another  initiative,  known  as  the  Asian  Bond  Fund  project,  represents  collective  efforts  of  the 
Executives' Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks, or EMEAP, to broaden and deepen the bond 
markets  in  the  region.  The  ABF  project  will  bring  about  many  benefits.  First,  it  introduces  and 
promotes  new  fixed-income  products  to  the  Asian  markets.  Secondly,  it  helps  improve  market 
infrastructure.  Thirdly,  the  initiative  has  helped  accelerate  tax  and  regulatory  reforms  in  both  the 
regional and domestic markets. 
The  Bank,  with  its  mission  as  the  region's  development  bank,  is  well  positioned  to  assist  emerging 
market economies in Asia to cope with the challenges of globalisation. In the past year, the Bank has 
contributed to the issuance of local currency-denominated bonds in India, Hong Kong, Malaysia and 
Singapore. The Bank is also providing valuable support to the Asian Bond Markets Initiative through 
the  former  Regional  Economic  Monitoring  Unit,  which  is  now  known  as  the  Office  of  Regional 
Economic  Integration.  Mr  President,  your  decision  to  expand  this  Office  and  dedicate  it  to  regional 
cooperation matters is most timely and welcome, as a well defined agenda for the Bank on regional 
cooperation will enhance financial stability by strengthening regional surveillance and cooperation. 
Despite  these  efforts,  developments,  and  -  dare  we  say  it  -  successes,  there  are  many  challenges 
lying ahead of us. One-fifth of world population is still living in poverty, with the majority of them in 
Asia. How to address the poverty issue and the uneven distribution of income amid globalisation has 
become your biggest challenge. Mr. President, I believe more wealth could be generated if savings in 
BIS Review 32/2005 
 1
the  region could  be recycled  to  finance  investments in  the  region,  if  intra-regional  trade could  grow 
faster,  and  if  investors  could  move  funds  easily  from  one  economy  to  another  in  the  region. 
Mr. President, I am confident that under your leadership, the Bank will play an even greater role in the 
integration of trade, finance and investment in the region. You have our unremitting cooperation and 
support. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2005
