Stanley Fischer: A central banker’s look at key issues facing the EBRD  
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the EBRD Annual Meeting, 
Belgrade, 22 May 2005. 
 Mr. Chairman, Mr. President, Governors, Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen:  
It is a pleasure for me to be here in Belgrade for the first time in 15 years - eventful and extremely 
difficult years for the peoples of this city and country and of neighboring countries - and to participate 
in this 14th Annual Meeting of the EBRD as Governor of the Bank of Israel and the representative of 
Israel.  
It is a special pleasure for me to take part in a meeting of the EBRD, whose record has more than 
justified its creation. As a researcher I benefited greatly from the basic research and analytic work on 
the  transition  process  done  by  the  Bank,  under  the  leadership  of  a  series  of  outstanding  Chief 
Economists, John Flemming, Nick Stern, and Willem Buiter. The Bank has also managed to achieve 
impressive  operational  and  financial  results.  In  2004,  for  example,  the  financial  commitments  and 
disbursements of the Bank were higher than ever before, the number of projects was greater than in 
previous years, and there was a record amount of commercial co-financing of its projects.  
I  would  like  to  express  my  congratulations  to  the  Bank's  management  and  staff  for  these 
achievements, and to thank and congratulate Jean Lemierre for his highly effective leadership of the 
institution. I would also like to express my appreciation to Noreen Doyle, First Vice-President of the 
EBRD, and Willem Buiter, for their distinguished service to the EBRD, and to wish them well in their 
future endeavors.  
The  countries  of  this  region  continue  to  face  formidable  economic  and  political  challenges. 
Nonetheless  the  prospect  of  dealing  with  them  in  the  context  of  growing  integration  with  Europe, 
together with progress in our host country, Serbia and Montenegro, make the outlook brighter than it 
has  been  for  many  years.  This  meeting  provides  all  of  us  with  an  opportunity  to  strengthen  our 
commitment to the region, and I would like to thank the authorities of Serbia and Montenegro and the 
city of Belgrade for being such good hosts and for making this meeting possible.  
I would like to use this opportunity to make brief remarks on three key issues facing the EBRD: first, 
SMEs and microfinance; second, currency risk; and third graduation.  
SMEs and microfinance  
1.  
It  is  well  known  that  the  SME  sector  is  a  key  contributor  to  growth  and  employment,  including  and 
perhaps especially in the transition countries. It is equally well known that in most countries this is a 
difficult sector to finance: the financing of small and medium scale enterprises requires detailed local 
knowledge of the relevant companies and entrepreneurs, and is likely to be very labor-intensive. This 
work  is  best  done  by  local  financial  institutions,  which  are  more  likely  to  have  developed  branch 
networks that enable them to understand both the economic conditions facing these companies and 
the quality of the firms' management.  
The EBRD has been successful in promoting SME financing in several countries, including in Russia, 
through  onlending  to  local  financial  institutions.  The  Bank's  work  and  familiarity  with  financial 
intermediaries throughout the region has increased its effectiveness in assisting smaller enterprises in 
its  countries  of  operation.  It  is  highly  desirable  that  the  Bank  continue  to  promote  SME  lending, 
especially in the countries of this region, both through its lending and by helping create a business 
environment in which the private sector can flourish.  
At the same time, let me put in a plug for the potential role of microfinance in helping even smaller 
businesses than the SMEs to obtain financing, and also in helping the poorest consumers to obtain 
access  to  the  financial  sector.  Governments  can  contribute  to  this  process  by  ensuring  that  their 
regulatory framework does not discriminate against microfinance institutions. Private sector financial 
institutions can contribute by working together with microfinance institutions, for instance by helping 
them gain access to financing and by assisting in the development of microfinance products.  
BIS Review 38/2005 
 1
The EBRD has been successful in promoting SME financing in several countries, including in Russia, 
through  onlending  to  local  financial  institutions.  The  Bank's  work  and  familiarity  with  financial 
intermediaries throughout the region has increased its effectiveness in assisting smaller enterprises in 
its  countries  of  operation.  It  is  highly  desirable  that  the  Bank  continue  to  promote  SME  lending, 
especially in the countries of this region, both through its lending and by helping create a business 
environment in which the private sector can flourish.  
Local currency financing  
2.  
Governments  in  several  regions  have  been  attempting  to  develop  local  currency  bond  markets  in 
which foreign investors and institutions participate. In part this is designed to deal with the so-called 
problem  of  "original  sin",  according  to  which  developing  countries  are  able  only  to  borrow 
internationally in foreign currencies, and consequently suffer financial losses in their own currency if 
forced  to  devalue.  Despite  the  belief  that  original  sin  will  always  be  with  us,  several  developing 
countries,  including  Mexico  and  Malaysia,  have  recently  been  able  to  borrow  from  international 
investors in their own currencies, and there is good reason to believe that this trend will continue.  
Another reason to develop local currency bond markets is that it is desirable that local firms that need 
to borrow have the option of doing so in their own currency. In this regard, the EBRD's initiative to gain 
access to local currency funding for onlending to the private sector, rather than requiring that private 
sector borrowers take foreign currency loans, should be strongly commended and encouraged. Given 
the greater sophistication and financial strength of the international financial institutions, they are in a 
much better position to in essence provide hedges against the risks of foreign currency financing than 
are local institutions. The EBRD has been able to gain such access in some countries, and it deserves 
our encouragement as it seeks to broaden this initiative.  
Graduation  
3.  
Despite  many  setbacks,  and  an  unexpectedly  difficult  beginning,  the  transition  process  has  on  the 
whole been successful - more so in some countries and less so in others in which the EBRD operates. 
This year, eight of the countries of operation of the EBRD are already full-fledged EU member states, 
and other countries of operation are preparing to achieve this status in the next few years.  
The Bank has started a process of shifting resources away from the new European Union member 
states to countries in South Eastern Europe and the CIS. Looking forward, further discussions of the 
process of graduation from EBRD financing will take place later this year, within the context of the next 
Capital Resources Review. This exercise should be oriented towards formulating the Bank's strategy 
on graduation through the year 2010.  
I  believe  that  the  EBRD  should  continue  to  shift  its  operations  away  from  the  more  developed 
countries that are already in the EU, and should strengthen its focus on operating in the less advanced 
countries of operation, where the challenge of transition is greater, and where the available capital and 
knowledge resources are more limited. It would be useful to set guidelines for the dates by which the 
Bank would phase out and cease operating in certain countries - but these guidelines should leave 
room  for  some  flexibility,  particularly  in  fields  of  operation  in  which  the  EBRD  has  special  technical 
expertise.  
 In conclusion, let me say that the remarkable success of the EBRD in fostering transition in the region 
deserves the appreciation of all its shareholders. I wish the Bank continuing success.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
2 
 BIS Review 38/2005
