Nicholas C Garganas: Adjusting to the single monetary policy of the ECB 
Luncheon  address  by  Mr  Nicholas  C  Garganas,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  before  the  Euro 
50 Group, Athens, 24 June 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  thank  Prof.  Richard  Portes  for  his  kind  introduction.  It  is  indeed  an  honour  and  a 
pleasure to address such a distinguished audience of academics and practitioners specialized in the 
field of European economic policies and broader issues linked to the Euro. 
This meeting is an important event. It takes place at a time of tensions about the impact of the single 
monetary  policy  on  the  euro  area  and  when  several  commentators  have  raised  doubts  about  the 
sustainability of monetary union. Europe's single-currency undertaking is perhaps the boldest attempt 
ever in which a large and diverse group of sovereign states has attempted to reap the efficiency gains 
of using a common currency. The euro has created a new monetary reality for 307 million Europeans 
that  few would  have  thought  possible  a  generation  ago.  Like  most  bold  undertakings,  however,  the 
euro  has  had  its  share  of  ups  and  downs.  When  the  euro  was  launched  in  1999,  skeptics  were 
doubtful  whether  it  would  be  possible  to  make  the  euro  a  stable  currency.  Yet,  the  euro,  which  is 
probably the most visible and tangible symbol of this integration process, is now in its seventh year 
and has been firmly and credibly established as a stable currency. 
Today, I want to address a widely-debated issue - namely, whether a single monetary policy can fit all 
parties in a supposedly heterogeneous currency area. This issue has been debated extensively since 
the  start  of  EMU.  The  debate  has  recently  intensified,  reflecting  concerns  about  the  increased 
divergence  of  growth  rates  over  the  past  few  quarters  and  uncertainties  deriving  from  French  and 
Dutch rejections of the Constitutional Treaty. Before I discuss this issue, allow me to offer the following 
qualification. My perspective is that of someone from Greece, a small, open economy with a history of 
very  high  inflation  and  enormous  fiscal  deficits  in  the  1980s  and  the  first  half  of  the  1990s.  Other 
countries' perspectives might well highlight features other than those that I will discuss. 
EMU: An optimum currency area perspective 
EMU  brought  unique  challenges  for  monetary  policy.  Critical  observers  took  the  view  that  a  single 
monetary  policy  was  doomed  to  failure.  This  skepticism  was  supported  by  the  arguments  of  the 
traditional theory of optimum currency areas, which recommended monetary unification only among 
economies  with  flexible  markets,  free  mobility  of  labour,  a  centralised  fiscal  policy,  and  a  limited 
incidence of asymmetric shocks. Clearly, these conditions did not - and do not - hold for the euro area. 
After  all,  the  euro  zone  is  characterised  by  significant  rigidities  in  labour  and  product  markets,  the 
absence  of  a  significant  centralised  fiscal  transfer  mechanism,  and  national  economies  with  unique 
institutional and economic features - a set of circumstances that results in a high incidence and impact 
of asymmetric shocks. 
In  these  circumstances,  so  the  argument  goes,  such  shocks  are  likely  to  lead  to  widening  price 
differentials  so  that  a  common  nominal  interest  rate  in  the  monetary  union  results  in  different  real 
interest rates among countries. For member countries with relatively-strong domestic demand and a 
higher-than-average  inflation  rate,  the  lower  real  interest  rate  fuels  domestic  demand  and  national 
inflation.  Conversely,  for  countries  with  relatively-weak  domestic  demand  and  a  lower-than-average 
inflation  rate,  the  high  real  interest  rates  put  further downward  pressures  on  domestic  demand  and 
inflation. A one-size monetary policy, in other words, does not match the needs of all members. 
The foregoing, traditional view of optimum currency areas neglects several important factors. It seeks 
to identify the characteristics that a country should satisfy prior to joining a monetary union - that is, ex 
ante.  We  now  know,  however,  that  participation  in  a  monetary  union  may  itself  induce  changes  in 
economic structure and performance ex post through at least two channels. These channels operate 
through enhanced credibility and trade and financial integration. 
How does the credibility channel work? A major benefit of participating in EMU, especially for countries 
such  as  Greece,  Italy,  Portugal,  and  Spain  that  have  had  recent  histories  of  relatively-high  inflation 
rates, has been the credibility gain derived from eliminating the inflation bias of discretionary monetary 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 1
policy.  With  low  and  stable  inflation  and  inflation  expectations,  nominal  interest-rate  differentials 
between these countries and countries with histories of relatively-low inflation rates, such as Germany, 
have almost been eliminated. With lower nominal interest rates in traditionally high-inflation countries, 
the cost of servicing public-sector debt is reduced, facilitating fiscal adjustment, and freeing resources 
for  other  uses.  Moreover,  with  low  and  stable  inflation,  economic  horizons  lengthen,  encouraging  a 
transformation of the financial sector. The lengthening of horizons and the reduction of interest rates 
stimulate private investment and risk taking, fostering faster growth. 
For Greece, entering the euro zone has meant not only the loss of an independent monetary policy - 
the fruits of which were amply demonstrated in the 1980s and the early 1990s - but also the credibility 
gains associated with a stable, low-inflation monetary regime. In the 15 years until 1994 - the year in 
which Greece's efforts to qualify for euro-area entry began in earnest - inflation averaged almost 20 
per  cent  while  real  growth  averaged  less  than  1  per  cent.  In  contrast,  during  the  past  6  years  real 
growth has averaged more than 4 per cent while inflation has been slightly above 3 per cent. Another 
way to infer the credibility gains is by looking at interest-rate spreads. In 1997, the year in which a 10-
year government bond was first issued in the Greek financial market, the yield differential between that 
bond  and  the  comparable  German  bond  was  412  basis  points.  Today,  it  stands  at  only  24  basis 
points. I suggest, therefore, that giving up a nationally-tailored monetary policy has not, in fact, been a 
cost, but a benefit. 
Now let me turn to the trade channel. Recent empirical work has shown that a common currency can 
promote trade and growth over and above any effect produced by separate currencies tied together 
with fixed exchange rates. For the euro area, the evidence suggests that the adoption of the euro has 
already increased trade among EMU members by between 4 and 16 per cent compared with trade 
among European countries that have not adopted the euro. Increased trade integration leads to more-
highly-correlated  business  cycles  because  of  common  demand  shocks  and  greater  intra-industry 
trade, reducing the need for country-specific monetary policies. 
There are additional reasons that a monetary union reduces the incidence of country-specific shocks. 
One  of  the  principal  causes  of  asymmetric  shocks  -  the  effects  of  divergent  monetary  policies  -  no 
longer exists. Furthermore, it is to be expected that the deepening of financial-market integration will 
also entail a convergence in the transmission mechanism of monetary impulses. Finally, the common 
currency helps to increase price transparency and, therefore, competition in goods, services and factor 
markets, leading to a further alignment of economic cycles. 
Inflation differentials 
The fact remains, however, that there are inflation differentials among the members of the euro zone. 
How significant are these differentials and how concerned should we be? Recent evidence provided 
by  the  ECB  shows  that,  over  the  period  1990-99,  the  12  countries  now  comprising  the  euro  area 
experienced  a  downward  trend  in  the  degree  of  inflation  dispersion  -  measured  as  the  standard 
deviation of that dispersion - from about 6 percentage points in the early 1990s to a low of less than 
one percentage point in the second half of 1999. Since that time, inflation dispersion has changed very 
little - that is, it remains less than a percentage point. To provide a basis of comparison, since 1999 
inflation  dispersion  across  the  euro  area  has  fluctuated  close  to  the  level  observed  across  the  14 
metropolitan statistical areas of the United States. Remarkably, the process of nominal convergence in 
the  euro  area  was  not  accompanied  by  greater  dispersion  of  real  GDP  growth  rates,  which  has 
remained close to its historical average of around 2 percentage points following the adoption of the 
euro. 
There is one notable difference, however, between inflation differentials in the euro area and those in 
the  United  States.  Although  inflation  differentials  in  the  euro  area  have  not  widened,  they  have 
exhibited  a  relatively-high  degree  of  persistence,  higher  than  that  experienced  across  the  14 
metropolitan  statistical  areas  of  the  United  States.  Seven  of  the  12  euro-area  economies  have 
recorded annual inflation rates that have remained either persistently above or persistently below the 
euro-area  average  since  1999.  One  of  those  countries  is  Greece,  where  inflation  has  persistently 
exceeded the euro-area average by about one-and-a-half percentage points since Greece became a 
member of the euro area in 2001. 
Several  factors  have  contributed  to  the  persistence  of  inflation  differentials  across  euro-area 
economies. One factor in relatively-low income countries, such as Greece, is the so called Balassa-
Samuelson  effect,  according  to  which  long-term  differentials  in  regional  inflation  are  attributable  to 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2005
differences in the rate at which productivity increases in the various regions' tradable and non-tradable 
goods  sectors.  Although  it  is  difficult  to  quantify  this  effect  with  precision,  it  provides  only  a  partial 
explanation for the persistent inflation differentials that exist in the euro area. In any case, this effect is 
a  transitory  one.  It  is  part  of  what  I  have  called  the  adjustment  mechanism  -  in  this  case,  the 
adjustment to a higher standard of living. 
Other factors contributing to the inflation differentials within the euro area, including misaligned fiscal 
policies, wage dynamics not linked to productivity developments and structural inefficiencies such as 
rigidities in product and factors markets, are not so benign. Redressing these problems, as you know, 
is not within the domain of monetary policy. National economic policies are the relevant instruments to 
enhance the ability of individual countries to respond to economic shocks and to national divergences. 
I  believe  that  EMU  has  helped  stimulate  reforms  in  the  euro  area.  Major  reforms  are  undoing  the 
rigidities  accumulated  over  decades,  preparing  social  institutions  for  the  looming  demographic 
changes  and  making  the  euro  area  increasingly  competitive  internationally.  It  is  crucial  to  continue 
strengthening  competition  in  labour  and  product  markets,  for  example,  through  liberalisation  and 
deregulation, to improve the efficiency of price signals. National fiscal policies also provide important 
instruments. They can react to shocks in such a way as to counteract the emergence of differentials. 
However,  sound  public  finances  are  an  essential  element  of  price  stability  and  are  necessary  if 
automatic stabilizers are to work fully without the risk of excessively high deficits. In this respect it is 
important that Governments strive to achieve balanced budgets or surpluses in periods of favourable 
economic activity. 
What  difference  would  such  changes  make?  I  previously  referred  to  the  relatively-low  dispersion  of 
real growth rates in the euro area, which is, in fact, of an order of magnitude near that existing among 
regions of the United States. The dispersion among US regions, however, is centered around a higher 
average growth rate. Since 1999, the US economy, which is more flexible than that of the euro zone, 
has grown at an average rate of about 3.1 per cent, compared with about 1.9 per cent average in the 
euro area. 
It is important that national labour market policies enhance flexibility at the national and regional levels. 
Structural  policies  should  also  aim  at  improving  the  efficiency  of  the  wage  and  price  setting 
mechanism to reduce the persistence of inflation divergence. In this connection, I should note that in 
some countries, such as Greece, wage behaviour has not fully adapted to the new regime. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude with the following thoughts. Recent events have given rise to some populist rhetoric 
about the wisdom of a single currency within Europe. A few commentators have posed the question: 
Why have a monetary union in Europe? My perspective is very different. I share the sentiment of my 
colleagues on the Governing Council who have dismissed as "absurd" speculation that the euro area's 
future has been thrown into doubt. A single-size monetary policy has worked extremely well, delivering 
price stability so that changes in prices convey more effective information about demand and supply 
conditions. 
The  credibility  of  the  ECB's  monetary  policy  has  delivered  interest  rates  that  are  at  historically  low 
levels  to  all  member  countries  of  the  euro-area.  Yet,  price  stability  and  low  interest  rates  are  not 
enough  to  raise  growth  and  improve  living  standards.  They  provide  the  fabric  upon  which  a  more 
dynamic Europe can be woven. Recent events, in my view, only confirm that a currency union requires 
greater competition than do independent monetary areas. Market reform and strict fiscal rules are not 
luxuries for members of a monetary union, but necessities. In response to those who are asking, "Why 
have  a  single  currency?  let  me  cite  some  wise  words  penned  by  the  late  Irish  playwright,  George 
Bernard Shaw. "Some people," he wrote, "look at things as they are and ask, 'Why?' I look at things as 
they  might  be,  and  ask  'Why  not?'"  This,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  is  the  way  I  look  at  the  future  of 
Europe. Why not, indeed? 
Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 3
