Klaus Liebscher: Overview of financial services in Austria 
Speech  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the  Global  Financial 
Services Industry 2005 Summit, Vienna, 17 June 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is with great pleasure that I accepted the invitation to participate in the Global Financial Services 
Industry 2005 Summit here in Vienna, and I would like to extend to all of you a warm welcome on 
behalf of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB). In the next twenty minutes I will address some 
issues regarding the development of the financial services industry in Austria. 
First,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  changes  in  the  Austrian  economy  and  financial  sector  that  have 
taken place since Austria joined the European Union (EU) ten years ago. 
Second, I am going to outline how these developments and adaptations have made Austria’s financial 
sector highly competitive, sound and stable. 
Third,  I  will  focus  on  the  recent  performance  of  the  Austrian  financial  sector  and  on  the  major 
challenges it will face in the near future. 
Changes in the Austrian economy and financial sector since EU accession 
1. 
Austria celebrates a number of important anniversaries this year. We commemorate not only the end 
of  World  War  II  60  years  ago  and  the  signing  of  the  Austrian  State  Treaty  50  years  ago,  but  also 
Austria’s accession to the European Union ten years ago. EU accession was an important milestone 
promoting the positive development of the Austrian economy and had - among other things - beneficial 
effects on economic growth, price stability, the labor market and the country’s attractiveness to foreign 
investors. These effects - paired with the high adaptability and innovative character of the industrial 
and especially also the financial sector - strengthened Austria’s competitiveness in the international 
arena. 
Let me give you a few figures that attest to the favorable economic development in Austria following its 
accession to the EU: 
• 
• 
Goods exports increased considerably from 25% of GDP in 1995 to 38% in 2004. 
The  trade  deficit  had  been  widening  until  1995,  but  this  trend  clearly  reversed  following 
EU accession. 
The volume of foreign direct investment from the EU-15 in Austria almost quadrupled from 
10  billion  euro  to  38  billion  euro  over  the  last  ten  years,  while  the  volume  of  Austrian 
investments within the EU-15 went up nearly five times from 4 billion euro to 19 billion euro. 
 Austria’s  accession  to  the  EU  had  a considerable  impact  on  the  financial services  industry  and  the 
capital  market.  In  this  respect,  the  EU’s  common  market  served  as  an  important  catalyst  for  the 
increased refocusing and consolidation efforts the Austrian banking sector made in order to become 
more  competitive.  Specifically,  consolidation  efforts  resulted  in  a  decline  in  the  total  number  of 
Austrian  credit  institutions  from  1,053  at  end-1994  to  882  at  end-2004  while  total  assets  on  an 
unconsolidated basis increased from 369 billion euro to 653 billion euro over the same period. The 
unconsolidated return on assets (ROA) improved from 0.33% at end-1995 to 0.46% at end-2004. 
The number of credit institutions went down most significantly in particular in the decentralized sectors 
of the Austrian banking industry (that is savings banks, Raiffeisen and Volksbank credit cooperatives) 
and  to  a  lesser  extent  also  in  the  other  banking  sectors  (that  is  joint  stock  banks,  state  mortgage 
banks,  building  and  loan  associations,  and  special  purpose  banks).  Examples  of  the  consolidation 
dynamics at the level of large banking groups were the acquisition of the largest Austrian bank - Bank 
Austria  Creditanstalt  -  by  the  German  HypoVereinsbank  as  well  as  the  acquisition  of  P.S.K.,  the 
Austrian Postal Savings Bank, by BAWAG, both in 2000. Austria nevertheless retains a high banking 
and  branch  office  density,  with  the  number  of  inhabitants  per  banking  office  (head  offices  and 
branches)  amounting  to  1,537  in  2003.  This  compares  to  2,113  inhabitants  per  banking  office  in 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 1
Germany  and  2,043  in  Switzerland.  This  means  there  is  still  room  for  further  consolidation  in  the 
Austrian banking sector. 
Another  significant  development  in  the  last  decade  was  the  formation  of  clusters  of  smaller  banks 
within  a  sector  that  became  increasingly  tied  to  central  institutions  (e.g.  Erste  Bank,  RZB)  through 
cross-guarantee schemes. This development produced a few relatively large banking groups. 
To put that into perspective, in a worldwide ranking of banking groups1, BA-CA occupied rank 99 in 
2003, while Erste Bank occupied rank 106 and RZB rank 189. The banks at the head of the sector 
pyramid provide centralized services and achieve economies of scale in areas such as payment and 
settlement, liquidity management and funding. Furthermore, the traditional multisector structure of the 
Austrian banking sector - derived from historical differences in lines of business and ownership - has 
changed  significantly  in  recent  years,  and  the  vast  majority  of  banks  now  effectively  operate  as 
universal banks. 
The refocusing of efforts aimed at raising financial sector competitiveness in the run-up to Austria’s 
EU accession  resulted,  among  other  things,  in  the  expansion  of  some  large  Austrian  banks  (RZB, 
BA-CA,  Erste  Bank)  into  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  (CEE),  a  region  sharing  historical  ties  with 
Austria.  At  the  beginning  of  the  transition  period  in  CEE,  the  financial  sectors  of  these  economies 
showed  inefficiencies,  instabilities  and  a  low  degree  of  financial  intermediation.  For  this  reason, 
Austrian  banks’  strategic  move  into  this  region  not  only  benefited  the  respective  banks,  but  also 
helped  stabilize  the  financial  sectors  in  these  economies  and  improved  the  penetration  of  banking 
services. 
The  successful  cross-border  diversification  strategy  of  several  Austrian  banks  has  contributed 
substantially to their positive profit development, since margins in CEE are still relatively high. Austrian 
banks  today  account  for  a  market  share  of  approximately  20%  in  CEE  (except  Russia),  and  Erste 
Bank,  BA-CA  and  RZB  are  among  the  major  players  in  this  region.  In  our  neighboring  countries 
Austrian credit institutions reach market shares ranging from 32% in the Czech Republic to 44% in 
Slovakia in 2004. 42% of net profits of Austria’s five largest banks stem from operations in Central and 
Eastern European countries. Not least owing to the accession of many CEE countries to the EU in 
May  2004  and  the  subsequent  boost  in  economic  growth  as well  as  the  harmonization  of  the  legal 
framework,  this  positive  impact  on  profitability  is  expected  to  continue,  although  probably  on  a  less 
pronounced basis as margins adapt to EU level and therefore are expected to decline. The positive 
experience from operations in CEE are now being transferred to upcoming markets, especially in the 
Southeastern European countries, with Austrian banks increasingly taking the lead in this region as 
well. 
As I have shown by taking the Austrian banking sector as an example, European integration has been 
a success story. In this respect, Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) - and especially the adoption of 
a common currency for 12 EU Member States - certainly marked a historic and successful milestone 
of the integration process. 
EMU  is  based  on  the  efficient  interplay  of  three  main  factors  embodied  in  the  stability  architecture: 
first, a monetary policy with the primary goal of maintaining price stability in the medium term; second, 
sustainable  public 
that  support  growth  and  global 
competitiveness. Price stability is of high importance for safeguarding consumers’ purchasing power 
and promoting secure and stable planning conditions for enterprises. Price stability, however, can only 
be  maintained  if  a  solid  financial  policy  is  pursued.  Moreover,  structural  reforms  are  necessary  to 
overcome  frictions  in  the  labor  and  product  markets  as  well  as  in  the  service  sector;  they  are  also 
important  when  it  comes  to  improving  the  resilience  of  economies  against  shocks  by  making  them 
more flexible. These three mutually supportive factors are responsible for the success of EMU and are 
prerequisite for economic stability, sustainable growth and employment. Therefore, some of the recent 
public discussions about a dissolution of EMU are totally absurd. 
Regarding price stability, moderate wage increases in Austria in the last ten years and low inflation, 
which remained below 2% annually after 1999, have contributed to the positive development of the 
economy and supported Austria’s competitiveness in the euro area as well as internationally. 
third,  structural  policies 
finances;  and 
                                                      
1  Source: The American Banker. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2005
However, since the beginning of 2005 inflation in Austria has been higher than 2%, which is mainly 
attributable to growing pressures from energy prices, the services sector and increasing rents. 
Stability and soundness of the Austrian financial sector 
2.  
The  fact  that  Austria’s  financial  institutions  proved  to  be  highly  adaptable  to  the  changing 
macroeconomic  environment  has  strengthened  the stability  and soundness  of  the  Austrian  financial 
sector. This was confirmed by the International Monetary Fund during its Financial Sector Assessment 
Program (FSAP)2 in 2004 and reconfirmed during its yearly consultation finalized in May 2005. 
The key conclusions of the IMF assessment are as follows: 
• 
• 
Austria’s financial sector is generally stable and resilient to external shocks. 
The stability of the banking sector was confirmed by detailed stress tests conducted by the 
IMF in cooperation with the Oesterreichische Nationalbank. 
The  Austrian  insurance  sector  has  performed  relatively  well  compared  with  that  of  many 
other European countries. 
Austria enjoys a high standard of prudential supervision based on strong institutions and a 
comprehensive  legal  framework.  Financial  supervision  was  integrated  in  the  Financial 
Market  Authority  (FMA)  in  2002,  and  the  cooperation  between  the  FMA  and  the 
Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  which  continues  to  be  strongly  involved  in  banking 
supervision, works smoothly. 
This framework results in a high level of compliance with internationally accepted standards 
in the areas of banking, insurance, securities and the prevention of money laundering. 
   This highly favorable IMF assessment reflects, among other things, the strategic foresight of Austrian 
banks with respect to the opportunities in Central and Eastern Europe and the innovative potential and 
adaptability of Austria’s financial intermediaries. The strong competitiveness of the financial sector is 
furthermore supported by high business and regulatory standards as well as effective and stringent 
banking secrecy rules. 
However, the IMF critically mentioned the low domestic profitability and efficiency of Austrian banks. 
For one thing, these factors are traceable to strong competitive pressures given the high banking and 
branch office density. For another, banks still retain a rather unfavorable cost-income ratio, with some 
banks still absorbing the costs of recent domestic consolidation, of expansion into Central and Eastern 
Europe  as  well  as  of  major  investments  into  upgrading  information  technology  platforms  and  risk 
management systems. 
Furthermore, the IMF expressed concerns regarding the high level of foreign currency loans taken out 
especially  for  house  mortgages.  The  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  had  already  raised  the  same 
concerns  earlier  on.  In  the  first  quarter  of  2005,  foreign  currency  loans  accounted  for  19.3%  of  all 
loans issued to domestic nonbanks and for about 30% of all loans to households. From the European 
perspective, loans granted by Austrian banks accounted for approximately 3% of all euro area loans 
to nonbanks while foreign currency loans accounted for 18% of all euro area foreign currency loans 
granted  to  nonbanks  at  end-20043.  Nearly  90%  of  all  foreign  currency  loans issued  to  nonbanks  in 
Austria are denominated in Swiss francs while the importance of the Japanese yen currently stagnates 
at a low level, equaling the volume of loans denominated in U.S. dollars. 
This  high  amount  of  foreign  currency  loans  is  tightly  monitored  by  the  Austrian  authorities  and  has 
already  entailed  a  number  of  supervisory  actions, 
introduction  of  a  set  of 
recommendations called “Minimum Standards of Granting and Managing Foreign Currency Loans.” 
including 
the 
                                                      
2  FSAPs  are  designed  to  assess  the  stability  of  a  financial  system  as  well  as  to  identify  and  remedy  weaknesses  in  a 
country’s financial sector structure. 
3  Swiss francs 42%, Japanese yen 19%, U.S. dollars 2%. 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 3
Economic and financial sector performance in 2004 and in the first months of 2005 
3.  
Turning  to  my  third  issue,  I  would  now  like  to  give  you  a  brief  glance  on  the  development  of  the 
Austrian economy and financial sector in 2004 and the first months of 2005. 
Austria encounters the current challenges and reform requirements with a forward-looking economic 
policy. The pension reform contributes to a sustainable retirement system that is financially secure in 
the  long  term.  The  corporate  and  income  tax  reform  add  to  making  Austria  an  attractive  business 
location and supports the real income of households. Austria’s current account surplus amounted to 
0.3% of GDP in 2004 and is expected to improve further in the course of this year. 
Mainly on the back of strong exports, Austria’s GDP grew by 2% in 2004, thus being clearly higher 
than in the two previous years but in line with the euro area average. The OeNB recently forecast real 
GDP  to  grow  by  2.0%  in  2005  and  2.2%  in  the  next  two  years.  Supported  mainly  by  exports,  the 
second stage of the tax reform also constitutes an important impetus for domestic demand. Austria’s 
economy, however, cannot fully withstand the current economic slowdown in the euro area. 
Austria’s deficit according to Maastricht amounted to 1.2% of GDP in 2004, which is considerably less 
than  the  euro  area  average.  The  2005  tax  reform  is  expected  to  raise  the  deficit  to  1.8%  in  2005. 
However,  Austria’s  most  recent  Stability  Program  sets  the  target  of  reaching  a  balanced  budget  as 
well as a debt ratio of below 60% of GDP by 2008. 
The stability of the banking sector strengthened further in 2004 and the first quarter of 2005. In March 
2005,  total  assets  of  the  banking  sector  amounted  to  678  billion  euro  on  an  unconsolidated  basis 
(+3.9% qoq). 
In  other  words,  total  banking  sector  assets  grew  by  3.9%  compared  to  the  fourth  quarter  of  2004, 
which  is  among  other  things  attributable  to  a  rise  in  international  business.  The  cost-income  ratio 
improved  to  64%  on  an  unconsolidated  basis  owing  to  reduced  costs  and  higher  income.  The 
unconsolidated  operating  profit  increased  in  the  first  quarter  of  2005  by  13%  year-on-year  to 
1.34 billion euro. The capital ratio, which relates banks’ capital to their risk-weighted assets, remained 
well above the minimum requirement and stood at 14.6% on an unconsolidated basis, giving Austrian 
banks  ample  capital  buffers  in  case  of  stress  scenarios.  (Year-end  2004  data:  consolidated  ROA 
0.6%, consolidated capital ratio 12.2%). 
The insurance industry experienced a positive development in 2004 as well. A total of 52 insurance 
undertakings (except small mutual associations) were operating in Austriain 2004. Their total assets 
came to 68 billion euro in 2004, which constitutes an increase of 7% year on year. Their total premium 
volume  rose  by  7%  to  around  14  billion  euro  in  2004,  which  was  mainly  attributable  to  a  further 
increase in the demand for retirement-related products. Insurance penetration expressed as a ratio of 
total insurance premiums to GDP stood at 7.2% in Austria in 20044. 
Pension funds (Pensionskassen) managed assets to the amount of approximately 10 billion euro in 
2004,  which  means  an  11%  increase  year  on  year.  Pension  funds  thus  further  strengthened  their 
position as important institutional players in Austria’s financial sector. The Austrian market for pension 
funds  is  highly  concentrated,  with  the  three  major  players  accounting  for  a  market  share  of 
approximately  70%.  The  performance  of  pension  funds  exceeded  7%  on  average  in  2004,  thus 
continuing the positive trend of the previous year. 
The  mutual  fund  sector  enjoyed  a  strong  year-on-year  growth  of  13%  in  2004,  which  can  be 
attributed to the positive economic environment, the launch of new retirement-related saving products 
as well as the good performance of the Vienna stock exchange, Wiener Börse AG. Total assets of the 
mutual  fund  sector  amounted  to  125  billion  euro  in  2004.  2,021  funds  of  domestic  mutual  fund 
management companies and 3,378 funds of foreign mutual fund management companies are licensed 
in Austria. 
The Vienna stock exchange performed strongly in 2004 and has continued to do so in 2005, with the 
ATX outperforming major international indices. Stock market capitalization amounted to 74 billion euro 
in April 2005, reaching approximately 30% of GDP. While market capitalization can still be considered 
rather  low  compared  with  other  advanced  economies,  the  ATX  showed  a  strong  growth  of 
                                                      
4  U.K.: 14.8%, Switzerland: 13.4%. 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2005
approximately 33% year on year at end-April 2005, or of 140% when comparing end-2000 with April 
2005. 
Having demonstrated the positive performance of the Austrian financial sector as well as its stability 
and soundness, I would now like to outline some major challenges that financial institutions face in the 
near future. 
These challenges result not only from the continuing integration process of the EU financial services 
sector,  but  also  from  the  development  of  new  products  and  techniques  that  shape  the  financial 
industry. 
Continuing financial integration in the euro area is - from the perspective of a central bank - conducive 
to the effective implementation of monetary policy. Moreover, the economies of the euro area should 
become  more  efficient  owing  to  an  improved  allocation  of  financial  resources  and  a  reduction  of 
financing  costs.  However,  the  impact  of  financial  integration  on  financial  stability  is  more  complex. 
Deeper  financial  integration  may  increase  diversification  and  reduce  certain  vulnerabilities,  while 
possibly raising contagion risk. Close cooperation between supervisors and central banks especially in 
the euro area therefore seems warranted. 
Faster and more efficient legislative procedures on the European level are important in order to keep 
pace  with  rapid  technological  changes  and  financial  innovations.  In  this  respect,  the  so-called 
Lamfalussy regime, which was developed in the securities business, was extended to comprise the 
entire  financial  services  sector  in  2004.  The  Committee  of  European  Banking  Supervisors  (CEBS), 
which consists of high-level representatives of national supervisory authorities and central banks, has 
become  the  most  important  advisory  body  supporting  the  European  Commission  in  supervisory 
matters.  The  CEBS  not  only  aims  to  ensure  a  consistent  implementation  of  EU  directives  across 
member countries, but develops standards and guidelines to harmonize supervisory practices in the 
EU. 
In order to achieve further financial integration in the EU and a single market in financial services, the 
European Commission launched the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) in 1999. One of the last 
and  most  prominent  open  issues  on  the  agenda  of  the  FSAP  is  the  proposal  of  a  new  capital 
adequacy directive to implement the New Basel Capital Accord (Basel II) in the banking sector. 
Basel II is regarded a necessary instrument to meet the fundamental changes in the banking industry, 
which includes the emergence of new financial products and advances in risk management practices. 
Basel  II  aims  to  enhance  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  via  more  risk-sensitive  capital 
requirements. 
Austrian  banks  are  considered  to  be  well  informed  of,  and  prepared  for,  the  changes  induced  by 
Basel II. The Oesterreichische Nationalbank is closely involved in the Basel II process and currently 
conducts  a  road  show  on  this  topic  to  improve  the  level  of  know-how  especially  among  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in Austria. 
While completing the EU initiatives especially with a view to the new capital requirements, Solvency II, 
and the Legal Framework for Payments, the European Commission has announced that in the post-
FSAP  era,  its  activities  will  rather  focus  on  the  effective  implementation  and  enforcement  of 
regulations issued in recent years. Any new initiatives will be subject to rigorous impact assessments, 
and  the  European  Commission  will  continue  its  consultation  activities  with  the  industry.  One  of  the 
priorities in this respect will be the further integration of the retail financial market. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Given the limited time frame I was only able to touch upon some cornerstones of the financial services 
industry in Austria. By way of conclusion, however, let me say that I am convinced that, based on its 
solid  background,  the  Austrian  financial  sector  is  in  an  excellent  position  to  meet  both  current  and 
future challenges. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 5
