Edgar Meister: Pillar 2 in Basel II - supervisory implications and 
implementation in Germany 
Presentation by Mr Edgar Meister, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at a 
seminar at the Bank of Russia “The supervisory implications of Basel II”, Moscow, 20 April 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to be invited to this seminar and to share with you some thoughts on the 
challenges  of  implementing  Pillar  2,  also  called  the  Supervisory  Review  Process  (SRP)  of  the  new 
Basel II framework. As Madame Nouy elaborated this morning the framework comprises overall three 
pillars: Pillar 1 is covering the minimum capital requirements set by supervisors, Pillar 2 is focusing on 
banks’  internal  capital  assessment  and  Pillar  3  is  addressing  market  discipline  and  disclosure.  A 
significant  innovation  of  Basel  II  is  the  greater  use  of  banks’  own,  internal  methods  for  calculating 
regulatory capital requirements. For example, institutions get the possibility to use internal ratings for 
the  measurement  of  credit  risk  as  inputs  to  regulatory  capital  calculations.  Of  course,  in  order  to 
ensure  the  integrity  of  internal  methods  banks  have  to  comply  with  a  number  of  qualitative 
requirements.  Correspondingly,  it  is  the  task  of  each  supervisor  to  develop  review  procedures  for 
ensuring banks’ compliance with those qualitative requirements to make sure that banks’ systems and 
controls are adequate.  
The  challenge  for  supervisory  authorities  is  how  to  implement  the  new  standards  in  their  existing 
supervisory  regimes.  Before  I  start  presenting  to  you  how  the  German  supervisory  authorities  cope 
with this task, which is the second part of my speech, let me first recall the key principles of Pillar 2. 
I 
As you are all aware of, there are two sources of international requirements to be recognized by all EU 
member states: The Basel Committee’s framework paper, which constitutes the Supervisory Review 
Process  in  its  second  pillar,  on  the  one  hand  and  the  draft  EU  directive,  putting  Basel  II  into  force 
within the EU, on the other hand.  
The  Basel  II  document,  addressing  internationally  active  banking  groups,  sets  up  the  supervisory 
review process by means of four key principles. Whereas Principle 1 contains provisions banks have 
to comply with, principles 2 to 4 create standards for supervisory authorities. To start with the banking 
side, Principle 1 states:  
Principle 1: Banks should have a process for assessing their overall capital adequacy in relation to 
their risk profile and a strategy for maintaining their capital levels.  
In  brief  this  is  called  the  Internal  Capital  Adequacy  Assessment  Process  (ICAAP).  In  contrast  to 
Pillar 1, which contains rules how institutions have to calculate regulatory capital, Principle 1 of Pillar 2 
focuses  on  banks’  internal  methods  and  processes.  Thus,  banks  have,  apart  from  some  qualitative 
requirements,  which  I  will  address  next,  significant  leeway  to  design  their  internal  capital  adequacy 
process. Conversely that also means, that there are no standardised methods or specific guidelines 
for institutions. 
The Basel II paper elaborates the main features of a rigorous process, which have to be in place in 
order to fulfil Principle 1 of Pillar 2. Namely they are  
• 
Board  and  senior  management  oversight.  The  ultimate  responsibility  for  the  risk 
management processes and the internal capital adequacy assessment process is with the 
senior management. It has to set the strategic goals for capital needs, capital levels and so 
forth.  
Sound capital assessment. This is the core feature of the internal process and states the 
requirement to relate capital to the level of all material risks not only as of today but also for a 
certain planning horizon. 
Comprehensive assessment of risks. Different to Pillar 1 the list of risks under Pillar 2 is 
not  limited  but  should  be  adequate  to  fit  the  individual  needs  of  every  institution.  A  bank 
  BIS Review 28/2005 
 1
would have to cover liquidity risk and interest rate risk in the banking book or even further 
types addition-ally to the well known risks covered under Pillar 1 (credit risk, market risk and 
operational risk), e.g. reputational and strategic risk.  
The remaining two features are “monitoring and reporting” and “internal control review”.  
Taking into account the comprehensiveness, the internal process has to guarantee, and its planning 
function,  obviously,  the  requirements  will  be  best  met  by  implementing  an  economic  capital  model. 
Such a mathematical model relates the capital of an institution to the risks it takes within its business 
activities  taking  into  account  diversification  effects  between  risk  types.  Only  internationally  active 
banks have the resources to set up a system as complex as that. 
And  indeed,  some  of  the  largest  German  banking  groups  are  using  already  an  economic  capital 
model.  
I  am  turning  to  the  relevant  requirements  for  supervisors  in  Basel  II.  While  Principles  3  and  4  are 
related to regulatory capital ratios, the qualitative part of the supervisor’s duty under the supervisory 
review process is formulated in Principle 2 of Pillar 2. It states: 
Principle  2:  Supervisors  should  review  and  evaluate  banks’  internal  capital  adequacy  assessments 
and strategies, as well as their ability to monitor and ensure their compliance with regulatory capital 
ratios.  Supervisors  should  take  appropriate  action  if  they  are  not  satisfied  with  the  result  of  this 
process. 
In implementing this principle supervisors have, amongst other things, to assess whether a bank has 
taken,  for  its  internal  capital  process,  the  full  range  of  material  risks  into  account.  In  addition, 
supervisors  will  review  how  the  bank  is  using  the  measured  risks  operationally  in  setting  limits,  for 
example.  In  relation  to  the  economic  capital  it  will  be  of  interest  for  supervisors  to  assess  its 
composition.  Questions  to  answer  will  be  whether  the  bank  individual  economic  capital  can 
substantially cover unexpected losses or whether the bank uses the economic capital to manage its 
risks.  
The  single  most  debated  feature  of  Pillar  2  might  be  the  supervisors’  right  to  set  capital  charges 
exceeding minimum requirements set in Pillar 1, which is 8% of risk weighted assets. The rationale for 
this specific supervisory method is to ensure that individual banks are operating with adequate levels 
of capital.  
Before introducing the differences between Basel and the EU directive I want to use the opportunity to 
express my scepticism regarding capital add-ons. 
I  am  not  convinced  that  capital  targets  above  the  minimum  on  a  bank-by-bank  basis  should  be  a 
preferred measure. In general, I am in favour of other prudential measures that would require banks to 
improve their systems and controls. I therefore prefer the principle of prevention. Supervisors should 
not  rely  on  the  fact  that  losses  caused  by  weaknesses  in  a  bank’s  systems  and  controls  can  be 
covered by additional capital. 
I  am  also  sceptical  how  supervisors  can  be  sure  not  to  treat  institutions  un-equally  and  as  a 
consequence distort the level playing field. At least the types of risk and the capital concept according 
to  Pillar  2  are  different  from  Pillar1.  It  seems  to  be  quite  a  challenge  to  determine  an  institutions’ 
individual  capital  add-on.  Certainly,  this  can  not  be  done  simply  by  comparing  capital  amounts 
resulting from significantly different capital concepts.  
To be clear, I am not totally against additional capital charges. In exceptional cases, where all other 
supervisory  measures  have  been  insufficient  to  improve  a  banks’  systems  and  controls  they  are 
useful. Institutions should expect capital add-ons as an ultimate supervisory measure. However, by no 
means there should be an automatism stating the amount of additional capital to hold, if for example 
Pillar 2 capital exceeds the amount of regulatory capital according to Pillar 1.  
I am now turning to the corresponding rules of the draft EU directive. Although the EU document for 
most aspects poses no additional requirements but mainly translates the Basel II framework paper into 
EU  law,  there  is  an  important  difference  regarding  the  circles  of  addressees.  The  directive  once  in 
force  will  not  only  oblige  the  biggest  banks  but  all  banks  throughout  the  whole  EU  to  implement 
internal capital adequacy processes. As I said a few moments ago, the natural way of implementing it, 
is developing an economic capital model. By no means we can require medium or small sized banks 
to make this effort.  
2 
 BIS Review 28/2005
The key principle of proportionality solves this issue. It states that processes and strategies have to be 
“proportionate regarding to the nature, size, scale and complexity of the credit institution’s activities.” In 
practice small institutions are not forced to build highly sophisticated models.  
The  principle  of  proportionality  is  valid  for  supervisors  also.  Supervisory  activities  with  regard  to  an 
institution should always take into account the specific situation of the institution as described by the 
characteristics  mentioned  above  –  nature,  size,  scale  and  complexity.  Additionally,  systemic 
importance is a natural dimension to look at for supervisors. 
We should have now a good understanding of the principles of Pillar 2 in Basel and Brussels. Before I 
will present how we have implemented Pillar 2 in Germany, I would like to address some more general 
implementation issues first. 
II 
One  issue  of  relevance  not  only  for  my  country  is  the  cross-border  approval  process  of  internal 
measurement approaches. This issue is important for al-most every banking group with international 
operations. As Basel II does not change legal responsibility of supervisors a banking group may be 
required to obtain approval for advanced approaches from several supervisors. These are the relevant 
host  country  supervisors  on  an  individual  or  sub-consolidated  basis,  as  well  as  the  home  country 
supervisor  in  respect  of  consolidated  supervision.  Consequently,  big  internationally  active  banks 
operating in a large number of countries face an even bigger number of supervisory authorities to deal 
with in terms of approval process. In order to reduce the burden for banks and supervisors the Basel 
Committee recognized that closer cooperation and coordination of supervisors will be needed. For this 
reason it published in 2003 six high level principles for the cross-border implementation of the new 
accord, which have been developed by the Committee’s Accord Implementation Group. Remarkably, 
the principles do not touch legal responsibilities of national supervisors.  
Different from Basel the EU Draft suggests in Article 129 to change legal responsibilities of supervisors 
for the approval process. The idea is that home and host supervisors shall accomplish the approval 
work  together  in  full  consultation.  Further,  they  shall  within  no  more  than  six  months  reach  a  joint 
decision on the application. In the absence of a joint decision within six months, the home supervisor 
shall  make  its  own  decision  on  the  application.  Although  I  show  respect  to  the  EU  Commission  for 
such a proposal, I also see the following problems with that rule:  
There is a conflict between the strong position of the home supervisor who obtains the right to make 
the  final  decision  on  credit  risk,  market  risk  and  operational  risk  approaches  for  the  whole  banking 
group and all its entities on one hand and the host supervisor being responsible for financial stability in 
his jurisdiction on the other hand.  
The competition argument is another aspect to be considered. Domestic competitors of the subsidiary 
of a foreign banking group could be disadvantaged because they would have to accomplish different 
requirements  than  the  subsidiary  of  the  foreign  group  that  received  its  approval  from  the  home 
supervisor. An example would be a host supervisor who does not allow his banks the use of advanced 
approaches.  
Further,  there  is  a  risk  that  those  host  supervisors  who  are  not  willing  to  accept  a  home  country 
supervisor’s decision could require the subsidiary in its jurisdiction to hold additional capital charges 
via Pillar 2. This would undermine the idea of a strong home supervisor in the current EU directive. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  the  largest  internationally  active  EU  banks  the  concept  can  not  be  fully 
satisfying, as there are countries with important financial markets outside the EU not applying it. Of 
course,  those  countries  could  follow  in  accepting  the  rule  as  proposed  in  Article  129  of  the  draft 
directive, which in my view represents a highly improbable scenario. Consequently, the introduction of 
Article  129  into  EU  law  may  jeopardise  the  international  level  playing  field  between  EU  member 
countries on one hand and countries outside the EU on the other hand. This outcome is intensified by 
the fact that some countries outside the EU have decided not to offer the use of all Pillar 1 approaches 
to the credit institutions in their jurisdiction.  
A second issue of general importance is the structure of the German banking sector and its relevance 
for the implementation of Basel II. The banking sector in Germany is characterised by a high degree of 
fragmentation with the majority of banks competing to each other. As of December 2004, there were 
2.400 credit institutions operating in Germany. The majority of them are universal banks each covering 
a  broad  spectrum  of  banking  activities.  Compared  to  other  European  countries,  for  example 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 3
Netherlands or France where the five largest credit institutions amount to 84% and 47% of total assets 
in  the  national  market,  the  German  corresponding  figure  is  25%.  At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum 
there are more than 2000 German banks covering only 20% of the market. What does this mean with 
regard to the implementation of Basel II? The main conclusions are twofold: 
First,  for  level  playing  field  reasons  Basel  II  will  be  made  available  for  all  banks,  not  only  for  the 
internationally active ones.  
Second,  although  German  banks  compete  to  each  other,  they  differ  significantly  in  size  and  risk 
management. In order to allow them appropriate flexibility in implementing Basel II we are going to 
implement the full set of credit risk and operational risk approaches that is available in Basel II. We do 
not require the big banks to use either the foundation or the advanced IRB-Approach. It is up to the 
banks  to  make  their  choice.  Of  course,  we  think  that  for  those  banks  the  advanced  IRB  approach 
would be adequate without having any legal instruments to require certain types of approaches.  
A  survey  amongst  all  German  institutions  performed  last  summer  indicated  that  most  of  our 
internationally  active  banks  (Deutsche,  Dresdner,  HVB,  Commerzbank,  WestLB,  DZ  Bank)  are 
preparing for implementing the advanced approach at least on a sub-portfolio level by implementation 
date.  As  far  as  the  smaller  banks  are  concerned  we  expect  about  460  of  them  to  use  an  internal 
ratings approach right from the beginning of Basel II. You might ask yourself how there can be such a 
big number of institutions using the internal ratings approach. The answer is that banking associations 
are providing centrally developed risk measurement methods, IT services, default information etc. to 
member institutions. This turned out to be a very efficient way for the institutions to avoid development 
cost  and  to  share  information,  e.g.  default  data.  This  combined  effort  of  the  institutions  and  their 
associations contributes to en-sure the credit supply all over the country. 
Let me compare our case with the situation in the United States where about 20 of the largest US 
banks will have to use the most advanced approaches to measuring their credit and operational risk. 
The rest of the US banking system, which are thousands of smaller banks, have to remain under the 
existing 1988 Accord. Recent developments in the United States show the importance of taking into 
account  the  structure  of  the  banking  market  when  implementing  Basel  II.  Many  of  the  smaller  US 
banks fear that they may be left at a competitive disadvantage after the adoption of the Basel II by 
their larger rivals. In-deed, a recent Federal Reserve Study revealed for some types of small business 
loans unintended competitive advantages and disadvantages. US regulators therefore signalled their 
readiness to adjust the Basel I provisions to protect smaller US banks from unintended problems.  
I  will  now  focus  on  the  implementation  of  Pillar  2  in  Germany  in  further  detail.  How  are  we 
implementing the supervisory review of the banks’ internal capital adequacy assessment process. For 
this purpose, please recall the most important facts we have to deal with:  
1. 
2. 
In Germany, we face the challenge to provide regulation that meets those criteria at a time. We need 
rules being flexible enough for forcing large banks to set up sophisticated risk management processes 
and models without strangling all the smaller banks. The experience with minimum requirements for 
the credit business and trading activities of credit institutions over the past 25 years shows that they 
are an instrument meeting this necessities.  
Given the wide scope of an internal capital adequacy assessment process covering all aspects of risk 
management, however, the German implementation needs to be holistic as well. This is the reason 
why  the  idea  of  minimum  requirements  on  risk  management  (MaRisk)  was  born:  a  flexible, 
overarching  set  of  rules  implementing  the  qualitative  requirements  for  the  bank  internal  capital 
process. In accordance with the holistic approach in Pillar 2 of the Basel II framework paper and the 
EU directive, the MaRisk require banks to manage all relevant risks. Specifically the MaRisk address 
credit risk, market risk, interest rate risk, operational risk and liquidity risk.  
As  can  be  inferred  from  the  term  “minimum  requirements”,  the  MaRisk  are  formulated  on  a  sound 
practice level. Risk management processes of smaller banks can regularly be regarded as adequate if 
they are meeting sound practice. Therefore, the sound practice level is in line with the application of 
the MaRisk at all institutions. Of course, the leading and largest banks should strive for best practice.  
In addition to the qualitative requirements, Pillar 2 of Basel II contains some very specific provisions 
with regard to securitisation or stress-testing in the IRB approach and some quantitative rules for the 
measurement of interest rate risk. All this is not content of the MaRisk as it either concerns just banks 
Every Institutions, independent of its size, has to set up such a process.  
Germany has a lot of smaller banks with limited resources.  
4 
 BIS Review 28/2005
on  more  advanced  approaches  or  it  does  not  fit  the  concept  of  minimum  requirements  which  are 
qualitative in nature only. Nevertheless, for the majority of German banks complying with the MaRisk 
would mean to be also compliant with Pillar 2.  
BaFin has published a first draft of the MaRisk in February. An expert group comprising supervisors 
and  representatives  of  banks,  associations  and  external  auditors  is  discussing  it  with  the  goal  to 
present a second draft by June this year. The draft should be fit for formal and final consultation in 
order to publish the MaRisk in December. Institutions can prepare during 2006 for the starting date 
end 2006 together with the Basel II framework paper.  
Turning  from  requirements  for  banks  to  regulation  for  supervisory  authorities,  let  me  first  give  you 
some  insight  in  the  structure  of  financial  supervision  in  Germany  and  mention  some  more  general 
aspects  of  implementing  Basel  II.  After  that  I  will  present  how  BaFin  and  Bundesbank  as  German 
supervisors prepare for Pillar 2. 
III 
Banking supervision in Germany is characterised by a dual system, i.e. there are the two supervisory 
bodies Bundesbank and BaFin in charge of banking supervision. Let me in brief describe the role of 
Bundesbank within this framework. Bundesbank, as a rule, shall carry out day-to-day supervision (e.g. 
collection of information, regular analysis of financial statements, monthly balance sheets, large loan 
reports etc., on-site examinations as part of the supervisory review process). As a result of this work 
Bundesbank  provides  analysis  of  information  and  findings  to  BaFin.  Bundesbank  further  proposes 
supervisory  actions  to  BaFin  being  the  authority  with  the  sole  responsibility  for  all  legal  acts  (in 
particular,  granting  and  withdrawing  licenses,  closing  operations  of  a  bank,  restricting  business  of 
institutions etc.). 
Looking  at  the  organisational  structures  of  both  institutions  the  current  division  of  duties  between 
BaFin and Bundesbank makes a lot of sense: Different from BaFin Bundesbank is present all over the 
country in its nine regional offices. With an increased importance of on-site examinations and a more 
intense  dialogue  between  institutions  and  supervisors  as  a  goal  of  Basel  II  the  presence  of 
Bundesbank in all regions is even more relevant. Consequently the on-site inspections and day-to-day 
supervision related to the supervisory review process shall, as a rule, be performed by Bundesbank. 
Another reason, already mentioned, is that Germany still has a non-centralised banking system with 
important banks in various cities. Therefore it would remain difficult for BaFin, which has no regional 
offices  in  the  “Länder”,  to  carry  out  day-to  day-  supervision.  Nevertheless,  in  non-standard  cases 
BaFin will also perform its own on-site audits. The emphasis of BaFin´s audits shall be on cases in 
which the need for serious supervisory measures is anticipated. 
A  last  but  important  issue  for  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  is  that  the  number  of  supervisory 
examiners in Germany before Basel II  was rather low. In 2001 there were about 100 colleagues in 
Bundesbank and BaFin performing supervisory examinations. With the introduction of the supervisory 
review  process  in  the  new  capital  framework  we  decided  to  adjust  our  examiner  capacities.  This 
process  started  in  2002.  Because  of  the  restructuring  of  Bundesbank  the  majority  of  the  needed 
personnel  could  be  provided  internally.  In  order  to  prepare  the  new  staff  for  their  challenging  job 
Bundesbank and BaFin started a joint training program in summer 2002. To give you some figures: 
from July 2002 to July 2004 about 200 colleagues participated in the program. The program consists 
of training on the job periods and seminars as well, to which many experts from our banking industry 
accepted to contribute. More than half of the 150 trainers came from outside banking supervision . The 
program is a revolving one and is still running. For our “advanced examiners” we developed special 
courses  in  English  language  which  have  been  opened  this  year  for  colleagues  from  all  EU  central 
banks.  
Even as the manpower of BaFin and Bundesbank has been increased, we will have to concentrate our 
supervisory activities on banks which are relevant for the stability of the financial system and which 
operate  on  an  international  level.  Given  the  big  number  of  very  small  banks  we  are  not  going  to 
conduct a full scale Supervisory Review Process including on-site examinations for all banks on an 
annual basis.  
From  the  supervisor’s  point  of  view  the  supervisory  review  and  evaluation  process  is  not  only  the 
review of the implementation of a banks’ internal capital process as described in Principle 1 of Pillar 2, 
i.e. the MaRisk. Another important aspect for supervisors is to make sure that a bank is compliant with 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 5
Pillar 1 on an ongoing basis. Let me cover this second part of the supervisory review and evaluation 
process first.  
During  the  last  year  BaFin  and  Bundesbank  prepared  for  the  approval  process  of  internal  rating 
systems.  The  goal  was  to  be  as  early  as  possible  in  a  position  to  conduct  on-site  examinations  of 
internal ratings approaches. You may imagine, that given the number of 460 banks planning to use 
this  kind  of  approach  as  indicated  by  last  summer’s  survey  a  supervisory  authority  faces  a  major 
challenge; especially, since there is a certain risk of coming at the same time. Consequently, at the 
end of last year we provided institutions with application forms and guidance in order to apply for the 
use of an internal ratings approach. In the light of the large number of expected applications, it is of 
major  importance  to  distribute  the approval  and  examination  work as  evenly as  possible  during  the 
time remaining until the EU directive gets into force.  
Before  a  rating  model  is  accepted  for  calculating  regulatory  capital  it  is  subject  to  an  on-site 
examination.  That  means,  one  examination  at  an  applying  bank  will  suffice  only  in  the  case  of  a 
smaller  savings  bank  or  credit  co-operative,  which  use  standard  models  developed  by  their 
associations.  In  the  case  of  our  largest  banks,  a  series  of  approval  examinations  will  take  place  at 
every institution for evaluating the variety of rating models.  
Another issue with regard to Pillar 2 is the approval of advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for 
operational risk. Germany’s approach regarding the advanced approach for operational risk is similar 
to that for internal ratings approaches. As the advanced operational risk approach will be available not 
be-fore the beginning of 2008, the schedule is not that tight. Currently we are going to be prepared 
until the end of this year to handle applications.  
Turning back to the national implementation of Pillar 2 in Germany, the approval of internal ratings and 
advanced operational risk systems is comparable to that of market risk models. In Germany, we have 
experience  with  this  process  whereas  the  second  part  of  the  supervisory  review  and  evaluation 
process – challenging the institution’s internal capital allocation assessment process – is new for us. 
Due to the overarching nature of the internal process it is quite clear, that there is not a single tool to 
perform  the  review  of  it.  Quite  on  the  contrary,  all  supervisory  instruments  like  off-site  review  of  all 
kinds of reports, meeting with different levels of the management and on-site inspections have to be 
used in order to get an idea of the quality and adequacy of an internal capital adequacy assessment 
process regarding the particular institution using it.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
without  any  doubt:  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  is  a  significant  challenge  for  both,  banks  and 
supervisory  authorities.  This  holds  especially  true  for  countries  where  a  high  number  of  banks  are 
planning to use their internal risk measurement methods for supervisory purposes as well.  
It was the intention of my speech to deliver three key messages:  
1. 
The second pillar of Basel II is a significant, vital part of the whole framework. Its scope in 
covering  the  risks  banks  are  facing  is  much  wider  than  the  concept  of  minimum  capital 
requirements in Pillar 1. 
Supervisors need to prepare guidelines for their institutions and manuals for themselves how 
to  act  under  Pillar  2.  I  gave  you  an  overview  of  the  package  we  have  prepared  in  this 
respect.  
Both,  the  Basel  II  framework  and  the  EU-Directive,  are  leaving  the  necessary  flexibility  to 
supervisors to conduct the supervisory review process in proportion to the risk contribution of 
a bank to the financial system. Especially for countries having a large number of small and 
medium sized banks this is important to promote the acceptance of the new rules.  
2. 
3. 
One  common  goal  finance  ministries,  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  are  sharing  is  to 
enhance the stability of the financial system. The implementation of Basel II will bring us one important 
step further in achieving and maintaining this goal. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 28/2005
