Lars Nyberg: The Riksbank and the inflation target 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Nordea,  Copenhagen, 
19 May 2005. 
 Thank you for the invitation to come and speak at Nordea about Swedish monetary policy! Today I 
shall mainly concentrate on the content and interpretation of our inflation target. One special aspect of 
the  inflation  target  and  monetary  policy  that  I  shall  discuss  towards  the  end  of  my  speech  is  the 
household sector’s growing debt burden and house price increases.  
A clear framework for monetary policy 
Sweden is currently enjoying what is usually described as an economic boom. Growth last year was 
almost 3.5 per cent, one of the highest figures in 30 years, and households’ real disposable incomes 
are expected to rise by around 3 per cent this year. Inflation is at its lowest point in living memory, as 
are interest rates. However, there is a problem. Employment has not risen at all as most forecasters, 
including the Riksbank, expected. We therefore find ourselves in a discussion of whether interest rates 
should possibly be even lower. Given the intensive debate on this subject, I consider there is good 
reason  to  describe  and  discuss  our  monetary  policy  framework  and  its  significance  for  the  way  we 
work.  
It is well known that one of the Riksbank’s fundamental objectives since the beginning of 1993 has 
been to maintain price stability. This is inscribed in the Sveriges Riksbank Act of 1999 and is thus a 
parliamentary decision. However, it was left to the Riksbank to determine the practical application of 
this objective. Our choice was to specify a quantitative target for the inflation rate: The annual increase 
in  the  consumer  price  index,  CPI,  should  be  two  per  cent  with  a  tolerated  deviation  of  +/-  one 
percentage point. The purpose of a tolerated deviation is to make it clear both that inflation will deviate 
from the two per cent level from time to time and that the Riksbank's aim is to limit such deviations. 
The target is symmetrical, which means that it is as undesirable to have an inflation rate below the 
target level as above it.  
Many other countries also conduct monetary policy where they have formulated a price stability target 
in one way or another. The euro countries have chosen to maintain inflation at a level close to, but 
below, two per cent, in other words, a non-symmetrical target. The United States has taken a different 
view and chosen a vaguer wording for its target, with no figures expressed, as well as taking greater 
account  of  general  economic  trends.  In  New  Zealand  they  have  a  target  for  inflation  expressed  in 
terms of an interval (1-3 per cent) but no exact figure. However, we have seen two clear advantages of 
having  a  clearly  expressed  target  to  aim  for;  firstly  it  provides  a  good  foundation  for  inflation 
expectations and secondly it makes it easier to assess the policy conducted.  
Since 1997 we have applied a simple policy rule in order to make our monetary policy even easier to 
understand: If the forecast shows that inflation will be above target level two years ahead, we usually 
raise the repo rate, and we lower it if the forecast is below target level. But, as I intend to argue here, 
the policy rule cannot be applied mechanically. It should instead be regarded as a rule that on average 
provides a good picture of the policy, but where departures from the rule can and should be made 
under certain circumstances.  
The first argument is connected with the time aspect. As there is a time lag before monetary policy has 
an effect – it takes around 1-2 years before interest rate adjustments achieve full impact on inflation – 
the Riksbank’s policy must look ahead. Our interest rate decisions are therefore based on forecasts of, 
for  instance,  the  prospects  for  inflation  and  economic  activity  over  the  coming  two  years.  It  goes 
without  saying  that  these  forecasts,  like  other  assessments  of  future  events,  are  uncertain. 
Forecasting  errors  are  often  due  to  genuinely  unexpected  things,  which  we  have  not  been  able  to 
assess in advance.  
At the beginning of 1999 the Riksbank made a decision to clarify the principles for monetary policy, as 
a complement to the simple policy rule. This clarification states that monetary policy is normally aimed 
at  bringing  inflation  onto  the  targeted  path  one  to  two  years  ahead.  However,  it  also  identifies  two 
circumstances under which the Riksbank can depart from this aim; namely transient effects on inflation 
BIS Review 37/2005 
 1
and large deviations from target. The main idea behind this is that we do not focus solely on inflation in 
every  situation;  we  should  also  be  able  to  regard  developments  in  growth  and  employment  when 
these do not conflict with the inflation target. 
Transient  effects  refers  to  certain  determined  factors  which  affect  the  inflation  forecast  one  to  two 
years ahead, but which will then subside without having any lasting effect on inflation trends. This was 
the case, for instance, in 2002-2003, when large fluctuations in oil prices had a significant effect on 
inflation. We made it clear then that monetary policy should disregard these transient effects.  
Large deviations from target refers to when inflation deviates so far from the target level that there may 
be  justification  for  bringing  it  back  to  the  target  level  over  a  longer  period  of  time  than  the  usual 
two-year  horizon.  A  more  rapid  return  to  the  target  could  cause  undesirable  fluctuations  in,  for 
instance, production and employment and thereby lead to large costs for the real economy.  
Since the decision on the clarification was taken in 1999, it has become increasingly evident, in my 
opinion,  that  there  are  a  number  of  good  reasons  for  allowing  deviations  from  the  inflation  target 
during short or long periods of time. It is important that monetary policy, if necessary, can be allowed 
some scope and flexibility when the economy is subjected to various forms of shock and disturbance.  
If this is to happen, it is essential that there is a high degree of confidence in monetary policy. I believe 
that we have achieved this, largely thanks to a large degree of openness and transparency with regard 
to the bases for our monetary policy. Inflation expectations two years ahead and further have been 
well in line with our target since the regime stabilised in 1997-1998. The way we have clearly defined 
and explained our considerations has enabled us to create room for manoeuvre, which we have also 
utilised over the years. In other words, we have had fairly substantial freedom to deviate from target 
without affecting confidence in our policy.  
Another  factor  significant  for  the  interest  rate  decisions  is  the  length  of  the  forecast  horizon.  As  I 
mentioned earlier, the Riksbank works on the basis of a time perspective of two years, as this is how 
long it takes before interest rate adjustments have full impact on inflation. However, since December 
2000 we have often found reason to supplement this horizon with a qualitative assessment covering a 
slightly longer period. The March 2005 Inflation Report took a further step forward, presenting more 
detailed  forecasts  beyond  the  two-year  horizon  and  using  the  assumption  that  the  repo  rate  would 
develop in line with implied forward rates, with the aim of increasing understanding for the Riksbank’s 
reasoning.  
A longer time horizon can contribute to clarifying monetary policy considerations and thereby enable 
us to better explain the way we work. If, for example, we see that inflation is slightly above two per 
cent at the end of the forecast horizon, our policy rule says that we should raise the repo rate to hold 
back demand and thereby inflation. However, if demand nevertheless falls and inflation beyond the 
forecast horizon is below the two per cent level, the conclusion is not so obvious. Then it may be time 
to discuss lowering the interest rate. Extending the forecast horizon may in some situations explain 
why increased flexibility is needed in monetary policy. 
These  are  some  reflections  on  the  time  aspect  and  the  monetary  policy  operational  framework. 
However, there are also other important factors indicating that the inflation target and the policy rule 
must be interpreted with a measure of flexibility. It is easy to have a blind faith in monetary policy’s 
scope for economic fine tuning, but we should be sceptical of this for at least two reasons. 
One is that our forecasts and other reports on which the interest rate decisions are based contain a 
large  measure  of  uncertainty,  because  of  gaps  in  statistics,  information  lags  regarding  economic 
trends,  incomplete knowledge of  how companies  and  households  will react  and  structural  changes, 
such as increased globalisation. Reactions to monetary policy may also vary considerably over time, 
partly, but not completely, due to economic activity. Our knowledge is quite simply too brittle to enable 
us to lead the economy exactly by fine tuning monetary policy at perfectly chosen moments. 
The second reason why fine tuning of monetary policy is doomed to failure is that the repo rate is only 
one of the factors affecting the economy. The most important economic decisions in our society, such 
as house purchases and corporate investment, are mainly due to developments in long-term interest 
rates, and monetary policy decision-makers can only have an indirect and very limited effect on these. 
This reasoning therefore comes to the conclusion that we should not have overly high expectations of 
what the Riksbank can achieve to influence real economy developments, as has been the focus of 
recent debate. There is in actual fact every reason to be humble with regard to what we can actually 
achieve. But if we can keep inflation within our target area of 1-3 per cent and clearly anchor inflation 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2005
expectations around two per cent, this will have great significance for growth and employment in the 
long term. 
Monetary  policy  is  not  an  exact  science.  Sometimes  monetary  policy  is  described  as  a  car,  where 
gentle acceleration or easing on the gas adjusts the speed of the journey down a winding road. This is 
a very misleading image. It is not possible to see the road ahead clearly and nor is it possible to know 
exactly what will happen if one puts one’s foot down on the accelerator pedal – only that the effect will 
come after a fairly long period of time.  
Why haven’t we cut the interest rate? 
Let me now return to the present situation and the question of whether it is reasonable to lower the 
interest  rate  in  order  to  rapidly  bring  the  present  low  inflation  rate  back  in  line  with  the  target.  The 
Executive Board’s reasoning at its most recent monetary policy meetings has been roughly as follows.  
Firstly,  as  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning,  the  Swedish  economy  has  developed  at  an  increasingly 
strong  rate  in  recent  years,  and  our  analyses  during  the  winter  and  spring  have  come  to  an 
assessment that this will continue. We have thus seen a rise in inflationary pressure at the end of the 
forecast horizon. If our assessment during this period had been that demand was declining, I believe 
the situation would have been different. 
Secondly, the present low inflation rate can be largely explained by what is known as positive supply 
shocks, such as increased competition, lower import prices and surprisingly rapid productivity growth. 
These factors benefit economic developments. To attempt to push up prices for domestic goods and 
services to counteract a decline in prices for imported goods is not necessarily a wise choice. 
Thirdly, monetary policy’s impact comes through influencing demand, primarily corporate investment 
and household consumption. Investment has begun to rise, albeit at a slightly later stage than we had 
assumed. However, it is unlikely that the problem of a low investment rate now is connected to interest 
rates being too high. Given the low interest rates we see now and the good access to credit in the 
financial  system,  financing  costs  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  a  factor  holding  back  investment.  With 
regard to households, it is possible that even lower interest rates could make them increase their debt 
burden and borrow in order to increase consumption, but to me this is not an obvious conclusion. In 
addition, there are risks here. This brings me onto the question of how households have reacted to the 
low inflation and low interest rates, and this issue deserves more detailed discussion. 
Households’ growing debt burden and rising house prices 
In recent years, households’ debt burden has increased gradually and now amounts on average to 
125 per cent of their annual disposable income, which is almost as high as immediately prior to the 
property  crisis  in  1992.  However,  interest  payments  are  now  less  than  half  what  they  were  then, 
approximately 4 per cent of disposable income. The fact that households are loaning at an increasing 
rate,  both  in  Sweden  and  many  other  countries,  can  be  regarded  partly  as  an  adjustment  to  lower 
inflation,  which  is  also  expected  to  be  permanent.  Falling  interest  rates,  perhaps  combined  with 
greater predictability as to how interest rates and inflation will develop in future, explain a large part of 
the  increased  willingness  to  borrow.  One  can  thus  say  that  households’  growing  debt  burden  is  to 
some extent a natural consequence of the successful inflation-targeting policy pursued over the past 
decade. As I see it, it is reasonable to assume that we are heading towards a new equilibrium, where 
households have adapted their borrowing to what they perceive as a lower long-term level for interest 
rates, although it is not yet possible to say when we will reach this stage. There is still a possibility that 
households  are  underestimating  the  uncertainty  of future  trends  and  therefore  borrowing more  than 
would correspond to a long-term equilibrium position. 
In  Sweden,  as  in  many  other  countries,  households  have  primarily  borrowed  in  order  to  buy 
accommodation, which has led to house prices rising at roughly the same rate as the borrowing. 
The question now is whether there is reason to take this development into account in monetary policy 
decisions. A strictly-applied inflation-targeting model would not take this into account, and there is no 
mention of it in the monetary policy clarification published in 1999. The general problem is whether low 
inflation can make various asset prices, such as equity prices or house prices soar way beyond what 
is reasonable and if so, what monetary policy can do to remedy this. Should the repo rate be used to 
slow down this development to try to prevent prices becoming so high that the fall, when it actually 
BIS Review 37/2005 
 3
comes, will be too fast and too far? There are many examples of how the air has gone out of asset 
markets  and  thereby  triggered  or  aggravated  a  downswing  in  economic  activity.  Or  is  it  more 
reasonable to wait until the “bubble” has burst and then try to counteract the effects the best one can?  
This question is neither a simple one nor a new one. It is discussed by central banks around the world, 
whether or not they have specific inflation targets. And there is hardly a clear-cut answer.  
As  I  see  it,  the  seriousness  we  in  Sweden  should  attach  to  households'  increased  debt  burden  is 
closely connected with how we assess price trends in the housing market. Although there has so far 
been a large rise in prices, particularly in metropolitan areas, we have not seen the clearly speculative 
tendencies apparent in other markets, for instance Australia and the United Kingdom. In Sweden we 
still usually buy housing to live in it ourselves. In some other countries, where the tax legislation and 
housing loan markets are different from in Sweden, people buy one or more additional properties in 
the hope that they will rise in value, rather like buying equity or other financial assets. This of course 
puts upward pressure on prices, but also downward pressure when prices rebound and many people 
want to sell. 
In both Australia and the United Kingdom, prices have levelled out in recent months after short-term 
interest  rates  rising  in  these countries as  their  central  banks  increased  their  key  rates. However,  in 
Sweden  both  household  borrowing  and  house  prices  appear  to  be  continuing  upwards,  partly  as  a 
result of expectations of continued low interest rates. Moreover, the competition between banks has 
increased,  which  has  led  to  more  aggressive  marketing,  lower  collateral  requirements  and  longer 
amortisation periods. It is possible to begin to detect a scent of the reckless 1980s, one cannot deny it. 
There  is  therefore  every  reason  to  increase  our  vigilance,  and  we  have  recently  emphasised  the 
developments in credit and house prices as a further argument, although in my opinion perhaps not a 
particularly  strong  one,  against  more  expansionary  monetary  policy.  It  is  nevertheless  important  to 
point out that so far we have seen no signs of unwarrantedly large price rises and overheating in the 
housing  market;  in  Sweden  prices  are  still  essentially  governed  by  the  normal  supply  and  demand 
relationship.  
However,  taking  into  account  developments  in  asset  prices  is  a  further  argument  in  favour  of 
interpreting the inflation target with some degree of flexibility. 
Households and financial stability 
Let me now for a moment leave the inflation target and concentrate on some reflections regarding the 
Riksbank’s  other  objective,  to  promote  a  safe  and  efficient  payments  system.  Here  the  concern  is 
whether  household  borrowing  entails  any  risks  for  the  banking  system  and  thereby  for  financial 
stability.  When  it  comes  to  rapidly  rising  property  prices  and  growing  bank  borrowing,  it  is  easy  to 
relate  it  to  the  developments  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  and  the  banking  crisis  they  triggered. 
However, developments were different then in certain essential aspects. 
Firstly, the majority of the banks’ losses were not caused by housing loans – this constituted a very 
small  part  –  but  by  lending  against  collateral  in  commercial  properties.  Commercial  property  prices 
rose more than housing prices prior to the crisis. This has not been the case in recent years; quite the 
reverse. The commercial property market has been subdued since the economic downturn after 2000, 
with  low prices and  high vacancy  ratios  and only  began  to  improve  over  the  past  year. The  banks’ 
risks in this market appear very moderate at present. 
Secondly,  although  households  are  borrowing  substantially,  they  have  a  good  ability  to  pay  on 
average. Moreover, Swedish households, unlike US households, have substantial savings, both real 
and  financial  savings.  As  shown  in  the  Riksbank’s  Financial  Stability  Report,  which  was  published 
earlier today, the risk of households as a collective suffering payment problems if interest rates rise or 
housing prices fall, is slight. And even if a large number of households were to experience difficulties 
in  meeting  interest  and  mortgage  payments  on  their  loans,  it  would  not  threaten  the  banks’  capital 
adequacy or the stability of the Swedish financial system. 
Although households will manage well on average, I believe there is still reason to question whether 
individual  households  are  not  borrowing  more  than  is  reasonable  in  the  long  term  and  thereby 
increasing  their  sensitivity  to  unforeseen  events.  At  the  Riksbank  we  have  expressed  concern,  in 
various contexts, that households have excessive confidence that interest rates will remain low for a 
long period of time. The average period for fixing interest rates has fallen to 12 months, despite the 
fact that long-term interest rates have been at lower rates than ever. It is easy to be seduced by a low 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2005
monthly cost and forget that even minor increases in interest rates will lead to a proportionately large 
increase in loan costs. If, for instance, the interest rate rises from 3 to 4 per cent, it means that the 
monthly cost will increase by one third.  
There is reason for the Riksbank to closely monitor developments in household borrowing. However, 
this  is  a  question  of  concern  over  developments  in  individual  households  and  over  the  effects  on 
house prices rather than a question of stability within the banks and the financial system. 
What will be the future direction for monetary policy, given the current situation? 
The inflation target, the simple policy rule and the clarification of the principles behind monetary policy 
together provide a clear intellectual framework, which has guided our actions in recent years. In my 
opinion, this intellectual framework provides a sufficient degree of flexibility for monetary policy. The 
policy  rule  shall  not  be  applied  mechanically  under  all  circumstances.  This  is  particularly  important 
given  that  the  economic  reality  appears  to  be  taking  on  increasing  complexity  and  becoming  more 
difficult to define.  
The  Inflation  Report  published  in  mid-March  contained  the  assessment  that  economic  growth  in 
Sweden and abroad would remain high over the coming years. Our forecast for Sweden was a growth 
rate of around 3 per cent a year, which is higher than we consider to be sustainable in the long term. 
The new information received since then has been mixed. The oil price has been unexpectedly high, 
although recently it has fallen slightly. Moreover, industrial activity appears to have weakened slightly, 
both  in  Sweden  and  abroad.  We  therefore  came  to  the  conclusion  in  April  that  growth  in  Sweden 
would be somewhat weaker than was anticipated in the March Inflation Report. Since then, we have 
seen statistics showing that growth in Germany was slightly stronger than expected during Q1, and 
that  the  downturn  noted  in  the  United  States  in  March  appears  to  have  been  temporary.  We  had 
anticipated lower growth in Sweden’s net exports, but exports of goods appear to be increasing even 
less than was forecast. However, good growth in real incomes and low interest rates will contribute to 
favourable  growth  in  household  consumption.  The  labour  market  remains  relatively  weak,  and  our 
forecast is based on employment strengthening during 2005.  
At the same time, we can see rising price pressures in some industrial nations, particularly the United 
States, which are partly – but not solely – a consequence of the high oil prices gaining greater impact 
in the production and consumer segments. 
It  is  important  to  monitor  whether  the  slackening  tendencies  seen  in  economic  activity  recently  are 
temporary or more persistent. If we were to see a notably poorer development than we envisage now, 
such as much lower growth than forecast, the arguments in favour of cutting interest rates would in my 
opinion take on greater substance. We will be considering all of these factors at our next monetary 
policy meeting on 20 June.  
Thank you! 
BIS Review 37/2005 
 5
