Nout Wellink: On the euro and exports, speculation and global trade 
Speech  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements,  on  the  occasion  of  a  luncheon  conference  of  the  Limburgse  Werkgevers 
Vereniging, Herten-Roermond, 26 January 2005.  
 I shall speak to you about the euro and the consequences of its rising rate for the exports sector. But I 
shall also dwell on the global causes as well as the macro-economic effects of the strong euro.  
Consequences of a rising euro rate for businesses  
Exchange  rate  movements  may  have  considerable  impacts,  in  particular  at  the  level  of  industrial 
operations. While perhaps it was not the low dollar rate that finished Fokker, adverse exchange rates 
did play a role in that company’s fate. This stiff westerly wind rose just when Fokker was most in need 
of the right updraught. And, if you will allow me to use an example from your region, Océ – which over 
the course of time has proved a rich source of supervisory board members for DNB – realises much of 
its  turnover  in  US  dollar.  In  addition,  many  of  its  competitors  are  based  in  the  United  States  or  in 
countries whose currencies are pegged to the dollar. Small wonder that they keep a sharp eye on the 
exchange rate of the euro.  
On the one hand, exporters are recording declining sales and are compelled to settle for lower profit 
margins as a result of the high euro rate, whereas, on the other, citizens and businesses are benefiting 
from cheaper products from abroad. A case in point is the moderating effect of the rising euro rate on 
the increasing oil price. Since early 2003, the dollar price for a barrel of crude oil has gone up by 48%, 
while expressed in euro the price increase amounts to 21%. 
Also some of the activities of financial institutions profit from exchange rate fluctuations. An increase in 
the number of businesses hedging against – or speculating for – exchange rate fluctuations leads to 
higher commission income from currency translations and future contracts.  
The  euro  exchange  rate  not  only  influences  the  proceeds  from  business  activities,  like  imports  and 
exports. Exchange rate movements also work through to the value of assets and liabilities expressed 
in foreign currencies. The 20% fall of the dollar rate in 2003 translated into a EUR 4 billion loss for 
Dutch businesses, approximately 1% of Dutch national output. The net wealth effects of exchange rate 
and price movements in 2003 were insignificant, as overall cross-border claims and liabilities rose by 
about just as much.  
Macroeconomic consequences of the rising euro rate 
The consequences for individuals and businesses translate into macroeconomic effects. On this scale, 
too, there are pros and cons attached to an appreciation of the euro. The main minus point is that 
competitiveness will weaken, in particular initially. This in turn will affect exports, just when this sector 
is of vital importance as engine of the Dutch economy, domestic dynamics in the Netherlands and the 
rest of the euro area being less than optimal.  
The credit side of the balance sheet shows that we have grown richer on account of the appreciation 
of  our  currency.  With  imports  becoming  cheaper,  the  appreciation  of  the  euro  –  while  on  balance 
hampering economic growth, especially in the shorter term – is favourable for inflation. According to 
DNB  simulations,  in  the  next  three  years  the  euro’s  appreciation  in  2003  and  2004  will  reduce 
production growth in the euro area by about 0.3 percentage point per year on average. Inflation will 
each  year  come  out  circa  0.5  percentage  point  lower  than  it  would  have  without  the  euro’s 
appreciation. In making these technical calculations, we should remember that the euro appreciated 
significantly right after its launch. Set off against the dollar, the value of the euro is not much higher 
than it was in the mid-nineties.  
The euro also turns out to be less strong than may seem at first sight if we bear in mind that, besides 
the  American  dollar,  also  other  foreign  currencies  are  important.  For  example,  for  the Netherlands, 
United Kingdom is more important as a trading partner than the United States. Of our goods exports, 
11% goes to the UK, against 5% to the United States. Compared to all foreign currencies in terms of 
BIS Review 12/2005 
 1
their weights in international trade, the euro has risen 11% in value since 2003, against 25% opposite 
the dollar.  
The US dollar is more important to Europe than the trade flows between the United States and our 
continent would suggest. Many commodities are priced in US dollar. Besides, many countries seek to 
keep the value of their national currencies stable against the dollar. This policy may well be considered 
a source of concern. The preference of some countries, like China, not to use the exchange rate as an 
adjustment  tool  in  their  relations  with  the United  States  adds  pressure  to  other  currencies,  e.g.  the 
euro and the Canadian dollar.  
Explanation for the strong euro versus the current account deficit of the United States 
I would like to dwell briefly on the factors underlying the strong euro. The prominent role of the dollar is 
tied up with the United States ’ global leadership, in both economic and political terms. Its prominence 
does not necessarily signify that the dollar is strong. At this moment, the dollar is weaker vis-à-vis the 
euro than in the period between 1980-2000, because the United States has lived beyond its means for 
so  long.  Both  the  average  American  citizen  and  central  government  are  consuming  too  much  and 
saving too little. Private savings in the United States make up a meagre 0.4% of disposable income. In 
the euro area, citizens lay by more than 10% of their income. While the low level of private savings in 
the  United  States  is  not  easily  accounted  for,  stock  exchange  and  housing  price  movements  are 
probably an important factor. From surveys it emerges that especially citizens in the higher income 
brackets  are dissaving.  They  look  upon  their  assets as  a substitute  for  savings.  Not  only  American 
citizens are not saving much, if at all, even central government is dissaving, witness the high budget 
deficit. The expense of the war in Iraq and internal security is one of the causes of the high budget 
deficit.  
On the balance of payments, the national savings deficit of the United States translates into a current 
account deficit to the tune of 6% of the gross domestic product, or about 1.25 times the total annual 
output of the Netherlands. This means that funds must be raised from other countries on a structural 
basis. This cannot go on forever. A tad more Calvinism would not hurt. In some areas a lot can be 
achieved  with  little  effort.  The  American  administration  might  decide,  for  example,  to  raise  tax  on 
energy consumption, after the European example. This measure would bring down the public sector 
deficit  and  put  a  brake  on  private  spending.  Besides,  it  would  enhance  national  security  by  limiting 
dependence  on  oil  imports.  And  this  measure  would  benefit  the  environment  into  the  bargain. 
However,  it  is  not  just  the United  States  that  should  be  doing  something  to  lessen  the  global 
imbalances  on  the  balance  of  payments.  The  rest  of  the  world,  too,  should  pull  its  weight; Asia,  by 
observing  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility,  and Europe,  by  generating  more  growth.  Healthy  public 
sector  finance  may  make  a  contribution  within  this  scope.  The vicissitudes  around  the Stability Pact 
show that the European house is also not in order in this respect.  
The other side of the coin: the accumulation of dollar reserves in Asia  
The countries that for internal reasons have resolved to stabilise their currencies against the dollar, 
have had to buy up substantial amounts of dollars to prevent their currency from increasing in value in 
dollar  terms.  As  a  result,  they  have  built  up  unprecedentedly  high  dollar  reserves.  I’m  referring 
to Japan, China  and  several  other  Asian  countries.  This  policy  cannot  and  will  not  be  continued 
forever.  Neutralising  the  monetary  consequences  will  be  at  increasing  cost.  On  top  of  that,  the 
potential foreign exchange risks rise with each dollar by which the reserves increase.  
The present situation shows a remarkable resemblance to the early seventies. Also back then, many 
countries had pegged their currencies to the dollar. In the post-war period most developed countries 
had adopted a system of fixed but adjustable exchange rates. This system was named after Bretton 
Woods, the American town where it was devised in the final year of World War II. The guilder and 
other currencies had fixed their exchange rates against the US dollar, which in turn was pegged to the 
gold standard. In the early seventies, the American balance of payments likewise began to deteriorate 
due to public sector overspending. This situation was related to the war in Vietnam. Also, the central 
bank kept interest rates low and oil prices were high in real terms. Under these circumstances, the 
fixed parity between the dollar and gold proved unsustainable and, in 1973, the Bretton Woods system 
collapsed once and for all. This historical parallel underscores the vulnerability of a combination of an 
unbalanced balance of payments and fixed exchange rates. By way of an anecdote, I might add that 
an American delegation visited the Nederlandsche Bank in 1971 in order to beg of us not to exchange 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2005
dollar reserves for gold. In response, the then President, Jelle Zijlstra, decided to do the very opposite 
and to do so without delay and on a massive scale.  
Global economy structurally sound  
So,  let  us  consider  where  we  stand:  the  dollar  is  weak.  In  itself,  this  is  not  positive  for  our  export 
sector.  But  the  exchange  rate  is  not  the  only  factor  determining  our  export  position.  The  growth  of 
world trade is of much greater importance. And as to that, the stars are favourably disposed. In our 
region it may hardly feel that way, but for the world economy 2004 was a peak year. At about 5%, real 
growth was the highest of the past two decades, and exports benefited accordingly. In all likelihood, 
2005 will also be a propitious year, seeing the economy grow by approximately 4%, a rate that is still 
above-trend.  In  2005,  our  export  sector  will  continue  to  profit  from  a  global  trade  growth  by 
approximately 8%. And we should factor in something else. As economies grow more flexible, so will 
their ability to cope with exchange rate fluctuations. Take the Canadian, Australian and New-Zealand 
economies, for example, which in the past 5 years expanded by 3% or more. This contrasts sharply 
with the average growth rate of 1.6% in the euro area. The hefty movements in the euro/dollar rate 
seen in the past five years should therefore bring home the need for greater flexibility in the economy.  
The  favourable  global  picture  is  largely  accounted  for  by  the United  States  and Asia,  more  in 
particular China  and India.  Over  a  period  of  six  years,  exports  from China  doubled  to  6%  of  world 
exports in 2003. China ’s tempestuous economic development is taking place at the expense of the 
environment. It would be bad for the global environment if every Chinese citizen had a throbbing car 
and a humming fridge. And while signs are pointing to a gradual awareness in China of the downside 
of booming energy consumption, this does not take away the fact that we are dealing with a colossal 
problem. However, we should also count our blessings: it is pure gain that so many world citizens are 
sharing  in  wealth.  I  consider China’s  breakthrough  final.  From  now  on,  we  should  refer  to  the  G4, 
instead  of  G3.  We  live  in  a  quadrupolar  world,  made  up  of  the  United  States,  Europe, Japan 
and China.  
Europe is lagging behind the United States and Asia. More growth in Europe would be desirable, also 
from  a  global  perspective.  It  would  increase  the  United  States  ’ export potential.  What  is  especially 
required  is  a  stronger  European  drive  in  the  structural  field.  The  EU  enlargement  in  Central  and 
Eastern  Europe  will  provide  an  impulse  in  the  short  term.  This  is the  only  part  of Europe  that  does 
share in the global growth acceleration. Furthermore, we should hope that the growth spurt seen in the 
nineties  in  the United  States  will  spread  to  Europe.  In  a  recent  study,  the  American  central  bank 
estimates annual labour productivity growth at 2.6% in the next ten years. It is about time that Europe 
also manages to realise a substantial rise in productivity. If markets function properly, the chance of 
that increase materialising will be greater. Let us hope that the implementation of the Kok Committee 
proposals for structural reforms within the scope of the Lisbon agenda will get off the ground.  
Conclusion 
Considering all this, how are we to look upon exchange rate fluctuations? What it amounts to in simple 
terms is that highly integrated economies forming, so to speak, one economic block, benefit from fixed 
exchange rates. Economies that differ widely from each other and do not interact much, profit from 
mutually  flexible  exchange  rates.  Admittedly,  exchange  rates  sometimes  tend  to  move  too 
uncontrollably, creating a breeding ground for speculation. But if exchange rate changes arise from 
structural factors, we should welcome them.  
It is satisfying that these days there are fewer complaints about the euro exchange rate than before. At 
the macro level, this is appropriate. Rather than with the rock-bottom level seen several years ago, the 
current  level  of  the  euro/dollar  rate  should  be  compared  with  the  average  level  over  a  prolonged 
period. To assess our competitive position, it would therefore be better to take the exchange rates with 
all trading partners into account and correct them for mutual inflation differences. This so-termed real 
effective  exchange  rate  of  our  currency  is  now  8%  above  the  average  for  the  period  1980-2000. 
Moreover, there is little reason to complain about the euro exchange rate as its consequences are not 
that overwhelming. To the extent that the Netherlands is a small, open economy, the vast majority of 
its trade is confined to countries that also calculate in euro. On a corporate level, some operations are 
obviously  sensitive  to  the  exchange  rate.  They  must  adopt  strategies  that  anticipate  the  adverse 
effects of exchange rate fluctuations. This is just what they are doing. The German car manufacturers 
BMW and Mercedes are cases in point. And judging by the parking area outside this building, they are 
BIS Review 12/2005 
 3
successful enterprises. The fact that both costs and revenues would be expressed in dollar played a 
weighty role in their decision to set up production facilities in the US. With this move, both companies 
have covered themselves against exchange rate fluctuations in a natural manner. Another much-used 
way to do so is by means of financial instruments. I suggest that we send the euro rate as scapegoat 
for wrong economic moves into the desert, just as happens in the Jewish tradition at the time of the 
Day of Atonement.  
4 
 BIS Review 12/2005
