Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 
14 March 2005. 
 Madame  la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs  les  Membres  de  la  Commission  Economique  et 
Monétaire,  j’ai  l’honneur  de  paraître  devant  votre  Commission  aujourd’hui  dans  le  cadre  de  notre 
dialogue  régulier.  Comme  vous  le  savez,  j’attache  beaucoup  d’importance  à  nos  rencontres 
trimestrielles  qui  permettent  à  la  Banque  Centrale  Européenne  d’expliquer  ses  décisions  et  de 
répondre  à  toutes  les  questions  que  se  posent  les  Parlementaires.  Mes  collègues  et  moi-même 
considérons  ces  rencontres  fréquentes  comme  essentielles  au  bon  fonctionnement  de  l’Union 
Economique  et  Monétaire.  Ich  möchte  meine  Ausführungen  mit  einer  Beurteilung  der  aktuellen 
wirtschaftlichen  und  monetären  Entwicklung  beginnen.  Sodann  werde  ich  zu  fiskalpolitischen  und 
strukturpolitischen  Fragen  Stellung  nehmen.  Abschließend  möchte  ich  Ihnen  einige  Überlegungen 
hinsichtlich der Folgeaktivitäten zum EU Aktionsplan für Finanzdienstleistungen vorstellen.  
Economic and monetary developments 
After the positive developments in the first half of 2004, only modest growth rates of economic activity 
were  observed  in  the  second  half.  Real  GDP  in  the  euro  area  is  estimated  to  have  grown  at  a 
quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.2% in both the third and fourth quarter. Taking the year as a whole, real 
GDP  growth  –  on  a  working-day  adjusted  basis  –  was  +1.8%  in  2004,  marking  a  significant 
improvement from the 0.5% seen in 2003. The composition of demand growth in the fourth quarter 
offered some positive signs with regard to the outlook for economic activity.  
In  the  coming  quarters  consumption  growth  could  benefit  from  anticipated  developments  in  real 
disposable  income.  Investment  is  expected  to  continue  to  benefit  from  very  favourable  financing 
conditions,  robust  earnings  and  greater  business  efficiency.  Euro  area  exports  should  continue  to 
benefit  from  strong  world  economic  growth.  Accordingly,  we  expect  continued  relatively  moderate 
economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  in  2005  and  2006,  as  reflected  in  the  ECB  staff  projections 
published earlier this month, which are broadly in line with available forecasts from international and 
private sector organisations. 
Nevertheless, the outlook for economic activity continues to be surrounded by uncertainties. On the 
external  side,  high  and  volatile  oil  prices  and  persistent  global  imbalances  pose  downside  risks  to 
growth. As regards exchange rates, we confirm our position – expressed when the euro rose sharply – 
that such moves are unwelcome and undesirable for economic growth. On the domestic side, there 
are  uncertainties  surrounding  the  evolution  of  private  consumption,  while  the  favourable  financing 
conditions  and  the  recovery  in  corporate  earnings  could  lead  to  higher  investment  growth  than  is 
currently projected. 
Turning  to  price  developments,  the  evolution  of  oil  prices  and  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and 
administered  prices  have  had  a  significant  impact  on  consumer  price  inflation  in  the  course  of  last 
year. For 2004 as a whole, annual HICP inflation was 2.1%. More recently, the annual inflation rate 
declined quite substantially, falling to 1.9% in January from 2.4% in December, largely a result of base 
effects from developments in indirect taxes and administered prices in some countries. Eurostat’s flash 
estimate of annual HICP inflation in February was 2.0%.  
In the coming months, annual inflation rates are likely to fluctuate around 2%. Looking further ahead, 
there is still little evidence that stronger underlying domestic inflationary pressures are building up in 
the euro area. Wage increases have remained moderate over recent quarters and this trend should 
continue  in  the  context  of  moderate  economic  growth.  Accordingly,  the  ECB  staff  projections  put 
average annual HICP inflation between 1.6% and 2.2% in 2005 and between 1.0% and 2.2% in 2006, 
broadly unchanged from the Eurosystem staff projections published in December. This is consistent 
with forecasts recently released by international and private sector organisations. 
However,  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  remain  on  the  upside,  requiring  continued 
vigilance.  Such  risks  continue  to  be  associated  mainly  with  oil  price  developments,  uncertainty 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 1
regarding  future  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices,  and  potential  second-round 
effects stemming from wage and price-setting behaviour. In this respect, developments in long-term 
inflation expectations need to be monitored closely. 
Our monetary analysis also calls for vigilance regarding upside risks to price stability over the medium 
term and long term. After moderating in the first half of 2004, M3 growth has strengthened significantly 
since mid-2004, reflecting the stimulative effect on monetary dynamics of the historically very low level 
of interest rates in the euro area. As a result of the persistently strong growth in M3 over the past few 
years,  substantially  more  liquidity  exists  in  the  euro  area  than  is  needed  to  finance  non-inflationary 
economic growth. The exceptionally low level of real interest rates is also stimulating private sector 
demand for credit.  
In the context of relatively contained underlying inflationary pressures, the ECB has left its key interest 
rates  unchanged  since  June  2003.  The  low  level  of  nominal  and  real  interest  rates  has  provided 
significant and continued support to the economic recovery. At the same time, upside risks to price 
stability  remain.  Cross-checking  with  the  indications  from  monetary  analysis  supports  the  case  for 
continued vigilance with regard to those risks. 
Fiscal policies and the Stability and Growth Pact 
I would now like to make a few remarks on fiscal policies. While some progress on fiscal consolidation 
and  the  correction  of  excessive  deficits  is  envisaged  in  euro  area  countries’  updated  stability 
programmes, further consolidation in a number of countries is needed.  
With respect to the Stability and Growth Pact, discussions now need to be brought to a convincing 
conclusion  with  an  outcome  that  safeguards  fiscal discipline.  The  fiscal  framework  enshrined  in  the 
Treaty and in the Stability and Growth Pact is a cornerstone of Economic and Monetary Union, crucial 
for the economic rationale and the overall cohesion of EMU.  
As the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament knows, since the 
beginning  of  these  discussions  the  ECB  has  made  its  views  clear.  Improvements  in  the 
implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  and  in  particular  its  preventive  arm,  would  be 
welcome.  But  the  corrective  arm  should  not  be  weakened.  The  credibility  of  the  excessive  deficit 
procedure  as  a  means  to  deter  and  correct  excessive  deficits  needs  to  be  fully  preserved.  This  is 
necessary  in  order  to  anchor  expectations  of  fiscal  discipline,  which  is  fundamental  not  only  for 
macroeconomic  stability  and  cohesion  in  the  euro  area  but  also  for  enhancing  confidence  and 
fostering growth prospects in all Member States. 
The Lisbon strategy 
Let me now turn to the forthcoming mid-term review of the Lisbon strategy. The Lisbon strategy was 
designed  in  2000  to  push  forward  structural  reforms,  which  Europe  so  urgently  needs  in  order  to 
maintain its high level of prosperity. Structural reforms raise European economies’ growth potential. 
They also enable countries to face the challenges of technological change, globalisation and ageing 
populations.  In  addition,  structural  reforms  increase  countries’  resilience  to  economic  shocks, 
contribute  to  improving  the  management  of  public  spending  and  make  it  easier  to  maintain  price 
stability.  Five  years  after  Lisbon,  however,  there  is  broad  agreement  that  progress  on  structural 
reforms, particularly at the national level, has been unsatisfactory. This is not to deny that there has 
been  notable  and  in  some  areas  impressive  progress  on  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms 
across Europe. However, much remains to be done to meet the challenges most European countries 
still face. In particular, the EU needs to increase employment and labour utilisation, especially in the 
context  of  ageing  populations.  At  the  same  time,  productivity  needs  to  be  raised.  Against  this 
background, the ECB supports the Commission’s proposals to push forward the Lisbon strategy by 
focusing reform efforts at the national and European level on “delivering stronger, lasting growth and 
creating more and better jobs”. Such an economic environment would facilitate the achievement of the 
Lisbon agenda’s social and environmental objectives. Through the maintenance of price stability, the 
ECB will continue to support the Lisbon process by providing a vital element for fostering sustainable 
output growth as well as for supporting employment and social cohesion. 
The  ECB  also  supports  national  governments  when  they  are  determined  to  close  the  existing 
implementation gap, which must be done in order to reap the full benefits of reforms. This should also 
improve consumer and business confidence in the short run. In this regard, the ECB sees the use of 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2005
benchmarking  as  an  important  instrument  for  fostering  the  implementation  of  reforms  by  surveying 
best  practices  across  Member  States.  Benchmarking,  based  on  sensibly  defined  quantitative 
indicators,  should  be  regarded  as  a  welcome  driver  of  public  debate,  raising  public  awareness  that 
structural  reforms  can  be  implemented  successfully  in  EU  countries  and  that  they  have  important 
benefits.  
The post-Financial Services Action Plan strategy 
Let me now turn to the ongoing structural reform process in the field of financial services. Since the 
introduction of the single currency, financial integration at the level of institutions, markets and market 
infrastructures has been making significant progress. This is especially the case in wholesale markets, 
such  as  the  unsecured  money  market,  the  government  bond  market  and  the  related  derivatives 
markets. This development is also the result of the impetus provided by the public measures taken in 
the context of the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP), which is about to be completed. At the same 
time, integration in retail markets is not yet sufficiently advanced. 
As regards the post-FSAP strategy, although the ECB is still in the process of formulating its views on 
the matter, we have already identified at least three important elements.  
First, the focus should be on the effective and consistent implementation of the FSAP at the national 
level.  New  legislative  initiatives  at  the  Community  level  should  be  kept  to  a  minimum  and  only 
introduced  if  strictly  necessary.  In  this  respect,  the  implementation  of  the  Lamfalussy  framework 
represents  a  unique  opportunity  to  achieve  a  consistent  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for 
financial services. Indeed, the experience so far gained with the implementation of the framework in 
the securities field is broadly positive. It should be recognised, however, that there is still scope for 
improvement,  for  instance  with  regard  to  striking  the  right  balance  between  the  two  levels  of 
Community legislation (core principles and technical details).  
Second, the policies relating to the regulatory and supervisory framework should be complemented by 
and  closely  coordinated  with  other  relevant  policies  for  financial  services,  for  instance  competition 
policy.  
Third, incentives should be provided for the private sector to play its role in exploiting the opportunities 
offered by public action. Where appropriate, mechanisms should be provided to facilitate coordinated 
approaches among market participants. 
Moreover, the Eurosystem has requested that a Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) be created for 
the  euro  area  from  1  January  2008,  meaning  that  citizens  and  enterprises  could  make  payments 
throughout the euro area from a single bank account, using a single set of payment instruments, as 
easily and safely as in the national context today. In addition, national infrastructures should migrate to 
a pan-European payments infrastructure by the end of 2010. We appreciate the Commission’s support 
for the SEPA project. The ECB is also in a regular dialogue with the banking industry to seek market 
participants’ support for these objectives. 
I am now ready to answer your questions. 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 3
