V Leeladhar: Managing talent in banks - a few thoughts 
Speech by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, on the occasion of the 
centenary celebrations of the Corporation Bank, Bangalore, 12 March 2005. 
 It gives me great pleasure to be in your midst today. A hundred years is, indeed, a landmark event in 
the history of an institution and as Corporation Bank celebrates its centenary, it joins the rank of the 
‘venerables’.  The  establishment  of  the  Corporation  Bank  with  its  humble  beginnings  in  1906  was 
during an eventful period in India’s economic history. It was a brave new era which saw a flurry of 
activity when a host of what were then termed ‘native’ banks were set up in India, spurred, in no small 
measure,  by  the  forces  of  a  resurgent  nationalism  and  the  yearning  for  self  determination.  These 
forces, later coalesced into the Swadeshi Movement, helped draw out the latent entrepreneual talent 
of the time in the field of banking to set up banks oriented towards the indigenous communities which 
they sought to serve.  
With the onset of liberalization, banks in India are under pressure to change the ways in which they do 
business. They now face an increasingly competitive environment not only from banks but also from 
non-bank financial institutions. Explosive growth in IT has changed the way individuals interact with 
banks  and  the  way  banks  respond.  In  the  changed  scenario,  success  will  depend  on  the  ability  of 
banks to leverage the human potential and capabilities. This speech is an attempt to reflect on the 
new challenges facing banks in the management of human resources. 
The  period  1904  to  1913  saw  a  bank  being  set  up  virtually  every  year  –  prominent  amongst  these 
were the Bank of Burma established in 1904, the Bank of India, the Corporation Bank and the Canara 
Bank in 1906, the Indian Bank in 1907, the Bank of Baroda and the Punjab and Sindh Bank in 1908, 
the Central Bank of India in 1911 and the Bank of Mysore in 1913. The Corporation Bank has come a 
long  way  since  the  heady  days  of  the  early  20th  century.  Today,  we  can  proudly  state  that  it  has 
fulfilled the vision of its founders if ‘not in full measure, very substantially’. It has not only survived a 
hundred turbulent years, but is today one of the more agile PSB players in the market. This has been 
possible in no small measure by the Bank’s ability to manage and utilize its talent and potential. And 
this brings us to the theme of my deliberation today - managing talent in banks. 
In  the  run  up  to  the  hundred  years,  banks  and  banking  have  changed  substantially.  As  we  view 
matters in retrospect, we see two landmark events which constituted strategic inflexion points in the 
history of Indian Banking in the 20th century – one being the nationalization of banks in 1969-70 and 
the other, the financial sector reforms that commenced in the early 1990s. Nationalisation generated 
forces  that  took  banking  from  an  elite  class  to  the  masses.  It  led  to  the  establishment  of  a  very 
substantial infrastructure across the geographical expanse of the sub-continent and more importantly 
to  the  financial  empowerment  large  sections  of  society  which  substantially  changed  the  Indian 
socio-economic  landscape.  The  second  inflexion  point  in  banking  was  the  financial  sector  reforms 
initiative  that  was  launched  in  the  early  1990s.  These  reforms  heralded  a  dramatic  shift  in  the  way 
banks  functioned  and  operated  in  India.  The  changed  environment  and  the  internal  compulsions 
arising from greater competition and the need to improve their market share / profitability gave rise to 
the  quest  for  greater  efficiency  and  the  need  to  reposition  themselves  given  the  realities  of  the 
environment and their internal strengths and weaknesses.  
A response to competition and the need to shape up has been the quest for efficiency. This quest, like 
the task of Sisyphus, has been never ending. Every target met, every cost reduction constitutes the 
new threshold limit to be crossed in the next quarter or half year. Every achievement gives rise to ever 
greater  expectations  of  greater  efficiency  and  cost  reductions  and  greater  output  –  and  this  is  any 
CEO’s bane. Banking essentially consists of intermediating and managing risk and providing banking 
services. In the quest for efficiency what distinguishes one player from another is its human capital. As 
former RBI Governor, Dr. Bimal Jalan had pointed out “capital and technology are replicable but not 
human capital which needs to be viewed as a valuable resource for the achievement of competitive 
advantage.”  
Where an institution is, in its time trajectory, fundamentally dependent not just on the sum total of its 
individual human capital, but on how effectively it draws out the best from its talent bank at any point of 
time, through effective placements, performance appraisal, rewards and recognition mechanism. How 
the trajectory changes is dependent on how it builds capacities, through training and recruitment. What 
BIS Review 18/2005 
 1
ever be the organizational goals, the key issues facing Managements today is how to draw out the 
best  from  its  staff?  How  to  build  capacities  to  reposition  to  achieve  the  organizational  vision  and 
strategic goals? And this boils down to one single factor that makes the difference – viz., talent. Today 
management  itself  has  come  to  mean  how  to  attract  talented  people,  how  to  nurture  them,  how  to 
develop them and to give them the necessary space  
Indeed,  when  it  comes  to  Human  Resources,  it  is  a  great  humbling  factor  -  the  best  of  knowledge 
workers who have ready answers for just about every technical issue are necessarily humbled when it 
comes to human resources. When we deal with humans, there are questions, issues and concerns – 
but  no  ready  answers,  no  quick  fixes,  no  instant  remedies.  It  is  thus  with  humility,  but  humility 
combined with a will to succeed that we can approach any Human Resource subject. 
The  purpose  of  Human  Resource  Management  is  essentially  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the 
organization, to allow and indeed nurture the personal growth and well-being of the staff and to create 
a  facilitating  environment  and  an  organizational  culture  that  removes  impediments  and  irritants  and 
fosters a feeling of pride and belonging – an internal brand building. The first and primary concern is 
thus organizational efficiency - traditionally HRM addresses this issue by putting in place HR systems 
that address issues of recruitment, placements, training and capacity building, performance appraisal 
and  finally  what  is  broadly  grouped  under  the  rubric  -  compensation,  rewards  and  recognition.  In 
laypersons terms the questions that we ask are – are we recruiting the right people, are we placing 
them  as  per  their  strengths,  are  we  correctly  assessing  their  training  needs,  are  we  assessing  the 
efficacy of training, are we having a succession plan, do we have objective systems for performance 
appraisal and finally are we compensating, rewarding and recognizing the performance of our human 
capital?  
Issues of personal growth and well-being are important as these not only contribute to a more healthy 
work  environment  but  can  be  effectively  harnessed  to  help  align  personal  goals  with  organizational 
goals.  It  implies an  approach where  the  organization attempts  to build upon strengths  of  its  human 
capital combined with appropriate placements where we can harness individual passions and energies 
into fulfilling organizational objectives. Finally, it is important to sensitize ourselves to the fact that HR 
functions and systems are here to facilitate and not to impede. An organizational culture that fosters 
trust,  openness  fairness  and  what  is  alluded  to  in  institutional  economics  as  a  ‘security  of 
expectations’, goes a long way in employee satisfaction and a congenial atmosphere at the workplace. 
This in turn helps attract and retain talent.  
While  these  for  long  have  been  common  knowledge,  these  have  been  difficult  to  implement  in  the 
absence of human resource management systems. Mapping competencies for every job requirement, 
mapping the competencies of the work force and matching these, anticipating workforce requirements, 
providing  training  tailored  to  individual  goals  and  finally  measuring  performance  are  by  no  means 
simple.  It  is  in  the  proper  management  of  talent  that  opportunities  for  very  substantial  gains  in 
productivity, profitability and personnel development lie – It is here that public sector banks can reap 
very  substantial  productivity  gains.  This  takes  HR  and  especially  talent  management  from  the 
shadows of the boardrooms on to the proscenium – on to the centre stage of concerns of the banks 
CEOs. 
The preconditions for an effective talent management is clarity of where the organisation is, i.e., the 
starting point and where it wishes to reach in a given time horizon, i.e., the destination. Talents then 
constitute the prime resource needed to reach the destination laid out in the organisational goals and 
vision. To put any successful talent management programme into action, we need data and a robust 
MIS. It is intrinsically linked with strategy, with technology, with processes, with the quality initiatives 
and  the  traditional  HR  subsystems  such  as  recruitment,  placements,  performance  appraisal,  and 
compensation.  The  questions  that  come  to  mind  are:  do  we  have  a  comprehensive  idea  of  all  our 
processes,  what  percentage  of  staff  is  deployed  for  facilitating  functions,  can  better  systems  and 
reengineering  of  processes  release  and  free  valuable  talent  to  explore  their  potential  in  functional 
areas? What are the competency gaps that need to be filled through capacity building and what gaps 
need to be filled with new recruits or lateral intake or contractual appointments? How do we gauge 
performance? Are we distinguishing between potential and performance? What forces come between 
potential  and  performance  and  is  the  institution  addressing  these?  What  is  the  reward  mechanism 
which we have in place? What is the flexibility we can offer to move from a compliance culture to and 
outcome oriented culture – to foster a mindset driven by teleology rather than bureaucratic processes.  
These issues have always been important, it’s just that the imperatives to address them squarely in 
substance were not so compelling. There have been broadly three catalytic forces that have brought 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2005
about  this  changed  perception  of  human  resources:  First,  as  the  widespread  use  of  the  personal 
computer  and  the  advent  of  the  internet  in  the  1990s  attained  a  critical  mass,  it  marked  a  specific 
inflexion  point  which  ushered  in  the  Information  Age.  In  this  age,  the  intangible  assets  such  as 
intellectual  capital  and  talent  have  gradually  supplanted  hard  assets  of  the  Industrial  Age  such  as 
capital, factories and inventories. The new reality is that people are increasingly the principal assets of 
an organization and salaries and compensation one of the principal components of the profit and loss 
account.  
Secondly, a host of new industries, such as information technology, media and entertainment which 
changing technology and social needs have spawned, have given rise to a supply demand imbalance. 
Today, these new industries compete with the old for talent and banks need to look afresh not only at 
their recruitment strategies but also how to retain their talent – an issue hitherto far from the ken of the 
staid  banker.  Thirdly,  there  is  the  issue  of  ownership.  Organizations  own  physical,  financial  and 
property  assets  –  their  ownership  rights,  however,  do  not  extend  to  people.  In  the  pre  1990s, 
employment bonding worked on what was termed the ‘psychological contract’ or the ‘loyalty contract’ – 
this involved the exchange of long term employment for employee loyalty. This in today’s world has 
been seriously undermined, spurred not merely by a spurt in job opportunities, but also by the greater 
transparency  in  job  opportunities  brought  about  by  the  internet  revolution.  The  old  values  of  loyalty 
have eroded and indeed it is fashionable to have multiple companies in ones resume. This irreversible 
shift  from  Industrial  age  to  information  age,  greater  demand  for  high  caliber  managerial  talent  and 
greater promiscuity of people shifting from one job to another, has changed the playing field for the 
search and retention of talent – this is the new reality companies and banks in India have to contend 
with.  
The  term  ‘talent  management’,  though  known  to  entrepreneurs  for  centuries,  entered  the  business 
lexicon  in  a  rather  dramatic  and  perhaps  eponymous  phrase,  ‘The  War  for  Talent’  penned  in  a 
McKinsey  article.  While  the  article  spurred  intense  debate  on  both  sides  of  the  argument,  it 
nonetheless  brought  the  issue  to  the  fore  of  the  concerns  of  Management  and  is  today  of  special 
relevance  to  Public  Sector  Bank  in  India.  There  is  however  a  basic  definitional  issue.  What  do  we 
understand by talent? There is no consensus – there was a time when talent referred to persons with 
expertise  in  a  functional  area  –  persons  with  knowledge,  skills,  competence  or  effectiveness  to 
achieve  predetermined  targets.  Today  in  the  age  of  ‘metrics’,  most  of  these  are  taken  for  granted. 
There  is  an  increasing  realisation  that  it  is  not  functional  skills  alone  or  intellectual  capacity  that 
matters,  but  leadership  qualities,  the  ability  to  straddle  different  functional  areas,  businesses,  and 
cultures. In essence, talent in leaders, refers to the ability to effectively handle competing imperatives. 
While there would always be a place for the passionate niche specialist or the stellar uni-dimensional 
performer, the task of leaders would be to stitch together and harness their abilities. It is thus that in 
most corporate training establishments there is an increasing focus on softer skills such as ability to 
present, to carry a team, values, creativity, and the willingness to learn and to share.  
Talent in itself has little meaning unless it is woven into the weft and warp of the corporate strategy. 
The need for talent arises directly out of the business strategy adopted. The linkage between talent 
and  an  organisation’s  business  challenges  and  strategies,  effective  strategy  execution  requires 
sufficient  numbers  of  the  right  people  with  the  right  skills  and  knowledge,  in  the  right  roles.  The 
inevitable next issue involves the approaches to talent management. Two quite distinct approaches 
that  come  to  mind  are  the  (i)  Talent  based  on  stellar  performers  and  (ii)  Talent  based  on  robust 
systems.  The  first  approach  leverages  individual  and  group  performance  of  an  elite  group  of  the 
brightest  people;  the  second  focuses  on  recruiting  and  retaining  ordinary  people  and  getting 
extraordinary  performance  from  them.  The  focus  is  on  systems  –  focusing  on  the  collective  vision 
which brings together the disparate pieces and sews them together in a common purpose. Whatever 
be the model followed, talent management entails that the organization knows what it is looking for, 
that is, what talent one needs for business, now and in the foreseeable future; knowing how best to 
source such talent; getting it and deploying it for optimum effect within the organisation.  
Having said that, one must admit that the ground reality in our country is such that there is a host of 
issues to contend with before putting in place an effective talent management strategy. Forced with 
legacy  issues,  constraints,  and  the  sheer  complexity  of  the  task,  most  organizations  abandon  the 
attempt  to  make  rational  choices.  Most  treat  their  people  with  diverse  skill  sets  as  undifferentiated 
resources and merely guess how best to assign employees to their job. This reality of course exists 
not just in India, where Public Sector Banks have their own constraints – ground rules and framework 
for employment - which make them less agile and responsive, but across the world.  
BIS Review 18/2005 
 3
One issue that bedevils public sector banks is that of compensation. How do they attract new talent 
and  match  the  salaries  and  the  compensation  flexibility  being  paid  by  consultants,  by  IT  firms,  by 
multinationals, by private sector banks? Is the quest for talent lost ab initio? Here it may be stated that 
while  the  traditional  psychological  contract  of  long  term  employment  for  loyalty  may  have  been 
undermined,  quantitative  solutions  of  the  1990s  are  not  necessarily  the  answer.  Money  can  be 
matched and topped by competitors – the pay packet may not be the only compensation that attracts 
talent.  The  monetary,  social  and  psychological  needs  of  talent  today  are  in  a  melting  pot.  It  is  this 
ambiguity that can be a source of opportunity for Public Sector Banks. Today, the ‘loyalty contract’ is 
being replaced by a complex mix. There are a host of non monetary benefits that an organisation can 
offer ranging from job content, work exposure, project challenge, working at the cutting edge, working 
with  a  charismatic  leader,  flexible  work  environment,  early  leadership  roles  and  positions  of 
accountable influence, high-value, visible or high-profile assignments, cross-functional roles, training 
facilities, opportunities for personal growth, opportunities to build a resume in a particular work area, 
community bonding, location benefits or for that matter independence and space amongst others.  
Understanding  what  it  takes  to  foster  a  productive  work  environment,  often  alluded  to  as  the 
"employee  value  proposition",  essentially  entails  non-discriminatory,  hostile-free  workplaces  with 
flexible  and  dynamic  HR  policies  that  enable  an  environment  where  employees  feel  included  and 
valued, where commitment and motivation is maximized and where an organization needs to spend 
fewer  resources  on  managing  employee  grievances.  It  is  up  to  the  creativity  of  the  Public  Sector 
Banks  to  turn  their  constraints  into  an  opportunity  to  create  such  employee  value  propositions  that 
appeal  to  the  talent  these  banks  wish  to  recruit.  It  also  forces  them  to  revamp  their  own  talent 
requirements, their job content and reposition themselves as more agile players in the talent market.  
In fact, effective recruiting is the beginning of effective retention. Matching between tasks and talents 
is a challenging problem and it is essential for allocational efficiency that people get allocated to right 
occupations. Refashioning the recruitment process may well therefore be the precursor of an effective 
talent  management  strategy.  This  may  include  identification  of  key  positions  and  turnover  risks 
associated with these positions, and competency/behavioural-based selection criteria that support the 
retention strategy and business drivers. Only a carefully designed and integrated set of initiatives that 
allow the employee to align himself with the organisational goals and objectives, map competencies 
for diverse work areas, build up capacities through a well-crafted and sustained strategy and draw out 
latent  possibilities  optimally  would  ensure  emergence  of  leadership  talent  that  is  critical  to  any 
organisation’s prosperity and is therefore a central element of talent management. The aim is to align 
the  current  and  future  talents  of  individuals  with  the  strategic  challenges  of  our  business.  So  while 
employees need to understand how to be more effective in their current roles, deliver specific business 
challenges, and pull together a personal development plan for shaping future careers, organizations 
too  have  to  strategize  how  best  to  utilize  the  people’s  talents  and  identify  areas  for  internal 
development necessary for ensuring future success.  
In a major push to banking reforms in our country, the Government of India has recently announced a 
slew  of  HR  autonomy  incentives  for  the  better  performing  banks.  Differential  pay  structures,  lateral 
entry,  contract  employment  and  perhaps  performance-linked  pay  as  a  sub-component  of  the 
compensation  structure  may  turn  out  to  be  a  potent  talent  management  instrument  in  public  sector 
banks too. While the debate on the merits of performance pay remains open and is contingent on an 
effective  Performance  Appraisal  System  being  in  place,  the  risks  may  be  manageable  if  the 
performance management  system  is well  designed  and  carefully  implemented.  Of  course  this  is an 
area where bank managements need to design carefully calibrated institution-specific responses.  
Talent  management  is  thus  a  broad  mandate.  Today  –  more  than  ever  before  –  banks  must  be 
prepared to be collaborative, supportive, and nurturing of their people while at the same time being 
more exacting. Standing as we do at the cusp of major role shifts and organizational transformations, 
every  successful  talent  management  strategy  would  have  to  be  the  right  mix  of  a  set  of  ‘push’  – 
motivation, recognition, career progression, capacity building and drawing out plans - and ‘pull’ – more 
tangible  factors  like  higher  pay,  better  benefits  and  heftier  perks  -  factors.  Misalignment  of  mutual 
expectations,  person-job mismatch,  perception of  poor  career  advancement prospects  and  work-life 
imbalance can be huge setbacks which we can ill afford. In the roadmap that has been envisaged for 
the Indian banking sector, Indian banks have about five years to shape up to face the challenges of 
unfettered competition. If they get their mix of talent management, performance management and their 
compensation incentives right, they should be on the threshold of a brave new era in Indian banking. I 
trust  that  Corporation  Bank  with  its  time-tested  track  record  would  convert  these  challenges  into 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2005
opportunities and emerge as a talent management trend-setter. On this momentous occasion, I wish 
you all every success in all your future endeavours.  
BIS Review 18/2005 
 5
