Lucas Papademos: Interview with Corriere della Sera 
Interview  with  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  conducted  by 
Ms Marika de Feo (Corriere della Sera), Frankfurt, 31 March 2005. 
Corriere della Sera publishes an abstract of the text below.  
 The markets are under the impression that the ECB is unhappy with the current level of interest 
rates. Why not raise them here and now?  
Our message has been clear: the current level of interest rates is in line with maintaining price stability 
over the medium term. Our latest assessment confirmed that underlying inflationary pressures remain 
contained  and  that  inflation  is  projected  to  decline  over  the  medium  term.  There  are,  however,  a 
number of upside risks to price stability, such as high and volatile oil prices. These risks stem mainly 
from potential second-round effects of higher oil prices on wages and prices. Up till now past oil price 
increases had no significant effects on wage developments, inflation expectations and core inflation. 
But the risks also stem from money growth, don’t they?  
Yes, they do. The excess liquidity accumulated over the past few years and the acceleration of money 
and credit  growth since  the  middle  of  last  year poses medium-term risks  to price stability.  Stronger 
economic growth in 2005 and 2006 could imply an increased likelihood that inflation risks associated 
with monetary and credit growth could materialise. This prospect requires continued vigilance. 
With  regard  to  high  oil  prices,  are  you  more  concerned  about  their  impact  on  growth  or  on 
inflation?  
It is an unpleasant fact that high oil prices pose simultaneously upside risks to inflation and downside 
risks to growth. Estimates of the impact of higher oil prices on growth and inflation are surrounded by 
uncertainty  and  must  be  interpreted  with  caution.  Having  stressed  this,  I  can  say  that  the  average 
estimated effect of an oil price increase of 10 % is to add about 0.1 percentage point to euro area 
inflation  in  the  first  year  and  to  reduce  GDP  growth  by  approximately  the  same  amount,  that  is  by 
0.1 percentage point in the same year. In subsequent years, the effects on both inflation and growth 
decline. Our aim is to prevent oil price shocks from having second round effects on inflation so as to 
minimise their cumulative adverse effects on both inflation and growth. 
Are you still optimistic about growth?  
I  am  cautiously  optimistic  and  expect  that  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  will  pick  up 
momentum in the course of 2005. The somewhat lower GDP growth projected in 2005 by ECB staff 
compared to earlier projections mainly reflects the carry-over effect of weaker economic developments 
in 2004 rather than a downward revision of the expected pick-up of activity this year. There are some 
signs of an upturn in investment. As far as consumption is concerned, we expect that it will increase in 
line with real disposable income, which is projected to rise by about 1.4% in 2005. 
Despite the increase in oil prices?  
Oil  prices  are  assumed  to  decrease  gradually  in  the  future  as  implied  by  futures  markets.  We  are 
making  no  assumptions  about  other  factors,  such  as  an  improvement  in  confidence,  that  could 
positively influence consumer behaviour. Of course, if oil prices turn out to be higher than currently 
envisaged, they would dampen disposable income and consumption growth. 
What constitutes a natural interest rate for the ECB?  
The concept of a natural interest rate refers to an equilibrium real interest rate that reflects productivity 
and population growth. Although most recent analyses seem to indicate that in the euro area it lies 
within a corridor of 2% to 3%, I would not be surprised if the lower bound of the estimated range is 
revised downwards as a result of the lower growth in productivity in the euro area during the past ten 
years.  Owing  to  the  high  level  of  uncertainty  surrounding  the  estimates  of  the  natural  interest  rate, 
great  caution  is  called  for  when  using  them.  The  natural  interest  rate  does  not  constitute  an 
intermediate objective of the ECB’s monetary policy. 
Competitiveness is improving in Germany, including as a result of wage cuts. Is this a “recipe” 
for other countries, like Italy?  
BIS Review 22/2005 
 1
Germany  has  indeed  succeeded  in  significantly  improving  its  international  competitiveness.  Without 
giving  advice  to  individual  countries,  I must stress  that  it  is  essential  to  improve  competitiveness  to 
effectively compete in the global economy. Italy’s competitiveness has declined during the past five 
years. It is therefore important to reverse this developing trend. 
How?  
For example, by increasing productivity growth and enhancing market flexibility. 
The Wall Street Journal views Italy as a “fortress” because of its restrictive attitude towards 
imports. Do you support this policy, or is it better to be more competitive?  
Past  experience  has  shown  that  protectionism  is  not  effective  and  can  never  be  an  appropriate 
response in the long term. It may even be damaging in the short term, if it leads other countries to 
introduce  protectionist  measures  as  well.  Besides,  such  measures  are  not  in  accordance  with  the 
European  Union’s  fundamental  principle  of  an  open  and  competitive  economy.  Competition  is  an 
important condition for stimulating productivity growth. This in turn increases the competitiveness of a 
country and its capacity to sustain a higher rate of economic growth. 
So do you think that protectionism acts as a brake on growth?  
Trade protectionism can temporarily help shield certain sectors from external competition. However, 
over the longer term, it will have a negative impact on the overall level of economic activity and lead to 
lower  growth.  This  is  because  protectionism  tends  to  preserve  inefficient  production  and  market 
structures thus eroding the competitiveness of a country and its ability to sell its goods on the global 
market. 
Are you disappointed that the single market is not proceeding at the desired rate, particularly 
in the banking sector?  
It  is  a  rather  discouraging  fact  that  financial  integration  has  been  much  slower  than  expected  and 
hoped  for.  The  ECB  favours  increased  financial  integration  and  more  competition  in  all  sectors, 
including the banking sector. This is because, as I previously stressed, increased competition is key to 
sustaining higher levels of growth in the long term.  
2 
 BIS Review 22/2005
Will you increase interest rates because of the reform of the Pact?  
The ECB sets interest rates at the level that is in line with our objective of maintaining price stability. 
The stance of fiscal policy is one factor influencing price developments. The agreed changes in the 
fiscal framework per se do not automatically imply that the stance of fiscal policy will change in the 
euro area. There is, however, a serious risk that the revised Pact, notably the changes in its corrective 
arm, may lead to a weakening of fiscal discipline.  
Such  an  outcome  could  affect  the  prospects  for  price  stability  and,  consequently,  it  could  require a 
change in the stance of monetary policy. Of course, the ECB’s decision on interest rates at a given 
point  in  time  will  depend  on  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  anticipated  effects  of  all  factors 
determining  the  price  level  over  the  medium  term.  I  should  also  point  out  that  market  expectations 
regarding the fiscal policy stance in the future will influence long-term bond yields, given the ECB’s 
firm commitment to maintain price stability.  
Are there any new rules of the Pact that you recognise as good?  
The proposed arrangements to improve governance and strengthen national ownership of the fiscal 
framework are welcome. Moreover, some changes in the preventive arm of the Pact could strengthen 
it and thus help prevent the emergence of excessive deficits. The declared commitment of member 
states to actively consolidate public finances in good times is a positive development. Also, the greater 
emphasis on the long-term sustainability of public finances and the increased focus on debt should 
contribute to a better implementation of the Pact. Needless to say, and this is crucial, the expected - in 
principle - positive effects of these changes on the conduct of prudent fiscal policies will have to be 
proved in practice and will depend on a rigorous implementation of the revised fiscal framework. 
What do you think of the new rules about debt?  
The  increased  focus  on  debt,  in  both  the  preventive  and  corrective  arms  of  the  Pact,  is  definitely 
warranted,  as  the  overall  indebtedness  of  a  country,  including  a  government’s  implicit  liabilities 
resulting from pension systems and ageing populations, allows for a more comprehensive assessment 
of a country’s fiscal situation and prospects. At the same time, the application of the debt criterion in 
“qualitative terms” will not be straightforward and, for this reason, it is essential that this be done in a 
systematic  and  credible  manner.  The  increased  emphasis  on  debt  is  expected  to  strengthen  the 
Commission’s position to launch an excessive deficit procedure on the basis of its assessment of debt 
developments. 
Do you think that the new rules are more credible for the governments and that, consequently, 
they will try to stick to the new rules more than to the old ones?  
Credibility is gained through actions. It cannot be established and it cannot be predicted on the basis 
of  good  intentions  and  theoretical  arguments.  All  parties  to  the  Pact  are  expected  to  fulfil  their 
responsibilities and implement the revised fiscal framework in a rigorous and credible manner. 
BIS Review 22/2005 
 3
