David Dodge: How the Canadian economy is adjusting to global forces 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Tokyo, 9 June 2005. 
 I am happy to have the opportunity to be back here in Tokyo, and to address this group. No matter 
where  you  are  in  the  global  economy  these  days,  everyone  is  talking  about  the  same  powerful, 
economic forces. We are all aware of the large and growing financial imbalances in the United States 
and in Asia. Rapid growth in emerging-market economies is driving up demand for commodities, and 
that has pushed up world prices for oil and many non-energy commodities. Meanwhile, productivity 
improvements  in  some  countries  and  a  competitive  world  environment  are  lowering  the  prices  for 
some  consumer  goods,  communications  services,  and  computer  equipment.  All  of  these  forces  are 
causing significant movement in the exchange rates of key currencies, including a sharp appreciation 
of  the  Canadian  dollar  against  the  U.S.  dollar  over  the  past  couple  of  years.  In  short,  these  are 
challenging economic times, not just in Canada and Japan, but throughout the world. 
Today, I’d like to raise two issues. I’ll talk first about how the Canadian economy has been adjusting in 
the face of these forces - an adjustment that is being facilitated by the Bank of Canada’s monetary 
policy framework. Then, I’ll talk briefly about what needs to be done internationally to help bring about 
an orderly resolution of global imbalances. 
Adjustments in the Canadian economy 
So let me begin with the Canadian economy. I should set the scene by saying just a few words about 
how the Bank of Canada conducts monetary policy. 
The Bank of Canada Act calls on the Bank to “mitigate by its influence fluctuations in the general level 
of production, trade, prices and employment, so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary 
action, and generally to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada.” The way we do this is 
by trying to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. Specifically, we aim to keep the annual rate of 
consumer price inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range. 
In order to keep inflation at the target, we try to keep the economy operating at full capacity. By this, I 
mean that we aim for a balance between total demand and supply in the economy. Simply speaking, if 
the demand for goods and services is pushing the Canadian economy against the limits of its capacity, 
and if inflation is poised to rise above the target, the Bank would raise its key policy interest rate. This, 
in turn, would push up other interest rates and help to cool off demand. Conversely, if the economy is 
operating below its production capacity, and inflation is poised to fall below the target, the Bank would 
lower  its  key  policy  rate,  to  help  stimulate  demand.  So,  by  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation, 
monetary policy also promotes greater stability in economic output. 
I  should  add that  since Canada  adopted  its  inflation-targeting system  in 1991,  our  track record has 
been  excellent.  Inflation  has  averaged  very  close  to  2  per  cent  and  has  remained  within  the  target 
range, with rare exceptions that were due mainly to large swings in the prices of oil and natural gas. 
And we have seen evidence that our symmetric approach to inflation targeting has helped to smooth 
the peaks and valleys of the business cycle. 
I should also add that a flexible exchange rate is a critical part of our monetary policy framework. We 
do not have a target or preferred exchange rate for the Canadian dollar. But it is an important relative 
price  in  our economy.  A  floating  currency  helps  us  to  achieve  our  inflation  target  and  can  act  as  a 
shock absorber to cushion our economy from the effects of events both inside and outside Canada. I’ll 
say a bit more about this in a few moments. 
With  that  as  background,  let’s  now  look  at  the  ways  in  which  Canada’s  economy  is  responding  to 
global  economic  developments.  As  I  mentioned,  the  Canadian  dollar  has  appreciated  sharply  and 
commodity  prices  have  risen  dramatically  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  though  both  have  been 
relatively  stable  in  recent  months.  Canada’s  terms  of  trade  -  that  is,  the  ratio  of  the  prices  that 
Canadians receive for their exports to the prices that they pay for their imports - have improved by 
about 15 per cent since late 2001, generating higher real incomes and stronger domestic demand in 
Canada. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 1
How has the Canadian economy reacted to these higher prices and stronger demand? In the Bank’s 
April Monetary Policy Report, we noted that we have seen increased business investment spending in 
oil  and  gas  extraction,  other  mining  activity,  and  wood-product  manufacturing.  We  are  also  seeing 
rising investment in sectors that are not very exposed to international trade, such as electric power 
generation, finance and insurance, and information and cultural industries. In these cases, firms are 
reacting to strong growth in Canadian domestic demand. As well, we’ve had very strong investment in 
residential housing. 
But there are other sectors, highly exposed to international trade, where prices are either not rising or 
are rising very slowly. Here, I am referring to goods-producing sectors such as auto parts, textiles, and 
clothing  manufacturing,  as  well  as  service  sectors  such  as  tourism.  Firms  in  these  industries  are 
feeling  the  pressure  of  the  higher  Canadian  dollar,  and  they  are  also  facing  increased  competition 
from other regions of the world. 
The good news is that many Canadian firms are making adjustments. Investment spending is being 
directed  towards  increased  specialization,  higher  productivity,  and  lower  costs.  Since  much  of  the 
productivity-enhancing  machinery  and  equipment  is  priced  in  U.S.  dollars,  the  stronger  Canadian 
dollar  has  made  it  easier  for  firms  to  buy  tools  that  boost  their  productivity.  Stiffer  competition  is 
encouraging firms to increase their specialization and offer more value-added, customized services. 
Other  adjustments  are  also  taking  place.  A  growing  number  of  firms  are  looking  to  cut  costs  by 
importing  more  inputs.  We’ve  certainly  seen  this  type  of  adjustment  taking  place  among  the 
manufacturers of telecommunications equipment. Other firms are phasing out the production of goods 
and services with low profit margins and concentrating on those that yield higher returns. 
Looking  at  the  economy  as  a  whole,  we  can  see  that  growth  will  come  primarily  from  domestic 
demand this year and next, as the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar continues to restrain net 
exports. As we noted in our last Monetary Policy Report, we expect the Canadian economy to move 
back to its production capacity in the second half of 2006. But of course, our outlook remains subject 
to  both  upside  and  downside  risks.  These  are  related  largely  to  the  global  developments  and 
associated  relative  price  changes  that  I  have  already  mentioned,  and  the  way  that  the  Canadian 
economy is adjusting to these factors. 
How is the Bank of Canada contributing to the adjustment process? At this point in time, monetary 
policy  is  aiming  to  maintain  strong  growth  in  domestic  demand.  Low  interest  rates  help  encourage 
consumer  and  business  spending,  which  in  turn  helps  keep  the  economy  operating  close  to  its 
production potential. 
This  is  an  important  point  in  terms  of  the  adjustment  process.  Because  we  keep  inflation  low  and 
stable,  businesses  and  consumers  are  better  able  to  read  price  signals  in  markets,  and  this  helps 
them  to  make  better  long-term decisions  in  the face  of  major  economic  developments.  These  price 
signals prompt sectors that are shrinking because of weak demand to release resources that can be 
absorbed by expanding sectors, where demand is strong. Of course, adjustment takes time, and is 
never simple or without pain. Individuals may have to retrain or relocate, and expanding businesses 
may  require  time  to  put  the  necessary  capital  equipment  in  place  to  increase  productivity.  And  of 
course, some firms will go out of business and some people will be unemployed for a period of time. 
But from a macroeconomic point of view, adjustment can take place with less social and economic 
cost  overall  when  inflation  expectations  are  well  anchored,  the  economy  is  operating  close  to  its 
potential, and a floating exchange rate is helping to absorb external shocks. 
International adjustments 
That’s a quick look at how the Canadian economy is adjusting to global forces. Our flexible exchange 
rate is helping to bring about movements in the real exchange rate, which is what matters in terms of 
the adjustment process. But this is not the case in all countries. Where the nominal exchange rate is 
fixed, the only way to bring about adjustments in the real exchange rate is through large movements in 
relative wages and prices. This is theoretically possible if wages and prices are highly flexible, both 
upwards and downwards. But in practice, wages and prices aren’t that flexible. And so when exchange 
rates are fixed, adjustment can still take place, but it comes at a high cost - through shrinking output 
and rising unemployment in countries with current account deficits, and eventually through very high 
inflation in countries with current account surpluses. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2005
While this adjustment is costly, it does work, provided countries that are fixing their currencies through 
foreign exchange intervention are not offsetting the monetary consequences of this by “sterilizing” the 
intervention. This is an important point. When intervention is sterilized, this temporarily prevents the 
movements in wages and prices needed to bring about the necessary economic adjustment. In these 
cases, economic adjustment is postponed - in both surplus and deficit countries. But the adjustment 
and its costs are only delayed, they are not avoided. Indeed, the costs typically end up being larger 
than  they  would  otherwise  be,  precisely  because  they  have  been  delayed.  The  only  way  to  truly 
minimize the costs of adjustment is to allow nominal exchange rates to move around. 
For decades, Canada has benefited from having a flexible exchange rate that can help bring about 
economic  adjustments.  By  the  end  of  the  1990s,  most  industrialized  economies  and  a  number  of 
emerging-market  economies  had  also  realized  the  benefits  of  having  a  floating  currency.  But  other 
economies, particularly but not exclusively here in Asia, have opted for a fixed exchange rate regime. 
And unfortunately, some have rejected the adjustment mechanisms that should go along with such a 
regime. By sterilizing their interventions, they are accumulating even larger foreign exchange reserves. 
But  more  importantly,  they  are  undermining  the  efficiency  of  their  own  domestic  economy,  and 
interfering with the resolution of imbalances. 
Because of this and other impediments, global imbalances are growing, and this is increasing the risk 
of  a  disorderly  correction  at  some  point  down  the  road.  Furthermore,  the  longer  the  adjustment  is 
delayed,  the  greater  the  risk  that  industrialized  nations  will  take  protectionist  measures  against 
emerging-market  economies  that  are  perceived  as  not  playing  by  the  rules.  And  this  may  be  the 
greatest  threat  to  the  global  economy  -  a  rise  in  protectionism  which  could choke  off  the  growth  of 
international trade that has led to rising incomes around the world. 
So what is to be done? The adoption of appropriate exchange rate regimes is an important start. But 
this is only one element of a policy framework that will facilitate adjustment and promote the resolution 
of global imbalances. First, we all must actively support the Doha round of talks at the World Trade 
Organization (WTO), recognize  the  legitimate  role of  the  WTO  as  arbiter  of  international  trade, and 
resist calls for protectionist measures in our own economies - measures that will ultimately hurt us all. 
Second,  we  all  must  enhance  the  flexibility  of  our  domestic  markets.  Third,  we  all  must  create  and 
maintain a sound financial system. Finally, we all must follow appropriate fiscal and monetary policies. 
We know what needs to be done to help our economies adjust to global economic forces. We all talk a 
good line about these policies, but action has been slow. If we can get on with the job, not only will we 
help ourselves, we will also improve the long-term prospects for the global economy. And that is an 
outcome that’s in everyone’s interest. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 3
