Zdeněk Tůma: The interrelationship between monetary policy, price stability 
and financial stability 
Speech by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the European banking and 
financial forum 2005, Prague, 22 March 2005. 
 Mr. President, Excellencies, Governors, distinguished guests,  
It is an honour to be opening the central bankers' forum. As the main part of the conference program 
concerns the financial sector challenges and opportunities in the “New Europe”, the central bankers' 
panel  has  to  necessarily  reflect  the  close,  particularly  topical,  issue  of  the  financial  stability  and  its 
relationship to a reasonable monetary policy conduct.  
While  my  colleagues  will  discuss  mainly  the  particular  issues  of  financial  stability,  I,  having  the 
privilege to be the chairman of the panel, would like to frame the discussion using a more general and 
historical context. Bearing this perspective in mind, I would like to point to the interrelation between the 
ultimate goal of monetary policy, the price stability, and the financial stability.  
First of all, let me start with the definition of financial stability, simply assuming that price stability does 
not need any further explanation. To be as brief as possible, financial stability can be defined as the 
soundness of the financial system, that is, its resilience against various shocks. What I understand as 
a sound financial system can be thought of as a system that, firstly, enables individuals to do all the 
payments they want at the very moment they like, and, secondly, enables individuals to smooth their 
consumption across time by saving and borrowing.  
In this respect, the financial stability issue, which arose during the nineties, is not a completely new 
one.  Indeed,  it  has  been  of  a  significant  importance  since  banking  emerged.  The  long  years  of 
commodity money system (so called “golden standard”) could be characterised as years when money 
supply, i.e. the supply of gold, was so exogenous that it was even out of the central bank's control. 
Consequently,  monetary  policy  was  relatively  easy  to  do,  just  establishing  the  parity  between  the 
central bank banknotes and the gold, but the role of the central bank as a lender of last resort was 
relatively  constrained.  Under  those  circumstances,  the  financial  stability  was  naturally  of  a  high 
importance,  because  for  any  commercial  bank  the  attempt  to  “run”  the  bank  could  be  deadly. 
Moreover, this could cause stampede runs on others banks and bring the whole system to an end, as 
the central bank's ability to provide the additional currency would be constrained by its gold reserves. 
To  protect  themselves,  the  commercial  banks  and  the  central  bank  established  clearing  houses  to 
provide, in case of the run on any particular participating bank, the currency to each other. That was in 
fact a financial stability remedy, of course, being a product of its time.  
After the Second World War the abandonment of the “golden standard” changed things completely. 
The introduction of the fiat money changed the monetary policy framework dramatically, forcing the 
financial stability issues to take back seats in the central banks considerations. There were two main 
reasons for financial stability being less of a worry. First, by using the fiat money the role of the lender 
of the last resort was not limited anymore. The central bank could lend to commercial banks as much 
as they wanted to borrow, just printing new money. There was no need to hold a parity to anything. 
Second,  many  central  banks  faced  serious  troubles  in  order  to  meet  their  ultimate  target,  the  price 
stability, within the new fiat money environment. Therefore the policy focus shifted and huge effort was 
concentrated on finding a new appropriate policy framework.  
The situation was even more complicated due to the fact that both aforementioned points were closely 
interdependent.  To  illustrate  this  point,  let's  assume  that  there  was  an  inflationary  pressure  which 
caused redistribution disturbances to the financial system as it led to the redistribution of wealth from 
lenders  to  borrowers.  The  central  bank  either  had  not  established  the  appropriate  framework  for 
dealing inflation yet, or even worse, inflation had not been viewed as an undesirable phenomenon. On 
the other hand, the central bank was ready to fulfil its role as a lender of last resort. But saving the 
commercial banks from imminent bankruptcy further increased inflationary pressures. At the end this 
caused kind of inflationary trap. It was not surprising that during those times the financial stability was 
not of a main concern for the central bank.  
As the central banks learnt during the second half of eighties to deal more properly with inflationary 
disturbances,  the  price  stability  was  broadly  achieved  again.  Consequently,  the  interest  in  financial 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 1
stability issue has been increasing during the nineties. In my opinion, there are two main reasons for it. 
First of all, central banks have learnt one important rule: that their role of the lender of last resort is 
something the central bank should be ready to fulfil, but in fact it is optimal, never to do it in practice. 
Second  of  all,  the  financial  system  is  in  the  end  completely  incomparable  to  the  pre-World-War-II 
system. Nowadays, we live in a global world and, although we are more capable of minimising the 
impact of inflationary disturbances, there are other types of shocks arising.  
To sum up, the main message we can learn from the history is that price stability as the ultimate goal 
of monetary policy is not in contradiction with the effort to achieve the financial stability. Indeed, on one 
hand,  price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  to  achieve  financial  stability,  as  the  inflationary 
disturbances have the potential to cause serious damages to the financial system; on the other hand, 
a sound financial system enables the monetary policy to smooth its actions in order to achieve price 
stability.  
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention.  
2 
 BIS Review 20/2005
