Y V Reddy: Indian economy - current status and select issues 
Remarks  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  release  of  the  India 
Development Report 2004-05, Mumbai, 12 January 2005. 
 Professor Parikh, Professor Radhakrishna and Friends, 
I am thankful to Professor Radhakrishna for giving me the opportunity to be here for the release of 
India  Development  Report  2004-05.  The  Report  prepared  by  IGIDR,  released  today,  is  unique  in 
several  respects.  It  addresses  contemporary  policy  issues  unambiguously  and  is  more  issue-based 
than  technique  oriented.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  based  on  thorough  research  with  scholarly  inputs. 
Being issue-oriented, the Report captures both macro and micro aspects, especially the institutional 
aspects  of  development  and  human  welfare.  While  being  highly  analytical,  drawing  on  theory,  the 
Report has no ideological biases and one should be delighted to note the India-centric nature of the 
policy prescriptions. This Report is special in the sense that it lays significant emphasis on welfare and 
the social sector. I have no hesitation in strongly recommending this Report to students and scholars 
alike  and  to  the  policy  makers  and  analysts  as  well.  No  doubt,  there  are  some  areas  where  the 
observations  in  the  Report  do  not  fully  conform  to  the  policies  being  pursued  by  RBI,  but  such 
differences in approach do help fine tune the policies better; though most of the differences arise from 
the assumptions made: the assessment of risks in alternate paths, weights to be attached to relevant 
factors, operational feasibility contingent upon the political economy, the institutional considerations, 
etc. So, let me compliment all the authors, and in particular Dr. Parikh and Dr. Radhakrishna for this 
illuminating volume. 
I will take the opportunity, not to comment on the Report which is highly recommended for detailed 
reading, but to supplement it with a few remarks on current status of the economy and refer to select 
issues. 
On  October  26,  2004,  we  set  out  in  the  Mid-Term  Review  of  Annual  Policy  Statement  for  the  year 
2004-05 that the overall GDP growth for the year 2004-05 would be in the range of 6.0 to 6.5 percent. 
Subsequent developments indicate that while monsoon conditions and sharper rise in oil prices had a 
moderating effect on growth, the manufacturing sector and exports have been performing better than 
expected. With the economy growing at 7.4 percent in the first quarter and 6.6 percent in the second, 
the GDP growth in the first half of the year works out to be about 7.0 percent. Unless there are totally 
unexpected shocks, inspite of some adverse impact of Tsunami which is localised, the projected GDP 
growth for the year in the range of 6.0 to 6.5 percent should materialise comfortably. 
In response to the impact of Tsunami, RBI has adopted a three-track approach. First, ensuring supply 
of  currency,  banking  services  with  relaxations  in  procedures,  as  appropriate,  liberal  provision  and 
restructuring  of  credit  for  consumption  as  also  resuming  productive  activities,  finance  for  rebuilding 
houses and coordinating with state governments, NABARD, NHB and commercial banks. This process 
is still underway and the RBI’s Task Force constituted for the purpose is directly in communication with 
over 40 branches of commercial banks catering to the affected areas. Second, monitoring of financial 
markets,  which  remain  largely  unaffected.  Third,  assessing  the  impact  which  indicates  enormous 
human suffering and considerable localised loss of assets in both public and household sector but with 
marginal impact on overall growth and the external sector and manageable additional expenditure in 
the Central and State budgets. 
The Mid-Term Review devoted considerable attention to issues relating to price-stability and inflation 
expectations. The WPI inflation, on a year-to-year basis decelerated to 6.4 percent during week ended 
December 25, 2004. In view of several uncertainties and the fact that all indirect effects of increases in 
oil prices domestically are yet to be fully transmitted, the projection at around 6.5 percent made in the 
Review, continues to be valid. CPI (Industrial workers) inflation, year-on-year, rose to 4.2 percent in 
November 2004 from 3.1 percent a year ago. In this regard, it is necessary to reiterate the serious 
concerns  expressed  in  the  Review  in  regard  to  price  stability  and  inflation  expectations  for  three 
reasons.  First,  inflation  is a  major  problem  for  the poor.  Second,  stabilising  inflation  expectations  is 
critical  to  ensuring  enhanced  investment  activity  in  the  private  sector,  which  is  a  crucial  element  of 
current strategy for growth and welfare. Finally, our economy is now more integrated with the global 
economy,  and  hence,  maintenance  of  price-stability  is  critical  for  ensuring  financial  stability.  In  this 
background, both monetary and fiscal policies give considerable attention to price stability, as part of a 
growth-oriented  strategy.  The  hard  earned  gains  in  this  regard  could  be  reversed  if  there  is  a 
perception of dilution in commitment to contain undue inflationary pressures. In assessing the risks of 
higher inflation it is, therefore, important to capture not only the probability and magnitude of adverse 
impact  of  policies  on  inflation  but  also  the  damage  that  could  be  done  both  to  price  stability  and 
inflation  expectations  in  the  event,  even  with  very  low  probability,  the  risks  do  materialise.  Hence, 
there is a need to continue to demonstrate, in a credible fashion, by words and deeds, commitment of 
both monetary and fiscal authorities to stabilise inflation expectations. 
The government finances present a mixed picture since the presentation of the Review, with greater 
comfort  in  regard  to  the  Central  government’s  borrowing  programme  and  some  discomfort  at  the 
trends in revenue deficit relative to Budget Estimates. The conduct of market borrowing programmes 
of several States continues to be a matter of concern. 
A distinguishing feature of the current year has been the strong growth in bank credit. Non-food credit 
expanded by 18.1 percent in the current financial year up to December 24, 2004. The growth in credit 
for housing and consumer durables continues to be a matter of some concern to the extent it reflects 
on  credit  quality,  but  a  source  of  comfort  is  that  the  overall  credit  growth  of  late  is  reasonably  well 
dispersed across sectors. Though credit growth has shown an uptrend, money supply (M3) growth has 
remained subdued at 7.2 percent. By and large, the monetary trends are within the projections made 
in the Review. 
The  financial  markets  generally  remained  stable.  Though  there  was  upward  movement  in  interest 
rates in money and government securities markets in November, the interest rates have since reverted 
closer  to  levels  in  October  2004.  The  yield  spread  between  highly  rated  corporate  paper  and 
government  securities  increased.  Furthermore,  the  spread  between  long  term  and  short  term 
government securities has declined. 
In the credit markets, the benchmark prime lending rates remain generally unchanged though interest 
rates for housing have marginally firmed up. Public sector banks increased their rates for deposits of 
over one year. 
In the external sector, conditions in our forex market continue to be orderly. Global developments in 
regard to output growth, currency markets, etc. have not been divergent from our expectations in the 
Review and may continue to be so though uncertainties in regard to oil prices will continue, albeit in a 
muted  fashion.  Since  March  2004  the  rupee  has  tended  to  appreciate  against  the  US  dollar  and 
depreciate against other major currencies, primarily reflecting the weakening of US dollar. There are, 
however, some developments during the current year which are noteworthy. First, foreign exchange 
reserves increased by US$ 18.2 billion, from US$ 113.0 billion at end March 2004 to US$ 131.2 billion 
as at end December 2004. Nearly sixty per cent of the reserve accretion in the current financial year 
has come in two months (November and December) - perhaps indicative of the volatility in portfolio 
flows. 
Second, the trade-deficit on the balance of payments basis doubled to US$ 12.3 billion in the second 
quarter from US$ 5 billion in the first quarter - reflective of surge in imports - both due to increase in 
oil-prices and pick up in investment activity. There is no reason to believe that the trend will not persist 
for the rest of the year which may have a potential for a large trade-deficit during the year as a whole. 
Third, the current account of the balance of payments which was in a surplus of US$ 3.2 billion in the 
first quarter turned into a deficit of US$ 6.4 billion, reflective of not only surge in trade-deficit but also 
moderation in the invisibles surplus. It is, therefore, possible that the current account for the year as a 
whole may be marginally in deficit or very marginally in surplus. Despite the surge in trade-deficit, a 
strong case for further liberalisation of trade and rationalisation of tariffs persists since the beneficial 
effects of such liberalisation are evident. 
Fourth,  the  capital  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  shows  that  in  the  second  quarter,  external 
commercial  borrowings  and  short  term  credit  moderated,  while  there  were  outflows  under  banking 
capital. NRI deposits continued to register net outflows. Overall, however, the current trends do point 
to continued surpluses in balance of payments, with possible marginal deficit in the current account 
being  more  than  compensated  by  continued  strong  inflows,  particularly  on  account  of  inflows  on 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and FII flows. 
Our  emphasis  in  management  of  capital  account  has  generally  been  on  external  debt  as 
recommended by Rangarajan Committee, more than a decade ago, but there are several reasons, for 
exploring  an  appropriately  active  but  nuanced  management  of  non-debt  flows  at  this  stage.  The 
magnitudes of FDI/ FII flows are tending to be large and volatility has perhaps increased. The impact 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2005
of such flows on the stock markets is discernible, but perhaps less evident at this juncture in corporate 
ownership and control. The possible issues that need to be considered if one were to achieve a better 
management of non-debt components of capital flows that will address emerging concerns are: 
First, a view needs to be taken on the quantity and quality of FII flows. While quotas or ceilings, as 
practised by certain countries, may not be desirable at this stage, there is merit in our keeping such an 
option open and exercising it selectively as needed, after due notice to the FIIs. 
Second, there is scope for enhancing quality of flows through a review of policies relating to eligibility 
for registration as FIIs, and assessment of risks involved in flows through hedge funds, participatory 
notes,  sub-accounts,  etc.  Strict  adherence  to  ‘Know  Your  Investor’  principle,  especially  in  regard  to 
flows from tax-havens, including beneficial ownership would enhance quality. 
Third, price-based measures such as taxes could be examined though their effectiveness is arguable 
and hence may not be desirable. 
Fourth, FDI flows, as currently defined, also include transfer of equity from residents to non-residents 
and  a  disaggregated  analysis  of  FDI  through  several  routes  could  enable  a  policy-intervention,  as 
appropriate on quantities and quality. 
Fifth, since there are several routes by which non-residents could hold shares and voting power over 
Indian  corporates,  reporting  and  monitoring  arrangements  could  be  considered  for  assessing  the 
aggregate  shares  of  residents  (other  than  government)  and  non-residents  in  larger  corporates  and 
those in sensitive sectors in particular. Such monitoring could help timely policy-responses on several 
fronts. 
Finally,  consistent  with  the  principle  of  hierarchy  of  capital  flows,  a  view  could  be  taken  on  relative 
policy emphasis on sources and types of investment that need to be encouraged. For example, it is 
well  recognized  that  giving  better  incentives  to  foreign  investors  over  domestic  investors  results  in 
scope for “round-tripping” and inefficiencies. Similarly, if avenues for portfolio flows or equity-transfers 
from domestic to foreign investors are easily available and attractive, the flows under FDI defined in 
terms  of  adding  to  domestic  production-capacities  will  tend  to  be  smaller.  Attention  to  these  may 
simultaneously address micro or institutional issues relating to corporates, volatility issues relating to 
capital flows and financial markets, and above all ensure high-quality inflows of foreign savings which 
is more important to our country at this stage of development, to provide a healthy supplement to the 
domestic savings. 
Ultimately  our  unswerving  objective  has  to  remain  a  sustained  growth  rate,  moderate  inflation  and 
distributive justice, in an atmosphere of overall stability. 
It  has  indeed  been  a  pleasure  listening  to  the  illuminating  remarks  of  Dr.  Deshpande,  Dr.  Chandra 
Mohan, Dr. Narsimha Reddy and Dr. Parikh. Let me conclude by expressing, once again, my deep 
appreciation of the excellent and pioneering work undertaken by IGIDR on developmental issues. 
Thank you. 
