Burhanuddin Abdullah: Progressing towards a sound, strong banking system 
for promoting development 
Address  by  Mr  Burhanuddin  Abdullah,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  2005  Bankers’  Dinner, 
Jakarta, 14 January 2005. 
 Introduction 
Fellow Bankers in Indonesia, 
Senior colleagues at Bank Indonesia, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
Assalamu‘alaikum wr.wb, 
Good evening, and greetings to you all, 
I. 
At the outset, let us first of all express our gratitude to God Almighty that we are still able to gather 
here this evening in good health to attend the Annual Bankers’ Dinner for the year 2005. For us in the 
banking  community,  it  has  been  our  tradition  to  gather  together  for  a  moment  of  reflection  and 
communication among us.  
Furthermore, on this occasion, allow me, on behalf of the Board of Governors of Bank Indonesia to 
extend to you our very best wishes for the Year 2005.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The year 2004 has just ended. As we reflect on the year 2004, we can say that it was a year that was 
full of events that had meaning. It was a year full of accomplishments but also a year full of challenge. 
Perhaps we can say that 2004 was a year where we experienced the peak of political transition and in 
the process we have successfully conducted the general election in a democratic, peaceful, honest, 
and fair manner. It was a year where our society has succeeded to recompose itself in an accelerated 
fashion so that our social life can function in more tranquility. We can also note that the year 2004 was 
also the year where we achieved macroeconomic stability which would provide a stronger basis on 
which  to  base  the  growth  of  our  economy.  Exports  and  investment  are  beginning  to  show  signs  of 
vitality in order enabling a more broad-based growth to take place. In our external relations, we can 
also note that the year 2004 was the year that we have regained our place and our role as member of 
the  international  community.  We  have  shown  we  have  achieved  maturity  as  a  nation  and  as  a 
democratic society. We have also shown that we are able to deal with the problems we faced in our 
own way and with our own program. In short, the year 2004 was a year where we are beginning again 
to show our own identity as a nation and our determination to stand on our own two feet. 
With the record achieved in the year 2004 it was natural for us to look to the year 2005 with optimism. 
However,  as  we  approach  the  end  of  the  year  2004  a  series  of  serious  natural  disasters  had  also 
occurred that overshadowed the record of accomplishments we achieved. The earthquake in Nabire 
on  the  Eastern  end  of  our  country  and  the  Tsunami  disaster  in  Aceh  and  North  Sumatera  on  the 
Western end of the country had shocked all of us. We have been deeply saddened by the news of the 
disaster  where  more  than  one  hundred  thousands  of  lives  had  been  lost  as  well  as  property  and 
infrastructure. 
In the face of the tragic losses of lives and property I wish to extend my deepest sense of gratitude for 
the concern and commitment that have been shown by the banking community to help our brethrens 
in Aceh and Sumatera who suffered from the calamities. Assistance for disaster relief from the banking 
community coordinated by Bank Indonesia has so far reached Rp. 67.8 billion. I also wish to extend 
my  deepest  appreciation  to  those  in  the  banking  community  who  institutionally  or  individually  have 
organized the relief efforts on their own, and to who had even delivered the assistance directly on the 
location in the disaster areas.  
Moreover, may I also take this opportunity to express my great appreciation for the strong commitment 
of the banking community to restore economic activities in Aceh. In my visit together with the group of 
the Coordinating Minister last week, I am gratified to note that all banks that have had operation in 
Aceh have again resumed their normal operation.  
It is also with great sadness to learn that more than 170 bank employees in Aceh have been reported 
to have died or are missing in the disaster. More than 120 bank offices have been seriously damaged 
   1/12 
in  Aceh.  Under  such  conditions  it  is  heartening  to  learn  that  banks  have  begun  their  operation  on 
January  3,  2005,  one  week  after  the  disaster  occurred.  Bank  clearing  operation  had  resumed  on 
January 5 2005. Thus the payments of salaries to civil servants in Aceh have been made according to 
the normal process prevailing in the rest of the economy. Up to today, it has been reported that of the 
13  banks  operating  in  Aceh,  7  have  resumed  their  operation  in  their  premises,  2  in  a  newly-rented 
premises, and 4 operating in premises made available by Bank Indonesia. 
Distinguished guests, fellow officials from Bank Indonesia, ladies and gentlemen, 
Theme: strengthening the banking industry 
II. 
The  theme  I  have  chosen  for  my  address  this  evening  is  “Progressing  Towards  a  Sound,  Strong 
Banking System for Promoting Development.” This theme has been deliberately chosen based on the 
facts  and  urgency  of  future  developments  that  challenge  us  to  resolve  fundamental  problems 
pertaining  to  the  lifeblood  of  the  industry.  In  recent  years,  various  efforts  have  been  targeted  with 
emphasis  on  maintaining  macroeconomic  stability,  with  Bank  Indonesia’s  attention  drawn  more 
towards resolving economic and monetary issues. Macroeconomic stability, as I frequently explained 
last year, is an element of continuity, a matter of essentiality for any economy seeking to progress. 
In  this  regard,  we  are  thankful  that  in  the  midst  of  a  multiplied  challenges  and  tests,  we  have 
succeeded in building and sustaining macroeconomic stability. The rupiah has been maintained at an 
encouraging  level,  despite  coming  under  pressure  around  mid-year,  and  the  inflation  rate  is  under 
relative control at a low 6.4%, with the domestic economy growing at about 5%. 
With the support of this macroeconomic stability and the fundamental understanding that higher levels 
of economic growth would require a strong and efficient banking industry, we launched the Indonesian 
Banking Architecture (API) at the beginning of 2004. This master plan for the future of the banking 
industry received enthusiastic comments from many quarters. Suggestions, input, and criticisms came 
from various parties with a concern and interest in our banking industry. All are aware that banking is a 
key if not the most important industry in turning the wheels of the economy. From that time forth, we 
have been buoyed with confidence in the ability of our banking industry to proceed with consolidation 
and institution building by laying down the foundations that will set the course for the banking industry.  
Having achieved macroeconomic stability, I envisage two important agenda for 2005. The first is to 
maintain  this  stability  with  focus  on  sustainability,  and  the  second  is  that  it  is  time  for  us  to  devote 
greater attention to the systems and institutions in the banking industry in order to build strength and 
deliver  results.  The  hard-won  macroeconomic  stability  should  not  be  frittered  away  because  of  the 
fragile condition  of  some banks  that could  endanger  the stability  of  the  system  as  a whole.  On  the 
other hand, the banking sector must be capable of building its strength and capacity so that it does not 
disrupt the stability that we have in hand and can deliver greater benefits to the public. To this end, 
banking  policy  in  2005  will  be  directed  towards  efforts  to  strengthen  the  banking  industry  with  new 
measures to reinforce policy and concrete actions to accelerate the bank consolidation process. 
The primary objective of consolidation in the banking sector is to strengthen the banking industry in 
the  face  of  mounting  future  competition.  It  is  this  ability  to  face  competition  that  will  determine  the 
ability  of  banks  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  public.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  Bank  Indonesia  in  the 
period  ahead  will  pay  an  increasingly serious  attention  toward banks  which are  unable  to meet  the 
requirements in the process of consolidation. Bank Indonesia will not hesitate to take a firm policy in 
order to ensure that the process will succeed. 
Let it not be that one bad apple spoils the whole barrel. We must not allow the progress we have so 
far achieved to be endangered by the problem faced by only a handful of banks with problems. The 
growing momentum of improvements in the banking sector must be safeguarded and supported by 
continuing corrective efforts.  
At our gathering this evening, I will present a number of policies that we will pursue throughout 2005 
and in the medium to long term. These are specifically the policies that we will institute to accelerate 
the consolidation process in the banking industry, as I touched on earlier. 
To  elaborate  and  discuss  the  theme  of  my  speech  this  evening,  I  will  first  explain  the  present 
macroeconomic conditions and outlook and the performance and prospects of the banking industry. 
This  section  will  be  followed  by  the  views  of  Bank  Indonesia  on  key  problems  and  challenges 
confronting the industry in 2005 and the medium term. In this section, I will also present the various 
   2/12 
policies that we have developed and now expect to resolve the various problems and challenges and 
build the Indonesian banking industry as a sound, strong, and efficient banking industry, of benefit to 
the  economy  and  society.  In  my  closing  remarks,  I  will  attempt  to  present  some  conclusions  by 
reiterating the key messages that I see as important and deserving of attention from us all. These are 
points that I expect to become the focus in our efforts to take the development of the banking industry 
to a new level in support of 7% economic growth in year 2008.  
Distinguished guests, fellow bankers, ladies and gentlemen, 
The macro environment of the banking industry 
III.  
Before  I  deal  with  future  policy  issues  on  banking,  I  wish  to  take  this  opportunity  to  glance  at  the 
macro-economic  factors  that  surround  the  operation  of  banks.  If  we  examine  the  development  of 
several key  indicators since  the crisis,  we can  note  with  some satisfaction  that  they  have generally 
show improvements. Various stabilization efforts undertaken by the Government and Bank Indonesia 
in  the  monetary  and  fiscal  fields  as  well  as  in  bank  restructuring  have  been  achieved  according  to 
expectation. 
Having achieved stability which we will continue to safeguard, we are now confident that the time has 
come to look ahead. After the initial focus of managing the immediate impact of the crisis had been 
undertaken, we had subsequently began to deal with the process of recovery by focusing on achieving 
and  maintaining  stability.  Our  next  phase  is  to  prepare  for  the  longer-run  policy  requirement  to 
generate the momentum for a higher and more sustained growth. This shift in the evolution of policy 
can be seen from phasing out of institutions that was directed at dealing with the immediate impact of 
the crisis. We have exited from the IMF program and the IBRA is now dissolved. 
Improvements in macroeconomic and monetary situation have ushered a more favorable environment 
to the economy. Stable inflation and interest rates levels have helped the business sector to obtained 
cheaper funding through both banking system and the capital market. For the banking system, stable 
interest rates at the level that was relatively low reduces credit risk of banks and hence progressively 
facilitate extension of credit to real sector. For the public, gradually decreasing of the level of interest 
rates, increases their access to bank credits and led to the increase in consumption of durable goods. 
This in turn had a positive impact on the real sector as reflected in the increase of GDP by 5% during 
year 2004. 
Improved macro-economic situation has a salutary impact on the real sector. Although so far growth 
has  been  spurt  by  consumption,  it  is  gratifying  to  note  that  investment  and  exports  are  begining  to 
show  improvements.  Growth  has  taken  place  across  wide  spectrum  of  sectors,  with  the  highest 
contribution coming from the process industries, trading and transportation. The fact that growth has 
taken  fairly  evenly  across  sectors  can  also  be  seen  by  looking  at  expenditures  when  outlays  for 
investments including investment credits have increased. In addition to the domestic factors that has 
contributed to growth, favorable external situation has also been helpful. The open global economy 
still provides opportunity for exports and prices of commodities of our interest have been improving. 
As  we  enter  2005,  we  look  forward  to  continued  improvement  in  the  Indonesian  economy.  I  am 
optimistic that macroeconomic stability will be sustained throughout the years to come. The rupiah is 
set  to  remain  stable  with  an  appreciating  trend,  while  inflation  in  overall  terms  will  stay  well  under 
control  despite  some  expected  pressure.  The  rupiah  is  forecasted  to  hold  stable  while  inflation  is 
predicted to stay on track with the government-mandated inflation target of 6%-7%. 
We predict that the Indonesian economy will grow in the range of 5.0%-6.0% while shifting to healthier 
balance  in  sources  of  growth.  The  year  2005  will  be  the  year  of  infrastructure.  The  government 
commitment to promoting development projects with added value for the economy, such as toll roads, 
ports,  telecommunications  and  transportation,  and  the  rail  network  is  a  key  factor  sustaining  our 
optimism for improvement in sources of economic growth and especially investment.  
Alongside this, non oil-gas exports are predicted to maintain their heartening trend, consistent with the 
favorable  conditions  in  the  international  economy,  a  competitive  exchange  rate  for  the  Rupiah,  and 
expanding  access  to  international  trade  financing.  Our  estimation  is  that  non  oil-gas  export  will 
continue to be driven by primary products, such as coal, nickel, and rubber, and some manufacturing 
sectors such as electronics and the food and beverages industry.  
   3/12 
Looking  ahead,  improvement  in  export  performance  will  be  contingent  on  none  other  than 
improvement in export competitiveness. Global imbalances that could potentially push China towards 
revaluation  of  the  Yuan  will  indeed  create  new  opportunities  for  Indonesian  exports  through 
substitution. However, given China’s high productivity and low labor costs, we will be able to avail this 
opportunity only if we succeed making improvements in productivity and efficiency. The challenges in 
penetrating  export  markets  will  become  significantly  harder  in  2005  with  the  elimination  of  textile 
export quotas,  while so  far,  almost 60%  of  our  textile  and  textile  products  have  been sold  to  quota 
countries such as the United States and the European Union. With the abolition of quotas, China and 
India, the world’s leading competitors in the textile industry, are predicted to control a 60% share of the 
global market. 
Distinguished guests, fellow bankers, ladies and gentlemen 
Performance of the banking industry  
IV.  
Improved macroeconomic condition and stability and growing momentum in growth has had a positive 
impact  on  the  banking  sector.  Extension  of  credits,  which  is  the  mainstay  of  banking  activities  has 
gradually increased and it has now reached a significant level. Moreover, what is even more gratifying 
is the increase in investment credits,which during the crisis had been lagging behind. It is reasonable 
to expect that bank intermediation will further improve in the years ahead. 
On the more microeconomic side, the banking industries have achieved some significant progress in 
many fronts. A number of measures and programs for internal consolidation and restructuring which 
have been implemented since a few years ago have continued to show satisfactory progress. This can 
been seen  from  the strengthening  in  the  capital structure  of  banks  and  from the  reduction  of  credit 
risks as well as increase in profitability. The Capital adequacy ratio of banks [CAR] has arrived at a 
more satisfactory level, stabilizing at 20%. Problem credits has been under better control as shown by 
our  figures  on  net  non-performing  loans  (NPL)  of  2.1%  and  gross  non-performing  loans  of  6.7%. 
Lower  NPLs  improves  profitability  of  bank.  In  fact,  the  banking  industry  enjoys  one  of  the  highest 
returns to capital.  
Even  more  impressive  is the  progress achieved  in syaria banking.  Rapid  growth  in  this segment  of 
banking can be seen from the rapid increase in banks undertaking shariah banking, their total asset, 
as  well  as  the  amount  financing  being  extended  by  shariah  banks.  It  is  appropriate  to  note  with 
satisfaction that the intermediation function performed by shariah banks have been high where their 
FDR had reached 104%. This level of FRD has placed Indonesian shariah banks high in the ranks 
among shariah banks in any country in the world. This level of FDR is even higher than the level of 
conventional bank which only reached 50%. 
However, with market share still around the 1% mark, sharia banking has not yet reached the point of 
providing  a  significant  contribution  to  the  economy.  Nevertheless,  with  the  record  achieved  so  far 
shariah banks have demonstrated the viability of alternative financing to the public. However, with the 
brisk  growth  achieved  in  recent  years,  the  sharia  banking  industry  has  vividly  demonstrated  its 
capacity  to  offer  an  alternative  avenue  for  financing  to  the  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
(SMEs). Therefore, it would not be an exageration to anticipate that in the years to come the share of 
shariah  banking  will  increase  significantly,  at  least  comparable  to  the  share  in  other  countries 
members of the Organization of Islamic Conference. 
Looking  ahead,  it  is  envisaged  that  sustained  macroeconomic  stability  will  pave  the  way  for  the 
banking  system  to  strengthen  the  bank  intermediary  function.  This  is  expected  to  boost  lending  in 
2005 by 20% or about Rp 106.2 trillion. With the continued overliquid condition of the banking system 
and the moderate 6% increase in deposit funds, this projected growth is seen as achievable. 
Investment  credit,  which  began  to  pick  up  in  2004,  is  predicted  to  expand  further  particularly  as 
infrastructure  projects  get  under  way.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  banking  system  can  play  a  key-
financing role in the Government plan to accelerate the construction of infrastructure. In this regard, I 
call on banks to keep a close watch on their funding structure and experience and capacity in project 
financing. In the consumer sector, credit expansion is predicted to remain strong and will be the first 
choice  for  private  banks  and  foreign  banks  as  more  banks  enter  into  cooperation  with  multifinance 
companies. In the property sector, banks need to exercise greater caution in lending because of the 
higher risk of default on loans for purchase of apartments and office premises.  
   4/12 
In  the  SME  and  microenterprise  sector,  lending  soared  in  2004  and  this  trend  can  be  expected  to 
continue in the years to come. For many banks SMEs would remain one of the preferred areas for the 
allocation of credits. We need to respond positively to the initiative launched by the UN to declare this 
year as the International year of micro-credit to help SMEs. With the great potential that are available 
in the SMEs given banks the opportunity to perform their intermediation function. 
To extend support to the SMEs, efforts need to be devoted to encourage the Peoples’ Credit Bank 
(BPR), as the financial institution closest to SMEs in their operation, to enhance their capacity to deal 
with  SMEs.  The  proximity  of  BPR  to  SMEs,  both  physically  and  “psychologically”,  is  part  of  the 
strength  of  these  banks  that  we  will  continue  to  build.  Looking  ahead  at  the  next  1-3  years,  Bank 
Indonesia will pursue measures to promote institutional and capacity building to enhance the capacity 
of BPR to perform this function and to assume the function of a community bank that would be the 
spearhead of micro-credit extension. 
Going  forward,  the  banking  industry  need  to  examine  and  develop  innovations  to  assist  the 
development  of  SMEs.  These  innovation  could  extend  the  scope  of  financing  to  SMEs  and  at  the 
same time reduce the risks of extending credits to the sector. In this connection, it may be noted that 
since  recent  time,  we  have  launched  a  pilot  project  in  cooperation  with  local  governments  and 
ASKRINDO to explore the possibility of creating a guarantee scheme for credits extended to SMEs. It 
is  our  hope  that  the  pilot  project  could  be  expanded  to  more  regions  if  it  proves  to  be  effective  to 
reduce  the  credit  risk  to  SMEs  that  has  hitherto  represented  a  major  obstacle  to  lending  by  the 
banking sector. 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
Problems and challenges 
V.  
As I have mentioned, our goal is to develop a banking industry that would be strong and proactive in 
order  to  be  able  to  support  a  sustained  growth  of  our  economy.  In  the  years  ahead  despite  the 
progress we have achieved, we are fully aware that we will continue to face a series of problems and 
challenges. Given the dynamic nature of the banking industry, it can only be expected that routine, 
technical, and operational issues will emerge from time to time as we move forward on our journey. 
However, we will not be confronting only technical and operational issues. Our lives will not be that 
easy. The multidimensional crisis we have faced has left some deep scars at the level of the systems, 
institutions,  and  individuals.  Segments  in  our  society  have  blamed  us,  the  banking  industry,  for  the 
misfortunes that they have suffered arising from the crisis. At certain stage the banking industry had 
suffered a loss of public confidence. This highly abstract but fundamental factor that is central to the 
banking  industry,  trust,  seemed  for  a  while  to  have  been  uprooted  from  the  core  of  the  banking 
community. There was a feeling at some quarters in the public that the banking industry have failed to 
provide a sense of security. The reverse also took place. The trauma of debtors defaulting on their 
loan agreements similarly led to a loss of confidence in the banking system in their debtor customers.  
Restoring this fundamental building block in the banking business is no easy task. Although we have 
in  general  achieved  much  progress,  there  are  many  more  things  that  need  to  be  done  in  order  to 
regain the trust that had been undermined. We must take steps to regain some of the lost trust by 
taking steps from the most simple to the most sophisticated. Some the the major challenges we will 
continue to face and resolve are: 
First, the problem of relying excessively on short-term fund leading to the predominance of 
short term credits 
Although on the average in 2004 deposits experienced a modest increase, the composition of deposits 
have  been  dominated  by  those  with  maturity  of  1  month.  In  the  meantime,  deposits  with  longer 
maturities have gradually declined. They have been subsequently placed in instruments issued by non 
bank financial institutions such as bonds and mutual funds. 
With  this  composition  of  deposit  funds,  the  banking  system  as  a  whole  faces  the  problem  of  high 
volatility  of  funds.  This  in  turn  will  hinder  the  banking  system  from  placing  funds  in  long-term 
investment financing. The present condition has encouraged banks to seek business in consumption 
credit or working capital credit carrying relatively short terms in order to avoid difficulties with mismatch 
between funding sources and placements. 
   5/12 
Second, problems with information concerning the debtor soundness have eroded the 
confidence of the banking industry in the real sector, hampering the intermediary function 
We  must  admit  that  despite  the  improvement  in  the  intermediary  function  over  the  years,  among 
conventional banks the function is still not operating as it should. This is indicated by the continued 
high risk premium charged by banks, resulting in the slow decline in lending rates and the tendency of 
banks  to  focus  their  efforts  in  credit  expansion  on  existing  debtors  and  short-term  credit  carrying 
relatively low credit risk. This problem stems primarily from lack of information on the soundness of 
debtors  that  would  reduce  the  perception  of  risk  in  the  banking  system  regarding  prospective 
borrowers. 
Within this context, the challenge is how to improve transparency and accuracy on flows of information 
on debtors/prospective borrowers and economic sectors with potential for lending. This also includes 
information on the policy direction in the real sector, how to build the understanding and capacity of 
banks in assessing risk, and how to improve legal certainty in the resolution of problem loans in order 
to reduce the negative impact of the cost of problem loans on the risk perceptions of banks. 
On  the  other  hand,  banks  must  be  able  to  understand  the  wide  ranging  technical  aspects  and  the 
economic  dynamics  operating  in  the  sectors  where  they  intend  to  market  their  credits.  Excessive 
concentration of credits in certain sector, in the long term will lead to market saturation, which in turn 
would increase the risk in extending credit to this sector. Accordingly, bank must be more proactive 
and constructive in providing opportunity of financing in sectors which are productive and which have 
not so far being touched optimally.  
Third, the credibility of the banking system will be contingent on the ability of the banking 
industry to strengthen good corporate governance, including management of operational risk 
During 2004, we witnessed a number of cases generally related to the inability of banks to manage 
operational  risks,  particularly  in  regard  to  fraud  committed  by  bank  owners  and  management.  The 
incidence of fraud points to bad faith on the part of owners and managers who exploit their banks for 
dishonest personal gain. Failure on the part of individual banks, if allowed to continue, will undermine 
trust to the banking system. 
Another matter of fundamental importance and calling for urgent attention is the issue of integrity at all 
levels, including bank employees. The issue of integrity does not stand in isolation, but comprises part 
of another, larger problem of the deteriorating credibility of the banking system. 
In view of these facts, it is time for the focus of our attention to move up to the more advanced level of 
modern  management  of  the  banking  industry,  the  application  of  good  governance  principles,  and 
meticulous, scrupulous management of operational risk.  
Fourth, implementation of deposit insurance scheme requires banks to strengthen market 
confidence 
As I elaborated earlier, public confidence in the national banking industry at this time is not fully based 
on objective considerations. For the public, the Government blanket guarantee is a dominant factor in 
determining their opinion and confidence toward the banking system. 
This condition cannot be allowed to persist. Beginning in 2005, the Government blanket guarantee will 
be  phased  out  and  replaced  by  the  Deposit  Insurance  Agency  (LPS).  This  changeover  will  place 
added responsibility on the banking industry to build and maintain public confidence. Without a high 
level of confidence, the public will quickly move funds from the less trusted banks to sounder banks 
with stronger capital resources.  
To prevent this unhelpful phenomenon, the banking industry must be capable of proving that it exists 
as a secure, sound industry. In order to adequately functional in this environment, going forward banks 
soundness  would  be  determined  not  only  by  its  quantitative  prudential  indicators,  but  will  be  much 
wider to include a more qualitative assessment. Banks must be able to show their ability to strive in 
situation of fierce competition. In doing this, must be managed by professionals with high integrity who 
are  able  to  govern  between  prudence  and  the  management  of  risks  on  the  one  hand,  and 
aggressiveness and creativity in developing new opportunities on the other hand. All transactions must 
be conducted quickly, promptly, and accurately by means of an extensive office network with optimum 
utilization  of  information  technology.  Banks  ability  to  implement  modernization  and  to  adopt  best 
   6/12 
practices  must  become  a  distinct  feature  of  strategic  management  that  has  selling  value  and  can 
always be transparently monitored by the public.  
Conversely, banks that are unable to meet the expectation and aspiration of the public as described 
above would inevitably be abandoned by its customers. Failure to anticipate this means that the banks 
concerned will inexorably find difficulty in keeping up with normal business, suffer substantial loss or 
even deteriorating its soundness to the level that may endanger its existence.  
Fifth, the banking industry is constantly challenged by competition from non-bank products, 
such as mutual funds, bonds, and insurance 
As I have mentioned in our bankers’ dinner last year, banks in 2004 would face an increasingly tight 
competition  both  among  each  other  and  competition  arising  from  other  financial  institutions.  If  we 
compare  the banking  and non-banking  industries,  it  is  obvious  that  growth  in non-bank  instruments 
such as mutual funds has outpaced growth in bank products. Last year, the level of banks deposit has 
only increase slightly by 4.5% whereas net asset value of mutual funds increased by an impressive 
40%. On the other hand, bank credits during 2004 grew only by 20% whereas the Jakarta Composite 
Index grew more rapidly, especially during the second half of the year, to close 44% higher at year 
end.  
The higher return in bullish capital market is also a contributing to a tighter competition faced by banks 
in mobilizing deposit funds. On one hand, the rate of interest offered on bank funds is limited, being 
tied  to  movements  in  the  blanket  guarantee  scheme  rates.  On  the  other  hand,  mutual  funds  that 
comprised of fixed income instruments can offer a fixed and significantly higher return as compared to 
any  bank  product.  Return  from  investment  in  the  stock  exchange  was  even  higher.  Moreover, 
competition  also  stemmed  from  insurance  company  that  also  offer  hybrids  of  insurance  and 
investment services, known as unit links.  
The highly active bonds market in the recent period is expected to escalate in the periods ahead. This 
in part is attributable to eminent issuance of new bonds by both the government as well as the private 
sectors  in  order  to  finance  physical  development.  The  volume  of  transaction  in  the  bond  market  is 
expected to be relatively high would of course influence the decision of the public to place their funds 
in this instruments. 
The  increasing  trend  of  types  of  financial  instruments  offered  to  public  is  expected  to  continue  the 
period  ahead.  This  condition  in  turn  would  have  an  impact  in  slowing  the  growth  time  deposit 
especially  those  deposits  with  maturity  longer  than  1  month.  On  the  assumption  that  interest  rates 
would remain relatively stable, it can be expected that the share of this product in the market would 
continue  to  decline  while  the  mutual  funds  that  are  sold  through  banks  will  experience  significant 
increase. 
It is important to note the increasing role of banking industry in the growth of mutual funds. The extent 
of the involvement can be attributed to the close relationship between banks with security companies 
which issued mutual funds. The closeness of this relationship makes it difficult to distinguish between 
activities of banks from those of other financial institutions. This phenomenon in bank operation of the 
banking system and the coming strengthening of the regulatory framework for collateralized securities 
products linked to the banking system appear likely to take bank industry to a new dynamic that would 
lead toward a more universal characteristics of banking practices. In turn, however, this will aggravate 
the  inherent  risks  in  the  banking  system  and  lead  to  a  wider  contagious  effect.  This  is  because 
instability in the market for one type of product will quickly spread, affecting the overall stability of the 
banking industry. 
It is logical to expect that strategic alliance would continue to develop, as the operation of financial 
institutions become more integrated and interrelated to one another. Nonetheless, our expectation is 
that the bank sector would be able to continue to be the driving force in development of these new 
products. This strategic function can operate directly and indirectly. Directly, banks can serve as the 
originator  of  such  products.  And  indirectly,  banks  can  act  as  selling  agent,  creditor  to  financial 
institutions or as owner of non bank financial institutions such as insurance and security companies.  
Distinguished guests, fellow bankers, ladies and gentlemen 
   7/12 
Future policy direction 
VI.  
Within the banking industry, we have long been aware of these problems and challenges. Responding 
to  this,  we  have  worked  together  to  map  out  actions  and  do  what  is  necessary  to  ensure  the 
sustainability of our banking system. Our desired objective is for the banking system to regain its place 
as a reliable, trusted industry capable of promoting national economic growth. 
To accelerate this change and respond to the various problems and challenges that lie before us, we 
have  formulated  a  number  of  policy  directions  for  the  banking  system  that  we  believe  will  set  the 
course  for  the  future  dynamics  of  the  national  banking  industry.  These  policy  direction  include  the 
following: 
Market driven consolidation  
Directives consolidation  
Heavy-handed consolidation. 
First, accelerate the consolidation process in the banking industry 
In  the  Indonesian  Banking  Architecture  (API),  Bank  Indonesia  has  laid  out  a  series  of  measures  to 
build  the  soundness  and  strength  of  the  national  banking  industry.  Under  this  policy,  the  banking 
industry  consolidation  program  is  a  key  initiative  that  sets  the  course  for  the  future  of  the  national 
banking industry. Within the next 10-15 years, the national banking industry must become capable of 
serving as a sound, strong, and dynamic backbone to the economy and of delivering results. However, 
as I explained earlier, the present situation and challenges and an array of unexpected events in 2004 
have compelled us to adopt a shorter time frame for consolidation of the banking industry.  
In this regard, we must realize that to create a sound, robust, strong, and efficient banking industry, 
the industry consolidation will not be achieved without first going through a process of consolidation at 
the level of the individual bank. And, it is this process of individual consolidation that we must strive to 
complete in 2005. The picture is that an industry putting its house in order and striving for growth must 
first be sterilized of potential systemic risk that could arise from problems at individual banks. 
Before  the  recent  launching  of  the  API,  Bank  Indonesia  put  together  a  range  of  scenarios  for  the 
consolidation program for the building of soundness and strengthening of the banking industry as a 
whole. These scenarios are: 
• 
• 
• 
These scenarios are in essence of a sequence of action programs that are mutually complementary, 
should one of the scenarios earlier in the sequence prove ineffective and fail to deliver the desired 
results. 
Taking into account the developments that have taken place since the introduction of the API in early 
2004,  Bank  Indonesia  is  now  readying  itself  to  apply  the  second  scenario  in  the  consolidation 
program, which in essence is an acceleration of the consolidation program scenario set out in the API. 
The accelerated consolidation cannot be postponed any longer. We all know that pain will continue to 
afflict  us  and  will  be  difficult  to  heal  if  we  persist  in  concealing  a  wound.  The  credo  of  intensifying 
competition will sooner or later open up any and every wound suffered by non-competitive banks. For 
us  to  restore  soundness,  we  must  open  the  wound  and  take  serious  action,  including  possible 
amputation.  This  is  the  analogy  that  underlies  the  thinking  on  why  we  must  proceed  with  the 
consolidation of the banking industry at this time. The choice lies before us, to reduce problems to the 
minimum and deal with them as early as possible or wait until the condition becomes irreversible. The 
second choice is clearly undesirable, as it could potentially trigger instability in the overall system. 
The  consolidation  scenario  that  we  are  considering  for  implementation  in  2005  will  begin  with  a 
process of identifying the medium and large banks that are currently in very sound shape and have 
adequate human resources to expand market share without sacrificing prudential banking principles. 
Our  expectation  is  that  these  will  become  the  anchor  banks  capable  of  stimulating  a  process  of 
strengthening among other banks whose future ability to compete is reportedly constrained by a range 
of factors. 
In conjunction with the process of determining these anchor banks, Bank Indonesia will also identify 
the  banks  that  have  or  are  thought  to  have  lost  competitiveness  because  of  their  inability  to  build 
stronger  resources  and  especially  capital.  These  banks  will  then  be  grouped  with  other  banks  in 
reasonably good condition but which lack competitiveness because of limited market share and are 
   8/12 
experiencing downward trends in both assets and deposit funds. Each group of banks will be offered 
three options: first, acquisition by an anchor bank; second, merger with other banks in the group; and 
third, a combination of merger between a number of banks and an anchor bank. 
In  the  merger  and  acquisition  process,  identification  of  similarities  in  operations,  market  segment, 
ownership links, and business orientation of the two parties, both the acquiring bank and the bank to 
be taken over in the acquisition, are key aspects that should form the basis of any decisions taken. It 
is  hoped  that  with  a  consolidation  mechanism  based  on  the  objective  condition  of  each  individual 
bank, the stakeholders will be open and willing to see that the process will benefit all involved. The 
banking system will be significantly strengthened, because its actors are banks with optimum levels of 
resilience and competitiveness. 
The  first  scenario  for  accelerated  consolidation  described  above  will  naturally  be  reinforced  by  a 
variety  of  supportive  measures,  such  as  provision  of  incentives for  acquisitions  or  mergers  and  the 
issuance of special regulations requiring banks meeting certain criteria to proceed immediately with 
consolidation. By adopting what are regarded as more concrete policy measures for consolidation, the 
hope  is  that  the  national  banking  industry  will  be  made  up  of  banks  that  possess  the  strong 
commitment  and  capacity  to  play  an  optimum  role  in  the  national  development  process.  Bank 
Indonesia has  taken steps  to  prepare for  implementing  this consolidation policy  through  a  series  of 
amendments  to  the  Legal  Lending  Limit  provisions,  particularly  in  regard  to  restrictions  on  equity 
participation, and we will announce the new provisions in the near future.  
Second, reorientation of the working mechanisms and procedures of the national banking 
industry to more effectively accommodate the needs of the national economy 
Parallel with the process of institutional consolidations, banks are also required to revitalize their mode 
of  operation. The  process of  allocating funds  that  is practiced  by banks have been so  far relatively 
passive. Decisions are not based on accurate research information concerning the sectors they are 
financing. In the years ahead, banks must be able to identified more clearly the various market niches 
they wish to operate in and must be proactive in seeking the potential clients in those sectors. The 
human resources in the bank cannot stand by idly, satisfied with their acquired formal education. They 
must be trained to understand the realities in the market in which they operate.  
The banking system cannot keep operating only on a conventional basis. The advantage of having 
complete information on the condition of a certain business or industrial sector will ease the work of 
the banking system in carrying out its function. The perception of credit risk in the sector will decline 
and the competitive atmosphere will improve, because any financing activity undertaken by banks will 
be based on their strengths. The current phenomenon of disintermediation in the banking system will 
disappear because banks will no longer have doubts about the condition of a sector that it intends to 
finance.  This  revitalization  process  gained  added  validity  when  we  all  agreed  that  the  SME  and 
microenterprise  sector  would  become  the  future  of  our  future  expansion.  Financing  in  this  sector 
literally  demands  an  in-depth  understanding  for  the  potential  and  productivity  of  the  sector  to  be 
developed to the full extent. 
Third, take steps to strengthen the financial system infrastructure  
A  sound,  efficient  banking  system  requires  adequate  infrastructure.  In  this  regard,  it  is  essential  to 
have  an  adequate  financial  safety  net  (FSN).  To  move  towards  the  establishment  of  an  adequate 
FSN,  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  Government  have  jointly  completed  the  formulation  of  the  policy 
framework for the FSN that also encompasses the soon-to-be-established Deposit Insurance Agency 
(LPS).  With  the  establishment  of  this agency,  the  responsibilities  for  management  of  the guarantee 
program and resolution of insolvent problem banks will be defined more clearly. To provide assurance 
of the maintenance of financial system stability in regard to the banking system, implementation of the 
LPS  guarantee  will  be  phased  in  so  that  deposit  funds  will  ultimately  be  guaranteed  only  to  a 
maximum of Rp 100 million. 
In  addition,  Bank  Indonesia  has  worked  untiringly  to  promote  the  application  of  Good  Corporate 
Governance  (GCG)  at  all  levels  of  bank  management.  Bank  Indonesia  is  currently  upgrading  the 
provisions  relevant  to  GCG  in  the  banking  system  and  the  new  GCG  regulations  pertaining  to  the 
functions of the board of commissioners and board of directors should be ready in the near future. At 
some  point  in  the  future,  Bank  Indonesia  will  also  consider  an  intensive  study  of  possibilities  for 
changes to the regulations governing ownership of bank shares.  
   9/12 
Because  the  implementation  of  GCG  requires  very  strong  cooperation  and  commitment  from  all 
parties involved in the banking industry, Bank Indonesia will facilitate the establishment of a banking 
GCG forum in the near future in cooperation with banking associations and the national committee for 
GCG.  This  forum  is  expected  to  discuss  and  set  out  a  regular  program  for  the  issues  related  to 
governance  in  the  banking  system.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  once  again  that  the 
responsibility for implementing GCG and management of operational risk does not rest solely with the 
Compliance Director. All line management and members of the Board of Commissioners must play 
their part in strengthening and upholding GCG.  
In  the  coming  year  we  must  also  take  stronger  action  against  irresponsible  parties  who  have 
besmirched  our  image.  Prevention  of  acts  of  bad  faith  by  bank  owners  and  management  clearly 
requires  coordination  and  cooperation  from  parties  on  many  sides.  I  call  on  all  members  of  the 
banking  system  to  be  critically  vigilant  of  the  practices  going  on  within  our  community,  and  also 
provide  input  and  support  for  the  introduction  of  adequate  legal  instruments  and  stronger  law 
enforcement.  We  are  Bank  Indonesia  have  and  will  continue  to  build  networks  of  coordination  and 
cooperation  with  all  concerned,  ranging  from  the  banks  themselves,  associations,  and  other 
authorities  including  law  enforcement  agencies  to  work  systematically  and  persistently  to  bring 
certainty  of  law  enforcement  into  banking  governance  in  Indonesia.  Bank  Indonesia  is  currently 
working with the Ministry of Finance in drafting a Joint Decree to strengthen coordination between the 
two institutions for action against fraud possibly committed by banks and other financial institutions. 
On the other hand, we all know that the banking system will also face mounting operational challenges 
in the future. Rapid advances in technology will increase the complexity of banking business and lead 
to the emergence of increasingly innovative products. However, as an industry that has just pulled out 
of crisis, we must recognize that the banking system faces major limitations in its ability to anticipate 
risks. For this reason, we need measures for planned and systematic improvement in the quality of 
risk management. Not long ago, Bank Indonesia issued regulations on risk management that apply to 
all commercial banks as a minimum standard that banks will soon be required to meet.  
To build the quality and competence of banking personnel in risk management, Bank Indonesia has 
introduced the requirement for risk management certification for all levels of bank management. The 
certification program was launched in 2004 in a program for bank executives, and so far, a total of 252 
commercial bank directors have completed their certification. The program will be continued in 2005 
for commissioners and also all banking personnel whose work is relevant to the control and operation 
of risk management.  
Furthermore, 
function,  supporting 
infrastructure is needed that will enable the lending process to operate more quickly and reduce the 
potential for problem loans. To this end, Bank Indonesia has initiated the establishment of the Credit 
Bureau set to commence operation in 2005. We have waited long for the Credit Bureau, and a great 
many have repeatedly asked me when this plan will come to fruition. We fully understand the urgent 
need of banks for this supporting infrastructure, not only to improve the quality of decision making, but 
also for increased quantity of lending. We have completed the various preparations and as an initial 
step  to  support  the  operation  of  the  Credit  Bureau,  we  will  soon  release  the  Bank  Indonesia 
Regulation  on  the  Debtor  Information  System.  This  regulation  in  essence  requires  banks  to  report 
information on all debtors, and this information will then be available to banks to support their lending 
needs. 
the  effectiveness  of 
to  strengthen 
intermediary 
the  bank 
Fourth, improving bank prudential aspects and intermediary function 
In  the  next  few  days,  as  we  promised  not  long  ago,  Bank  Indonesia  will  issue  the  “Banking  Policy 
Package” with 3 (three) key objectives that I can mention here: 
First, promote the operation of the intermediary function and consolidation of the banking system in 
productive  business  sectors,  as  reflected  in  the  Bank  Indonesia  Regulations  on  the  Legal  Lending 
Limit, the Debtor Information System, and Asset Securitization; 
Second, promote efforts to build bank capacity in credit risk management, application of prudential 
principles,  and  sound  banking  practices  that  will  ensure  sustained  financial  system  stability.  This 
objective is clearly reflected in the regulations on Earning Assets Quality, Legal Lending Limit, Foreign 
Borrowings, and Asset Securitization; 
   10/12 
Third,  measures  to  improve  consumer  protection  through  certainty  in  the  application  of  standard, 
secure,  and  transparent  banking  services.  This  objective  will  be  achieved  through  the  issuance  of 
Bank Indonesia Regulations relevant to consumer protection and transparency of banking products. 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
Fifth, position the national banking industry on a level playing field  
It is naturally our hope that all of the policies, commitments, and measures to be pursued during 2005 
will bring our banking industry to a condition that will encourage and comfort our hearts. I believe that 
it is the aspiration of us all for the Indonesian banking community to stand in par with other banking 
systems  in  the  region.  For  this  reason,  we  are  working  as  quickly  as  possible  to  apply  the  best 
practices now established as international standards.  
With  this  objective  in  mind  and  having  held  intensive  discussions  with  the  banking  sector,  Bank 
Indonesia envisages the application of the Basel II working framework as a medium term program that 
we  must  strive  to  achieve  within  a  time  frame  of  3-5  years.  Bank  Indonesia  plans  to  launch  the 
application  of  the  Basel  II  working  framework  for  all  commercial  banks  in  2008.  This  working 
framework will be phased in, beginning with the most simple approaches. The policy is expected to 
influence  the  behavior  of  banks  in  risk  management.  It  is  also  based  on  the  consideration  that  the 
Indonesian  banking  system,  and  especially  the  big  banks,  have  become  part  of  the  international 
banking community, and therefore the application of Basel II can no longer be regarded as merely an 
option. 
We believe that the application of the Basel II framework will strengthen the resilience and stability of 
the  banking  system  and  promote  better  risk  management  practices.  In  practice,  the  application  of 
Basel II framework calls for thorough preparations by Bank Indonesia, the banking industry, and other 
stakeholders.  The  scale  of  comprehensive  preparations  encompasses  effective  risk  management 
practices,  competent  human  resources,  adequate  information  technology  and  databases,  and  other 
supporting infrastructure such as accounting standards based on International Accounting Standards 
(IAS) and credible rating agencies.  
In view of the scope of all that we will be required to do, it is clear that we face an array of daunting 
tasks.  To  this  end,  over  the  next  3  years  Bank  Indonesia  will  work  on  the  development  and 
implementation of action plans so that each of the crucial agenda that must be undertaken by us all, 
including Bank Indonesia, the banking system, and other stakeholders, will be focused and directed 
towards efforts to comply with all the criteria and conditions required under Basel II. 
Then, having put into place all the prerequisite conditions, we can look forward to having a banking 
industry at the end of 2010 that will be fully capable of applying best practices and most importantly 
Basel II.  
In this process, Bank Indonesia will strive to play a proactive role that is nevertheless proportionate to 
our mandate. We are strongly committed to continued facilitation of the various needs of the national 
banking system in response to the problems and challenges that we face in the future. We will keep 
working to synchronize our banking sector programs with the process of building the resilience and 
competitiveness of the business sector. Our studies and research will be guided to respond effectively 
to various problems and challenges. We will make further improvements to the quality of the regulatory 
framework so that the dynamics of the banking industry will keep moving on the desired course. Our 
supervisory actions will be more proactive to prevent problems, but will also be given stronger teeth to 
deal with problems that arise in order to safeguard the resilience and stability of the system. 
Summary and conclusion 
VII.  
We are of course aware of the limitations in undertaking the challenging tasks I have described this 
evening. That is we in Bank Indonesia are grateful for the support that we have enjoyed from many 
parties.  Indeed,  a  strong  and  healthy  banking  industry  is  an  objective  that  concerns  not  only  the 
monetary  authority.  This  aspiration  is  also  shared  by  the  general  public,  investors  and  owners  and 
managers  of  banks.  Therefore,  ultimately  a  healthy,  strong  and  proactive  banking  system  is  in  the 
interest of all in the society. 
The various actions, policies, and issues that provide the context as I explained earlier will also inform 
the recommendations put forward by Bank Indonesia for the drafting of the Amendment to the Banking 
   11/12 
Law,  likely  to  be  passed  in  2005.  To  ensure  that  we  all  have  ownership  in  this  Banking  Law,  the 
involvement of all members of the banking community in the drafting process will be essential. I will be 
looking forward to the contributions and criticisms from the banking industry regarding the draft law 
that is of such importance to us all. 
I am deeply gratified that the Government, and in particular, the President of the Republic, has given 
us  full  support  in  the  endeavors  we  are  undertaking  in  Bank  Indonesia  to  strengthen  the  banking 
industry. In our meeting with the President, the President had stated that Bank Indonesia should not 
leave any room for bankers or banks to the disturb the stability of the economy. I am equally gratified 
to see that members of the banking community have expressed the spirit and intention, as stated in 
our meetings with Perbanas recently to give stern warning to those bankers for conducts which do not 
adhere to the principle of prudence and who have violated principles of good corporate governance in 
at the expense of the broader interest of the banking industry and the public.  
As  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  we  have  so  far  achieved  significant  progress  in  putting  in  place  the 
foundation for economic stability and financial system more in line with challenges in the years ahead. 
However  we  are  also  aware  that  in  our  path  toward  achieving  the  objective  of  a  more  satisfactory 
financial and banking sector requires time. We are entering a crucial period in the process of transition 
toward a better future of banking system. The process of consolidating the national banking industry is 
an objective that we cannot compromise if the stability and resilience that we desire for the banking 
system is to be achieved. 
We must all take note, first of all that the coming years will be no time for complacency. Before us lies 
only one choice, to work hard to fulfill the commitments and sincere intentions to restructure whatever 
needs to be put right. We should no longer feel comfortable watching as the various problems unfold 
within our banking industry. In fact, we as the banking authority see that much remains for us to do to 
be able to meet this demand.  
The  second  point  is  that  in  the  future,  the  public  will  become  more  discerning  and  cautious  in  the 
selection  of  banks  capable  of  serving  their  transaction  needs.  They  will  only  be  willing  to  deal  with 
banks  that  provide  a  sense  of  security  while  also  offering  returns  on  the  funds  entrusted  to  their 
keeping. They will also select only those banks that understand their needs and are able to provide a 
wide  range  of  conveniences  in  their  services.  These  are  the  criteria  that  indeed  will  build  and 
strengthen public confidence. 
Much work remains to be done. We must do so systematically with clear design. The years ahead will 
not be without challenges, in fact we will face many more challenges than today. The days ahead will 
full of struggle but also full of hope. May God almighty gives us the strength and the resolve in our 
work to achieve a brighter future. Thank you.  
 
   12/12 
