Ardian Fullani: A brief look at the Albanian banking system 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Black  Sea  Business  Day, 
Yerevan, Armenia, 6 June 2005. 
 Distinguished Ladies and gentlemen, 
Dear participants, 
It’s a great pleasure for me having the opportunity to participate in this regional meeting of Black Sea 
countries. I have always appreciated this initiative as a special opportunity for all the countries being 
involved in. 
In my long career, I have realized that the success of this business consists generally in the ability it 
has to gain public confidence. Nevertheless, the overall economic, political and social environment of 
the country is playing also an important role. During my career, I have been witness of many events 
which directly or indirectly have damaged the banking system. 
The  monetary  collapse of  the  banking system at  the  end of  the communist  era,  the  flourishing  and 
degenerating  of  the  fraudulent  investment  schemes,  as  well  as  many  other  social,  political  and 
economic problems that have associated the Albanian transition, made the banking system “suffer” for 
a long time. However the reputation of the Albanian Banking system is in place recently. It’s enough if I 
just refer to the latest problematic episode occurred in Albania, in early spring of 2002, when due to 
the lack of public information and to political speculation with the introduction of the deposit guarantee 
scheme, the confidence of households was traumatized, leading to a considerable deposit run from 
the banking system. 
Having a look at all the statistical indicators, it results that the banking system at that time it 
was sound and growing continuously. But, all this was insufficient since the memories of year 
1997 (the collapse of fraudulent schemes) were still present and households sensitivity to them 
was very high. 
Inspite of the recent significant achievements I would like to stress that still there is a high potential of 
fragility in our economy and the entire region as well. As a consequence, I think that we have to be 
much more prudent and much more diligent when speaking about the financial stability of the country. 
This  episode  suggests,  inter  alia,  the  necessity  to  associate  the  reforms  with  concrete  preparatory 
steps and, certainly, combined with back-up plans in the case of failure. For this purpose the market 
needs  to  be  intensively  prepared  and  elaborated  since  in  early  stages  of  the  implementation  of 
reforms.  It  is  imperative  that  the  decisionmakers  should  themselves  know  in  advance  the  market 
behavior and sentiments. 
Last spring, a joint assessment of the Albanian financial sector conducted from both the International 
Monetary  Fund  and  World  Bank  (FSAP)  concluded  that:  the  financial  sector  consists  mainly  of  a 
regulated  and  supervised  banking  system.  The  Stress-Test  indicated  that  the  level  of  different  risk 
exposure to the banking system is rather low, an argument that supports this conclusion. 
The  banking  system  has  experienced  remarkable  developments  over  2004.  After  the  licensing  of 
Popular Bank, with Albanian capital, the number of banks increased from 15 to 16, and a preliminary 
license is granted to Union Bank, which is expected to raise the number of banks to 17 over 2005. The 
system assets have further increased by 14 percent while there was an increase of banking products 
and an expansion of their network. During this year there will be sold the public shares of both the 
Italian Albanian Bank and United Bank of Albania, which will lead to an increase of effectiveness and 
banking competition, paving the way to the processes of selling, merging and acquisitions towards a 
new consolidation of the banking system. 
The lending activity increased by 38 percent where one can distinguish inter alia the significant growth 
of medium-term and long-term loans compared to short-term loans. 
The  map  of  coverage  of  the  country  with  the  banking  system  has  further  expanded,  including  new 
areas  ever  covered  before.  At  the  end  of  2004,  the  total  number  of  branches  reached  88,  or 
11 branches more that the end of the previous year, while the number of agencies recorded for the 
first  time  a  full  three-digit  number,  100  and  the  number  of  the  employed  people  increased  by 
26 percent. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 1
The high increase of the number of branches relative to agencies shows that banks are not interested 
only in providing the service of collecting deposits but also in providing other products like crediting to 
the  economy.  These  developments,  besides  their  positive  contribution  in  enhancing  the  financial 
intermediation speak for a better perception of the investing potential from banks, in Albania. 
An  outstanding  development  is  mainly  related  to  the  client  service,  which  is  accompanied  through 
electronic  terminals  by  the  increasing  number  of  electronic  cards  in  circulation.  Banks  offer  already 
debit and credit cards in co-operation with international companies such as Visa and MasterCard. Six 
banks provide the ATM service and the number of ATMs reached 108 by the end of February 2005. 
The banking system results to have a profit level, which has been increasing to Lek 5.1 billion. Return 
on equity (ROE) was estimated at 21 percent while problem credits represent only 4.2 percent, from 
4.6 percent in the previous year. 
On  the  other  hand,  for  the  rest  of  the  financial  sector  the  FSAP  reports  indicates  many  problems, 
which  simultaneously  contain  many  themes  including  essential  issues  such  as  their  supervision. 
Although, due to their small dimensions, these problems do not present imminent risks for the time 
being, they still should be carefully examined and resolved. 
Returning to the assessments made under FSAP in other countries similar to Albania (I mainly refer 
here to South East European Countries, SEEC) and to many other financial reports referring to this 
region,  we  realize  that  these  problems  are  similar  and  these  countries  suffer  more  or  less  similar 
symptoms.  If  one  has  a  look  back  at  the  history,  it  realizes  that  it  can  not  happen  differently.  The 
regional tradition is poor, of little inheritance in institutions, market rule and behaviour, and financial 
intermediation.  However,  today,  about  15  years  after  the  big  collapse  of  the  communist  regime  it 
seems that South East European Countries (SEEC) have been engaged in an irreversible process of 
their stabilization and integration with the rest of Europe. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2005
