Lars Heikensten: Thoughts on how to develop the Riksbank’s monetary policy 
work 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Swedish  Economics 
Association, Stockholm, 22 February 2005. 
 Introduction 
Allow me to begin by thanking you for the invitation to once again visit the Economics Association and 
speak about monetary policy.  
Since  I  was  here  a  year  ago  there  has  been  a  relatively  lively  debate,  by  Swedish  standards,  on 
monetary policy. Some commentators have focused on the currently low inflation rate, but what has 
really  added  fuel  to  the  debate  is  the  rise  in  unemployment  that  has  occurred  despite  record-low 
interest  rates  and  strong  growth.  Other  participants  have  centred  on  the  low  interest  rates,  voicing 
concerns over their implications for credit growth, household debt and the housing market. 
I don’t intend to enter into this discussion today, however. Instead, I would like to take advantage of 
the  opportunity  to  have  a  more  fundamental  discussion  about  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy 
framework, its monetary policy analysis and the possibilities to improve the material underpinning our 
decisions. I shall describe the changes that we are planning to make to our methods. At the same time 
I should stress that it is not a question of changing the Bank’s monetary policy strategy. 
The Riksbank’s inflation targeting policy today 
An explicit target and a clear intellectual framework 
The  Riksbank’s  decision  in  1993  to  let  its  policy  be  guided  by  an  inflation  target  was  a  fairly  new 
approach  at  the  time.1  The  idea  had  only  really  been  tried  in  three  other  countries  before  (New 
Zealand, Canada and the United Kingdom). An inflation target has considerable advantages over the 
methods of conducting monetary policy under a floating exchange rate that have been tried before, 
e.g.  a  target  for  the  growth  rate  of  money.  Communication  becomes  simpler  when  the  operational 
target  agrees  with  the  final  one.  In  addition,  an  explicit  target  facilitates  a  stabilisation  of  inflation 
expectations  and  enables  policy  to  be  evaluated.  The  inflation  target  also  has  the  advantage  of 
capturing all important variables in one single variable. The inflation forecast is influenced not only by 
interest rates but also by an assessment of credit developments, the exchange rate and other factors 
of significance to demand. 
The monetary policy objective laid down by Parliament is to maintain price stability. The Riksbank has 
operationalised  this  objective  in  the  shape  of  a  quantitative  target  for  the  inflation  rate:  the  annual 
increase in the consumer price index, CPI, should be 2 per cent. Around this target is a tolerance band 
of +/- 1 percentage point, the purpose of which is both to make clear that inflation from time to time will 
deviate from 2 per cent and that the Riksbank’s ambition is to limit such deviations. 
Since  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  are  exerted  with  a  certain  lag  the  Riksbank  must  adopt  a 
forward-looking approach and base its interest rate decisions on a forecast of future developments. 
Before each decision, therefore, we prepare forecasts of factors such as inflation developments and 
the  business  cycle  over  the  next  two  years.  Since  December  2000  we  have  often  found  reason  to 
supplement the forecasts two years ahead with a qualitative assessment of the longer term. 
We have also worked with a simple policy rule: If inflation is forecast to be above target one to two 
years ahead we normally raise the repo rate, and vice versa if the forecast is below target. We haven't 
followed this rule mechanically, of course. That is exactly why the word ”normally” is always included 
                                                      
1   See Heikensten, L., “Behind the Riksbank’s massive walls – establishing the inflation targeting policy 1995-2003", Sveriges 
Riksbank Economic Review 3, 2003, 45–80, for a more in-depth account of the analytical framework for monetary policy and 
how it was developed up to 2003. 
BIS Review 11/2005 
 1
in  the  formulation  of  the  policy  rule.  It  is  a  rule  that  on  average  provides  a  good  description  of  the 
Bank’s policy.  
The  policy  rule  was  introduced  in  1997,  primarily  due  to  a  desire  to  make  policy  even  more 
transparent. The studies available at the time, all of which are uncertain, indicated that interest rate 
adjustments tended to have their largest impact on inflation in this time perspective. For my part I also 
considered it important to focus the difficult forecasting work on the time perspective that was deemed 
to be the most essential for monetary policy and not become too involved in discussions about a more 
uncertain future. This argument was strengthened in my opinion when the Riksbank’s decision-making 
process became a collective undertaking. With a less explicit rule and an entirely flexible time horizon 
our discussions would have risked focusing – more than would have been desirable – on the choice of 
time perspective, at the cost of a discussion about what we actually know about the present and what 
we believe about developments over the coming two years. 
Consideration of real developments 
Allow  me  also  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  background  to  the  clarification  of  the  principles  for 
monetary  policy  that  the  Riksbank  decided  on  at  the  start  of  1999.  When  the  inflation  target  was 
established  in  1993  we  understood  even  then  that  it  couldn’t  be  applied  mechanically.  That  was 
intimated, among other things, in a statement that the target was not to begin to apply fully until 1995, 
in order thereby to cushion the effects of the inflationary impulses that were predicted during 1993 and 
1994 following the krona’s fall and the change in indirect taxes. There were also several occasions 
during  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s  when  policy  was  not  conducted  slavishly  on  the  basis  of  CPI 
forecasts. That was because it was obvious that it could result in absurd consequences. For example, 
the rate cuts in 1996 and 1997 had caused a decrease in the CPI via housing costs. This could have 
resulted in the claim that interest rates should have been lowered further, as a direct consequence of 
the  fact  that  they  had  only  just  been  cut  sharply.  However,  it  wasn’t  until  the  turn  of  the  year 
1998/1999  that  the  Riksbank  developed  a  coherent,  explicit  approach  to  these  issues.  It  had  been 
preceded by a long discussion, where the main idea had been to change from the CPI to a different 
index,  in which  the  components  that  fluctuated  most  due  to  temporary  reasons would  be excluded. 
However,  the  more  we  discussed  this  the  clearer  it  became  that  there  was  no  index  that  always 
provided the best picture of inflationary pressures in the economy. For this reason we opted instead 
for an approach whereby we, in connection with each decision, would make it as clear as possible 
what considerations were guiding policy at the time. This would enable our actions to be evaluated in 
a better way than before. 
The clarification states that monetary policy should normally be centred on bringing inflation to target 
one  to  two  years  ahead.  It  also  identifies  two  cases  when  the  Riksbank  may  depart  from  this  rule: 
transitory effects on inflation and large deviations from the target. By transitory effects is meant that 
some particular factors affect the forecast of inflation one to two years ahead, but that the effects are 
expected to dissipate without the need for any monetary policy action. By large deviations from the 
target is meant that inflation has deviated so much from the target that there may be reason to bring it 
back to target over a longer period than the normal two-year horizon. A faster return to target could 
give rise to undesired fluctuations in output and employment, for example. 
In practice this approach has often led us to focus our monetary policy analysis and discussion on the 
inflation measure UND1X, as there is generally always reason to disregard the effects on inflation of 
indirect taxes and subsidies as well as of changes in interest rates. In some situations we have also 
decided to study inflation measures from which other price changes have been excluded, e.g. in spring 
2001, when the prices of a number of goods such as electricity, heating oil, petrol, telecommunications 
and different kinds of food rose; and 2003, when it was primarily fluctuations in electricity prices that 
had a very sharp impact on inflation for a period. 
Inflation and inflation expectations in line with the target 
The result of the Bank’s policy can be illustrated in different ways. Let me begin with the most obvious 
gauge,  the  inflation  outcome.  If  we  start  with  the  date  that  was  set  in  the  original  decision  –  the 
beginning  of  1995  –  CPI  inflation  up  to  today  has  averaged  1.4  per  cent.  If  we  instead  go  back  to 
January 1993, when the new policy was announced, the same figure is 1.7 per cent. If we focus on 
UND1X, the underlying measure that guided policy especially in recent years but also during a large 
part of the period 1996-1999, the corresponding figures are 1.8 and 2.0 per cent, respectively (see 
Figure 1).  
2 
 BIS Review 11/2005
Whether this constitutes a good result or not is open to discussion, of course. Allow me here to simply 
say  that  when  the  target  was  adopted,  and  as  an  observer  outside  the  Bank,  I  thought  like  many 
others that it would be very difficult to bring inflation down sustainably to a level around 2 per cent. 
What is particularly interesting in this context is that it has proved possible to establish a regime with a 
low inflation rate, close to the target, and to combine it with firm economic growth, which over these 
years has averaged almost 3 per cent a year, compared with about 2 per cent during the two previous 
decades. If anything, economic growth also appears to have become more stable since the inflation 
target was introduced.2  
Another way to assess policy is to study whether we have acted in the way that we say we will, i.e. 
followed  our  policy  rule.  Figure  2  shows  our  interest  rate  adjustments  on  the  vertical  axis  and  our 
inflation forecasts’ deviation from the target two years ahead on the horizontal axis. As we can see 
there is a clear relationship between forecast deviations from target and our decisions, but there are 
also  points  in  Figure  2  that  deviate  from  the  average  behaviour.  These  points  chiefly  relate  to  the 
forecasts we produced when we chose not to counter the effects of energy prices on inflation. So it 
seems that we have essentially acted in line with how we have said we will normally act.  
Yet another way to evaluate the result of our policy is to investigate whether it is credible. The most 
important  factor  here  is  that  inflation  expectations  2  years  ahead  and  beyond  have  been  firmly 
anchored to our target since the regime was stabilised in 1997-1998. That conclusion holds up fairly 
well regardless of the method used (see Figure 3).  
Our  ambition  to  be  transparent  derives,  among  other  things,  from  a  desire  to  avoid  unnecessary 
movements  or  unease  in  the  financial  markets.  To  illustrate  our  performance  in  this  regard  the 
Riksbank has conducted a number of studies over the years, of which some have been published.3 
The picture we’ve received is that our policy has essentially been intelligible and that it hasn’t resulted 
in any sharp fluctuations in financial prices that could have been avoided. International comparisons 
as well as surveys and similar studies that have been carried out by external analysts in the media, for 
example, confirm that the Bank’s monetary policy communication has worked fairly well. However, this 
doesn’t  mean  –  and  I  want  to  stress  this  –  that  there  are  no  examples  of  episodes  when  our 
communication in my opinion could have been better.  
My conclusion is that the Bank’s policy in the past ten years has worked well. Nonetheless there is of 
course every reason to reflect on whether the analysis that we carry out and the framework that we 
follow in our monetary policy work could be improved. That is the aim of the rest of my speech.  
Some thoughts on how to develop the Riksbank’s monetary policy work 
Methodological aspects  
Let me begin by addressing an issue that is of a rather technical or methodological nature, but that, as 
we  also  shall  see,  has  a  number  of  further  consequences:  the  choice  of  repo  rate  on  which  the 
inflation forecast is based.  
Since 1996 the Riksbank’s Inflation Reports have presented overall assessments of the economy and 
inflation that have served as a guide for policy. From the fourth Report in 1997 these have included 
numerical, relatively detailed forecasts. The published forecasts have consistently been based on the 
assumption  of  an  unchanged  repo  rate,  above  all  because  forecasts  arrived  at  in  that  way  make  it 
easy to motivate changes in policy. Before a monetary policy decision the Bank makes clear whether it 
expects inflation to deviate from the target or not, given the current interest rate level. If the forecast is 
above or below target it shows clearly that there is reason to consider whether the repo rate needs to 
be changed.  
The  framework  applied  by  the  Riksbank  has  been  the  established  practice  in  inflation-targeting 
countries. But as early as the mid-1990s the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, for example, opted for a 
                                                      
2   The volatility, measured as the standard deviation of GDP growth, was 1.9 percentage points during the period 1970-1992. 
Since 1995 the corresponding standard deviation has been 1.3 percentage points. 
3   See Andersson, M., Dillén, H. and Sellin, P., ”The yield curve and the Riksbank’s signalling”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic 
Review 3, 2002, 5-19. 
BIS Review 11/2005 
 3
different method, publishing forecasts based on the interest rate path that they thought gave the best 
target fulfilment. Our academic advisers have also repeatedly said that we should prepare forecasts 
based either on how the market expects interest rates to evolve or that we, as in New Zealand, should 
work out what interest rate path is consistent with reaching the inflation target.4  
Against this background we at the Riksbank have of course discussed over the years the question of 
what importance we should attach to different interest rate assumptions in our internal work and when 
we  publish  forecasts.  When  making  decisions  we  have  also  had  many  other  kinds  of  model-based 
estimates  and  scenarios  to  go  on  than  those  published.  Moreover,  from  October  1999  until  March 
2003,  our  Inflation  Report  contained  boxes  in  which  we  published  estimates  based  on  a  survey  of 
market expectations of the repo rate.5 The estimates were seldom given any great significance in the 
monetary policy debate, however. 
So  what  are the  points of  attaching  greater  importance  to,  and also  publishing  forecasts  based  on, 
other interest rate assumptions than a constant repo rate? There are chiefly two: 
The  first  point  has  to  do  with  comparability  and  the  possibilities  to  assess  our  forecasts.  As  things 
currently  stand  the  Riksbank’s  forecasts  can  be  difficult  to  compare  with  others,  since  other 
forecasters  do  not  normally  base  their  forecasts  on  an  unchanged  policy  rate.  This  risks  confusing 
those that monitor the Riksbank and compare our forecasts with others in, for example, the media. So 
it is possible that an interest rate assumption that is more consistent with the market's view of how the 
interest rate will develop could make our communication easier in certain situations. That is especially 
true of course if there is a large deviation between the assumption of an unchanged repo rate and a 
more realistic assumption of the rate's path. What is clear in any case is that ex post assessments of 
forecasts of economic and inflation developments become generally easier if they are based on an 
assumption that better reflects the interest rate expectations of market players. 
The  other  point  has  to  do  with  the  fact  that  it  becomes  easier  to  produce  consistent  forecasts  and 
scenarios.  This  is  particularly  important  when  preparing  estimates  and  developing  scenarios  in  a 
somewhat  longer-term  perspective  than  the  usual  two  years,  which  can  sometimes  be  valuable  in 
order,  for  example,  to  show  the  effect  on  inflation  of  shocks  that  are  judged  to  be  temporary.  The 
assumption of a constant repo rate becomes generally more unrealistic the longer the forecast horizon 
is  extended.  When  the  difference  between  the  market’s  view  of  the  future  repo  rate  and  the 
assumption  of  an  unchanged  repo  rate  has  been  large,  it  has  also  been  complicated  to  link 
assumptions about short-term interest rates to a reasonable picture of, for instance, future long-term 
rates, since long-term rates depend on expectations of how short-term rates will evolve. 
Up to now the Riksbank has chosen to highlight forecasts based on an unchanged repo rate; this has 
basically  worked  well,  not  least  in  terms  of  communication.  Little  by  little,  however,  the  Bank's 
monetary policy work has evolved to the extent that there are now sufficient analytical resources with 
which  to  deepen  the  discussion  in  this  area.  The  approach  used  so  far  has  also,  as  the  Bank’s 
analysis has developed, felt like a bigger restriction in the internal work than before. The perceptions 
of how the Riksbank acts seem also to have become so well established that the communication risks 
of presenting forecasts with different interest rate scenarios appear smaller today than before. I should 
also mention here that a couple of other inflation-targeting countries with which we have an extensive 
professional  exchange  –  the  UK  and  Norway  –  have  recently  begun  to  attach  much  greater 
importance to forecasts based on other assumptions than a constant policy rate and that this appears 
to have worked well.  
We expect to be able to make use of our development work as early as the next Inflation Report. In 
that Report we intend to publish forecasts based on implied forward rates, a measure that may not be 
exactly the same as market expectations of the future repo rate, due, among other things, to maturity 
premiums, but  that  nevertheless are  a reasonable approximation.  It  doesn't  really  matter  that  much 
whether one chooses to condition the forecast on implied forward rates, surveys that attempt to give a 
more direct reading of market expectations, or some other fairly reasonable assumption about future 
monetary  policy.  We  have  chosen,  however,  to  use  implied  forward  rates,  since  this  is  a  relatively 
                                                      
4   See, for example, Svensson, L., ”Monetary Policy and Real Stabilization” in Rethinking Stabilization Policy, A Symposium 
Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 29-31, 2002, 261-312. 
5   The  only  exceptions  were  Inflation  Report  2001:1  and  2001:2  when  no  such  estimates  were  published,  since  market 
expectations largely coincided with the assumption of an unchanged repo rate. 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2005
simple way to get a fairly reasonable idea of future monetary policy. What is important to underline, 
though, is that the paths we publish on the basis of implied forward rates should not be taken as a sign 
of  our  own  judgement  of  the  future  path  of  the  repo  rate.  Experience  also  shows  that  the  situation 
often changes so that the actual repo rate path turns out to be a different one than that implied by 
forward rates. Allow me also to stress that we intend as usual to present a forecast on the assumption 
of an unchanged repo rate in order to maintain continuity and transparency in our analysis.  
Communication 
One advantage of using implied forward rates is, as I just mentioned, that it becomes more meaningful 
to  produce  forecasts  over  a  longer  time  frame.  It  also  makes  it  easier  to  estimate  and  present 
scenarios that can illustrate some of the problems that we face. Allow me to considerer two different 
issues, both of which have come to the fore in recent years, and thereby show how our developed 
methods can be used to improve primarily our communication but also our own understanding of the 
problems we have to address. 
The first relates to situations when there have been particular shocks to the inflation outlook that we 
have judged to be of a temporary nature. Perhaps the best example of this is 2002 to 2003, when 
electricity prices suddenly began to rise to record-highs as a result of lower water levels in Sweden 
and  Norway  as  well  as  colder  weather  than  usual.  There  was  reason  to  believe  that  the  electricity 
prices  would  fall  back  and  that  this  would  then  also  have  a  marked  impact  on  inflation.  We  thus 
followed the strategy that we had established in our clarification from 1999, and explained that policy 
should  disregard  the  temporary  effects  of  the  fluctuations  in  electricity  prices.  On  this  particular 
occasion it was appropriate to calculate an alternative measure of inflation, UND1X excluding energy, 
and this measure was therefore used as a basis for policy. 
Figure 4 gives a fairly good idea of the nature of the decision facing us. Inflation was driven up at the 
start of 2003, when electricity prices rose, and then fell again during the latter half of 2003 and 2004 
when  the  rise  in  electricity  prices  dropped  out  of  the  inflation  data.  If  we  instead  look  at  UND1X 
excluding  energy  the  picture  is  considerably  less  dramatic.  When  we  looked  ahead  to  forecast 
developments the picture also proved very different depending on whether we focused on UND1X or 
on the same measure excluding energy prices. That the outcome for UND1X excluding energy didn’t 
turn out exactly as we expected is a different matter, attributable to imported inflation turning out lower 
and productivity proving higher than anticipated. However, that doesn’t take away from the fact that we 
essentially made the right assessment about electricity price developments. 
This problem could also have been described with a forecast of inflation in a longer time frame. Let me 
illustrate this line of thought with a stylized example (see Figure 5). The developments in energy prices 
were  expected  to  contribute  first  to  inflation  being  above  target  and  then  to  the  expectation  that  it 
would  be  clearly  below  target  1-2  years  ahead.  If  we  look  at  UND1X  excluding  energy  prices  this 
measure  was  projected  to  be  roughly  in  line  with  the  target  over  the  entire  forecast  period.  With  a 
forecast that only extends over the first two years it is not evident that inflation will gradually return to 
being in line with the target. One possibility then is to show a measure that excludes the energy prices 
and on the basis of this measure explain why the Bank does not want to counter the shock. Another is 
to  extend  the  forecast  horizon  somewhat.  That  illustrates  more  clearly  that  the  fluctuations  are  not 
expected to have a lasting effect on inflation. 
There is reason to underscore that this way of working, where we extend the time horizon, does not of 
course mean that we can escape the truly difficult question: is the rise or fall in inflation temporary and 
what is the conclusion for monetary policy? But the point is that once you have put your foot down on 
this issue you can presumably sometimes explain your conclusions more clearly if you describe how 
you expect the situation to develop in the longer run.  
The other issue has to do with how alternative interest rate paths can be used to illustrate the choices 
facing  monetary  policy.  Let  me  use  the  Riksbank’s  interest  rate  decision  in  December  2004  as  an 
example. On that occasion we left the rate unchanged despite the fact that inflation was forecast to be 
below our target of 2 per cent during the greater part of the next two years. With inflation forecast to be 
so low during such a large part of the forecast period it would have been possible to justify a further 
rate  cut.  But  there  were  also  arguments  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  most  important  was  that 
demand was already growing markedly faster than the economy was deemed capable of sustaining in 
the long run. The vigorous growth was anticipated to continue and so it wasn’t weak demand that was 
causing the low inflation. Instead, the low inflation was being caused by unexpectedly high productivity 
BIS Review 11/2005 
 5
and unexpectedly low price increases for imported goods, something that in itself could be expected to 
further stimulate growth in the period ahead. An additional factor was that the repo rate was already at 
an  unusually  low  level,  which could  partly  explain the  increase in  households’  debt  burden  and  the 
continued rise in housing prices. Even though debt levels were not deemed to be a threat to financial 
stability,  another  rate  cut  could  have  further  fuelled  house  price  inflation  and  indebtedness.  That  in 
turn could have given rise to future problems when monetary policy eventually would most likely have 
to be tightened. None of these arguments in themselves were the key factor in deciding to leave the 
repo rate unchanged, but taken together they indicated nevertheless the need for a certain measure of 
caution.  
In this kind of situation it can be interesting to consider how different future paths for the interest rate 
can be expected to affect both the real economy and inflation. Figure 6 shows resource utilisation in 
two different cases: one based on an unchanged repo rate and another on the implied forward rates 
that applied during the autumn. At that time the implied forward rates were indicating that the repo rate 
would be raised very shortly and that it would then rise to levels around 4.5 per cent in the longer term. 
Resource utilisation picks up in both cases, turning positive after about a year. But if the repo rate is 
raised according  to  the  implied  forward  rate  at  the  time,  resource  utilisation  drops,  turning negative 
again during 2007, whereas it remains positive throughout the whole period covered by the example if 
the  rate  is  held  constant.  The  situation  also  differs  somewhat  between  the  two  alternatives  when  it 
comes to inflation (see Figure 7). With last autumn’s implied forward rate, inflation never reaches the 
inflation  target,  while,  with  an  unchanged  repo  rate,  it  can  be  expected  to  overshoot  the  target  just 
beyond the traditional two-year horizon.  
What  this  example  illustrates  is  that  an  unchanged  repo  rate  entailed  a  continued  rise  in  resource 
utilisation,  which  in  turn  drove  up  inflationary  pressures  beyond  the  two-year  horizon.  At  the  same 
time, the forecast based on the market’s assessment of the future repo rate shows that there didn’t 
have to be any hurry to begin to hike rates. A repo rate path consistent with implied forward rates led 
in this example to inflation never reaching the target.  
Examples  like  this  can  of  course  never  give  an  exact  answer  to  when  the  repo  rate  should  be 
adjusted.  What  they  can  do  is  increase  our  understanding  about  the  consequences  of  different 
options. In this case they can help us to narrow down a number of reasonable scenarios for policy a 
few quarters ahead. And in this particular example an unchanged repo rate was certainly one such 
reasonable option for a period.  
Allow  me  for  safety’s  sake  to  emphasise  that  the  conclusions  for  monetary  policy  of  both  the 
alternative forecasts – the Inflation Report’s usual main scenario and the estimates based on implied 
forward rates – can generally be expected to be the same. Regardless of whether we reason on the 
basis of the simple policy rule, which relates the forecast of inflation one to two years ahead – under 
the  assumption  that  the  repo  rate  is  held  constant  –  to  the  current  decision,  or  whether  we  study 
forecasts  based  on  implied  forward  rates,  for  example,  we  can  reach  the  conclusion  that  it  was 
reasonable to leave the repo rate unchanged in December and that the repo rate sooner or later will 
need  to  be  raised.  The  point  is  that  paths  derived  from  different  interest  rate  assumptions  make  it 
possible to some degree to quantify and weigh up various monetary policy options against each other.  
So, to sum up it is easy to see that the monetary policy communication can be made easier in various 
ways  if  the  forecast  horizon  is  extended.  The  new  methods  that  have  been  developed  can  also 
facilitate  the  creation  of  alternative  scenarios  to  more  clearly  understand  and  communicate  the 
considerations facing the Bank.  
Conducting monetary policy 
I should like to conclude by mentioning a third perspective. This does not concern methodology for 
forecasting, or how monetary policy is communicated, but how policy is actually conducted. 
From  time  to  time  the  view  is  expressed  in  the  general  debate  that  monetary  policy  should  be 
conducted in a more “pragmatic” manner, more like the Federal Reserve in the United States. It is not 
always easy to understand exactly what this entails, but one thought appears to be that the Riksbank 
has in some way bound itself too tightly to the framework that we and many other inflation-targeting 
countries  abide  by.  Even  though,  when  looking  back  over  the  past  ten  years  of  monetary  policy,  I 
cannot see any situation where we have been curbed by our analytical framework and thereby made 
some tangible error in our policy, I believe this issue is worth discussing. 
6 
 BIS Review 11/2005
Let  me  just  take  this  opportunity  to  note  that  my  impression  is  that  there  has  been  a  convergence 
process within the central bank world. Countries that have conducted a more ”pragmatic” policy like 
that in the United States, which is less governed by clearly-described principles have been working on 
making more information publicly available and establishing a clearer framework for their policy. At the 
same time, inflation-targeting countries have been discussing in greater depth the various problems 
that sometimes prevent policy from following the simplest principles. 
The  Riksbank’s  approach  to  new  monetary  policy  issues  or  problems  is,  as  has  been  pointed  out 
earlier,  that  we  keep  to  a  relatively  well-specified  framework.  This  is  our  starting  point  when 
considering the monetary policy stance to be taken. If, for instance, we wish to deviate from the usual 
policy rule, we can do so, but we then make the requirement of ourselves that we can motivate this on 
the  basis  of  the  framework  we  use  and  the  flexibility  we  apply.  It  is  difficult  to  see  any  reason  to 
change this system. In my opinion, it has served us well and forced us to improve our thinking with 
regard to tackling the various problems that arise. 
The new analysis and forecasting methods do not change the framework for our monetary policy. We 
still  have  the  same  target,  the  same  ambition  to  achieve  this  target  in  two  years  and  the  same 
arguments for taking real developments into account when deciding the details of the policy. However, 
we  now  have  new  data  on  which  to  base  our  decisions  and  new  opportunities  for  communicating 
them. 
Conclusion 
Let me try to summarise my message here. I believe that most people agree that inflation-targeting 
has  worked  well  on  the  whole.  We  know  that  since  inflation-targeting  was  introduced,  Sweden  has 
gone from being a high-inflation economy to an economy with low inflation and stable wage increases. 
The lower inflation rate has not led to weaker output growth; GDP growth has on average been higher 
under the new regime. It also appears that, if anything, the real stability of the economy has improved. 
Nevertheless, there is always good reason to consider how monetary policy can be developed and 
improved. To this end, I have discussed how the Riksbank’s monetary policy work can be developed. 
This  has  included  what  could  be  termed  technical improvements;  for  instance,  greater  use  of  other 
assumptions  than  an  unchanged  repo  rate  and  an  extended  forecast  horizon  when  producing  and 
presenting data. The advantage of using, for example, implied forward rates as a basis is that they can 
often be a more realistic assumption than an unchanged interest rate. This can in turn allow more and 
better  alternative  scenarios,  which  can  illustrate  different  aspects  of  monetary  policy  including  the 
consequences for inflation and resource utilisation over a longer time horizon. 
It  has  also  included  the  Riksbank’s  communication.  Working  with  a  longer  time  horizon  provides  a 
better  overview  of  the  effects  of  temporary  influences  on  inflation.  Scenarios  containing  different 
assumptions regarding the repo rate and using a longer time horizon can also contribute to a clearer 
illustration  of  the  considerations  monetary  policy  has  to  take  into  account  with  regard  to  balancing 
inflation against real economic aspects. I have also discussed this. 
The primary advantage of supplementing the assumption of an unchanged repo rate with alternative 
interest rate paths and making longer-term forecasts is that it makes it easier to explain the monetary 
policy  message.  The  simple  policy  rule  –  which  involves  interest  rate  decisions  being  based  on 
inflation normally being returned to the target one to two years ahead – will continue to provide a good 
guide to our actions. The guidelines in the clarification from 1999 will thus continue to form the basis of 
our monetary policy. When the decisions need to take account of other information than that significant 
for inflation one to two years ahead, the new working method should make it easier to understand how 
this is done. 
Discussing an entire interest rate path can also create the conditions for a more balanced discussion 
of monetary policy. This can involve when we intend to change our monetary policy stance and how 
quickly we should proceed. What will happen if we wait a while before changing the interest rate? This 
type  of  consideration  is  probably  more  important  than  detailed  discussions  about  tenths  of  a 
percentage point in a forecast. 
In conclusion, I have also mentioned the fundamental framework that governs monetary policy. This is 
mainly because it is sometimes claimed in the general debate that the Riksbank and other inflation-
targeting  countries  have  bound  themselves  too  tightly  to  a  particular  model  and  that  a  more 
“pragmatic” policy system would give better results. My conclusion is that our method of working is 
BIS Review 11/2005 
 7
sufficiently  flexible  to  manage  the  necessary  balance.  As  I  see  it,  there  are  major  advantages  to  a 
system like ours, with a clear target, publication of the background data, a policy rule, etc. It provides 
our  activities  with  stability,  both  at  the  staff  level  and  in  the  Executive  Board’s  discussions  and 
communications.  We  are  also  forced  to  systematically  examine  all  new  ideas  and  issues  that  arise 
against the framework we apply, which has proved an intellectually fruitful exercise. 
However, what I have tried to show here is that the methods we now use can sometimes enable us to 
produce  more  interesting  data  for  monetary  policy  and  to  describe  our  considerations  in  a  more 
pedagogical manner. They can make it easier to demonstrate the flexibility  of the inflation-targeting 
regime we work with. Whether this will then have an impact on the monetary policy debate in Sweden, 
and ultimately on the policy conducted, is a very difficult question that only the future can answer. One 
consolation for those who wish for an answer is that they can form an opinion of how the Executive 
Board develops its view of monetary policy through the Inflation Reports, speeches and the minutes of 
the monetary policy meetings published. 
 
1. Different measures of inflation
Annual percentage change
CPI
UND1X
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
  8 
 BIS Review 11/2005
2. Repo rate decisions and inflation forecasts, 
1999-2004
Per cent
IR01:1
IR02:3
IR03:4
IR04:2
IR01:4
IR99:2
IR00:2
IR01:3
IR04:3
IR04:4
IR03:3
IR00:4
IR02:1
IR99:4
IR99:1
IR02:4
IR03:1
IR03:2
IR04:1
IR99:3
IR00:1
IR00:3
IR01:2
IR02:2
 e
g
n
a
h
c
e
t
a
r
 
o
p
e
R
0,50
0,25
0,00
-0,25
-0,50
0,50
0,25
0,00
-0,25
-0,50
-0,6
-0,4
-0,2
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
Forecast deviation from inflation target
Source: The Riksbank
 3. Different agents’ expectations of inflation 
two years ahead
Per cent
4
3
2
1
0
-1
Labour market organisations
Purchasing managers
Money market agents
4
3
2
1
0
-1
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2004
2003
Source: Prospera
   BIS Review 11/2005 
 9
4. Inflation with and without energy
prices
Annual percentage change
4
3
2
1
UND1X
UND1X, forecast Inflation Report 2003:2
UND1X excluding energy
UND1X excluding energy, forecast Inflation Report 2003:2
4
3
2
1
0
Jun-02
Dec-02
Jun-03
Dec-03
Jun-04
Dec-04
0
Jun-05
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
 5. A schematic outline of inflation 
developments with and without energy prices
Per cent
  UND1X
UND1X excluding energy
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Year
1
Year
2
Year
3
Source: The Riksbank
 4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0
Year
10 
 BIS Review 11/2005
6. Output gap
Per cent of potential GDP
Constant repo rate
Implied forward rates
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
2004
2005
2006
2007
Source: The Riksbank
 7. UND1X-inflation
Annual percentage change
Constant repo rate
Implied forward rates
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2004
2005
2006
2007
Source: The Riksbank
  BIS Review 11/2005 
 11
