Bodil Nyboe Andersen: Recent economic developments in Denmark  
Speech  by  Mrs  Bodil  Nyboe  Andersen,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks, Copenhagen, 28 April 2005. 
 The global economy is generally in a period of strong growth – at a rate of 5.1 per cent in 2004. This 
may not completely match the picture painted by the media. The reason is that the figure conceals 
very strong variation between growth rates in various parts of the world.  
After a slowdown in 2001 and the beginning of 2002, the USA has achieved annual growth of 3-4 per 
cent.  This  growth  has  been  driven  particularly  by  strong  private  consumption,  stimulated  by  tax 
reductions  and  very  low  interest  rates.  However,  the  downside  in  the  USA  has  been  a  high  and 
growing current-account deficit and a considerable government finance deficit. Both of these deficits 
are often mentioned as the reason for the dollar's weakening against the euro. However, the USA has 
not  faced  difficulties  in  financing  its  current-account  deficit  and  selling  its  government  bonds.  The 
demand for dollar assets is still high, especially from the Asian countries.  
Even though financing has not presented problems for the USA, this does not change the fact that the 
USA  is  becoming  increasingly  indebted  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  This  course  does  not  appear 
sustainable, but it is naturally hard to predict how long it can continue. 
Asia,  apart  from  Japan,  has  even  higher  annual  growth  rates,  at  6-9  per  cent.  This  reflects  strong 
growth in exports to especially the USA, as well as growing domestic demand, including rising private 
consumption. 
This American-Asian growth is driving the global economy.  
Growth in the euro area, on the other hand, is currently very weak. Once again, private consumption is 
part of the explanation. Especially in Germany, households are reluctant to increase their consumption 
demand. More fundamentally, Germany has a clear need for structural reforms of its labour market 
and welfare system. The reforms are being addressed, but as long as the changes are still ongoing 
and even more are expected, general uncertainty will prevail. This contributes to the caution towards 
increasing private consumption.  
Structural reforms are also needed elsewhere in the euro area. For the euro area overall, the weak 
development in consumption is a key factor behind the moderate growth.  
In Denmark, however, we are good consumers! At least in the sense that we are currently spending a 
lot  of  money.  Private  consumption  rose  by  more  than  4  per  cent  in  2004,  the  largest  increase  in 
10 years.  The  Danes  have  great  faith  in  their  own  future  finances,  and  they  show  no  hesitance  in 
taking advantage of recent years' tax cuts, lower interest rates and deferred-amortisation loans in what 
could almost be called a consumption bonanza. 
As is the rule for such upswings, the impact on Danish employment has materialised with a certain 
time lag. Moreover, part of the consumption increase has naturally enough been directed at imported 
goods and services, including foreign travel. This does, of course, create jobs, but in other countries. 
This development in imports has contributed to reducing the current account surplus by almost kr. 10 
billion, albeit from a very high level exceeding kr. 45 billion in 2003. It is important to note, however, 
that stronger growth in demand in Denmark than abroad traditionally has a strong impact on the trade 
figures.  
Some of us are old enough to remember how in the 1970s and 1980s the balance of payments was 
the key problem in the Danish economy for a period of more than 20 years. We can certainly confirm 
that the Danes were also good consumers then.  
Solving  the  sustained  Danish  current-account  problem  required  a  number  of  structural  economic 
reforms in e.g. the labour-market and taxation areas. This entailed some difficult years of adjustment 
in  the  1980s  and  1990s.  But  these  reforms  made  a  vital  contribution  to  the  strength  of  the  Danish 
economy from the late 1990s right up to the present day. Unlike then, we cannot say today that overall 
we are living beyond our means. Having said that, we should also remember that we currently have 
very  substantial  export  revenues  from  oil  and  shipping,  and  these  sectors  are  highly  sensitive  to 
cyclical developments. 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 1
In this perspective the current rising consumption does not pose balance problems for the economy. 
But  in  the  slightly  longer  term  the  economic  upswing  ought  to  be  more  balanced  so  that  overall 
production can keep up with growth in demand. 
Unemployment  has  been  falling  during  the  past  year  and  is  now  at  the  level  of  the  spring  of  1998 
when the government of the day introduced the Whitsun package of economic measures in order to 
dampen consumption and increase the supply of labour. The Government Platform of February 2005 
sets out a number of means to achieve a permanent increase in employment. Recent developments 
show  the  importance  of  immediate  concrete  initiatives  to  increase  the  supply  of  labour.  Otherwise 
there is a risk of a situation with pressure on the labour market.  
The traditional basis for Danish mortgage credit was that homeowners could borrow on capital-market 
terms. The bonds were callable, so that borrowers could take advantage of falling interest rates, but 
were not affected by interest-rate increases.  
The terms offered by the various mortgage-credit institutes were virtually identical, and bonds issued 
by  the  various  institutes  were  perceived  as  almost  perfect  substitutes,  called  "uniform  bonds"  or 
"enhedsobligationer". 
The  mortgage-credit  market  has  also  traditionally  been  closely  regulated  in  terms  of  maturities, 
mortgageable limits and types of loans. The limitations on access to lending, designed to steer cyclical 
development, were gradually removed so that legislation was based solely on the security aspects. Up 
to the mid-1990s this system by and large reigned supreme.  
But then the development of new mortgage-credit products began to take off. 
Today there is a choice between not only fixed and adjustable interest rates, but also mixes such as 
adjustable interest rates with a ceiling and deferred amortisation for fixed periods, while commercial 
banks have also joined the market to offer mortgage loans. Loan conversions are the order of the day, 
and the average borrower keeps loans unchanged for a shorter period than was the case just a few 
years ago.  
Homeowners are bombarded with offers of loan conversion, and the products offered are becoming 
ever more complex. Institutions compete intensely to be the first to introduce new products in order to 
win  market  shares.  The  only  parameter  that  does  not  seem  to  be  subject  to  competition  is  the 
contribution fees for loans for owner-occupied homes and summer cottages. 
The mortgage-credit sector should perhaps consider whether the many new products will lead to bond 
series  that  are  so  small  that  they  adversely  affect  the  very  favourable  interest  terms  traditionally 
characterising Danish mortgage-credit bonds.  
The  rising 
for 
deferred-amortisation loans have brought up the issue of the vulnerability of households in the event 
of a significant increase in interest rates.  
On the basis of data made available by Nykredit, Danmarks Nationalbank has analysed the sensitivity 
of homeowners to changes in interest rates. The analysis will be published in our annual publication 
"Financial  stability",  which  will  be  issued  on  12  May.  The  analysis  exclusively  considers  effects  on 
interest costs without incorporating the mortgageable values. 
The higher the homeowners' incomes, the lower their interest burden, i.e. interest expenses as a ratio 
of gross income. On the other hand, the groups with the highest incomes have a larger proportion of 
adjustable-rate loans. 
Despite the variations in the debt composition of the different groups, the calculations show that the 
interest-rate exposure is more or less identical for all income groups. Interest-rate exposure indicates 
the increase in the average interest burden on the group on an increase in the short-term interest rate. 
The latter is expressed as the interest rate on an adjustable-rate loan, irrespective of maturity.  
The analysis shows that if the short-term interest rate increases by 1 percentage point, homeowners' 
interest expenses will on average increase by approximately 1 per cent of their gross income. Note 
that  this  is  an  average  consideration.  There  is  considerable  variation  in  the  figures  both  within  the 
individual groups and with regard to other criteria, e.g. geographical location. For example, households 
in Greater Copenhagen and Århus have a higher mortgage debt than in the rest of the country.  
Is this a large or small degree of vulnerability? This cannot be assessed from a single partial analysis 
of the debt composition.  
indebtedness,  greater  use  of  adjustable 
interest  rates  and 
the  opportunity 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2005
Firstly,  as  mentioned,  the  figures  are  subject  to  considerable  variation.  Even  if  the  average 
homeowner does not face considerable difficulties in paying a higher interest rate, there is a significant 
group of households that are far more vulnerable because their interest-rate exposure is more than 
twice as high.  
Secondly, vulnerability depends on whether the household has other loans at adjustable interest rates, 
whether  it  has  a  buffer  to  meet  any  higher  interest  expenses  and  whether  it  can  easily  reduce  its 
consumption  in  the  event  of  an  interest-rate  increase.  Unfortunately,  the  analysis  does  not  include 
data that would shed light on this aspect. Considerations of this nature should be central elements of 
the advice provided when loans are raised. 
Analysing  homeowners'  vulnerability  is  naturally  relevant  because  for  many  years  development  has 
been in one particular direction. House prices have risen and risen while the interest rate has been 
very  low  and  it  has  become  easier  to  borrow.  The  option  of  deferred-amortisation  loans  has  been 
taken up more than most people had expected. Therefore the question is now being raised of whether 
there is a property-market bubble, and if there is, when the bubble will burst. Nobody can give a clear 
answer to that.  
Bubbles are extremely interesting for economists to analyse, but unfortunately experience shows that 
bubbles  can  neither  be  predicted  nor  identified  when  they  exist.  Bubbles  are  only  apparent  in 
hindsight. 
In mortgage-credit circles – and in the media in general – falling interest rates and low interest rates 
are  considered  to  be  positive  while  high  interest  rates  have  a  negative  image.  This  is  the  typical 
viewpoint of the borrower.  
However, there is also a creditor side to the story, even though it plays a far smaller role in the debate. 
Perhaps this is because many people's assets are mainly placed collectively in pension schemes, so 
that the relationship between interest-rate level and yield is less apparent to the individual.  
We nonetheless see increasing focus on yields and concern about the low bond yield. Many investors 
still  remember  the  far  higher  bond  yield  ten  years  ago,  and  the  low  interest  rate  has  undoubtedly 
stimulated interest in shares and real assets.  
Today a 10-year government bond yields 3.5 per cent interest. With inflation below 1.5 per cent this is 
still a positive real rate of return. But for tax-liable investors the real bond yield after tax will seem very 
low.  
Almost  25  years  in  the  financial sector  have  taught  me  that  it  is  vital  to  emphasise  the relationship 
between  yield  and  risk.  Apart  from  utilising  asymmetrical  tax  rules,  a  borrower  or  financial  investor 
does  not  have  much  opportunity  to  make  a  profit  without  assuming  a  risk.  Nobody  knows  how 
exchange rates, share prices, interest rates or even house prices will develop. But many do have a 
firm opinion on this.  
So we currently see a growing interest in various more exotic investment products with yields based 
on exchange rates, share prices, etc. We have had products of these types for many years, but the 
new aspect is that they are now also marketed to private individuals with relatively modest investment 
portfolios and no particular financial insight.  
Investors may naturally speculate if they wish to, but it is important that they are aware that this is what 
they are doing.  
From time to time tales of disaster in the financial press serve to demonstrate that investors have not 
always understood that in today's markets an annual yield of 10-12 per cent is unattainable without 
taking on a large risk.  
It  is  therefore  essential  that  professional  advisers  take  great  pains  to  point  out  the  risks  and  the 
opportunities to diversify risk by not putting all one's eggs in the same basket.  
BIS Review 30/2005 
 3
