European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 2 June 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is our pleasure to welcome you to this press conference. The Vice-President 
and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB, which 
was also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
Overall, on the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we expect euro area underlying 
inflationary pressures to remain contained in the medium term. Accordingly, we have left the key ECB 
interest  rates  unchanged.  The  exceptionally  low  level  of  interest  rates  across  the  entire  maturity 
spectrum  continues  to  provide  considerable  support  to  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area,  which 
currently  shows  only  moderate  dynamics.  At  the  same  time,  we  will  remain  vigilant  with  regard  to 
upside risks to price stability. 
I shall now explain our assessment in more detail, turning first to the economic analysis. According to 
Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  real  GDP  grew  by  0.5%  quarter  on  quarter  in  the  first  quarter  of  2005, 
compared with 0.2% in the previous quarter. However, figures for real GDP growth over the last two 
quarters partly reflect statistical effects related to working-day adjustments to the data. This has led to 
some understatement of growth dynamics in the last quarter of 2004 and to some overstatement in the 
first quarter of 2005. Most recent indicators for economic activity remain, on balance, on the downside. 
The moderation in economic activity observed since mid-2004 is partly related to the rise in oil prices. 
Looking ahead, there is scope for positive fundamental factors to again shape the outlook, assuming 
that  the  effects  from  adverse  developments  gradually  diminish.  Notably,  global  economic  activity  is 
expected to remain strong, despite some moderation from the record levels observed last year. This 
continues  to  support  euro  area  exports  and  should  have  a  potential  positive  impact  also  on 
investment.  Investment  is  expected  to  benefit  from  robust  earnings,  improvements  in  business 
efficiency  and  the  very  favourable  financing  conditions.  At  the  same  time,  consumption  growth  is 
expected to develop in line with real income growth. 
This  assessment  is  broadly  consistent  with  the  new  Eurosystem  staff  projections,  which  will  be 
published today. Euro area real GDP is projected to grow at rates of between 1.1% and 1.7% in 2005, 
and  between  1.5%  and  2.5%  in  2006.  Recent  forecasts  from  international  and  private  sector 
organisations give similar indications. In comparison with the March ECB staff projections, the ranges 
projected for real GDP growth in 2005 and 2006 have been adjusted slightly downwards. 
All  in  all,  our  judgement  remains  that  real  economic  growth  will  gradually  improve  over  the  period 
ahead. At the same time, recent data have heightened the uncertainties surrounding the short-term 
evolution  of  domestic  demand,  and  persistently  high  oil  prices  and  global  imbalances  may  pose 
downside risks to the projections for economic growth. 
Turning to price developments in the euro area, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP 
inflation  was  2.0%  in  May,  compared  with  2.1%  in  April.  Over  the  coming  months,  annual  HICP 
inflation rates are expected to remain broadly around current levels. On the one hand, energy prices 
are exerting upward pressure on HICP inflation. On the other hand, underlying inflationary pressure 
has  been  rather  contained  and,  on  average,  wage  increases  have  remained  moderate  over  recent 
quarters. 
According to the Eurosystem staff projections, average annual HICP inflation is seen to lie between 
1.8%  and  2.2%  in  2005,  and  between  0.9%  and  2.1%  in  2006.  Compared  with  the  ECB  staff 
projections  published  in  March  2005,  the  inflation  projections  for  2005  have  been  revised  slightly 
upwards and for 2006 slightly downwards. In 2006, this largely reflects the expected statistical effect of 
a planned health care reform in one euro area country, the Netherlands, which is estimated to imply a 
one-off reduction of 0.2 percentage point in the euro area inflation rate for 2006. This effect should be 
excluded from the assessment of the medium-term outlook for price stability. 
Taking into account the assumptions underlying the projections, upside risks to the inflation projections 
prevail.  These  risks  relate  notably  to  future  oil  price  developments,  indirect  taxes  and  administered 
prices. Furthermore, ongoing vigilance is required in order to ensure that past price increases do not 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 1
lead  to  second-round  effects  in  wage  and  price-setting  throughout  the  economy.  In  this  respect, 
continued responsibility on the part of social partners is very important. 
The  monetary  analysis  provides  further  insight  into  the  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to 
longer term. Over the past few months, money and credit have continued to grow robustly in the euro 
area. These developments mainly reflect the stimulative effect of the low level of interest rates in the 
euro area. The monetary dynamics are driven by the strong growth of the most liquid components of 
broad money contained in the narrow aggregate M1. At the same time, the euro area private sector’s 
demand for MFI loans, in particular for house purchase, has remained strong. 
The assessment of ample liquidity in the euro area is confirmed by all indicators. Also in the light of the 
increasingly  liquid  nature  of  monetary  expansion,  the  accumulated  stock  of  the  broad  monetary 
aggregate M3 may entail upside risks to price stability over the medium to longer term. 
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  suggests  that  underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  remain 
contained in the medium term. At the same time, it is necessary to underline the conditionality of this 
assessment and the related upside risks to price stability. Cross-checking with the monetary analysis 
supports the case for ongoing vigilance. 
As regards fiscal policies, developments in the euro area remain of concern. While a few countries 
are succeeding in maintaining sound budgetary positions, in several countries it is essential that fiscal 
consolidation  is  given  the  highest  priority  in  view  of  the  budgetary  situation.  Moreover,  the  revised 
rules  and  procedures  for  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  expected  to  take  effect  soon,  need  to  be 
implemented in a strict manner to ensure credibility and to promote a timely return to sound budgetary 
positions. 
With respect to structural reforms, the so-called “Integrated Guidelines” for 2005-2008, covering both 
the  new  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines  and  the  new  Employment  Guidelines,  are  soon  to  be 
adopted. These guidelines for economic and employment policies will, in turn, serve as the basis for 
action at the EU level and for Member States to draw up national reform programmes by the autumn 
of  this  year.  The  new  governance  structure  of  the  Lisbon  agenda  should  provide  new  impetus  to 
structural reforms in Europe. These reforms are vital for Europe’s ability to respond to the challenges 
arising from an ongoing deepening in the global division of labour, the fast process of technological 
change and the ageing of the population. A determined approach in addressing these challenges and 
successful communication that convinces the public of the benefits of the reforms hold the key to both 
improving the economic outlook in the short run and sustaining the prosperity of European citizens in 
the longer term. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
Nicholas C Garganas: On the practice of financial stability in Greece - the 
implications of Basel II 
Speech by Mr Nicholas C Garganas, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Conference on Financial 
Stability and Implications of Basel II, Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Istanbul, 16 May 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I thank the organizers of this conference for inviting me to be here today. I am especially pleased to be 
speaking  on  such  an  important  issue.  The  concept  of  financial  stability,  considered  from  different 
perspectives,  which  is  the  main  focus  of  the  Conference,  is  appropriately  receiving  considerable 
attention in the light of the variety of risks confronting financial systems. My presentation will deal with 
the  practice  of  financial  stability  assessment  in  Greece,  key  aspects  of  the  Basel  II  implementation 
process in Greece, and some implications of Basel II for financial stability. 
It is generally agreed that the objective of financial stability assessment is to review the main sources 
of risks and vulnerabilities likely to affect the stability of the financial sector and to evaluate its capacity 
to absorb the impact of adverse disturbances. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2005
The Bank of Greece’s assessment of the stability of the Greek financial sector is contained in a section 
devoted to that issue of its semi-annual report to the Greek Parliament. Moreover, the Bank’s Annual 
Report  to  the  General  Meeting  of  its  shareholders  also  contains  a  section  on  the  stability  and  the 
supervision of the Greek banking sector. 
Before  presenting  the  Bank’s  approach  to  financial  stability  assessment,  let  me  provide  some  key 
aspects of the Greek supervisory framework and of the Greek financial sector. 
Effectively there are three bodies responsible for supervision of the financial system as a whole. 
• 
The  Bank  of  Greece  regulates  and  supervises  credit  institutions  and  some  special 
institutions such as credit companies, financial leasing and factoring companies, etc. It also 
has a mandate to contribute to the overall stability of the financial sector. 
The  Hellenic  Capital  Market  Commission  regulates  the  capital  markets  and  supervises 
investment firms and collective investment funds. 
Finally,  the  recently-established  Commission  for  the  Supervision  of  Private  Insurance  is 
responsible for insurance companies. 
  Cooperation between  the three  domestic  supervisory  authorities  is  crucial  to  the  pursuit  of  financial 
stability. To this end, a Memorandum of Understanding has been signed between the Bank and the 
Capital Markets Commission which lays down the practical arrangements for cooperation; in addition a 
representative  of  the  Bank  sits  on  the  Commission’s  Board.  Cooperation  with  the  new  supervisory 
body for the insurance industry is expected to be organized along similar lines once the authority is 
fully operational. 
Banks dominate the Greek financial sector, accounting in terms of assets for approximately 85% of the 
entire financial sector. The banking sector itself is characterized by relatively high concentration with 
the 5 largest banks controlling 65% of the total assets of the banking sector. The Bank of Greece’s 
regulatory framework is essentially based on the relevant EU Directives which are closely aligned to 
the Basel I framework. In the Greek context, credit risk is the main component of banking risks. Overall 
the profitability and capital adequacy of Greek banking groups is satisfactory. On a consolidated basis, 
the rate of return on equity and the rate of return on assets before taxes were respectively 16,1% and 
1% for 2004 and the capital adequacy ratio reached 12,8% at the end of 2004. 
In  view  of  the  dominance  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  Greek  financial  system,  I  will  focus  on  this 
sector. 
First, let me outline the approach followed by the Bank to assess the stability of the Greek banking 
sector.  On  the  one  hand,  this  approach  involves  an  evaluation  of  the  information  provided  by  a 
number of indicators relating to the risk profile of banks and the economic condition of households and 
firms,  and  an  assessment  from  a  stability  perspective,  of  developments  in  key  macroeconomic 
variables and markets. On the other hand, the Bank seeks to determine the banking sector’s capacity 
to absorb negative shocks. For this purpose, it utilizes data on bank profitability and capital adequacy 
and also takes account of the results obtained from stress tests. 
To  derive  the  main  indicators,  the  Bank  makes  use  of  information  submitted  by  banks  in  their 
supervisory reports on exposures in default, provisions, concentration ratios and credit migrations of 
individual  exposures.  Alongside  ratios  calculated  from  this  source,  data  from  household  and  firm 
surveys on both debt and income/profit levels provide information on the debt-bearing capacity of the 
household and business sectors. 
Data from supervisory returns also provide information on market and liquidity risks. In its evaluation of 
the  information  provided  by  all  these  indicators,  the  Bank  takes  into  account  the  corresponding  EU 
and Eurozone average values of these indicators where available. 
As regards macroeconomic variables and markets that may affect the stability of the banking sector, 
the Bank focuses on developments in the GDP growth rate, interest rates and exchange rates, and in 
the stock and real-estate markets. The direct impact on the financial condition of the banking sector of 
adverse developments in interest rates and exchange rates and in share and real-estate prices can be 
quantified using data on bank exposures to each of these risk factors. The indirect impact on banks of 
adverse developments in GDP growth and the aforementioned risk factors on banks mainly consists of 
an  increase  in  credit  risk  arising  from  the  effect  of  such  developments  on  the  financial  condition  of 
households and enterprises and thus on their debt-servicing ability. At present, the Bank makes only a 
broad qualitative assessment of this indirect impact in its published stability analysis. 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 3
In  order  to  assess  the  banking  sector’s  capacity  to  absorb  the  impact  of  adverse  disturbances,  the 
Bank  focuses  on  a  number  of  developments  in  banks’  financial  condition  and  makes  use  of  stress 
testing. The latter involves the Bank asking banks to quantify the impact on their own funds and capital 
adequacy ratios of pre-specified adverse changes in the values of certain basic risk factors. The risk 
factors considered are the probability of default and the loss given default, interest rates, share prices 
and  exchange  rates.  In  addition,  the  Bank  is  working  towards  developing  a  macro  stress-testing 
framework, especially for credit risk. 
Let me now move on to discuss issues related to Basel II, which represents a major change in the 
supervisory  framework  and  a  challenge  to  both  supervisors  and  banks.  Before  considering  some 
implications of Basel II for the stability of the banking sector, I would like to refer to the preparations for 
Basel II implementation in Greece and to the choices Greek banks are expected to make between the 
alternative approaches for calculating capital requirements. 
A  large  majority  of  Greek  banks  are  expected  to  adopt  the  standardized  approach  in  determining 
capital requirements for credit risk. However, a number of banks, comprising a share of around 50% of 
the total assets of the banking sector, are reasonably expected to adopt the foundation IRB approach 
for a significant part of their total portfolio. The Bank of Greece is encouraging banks to move to the 
IRB  approach  because  this  approach  will  require  an  improvement  in  their  risk  measurement  and 
management  systems.  Thus,  it  will  strengthen  their  competitive  position  and  their  capacity  to 
successfully adapt to changes in the economic environment. 
For operational risk, although the majority of Greek banks are expected to adopt the basic indicator 
approach to determine capital requirements, most of the large banks plan to adopt the more refined 
standardized approach. 
The Bank of Greece is working closely with the banks to help them prepare for the implementation of 
the new rules. In this connection, it has already put out 5 consultation documents dealing with issues 
where  there  is  national  discretion.  These  documents  discuss  measures  which  the  Bank  intends  to 
adopt as well as other matters requiring clarification and supervisory guidance. Detailed consultations 
with each bank planning to use the IRB approach have begun so that problems can be identified and 
resolved, while the preparations of banks intending to use the standardized approach will be reviewed 
at a later stage - sometime before the end of 2006. An important issue for the Bank of Greece is to 
evaluate not only the technical aspects of the banks’ internal systems and the methodologies used to 
validate their output, but also to ascertain whether the output of these systems is utilized in managerial 
decision-making in such areas as loan approval and pricing, provisioning, and capital allocation. 
At this stage it is difficult to determine the overall impact of Basel II on the total capital requirements of 
the Greek banking sector. The impact will depend not only on the alternative approaches adopted by 
the  banks,  but  also  on  the  composition  and  quality  of  their  assets,  both  of  which  are  affected  by 
economic  conditions.  However,  one  limited  preliminary  indication  was  provided  by  the  result  of  the 
2003 quantitative impact study. For the 6 Greek banks that participated using only the standardized 
approach at that time, there was a 7.5% net increase in the combined capital requirement for credit 
and operating risk compared to the corresponding requirement under the existing framework (a 2.5% 
decrease of the requirement for credit risk and a 10% increase for operating risk). 
Pillar  II  on  supervisory  review  requires  the  conduct  of  risk-based  supervision  and  the  existence  of 
detailed systems and policies at each bank to determine, maintain and allocate economic capital in 
accordance  with  its  risk  profile.  This  increases  the  pressure  on  supervisory  resources  as  well  as 
banks.  In  Greece,  supervision  has  traditionally  focused  more  on  examining  the  accuracy  of 
supervisory  returns  submitted  by  the  banks,  on  a  point-in-time  evaluation  of  the  quality  of  loan 
portfolios, and on the technical calculation of capital requirements to cover credit and market risk. In 
recent years, however, increasing emphasis has been placed on the assessment of internal control 
and risk-management systems, taking into account the risk profile of each bank. In this respect, the 
Bank of Greece found it necessary to impose a minimum capital adequacy ratio above the statutory 
minimum of 8% on some banks. To enhance its ability to conduct risk-based supervision, the Bank 
has taken steps to improve the skills of existing supervisory staff through specialized training and has 
also  recruited  personnel  with  skills  in  quantitative  risk  analysis.  The  banks  have  also  strengthened 
their  risk  management  units,  but,  in  order  to  successfully  implement  Pillar  II  further  efforts  will  be 
required. 
Pillar  III  enhances  market  discipline  by  requiring  credit  institutions  to  disclose  appropriate  risk 
information, allowing the market to reward well-managed and well-capitalized credit institutions. 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2005
Let me now turn to some implications of Basel II for the stability of the banking sector. 
To successfully implement Basel II, Greek banks will need to further improve their risk measurement 
and management systems and to develop their contingency planning. This will enable them to react 
more  promptly  and  effectively  to  disturbances  affecting  their  risk  profile.  In  addition,  the  Bank  of 
Greece, in its stability assessment, will utilize the output of the banks’ improved internal systems to 
undertake more timely and accurate estimates of the total impact of alternative stress scenarios on the 
risk exposures and capital adequacy of the banking sector. Therefore, it will be in a better position to 
evaluate the sector’s overall resilience. 
It  has  been  argued  that  Basel  II  is  likely  to  produce  a  procyclical  effect.  According  to  this  line  of 
reasoning, for banks using the IRB approach, capital requirements for credit risk will increase during 
cyclical  downturns  because  of  a  deterioration  in  the  quality  of  loan  portfolios  and,  conversely, 
decrease during cyclical upturns. As a result, bank capital adequacy will deteriorate during downturns, 
given  the  difficulty  of  raising  new  capital  in  such  conditions.  Consequently,  Banks  will  be  under 
pressure  to  restrict  their  lending  during  downturns,  while  during  upturns  they  will  tend  to  unduly 
expand it. It should be kept in mind, however, that bank lending is likely to be pro-cyclical to some 
degree,  irrespective  of  the  supervisory  framework.  Yet,  the  possible  additional  pro-cyclical  effect 
arising from the IRB approach can be mitigated. In the context of Pillar II, supervisors should insist that 
banks hold capital comfortably above minimum requirements under normal conditions and also require 
banks to conduct rigorous stress tests in order to assess the adequacy of capital buffers. In addition, it 
would be advisable to encourage banks to adopt a more forward-looking through-the-cycle approach 
in  their  credit  quality  assessments  and  in  their  provisioning  policy.  At  present,  even  the  more 
sophisticated Greek banks tend to employ only a point-in-time approach to determine the values of the 
main credit risk parameters. 
In its consultation document regarding the minimum requirements for the Internal Rating Systems, the 
Bank  of  Greece  has  announced  that,  although  it  will  accept  Point  in  Time  systems,  it  encourages 
banks to incorporate the effects of the economic cycle in their assessments. 
During  the  various  consultation  phases  preceding  the  finalization  of  Basel  II,  concerns  were  also 
expressed  with  respect  to  the  impact  of  Basel  II  on  small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs).  It  was 
argued that capital requirements applicable to loans to these firms, especially under the IRB approach, 
would increase compared to the existing framework, leading to an increase in their financing costs or, 
possibly, to a decrease in the amount of credit supplied to them. Both these factors would adversely 
affect their financial condition. This, in turn, would have negative consequences for economic growth 
and  employment  and  would  impact  on  financial  stability,  particularly  in  countries  such  as  Greece, 
where SMEs account for a large share of total output and employment. I believe, however, that the 
final version of Basel II substantially alleviates these concerns. In Greece, the majority of banks will 
adopt the standardized approach. For the significant part of their total exposures to SMEs, which will 
qualify as retail exposures, the applicable risk weight will actually decrease compared to the existing 
framework.  For  most  of  the  remainder,  the  risk  weight  will  remain  unchanged.  Even  in  the  case  of 
banks adopting the IRB approach, most of their SME customers are expected to derive some benefit 
either from the firm-size adjustment for corporate exposures or from the generally lower risk-weight 
function for retail exposures. 
Increased  disclosure  under  Pillar  III  is  expected  to  strengthen  market  discipline  by  increasing 
transparency. This will have a positive effect on stability to the extent that anticipated market reaction 
dampens banks’ incentives to assume excessive risks. However, the influence on bank behavior of the 
direct  market  discipline  exercised  by  depositors,  other  creditors,  and  shareholders,  is  often  limited 
either because these stakeholders lack sufficiently strong incentives or because, in some cases, the 
interests of the different stakeholders do not coincide. In particular, the actual or presumed existence 
of public safety nets may dampen the incentives of depositors to exercise discipline. Wider and more 
pertinent public disclosure is expected to enhance the information content of listed banks’ share prices 
and  of  interest  spreads  on  subordinated  bank  debt.  This  will  increase  the  accuracy  and  predictive 
power of fragility indicators based on market data, such as the distance to default, an indicator derived 
from market prices of bank shares. At this point, I may mention that the 10 banks whose shares are 
listed in the Athens Stock Exchange account for over 75% of the total assets of all credit institutions 
operating  in  Greece.  Based  on  empirical  evidence,  changes  in  the  distance  to  default  represent  a 
useful  forward-looking  indicator  for  stability  assessment  purposes,  especially  if  based  on  weighted 
average values for the entire banking sector rather than for each individual bank. In general, market-
based fragility indicators are a useful supplement to supervisory data, which are derived as a rule from 
accounting records. 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 5
In concluding, I would like to stress the increasing importance of maintaining financial stability in the 
increasingly competitive environment of recent years, following the deregulation of the Greek financial 
system  and  the  liberalization  of  capital  movements.  These  changes  have  made  the  Greek  banking 
system  more  sensitive  to  international  capital  flows,  which  can  sometimes  be  volatile  and 
unpredictable. The internationalization of the activities of Greek banking groups, Greece’s entry into 
the  eurozone,  and  the  integration  of  European  financial  markets,  although  generating  significant 
benefits,  have  also  increased  the exposure  of  the Greek  financial  system  to contagion risks.  In  the 
light of these developments, the Bank of Greece has instituted - and continues to institute - changes 
that improve the quality of its financial stability analysis, so that timely and accurate assessment of 
risks be made and, where necessary, appropriate policy responses can be formulated. I believe that 
the implementation of Basel II in Greece will yield significant benefits because of its effects on the risk 
profile and the risk management systems of banks in the evaluation of their capital adequacy. This, 
after  all,  is  a  key  determinant  of  their  capacity  to  absorb  adverse  shocks.  Therefore,  both  from  a 
supervisory and a financial stability perspective, the difficult task of implementing Basel II in Greece 
will be well worth the effort. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 42/2005
