R Basant Roi: The Mauritius Islamic Finance Forum - premier event in Islamic 
finance 
Address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the premier event in Islamic 
finance, Grand Baie, 25-26 July 2005. 
 Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Hon. Minister of Arts & Culture 
Director of the Islamic Cultural Centre 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good Morning 
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  this  morning  for  the  Premier  Event  in  Islamic  Finance  in 
Mauritius.  May  I  first  of  all  express  my  deep  appreciation  to  the  Islamic  Cultural  Centre  for  having 
taken the initiative to promote awareness in Islamic Finance in Mauritius. I do fervently hope that the 
two-day  forum  will  provide  an  excellent  opportunity  to  share  views  and  ideas  on  the  principles 
underlying Islamic finance and the way forward towards the promotion of Islamic financial services. 
The  concept  of  Islamic  finance  dates  back  to  ancient  times.  However,  formal  Islamic  financial 
institutions are known to have been in existence for over 30 years. In the recent past, the growth of 
Islamic financial services worldwide has gathered momentum. Islamic financial institutions are today 
present in more than sixty countries across the world with total assets running in hundreds of billions 
of  US  dollars.  The  services  are  certainly  not  confined  to  Islamic  countries.  They  have  increasingly 
expanded  beyond  the  frontiers  of  Muslim  countries  and  are  slowly  taking  roots  in  western  financial 
systems. I am sure that all of us here are aware that Islamic laws, or the Shariah, strictly prohibits fixed 
or pre-determined rate of interest, the Riba as it is referred to, on financial instruments or such interest 
arising  from  dealings  and  transactions  in  risk  instruments.  Here,  in  Mauritius,  we  do  have  bank 
customers of 2 Islamic faith not claiming interest rates on their deposits. In fact, as of today, there are 
about 260 holders of deposit accounts who do not claim interest. This is not a recent phenomenon. It 
is a feature that has marked our banking industry for several decades and relatively unknown to the 
general  public  in  Mauritius.  It  obviously  follows  that  issues  relating  to  Islamic  banking  need  to  be 
discussed and fully appreciated by all of us who are in one way or the other concerned with banking in 
Mauritius.  
Before I proceed further with my remarks, let me underline one aspect of Islamic finance that could 
give  rise  to  ill-conceived  interpretation.  Financial  institutions  in  general  keep  adapting  to  changing 
socio-economic environment. Finance does not have to do exclusively with any specific ethnically or 
religiously defined groups. Islamic financial products are suitably carving out a market. There is indeed 
a  market  need  for  these  products  and  that  market  is  expanding  quite  fast.  Be  they  Muslim  or  not, 
individuals and corporate bodies in western markets are increasingly purchasing, for instance, Sharia-
compliant  mortgages  thus  supplying  funds  to  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  create  more  and  more 
Sharia-compliant  mortgages.  The  Sharia-compliant  mortgage  is  a  product  that  is  not  subject  to  the 
vagaries of interest rate volatility and as such this instrument is found to be the most appealing to bank 
customers.  
Having said that let me give a very broad brush-stroke of recent trends in Islamic banking. In a few 
countries  the  entire  banking  system  has  been  converted  into  Islamic  banking;  in  some  others  the 
banking system is dominated by conventional banking institutions operating alongside Islamic banks. 
Over 250 Islamic financial institutions are presently operating worldwide. Several international banks 
like the Citigroup, HSBC and Lloyds TSB are offering Islamic financial products and services either 
through ‘Islamic Banking Desks’ within their conventional banking businesses or the establishment of 
separate  banks  or  subsidiaries  that  specialise  in  financial  products.  Indeed,  these  banks  have 
successfully added targeted services to their broader platform. 
The  sources  of  funds  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  as  well  as  the  types  offinancing  proposed  by 
Islamic financial institutions have evolved over time. The main sources of funds are classified broadly 
into current accounts, savings accounts and investment accounts – such as in the form of Amanah 
BIS Review 53/2005 
 1
and Qard-hasan deposit 3 understood as conventional deposit for safekeeping the face value of which 
has to be guaranteed by the financial institutions. Mudarabah, refers to contracts in which a financial 
institution purchases goods upon the request from a client and the profit or loss is shared between 
them at an agreed upon ratio. This is classified as a loan. Participation term certificates and Profit and 
loss sharing certificates: these certificates resemble shares in a company and are generally classified 
as deposits. The principal types of financing are generally categorised into investment financing, trade 
financing, lending and services – in the form of Qard -hasan loans, Murabaha, Musharaka, Ijara, Ijara 
Wa Iktina and Salaf. These are but a few of the financial products.  
The modes of financing in Islamic banking emphasise principally profit-andloss sharing, although there 
are  also  some  non-profit  and  loss  sharing  modes  of  financing.  Theoretically,  Islamic  banks  are 
relatively more concerned about the feasibility and profitability of a project while conventional banks 
tend  to  rely  more  on  collaterals.  This  is  one  of  the  features  of  Islamic  banking  that  could  be  of 
tremendous  assistance  to  small-scale  businesses.  Conventional  banking  requires  comprehensive 
criteria that need to be satisfied for an applicant to become eligible for loans. Smallscale enterprises 
throughout  the  world  generally  face  greater  difficulties  in  obtaining  finance  than  large  -scale 
enterprises do. The services sector is made up of a large number of small entrepreneurs who usually 
do not have ready access to finance. It is a matter of fact that small entrepreneurs who were able to 
obtain credit facilities on the basis of collateral in the past are now finding it difficult to raise funds for 
their operations. With the implementation of Basel II in the years ahead, there does exist a potential 
risk  that  conventional  banks  would  be  less  inclined  to  lend  to  small-scale  enterprises.  Given  the 
characteristics  of  Islamic  banking,  the  small  and  medium  enterprises  is  an  economic  sector  where 
Islamic banking could play a central role in giving a fillip to entrepreneurship. 
In  short,  Islamic  banks  can  play  a  catalytic  role  in  fostering  economic  development  although  it  has 
been observed that, in practice, Islamic banks tend to favour short-term projects and trade finance - 
which are less risky. This is principally due to a lack of adequate techniques for project appraisals in 
an Islamic banking 4 context. Because of these weaknesses, it is advisable to address the need for 
having staff with the required skills to learn the new processes for operating Islamic banks.  
The  provision  of  Islamic  financial  products  and  services  has  expanded  beyond  the  market  for 
households,  businesses  and  institutions  to  governments.  They  have  made  inroads  into  capital 
markets.  The  Sukuk  bonds  –  which  differ  from  ordinary  bonds  to  the  extent  that  they  are  Shariah-
compliant – have gained prominence. The market for Sukuk bonds is expected to register rapid growth 
in the years ahead as more and more conventional financial institutions are expressing keen interests 
and are actually participating in it. The expansion of Islamic banking across the world has inevitably 
drawn  the  attention  of  central  bankers  and  regulators  in  the  Middle  East  and  elsewhere  to  the  risk 
factor associated with it. Like conventional banks, Islamic banks also need to be effectively regulated 
and supervised. Their strength and soundness are unequivocally as critical as for conventional banks. 
However,  the  nature  of  risks  associated  with  Islamic  banking  business  brings  forward  an  array  of 
issues  in  risk  measurement,  income  recognition,  adequacy  of  collateral  and  disclosure  standards. 
Effective prudential supervision for Islamic banks the world over is still in its infancy. 
The  very  fact  that  Islamic  banking  differs  from  conventional  banking  in  important  ways  poses 
regulatory and supervisory problems. The risks taken by Islamic financial institutions are not directly 
comparable to those of conventional financial institutions. In most of the countries where conventional 
banks operate alongside Islamic banks, the same regulatory and supervisory standard is being applied 
to the extent possible. So far the tendency has been to apply the standard set by the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision.  It  is  however  recognized  that  the  same  standard  as  is  applicable  to 
conventional  banking  cannot  be  made  rigorously  applicable  to  an  Islamic  banking  framework. 
Designing  a  comprehensive  set  of  standard  regulatory  prescriptions  and  supervisory  norms  for  an 
Islamic banking framework that are valid for all countries is a task yet to be accomplished. A prominent 
obstacle  in  the  accomplishment  of  this  task  is  the  lack  of  uniformity  in  specific  forms  of  Islamic 
principles in Muslim countries. Certain Islamic banking procedures and financial instruments that are 
accepted in one Muslim country may be rejected in another 5 Muslim country. The variants of Islamic 
banking  practices  make  generalisation  difficult  as  to  what  constitute  standard  and  universally 
acceptable Islamic banking principles. It is deemed imperative to reach a paradigm version of Islamic 
banking  that  could  be  used  as  a  benchmark  for  the  crafting  of  an  effective  regulatory  system  and 
supervisory norms.  
In short, the regulatory challenges raised by Islamic financial institutions are yet to be resolved in a 
comprehensive manner. Some regulatory authorities have already started looking into the appropriate 
regulatory  framework.  However,  there  is  still  quite  a  distance  to  travel  before  regulatory  authorities 
could  come  up  with  a  standard  and  comprehensive  set  of  regulatory  prescriptions  and  supervisory 
norms for Islamic banking. 
Recognising these facts, the IMF supported and facilitated the establishment of the Islamic Financial 
Services Board (IFSB) in 2002 with a view to promoting, disseminating and harmonizing best practices 
in  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  Islamic  banking  industry.  The  IFSB  also  aims  at  promoting 
good  practices  in  Islamic  financial  institutions  in  risk  management  through  research,  training  and 
technical assistance. It recently released exposure drafts on risk management standards for Islamic 
financial  institutions.  The  work  of  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organisation  for  Islamic  Financial 
Institutions is also of crucial importance. In the same vein, the work carried out by Shariah supervisory 
boards for Islamic financial institutions is of commendable importance for regulatory authorities.  
In conclusion, let me reiterate that banking is a universal concept that knows no boundaries – be they 
geographical, ethnic or religious. Any form of banking, so long as it is conducted within the parameters 
of the laws and regulations to provide services in the best interests of society, is most welcomed. May 
I wish all the participants in the Forum fruitful deliberations. To the distinguished visitors participating in 
the Forum, I wish them a pleasant stay in Mauritius. 
Thank you. 
