Ishrat Husain: Unleashing entrepreneurship 
Chief guest address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the launching of 
UN Secretary General’s Report on Unleashing entrepreneurship, Karachi, 28 December 2004. 
 I wish to commend the FPCCI and UNDP for launching the Report of the Commission appointed by 
the  Secretary  General  on Unleashing  entrepreneurship.  The Commission had  learned scholars  and 
practitioners such as Prof. C. K. Prahalad and Mr. Hernando de Soto as members for whose views on 
poverty alleviation are highly refreshing and I have great respect for them. The Report reflects their 
views and hence the Report is not only useful but practicable. 
The Commission has made an extremely important contribution to the debate on how to harness the 
energies  and  entrepreneurs  of  the  private  firms,  farmers,  businesses  -  big  or  small,  corporate  or 
individual - for the larger benefit of the majority of the poor. It is also gratifying to note that the fear 
about the power and domination of multinational corporations and private businesses that has become 
a rallying point for anti-globalization forces has given way to a more balanced and sobering analysis of 
the  role  of  private  sector  and  private-public  partnership  in  the  Report.  The  rhetoric  against 
liberalization  of  trade  has  been  replaced  in  the  Report  by  the  consensus  view  that  open  markets 
support economic growth. 
The Commission has rightly distilled the lessons of last five decades’ experience of development. It 
argues that favorable global and domestic macro 1environment, physical and social infrastructure and 
rule of law are the foundations for the private sector. And a level playing field, access to financing, 
access to skills and knowledge are the pillars of entrepreneurship. 
If I examine the findings of this Report in light of what we have tried to do in Pakistan during the last 
five years we can proudly claim that we have made strides in fostering and ensuring a stable domestic 
macroeconomic environment, taken initiative in building physical and social infrastructure, and made 
serious  endeavors  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  for  all  economic  players  whether  large  or  small, 
domestic or foreign. We have, however, not been able to make much headway so far in our quest for 
achieving rule of law across the board particularly for the poor in our country who still face enormous 
difficulties. We have also remained slack in skills and knowledge development. There is a mismatch 
between the skills required by the economy and the skills produced by our educational institutions. We 
are way behind other developing countries in these two aspects. 
One of the most gratifying aspects of our reforms in the financial sector during the last five years has 
been  broadening  access  to  financing  by  the  middle  and  lower  income  groups.  The  banking  sector 
which  dominates  our  financial  system  (it  controls  more  than  90  per  cent  of  financial  assets)  had 
traditionally catered to the needs of the Government for meeting their deficit financing, or to the large 
and  well  established  corporate  sector  and  also  financed  international  trade.  Through  the  reforms 
undertaken in last 5 years we have tried to open up the financial sector by promoting and encouraging 
non-bank financing companies which through leasing, modarabas, mutual funds etc. can reach out to 
new type of borrowers and savers. As most of the poor derive their livelihoods from agriculture, SMEs 
or have no tangible assets, the State Bank of Pakistan is facilitating flow of agriculture credit, SME 
loaning and microfinance to help them. Four years ago, ZTBL was the only major provider of credit to 
agriculture.  Today,  the  commercial  banks  have  overtaken  ZTBL  as  the  main  sources  of  agriculture 
credit. During this period the volume of credit to agriculture particularly small and subsistence farmers 
has  almost  tripled  and  this  year  we  hope  to  cross  Rs.  85  billion.  Similarly,  from  a  modest  start  the 
outstanding  loans  for  SMEs  now account  for  18  to  19 per  cent of  all  private sector  loans.  Khushali 
Bank, Pakistan Poverty Alleviation fund and other microfinance institutions and NGOs are now serving 
about half a million poor mostly the women in rural areas. 
Our aim is that 50 per cent of our agricultural households should be able to obtain bank credit in the 
next five years while we plan that microfinance institutions should reach 3 million borrowers from the 
current  level  of  half  a  million  borrowers.  In  small  and  medium  enterprises  the  banks’  efforts  will  be 
focused on financing at least two million enterprises throughout the country. Interestingly, the banks 
find it profitable to lend for microfinance, SMEs and agriculture as their target group is small holders, 
small  businesses  and  the  poor  particularly  the  women.  Their  track  record  in  loan  recovery  is  far 
superior to that of the large business houses and large farmers. The default rate was 25 per cent when 
the  banking  system  in  Pakistan  was  serving  the  traditional  target  group  of  corporates  and  large 
holders.  Today,  the  default  rate  is  less  than  5  per  cent  when  the  banks  are  gradually  shifting  their 
lending to the underserved sectors, underprivileged households and undercapitalized enterprises. The 
experience  with  the  banking  sector  reforms  in  Pakistan  has  therefore  exploded  the  myth  that  the 
formal  finance  can  only  be  made  available  to  the  organized  firms  and  well-to-do  families  and 
individuals. The conventional wisdom that the banks will lose money if they broaden their access to 
rural population or small enterprises does not hold any grounds looking at the results achieved by the 
banks in the last few years. 
For the middle class who form the backbone of any economy, we have allowed the commercial banks 
to offer mortgage financing, auto financing, consumer financing and Islamic banking. There has been 
an  impressive  response  to  these  products.  Most  of  the  autos  are  now  purchased  through  bank  or 
lease  financing.  The  banks  have  attracted  million  or  so  new  customers  from  the  middle  and  lower 
income groups who have availed of financing in these new areas. 
I  fully  endorse  the  view  of  the  learned  authors  of  the  report  that  large  incumbent  companies  in 
developing countries can stifle entrepreneurial energy and initiative but a dynamic financial sector, in 
which new entrants and incumbents can get finance under competitive terms, can create competitive 
pressures  in  the  market.  This  is  exactly  what  Pakistan  is  trying  to  do.  We  have  done  away  with 
effectively subsidizing large private sector firms which were selling low quality products at high prices 
under a regime of controls. We have allowed liberal entry and sale of imported goods and inputs and 
also removed high tariffs and quotas so that small firms can also produce goods domestically at low 
prices. 
Least that I am misunderstood that we have reached nirvana I wish to make it clear that we have just 
made a modest beginning in this journey towards reaching out to the poor and the middle class. The 
journey is long, tortuous and the road ahead is full of stones and boulders. We have to work hard to 
remove these impediments on our way and continue marching towards our destination without getting 
fatigued. 
I hope the recommendations of the report will not only be disseminated widely but also acted upon 
faithfully. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2005
