V Leeladhar: Value-based professionals - the need of the hour 
Valedictory address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Western 
India Regional Council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, Mumbai, 10 June 2005. 
 It gives me great pleasure to be in your midst today. The Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) 
has been a critical player in the Indian endeavour to develop professionals to protect the interests of the 
stake holders, to ensure corporate governance and contribute to public good - a topic which is intrinsically 
linked  to  the  theme  of  today,  viz.  value  based  professionals  and  the  broader  theme  of  corporate 
governance.  These  are  difficult  issues  and  given  today’s  audience,  we  here  deal  with  broad  generic 
issues rather than particulars. 
In the more innocent days of my youth, perhaps, the term value based professional would have been a 
tautology. It was then taken for granted that professionals possessed values. The word profession evoked 
fields  that  require  extensive  study  and  mastery  of  specialized  knowledge,  such  as  law,  medicine, 
engineering,  accounting,  etc.  This  contrasted  sharply  with  the  more  humble  term  occupation,  which 
referred merely to the nature of a person’s employment. To conduct oneself as a professional - exhibiting 
“professional behavior” - indicated that the person’s actions remained in accordance with specific rules, 
written or unwritten, pertaining to the standards of a profession. Indeed, early sociological definitions of 
professionalism, in particular, involved checklists of perceived or claimed characteristics, which apart from 
esoteric knowledge or special skills, invariably included ethical behaviour. It also entailed the recognition 
of  a  social  obligation  to  apply  one’s  skill  and  wisdom  for  the  general  benefit  or  what  is  termed  ‘public 
good’. 
One practiced a profession. It was in this context that the word mal-practice evolved. It was taken as the 
failure to provide professional services with the skill or ethics usually exhibited by responsible and careful 
members of the profession, resulting in injury, loss, or damage to the party contracting those services. It 
was with professions such as medics, accountants, lawyers, that mal-practice was associated and one 
could  be  charged  for  the  same.  While  George  Bernard  Shaw  characterized  all  professions  as 
“conspiracies  against  the  laity”,  professionals,  nonetheless,  were  generally  deemed  to  be  a  group  of 
people who shared not only common knowledge and skills built upon a formalized framework of learning, 
but also a common and articulate set of values and ethics. It is thus that competence and ethics formed 
the bedrock of the professional. One did not exhort values in professionals - a professional without values 
was no professional at all. 
Today,  the  world  has  changed.  We  no  longer  live  in  simple  times.  The  cries  for  values  and  ethics  in 
business today - the value based professional - stem essentially from a crisis of confidence. Whether in 
medicine or in finance, confidence is the linchpin of the professional - confidence in his competence to 
perform  and  confidence  in  his  integrity.  Till  recently,  competence  was  sought  to  be  enforced  through 
jealously guarded barriers to entry. Self regulation by the fraternity laid out codes of ethics and codes of 
conduct.  These  codes  and  standards  have  evolved  over  the  years  influenced,  to  no  small  degree,  by 
crises that affect the profession from time to time. 
The latest round of the crisis of confidence in the corporate sphere has been catalysed by the unexpected 
corporate failures of the 1980s, the 1990s and indeed the high profile collapses of new millennium. This 
perhaps added a new dimension in the discourse related to confidence, and this relates to confidence in 
the integrity of the system as a whole to subserve the needs of the market system, the stake holders and 
indeed society to provide reliable financial data and information on the ‘full and fair’ picture of a company’s 
accounts and the changes therein. 
Post mortem reports of accounts and of administrative lapses of failed companies given by liquidators 
/ regulators / inspectors give us an insight into accounting as well as regulatory lapses and provide a 
stark contrast between the ‘true and fair’ picture of the organisation at various points of time in its life 
and what it was reported to be. Often times it has been perceived that practices such as balance date 
adjustments, deferring expenses, advancing revenue recognition and judicious or indeed creative use 
of  complex  business  group  structures,  while  conforming  to  the  letter  were  sometimes  intended  to 
obfuscate and subvert the spirit of compliance. 
The general perception is that accounting statements have failed to inform of the drift of financial affairs of 
the company towards impending failure. This has catalysed debate on issues like accounting standards 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 1
as  well  as  issues  of  auditor  independence  on  the  one  hand  and  the  issues  of  integrity  and  personal 
deviance, on the other. The causal roots of the recent corporate “misdemeanors” are debatable. At one 
level,  they were attributed to a swashbuckling ethos  and corporate culture initially spawned and made 
fashionable by the investment bankers of the 1980s - an era that has oft been alluded to as the ‘decade of 
greed’.  This  set  in  motion  a  period  when  dramatic  financial  success  received  acclaim,  flamboyant  star 
operators were viewed as folk heroes and cautionary words from regulators were viewed with distaste. 
At another level, they are attributable to the changed business environment of relentless competition in 
which  firms  operate.  This  competition  has  brought  with  it  pressures  on  corporate  managements  to 
consistently  sustain  and  enhance  their  financial  performance  and  demonstrably  enhance  shareholder 
value. The pressures on management, have in the recent past, also spilled over to auditors and how they 
conduct their business. These pressures have also brought into focus concepts of earnings management 
- the quality of earnings and how methods of earnings management may lead to or even constitute fraud. 
The accounting, regulatory and ethical failures subsuming the system, the cultural ethos and individual 
deviance  have  squarely  resituated  professional  values  and  ethics  and  the  broader  governance  issues 
onto the centre stage of boardroom concerns. 
The general dismay was, in fact, not with insolvencies per se but with unexpected collapses where the 
financial  statements,  regulatory  warnings  did  not  presage  what  was  to  come.  The  un-serviceability  of 
accounts to give a true and fair picture of what lay in store, the inaction of regulators to gauge the pulse of 
the  forthcoming  events  and  the  ethical  failures  of  the  organisational  culture  or  of  individuals  that 
perpetuated acts of commission or omission painted a picture of a systems failure that often got blurred 
with the media focus on personalities and on deviant behaviour. This in turn has brought back into focus 
the quest for codes and standards as well as the issue of values and ethics in business. 
While the quest for codes and standards, in generic terms is, in some ways, never ending, the endeavour 
in accounting and finance, nonetheless, is geared to improve the reliability of financial statements. This 
makes  them  more  credible  and  increase  shareholders’  confidence.  Confidence  in  financial  statements 
reduces the cost of capital and makes the markets more efficient. Thus, in a market economy, quality 
accounts, audits and the integrity of professionals create an enabling environment for economic efficiency 
and corporate growth. 
Historically, the importance of published accounts was brought into focus by the UK’s Companies Act of 
1844. This, over time, gave rise to the quest  for  standards, codes  and quality in accounting in market 
based economies has been to shore up investor confidence by setting strong and binding accounting and 
auditing standards. It was thus that financial audits were preformed by auditors who were independent of 
the entities whose financial statements they audited. The purpose was to reduce incentives for conflict of 
interest which would compromise professional judgement. The early attempts in modern times to build 
binding  standards  date  back  to  the  early  1930s  in  the  run  up  to  the  period  when  the  Securities  and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) was established in the US in 1934. It is interesting to recall some of the 
issues that arose in the 1930s which are redolent of the debates of today. One was whether audits should 
be performed by private firms or government auditors and another was whether the rules for the auditing 
profession would be set by auditors themselves or by outsiders. 
The first issue of government auditors vs. private firms was resolved 1933 in favour of private firms. The 
second  issue  of  whether  auditing  standards  and  rules  should  be  set  by  those  who  laboured  in  the 
trenches, viz., the auditors themselves or by outsiders who were essentially the users of the accounting 
services was more contentious and was settled in the late 1930s - in 1939 to be specific. The issue was 
resolved  narrowly,  and  not  without  considerable  lobbying,  in  a  3-2  vote  in  favour  of  the  auditors 
themselves  setting  their  own  accounting  and  auditing  standards,  i.e.,  regulating  themselves,  thus 
formalising the regime of self regulation. 
This  debate  has  come  a  full  circle  today,  when  the  consensus  has  once  again  veered  in  favour  of 
“outsiders” having a prominent, if not dominant, say in the setting of accounting standards in the quest for 
accounting  quality.  The  recent  events  -  high  profile  misstated  earnings  and  frauds  -  have  in  no  small 
measure helped catalyse this development. The underlying purpose of the endeavour for quality has been 
to restore the confidence of the stakeholders, the regulators and the society at large in the quality of the 
attest functions performed by accountants and the integrity of the professional. 
It is in the context of this background, perhaps, that almost half the members of the Peer Review Board of 
the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  India  set  up  in  2002,  are  drawn  from  industry,  banking, 
academics, etc. In the international arena,  the dominance of outsiders is even  more pronounced - the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 in the US envisages that of the 5 members of the Accounting Board only two 
members can be Certified Public Accountants. In some ways this reflects a movement to resituate the 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2005
this  Board  represents  a  significant  step 
needs of the consumer of accounting services over the compulsions and convenience of the provider of 
these services. 
At a fundamental level, this marks a substantial change that has been brought about in the recent times in 
the governance of the auditing profession. In fact, the move in the 1980s towards ethical behaviour got 
gradually subsumed under the expanded notion of corporate governance, renewed discussions on which 
emanated  from  the  Cadbury  Report  of  1992.  Over  time,  the  voluntary  nature  of  self  regulation  and 
corporate governance has metamorphosed into an overlay of additional layer of rules and compliances 
such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Essentially, this is premised on two pillars : (a) the mechanism by which 
Corporations are directed and controlled; and (b) the mechanism by which those who direct and control a 
corporation are supervised. 
In matters relating to Corporate Governance, Secretarial Practices play a critical role. In India Secretarial 
practices have evolved over a period of time in differing business environments and have had different 
usages.  The  need  to  harmonise  and  consolidate  the  diverse  Secretarial  Practices  in  use  in  India,  has 
given  rise  to  the  quest  for  standards  and  codes  in  this  area  too.  Towards  this  end,  the  Institute  of 
Company  Secretaries  of  India  (ICSI)  has  constituted  a  Secretarial  Standards  Board  (SSB)  with  the 
objective  to  formulate  secretarial  standards  based  on  applicable  laws,  business  environment  and  best 
secretarial  practices.  The  Establishment  of 
towards 
harmonization, integration and standardisation of diverse Secretarial Practices prevalent in the corporate 
sector. These standards lay down the principles’ which companies are expected to adopt and adhere to in 
discharging their corporate responsibility. 
It is heartening to note that this has been a collaborative endeavour with consultations across the sector. It 
is thus that the SSB comprises eminent members of the profession and is represented by the regulatory 
authorities such as the Department of Company Affairs, the Securities and Exchange Board of India and 
your institute’s sister professional bodies such as the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India and the 
Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India. We trust that the Guidance Notes developed by SSB 
and the clarifications given by it on issues arising out of the standards will contribute to better corporate 
governance. 
We  as  regulators  at  the  Reserve  Bank,  too,  have  sought  to  catalyse  conditions  for  good  corporate 
governance. We have been at pains to emphasise that compliance with regulatory requirements is the 
minimum requirement of good corporate governance and what are required are internal, peer and market 
pressures to reach higher than minimum standards prescribed by regulatory agencies. A critical element 
of our endeavors has been the transparency aspect that is emphasized by expanding the coverage of 
information and timeliness of such information and analytical content. Importantly, especially in the post-
reforms  phase,  the  central  bank  has  reiterated  several  times  over  that  deregulation  and  operational 
freedom must go hand in hand with operational transparency. 
This also brings us to the moot question: What does it take to be a value based professional? This is a 
difficult question. There are, perhaps, qualities that individuals need to possess to make ethical decisions. 
First, recognising ethical issues and reasoning through ethical consequences of decisions. Second, the 
ability to look at alternate points of view and deciding what is right or appropriate in a particular set of 
circumstances. Third, the ability to deal with ambiguity and uncertainty and making a choice on the best 
information available. 
The pace of technical change, scientific innovation, and cultural interchange in the global world of today, 
increasingly confronts us with situations of conflicts and unanticipated ethical challenges where we are 
forced to make decisions we are not prepared to make but cannot avoid. Often times, the existing moral 
knowledge and ethical guidelines prove inadequate or simply do not provide answers to modern moral 
problems. Worse, the pace of change is such that similar situations cannot be replicated in stable and 
recurrent  conditions  and  it  is  therefore  very  difficult  to  look  to  or  construct  ethical  guidelines  for  a  fast 
changing present. What individual professionals, groups and organizations need to do in such situations is 
to  acquire skills  and  methods that give  them  the ethical competence and confidence to handle ethical 
issues that may arise in everyday professional life. 
Essentially what we need to know is how to apply our personal or organizational principles to concrete 
moral problems. Moreover, there can be a disconnect between individual and organizational values which 
leads  to  internal  conflict  and  dilemmas.  Worse,  there  can  be  a  disconnect  between  the  stated  and 
prevailing  values  in  an  organization.  We  all  have,  at  some  point  or  the  other,  faced  conflicts  between 
loyalty and integrity. We are confronted with issues of dissent and how to deal with dissent. Emerging 
commercial structures such as outsourcing bring with it their issues of enjoining the agent to profess the 
values  of  the  principal  they  represent.  Besides,  a  corporate  reality  check  indicates  that  we  have  to 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 3
increasingly live with issues which range from black and white areas such as false and misleading claims, 
fraud and manipulation, etc. to more grey issues such as concealment of information, conflicts of interest, 
coercion, vulnerabilities, principal-agent problems and fiduciary duties. 
Ethical  dilemmas  for  individuals  arise  not  from  issues  of  corporate  misconduct  such  as  whether  a 
particular  practice  is  unfair,  questionable,  misleading  or  intended  to  deceive.  It  arises  from  one’s  own 
personal  beliefs,  moral  values  and  commitment  to  right  action.  They  are  in  short  challenges  to  one’s 
integrity.  It  arises  from  questionable  behaviour  in  others  or  being  pressured  to  indulge  in  questionable 
behaviour  ones’  self  by  just  getting  a  job  done.  It  can  be  fostered  by  the  demands  of  the  times  or 
organisational pressures in the form of explicit instructions to do things that may be considered sleazy. It 
need not necessarily arise because the organization or superiors are corrupt but could grow out of the 
intense pressure to get a job done or, for that matter, from an organizational culture or a leadership that 
fosters an environment in which unethical behaviour takes place. 
What  is  needed  is  a  psychological  approach  to  ethical  competence  where  one  can  anticipate  moral 
problems, recognize them and address them squarely with confidence. In resolving ethical dilemmas that 
professionals may be confronted with, communication plays an important role to explain first to one’s own 
self  and  then  to  others  convincingly  the  basis  of  the  decision  taken  and  why  that  was  the  best  in  the 
circumstances. At an organizational level, it needs all the leadership qualities, communication skills and 
sensitivity to inculcate a culture that raises the level of ethical awareness and carries the organization and 
the  group  along with credibility and confidence.  And  confidence  is what the quest  for  the  value based 
professional is all about. 
It is thus not in codes and standards alone that a culture of the value based professional may be moulded. 
Nor in processes and compliance. While these are important, there are views that we need to cautiously 
work out the fine balance between processes and outcomes. In today’s politically correct world of form, 
there  are  therefore  increasingly  cries  for  substance  -  indeed,  one  school  of  thought,  in  the  accounting 
profession itself, feels that obsession with compliance begets a creativity that subverts. This brings the 
word dialectics, more associated with bohemia, revolution and the intellectual, squarely into the lexicon of 
the  staid  accountant  and  regulator.  Value  based  professionals  is  not  just  about  compliance  alone,  but 
living up to the spirit of compliance. These are difficult issues indeed, and we have more questions than 
answers.  Today  I  sign  off  with  a  call  for  more  innocent  times  and  leave  you  with  a  chiasmus  (where 
meaning is reversed as in a mirror image): I trust that value based professionals value the profession they 
profess and value the values they profess to value. I leave it to you to pause and ponder. 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2005
