Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Cross-border challenges in implementing Basel II in emerging 
economies 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Public-
Private Dialogue Session of the 7th SEACEN Conference of Directors of Supervision of Asia Pacific 
Economies, Kuala Lumpur, 4 August 2005. 
 Dr. Subarjo, Executive Director of the SEACEN Centre, 
Mr. Karl Cordewener, Deputy Secretary General of the Secretariat of the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision, 
Distinguished Guests,  
Thank you for the invitation to speak at this 7th SEACEN Conference of Directors of Supervision of 
Asia Pacific Economies organised by the SEACEN Centre in collaboration with the APEC Business 
Advisory Council, the Asian Bankers' Association and the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council. This 
event is of particular significance as it brings together the regulators and practitioners from the banking 
industry, to exchange ideas and share experiences on the operational and policy issues involved in 
cross-border banking, in particular, with respect to the implementation of Basel II. The participation of 
regulators and industry players from Latin America will, I believe further enrich the discussions. It is in 
our  common  interest  to  resolve  these  issues  expeditiously,  as  the  implementation  date  of  2007  for 
G10 countries approaches. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In most emerging markets, the banking sector forms the key component of the financial system that 
drives the economy. In Malaysia, despite the increased significance of the domestic capital market, the 
banking  sector  continues  to  be  the  predominant  source  of  financing  in  our  financial  system,  as  it 
evolves to offer more innovative financial solutions to meet the more sophisticated needs of customers 
and investors. The increasingly complex nature of their operations have had a significant impact on 
their  risk  profile  over  the  years.  The  domestic  financial  environment  has  also  become  more 
competitive,  following  an  intensification  of  the  liberalisation  and  deregulation  process.  Domestic 
banking institutions have now also ventured beyond our domestic borders. Increasingly, supervisory 
attention  is  therefore  directed  towards  ensuring  that  a  robust  risk  management  framework  is  put  in 
place to support such business expansion and growth strategies. 
Against this background, the call for improvements in risk management through the adoption of Basel 
II and the discussions on the effectiveness of supervisory arrangements on cross-border banking and 
financial activities are most relevant. The case of the BCCI in the early 90's and Baring in the mid-90's 
have also brought to the fore the gaps in supervisory oversight activities and highlighted the need for 
greater cooperation between home and host supervisors. Similarly, the arrangements for cross-border 
activities involving either international branch networks or the operation of subsidiaries is a subject of 
much discussion within supervisory circles, particularly with respect to its implications on supervisory 
cooperation.  While  there  may  be  differences  in  the  operational  arrangements  and  in  the  nature  of 
activities undertaken by global players in emerging markets in Asia and Latin America, the significance 
of their presence in the financial systems in both regions makes this dialogue session most relevant 
and  timely.  In  Malaysia,  foreign  banks'  account  for  almost  30%  of  the  total  assets  of  the  banking 
industry. In the context of cross-border banking, the local incorporation of all foreign-owned banking 
institutions' branches in 1994 has contributed towards the strengthening of Bank Negara Malaysia's 
supervisory oversight over the activities of foreign-owned banking institutions in Malaysia. The capital 
and resources dedicated to support the domestic subsidiary operations reflects the commitment of the 
foreign-owned banking institutions in the country. In addition, it has also facilitated the assessment of 
the financial soundness of local operations of foreign banks. While the merits of different operational 
arrangements are a matter of much debate, particularly in terms of business flexibility, the subsidiary 
structure of foreign-owned banking institutions in Malaysia has facilitated the consistent application of 
rules and regulations by Bank Negara Malaysia to the entire banking system.  
The  increasing  significance  of  the  foreign  institutions,  along with  the  different  operational  structures 
were key factors that influenced the design of the early cross-border supervisory framework. This is 
detailed in the Basel Concordat, that outlined the principles for supervision of foreign banks by home 
and  host  authorities,  issued  by  the  Basel  Committee  of  Banking  Supervisors  (BCBS)  in  1983.  The 
concordat recognised the greater roles of host supervisors for supervising foreign banks that operate 
via  locally-incorporated  subsidiaries.  Some  home  country  supervisory  in  fact  referred  to  the  host 
supervisor as the banks' "intermediate home supervisor". 
The  framework  also  recommended  a  high  level  of  reliance  by  host  supervisory  on  the  works 
undertaken by the home supervisors in their oversight and monitoring of the soundness of the foreign 
banks' branches in their jurisdictions. These important principles have become the foundations for the 
current cross-border supervisory framework and have been the basis for the formulation of the High-
Level  Principles  for  the  Cross-Broader  Implementation  of  the  New  Accord  issued  in  2003.  The 
Principles  have  sought  to  further  reinforce  the  responsibilities  of  home  supervisors  in  conducting 
consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates and the greater expectation on host supervisors in 
the supervision of individual subsidiary banks in their country.  
The new capital accord is yet another significant development that would challenge the robustness of 
the cross-border banking framework and principles. The real test would be in translating the principles 
into  detailed  policies  and  action  plans  that  are  both  sound  and  practicable.  The  main  challenge  in 
applying the new accord uniformly across the globe is, indeed the complexity of the framework itself. 
While the underlying intention of the framework to promote sound risk management and best practices 
is not in question, countries, particularly the emerging markets, are at different levels of readiness to 
cope with the extensive changes and potential implications of Basel II. Given the different stages of 
development  and  levels  of  market  sophistication,  applying  Basel  II,  that  is  designed  fundamentally 
based  on  parameters  and  experiences  drawn  from  developed  economies,  may  not  be  appropriate 
without some customisation to better reflect the situation in the emerging markets. The low liquidity in 
some  markets  and  the  higher  level  of  market  volatility  in  most  emerging  markets  may  not  be 
adequately  captured  in  the  underlying  assumptions  within  the  Basel  II  framework.  It  is  therefore 
important  to  emphasise  that  such  constraints  and  the  need  for  some  customisation  must  be  well 
understood  and  acknowledged  by  foreign  banks  operating  in  emerging  markets.  In  essence,  the 
discussions  on  the  cross-border  implementation  of  Basel  II  will  contribute  towards  avoiding  the 
imposition  of  "one  size  fits  all'  solutions,  and  minimising  the  potential  adverse  implications  of  the 
differences  in  approaches  in  addition  to  avoiding  the  unnecessary  duplication  of  efforts  and 
investments. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In many emerging economies, Basel II is seen as an important catalyst to accelerate the introduction 
of best risk management practices within the banking sector in the medium and longer term. While 
best  practices  that  have  been  adopted  by  global  banks  have  even  surpassed  the  expectations  of 
Basel  II,  this  is  not  the  case  for  most  domestic  institutions.  In  many  emerging  markets  where  the 
banking  system  is  still  highly  fragmented,  promoting  the  adoption  of  these  practices  throughout  the 
entire industry will indeed be a challenge. Such efforts would therefore need to be implemented within 
the  agenda  of  the  overall  financial  sector  development  programme  in  the  individual  countries.  It  is 
within this context that Malaysia has chosen to adopt a flexible timeframe, underpinned by four key 
implementation principles: 
• 
• 
First, for capacity building measures to be implemented; 
Second, within these capacity building efforts, the emphasis on the enhancement of the risk 
management framework for all banking institutions; 
Third,  to  emphasise  on  strong  business  justification  instead  of  regulatory  mandate  in  the 
adoption of the more advanced approaches; and 
Finally,  to  enhance  the  supervisory  methodology  to  assess  the  internal  models  and  the 
advanced risk management systems. 
  The  rigorousness  of  the  analytical  process  under  Basel  II  will  certainly  be  demanding  for  banking 
institutions.  It  is  equally  demanding  from  the  supervisory  perspective  to  develop  an  appropriate 
response  and  assessment  framework  on  these  processes.  Instead  of  over  focus  on  validating  the 
detailed  quantitative  and statistical procedures, supervisory  attention would  need  to ensure  that  the 
analytical processes are undertaken to support decision making, and not merely to meet regulatory 
expectations.  Supervisors  also  need  to  undergo  early  training  to  identify  the  relevant  issues  when 
undertaking  the  supervisory  assessment.  This  underscores,  the  importance  of  efforts  to  accelerate 
supervisory capacity building efforts, particularly in the development of specialised supervisory skills to 
conduct  model  validation.  While  emerging  market  economies  may  have  different  timelines  and 
priorities,  rigorous  training  programmes  need  to  be  simultaneously  pursued  to  ensure  that  the 
supervisors are able to fully understand and interpret the qualitative materials, and at the same time, 
are able to comprehend the broader supervisory issues and concerns. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  benefits  of  Basel  II  cannot  be  fully  realised  if  emerging  countries  do  not  have  the  necessary 
foundation for effective implementation. In reality, some developing and emerging countries still need 
to develop a more efficient and comprehensive legal, accounting, regulatory and market infrastructure. 
The  challenge  for  the  emerging  economies  is  therefore  to  place  high  priorities  towards  establishing 
and strengthening the fundamental infrastructure. Without the proper foundations in place, this could 
pose impediments to the implementation of Basel II, in addition to inhibiting the proper implementation 
of cross-border regulations and the effective conduct of consolidated supervision.  
In emerging countries where the necessary infrastructure is already in place, supervisors need to look 
beyond  the  state  of  the  current  financial  landscape,  in  the  context  of  the  globalisation  of  financial 
services,  and  integration  with  the  international  landscape.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  appropriate 
regulatory  framework  for  the  banking  industry,  in  particular,  the  future  of  cross-border  supervisory 
arrangements,  needs  to  be  articulated.  In  this  regard,  it  is  also  important  to  recognise  that  the 
challenge of cross-border banking in the context of the increased significance of international banks 
has far wider implications. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The effectiveness of cross border arrangements would be easier to achieve when there is a greater 
consistency in the regulatory rules and standards as well as supervisory practices among the home 
and host supervisors. The new capital accord was therefore intended to accelerate the convergence 
process  with  respect  to  the  adoption  of  international  standards  for  capital  adequacy  in  the  global 
environment.  In  reality,  however,  total  convergence  cannot  be  expected  given  the  varying  levels  of 
sophistication between developed and emerging countries. At any point in time, differences in rules 
and standards can be expected to exist. Our main task will be to find areas where convergence can be 
accelerated.  There  may  also  be  room  for  greater  mutual  recognition  of  supervisory  assessments 
among fellow supervisors that could avoid duplication of efforts and resources that could contribute 
towards reducing compliance costs to the banking institutions.  
While  we  deliberate  on  the  complex  issues  relating  to  cross-border  implementation  of  Basel  II, 
supervisors and banking institutions operating in emerging markets also need to take into account the 
broader  implications  of  Basel  II  on  the  economy  as  well  as  the  access  to  financing  for  specific 
economic  sub-sectors,  such  as  the  small  and  medium  size  enterprises  (SMEs).  The  highly  risk 
sensitive framework could indeed have a potential adverse impact on bank lending behaviour. There 
has  to  be  continuing  discussion  between  supervisors  and  the  banking  institutions  on  the  broader 
supervisory issues and the effectiveness of regulatory and supervisory framework that could mitigate 
such  potential  adverse  implications.  Basel  II  is  only  one  component  of  prudential  regulation,  and 
hence  must  not  be  viewed  in  isolation.  In  this  context,  the  suitability  of  other  rules  such  as  the 
provisioning framework and the stress testing practices must also be discussed with a view for future 
enhancements. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
While we engage in the intricacies of implementing Basel II we should not loose sight of the ultimate 
objective of maintaining financial stability. This dialogue is most important in providing a forum for the 
exchange of views and the sharing of experiences. Indeed, the outcome of the discussions should be 
escalated to a higher level of policy deliberation so as to further accelerate the progress in detailing 
the issues relating to the cross-border implementation of Basel II.  
On that note, I wish all of you for a stimulating and productive discussion. 
Thank you. 
