Zhou Xiaochuan: Improve corporate governance and develop capital market 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the High-level Forum on 
China’s Reform, Beijing, 13 July 2005. 
 Dear friends, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning. It’s my pleasure to attend this High-level Forum on China’s Reform. 
The theme of this forum, which is “Promoting Institutional Innovation by Emphasizing the Reform of 
Government Administration System”, implies that discussions will be made on the performance of the 
government and the steps it needs to take in the future. Having a well-established tradition of criticism 
and self-criticism, the Chinese government has always attached importance to promoting the reforms 
by deepening its understanding of various issues. In this context, I would like to speak on the roles of 
the government in promoting the reform of the financial institutions.  
First,  the  government  needs  to  further  clarify  the  objectives  of  the  reform  and  restructuring  of  the 
financial  institutions.  Why  should  we  spend  resources  on  financial  sector  reform  and  restructuring? 
There  are  two  answers  to  this  question.  Some  people  think  that  financial  sector  reform  aims  at 
preventing  risks,  crisis  and  instability,  thereby  avoiding  causing  trouble  on  the  government.  People 
holding  such  a  view  believe  that  since  risks  are  concentrated  in  the  financial  sector,  some  risky 
financial  institutions  should  be  closed  to  eliminate  the  risks.  While  some  people  think  that  the 
sustainable, steady and healthy development of the national economy depends on a robust financial 
sector that provides good financial services. Therefore, we need to carry out the reforms to make most 
financial institutions strong and healthy, so that they will be able to operate with lower risks and at the 
same time provide good services, thus contributing to the development of the national economy. 
The  first  view  is  somewhat  narrow  and  short-term  based.  Risk  is  not  the  only  factor  we  need  to 
consider. Inadequate financial services will hamper economic development. One example is related to 
the rural financial institutions. After we closed some financial institutions because of their unhealthy 
development, financial services in the rural area became insufficient, hindering the development of the 
rural  economy.  The  second  view  emphasizes  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  allocation  of 
resources. With inadequate financial services, the savings will not be effectively allocated, resulting in 
a waste of resources and significant negative impact on the long-term growth efficiency. Although the 
financial sector will give rise to risks, it can also absorb risks. In fact, the financial sector absorbs some 
of the risks produced by the real sector, and plays the role of price-discovery for the real economy. If 
performing well, the financial market can serve to absorb, buffer and resolve risks.  
If  we  hold  the  view  that  the  objective  of  financial  sector  reform  is  to  make  the  financial  institutions 
stronger  and  healthier,  measures  need  to  be  taken  in  many  areas.  First,  the  government  should 
properly handle the burden of non-performing assets of the financial institutions left over from the past 
or during the transition period. Second, sound financial, accounting, loss provisioning and tax systems 
need to be set up to create a favorable institutional environment to enable the financial institutions to 
develop  soundly  and  provide  good  financial  services.  Third,  the  government  should  remove 
unwarranted  controls  and  establish  effective  incentives  to  encourage  the  financial  institutions  to 
improve their services and contribute to better allocation of resources. Fourth, steps need to be taken 
to promote competition-based market mechanisms and eliminate unnecessary price control to enable 
prices  to  play  a  larger  role  in  the  economy.  Fifth,  measures  should  be  taken  to  help  the  financial 
institutions to improve their ability to properly set the prices, including on the money market and capital 
market. Sixth, we also need to take active and steady steps to develop various instruments including 
the  financial  derivatives  that  can  help  form  an  effective  pricing  mechanism  in  the  market.  Seventh, 
clear strategies on the intermediate services, including accounting, evaluation and credit rating, need 
to be formulated taking into account both the current need and long tem development of the market.  
Second, principles and guidelines of corporate governance need to be further clarified. Many people 
have  realized  that  improving  corporate  governance  is  of  crucial  importance  to  the  entire  reform. 
Nevertheless, the concept and content of corporate governance have yet to be clarified.  
The basic requirements of corporate governance are set in the Company Law, which needs further 
improvement in China. On the other hand, the Company Law does not encompass every aspect of 
corporate  governance.  Corporate  governance  involves  the  agreements  or  practices  outside  the 
BIS Review 52/2005 
 1
stipulations  of  laws  and  regulations  and  those  of  the  self-disciplinary  organizations  as  well  as  the 
cultural traditions. In China, different departments or institutions have different understanding for the 
requirements of corporate governance. We can see that these requirements have major omissions, 
and  no  guidelines  have  been  given  to  resolve  the  main  practical  issues.  No  official  view  has  been 
clearly  expressed  regarding  the  OECD  Principles  of  Corporate  Governance  (both  the  1999  version 
and the 2004 revised version). Therefore, the reform of corporate governance is likely to be a reform 
without  clear  definitions.  I’m  going  to  give  several  examples  in  this  regard.  First,  preserving 
shareholders’ rights is one of the core elements of corporate governance. Nevertheless, violating the 
rights  of  the  shareholders  is  not  a  rare  phenomenon  in  China,  and  there  is  explicit  solution  to  this 
problem. For instance, in the debt-equity-swaps, no effective measures are in place to safeguard the 
rights and interests of the shareholders, and in many cases, the assets they were holding turned out to 
be neither a loan nor an equity. Second, the OECD Principles of Corporate Governance emphasizes 
the role of stakeholders. So far, there has not been an accurate and widely accepted translation in 
Chinese for the word  “stakeholder”, nor do we have principles or guidelines concerning the role of 
stakeholders in corporate governance. Third, the respective roles of the Party organizations and of the 
board of directors and the management need to be clarified. This is an issue unique in China. In most 
cases, the Party organizations play a positive role in supporting the operation of the board of directors 
and  the  management.  However,  there  are  some  occasions  where  the  Party  organizations  and  the 
board of directors or management hold different opinions on certain issues, calling for principles and 
guidelines  to  resolve  such  issues.  Fourth,  the  relationship  between  corporate  governance  and  the 
authority’s  regulation  and  supervision  need  to  be  properly  handled.  In  the  planned  economy  and 
during the early transition period, government acted as both the owner and the supervisory authority of 
the enterprises. Despite the fact that enterprise management and government supervision have been 
basically separated, there are often cases where these two become mixed together. Clear principles 
and guidelines are needed in this area. 
Improving corporate governance is a reform on which the public has placed great hopes. We must not 
let the public disappointed because of unclear principles and guidelines in pursuing the reform. The 
government should play an important role in setting up clear principles and guidelines on corporate 
governance  by  drawing  upon  the  international  and  historical  experiences  as  well  as  taking  into 
account China’s current specific situation.  
Third, the operations and policies of asset management companies need to be improved. During the 
several  years  of  development  since  they  were  established  in  1999,  some  problems  have  emerged, 
which are reflected in the prices at which the non-performing assets are disposed, the abuse of power 
for personal gains, and the undue transfer of benefits. Several issues are yet to be clarified. First, if 
and only if the objective of the reforms is to make the financial institutions stronger so that they can 
provide  better  financial services  does  it  make  sense  to  dispose  the  non-performing  assets  left  over 
from  the  past,  particularly  during  the  period  when  the  management  of  the  enterprises  were  not 
separated from government administration. Otherwise the disposal of non-performing assets would be 
nothing but transferring the risks from the “left pocket” to the “right pocket” of the government, which 
will invite criticism from the public. Second, the asset management companies have been established 
to handle the non-performing assets in a professional way. It should be noted that the assets they are 
dealing  with  are  not  good  assets,  but  those  classified  as  doubtful  or  loss.  In  terms  of  value 
preservation and enhancement, different methods are required for handling the non-performing assets 
and the good assets. When seeking to recover the bad assets, we need to strike a proper balance 
between quantity and speed. Although the value of some assets will go up after they have been held 
for a considerable period of time, in most cases, the longer the assets have been held, the less their 
value will become. In this sense, the so-called “ice cream effect” does exist. On the other hand, the 
asset  management  companies  seeking  to  dispose  the  non-performing  assets  very  rapidly  will  likely 
face criticism, since people think that more will be recovered if the assets are disposed less rapidly. 
Third, against the background of market-oriented reform, the disposal of non-performing assets will be 
done through the market. Therefore, measures should be taken to develop the market and enable the 
assets  to  be  disposed  at  the  prices  formed  through  market  competition.  This  requires  that  market 
participants  be  under  hard  budget  constraints,  having  sound  financial  system,  clearly  defined 
ownership and well established incentive structure. Regarding incentives, the government should set a 
clear  baseline  for  the  recovery  of  the  non-performing  assets,  and  establish  an  effective  incentives 
system  that  will  encourage  the  asset  management  companies  to  make  the  greatest  efforts  in 
recovering the assets. Problems will occur in the market-based disposal of non-performing assets if 
any of the above-mentioned measures are not taken properly.      
What can the government do? First, steps should be taken to improve the legal framework. Although 
we  have  in  place  a  regulation  on  asset  management  companies,  there  are  weaknesses  in  the 
formulation,  administration  and  enforcement  of  laws  and  regulations  governing  the  disposal  of  non-
performing  assets.  International  comparison  shows  that  China  needs  to  make  improvement  in  this 
area.  Second,  apart  from  the  four  state-owned  asset  management  companies,  private  and  foreign 
participants should be encouraged to enter this market to promote competition. Third, internal reforms 
should  be  carried  out  in  the  four  state-owned  asset  management  companies  to  enable  them  to 
operate on real commercial basis with hard budget constraints. Fourth, when the market has not been 
fully  developed,  it  is  desirable  to  let  the  institutions  with  rich  market  experiences  to  make  price 
evaluation so as to avoid soft constraints and set up internal incentives. Fifth, efforts should be made 
to  establish  proper  incentives.  Without  incentives  or  with  very  weak  incentives,  it  is  not  possible  to 
preserve  and  enhance  the  value  of  the  assets  and  make  maximum  recovery.  Without  effective 
incentives,  people  may  also  tend  to  seek  personal  gains  from  the  disposal  of  assets.  Sixth,  it  is 
important to have appropriate procedures and prevent any improper practices so that the assets are 
disposed  through  market  competition.  However,  if  the  market  is  not  strong  enough  –  for  example, 
market  participants  are  under  soft  constraints  or  there  are  adverse  internal  incentives,  improper 
behaviors  may  arise  even  with  sound  procedures,  and  the  procedures  themselves  may  become  a 
shelter  disguising  those  improper  activities.  Seventh,  it  is  crucial  to  develop  market  intermediaries, 
since  the  disposal  of  assets  relies  importantly  on  the  integrity  and  services  of  the  intermediaries. 
Eighth, the objectives of setting up asset management companies are not only to dispose the non-
performing assets in a professional way, but also to make the commercial banks stronger so that they 
will be able to provide better financial services. So the government needs to consider how to handle 
the relationship between the asset management companies and the commercial banks.  
The asset management companies will not operate satisfactorily and there will be much criticism from 
the public if the above are not handled properly. 
The  State  Council  attaches  great  importance  to  the  issues  concerning  the  asset  management 
companies.  Premier  Wen  Jiabao  has  said  that  “the  asset  management  companies  have  had  five 
years’ experiences in disposing the non-performing assets, and it is time for them to carefully review 
the experiences and lessons and try to resolve the long-term problems”. Apart from promoting more 
effective  internal  management  of  the  asset  management  companies  and  strengthening  external 
regulation and supervision on them, the government has much more to do. From the longer-term point 
of view, China will need a well-functioning capital market to enable its economy to develop soundly. 
