Zhou Xiaochuan: Exclusive Interview with the People’s Daily  
Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, recently had an interview with a reporter 
of the People’s Daily.  
 Reporter:  On  monetary  policy  in  2004,  people  said  that  although  the  central  bank  had  taken  very 
effective measures, it had tightened money supply too much. How do you comment on this? 
Zhou: There is a time lag between the supply of money and the changes in economic activities. The 
higher-than-desired level of money supply in 2003 had its special background. The new leadership of 
the central government was formed in March 2003, followed by the outbreak of the war on Iraq and the 
SARS epidemic. These uncertainties prevented us from adopting a tight monetary policy stance. We 
had to carefully watch the situation to cope with the adverse impact brought by these events. After 
initial progress was achieved in the fight against SARS, we began to take measures to control money 
and credit growth. Nevertheless, given that all sectors of the economy wanted to make up for the slack 
from  the  SARS  epidemic  through  expanded  economic  activities,  those  control  measures  were  only 
moderate  in  nature.  Against  such  a  background,  money  supply  in  2003  was  unduly  high,  with  the 
effects lingering into 2004. Money supply was tightened somewhat in 2004. The average growth rates 
of  broad  money  (M2)  and  narrow  money  (M1)  during  2003  and  2004  were  17  percent  and 
16.3 percent  respectively,  slightly  higher  than  the  average  growth  rate  for  the  previous  five  years 
which is 15 percent. To judge whether money supply at a particular point of time is appropriate, we 
have to take into account the time lag effect as well as the interest rate in the money market. 
Reporter: What do you think of the credit structure? 
Zhou: With aggregate money supply being broadly appropriate, certain problems in the structure are 
inevitable to some extent. We require the commercial banks to differentiate credit policies to different 
sectors  and  improve  their  credit  services  to  the  small-  and  medium-sized  enterprises.  At  the  same 
time, we should note that with changing market circumstances, demands of the enterprises are also 
changing.  While  strengthening  and  improving  window  guidance,  the  central  bank  should  also  take 
measures to promote the reform of the commercial banks to better resolve the structural problems. 
Lack  of  fund,  particularly  of  working  capital  faced  by  some  regions  and  enterprises  is  related  to 
over-investment and excessively large inventories. Some enterprises have used their working capital 
to finance the investment projects. Moreover, working capital of some enterprises has been adversely 
affected  by  the  pile-up  of  inventories.  Statistics  show  that  the  stock  of  raw  materials  of  5000 
enterprises increased by about 37.3 percent, 25 percentage points higher over end-2003. 
Reporter: The central bank will continue to pursue sound monetary policy in 2005. What does “sound” 
mean? What are the issues that deserve special attention in formulating and implementing monetary 
policy in 2005? 
Zhou:  Briefly  speaking,  sound  monetary  policy  aims  at  preventing  inflation  and  systemic  financial 
risks. 
At present, the inflationary pressures have not been fundamentally alleviated. Higher prices of water, 
electricity, fuel and urban transportation services may push up CPI. Continued increase of prices of 
production materials will gradually feed through to CPI with some time lag. The prices of oil and certain 
important raw materials in the international market will also affect the development of domestic prices. 
In addition, the increase of household disposable income and consumer demand will lead to higher 
CPI. All these deserve our close attention. 
To  implement  the  sound  monetary  policy,  we  will  take  steps  in  the  following  five  areas.  First, 
strengthening the forward-looking approach so that we will be able to judge economic and financial 
development more accurately. Second, further improving the indirect management tools and flexibly 
applying the mix of various monetary policy instruments to ensure steady and appropriate growth of 
money  and  credit.  Third,  encouraging  the  financial  institutions  to  improve  their  credit  structure  to 
enable  the  prices  to  play  a  larger  role  in  promoting  balanced  economic  aggregates  and  structural 
adjustment.  Fourth,  closely  monitoring  external  economic  and  financial  development  to  promote 
balanced  international  payments.  Fifth,  appropriately  dealing  with  the  market  exit  of  some  financial 
institutions to maintain the stability of the financial system. 
BIS Review 33/2005 
 1
Reporter: Just now you mentioned the role of the prices. We can clearly recall that on October 29, 
2004, the central bank announced its decision to raise the interest rate, a step that arrested the world 
attention. Many people predicted that China would from then on enter into a period of repeatedly but 
moderately  raising  the  interest  rate.  Will  the  central  bank again  issue  the  news  attracting  the  world 
attention as it did last year? At present, the increase of prices seems to exceed the deposit interest 
rate. In addition, interest tax is imposed on the deposits. So the real interest rate on deposits seems to 
be negative. Will you take measures to address the “negative interest rate”? 
Zhou: China  is  in  the  transition  from  a  planned  economy  to  market  economic  system,  therefore  its 
economic development does not display clear cycles as the matured economies do. In the matured 
market economies, due to the obvious cycles in economic growth, the adjustment of interest rate also 
show a periodic feature, that is, raising the interest rate in one period and cutting the rate in another. 
The pattern of economic cycles in China is not yet that stable, so it’s not appropriate to say that we 
have entered a certain period. The central bank’s decision on raising the interest rate will be based on 
the  close  monitoring  of  the  changing  economic  and  financial  situation  and  timely  analysis  of  the 
development of macroeconomic indices. 
With regard to the “negative interest rate”, we shall understand that interest rate policy is not meant to 
ensure  that  the  real  interest  rate  is  positive  at  any  particular  point  of  time.  Instead,  it  depends  on 
various factors. 
First, the month-on-month CPI in China is significantly affected by seasonal factors. It may be high in 
one month and much lower in another. As regards the year-on-year CPI, it should not be used as the 
sole basis for judging whether the real interest rate is at an appropriate level, since the base figure of 
the same period of the previous year may contain some abnormal factors. Therefore, we should base 
our judgment on careful analysis and forecast. 
Second,  the  saving  rate  in  China  is  very  high.  Large  amount  of  savings  have  been  channeled  to 
investment projects, leading to overheating in some sectors. The Premier’s report on the work of the 
government  pointed  out  that  steps  will  be  taken  to  boost  domestic  demand  by  expanding 
consumption.  High  interest  rate  on  deposit  will  adversely  affect  the  efforts  to  increase  consumer 
demand.  
Third, investment can be financed by savings through many channels, including the banking system, 
capital  market  and  direct  investment.  In  China,  an  excessively  large  share  of  financing  is  made 
through the banking system, while that made through the capital market and direct funding is relatively 
low. So the asset-liability ratio or debt to equity ratio of the enterprises is unduly high. We will take 
measures to promote the funding of investment through channels out of the banking system. 
In  sum,  whether  the  interest  rate  of  deposit  is  positive  or  negative  is  not  the  only  consideration  in 
formulating the interest rate policy. There are various factors that need to be considered in setting an 
appropriate interest rate level.  
Reporter:  On  March  16,  2005,  the  central  bank  announced  its  decision  to  modify  the  policy  on 
individual housing loans. The new policy prescribes that preferential interest rate is no longer applied 
to  the  housing  loans,  and  in  the  cities  where  the  housing  prices  have  been  going  up  sharply,  the 
minimum down payment may be raised to 30 percent of the total payment. This decision has aroused 
strong response from the public. What are the considerations behind this policy change? 
Zhou: The excessively rapid increase of housing prices, if not duly contained, will bring risks to the 
market and adversely affect the individuals that plan to purchase or rent houses. Various policies are 
involved in the management of housing prices. Monetary policy is targeted at economic aggregates. 
Therefore,  we  cannot  expect  that  monetary  policy  alone  can  fairly  address  concerns  of  every 
participant in the economy. 
By changing the housing loan policy, the central bank intends to promote a reasonable expectation 
among consumers on the prices of funds. The individual housing loans are medium- and long-term 
loans with floating interest rate. The interest rate is adjusted annually in line with changes in economic 
situation.  It  is  wrong  to  think  that  housing  loan  rate  should  always  be  kept  low  regardless  of  the 
development of housing prices and the general price level. In the past, the interest rate of individual 
housing loans is called “preferential interest rate”, which may lead to a misperception that the rate is 
always “preferential” no matter how economic condition changes. Some people have not adequately 
assessed  the  risks  involved.  For  example,  the  prices  of  the  houses  they  have  bought  are  too  high 
relative to their income, resulting in heavy debt burden. And some people have purchased excessively 
large and luxury houses. All these indicate that consumers should properly understand the repayment 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2005
burden  and  risks  resulting  from  changes  in  the  interest  rate.  The  minor  revision  of  housing  loan 
interest rate policy is aimed at promoting risk awareness of the consumers. 
The policy change has more important implications for the banks. China’s housing reform started in 
the late 1990s, and was basically completed in recent years. Housing loan is a new business for most 
banks. Compared with traditional loans, housing loan proved to be a good asset in the banks’ total 
loan portfolios, so the banks have been actively engaging in this business. However, potential risks 
and problems may exist in China’s housing loan market. First, with only a few years’ development, the 
housing loan market in China has not accumulated sufficient data that reflect default rate in the long 
and  medium  term.  Second,  the  default  rate  may  go  up  when  economic  activities  become  weaker. 
Therefore, we should not be over-optimistic about the prospect of housing market development. Strict 
measures should be adopted to regulate the market. By modifying the housing loan policy, we intend 
to promote greater risk awareness of the commercial banks. They are encouraged to draw up their 
own strategies to develop the housing loan business based on careful consideration of various factors 
including relevant costs and probability of default in the long and medium term. 
Moreover, the development of housing prices differs substantially across the country. They have been 
rising in most cities. In some cities, the rise has been sharp or extremely sharp, while in others the rise 
has been moderate. Therefore, it is desirable to adopt differentiated policies. The bank associations 
have been given discretion to set the interest rate on housing loans. As to the ratio of minimum down 
payment,  the  commercial  banks  are  encouraged  to  make  their  own  decision  in  light  of  the  local 
situation,  window  guidance  of  the  central  bank,  self-disciplinary  mechanism  set  by  the  bank 
associations and regulatory requirement of relevant authorities.  
Reporter: Will the central bank adopt new policies to prevent further rise of the housing prices? 
Zhou: International experiences show that the authorities mainly rely on the benchmark rate policy to 
regulate housing prices. After the housing loan policy was revised, only the loans based on housing 
provident fund bear preferential interest rate, while the interest rate of commercial housing loan has 
been raised to the same level as that of other types of loans. If the benchmark rate is to be adjusted in 
the future, it will also affect the housing prices. 
Interest rate policy is targeted at many economic variables, including economic growth, employment, 
consumer  and  producer  prices,  asset  prices,  etc.  Housing  prices  constitute  only  part  of  the  asset 
prices. If most of the variables are moving in the same direction, we will of cause use the interest rate 
policy.  However,  when  these  variables  move  in  opposite  directions,  it  is  not  easy  to  select  the  key 
variable at which to target the interest rate policy  
Reporter: With regard to the reform of the state-own commercial banks, some people described the 
progress  in  financial  restructuring  as  “physical  changes”  and  the  improvement  in  corporate 
governance as “chemical changes”. There have emerged some cases since the Bank of China and 
the China Construction Bank started their joint-stock reform. People say that this indicates the reform 
has  not  produced  chemical  changes  in  these  two  banks.  What’s  your  comment  on  this?  Will  these 
cases affect the public listing of the Bank of China and China Construction Bank and the joint-stock 
reform of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China and the Agricultural Bank of China? 
Zhou: The so-called “chemical changes” have already occurred in the Bank of China and the China 
Construction Bank. First, they have already established and gradually improved the basic framework 
of corporate governance. Second, they have made great efforts to strengthen internal control and risk 
management.  Third,  the  personnel  management  system  and  incentive  mechanisms  of  these  two 
banks have improved. Fourth, their credit culture is improving. And lastly, they have placed greater 
emphasis on protecting the shareholders’ interests. 
In general, these two banks have made substantial progress in improving their corporate governance, 
but certain problems remain. Financial restructuring can be completed within a relatively short period 
of  time,  while  the  improvement  in  corporate  governance  will  have  to  take  longer  time.  As  for  the 
non-performing loans, it is quite normal for the commercial banks to have some non-performing assets 
since  they  are  engaged  in  many  risky  businesses.  As  long  as  the  amount  of  incremental 
non-performing loans of a given year is managed within a normal range and can be covered by the 
bad  loan  provisioning  of  that  year,  there’s  not  much  to  worry.  Otherwise  the non-performing  assets 
may erode the banks’ capital, putting the banks in an unhealthy situation.  
With regard to the cases that happened in some banks, serious lessons will be drawn so as to improve 
the  future  work.  I  believe  that  these  cases  will  not  have  a  substantial  impact  on  the  overall  reform 
process of the state-owned commercial banks. The reform has been carried out in a pragmatic and 
BIS Review 33/2005 
 3
step-by-step manner. On the one hand, reform will be strengthened with the lessons drawn from these 
cases. On the other hand, the cases themselves indicate that the old systems and mechanisms are 
still playing a negative role, calling for greater reform efforts. 
Reporter: In addressing a question from the media at the NPC and CPPCC press conference, you 
said that it won’t take too long for the Bank of China and the China Construction Bank to get listed. 
Could you further explain what “not too long” means. Is there a timetable for the reform the Industrial 
and Commercial Bank of China and the Agricultural Bank of China? 
Zhou:  As  to  when  and  where  the  Bank  of  China  and  China  Construction  Bank  will  get  listed,  this 
depends on the decision of the boards of directors of these two banks. It also depends on whether 
there is a suitable window for listing operation in the capital market as well as on the opinions of their 
financial advisors, major underwriters and accounting firms. By saying “not too long”, I mean that these 
two banks have basically met the requirement according to the major criteria for public listing in the 
capital market.  
Efforts  will  also  be  made  to  push  ahead  with  the  reform  of  the  Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of 
China and the Agricultural Bank of China. The office of the leading group for the pilot joint-stock reform 
of the state-owned commercial banks has already submitted to the State Council the overall plan for 
the  financial  restructuring  of  the  Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank.  The  reform  will  be  carried  out  in 
accordance with the arrangement of the State Council when conditions mature. The Agricultural Bank 
of  China  is  encouraged  to  strengthen  its  internal  control  and  risk  management  to  improve  its 
profitability and asset quality so as to pave the way for the joint-stock reform. 
Reporter:  The  market-based  interest  rate  reform  is  an  important  element  of  last  year’s  financial 
reform.  The  central  bank  has  recently  published  a  special  report  on  the  market-based  interest  rate 
reform. What is your conception on the market-based interest rate reform in the future? 
Zhou: It was clearly pointed out at the Third Plenum of the 16th CPC National Congress that steps 
would be taken to steadily advance the market-based interest rate reform and improve the interest rate 
formation  mechanism  based  on  market  supply  and  demand,  and  the  central  bank  would  guide  the 
movement of market interest rates by applying various monetary policy instruments.  
In recent years, the central bank has been making steady efforts to advance the market-based interest 
rate reform. Two important measures were adopted in 2004. First, the band of interest rate on loans of 
the financial institutions was widened on January 1, 2004. Second, the upper limit on loan rate and 
lower limit on deposit rate were removed on October 29, 2004. At present, there are only two control 
measures for interest rate, one is the ceiling imposed on RMB deposit rate and the other is the floor 
set for RMB lending rate. 
With the above two steps taken, the near-term goal for the reform of the interest rate system can be 
considered as basically realized and there will be no further reform measures in this regard in the near 
future. Of course, the commercial banks still need to make sustained efforts to enhance their ability to 
properly assess risk and set prices. 
The upper limit on loan interest rate and lower limit on deposit rate will be maintained for a relatively 
long period of time before consideration can be given to remove them. This is because such reform 
involves the consideration of many factors including the order of market competition and the amount of 
interest  rate  spread.  If  the  financial  and  capital  constraints  of  the  banks  are  not  strong  enough, 
removing these two limits is likely to result in improper competition in the market.  
Reporter: Recently, there has been an international chorus for the revaluation of the RMB so as to 
reduce the huge trade deficits of some countries with China and to fix the global economic imbalance. 
There have also been capital inflows to China speculating that the value of RMB will appreciate. So I 
would like to ask whether the RMB will be revaluated? If yes, when?  
Zhou: In setting the exchange rate policy, we will mainly take into consideration of China’s domestic 
economic situation and balance of payments, rather than the bilateral trade deficits or surpluses with 
some individual countries. 
Regarding China’s international balance of payments, our current account is in moderate surplus. Of 
course,  we  need  to  reform  the  mechanism  for  determining  the  RMB  exchange  rate  so  that  we  can 
maintain financial stability in the medium- and long term as we continue to integrate with the world 
economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2005
We  will  make  active  and  steady  efforts  to  push  ahead  with  the  reform  of  the  RMB  exchange  rate 
regime  on  a  well-planned  and  step-by-step  basis.  Relevant  policy  measures  will  only  be  taken  at 
proper time. Given that China is playing an increasingly important role in the global economy, we will 
assume a responsible attitude and take into consideration the impact of RMB exchange rate reform on 
the regional and global economy.  
Judging  from  China’s  current  balance  of  payments,  our  task  in  the  future  is  mainly  centered  on 
improving  the  mechanism  for  determining  the  RMB  exchange  rate  rather  than  simply  adjusting  the 
rate.  
Reporter: Since last year, you have mentioned on many occasions the notion of “financial ecology”. It 
seems to be an entirely new concept. Could you further explain it? 
Zhou: “Financial ecology” does not refer to the internal operation of the financial institutions. Instead, it 
refers to the external environment, or the basic conditions for financial operations. I am not the first to 
use this concept.  
First, the legal framework, including the laws and regulations that protect the interests of investors and 
depositors, the accounting standards and the bankruptcy law, is a key component of financial ecology. 
Second, financial ecology also involves the market system, including the intermediary system. Many 
intermediary  services  are  not  provided  by  the  financial  institutions  themselves.  The  intermediaries, 
including the lawyer’s offices, accounting firms and rating agencies play a very important role in the 
financial  services.  Weakness  in  these  sectors  will  adversely  affect  financial  operation  and  the 
development of the social credit system.  
In addition, since the non-performing loans of the banks are closely related to the creditworthiness of 
their  clients,  the  reform  of  the  corporate  sector  constitutes  another  important  part  of  the  efforts  to 
improve financial ecology. Insufficient progress in the reform of the enterprises would make them more 
vulnerable to financial problems, thus leading to higher NPL ratio of the banks.  
Ecology  is  a  systemic  concept,  so  concerted  efforts  from  all  sections  of  the  society  are  needed  to 
improve financial ecology. First, efforts should be made to improve the legislation and law enforcing 
system. Bankruptcy law is of utmost importance. With well-developed bankruptcy law, the lenders will 
be able to resort to legal procedures to protect their rights. Second, the reform of the corporate sector 
including  the  state-owned  enterprises  should  be  accelerated.  Third,  steps  need  to  be  taken  to 
establish and improve the social credit system and strengthen the collection of credit data. Fourth, the 
accounting, auditing and information disclosure standards should be improved. Fifth, the intermediary 
agencies need to improve their services.  
Improvement in financial ecology is also a kind of “chemical changes” that you mentioned just now. It 
is not a “chemical change” within the financial institutions. Instead, it is a change from both inside and 
outside. A relatively long period of time is needed for such changes to take place. 
BIS Review 33/2005 
 5
