Klaus Liebscher: Finance and modernisation 
Welcome  address  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the  Annual 
Conference  of  the  European  Association  for  Banking  and  Financial  History  (EABH),  Vienna, 
20 May 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  all  on  the  occasion  of  the  annual  conference  of  the 
European Association for Banking and Financial History in Vienna. And let me add that I am highly 
honoured  to  have  been  elected  to  the  Board  of  Management  of  your  distinguished  association  this 
morning. 
Vienna was chosen as this year’s conference location and hosted by BA-CA, because Creditanstalt 
was  founded  150  years  ago.  As  you  may  know,  we  celebrate  a  number  of  other  important 
anniversaries  in  2005.  We  commemorate  the  end  of  World  War  II  and  the  re-establishment  of  the 
Republic of Austria 60 years ago, the signing of the Austrian State Treaty 50 years ago and Austria’s 
accession to the European Union 10 years ago. I am convinced that this year of commemoration is a 
good opportunity for historians to remind people of what history has to tell them. It is an old wisdom 
that we have to repeat history if we do not draw lessons from it. This is true for big politics, but equally 
true for the development of the various subsectors of society and of the economy. 
Finance and banking are no exemptions to this experience, much to the contrary, but I would like to 
stress that ignoring the lessons of history is not the rule in the financial community. Let me mention 
two or three examples from the area of central banking policymaking. 
In  numerous  cases,  historical  evidence  has  shown  that  a  hasty  liberalization  of  financial  markets 
nearly always leads to financial crises, whose macro-economic costs are sometimes extremely high. 
Learning  from  the  generalized  mistakes  of  other  countries,  financial  market  liberalization  in  Austria 
followed a step-by-step approach and relied on the experience of others to set the “right” sequence of 
measures. Today Austria serves as a case in point of good practices in this respect, as a good historic 
example for other countries. 
With respect to exchange rate and price stability, Austria learned its lessons from own mistakes made 
in the past as you will hear from two presentations on episodes of Austrian central banking history this 
afternoon. Therefore, I would like to point to the fact that after the breakdown of the Bretton Woods 
system  the  so-called  “hard  currency”-policy  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  (OeNB)  conducted 
more  than  20  years  became  a  success  story  not  only  because  it  was  based  on  a  well-founded 
conceptual framework. It became a success also because the central bank, the government and the 
social  partners  put  their  experience  to  work,  i.e.  that  the  achievement  of  the  common  goal  of  price 
stability requires contributions from all parties. 
The OeNB as the independent central bank had to follow a credible monetary policy by pegging the 
schilling to the D-Mark as an exchange rate anchor. The government had to control budget deficits in 
order to avoid inflationary pressures. The trade unions accepted that wage rises had to be compatible 
with productivity increases. And the corporate sector realised that in order to remain competitive it had 
to  increase  productivity  by  improving  its  products  and  services,  its  organisational  potentials, 
rationalisations - just to mention some of the measurements. As the Eurosystem continues the same 
stability-oriented policy, the “quasi Monetary Union” with the D-Mark was an ideal preparation for the 
participation of Austria in the European Monetary Union (EMU). 
Let me recall that the main objective of the independent Eurosystem is to maintain price stability, i.e. 
safeguarding the value of the euro for currently more than 300 million people in the euro area. In so 
doing,  the  Eurosystem  strives  for  the  highest  level  of  integrity,  competence,  efficiency  and 
transparency. This anchoring of medium and long-term inflation expectations in the euro area, which 
reflects  the  credibility  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  is  essential.  It  is  this  credibility  which 
allows the Eurosystem to deliver price stability, in line with the mandate assigned to it by the Treaty, 
even  when  circumstances  are  very  challenging.  However,  a  credible  monetary  policy  must  be 
accompanied by a credible and sound fiscal policy and an appropriate set of structural reforms in order 
to support sustainable growth and job creation throughout the euro area. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 1
History teaches us not to put credibility at risk for unsecure and short-lived gains with respect to other 
economic goals. However, what is needed in all areas of economic policy - on a national, European 
and international level - is a permanent reform process that contributes to further peaceful integration 
and a stable development of our societies. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am convinced that your conference on “Finance and Modernisation” will deliver useful insights into 
today’s challenges from a historical perspective. The statute of the European Association for Banking 
and Financial History points out that its conferences and symposia are “focusing on areas of historical 
research that have important practical implications for modern day banking and finance”. 
I am sure that you are going to achieve this goal and - as a recipient of your research - I would like to 
thank you for your valuable work. I wish you a fruitful discussion and a successful outcome for the 
benefit of all of us in the financial community and beyond. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2005
