Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Les Echos 
English translation of an interview of Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
conducted by Ms Françoise Crouïgneau and Mr Thibaut Madelin (Les Echos), 20 January 2005. 
The  interview  was  published  in  the  edition  of  Les  Echos  dated  24  January  2005,  and  the  publication  of  the  translation  was 
authorised by Les Echos. 
 With the inauguration of the new Bush administration, are you looking for a greater degree of 
visibility  in  respect  of  American  politics  and  a  thawing  of  transatlantic  relations  in  terms  of 
monetary cooperation? 
Over the past 20 years, which have seen several major political changes on both sides of the Atlantic, 
I have observed great continuity of dialogue and a very high level of mutual confidence between the 
large central banks. The same can be said of cooperation within G7, among ministers and governors. 
As  regards  the  future,  John  Snow,  the  US  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  has  already  spoken  publicly 
about the need to reduce the budget deficit and maintain a strong dollar. This is of great importance 
and encouraging. However, let us not forget that we too have work to do on this side of the Atlantic. 
Isn’t it a case of a “dialogue of the deaf” with the Americans calling on Europeans for more 
growth, the Europeans calling on the United States for smaller deficits and both the Americans 
and Europeans calling on the Chinese to float free from the weakening dollar? 
What  you  call  a  dialogue  of  the  deaf,  I,  on  the  contrary,  would  describe  as  broad  transatlantic 
consensus. We agree on the diagnosis and the measures to be implemented: the Americans have a 
savings shortfall to make up and the Europeans need more structural reforms in order to increase their 
growth potential. The problem we share is one of implementing these measures. Public opinion in our 
democracies must be convinced that everyone would benefit from the reforms and that there would be 
more growth and higher employment. 
Do you really think that nothing has been achieved in the area of reform? Surely France and 
Germany feel the opposite is true? 
Not at all. On the contrary, the European Central Bank (ECB) recognises that a number of courageous 
decisions have been taken in the euro area and it supports those governments and parliaments that 
are undertaking structural reform. We are mindful of the difficulties that they face and the resistance 
that they encounter in public opinion. This is why the ECB and the Eurosystem go to great lengths to 
explain the benefits of bold reforms. 
Germany, which has on occasion been called “the sick man of Europe”, has once again been 
hailed as the world’s top exporter - and this despite the appreciation of the euro. What lessons 
can the other countries in the euro area draw from this? 
As  regards  exchange  rates,  let  me  be  clear:  following  the  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  on 
13 January,  I  confirmed  our  opinion,  which  we  expressed  when  the  euro  rose  sharply,  namely  that 
such  moves  are  unwelcome  and  undesirable  for  economic  growth.  Furthermore,  two  major  factors 
may explain the differences between member countries’ external accounts: the dynamism of domestic 
demand and cost competitiveness. On the one hand it is clear that Germany’s domestic demand has 
been less dynamic than that of the other countries, including France. Consequently, its imports have 
also  been  less  dynamic.  On  the  other  hand,  as  regards  cost  competitiveness,  Germany  has  fared 
better than the others in the past six years as it has had to close the gap in terms of competitiveness 
that stemmed from its reunification. Its export results attest to this. The building of Europe is a great 
and inspiring endeavour. The euro has provided outstanding protection against external risks. Think 
what the monetary situation within Europe would be like today if the former national currencies had 
had  to  face  the  external  shocks  that  we  have  seen!  This  leads  us  to  monitor  competitiveness 
indicators within the euro area much more closely than before. 
The fact remains that domestic demand is still weak in the euro area, where households are 
concerned about reforms and rising unemployment. 
Confidence  among  households  and  businesses  is  essential  if  domestic  demand  is  to  be  more 
dynamic. That of households depends on their confidence in price stability. Some still have concerns 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 1
which inhibit consumption. We say to them that they can and they should be confident: we are here 
precisely to ensure price stability at the level of the euro area as a whole. 
Wouldn’t  a  reduction  in  interest  rates  send  a  positive  signal,  if  only  a  psychological  one,  to 
households and investors? 
As we said in mid-January, our analysis indicates that current short-term interest rates are in line with 
our  mission  to  maintain  price  stability.  We  remain  vigilant,  since  vigilance  is  the  guarantee  of  our 
credibility in the medium and long term. And our credibility is essential, not only in order to be true to 
our mandate, but also to provide Europe with the most favourable financial environment for growth and 
job creation. Two, five, ten and thirty-year interest rates are at their lowest levels since the Second 
World War. In particular, this stems from an exceptional level of confidence that investors and savers 
have placed in Europe’s monetary team: my colleagues on the Governing Council, and among them 
the French Governor, Christian Noyer. 
The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  the  subject  of  growing  debate.  Are  you  satisfied  with  the 
consensus that is emerging to strengthen the prevention of excessive deficit while relaxing the 
application of sanctions? 
One  has  to  fully  realize  the  separate  responsibilities  that  exist.  The  proposals  fall  within  the 
competence of the European Commission and the decision lies in the hands of the representatives of 
the governments of the Member States, namely the Council of the European Union. Our responsability 
is  to  remind  all  parties  of  the  conditions  which  enable  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  to  function 
coherently.  Since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  main  criticism  by  many  economists  across  the 
Atlantic  has  been  that,  in  launching  a  single  currency  before  achieving  a  political  federation  and  a 
federal budget, we have put the cart before the horse. We took indeed a bold step. But our response 
to  these  criticisms  was  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  The  preventative  arm  of  the  Pact  can  be 
improved  on  and  we  welcome  certain  proposals  that  have  been  made  in  this  regard.  In  our  view, 
however, the corrective arm of the Pact must be upheld. 
The  Deutsche  Börse  has  made  ambitious  moves  towards  consolidating  the  European  stock 
exchanges. Are you in favour of closer integration of the financial markets? 
European financial integration is extremely important for the smooth operation of a single market with 
a single currency. For manufacturing goods, the single market works well, but for services in general it 
is much less effective. Financial services are no exception to this. The European Commission intends 
to take steps in this regard since it is clear that this offers further potential for growth. That said, we are 
in market economies and it is not our place to judge past, present and future restructuring, which are 
the outcome of decisions taken freely by free agents. We simply wish the single market to operate in 
the best way possible. 
Do these deficiencies point towards the need for a European financial authority? 
Like  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  approves  of  having  a  link 
between the central bank and the prudential supervisory authority for banks. The Treaty provides for a 
decentralised  system  entrusted  to  national  authorities.  The  ECB  is  strongly  in  favour  of  fostering 
dialogue  and  cooperation  to  the  maximum  extend  possible  between  the  competent  prudential 
authorities, as advocated by Alexandre Lamfalussy. 
There is less and less talk of setting up an international financial framework for averting global 
financial crises. Is it the case that there is no longer any systemic risk? 
We  live  in  a  world  filled  with  opportunity  and  promise:  advances  in  science  and  technology, 
international  trade  developments,  a  very  broad  consensus  in  favour  of  the  market  economy,  and 
improved global governance in which developing countries are actively involved. However, risks also 
exist. To give just two examples, first I would mention precisely a certain tendency among financial 
markets to underestimate risks and, second, the issue of external imbalances at a global level. 
A moratorium on debt has been declared for certain countries affected by the tsunami. Does 
this  bode  well  for  the  cancellation  of  the  debts  of  the  poorest  African  countries,  as 
recommended by the British government? 
I was extremely moved by the response, generosity and compassion shown globally in the wake of 
these  tragic  events.  I  have  myself  worked  very  closely  on  debt  strategy,  which  has  evolved 
considerably  over  the  past  20  years  to  offer  assistance  to  developing  countries,  and  especially  the 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2005
poorest  countries,  in  return  for  their  efforts  towards  good  governance.  Good  debt  strategy  plays  a 
crucial role in global financial stability. 
There  is  often  controversy when  you  speak  in English.  Do you  really  prefer the  language  of 
Shakespeare to that of Molière? 
I  am  very  attached  to  the  French  language and culture.  Over  ten  years  ago,  I  founded  the  Club  of 
French-speaking central bankers whose members represent 59 countries and 45 central banks. I am 
called upon to speak as the representative of an institution which has international responsibilities. For 
this reason, I speak English and other languages. But everybody knows my passion for the French 
language. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 3
