L Wilson Kamit: Policy and regulatory environment for business 
Address  by  Mr  L  Wilson  Kamit,  CBE,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  to  the 
21st Australia Papua New Guinea Business Forum, Cairns, Australia, 1-3 May 2005. 
 Introduction 
Honourable ministers  from  the  Governments of Papua New  Guinea  and  Australia,  Mr.  Alan  Walter, 
President of the Australia - Papua New Guinea Business Council, Mrs. Winifred Kamit, President of 
the Business Council of Papua New Guinea, members of both Councils, distinguished guests, ladies 
and gentlemen. I am honoured and pleased with your invitation to address this forum again. 
The macroeconomic stability seen in Papua New Guinea during the last three years, for me as the 
Governor of the Central Bank, is like breathing of fresh unpolluted air. Steady continuous high foreign 
exchange  inflows;  fiscal  discipline;  balance  of  payments  and  fiscal  surpluses;  enabled  the  Bank  of 
Papua New Guinea to pursue a stable exchange rate; which has led to low inflation and allowed for a 
reduction in domestic interest rates. 
The recent reports of a net profit of K85 million by the Bank South Pacific and K120 million by the 
POSF from their 2004 operations, a K58 million net profit by NASFUND for the first quarter of 2005, 
announcements of expansion in business operations, and a pick-up in construction activity, are good 
indicators  of  improvements  in  economic  activity.  A  large  number  of  companies,  including  banks 
declaring dividends and paying them to both their domestic and overseas shareholders, are a further 
indication of an increase in economic activity and that there is renewed confidence and optimism in the 
business community. 
I hope that we will continue to receive this type of news from the many other firms and industries in 
Papua New Guinea in the coming months. The stable macroeconomic climate experienced in Papua 
New Guinea over the last three years is expected to continue in 2005. Whilst this is obviously positive 
news,  those  of  us  tasked  with  ensuring  a  conducive  environment  for  economic  growth  and 
management  of  the  nation’s  economic  affairs,  are  constantly  challenged  towards  ensuring  its 
sustainability. 
The contribution of the Central Bank was, providing a stable interest rate and exchange rate regime 
through a conducive monetary policy as well as developing the necessary infrastructure for a sound 
financial system. This was implemented through the legislative changes introduced in 2000 and 2001. 
We constantly ask ourselves as to how else we can promote business activities in Papua New Guinea. 
In  this  same  forum  last  year  I  alluded  to  the  Bank’s  intentions  to  review  the  remaining  controls  on 
foreign exchange. Then at the Annual Mining Conference in Sydney in December 2004, I went on to 
announce our decision to affect these in 2005. I have been tasked to dwell on this aspect of reforms 
undertaken by the Central Bank in this morning’s session. 
Whilst there is this sense of the arrival of good times, it is only right that these good times be shared 
by  as  many stakeholders as  possible  in  our community  for  a  sense  of  accomplishment  to  be  felt.  I 
mentioned in my speech to this forum last year that significant strides have been made by the Bank to 
ensure the soundness and stability of the financial system. Coverage, in terms of accessibility to most 
of the population is lacking. This is an area very much outside of the Bank’s direct influence and it is 
pleasing to note that the Government, through its District Treasury Rollout Program is attempting to 
address  this  issue  at  the  moment  through  the  provision  of  banking  services  via  the  postal  service 
network and District Treasury offices. The Treasurer is the right person to give details on this program, 
but  from  what  I  have  heard  in  the  media  there  is  much  optimism  where  the  services  have  been 
launched in the Morobe, Eastern Highlands and Central provinces. 
Only  recently  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  issued  a  licence  to  the  Papua  New  Guinea  Micro 
Finance Company Limited owned by Papua New Guinea Sustainable Development Program Limited 
(60%) and the Bank South Pacific Limited (40%), with a very strong indication that the International 
Finance  Company  (IFC)  the  investment  arm  of  the  World  Bank  will  take  a  twenty  percent  (20%) 
ownership interest in this venture. It will be the first time that the IFC is directly involved in Papua New 
Guinea as an investor or lender. We hope this is a break-through and will see them involved in other 
projects in privately and publicly owned enterprises; a tacit vote of confidence. 
BIS Review 32/2005 
 1
Mr. Robert Igara the Chief Executive Officer of PNGSDP was invited to address the forum and provide 
some details on the operations of the company he is heading. The Government asked him to act as 
the liaison person with the IFC and I am sure he will be glad to answer any questions you might have. 
The Bank has also embarked on addressing the issue of banking and financial service coverage in 
Papua New Guinea, by introducing the Micro-Finance & Employment Project in 2000, co-sponsored 
by  the  Asian  Development  Bank,  AusAID  and  the  Government  of  PNG.  A  pilot  micro-bank in  Wau, 
Morobe province, which the Bank of Papua New Guinea licensed in 2004, is showing strong signs of 
growth by expanding its micro-finance operations into the city of Lae after one year of commencement. 
These initiatives are not in direct competition with the existing financial institutions, but are seen as 
complementary to the financial system. 
Foreign exchange control liberalisation 
Let me touch on the Bank’s decision to remove the remaining controls on foreign exchange. 
The  first  question  many  may  ask  is  the  obvious  one:  why  liberalise  the  exchange  controls?  The 
rationale as I have stated is to allow for a smoother flow of capital into and out of the country. Under a 
floating  exchange  rate  regime,  exchange  controls  are  not  required  because  the  market  can  adjust 
itself to meet the supply and demand of foreign currency and the exchange rate acts as an adjustor to 
adverse  impacts  from  domestic  or  external  shocks.  Prior  attempts  and  intentions  to  liberalise 
exchange controls did not eventuate. In 1994, after the kina was floated, the controls were retained to 
allow the severely depleted reserves to be rebuilt to comfortable levels. Again in 1997 and 1998, the 
timing was inappropriate with adverse economic shocks resulting from the El Nino drought, Sandline 
crisis and low confidence levels. One of the deciding factors not to pursue liberalisation was that, the 
Central  Bank  did  not  have  the  independence  to  rein  in  a  monetary  expansion,  as  a  result  of  any 
expansionary fiscal policy, and to stop the pressure on the kina emanating from it. 
In  2000,  whilst  the  enactment  of  the  Central  Banking  Act  gave  the  Central  Bank  greater 
independence,  the  controls  were  kept  to  give  the  Bank  time  to  develop  appropriate  monetary 
instruments  and  prudential  standards  to  achieve  the  objective  of  price  stability.  The  stable 
macroeconomic environment that emerged in 2003 and improved outlook for the country has enabled 
the Bank to revisit the liberalisation of the exchange controls. If ever there was a time to liberalise, this 
is it. 
The  next  question  many  of  you  may  have  is:  what  form  would  this  liberalisation  process  take?  As 
explained  in  my  address  to  the  Annual  Mining  Conference  in  December  2004,  the  liberalisation 
involves  imposing  EXEMPTIONS  on  the  exchange  control  regulations,  without  actually  doing  away 
with the legislation on Foreign Exchange and Gold Regulation itself. We are in a sense shelving the 
legislation  with  the  possibility  of  re-introducing  it  as  and  when  the  need  arises,  the  most  probable 
being in the event of a severe balance of payments crisis. 
Another question on the minds of many present here is: When will the liberalisation be implemented? 
As mentioned, the liberalisation means the Bank of Papua New Guinea will no longer be required to 
review, analyse and grant exchange control approvals. Whilst it will not be a delegated function, the 
authorised dealers, which at the moment are the four (4) commercial banks operating in the country 
would  have  to  process  all  transactions,  including  reviewing  applications  for  foreign  exchange 
transactions and ensuring tax clearance is obtained from the Internal Revenue Commission (IRC). The 
Bank of Papua New Guinea’s emphasis now will be on the reporting forms from the dealers and other 
transactors for Balance of Payments analysis purposes. 
At  the  time  the  initial  round  of  consultations  took  place  with  stakeholders,  including  the  authorised 
dealers, many were not aware of the full impact of the liberalisation of the existing controls and their 
ability to handle it. The views expressed by the major stakeholders and business community, including 
the Minister for Finance and Treasury during the post-announcement discussions is that whilst they 
welcomed  this  major  reform,  a  cautious  approach  to  stagger  the  liberalisation  process  should  be 
followed. Those were the reasons for the delay in implementing the proposed reform. 
It is my pleasure however to announce at this forum that the first aspect of this reform in the remaining 
controls on current and capital account transactions will be effective on 01st June 2005, except for 
the following controls: 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2005
  involving  private  capital  account  contracts  between  residents  and 
Approval 
non-residents; 
Approval to open and operate foreign currency accounts outside Papua New Guinea; 
and 
Licensing of authorised dealers and gold exporters. 
• 
These  controls  are  still  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Central  Bank  as  required  under  the  Foreign 
Exchange & Gold Regulation. For those transactions that will be liberalised, they will still require tax 
clearance, which will now be the responsibility of the authorised dealers and the IRC. 
Prior to the effectiveness of the liberalisation of these controls, the Bank of Papua New Guinea will 
undertake  public  awareness  campaigns  around  the  major  centers  of  Papua  New  Guinea  and  hold 
further consultations with the major stakeholders. Subsequent announcements on the liberalisation of 
the remaining controls will follow later on. 
We  would  like  to  work  together  with  everyone  concerned  to  ensuring  the  reform  is  implemented 
successfully. The exchange controls are a hang-over from the days of the fixed exchange rate regime. 
Liberalising  exchange  controls  would  open  up  the  economy,  removing  one  of  the  administrative 
impediments  to  doing  business  in  Papua  New  Guinea  and  assist  in  the  Government’s  Export-led 
Growth Strategy. 
Our supervision of the financial system in Papua New Guinea, covering the banks, licensed financial 
institutions,  the  saving  and  loans  societies,  superannuation  funds,  life  insurance  companies  and 
others  are  to  ensure  that  they  comply  with  the  legislation  requirements,  world’s  best  practices  and 
operational work ethics. 
I want to assure you all that the Bank of Papua New Guinea will not shy away from implementing and 
fulfilling its mandated role of ensuring a sound and stable financial system for the people of Papua 
New Guinea and those who do business in the country. We now have the necessary legislations in 
place  and  strong  independence  to  safeguard  the  institutions  that  we  licensed  in  the  various 
legislations  under  our  jurisdiction.  It  would  be  tantamount  to  gross  negligence  on  our  part  not  to 
enforce these regulations to safeguard the soundness of our financial institutions, their shareholders 
and beneficiaries. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 32/2005 
 3
   