Ishrat Husain: Global partnership for development 
Remarks by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Plenary session of the 
First International Conference on Volunteerism and Millennium Development, Islamabad, 7 December 
2004. 
 I will begin my remarks by taking a stock of the progress that has been made in the implementation of 
MDG agenda so far before I dwell on the Goal 8 specifically. My main sources of information are the 
Global  Monitoring  Report  2004  prepared  by  the  World  Bank  and  the  Human  Development  Report 
2003 prepared by the UNDP. A reading of this evidence suggests the following broad conclusions: 
• 
In  regard  to  income  poverty  goal  of  halving  income  poverty  between  1990  and  2015  the 
situation remains uneven. Due to the marked improvement in China and India, the World’s 
two most populous countries, the goal is likely to be met. East Asia has already met it as the 
number  of  people  living  on  less  than  $1/a  day  has  halved  just  in  the  1990s.  However, 
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) is seriously lagging behind. Low income countries under stress 
(LICUS) about half of which are in Africa are at risk of falling far short. 
Prospects for meeting education goals appear more promising than in health. It is at least 
comforting  that  the  goal  of  providing  universal  primary  education  will  be  achieved  in  most 
regions  with  the  exception  of  Sub-Saharan  Africa.  However,  gender  gap  are  quite  stark. 
Two-thirds of the illiterate adults are women and three-fifths of the children out of school are 
girls. These gaps are likely to persist and gender equality goal will be missed. 
Overall the goal of halting and reversing the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases 
appear daunting. Their incidence continues to rise, further aggravating conditions affecting 
child  and  maternal  mortality  and  entailing  broad  and  serious  economic  and  social 
consequences.  Health  system  in  poor  countries  are  seriously  underfunded  with  average 
public spending at almost one third of the WHO’s estimate of bare minimum of basic health 
services. 
The  health  goals are  rendered  more  difficult  by  the large  gaps  in  access  to  safe  drinking, 
water and basic sanitation. The gaps are largest in SSA for water and in South Asia (SA) for 
sanitation. The goal of halving by 2015 the proportion of population without access to safe 
water and sanitation means providing an additional 1.5 billion people with water and 2 billion 
with sanitation. With current rates of progress only about one fifth of countries will achieve 
the target increase; among low income countries (LICs), only about one-tenth will make it. 
   In overall terms, East Asia will meet the goals as it has countries such as China and Thailand, which 
have already made it. At the other end Cambodia and PNG are seriously off track. 
In general, middle income countries (MICs) are much better positioned to achieve the MDGs than the 
low income countries (LICs). The MICs will still have 280 million people living on less than $1/day and 
870 million people living less than $2/day. There are 59 top and high priority countries identified by 
UNDP where failed progress and terribly low starting levels undermine many of the goals. 
Now I turn to the question: what needs to be done in the next ten years i.e. until 2015 by different 
partners in this business. 
The achievement of the development goals will require rising above current trends and accelerating 
the pace of development and doing so swiftly. There is a need to scale up the action and there are 
three  ways  to  do  so.  1)  Accelerating  and  deepening  reforms  to  achieve  stronger  growth, 
2) Empowering and investing in poor people - stepping up action to improve the delivery of services 
affecting  HD,  3)  Matching  stronger developing  countries efforts  to  spur  growth  and  improve  service 
delivery to poor people with stronger support from developed countries. What is required by each of 
the partners in this compact is briefly outlined in the following paragraphs. 
Developing countries: 
Developing  country  policies  have  improved  most  notably  in  Asia  but  also  in  many  countries  in 
Sub-Saharan Africa. But public sector governance remains the weakest area of the reform agenda in 
 B) 
• 
 C) 
• 
• 
• 
D) 
• 
   most  countries.  Institutional  dimensions  of  reform  are  critical  both  for  good  macroeconomic 
management as well as delivery of services. 
Economic and financial policies 
A) 
The developing countries should continue to pursue; 
• 
fiscal  management  and  sound  public 
Prudent 
vulnerability to crises. 
Outward-oriented strategies by reducing tariff and non-tariff barriers and trade liberalization. 
Deregulation and strengthening institutions - especially property rights, rule of law. 
Implement  stronger  and  deeper  financial  sector  reforms  to  channel  savings  to  productive 
uses and broaden access to finance. 
financial  management 
for  reducing 
Human development 
Allocate more resources and ensure more effective use of these resources for accelerating 
HD. They can increase the impact of existing spending by proper targeting of subsidies. 
Put in place well targeted social safety nets that protect poor and vulnerable. 
Empower women. 
Public sector governance 
Accelerate governance reform - institutions to manage development interventions. 
Decentralize delivery of services with financial and administrative powers. 
Control corruption and promote transparency and accountability. 
Environmental management 
Build appropriate policy and institutional framework. 
Developed countries 
Developed countries have to carry out the following responsibilities. 
• 
Trade barriers are a major impediment to global well being. Trade policy reforms particularly 
in removing agriculture subsidies will be a major source of gains for the world economy and 
poor countries. 
Liberalization  of  services  trade,  including  migration will  help raising  incomes  in  developing 
countries. 
A substantial increase in ODA from the present level of $58-60 billion in 2002. or 0.23% of 
GNI in line with the Monterrey Consensus to 0.7 percent of GNI. 
Improving the allocation of aid - selectivity on basis of country performance. 
Increasing the effectiveness of aid through improved alignment and harmonization. 
Providing aid in forms that are responsive to country circumstances and needs. 
Provide debt relief and debt sustainability to Heavily indebted poor countries. 
International financial institutions and the UN family 
• 
• 
Work towards debt sustainability for the Heavily indebted poor countries. 
Increase financial and technical assistance to Sub-Saharan Africa. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2005
 Put in place crisis prevention and crisis management mechanism. 
Help build capacity building in poor countries. 
Play advocacy role vis a vis developed countries. 
NGOs and voluntary groups 
• 
• 
Actively participate in the provision and financing of basic services to the poor. 
Mobilise  the  poor  and  the  target  groups  for  participation,  empowerment  and  capacity 
development. 
Learn from the successes and failures of the innovative models of delivery to the poor. 
Share  and  disseminate  critical  success  factors  in  mobilizing  communities  and  voluntary 
groups. 
Complement  the  efforts  of  the  governments,  international  organizations  in  verifying  the 
progress and results of the MGD. 
Academia, research institutions and statistical agencies 
• 
Timely statistics on the development outcomes, fill in the gaps in data collection, and build 
statistical capacities in the developing countries. 
Research on transmission mechanisms and relative weights of the various determinants of 
growth and poverty reduction and interrelationships among them. 
Media groups 
• 
Communicate,  highlight  and  disseminate  widely  the  success  stories  of  projects  and 
programs  of  countries,  and  innovative  models  of  delivery  of  services  and  outreach  to  the 
poor. 
Promote  awareness  and  keep  a  vigilant  eye  on  the  various  stakeholders  in  meeting  their 
commitments. 
    Conclusion 
To  conclude,  the  global  partners  must  now  onwards  focus  on  the  lagging  regions  such  as 
Sub-Saharan  Africa,  lagging  countries  within  the  achieving  regions  such  as  Cambodia  and  Papua 
New  Guinea  and  lagging  provinces,  states  and  districts  within  the  successful  countries  such  as 
Guizhou, Yunnan and Xinjiang in China. 
There is a strong evidence to confirm the existence of virtuous cycle linking education and economic 
growth.  Education  is  critical  to  better  health  and  nutrition.  Better  education,  health  and  nutrition 
increase  the  productivity  that  leads  to  economic  growth.  Growth  then  generates  resources  that  are 
deployed to finance improvement in health and education, further raising productivity. Critical in this 
cycle is the female education which has the highest direct and indirect rates of return among all types 
of  investment.  Educated  and  healthier  women  participate  in  the  labor  force,  contribute  to  higher 
productivity by adopting new techniques and innovations and thus raise level of household incomes. 
The  higher  growth  outcome  achieved  in  this  benign  way  also  reduces  incidence  of  poverty.  Thus 
investment in female education must be given the highest priority. 
Within  a  country,  the  scale  and  effectiveness  are  the  two  main  determinants  of  achieving  the 
millennium goals. The scaling up effort cannot take place without the active involvement and capacity 
of the government at all levels. Planning, coordination, monitoring and filling in the capacity gaps by 
the government are essential ingredients of any meaningful scaling up. Improved delivery of education 
and health services as well as availability of water and sanitation to the poor people can best be done 
by the government. These not only require investments but also reforms in policies and institutional 
framework. 
On  the  other  hand  the  effectiveness  of  the  delivery  of  services  and  right  targeting  are  difficult  to 
achieve without the active involvement and serious efforts of the communities for which volunteers and 
voluntary organizations are best suited. The capabilities of poor people to participate in and benefit 
from growth will have to be upgraded and that can be done only by the volunteers and community 
leaders.  Successful  innovations  such  as  EDUCO  in  El  Salvador,  the  PROGRESO  programmed  in 
Mexico,  Female  Secondary  School  assistance  in  Bangladesh  are  good  examples  of  community 
engagement  in  effective  service  delivery.  In  Bangladesh  are  good  examples  of  community 
engagement in effective service delivery. In Porto Alegre, Brazil, public monitoring of local budgets has 
brought huge improvement in services. 
The various stakeholders involved in this global partnership i.e. the developing countries, developed 
countries, international financial institutions and the UN family, NGOs and voluntary organizations, the 
academia  and  media  should  examine  their  own  role,  responsibilities  and  attainments.  They  should 
mainly focus on the system-wise issues and the lagging regions, countries and areas to give them a 
helping hand in boosting their outcomes. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2005
