European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 7 July 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to our press conference. 
The Governing Council of the ECB expresses its deep sympathy and its total solidarity with the British 
people  and  the  Bank  of  England  in  these  dreadful  circumstances.  We  have  observed  a  minute  of 
silence in memory of the victims of these terrorist attacks and we convey our sincere condolences to 
the British people and the Bank of England. 
The Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council 
of the ECB, which was also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we have concluded that the monetary 
policy  stance  is  appropriate,  given  the  current  outlook  for  price  stability  over  the  medium  term. 
Accordingly,  we  have  decided  to  leave  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  Across  the  maturity 
spectrum,  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area  are  low  by  historical  standards,  in  both  nominal  and  real 
terms,  and  thus  lend  ongoing  support  to  economic  activity.  The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to 
monitor carefully all factors that might affect this assessment and remains vigilant with respect to the 
emergence of risks to price stability over the medium term. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail. 
In the context of our economic analysis, recent indicators of economic activity in the euro area have, 
on  balance,  confirmed  that  growth  has  remained  subdued.  High  and  rising  oil  prices  in  particular 
appear to have weighed on demand and confidence. On the basis of current information, the growth 
rate  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year  is  expected  to  be  lower  than  the  first  quarter  growth  rate  of 
0.5%,  quarter  on  quarter.  Available  data  are  still  mixed,  with  some  of  the  most  recent  indicators 
showing  a  slight  improvement,  but  there  are  no  signs  as  yet  that  a  more  sustained  recovery  in 
economic  activity  has  already  started.  At  the  same  time,  looking  beyond  the  short  term,  there 
continues to be reason to expect a gradual improvement in economic activity in the euro area. On the 
domestic  side,  investment  should  benefit  from  the  very  favourable  financing  conditions,  the  robust 
growth  of  corporate earnings currently  observed and  ongoing  improvements  in  corporate efficiency. 
Consumption growth should evolve broadly in line with expected developments in disposable income. 
On  the  external  side,  ongoing  growth  in  global  demand  and  improvements  in  euro  area  price 
competitiveness should support euro area exports. This assessment is in line with available forecasts 
and projections.  
This  baseline  scenario  for  growth  continues  to  be  surrounded  by  a  good  deal  of  uncertainty.  On 
balance, risks to economic growth lie on the downside and are notably related to the persistence of 
high oil prices, the low level of confidence prevailing in the euro area and global imbalances. 
Turning to price developments, annual HICP inflation was 2.1% in June, according to Eurostat’s flash 
estimate,  compared  with  1.9%  in  May.  Over  the  next  few  months  annual  HICP  inflation  rates  are 
expected to fluctuate around current levels and may not fall below 2% for the remainder of 2005. This 
outlook mainly reflects recent developments in oil prices, which were seen as an upside risk in the 
context  of  the  June  2005  Eurosystem  staff  inflation  projections.  However,  wage  increases  have 
remained contained over recent quarters and, in the context of moderate economic growth and weak 
labour markets, this trend should continue for the time being. Overall, we continue to see no significant 
evidence of underlying domestic inflationary pressures building up in the euro area.  
At the same time, upside risks to this scenario for inflation warrant close monitoring. These risks relate 
mainly  to  oil  price  developments  and  their  potential  to  lead  to  second-round  effects  stemming  from 
wage  and  price-setting  behaviour.  It  is  important  that  the  social  partners  continue  to  meet  their 
responsibilities.  Moreover,  uncertainties  about  future  developments  in  administrative  prices  and 
indirect taxes need to be taken into account when assessing currently available inflation projections. 
Looking at inflation prospects over medium to longer horizons, our assessment is also based on the 
results  of  our  monetary  analysis.  In  line  with  developments  since  mid-2004,  monetary  and  credit 
growth in the euro area remain strong. The stimulating impact of the low level of interest rates has 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 1
remained  the  dominant  factor  driving  monetary  developments,  as  reflected  in  the  strength  of  M1 
growth  and  the  dynamism  of  loans  to  the  private  sector.  Liquidity  remains  ample  by  all  plausible 
measures. Overall, monetary developments support the case for vigilance with regard to upward risks 
to price stability over medium to long-term horizons. 
To sum up, the economic analysis confirms that domestic inflationary pressures over the medium term 
remain  contained  in  the  euro  area,  while  oil  price  developments  in  particular  imply  some  upward 
revisions to the main scenario for price developments. The monetary analysis identifies risks to price 
stability over the longer term. Overall, cross-checking the information from the two pillars suggests a 
need for ongoing vigilance in order to maintain inflation expectations in line with price stability. In fact, 
by keeping medium-term inflation expectations firmly anchored at levels consistent with price stability, 
monetary policy is making a significant contribution towards a recovery in economic growth.  
Prudent  fiscal  policies  could  provide  considerable  support  for  confidence  in  the  euro  area.  The 
discussions on revising the Stability and Growth Pact regulations have been concluded and rigorous 
implementation  is  now  key  to  ensuring  an  effective  framework  for  fiscal  policy  coordination  and 
discipline.  This  is  all  the  more  true  as  current  and  projected  fiscal  deficits  in  several  euro  area 
countries still need to be addressed with rigour. In a number of cases these deficits not only imply a 
rising debt ratio, but also leave no safety margin for short-term budgetary relief in the event of adverse 
developments.  In  this  context,  as  significant  revisions  of  past  deficit  and  debt  figures  have  been 
reported  for  a  few  countries,  let  me  also  reiterate  previous  calls  by  the  Governing  Council  for  the 
reliable compilation and timely reporting of government finance statistics.  
Finally,  let  me  conclude  with  a  few  words  on  structural  reform.  As  we  have  stressed  repeatedly,  a 
decisive  and  comprehensive  set  of  measures  aimed  at  achieving  a  more  dynamic  and  competitive 
European economy with flexible labour and product markets is urgently needed. The primary objective 
of  such  measures  is  to  deal  with  the  ongoing  challenges  from  globalisation,  rapid  technological 
change and ageing populations and, overall, to ensure greater resilience to shocks. These challenges 
are  not  specific  to  the  euro  area.  Successful  structural  reforms  would,  however,  also  contribute  to 
fostering the adjustment processes within the euro area. In particular, they would allow those member 
countries  with  a  weaker  record  in  terms  of  economic  growth  and  employment  creation  to  perform 
better in the future. As regards existing growth and inflation differentials within the euro area, there is 
clear  evidence  that  the  dispersion  of  inflation  and  real  GDP  growth  rates  in  the  euro  area  is  not 
materially different from that of the United States and it does not show any signs of having increased 
since 1999. However, in cases where differences are not due to catching-up processes or temporary 
factors, structural reforms are even more necessary to enhance economic performance and flexibility 
in the adjustment process. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2005
