Svein Gjedrem: Economic perspectives 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the meeting of 
the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank, Oslo, 17 February 2005.  
The Charts in pdf-format 
 can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Introduction 
This  year,  Norway  is  commemorating  the  centenary  of  the  dissolution  of  the  union  with  Sweden. 
Historically, an important part of nation-building has been the establishment of a monetary system and 
a  central  bank.  In  Norway,  the  stage  was  set  for  the  introduction  of  a  national  currency  in  autumn 
1814. With the prospect of a union with Sweden, a clause was included in the Constitution stipulating 
that Norway should maintain its own bank and its own monetary system. The monetary unit was the 
specie daler.  
In  1875,  the  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament)  decided  to  join  the  currency  union  that  Denmark  and 
Sweden  had  established  two  years  earlier.  The  specie  daler  was  then  replaced  by  the  krone.  One 
Norwegian krone was worth 0.40323 grams of fine gold.  
In  the  latter  part  of  the  1800s,  Norway  benefited  from  free  trade  and  free  capital  movements  and 
became a relatively prosperous country. The standard of living in Norway did not lag behind that of 
Sweden.  
The  currency  union  was  maintained  after  the  political  union  with  Sweden  was  dissolved.  The 
agreement  lost  its  practical  significance  after  the  gold  standard  was  suspended  in  1914.  The 
agreement was not formally terminated until 1972.  
From  an  economic  viewpoint,  the  dissolution  of  the  union  in  1905  was  a  painless  process.  Former 
Central Bank Governor Nicolai Rygg1 wrote: “For 1905, (Norges Bank) points to the bright aspects of 
developments over the year, i.e. rising exports,…, but it takes time for confidence and the enterprising 
spirit to grow sufficiently to generate greater vitality and activity”. Norges Bank’s role was primarily to 
secure confidence in the monetary system. There were fairly large cash withdrawals from banks. Many 
sought  to  safeguard  their  wealth  by  investing  in  foreign  bonds.  Banks  had  to  resort  to  loans  from 
Norges Bank. The Board of Norges Bank nevertheless chose to leave the interest rate unchanged at 
5 per cent.  In  Rygg’s words,  this  would  not  contribute  to  undermining  the confidence-inspiring  calm 
that marked major historical events.  
Economic developments were favourable up to World War I.  
International real interest rates have fallen 
The interest rate level is lower today than in 1905. In fact, Norges Bank has not allowed the key rate to 
be this low since the Bank was established in 1816. This partly reflects international conditions.  
In many countries interest rates were reduced considerably when the economic situation deteriorated 
early in 2000. Interest rates adjusted for inflation, i.e. real interest rates, are now also low.  
The  first  decades  following  World  War  II  were  marked  by  stable  nominal  interest  rates,  moderate 
inflation  and  low,  but  positive  real  interest  rates.  In  subsequent  periods,  real  interest  rates  have 
fluctuated.  
In the 1970s inflation surged. Nominal interest rates rose, but to a lesser extent than the inflation rate, 
and real interest rates turned negative. Early in the 1980s, monetary policy was tightened considerably 
in many countries. Real interest rates moved up. Inflation gradually fell and stabilised again at a low 
level. This paved the way for a decrease in real interest rates in the 1990s before they fell further after 
the economic turnaround in 2001.  
                                                      
1   N. Rygg (1954): Norges Bank’s history, Norges Bank 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 1
Low real interest rates may be ascribed to several factors:  
Inflation has been low for such a long period that savers require a low premium as a hedge against 
unexpected inflation in the future.  
In order to prevent an appreciation against the dollar many Asian central banks have been buying US 
government bonds, exerting downward pressure on yields.  
Low short-term interest rates in the US, Japan and euro area countries are inducing investors to shift 
into more long-term securities, with an attendant fall in long-term interest rates.  
The  US  and  some  other  countries  have  increased  their  key  rates,  but  expectations  of  the  rate  of 
increase ahead have been dampened. The fall in long-term interest rates may be attributable to new 
assessments of the growth outlook for the world economy.  
In Norway, the real interest rate may deviate from external real interest rates when growth prospects 
diverge. This will also lead to a change in the real krone exchange rate, so that the expected return on 
investments  in  Norway  and  abroad  become  about  the  same.  However,  over  time  long-term  real 
interest  rates  have  largely  followed  international  rates,  and  in  line  with  international  developments 
long-term interest rates in Norway have also fallen markedly.  
Low risk? 
Real interest rates abroad are unusually low, and the risk premium is also low. Savers and investors 
are  offered  a  wide  range  of  investment  options.  Risk  and  expected  returns  are  assessed  when 
choosing  among  the  alternatives.  The  premium  that  investors  require  to  take  risk  has  fallen 
considerably in recent months and is now generally low.  
For example, there is little difference between government bond yields and yields on bonds issued by 
private enterprises. The extra premium that emerging economies have to pay on loans is also small. 
Moreover, premiums paid to hedge against future fluctuations in foreign exchange and equity markets 
are small.  
The  low  risk  premiums  may  reflect  fairly  solid  growth  in  the  world  economy  and  a  strengthening  of 
corporate profits and financial positions. It seems that credit risks are fairly well diversified in securities 
markets  and  international banks  appear  to  be  solid.  Fewer  major  negative  events  have  shaken  the 
markets in recent periods.  
But  another  explanation  may  be  that  low  interest  rates  have  prompted  investors  to  take  more  risk, 
thereby pushing down risk premiums. In that case, lower premiums reflect an expansionary monetary 
policy rather than low real risk.  
Imbalances in the world economy 
Low  interest  rates  and  risk  premiums  stand  in  stark  contrast  to  the  considerable  imbalances  in  the 
world economy.  
There  are  particularly  larges  imbalances  both  with  regard  to  the  US  trade  and  current  account 
balance. This partly reflects the US federal budget deficit. Moreover, US households have a high level 
of consumption and a low level of saving. Strong demand in the US has sustained growth in the world 
economy. The deficit in the US is matched by surpluses in Europe and Asia.  
A persistent deficit has pushed up US foreign debt to a high level.  
The US population is growing faster than that of other OECD countries. This may suggest that saving 
in the US is somewhat lower and investment somewhat higher, but the impact is now considerably 
greater than implied by demographic factors alone.  
The imbalances may continue for a period. International capital markets are deep and liquid with an 
ample supply of credit for US borrowers. If creditors begin to fear a fall in prices and withdraw, this 
may still trigger substantial corrections. This may lead to higher interest rates and perhaps also a fall in 
US equity markets that spills over to other countries’ financial markets. In that case the dollar will also 
depreciate. The household debt burden in the US may be another source of instability if households 
abruptly reduce both demand for housing and consumption.  
2 
 BIS Review 10/2005
The  Federal  Reserve  is  now  gradually  increasing  interest  rates  and  the  first  measures  aimed  at 
reducing the US budget deficit have been announced. This may curb growth in domestic demand and 
imports  of  goods  and  services.  However,  the  US  authorities  will  probably  not  go  as  far  as  to  bring 
economic growth to a halt, with an accompanying increase in unemployment.  
The US issues the world’s most important settlement and reserve currency. States and agencies in the 
US have access to dollar-denominated loans in major international capital markets. The exchange rate 
risk lies with foreign creditors. The US may have a long-term interest in maintaining a stable dollar that 
is used in international payments. But this may be weighed against short-term interests: If the dollar 
depreciates, the US trade deficit will be reduced with a limited impact on domestic production.  
The US is not the only source of trade imbalances. They also reflect very low growth in continental 
Europe  and  the  largely  export-based  growth  in  Asian  countries.  Countries  other  than  the  US  must 
therefore also contribute in order to prevent growth in the global economy from faltering.  
With limited domestic growth capacity and high unemployment, many industrial countries are poorly 
equipped to cope with a weaker dollar and lower US demand. The challenges are perhaps particularly 
demanding in Japan and some large European countries.  
The  situation  is  not  negative  across  the  board.  There  is  solid  growth  in  a  number  of  European 
countries such as Spain, Ireland and the Nordic countries. In Germany, structural reforms are being 
implemented,  particularly  in  the  labour  market,  which  could  promote  growth.  It  is  possible  that  low 
long-term interest rates will boost investment. Nevertheless, there is uncertainty as to future economic 
developments, which is not fully reflected in prices, interest rates and premiums.  
There is also a risk that large imbalances in world trade and low employment in Europe will trigger 
protectionism, which could reduce growth capacity even further.  
Low interest rates in Norway 
Norges Bank’s key rate, the sight deposit rate, is at a historically low level. Real interest rates are also 
low.  Between  December  2002  and  March  2004,  the  key  rate  was  reduced  by  a  total  of 
5.25 percentage points. The interest rate decline can be ascribed to a number of factors.  
In  late  autumn  2002,  inflation  started  to  fall.  The  inflation  projections  were  also  revised  down. 
Gradually new information about the outlook for other countries and the Norwegian economy indicated 
that inflation might be very low. Short-term interest rates fell by close to 4 percentage points.  
It would seem that it is not only changes in the real interest rate that have an influence, but also the 
level  of  real  interest  rates.  Between  December  2002  and  March  2004,  the  interest  rate  has  moved 
from a high to a low level.  
The real interest rate is now lower than a neutral interest rate. A real interest rate that is lower than the 
neutral  rate  will  stimulate  activity  even  after  the  effects  of  the  interest  rate  fall  itself  have  been 
exhausted.  This  was  pointed  out  by  the  Swedish  economist  Knut  Wicksell  in  19072:  "...the  upward 
movement of prices, whether great or small in the first instance, can never cease so long as the rate of 
interest is kept lower than its normal rate".  
Calculations seem to indicate that the neutral real interest rate for Norway is between 2½ and 3½ per 
cent and it has probably fallen somewhat in recent years.  
Monetary policy is functioning 
It  takes  time  for  an  interest  rate  reduction  to  have  an  impact  on  inflation.  We  are  now  seeing  the 
effects of monetary policy decisions some of which were taken two years ago.  
The  interest  rate  has  affected  inflation  via  the  krone  exchange  rate  and  via  demand  for  goods  and 
services. In particular, the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services has picked up. 
In addition, the reduction in the interest rate has probably contributed to holding up expectations of 
future inflation even when inflation is low.  
                                                      
2   Knut Wicksell (1907): “The Influence of the Rate of Interest on Prices”, Economic Journal, XVII (1907), pages 213-220. 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 3
Norges  Bank’s  key  rate  is  an  overnight  rate.  The  interest  rate  on  deposits  and  loans  with  longer 
maturities will reflect expectations as to future interest rate decisions. As the key rate was gradually 
reduced,  expectations  also  fell,  and  banks  reduced  their  lending  rates.  Monetary  policy  has  had  a 
greater impact because market participants expected the low interest rate to persist over a period.  
The first signs of the effects of the interest rate cuts appeared in the foreign exchange market. The 
interest rate differential against other countries narrowed. It became more attractive to borrow and less 
profitable to invest in the Norwegian krone. The movement in the krone exchange rate was reversed 
and it depreciated through 2003 and into 2004. However, the impact on the krone exchange rate has 
been considerably dampened because external interest rates have remained low. High prices for oil 
and gas and other export goods also contributed to an appreciation of the krone last year.  
The depreciation of the krone in 2003 contributed to restraining the fall in prices for imported goods. 
The effect occurred gradually. Companies and importers may have preferred to observe changes in 
the exchange rate over time before changing their selling prices.  
After  several  expensive  wage  settlements  and  a  short  period  of  a  strong  krone  had  weakened 
profitability in the Norwegian business sector, the depreciation of the krone contributed to curbing the 
decline in activity and employment.  
There  is  nevertheless  uncertainty  as  to  the  magnitude  of  the  impact  of  short-term  exchange  rate 
fluctuations because companies engage in currency hedging.  
There are different ways to hedge against currency fluctuations. Some enterprises buy intermediate 
goods  in  the  same  currency  in  which  they  sell  their  products.  Other  companies  raise  a  loan  in  the 
same currency as that of the company’s assets. In addition, companies can hedge against currency 
swings in the forward exchange market and options market. The large volume of international trade in 
currency derivatives, which is dominated by banks reduces, premiums and costs for other business 
sectors and thereby promote cross-border trade in goods and services. It is not a good idea to throw a 
spanner into the works.  
The  impact  on  household  consumption  and  housing  investment  has  been  substantial.  Business 
investment is now picking up.  
In  Norway,  household  debt  is  higher  than  household  deposits.  The  decline  in  interest  rates  has 
thereby freed up funds. Households reacted relatively rapidly, and growth in consumption picked up.  
The  fall  in  interest  rates  pushed  up  house  prices.  Turnover  in  the  housing  market  has  been  high. 
Higher housing wealth provides increased borrowing opportunities and thereby also boosts demand 
for consumer durables. Household debt has risen by around 11 per cent over the past year.  
High resale home prices have made it more profitable to build new homes, and residential construction 
is rising.  
The fall in interest rates has also contributed to sustaining the market value of office premises and 
commercial  property  even  with  a  high  vacancy  rate.  With  the  prospect  of  higher  occupancy  rates, 
prices are now rising.  
Owing to higher productivity and a drop in sickness absence, it may have taken time for the effects to 
become visible in the labour market. However, higher demand for labour and falling unemployment is 
gradually leading to a tighter labour market.  
High interest rates in 2002 and fiscal discipline contributed to a deceleration in wage growth to a more 
sustainable level.  
Higher  demand  for  companies’  goods  provides  scope  for  increasing  prices.  Experience  shows  that 
inflation is directly influenced by the level of capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy. Some of 
the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services can be attributed to higher margins in 
the business sector.  
If there is confidence in monetary policy, economic agents will expect inflation to be close to target 
over  time.  This  will  provide  a  basis  for  company  budgets.  This  will  then  contribute  to  stabilising 
inflation. Many companies change their prices only once or twice a year. When they change prices, 
they probably take into account the expected rise in other prices.  
It has been important to prevent inflation expectations from falling and becoming entrenched at a low 
level.  Surveys  of  inflation  expectations  nevertheless  indicate  that  expectations  are  well  anchored 
around the inflation target in the long term.  
4 
 BIS Review 10/2005
The interest rate is a powerful instrument. The effects come through growth in private consumption, 
higher house prices, increased residential construction, higher investment in various business sectors, 
business start-ups, improved corporate profitability, higher employment and wage growth, higher profit 
margins and higher imported inflation.  
The effects of the interest rate decline on demand, output and employment have been pronounced. It 
has taken time for inflation to pick up. This partly reflects low external interest rates and high oil prices, 
which have moderated the impact on the krone exchange rate. Higher imports from low-cost countries, 
competition and improved efficiency in Norwegian production have also kept inflation at a low level.  
As a result of low inflation, we have kept interest rates low for a longer period. The impact on output 
and employment is therefore more pronounced.  
We cannot expect the interest rate to have the same impact from one period to the next. The economy 
is also exposed to unexpected disturbances. As a result, we cannot fine-tune economic developments 
using the interest rate, but avoid the largest effects when the economy is exposed to disturbances. 
Experience  seems  to  indicate  that  inflation  expectations  remain  stable  even  if  inflation  varies 
somewhat as long as the interest rate is used actively to curb effects. Given our highly open economy, 
we may have to accept somewhat wider variations in inflation than some other countries.  
The interest rate level can influence the timing of household and business investment. With the current 
low interest rate level, many have found it advantageous to move forward purchases of property and 
other investments which they would otherwise have delayed.  
Housing demand 10 to 15 years ahead will depend on future income levels, population growth and 
living patterns. The current level of interest rates has limited implications for housing demand in the 
longer term. A high level of residential construction today will be followed by a lower level at a later 
stage. The same may apply to commercial property investment.  
There  are  examples  showing  that  a  period  of  higher-than-normal house  prices  can  have  an  impact 
over a very long period. At the end of the 1800s, house prices in Kristiania (now Oslo) rose sharply. 
Some areas of Oslo are still marked by the massive volume of residential construction prompted by 
the  rise  in  prices.  The  housing  market  collapsed  at  that  time.  The  demand  for  new  dwellings  was 
saturated. It was not until the mid-1980s that real house prices returned to the level in 1899.  
Household  debt  is  now  more  than  one  and  a  half  times  as  high  as  disposable  income.  The 
accumulation of debt partly reflects structural adaptation over time to a deregulated credit market and 
partly to low interest rates. The higher debt burden has made households more vulnerable. A period 
will come when households prefer to stabilise debt and reduce consumption.  
The  fall  in  interest  rates  has  sustained  activity  in  Norway  after  a  period  of  weak  economic 
developments abroad and high domestic wage and cost inflation. But an aggressive use of the interest 
rate as an instrument may itself be a source of new fluctuations in the economy because it influences 
the time profile for saving and investment. It is therefore important that growth is self-driven when the 
interest rate has to return to a more normal level after a period.  
The  effect  of  Norway’s  interest  rate  also  depends  on  external  interest  rates.  Many  countries  have 
raised  their  key  rates  during  this  cyclical  upturn,  also  in  several  steps.  Most  recently,  the  Federal 
Reserve increased its key rate by 0.25 percentage point, and it has also announced further interest 
rate hikes. With the prospect of low inflation, Norway has lagged behind other countries in adjusting 
interest rates to a more normal level.  
Two years after we started to lower interest rates it would appear that inflation is moving up, albeit 
slowly. Inflation is low, but the indices are also influenced by temporary and erratic disturbances. It will 
still take time before we will have seen the full impact of low interest rates. It may appear that growth in 
the  Norwegian  economy  has  become  more  self-driven.  Capacity  utilisation  is  close  to  normal  and 
rising. After a period, the interest rate can then gradually be raised to a more normal level.  
Economic policy tasks 
The  various  components  of  economic  policy  have  varying  effects.  This  is  why  they  have  different 
functions:  
• 
Monetary  policy  steers  inflation  in  the  medium  and  long  term  and  can  also  contribute  to 
smoothing swings in output and employment.  
BIS Review 10/2005 
 5
  The central government budget – growth in public expenditure – influences the krone and 
the  size  of  the  internationally  exposed  business  sector  in  the  medium  term.  Government 
expenditure and revenues must be in balance in the long term.  
Wage formation, the structure of the economy and incentives determine how efficiently we 
utilise our labour resources and other economic resources. 
There is also an interaction:  
• 
In its budget resolutions, the government authorities will attach importance to the effects of 
the  budget  on  the  Norwegian  economy  and  will  therefore  take  account  of  interest  rate 
effects. In this way, they avoid a situation where growth in public expenditure and the interest 
rate push the economy in different directions.  
With  a  known  monetary  policy  response  pattern,  the  parties  to  the  centralised  income 
settlements can take into account interest rate effects when wage increases are agreed.  
Moreover, the parties to public sector negotiations can take into account that the higher the 
pay increases are, the fewer there are that can be remunerated over government budgets. 
The interaction here came into clear evidence when employment in the general government 
sector fell after the expensive wage settlement in 2002. 
  The authorities can achieve better economic policy results if they can commit in advance to a set of 
credible  policy  rules.  Households,  enterprises  and  capital  markets  are  forward-looking  in  their 
decision-making. It is therefore important that the authorities do not sow doubt, but on the contrary act 
in a long-term and predictable manner. There must be consistency between plans and actions.  
Monetary policy’s role is to ensure low and stable inflation. Experience shows that we cannot reduce 
unemployment  over  time  by  simply  accepting  somewhat  higher  inflation.  In  many  countries,  also  in 
Norway, confidence that inflation will be held at bay has increased because interest rate setting has 
been delegated to the central bank.  
Budget norms are not new. The norm during the first 25 post-war years – and it was adhered to – was 
that the annual budgets should show a surplus. The surplus was sufficient to finance an increase in 
loans to state banks.  
At  the  beginning  of  the  oil  age  in  Norway,  in  the  early  1970s,  the  norm  had  to  be  assessed.  The 
relationship  between  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  and  changes  in  industry  structure  was 
highlighted.  
Report no. 25 to the Storting from 1973-1974, “The role of petroleum activities in Norwegian society” 
stated: “A transfer of production and employees between enterprises and industries can occur as a 
result  of  higher  domestic  cost  pressures”  …  and  further  …  “Inflationary  pressures  will  depend  in 
particular on the extent to which the Norwegian business sector is involved in petroleum activities and 
the  share  of  revenues  that  are  used  domestically”.  The  implications  for  economic  policy  were  also 
clarified:  “The  risk  of  excessive  inflationary  pressures  must  be  given  considerable  weight  when 
decisions are to be taken here”. The government budget was at that time used to steer the activity 
level in the economy. The interest rate was to be low – and kept unchanged. Today, with an inflation 
target, inflationary pressures will be steered using the interest rate, while the value of the krone will 
fluctuate. Today, this sentence would have to read: “The risk of an exchange rate that is too strong 
must be given considerable weight when decisions are to be taken here”.  
We are now in a period where petroleum wealth is being invested in foreign financial assets via the 
Government Petroleum Fund. The government is to gradually phase in petroleum revenues into the 
domestic economy by using approximately the expected real return on the Fund.  
The  fiscal  rule  was  established  in  2001.  Growth  in public  expenditure  started  to  accelerate in  1997 
after having been low in the mid-1990s. Spending growth has also been fairly strong in recent years, 
but perhaps somewhat slower than earlier. Since 2000, spending growth has averaged 6.3 per cent, 
while GDP growth in value terms has been 4.5 per cent. We have limited overall knowledge about real 
growth in public service production. Reliable measures of productivity and price developments have 
not been developed.  
The fiscal rule for the budget implies that the government can use 4 per cent of the Fund over time. 
This  year,  a  little  more  than  6  per  cent  is  being  used.  The  deviation  partly  reflects  an  unexpected 
shortfall in tax revenues in recent years. The government budget deficit is the difference between total 
6 
 BIS Review 10/2005
revenues and total expenditure. They each account for about half of total GDP in Norway. Even small 
deviations from expenditure and revenue projections can have a major impact on the deficit. Exchange 
rate changes will also lead to fluctuations in the value of the Petroleum Fund. For these reasons alone, 
the use of petroleum revenues may in periods deviate from the 4 per cent rule. Spending was also 
increased in response to the economic downturn. We can therefore safely affirm that the fiscal rule 
has been normative for fiscal policy.  
In  the  years  following  1997,  with  strong  growth  in  public  expenditure,  the  fiscal  rule  pointed  to  a 
continued  increase  in  the use of  petroleum  revenues.  We  had  to  expect  this growth  in spending  to 
lead to deteriorating competitiveness in Norwegian manufacturing, either through higher wages or an 
appreciation of the krone. With stronger wage growth in Norway than abroad, the competitiveness of 
Norway’s  manufacturing  industry  has  weakened  by  about  15  per  cent  since  the  mid-1990s. 
Competitiveness  is  about  5  per  cent  weaker  than  the  average  for  the  past  30  years.  The  krone 
exchange rate has been influenced by high oil and gas prices and prices for other Norwegian export 
goods. Monetary policy has also influenced the path for Norway’s relative costs, but the nominal value 
of the krone is about the same as 10 years ago. Strong growth in public expenditure and expectations 
of moderately higher growth in the use of petroleum revenues now seem to have been factored into 
the cost level.  
Over the past 30 years manufacturing has been scaled back in waves. The last wave occurred around 
the turn of the millennium, but a substantial decline also occurred in the period 1977 to 1984 and from 
1987 to 1992. Prior to these periods, the manufacturing sector’s competitiveness deteriorated.  
The  usefulness  of  a  fiscal  rule  is  that  it  gives  weight  to  long-term  considerations  when  addressing 
day-to-day economic policy challenges. The fiscal rule stabilises enterprises’ expectations concerning 
competitiveness and the krone exchange rate. This can prevent abrupt and pronounced swings in the 
structure  of  the  economy.  If  the  government  authorities  disregard  the  rule,  enterprises  will  lose  an 
important  reference.  A  policy  rule  can  make  matters  worse  if  economic  agents  have  drawn  up 
long-term plans on a faulty basis.3  
Both short-term and long-term considerations imply that the use of petroleum revenues as a share of 
the Petroleum Fund should be curbed ahead.  
The Norwegian economy is growing at a brisk pace.  
The public sector has invested heavily in the care of the elderly, which should cover the needs of a 
generation that was born just after World War I. The need for growth in public expenditure will be more 
moderate in the coming years and marked by the small cohorts of the 1930s and war years, who are 
now joining the ranks of the elderly. Moreover, the National Insurance Scheme, introduced in 1967, is 
nearing maturity. In addition, a few years remain before the large post-war cohorts retire and add to 
the demand for health services.  
Hence, the conditions are now conducive to returning to the use of 4 per cent of the Petroleum Fund.  
The current cost level in the Norwegian business sector is adapted to an expansion of the petroleum 
sector and a steady phasing-in of petroleum revenues into the mainland economy. Costs rose sharply 
from the mid-1960s to the mid-1970s and reached a very high level. In subsequent years, costs have 
varied around this level. After a period, we will be able to cover a smaller share of our imports using 
current petroleum revenues and drawings on the Petroleum Fund. Competitiveness must then have to 
be improved. It may have to be brought back to around the level prevailing at the end of the 1960s 
prior to Norway’s emergence as an oil nation.4  
The labour market 
In the long run, wage growth must be consistent with labour productivity. When real wage growth is 
higher than productivity growth, profitability in the business sector deteriorates and the business sector 
will then recruit fewer employees and reduce their workforces. Likewise, employment in public entities 
                                                      
3   See  Kydland,  F.E.  and  E.C.  Prescott  (1977):”Rules  rather  than  discretion:  The  inconsistency  of  optimal  plan”,  Journal  of 
Political Economy85, pages 473-490. 
4   See  Akram,  Farooq  Q.  (2003):  “Reell  likevektsvalutakurs  for  Norge”  (Real  equilibrium  exchange  rate  for  Norway),  Norsk 
Økonomisk Tidskrift 118, pages 89-112. 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 7
will decline if labour costs rise more than revenues. When the social partners engage in centralised 
and  local  negotiations,  they  will  therefore  weigh  employment  against  the  usefulness  of  taking  out 
higher pay.  
Compared with other European countries, income formation in Norway has been fairly flexible. Wage 
growth has rapidly declined when unemployment has risen. This is why unemployment has not taken 
hold at a high level.  
The  favourable  results  partly  reflect  the  considerations  underlying  the  wage  settlements  at  a 
centralised  level.  But  perhaps  it  has  been  equally  important  that  it  has  been  possible  to  adjust 
workforces and wage growth at a local level.  
First, companies can adapt the use of labour to production by using overtime, part-time positions or 
contract labour.  
Moreover,  the  supply  of  labour  is  highly  flexible.  When  demand  rises,  the  number  of  job-seekers 
increases.  Those  who  are  already  employed  work  more.  During  an  upturn,  we  have  in  particular 
observed  an  increase  in  labour  force  participation  among  young  people.  Along  the  same  lines,  the 
number of persons in education tends to rise when unemployment is rising.  
When labour demand increases, we see an influx of job-seekers from our neighbouring countries. In 
addition, close to 30 000 persons had some form of employment in Norway throughout or during parts 
of 2001, but resided in Sweden. With the enlargement of the EU Norway has become part of a larger 
labour market. Enlargement also provides scope for increased trade in services. This increases the 
production  capacity  of  the  Norwegian  economy.  For  example,  it  seems  that  capacity  in  the 
construction industry has increased. The activity level is now very high, and there are still no signs of 
rising wage growth. Hence, labour mobility can eliminate bottlenecks in the labour market.  
Employment  is  also  strengthened  by  local  wage  negotiations.  Some  of  the  newer  industries  apply 
performance-related pay to a greater extent, allowing firms to reduce costs more easily while retaining 
employees  when  earnings  decline.  There  also  seems  to  be  wage  flexibility  in  more  traditional 
industries.  Differences  in  productivity  growth  and  wage  growth  across  Norwegian  manufacturing 
enterprises show that workers tend to accept lower pay increases in enterprises with low productivity 
growth.5 This can provide companies with more time to adapt and curb the impact on unemployment.  
Unemployment  will  vary  over  the  business  cycle,  but  there  will  always  be  job-seekers  who  are 
temporarily without work. Fluctuations around the trend level of unemployment can be an expression 
of the level of frictional and structural unemployment. If restructuring and job changes become more 
common, the number of unemployed will also increase as a result of job changes. If economic activity 
is high, most job-seekers will rapidly find a new position. Job-seekers with skills for which there is less 
demand  must  seek  employment  for  a  longer  period.  In  periods  of  major  structural  changes  in  the 
economy, this group may increase. When there are few unemployed of this type, wage growth tends 
to be high.  
Even if Norway fares favourably in relation to many other countries, the Norwegian labour market also 
has its weaknesses. Wage growth now probably accelerates at a higher level of unemployment than it 
would have ten and twenty years ago. Many are also channelled from unemployment to social security 
benefits, and benefits may be an obstacle to returning to the labour force. Sickness absence also rose 
for  a  long  period,  but  has  decline  markedly  over  the  past  six  months,  partly  reflecting  tighter 
requirements concerning individual follow-up.  
Over  time,  cyclical  fluctuations  in  unemployment  have  been  small  in  relation  to  the  increase  in 
structural and frictional unemployment and growth in the number of disability pensioners and persons 
on early retirement.  
It  is  important  to  preserve  and  perhaps  improve  our  flexible  system  of  wage  formation.  Pension 
schemes  and  the  application  of  social  security  rules  should  also  be  changed  to  provide  better 
incentives and opportunities to seek employment. Legislation and rules governing the labour market 
can also be better designed to promote production and employment.  
                                                      
5   Source:Kjell Gunnar Salvanes: “Omstilling og strukturelle endringer i det norske arbeidsmarkedet” (Adaptation and structural 
changes in the Norwegian labour market). Lecture at a conference arranged by the Norwegian School of Economics and 
Business  Administration,  the  Norwegian  Shipowners’  Association  and  the  Foundation  for  Research  in  Economics  and 
Business Administration in Oslo on 8 October 2004. 
8 
 BIS Review 10/2005
Conclusion 
Before I conclude, let us return to the period surrounding the dissolution of the union with Sweden in 
1905.  
As mentioned, the dissolution did not have any implications for monetary policy in Norway. However, a 
Swedish economist of that period is in some ways present in today’s monetary policy – in both Norway 
and Sweden.  
Knut Wicksell was professor of economics at the University of Lund. When the Scandinavian currency 
union lost its significance in 1914, he proposed the establishment of a Scandinavian central bank. Its 
objective would be price stability.  
Once  inflation  targeting  became  the  framework  for  monetary  policy  in  many  countries,  Wicksell’s 
works experienced a renaissance. Not only did he point to the importance of maintaining price stability, 
but  he  also  gave  the  interest  rate  responsibility  for  doing  so.  When  we  today  refer  to  a  normal  or 
neutral rate of interest, Wicksell is an obvious reference.  
In 1907, he wrote the following about the relationship between the interest rate and inflation:  
“… the problem of keeping the value of money steady, the average level of money prices at a constant 
height, which evidently is to be regarded as the fundamental problem of monetary science, would be 
solvable (…) by a proper manipulation of general bank rates, lowering them when prices are getting 
low, and raising them when prices are getting high”.6  
Wicksell’s  proposal  to  establish  a  Scandinavian  central  bank  was  never  realised.  Wicksell  himself 
entered into a union with a Norwegian woman, Anna Bugge. As the story goes, she strongly urged him 
to complete his academic works, rather than devoting his time to writing for newspapers and popular 
oratory. She was active in the peace and women’s movement and was Sweden’s first female diplomat. 
The union between the two did not consist of a formal marriage as Wicksell refused to enter into a 
contract  which  at  that  time  would  have  made  him  her  guardian.  It  was  a  contractual  form  of 
cohabitation based on mutual trust and respect, perhaps not unlike the cohabitation that Norway and 
Sweden have enjoyed on the Scandinavian peninsula over the past 100 years.  
But that is another story.  
                                                      
6   Knut Wicksell (1907): “The Influence of the Rate of Interest on Prices”, Economic Journal, XVII (1907), pages 213-220. 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 9
