Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Bank Negara Malaysia LINK  
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  launch  of  Bank 
Negara Malaysia LINK, Kuala Lumpur, 25 February 2005. 
 Yang  Amat  Berhormat  Dato'  Seri  Abdullah  Ahmad  Badawi,  Perdana  Menteri  Malaysia  dan  Menteri 
Kewangan Malaysia,  
Tetamu-tetamu Kehormat, 
Tuan-tuan dan Puan-puan, 
The Central Bank engaging with the public is what Bank Negara Malaysia LINK is about. It is my great 
pleasure  and  honour  to  welcome  you  to  the  official  launch  of  the  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  Laman 
Informasi Nasihat dan Khidmat or the Bank Negara Malaysia LINK.  
The  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  LINK  aims  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia's 
interface with the public. Bank Negara Malaysia LINK is established as a centralised point of contact 
with the public on issues that relate to our operations, our policies, the financial sector and consumer 
education in the area of finance. We believe this continuous engagement with the public will not only 
enhance  awareness,  understanding  and  appreciation  of  the  issues  at  hand  but  also  contribute  to 
facilitating the efficient functioning of the financial system and ensure the effectiveness of policy. Bank 
Negara Malaysia LINK will also centralise all interface with the SMEs on issues that relate to matters 
on access to financing and thereby contribute towards enhancing their value added to the economy.  
Tuan-tuan dan Puan-puan, 
Kami amat berbesar hati dengan kesudian Yang Amat Berhormat Dato' Seri Abdullah Ahmad Badawi 
untuk melancarkan Laman Informasi Nasihat dan Khidmat Bank Negara Malaysia atau Bank Negara 
Malaysia LINK pada hari ini. Kami mengambil kesempatan dari kehadiran Yang Amat Berhormat Dato' 
Seri  di  taklimat  ekonomi  di  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  pada  pagi  ini  untuk  merasmikan  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia LINK. Penubuhan Bank Negara Malaysia LINK merupakan komitmen Bank Negara Malaysia 
untuk  meningkatkan  lagi  perkhidmatan  yang  diberikan  kepada  orang  ramai  dan  membantu 
meningkatkan  akses  pembiayaan  kepada  perusahaan  kecil  dan  sederhana.  Perasmian  ini  amat 
bermakna kerana Yang Amat Berhormat Perdana Menteri merupakan peneraju kepada peningkatan 
sistem penyampaian sektor awam. Yang Amat Berhormat Dato' Seri juga telah memainkan peranan 
penting  dalam  usaha  meningkatkan  potensi  perusahaan  kecil  dan  sederhana  sebagai  enjin 
pertumbuhan ekonomi negara kita.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Bank Negara Malaysia has always been in direct contact with the public. The Central Bank receives 
walk-in  members  of  the  public  seeking  information  in  relation  to  our  operations,  policies  and 
regulations  as  well  as  those  who  seek  redress  on  financial  issues.  The  SME  Unit  in  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia  also  has  direct  contact  with  the  SMEs  relating  to  issues  of  access  to  financing.  The 
establishment of Bank Negara Malaysia LINK is to allow the interface with members of the public as 
well as the SMEs to be centralised and conducted in a more efficient and effective manner.  
The premises of the Bank Negara Malaysia LINK was previously the Kuala Lumpur branch of Bank 
Negara  Malaysia.  The  Kuala  Lumpur  branch  used  to  provide  retail  banking  services  to  the 
Government as part of our role as banker to the Government. This role has now been transferred to 
banking institutions. It was also where currency was processed. This has also now been outsourced to 
MEPS Currency Management Sdn. Bhd. The branch premises is therefore now being transformed to a 
centralised service centre.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Bank Negara Malaysia LINK will also provide support to the Bank's SME Special Unit in a number of 
areas associated with access to financing. The SME Special Unit was established within Bank Negara 
Malaysia  almost  two  years  ago.  Initially,  the  functions  of  the  SME  Special  Unit  was  to  provide 
information on the various sources of financing available to the SMEs; facilitate the loan application 
process; and to provide advisory services relating to the financial requirements of SMEs. The role has 
subsequently been enhanced to monitor, coordinate and evaluate SME financing across all sectors, to 
BIS Review 12/2005 
 1
review policies to enhance access to financing and coordinate the implementation of all SME financing 
policies. In addition, the SME Special Unit also acts as the Secretariat to the Small Debt Resolution 
Committee, which facilitates the restructuring of non-performing loans (NPLs) of SMEs with on-going 
businesses.  The  SME  facilities  available  at  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  LINK  will  greatly  increase  the 
outreach capabilities of the SME Special Unit. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As  the  financial  system  becomes  more  developed  and  sophisticated,  there  needs  to  be  increased 
financial  literacy.  As  part  of  our  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan,  we  have  implemented  a  10-year 
programme to increase consumers' financial literacy. We are now in the third year of the programme. 
The effective participation by the public in the financial system needs to be an informed participation. 
There  needs  to  be  better  understanding  of  the  consumer's  financial  rights  and  responsibilities,  the 
opportunities and the associated risks and costs.  
Bank Negara Malaysia LINK through its exhibitions, interactive information kiosks and booklets, will 
serve  as  a  channel  to  provide  consumer  financial  education  to  the  public.  In  this  connection,  Bank 
Negara Malaysia LINK will provide information relating to conventional and Islamic banking, insurance 
and  takaful,  SMEs,  foreign  exchange  administration,  Central  Credit  Reference  Information  System 
(CCRIS), Biro Maklumat Cek, development financial institutions, and other financing related matters. 
Bank Negara Malaysia LINK would also attend to public complaints on the above matters. As part of 
efforts  to  preserve  the  history  on  Bank  Negara  Malaysia's  role  in  nation  building,  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia LINK also includes a section on the Bank's contribution in shaping the country's economy 
and financial sector since the 1950s.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The  establishment  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  LINK  takes  the  Central  Bank's  public  outreach 
programme to a higher level. By providing a centralised platform for the public to seek information and 
address financial issues, it is our hope that Bank Negara Malaysia LINK will be instrumental in building 
bridges  between  consumers, 
financial  business  community,  consumer 
associations and policymakers. We believe in the importance of this outreach effort not only because 
the public has a right to an informed participation in their financial dealings, but also because it is also 
an  important  part  of  our  collective  and  combined  efforts  that  will  determine  the  success  of  our 
endeavours.  
Tuan-Tuan dan Puan-puan, 
Akhir sekali, saya ingin mengucapkan berbanyak-banyak terima kasih kepada Yang Amat Berhormat 
Perdana Menteri atas kesudian beliau melancarkan Bank Negara Malaysia LINK. 
Sekian, terima kasih. 
including  SMEs, 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2005
