Caleb M Fundanga: Investment opportunities in the Zambian real estate 
business - the role of the Bank of Zambia 
Paper  presented  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  to  the  International 
Conference  on  Investment  Opportunities  in  Zambia  -  Integrating  African  Property  Markets,  Lusaka, 
15 June 2005. 
 The Chairperson  
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
• 
• 
• 
I feel greatly honoured to have been invited to talk to you on the theme, “Investment Opportunities in 
the Zambian Real Estate Business: The role of the Bank of Zambia.”  
From  the  outset  I  wish  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  Business  Week  for  organising  such  an 
important Conference. You will agree with me that this Conference is, perhaps, the first of its kind to 
have been solely organised by the private sector to look specifically at the issue of investment in the 
Zambian real estate sector. As you may be aware, investment in the real estate sector is critical to the 
economic well being of any country, since economic growth alone is insufficient if it does not translate 
into  development,  as  reflected  through  better  living  standards  that  includes  provision  of  quality  and 
adequate infrastructure, such as, real estate.  
Real  estate  can  be  defined  to  include  physical  property  and  bare  land  owned  by  an  individual  or 
organisation  under  freehold  or  non-freehold  tenure.  However,  for  purposes  of  my  discussion  this 
afternoon, I will use the term real estate to mean physical property.  
My discussion therefore, is structured as follows:  
i. 
First,  I  will  look  at  the  contribution  of  the  Zambian  real  estate  sector  to  gross  domestic 
product  (GDP)  in  Zambia.  During  the  discussion  of  this  issue,  I  will  also  look  at  the 
characteristics of the Zambian real estate finance sector; and  
Secondly, I will explain the role of the Bank of Zambia in the real estate sector.  
ii. 
Ladies and Gentlemen  
In Zambia, the share of the real estate sector has increased from an average of 6.8% between 1995 
and  1999  to  9.4%  between  2000  and  2004.  This  is  a  welcome  development,  as  it  shows  that  real 
estate business has been contributing positively to real GDP growth over the last six years.  
However, I strongly believe that the sector can perform even better than this, especially that most of 
our  people  have  no  good  and  affordable  accommodation,  as  evidenced  by  emergence  of  large 
unplanned residential areas. This is a challenge for you experts in the real estate business to facilitate 
the  building  of  more  houses  and  office  accommodation  to  reduce  rentals  for  these  facilities  to 
affordable levels and stem the expansion of unplanned residential areas.  
In spite of the growth in the share of real estate to GDP, the Zambian real estate finance sector is still 
characterized  by  inadequate  long-term  finance.  Prior  to  1990,  the  sector  was  dominated  by  the 
Zambia  National  Building  Society  (ZNBS),  which  following  the  liberalisation  of  the  economy  in  the 
1990s,  is  unable  to  meet  the  demand  for  real  estate  finance.  Much  as  there  are  other  building 
societies now, their impact on real estate finance is still minimal. Consequently, most of the people 
who are constructing nowadays are doing so out of their own funds. Since they are building using their 
own meagre resources, the quality of their structures leaves much to be desired and the projects take 
long  to  complete.  This,  in  part,  explains  the  mushrooming  of  shanty  compounds  I  have  alluded  to 
earlier. What I have said clearly shows that there is need for new players in the real estate financing 
sector.  To  this  effect,  I  wish  to  challenge  the  private  sector  to  invest  in  the  real  estate  financing 
business.  
Having said that, what is the role of the Bank of Zambia in enhancing investment opportunities in the 
real estate business? As you may be aware, the primary mission of the Bank of Zambia is to formulate 
and implement monetary and supervisory policies that will ensure price and financial system stability.  
BIS Review 46/2005 
 1
How  does  this  tie  in  with  real  estate  business?  The  relationship  between  real  estate  business  and 
monetary  policy  and  financial  system  stability  is  a  much  debated  issue  among  academics  and 
policy-makers, alike. The relationship brings to the fore important challenges involving policy design, 
financial regulation and risk management. In Zambia, however, like most other developing countries, 
we have had difficulties in quantifying the relationship due to paucity of reliable information on property 
markets,  thereby  limiting  the  scope  for  meaningful  analysis  as  an  input  into  policy  formulation.  It  is 
therefore,  critical  that  improvements  are  made  in  the  quality  of  real  estate  sector  data  to  enhance 
analysis and policy response to developments in this sector.  
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  rate  of  inflation  is  still  too  high  in  Zambia  compared  to  some  of  our 
neighbours,  like  Tanzania,  Botswana,  and  Mozambique.  However,  I  wish  to  assure  you  that  lower 
rates  of 
fiscal  discipline  and 
macroeconomic stability.  
It is a well established that high inflation (that is, above ten percent) is a cost to economic activities. 
This happens through:  
1. 
inflation  are  within  reach  given  Government  commitment 
to 
Increased  investment  costs.  High  and  persistent  inflation  adversely  affects  savings 
mobilization in the economy because savers would opt to hedge against inflation. Ultimately, 
this  leads  to  a  reduction  in  the  availability  of  loanable  funds  and  investments.  In  addition, 
high  inflation  is  normally  associated  with  high  interest  rates  and  high  interest  rates  inhibit 
borrowing  for  investment  purposes,  thereby  slowing  down  economic  growth  and  the 
development process;  
Rising prices erode the public and investors’ confidence in the economy and contribute to 
rapid exchange rate depreciation. This leads to currency substitution or dollarisation, which 
in turn, reduces the effectiveness of monetary policy;  
Rising  prices  also  undermine  the  country’s  external competitiveness,  which  may  lead  to  a 
decline in export earnings, thus, worsening the balance of payments position of the country; 
and  
Rising prices entrench poverty through the erosion of peoples’ incomes, particularly those on 
fixed incomes.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
Therefore,  high  inflation  is  a  major  source  of  concern  to  the  Central  Bank  as  it  poses  a  threat  to 
general economic development. With regard to the real estate sector, high inflation will affect the cost 
of  property.  In  the  case  of  the  low  income  group,  high  inflation  will  make  real  estate  prices 
unaffordable.  
Apart from inflation, there are other financial prices which are of great concern to the Bank of Zambia, 
especially in our efforts to stabilise the macro-economy. One such financial price is the level of interest 
rates. Interest rates, being the cost of funds, can inhibit borrowing for investment in real estate if they 
are too high. Inflation also affects the level of interest rates.  
To this effect, lowering of interest rates requires that all key stakeholders play their respective roles 
effectively  and  consistently.  The  Government,  by  reducing  domestic  borrowing,  contributes  to  the 
lowering  of  yield  rates  on  Government  securities,  which  are  often  used  as  anchors  by  commercial 
banks in setting their interest rates. Commercial banks are, on their part, also expected to respond 
favourably to improving macroeconomic conditions consistent with low interest rates, while borrowers 
need to improve their credit culture. As for the Bank of Zambia, the greatest contribution we can make 
to the lowering of interest rates is reduction of inflation to single digit levels. In this regard, the Bank 
will continue monitoring financial conditions and take appropriate actions to contribute to the lowering 
of lending interest rates.  
Exchange rates are yet another financial price that should be stabilised to effectively contribute to the 
promotion of the growth of the real estate industry, particularly that a substantial amount of building 
materials,  such  as,  steel  are  imported.  An  unpredictable  behaviour  of  the  exchange  rate  can  make 
investment in real estate unattractive.  
However, following the introduction of the Broad-based Interbank Foreign Exchange System (IFES) in 
July  2003,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Kwacha  against  major  foreign  currencies,  particularly  the  US 
dollar,  has  been  relatively  stable.  The  Kwacha  appreciated  by  2.6%  against  the  US  dollar  in  2004, 
after depreciating by 7.2% in 2003. Other factors contributing to the relative stability of the Kwacha 
include  strong  performance  of  the  external  sector,  prudent  fiscal  management,  and  the  broad 
weakness of the US dollar in the international market. From the behaviour of the exchange rate of the 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2005
Kwacha against major currencies, it is clear that, supported by effective supervision, foreign exchange 
market participants are able to police themselves and instil discipline in the market. 
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Allow  me,  at  this  juncture,  to  turn  to  the  other  function  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  –  that  of  ensuring 
financial  system  stability.  As  you  may  be  aware,  financial  system  stability  is  very  critical  to  the 
maintenance of macroeconomic stability. As a matter of fact, monetary policy would not be effective in 
pursuing the inflation objective if the financial system were not stable, for monetary policy actions are 
transmitted through financial institutions.  
In this regard, a stable financial system plays a catalytic role for financial institutions to provide the 
financial products that will contribute to the development of the real estate business.  
Therefore,  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  the  financial  institutions  to  meet  the  challenges  of  financing, 
among  others,  the  real  estate  sector,  the  Bank  has  undertaken  a  lot  of  reforms.  For  instance,  the 
Bank’s legislative and supervisory powers have been strengthened to conform to a liberalised financial 
sector.   
However, the development of a more active secondary financial market to enhance efficiency in the 
financial  system  remains  a  key  challenge  to  us.  To  address  these  and  other  challenges,  the 
Government approved the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) in 2004. In coming up with the 
FSDP,  the  Government  recognised,  among  other  weaknesses,  that  public  financial  institutions  that 
were established to facilitate the provision of various financial services to the majority of the people in 
the country were insolvent, and therefore ineffective, or have closed down. e.g., mortgages (ZNBS); 
agriculture lending (LIMA Bank, Co-operative Bank and EXIM Bank in the past) and; banking services 
for the rural populace (NSCB). In addition, long-term project finance has remained difficult to access 
for many years. In this vein, the FSDP is aimed at enhancing financial intermediation and efficiency of 
the financial sector, and it is anticipated that problems related to real estate finance would be resolved 
once the FSDP is fully functional.  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
In  conclusion,  I  wish  to  reiterate  the  importance  of  the  real  estate  sector  in  economic  and  social 
development in the country. With your contribution, and that of other stakeholders Zambia could easily 
achieve  the  national  socio-economic  goals  in  the  medium  term.  Every  economic  unit  needs  the 
services of a booming real estate and construction sectors for them to contribute more to economic 
growth  and  development.  In  this  regard,  I  trust  that  the  various  institutions  represented  here  will 
continue to facilitate and promote investments in the real estate sector in Zambia. On our part as the 
Bank of Zambia, we will continue to facilitate real sector economic activity by continuing to improve the 
macroeconomic  conditions  in  the  country  that  are  critical  to  the  mobilisation  and  expansion  of 
business.  In  turn,  it  is  expected  that  other  sectors  of  the  economy  will  benefit  and  contribute  to 
accelerated economic growth and development.  
I THANK YOU. 
BIS Review 46/2005 
 3
