Pierluigi Ciocca: “Basel 2” and “IAS” - more competition, less risk 
Speech by Mr Pierluigi Ciocca, Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, at the 8th ABI Convention 
“Implementing Basel 2 and IAS: Tendencies, Problems, Solutions”, Rome, 29 November 2004. 
 My  intention  in  these  remarks  is  to  set  the  issues  raised  by  Basel  2  and  IASwithin  a  common 
framework. I shall therefore not consider the technical details but three general aspects: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
the macroeconomic context in which the new methods will be inserted; 
the hoped-for effects on the financial system; 
their transposition by banks and the Italian legal system. 
The macroeconomic context 
a)  
The entry into force of the new International Accounting Standards and the “Basel 2” capital adequacy 
accord will be gradual, phased in between 2005 and 2007. Intermediaries and supervisors are making 
their preparations. The “context” thus consists in a set of present-day realities, plans, expectations and 
forecasts. 
The  information  now  available  suggests  that  the  moment  is  propitious  for  the  non-traumatic 
introduction of the new methods. 
The international economy is subject to the threat of military conflicts, oil shortages, high real-estate 
prices,  the  large  foreign  debt  of  the  United  States  and  a  declining  dollar.  Yet  overall  the  economic 
picture is the rosiest seen for a quarter of a century. The forecasting scenario for 2005-2006 remains 
one of inflation-free growth: annual GDP growth of 3 per cent in real terms and price inflation under 2 
per cent in the OECD countries, and annual world trade growth of no less than 9 per cent. 
This essentially benign macroeconomic situation is accompanied by systemic financial stability. The 
Financial Stability Forum, in which I have had the honour of participating since its foundation in 1999, 
is the world’s leading financial supervisory body. The Forum sees the debt of firms and households as 
moderate or sustainable, intermediaries as profitable and well-capitalized, share prices as basically in 
line with fundamentals, and prudential standards as stronger virtually everywhere. By comparison with 
the  past  the  indicators  of  stability  are  on  average  higher  and  have  lower  although  not  negligible 
dispersion. 
Italy  is  no  exception  as  regards  low  inflation  and  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole. 
Unfortunately, however, it is an exception in its rate of economic growth. From 1992 to 2006 (forecast) 
the yearly growth rate will come in at a mediocre 1.4 per cent. Yet the cyclical upturn is basically in line 
with  the  −modest  −expansion  of  potential  output.  Moreover,  even  an  economy  with  slow  growth  in 
potential output can be financially efficient and stable. The Italian economy’s “growth problem” can be 
solved.1 We are not condemned to stagnation. We have a diagnosis. And most important, the therapy 
is clear.2 The State must restore the health of the public finances, take care of infrastructure, reduce 
taxes and rewrite economic law; firms must expand in size and improve in quality with investment and 
technical progress; banks must select and support the best firms; the trade unions must defend but 
also moderate wage growth. All are called on to accept competition, not to impede the reallocation of 
resources. Policies and conduct together – not just government policies, not just the conduct of firms, 
banks and workers – can bring the Italian economy’s long-run growth rate back up to 3 per cent. 
                                                      
1   P. Ciocca, Il tempo dell’economia. Strutture, fatti, interpreti, Turin, Bollati Boringhieri, 2004, Chapter 14. 
2   P. Ciocca and G. M. Rey, “For the growth of the Italian economy”, Review of Economic Conditions in Italy, No. 2, 2004. 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 1
The purposes of Basel 2 and IAS 
b)  
Taken  together,  Basel  2  and  IAS  can  appreciably  increase  efficiency,  and  above  all  in  this  way 
enhance bank stability. 
How?  In  principle,  through  stepped-up  competition  between  intermediaries  and  within  the  financial 
markets. 
Without  competition  there  cannot  be  efficiency.  Without  efficiency,  in  the  long  run  there  cannot  be 
stability. Without stability the drive for efficiency is more difficult, and the free play of competition is 
impeded.  A  policy  of  prudential  supervision  that  –  by  choice  or  because  obliged  by  law  –  ignored 
competition or, worse, thought it could be sacrificed in the name of stability would be selfcontradictory. 
I  shall  back  up  these  propositions  –  of  whose  validity  the  Bank  of  Italy  remains  thoroughly  and 
analytically convinced – with a theoretical consideration and empirical evidence. 
Simplifying, the theoretical consideration can be quickly set forth. By their nature or in response to the 
urgings of supervisors, banks are risk-averse. They are in equilibrium if lower returns correspond to 
lower  risk.  Competition  erodes  quasi-rents,  the  extra  profits  of  oligopoly.  Other  things  being  equal, 
therefore, competition does not induce banks to take on greater risk. On the contrary, by eliminating 
the quasi-rent “subsidy” of their riskier assets, it recalls them to prudence. Supervisory action works in 
the  same  direction.  On  the  theoretical  plane  there  is  no  conflict  between  competition  and  banking 
stability. Accordingly, on the institutional plane there is no conflict in principle between supervision and 
antitrust action in banking where – as has been the case in the United States from the very beginning 
and in Italy since 1990 – the same institution is responsible for both. 
The  empirical  evidence  is  equally  clear.  Despite  the  protracted  stagnation  of  the  Italian  economy 
following  the  dramatic  foreign  exchange  crisis  of  1992,  in  supervising  and  regulating  the  banking 
system  the  Bank of  Italy  observed  increasingly  intense competition  and  at  the same  time  instability 
limited to individual banks. In most of the markets for banking products the microeconomic indicators 
of price and volume testify to heightened competition, the transition from the traditional state of little 
rivalry to one of sharply stepped-up competition.3 In the markets for corporate ownership and control, 
contestability in the banking sector has been boosted by the industry’s virtually total privatization and 
the increased share of overall banking business accounted for by listed banks. The Lerner Index of 
oligopoly was one fifth lower in banking in 2000-2001 than it had been on average in the 1980s; in the 
service sector as a whole it was a quarter higher; and in the industrial sector excluding construction it 
was  unchanged  at  a  lower  level.44  On  the  average,  as  we  can  see  from  the  tables  and  the  figure, 
productivity in banking rose faster between 1990 and 2003 than it had in the 1980s, while the real cost 
of labour rose more slowly. Nevertheless, profitability declined, not because of larger loan write-downs 
but because of sharper competition. Meanwhile, since 1990 the number of banks has fallen by nearly 
300 to 790, and 800 banks went out of business. Yet the present value of the total losses of the banks 
that failed or were taken over made good by other banks or by the State during this decade-and-a-half 
did not even amount to 1.5 per cent of a single year’s GDP. 
In the field of credit risk, regulations anticipated banking practice rather than following it as in the 1996 
market risk amendment to the Basel accord. “Basel 2” fosters efficiency in banking. Banks, large or 
small,  that  use  more  accurate  and  effective  methods  of  risk  assessment  and  management  are 
rewarded  with  lower  capital  requirements.  In  this  sense  the  new  accord  introduces  a  “Darwinian” 
selection bias for the survival of the fittest banks. It will heighten competition and shift market shares. 
The same holds for the new International Accounting Standards, although for different reasons. They 
are designed to enhance disclosure and transparency. They make the accounts of banks and firms 
comparable  internationally.  Potentially,  they  allow  for  a  more  realistic  representation  of  market  risk 
(with  the  application  of  fair  value  accounting  for  all  securities)  and  of  credit  risk  (with  the  broad, 
harmonized notion of “impaired loan”, which includes overdue credits). Information and transparency 
will also intensify competition both between firms and between banks. 
                                                      
3   P. Ciocca, The Italian Financial System Remodelled, Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2005, especially Chapter 6. 
4   N. Cetorelli and R. Violi, Forme di mercato e grado di concorrenza nell’industria bancaria dell’area dell’euro, Quaderni di 
Ricerche, Ente Einaudi, No. 35, 2003, pp. 37-39 and Table 4, p. 55. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2005
Since advances in competition and efficiency are for these reasons correlated with advances in capital 
soundness, Basel 2 and IAS together will certainly also strengthen the overall stability of the financial 
system.  
Two qualifiers are needed here, however, one self-evident and the second more debatable. 
The first is that Basel 2 will contribute to banking stability above all, and directly, by guaranteeing that 
banks’ capital is better able to cover the risks incurred. 
Second, aside from differences of opinion over the informational content of measurements based on 
fair  value,  it  can  be  feared  that  the  International  Accounting  Standards,  and  in  particular  those 
concerning securities, will make for more volatile balance sheets and income statements. This may not 
necessarily happen, once the impact of the initial transition to the new accounting rules is past; but 
even if it does, we must not mistake volatility in the operating results of firms and banks for instability 
of banks’ balance-sheets. If “true” variability – or at any rate that which is relevant to the markets – is 
reflected better in items marked-to-market than valued at cost, then the banks will be called on to take 
precautions in managing, insuring against and sustaining risks. Prudential supervision itself will focus 
more sharply on the financial institutions supervised. In itself, better registration of “true” variability is 
not destabilizing; quite the contrary. In any case consideration is being given to the idea of applying 
prudential  “filters”  in  calculating  supervisory  capital  that  can  attenuate  improper  volatility  in  the 
accounts due to the repercussions of fair-value accounting. 
The transposition of the new methods 
c)  
The  extent  to  which  the  aims  are  actually  attained  will  depend  on  how  well  the  banks  make  their 
preparations. But it will also depend on the adaptation of economic legislation. 
For banks the change will be profound, at once technical and cultural. From valuations and decisions 
still  largely  based  on  deterministic  values,  singlevalue  variables  and  the  simple  “summing  up”  of 
individual  items  they  will  move  towards  widespread  use  of  both  objective  and  subjective  probability 
distributions. The next step will be even more towards considering portfolios as a whole and taking 
account  of  the  linkages  between  asset  and  liability  values,  the  structure  of  the  balance  sheet  and 
immunization strategies. It will be less and less common for overall risk to be calculated by adding up 
the risk of the individual components. 
Italian  banks  are  readying  themselves.  The  banking  groups  that  will  use  advanced  internal  rating 
methods  from  the  outset  have  initiated  an  especially  intensive  interaction  with  the  supervisory 
department of the Bank of Italy. 
Basel 2 and IAS also constitute an additional reason for adapting Italian law to the needs of a modern 
“regulated market economy ”. Albeit in different ways and to a variable extent, three fields of economic 
legislation will be involved: company law, competition law and bankruptcy law. 
Italy’s  recent  company  law  reform  is  now  filtering  into  the  concrete  reality  of  firms  and  banks.  The 
legislation on banking has been coordinated with the Civil Code by Legislative Decree 37/2004. The 
implementing  regulations  will  follow  soon.  The  aspects  on  which  the  Bank  of  Italy  has  focused  in 
helping  banks  to  interpret  the  new  company  law  are  a  more  general  notion  of  equity  interest, 
adaptation of the requisites for bank officers and above all the duties and responsibilities of the board 
of directors and control bodies in the traditional and new models of governance. For Basel 2 and IAS 
to  have  the  desired  effects,  the  independence  granted  to  directors  –  notably  in  the  revised  Articles 
2381  and  2392  of  the  Civil  Code  –  must  be  accompanied  by  strengthened  internal  and  external 
controls on operations and accounts. 
In  applying  the  legislation  intended  to  safeguard  and  foster  competition  in  banking,  even  greater 
advantage will be taken of the connection between antitrust action and prudential supervision. Credit 
remains the heart of banking. Competition in the credit market is increasingly vital. As the supervisory 
authority, the Bank of Italy will have a delicate dual task. It must validate the various internal models of 
risk control that the banks can use under Basel 2. It will also have to check how these models are 
used in decision-making and, together with Consob, how the International Accounting Standards are 
applied.  As  stochastic  methods  come  into  more  widespread  use,  until  the  ways  in  which  they  are 
employed converge under the pressure of competition the credit “product” and its price will vary −from 
bank  to  bank  and  over  time,  and  perhaps  even  for  the  same  customer.  In  the  product 
price/quality/quantity analysis performed for antitrust purposes, the benefits of assigning the antitrust 
powers to banking supervisors will increase. The supervisory authority is better informed because it 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 3
has  primary  responsibility  for  the  validation  and  checking  of  the  banks’  risk  models  and  accounting 
methods. 
Lastly, the urgent need for radical revision of bankruptcy procedures has become even more glaring. 
In  a  world  in  which  corporate  planning  and  decisionmaking  are  no  longer  deterministic  but 
probabilistic, the old bankruptcy law, all black-and-white, without shades of grey (liquid-illiquid, solvent-
insolvent, revocable loans, impaired loans and bad debts) has become simply impracticable. Even the 
vested interests that have stymied all attempts at reform for years now will have to recognize the need 
to rewrite the bankruptcy procedures from top to bottom. 
Basel 2 and IAS encourage customized standards where abstract and general principles are hard to 
apply to concrete cases. This is consistent with the principle that the courts must weigh not so much 
the outcome of companies’ decisions as the process by which they are made. Both extremes must be 
avoided: having directors’ actions governed exclusively by established parameters on the one hand 
and placing excessive emphasis on the outcome, ex post facto, in judging their choices on the other. 
Ultimately, in any event, jurisprudence will be crucial. 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2005
Long-term trends in the Italian banking industry 
Demographics 
 
     Banks existing at 31.12.1990 
 
Banks existing at 30.06.2004 
 
Banks, that went out of business between 1.1.1991 and 30.6.2004 
 
       1,064 
790 
812 
Profitability and productivity 
         Return on equity 
Operating profit/total assets 
Rate of change in per capita staff costs 
at constant prices 
Rate of change in assets per employee 
at constant prices 
Rate of change in gross income per employee 
at constant prices 
            Number 
Market share (assets) (1) 
1991-2003 
  1980-1990 
(averages of annual data; percentages) 
 
 
11.3 
1.70 
6.0 
1.39 
     0.8 
1.0 
1.1 
      0.1 
4.0 
2.2 
Listed banks 
1981 
 
    32 
23% 
  1990 
47 
30%,  
 2004 
    40 
     80% 
Losses of banks that went out of business: 1990 - 2003 (2) 
   
Nominal losses (millions of euros)  
 
Present value as of 2003 (millions of euros) (3)   
 
Present value 2003 / GDP 2003 (3)  
 
 
 
 
 
1)  Directly and through unlisted subsidiaries. 
2) 
                 12,998 
17,465 
   1.34 
Income  statement  losses  between  1990  and  2003  of  all  the  banks  that  stopped  operating,  that  were  merged  with  other 
banks, or control of which was acquired by other banks or banking groups. 
3)  Calculated using the average annual rate on Italian Treasury bills. 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 5
Contribution to formation of the profit rate 
(as a percentage of capital and reserves) 
          
Operating profit  
 
Net value adjustments, net non-recurring expense / income 
 
Pre-tax profit rate 
 
Taxes   
 
Return on equity 
 
                1980-1990 
  45.9 
-23.2 
 22.7 
-11.4 
 11.3 
             1991-2003 
  20.19 
-8.75 
 11.4 
-5.4 
 6.0 
 6 
 BIS Review 10/2005
