Toshihiko Fukui: A review of the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy 
Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s Semiannual 
Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs,  House  of 
Councillors, Tokyo, 31 March 2005. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the first 
half of fiscal 2004 to the Diet in December 2004. I am pleased to have this opportunity to present an 
overall review of the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.  
Developments in Japan’s economy  
I. 
Japan’s economy is still at a pause due to such factors as the ongoing adjustment in the production 
and  inventory  of  IT-related  goods.  The  underlying  mechanism  for  economic  recovery,  however, 
continues to operate steadily and production, which was somewhat weak some time ago, has been 
more or less flat recently. The economy is therefore expected to emerge from this pause before long 
and to continue recovering and move to a sustainable growth path.  
In more detail, overseas economies, particularly those of the United States and China, are expected to 
continue to be on an expanding trend. Adjustment in IT-related goods is likely to be completed before 
long,  partly  because  manufacturers  started  adjustments  at  an  early  stage  while  demand  was 
increasing.  In  light  of  this,  exports  and  production  are  expected  to  increase.  Corporate  profits  and 
business  fixed  investment  are  expected  to  remain  on  an  increasing  trend,  as  structural  adjustment 
pressure  stemming  from  firms’  excess  capacity  and  debt  has  been  easing.  In  addition,  household 
income has clearly stopped declining while the employment situation continues to be on an improving 
trend. Private consumption, therefore, is expected to show signs of a gradual increase.  
Attention should, however, continue to be paid to developments in IT-related demand and crude oil 
prices, which have been at high levels recently, and their impact on the domestic as well as overseas 
economies.  
On the price front, domestic corporate goods prices had been rising since the beginning of 2004, but 
they have been somewhat weak recently. As for the outlook, they are likely to become relatively strong 
again, due to the rise in the prices of crude oil and other commodities at home and abroad. Consumer 
prices (excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) continue to fall slightly on a year-on-year basis in 
a situation where they have been less responsive to the economic recovery, reflecting the increase in 
productivity and the restraint on labor costs by firms. Slight year-on-year falls in consumer prices are 
expected to continue for the time being, partly due to such factors as the effects of the reduction in 
electricity and telephone charges accompanying deregulation.  
The  money market  remains stable  overall against the  background  of  the  Bank’s  provision  of  ample 
liquidity. The full removal of blanket deposit insurance is scheduled for April 1, 2005. Concerns about 
the  financial  system  have  decreased  significantly  as  financial  institutions  have  made  progress  in 
regaining  financial  health.  Financial  institutions  have  been  more  confident  in  raising  funds  in  the 
money  market  and  their  liquidity  demand  has  decreased,  as  implied  by  the  fact  that,  in  the  Bank’s 
funds-supplying operations, there were cases where bids fell short of the Bank’s offers.  
In the capital markets, stock prices have been firm on the whole. Long-term interest rates have been 
generally stable, although there was a temporary rise.  
The environment for corporate finance is becoming more accommodative on the whole. The lending 
attitude  of  financial  institutions  is  becoming  more  accommodative,  and  their  lending  attitude  as 
perceived by firms has also been improving. Under these circumstances, the rate of decline in lending 
by private banks has been diminishing at a moderate pace. Moreover, the fund-raising environment for 
firms in the capital markets through CP and corporate bonds remains favorable.  
BIS Review 28/2005 
 1
Conduct of monetary policy  
II.  
The Bank has been conducting the quantitative easing policy with the outstanding balance of current 
accounts held at the Bank as the operating target. The Bank has been providing ample liquidity to the 
money market in accordance with the current target range for the outstanding balance of “around 30 to 
35 trillion yen,” which is far above the amount financial institutions are obliged to hold at the Bank by 
law  or  arrangements  with  the  Bank.  This  has  contributed  to  maintaining  the  accommodative 
environment for corporate finance through maintenance of the stability of financial markets.  
The Bank has made a commitment to maintain the quantitative easing policy until the year-on-year 
rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) registers 
zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis. This commitment has contributed to stabilizing market 
interest rates, and thus firms have been able to raise funds at low interest rates. The commitment’s 
positive effects through interest rates on the economy will strengthen as corporate profits increase with 
economic recovery.  
III.  
The Bank’s measures regarding the financial system after the full removal of the 
blanket guarantee of deposits  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  financial  system  in  Japan  has  been  regaining  stability,  and  the  blanket 
guarantee  of  deposits  will  be  fully  lifted  on  April  1,  2005.  Financial  institutions  will  be  expected  to 
amplify  their  efforts  to  develop  innovative  services  tailored  to  customer  needs,  thus  supporting 
economic  activity.  The  Bank’s  basic  stance  regarding  financial  system  policy  must  shift  its  focus  in 
response to this changing environment: from crisis management to supporting private-sector initiatives 
toward providing more efficient and advanced financial services via fair competition, while maintaining 
overall system stability.  
In order to contribute to enhancing the functioning and robustness of the financial system, the Bank 
will  actively  encourage  financial  institutions’  efforts  to  improve  their  business  activities,  and  devise 
various ways to enhance its own business.  
Conclusion  
Although  Japan’s  economy  is  at  a  pause,  it  is  expected  to  continue  recovering  with  the  further 
expansion of overseas economies and progress in adjustment in IT-related goods. To ensure that this 
recovery  will  become  sustainable,  the  Bank  considers  it  essential  that  a  wide  range  of  economic 
entities continue to make efforts to revitalize the economy.  
The  Bank  is  determined  to  firmly  support  Japan’s  economy  from  the  financial  side  by  maintaining 
monetary  easing  with  the  commitment  based  on  the  CPI,  in  the  current  situation  where  the  CPI 
continues to fall slightly on a year-on-year basis.  
It has become increasingly important for the Bank to pursue more advanced services in a wide range 
of areas as well as ensure well-disciplined management to properly carry out the duties entrusted to it 
as the nation’s central bank. In light of this, the Bank has for the first time formulated a Medium-Term 
Strategic Framework (MTSF) for fiscal 2005-2009, which sets out the Bank’s management policy for 
the next five years. The Bank is committed to continuing its efforts, through the steady implementation 
of this MTSF, to retain public confidence and fulfill its mission of contributing to the sound development 
of the economy.  
2 
 BIS Review 28/2005
