Lars Heikensten: Stability and Growth Pact needs reinforcement 
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a conference organised by the 
European Commission, Brussels, 15 December 2004. 
 Thank you, Mr Chairman. 
I  very  much  appreciate  this  opportunity  to  comment  on  the  work  of  the  Commission.  Perhaps  the 
invitation is particularly pleasing for me as, unlike the other members on the panel, I do not come from 
a country that has introduced the euro. 
I  should  also  immediately  say  that  I  very  much  enjoyed  reading  the  background  report  and  the 
communication on the Stability and Growth Pact produced by the Commission. 
Let me begin by characterizing the experiences from the Monetary Union so far. There is no doubt that 
the regulations on fiscal policy laid down in Maastricht had clearly positive effects up until the euro was 
launched.  They  are  still  having  the  same  impact  on  those  countries  that  remain  outside  the  single 
currency and have the ambition of joining in the future. Far-reaching measures were taken, and are 
also being taken today, to enable entry into the Monetary Union. Noting the progress, some people 
have  even  claimed  that  earlier  less  well-functioning  national  economic-political  cultures  have  been 
replaced  by  a  more  stability-oriented  common  European  culture.  But  since  the  start  of  Monetary 
Union,  this  momentum  has  been  lost.  Several  countries  have  returned  to  their  old  behaviour  even 
though there are good examples of the contrary. And this is not primarily the result of an unusually 
long slowdown, as many have claimed. The preceding boom was also unusually long. Furthermore, 
we knew that there were large risks associated with the fiscal policies conducted in the initial years of 
the Monetary Union. The discussions on fiscal policy were occasionally rather acrimonious in the EFC, 
for example. Several of us gave clear warnings regarding the fiscal policies pursued by, for instance, 
France  and  Germany  at  the  time.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  obviously  did  not  serve  as  the 
deterrent it was supposed to be, at least not sufficiently. Nor did EMU - so far anyway - contribute as 
much  as  we  had  hoped  to  making  the  European  economy  more  efficient.  Perhaps  there  are  a  few 
exceptions here related to the financial sector and the financial markets. 
It is my intention in this introductory remark to focus on some suggestions for the future. In doing this, I 
will talk about macroeconomic issues, rather than dealing with the severe structural challenges Europe 
is confronted with. However, before doing this let me make a general comment. 
In the present debate some conclude that the current policy framework should be relaxed, which is 
normally expressed as saying it should become more flexible. I have difficulty understanding this view. 
On the contrary, I think the developments in recent years have strengthened the arguments in favour 
of  a  regulatory  framework.  From  the  start  there  were  concerns  about  “free  riders”.  These  concerns 
were  confirmed  sooner  than  expected.  There  was  also  some  unease  that  small  countries  could  be 
affected if the larger ones did not maintain discipline. Here, too, developments have given cause for 
concern, at least as regards the implementation of the regulations. Allow me to add a third argument. 
During the decades before the start of Monetary Union, economic policy in the EU was dominated by 
Germany. This was because of Germany’s size, of course, but it was also due to Germany’s economic 
success over several decades and its stable economic policies. There was almost a moral dimension 
to Germany’s actions. I still remember the meeting in the Monetary Committee when it became clear 
that Germany’s public finances in the coming years would be as weak as Italy’s. The dynamics in the 
room changed as if by magic. Since then no country has been able to take over the leader’s mantle. In 
such a situation peer pressure can easily turn into peer protection. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  future.  In  doing  so  I  have  tried  to  be  constructive  and  limited  myself  to 
proposals I believe to be politically feasible. I will be happy to return to any of the subjects I will bring 
up. 
I. 
My  first  point  concerns  the  division  of  labour  and  the  cooperation  between  fiscal  and 
monetary  authorities.  This  is  firmly  established  in  the  Treaty.  The  only  uncertainty  relates  to  the 
responsibility  for  exchange  rate  policy.  Of  course  all  parties  must  respect  the  existing  rules.  The 
demands that fiscal authorities can impose on the ECB are that the bank conducts a clear, consistent 
monetary  policy  aiming  at  price  stability  for  the  Union  as  a  whole,  which  can  be  understood  and 
predicted. In the same way the authorities responsible for monetary policy should be able to count on 
Allow me now to comment on the Stability and Growth Pact itself. 
a clear, predictable and long-term fiscal policy targeted at achieving balance over the economic cycle 
(after taking account of the demographic changes that now lie ahead). More generally, I think that we 
in  Europe  should  model  our  approach  on  cooperation  between  the  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities 
along the lines of the relationship between the Fed and the Treasury during the Clinton years. Europe 
would also be better off if the finance ministers followed the advice of my British colleague at a recent 
meeting “ask not what the ECB can do for you, but what you can do for the ECB”. There may also be a 
need  for  more  collegial  leadership  from  the  euro  area’s  finance  ministers,  particularly  if  rapid 
coordinated action is required, something that can not be ruled out. One example could be a situation 
with a dramatic and substantial change in the exchange rate, another a financial crisis. A strong Euro-
group with a respected  chairman should  be  positive  in  this regard  and should  facilitate  an effective 
dialogue with the ECB. 
II. 
It is not difficult of course to see economic arguments in favour of amending the Pact. However, one 
fundamental  problem  is  that  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  a  relaxation  of  rules  in  certain  areas  could  be 
compensated by a purposeful tightening in others. Relaxing the 3 per cent rule would thereby imply a 
weakening  of  the  construction  as  a  whole  at  a  time  when  -  as  I  mentioned  earlier  -  the  conduct  in 
some  countries  suggests  that  if  anything  the  opposite  appears  to  be  required.  There  is  already 
flexibility  in  the  regulatory  framework  for  different  interpretations  of  the  phrase  “exceptional 
circumstances”. To increase this flexibility by allowing for country-specific factors on a general level 
would lead to risks. In particular, there is a risk that the rules would be interpreted too much ex post 
and that small countries would be discriminated against even more than is already the case. 
However, there is room for substantial improvements in the preventive arm of the Pact. The Achilles’ 
heel of the Pact is not actually the 3 per cent limit but its asymmetry; the pact involves gentle warnings 
in  booms  but  hard  sanctions  in  slowdowns.  This  means  that  the  pact  lacks  credibility  when,  after 
impotently  highlighting  indiscipline  during  booms,  it  is  expected  to  force  governments  into  highly 
painful, 180-degree turns towards austerity during slowdowns. It also risks contributing to procyclical 
policy. 
Against this background the Commission has worked hard on improving the preventive arm in recent 
years. I have sympathy for many of their proposals. Some examples: 
• 
• 
• 
Strengthen incentives in good times. Here, considering the debt level could play a role. 
Timetables could be improved - linking them more closely to national processes. 
Using the now more developed measures of cyclical balances could also be useful in this 
context. 
My third point has to do with consolidating the fiscal institutions and regulations at national 
In  general,  I  think  it  is  important  to  enable  the  Commission  to  dig  deeper  into  these  areas  and  to 
increase  the comparability  between  different countries.  On  the  basis  of  this  work  the  Commission’s 
role should be strengthened as regards giving “early warnings” and proposing measures. I also believe 
that the Commission should have the task of emphasising its analyses and going public more than it 
does today, thereby being more effective in the general debate in the individual member states. 
III. 
level. Here a lot more can be done. 
One  aspect  that  too  often  seems  to  be  forgotten  in  the  debate  on  the  pact  is  that  a  balanced, 
countercyclical fiscal policy is not just a common European interest; it is in the individual interest of 
each  country.  Some  politicians  contribute  to  this  misunderstanding  when  they  depict  the  commonly 
adopted criteria as an unreasonable burden from “accountants in Brussels”. One manifestation of the 
same  attitude  is  the  recurring  problems  with  the  data  that  are  sent  to  the  Commission.  Instead  of 
having a transparent process, increasingly unrealistic figures are being delivered. There are several 
examples  of  governments  reporting  data  before  an  election  that  after  the  election  proved  to  be 
misleading. 
The best, and perhaps the only, antidote to these problems is institutionalised transparency; promoting 
a  regular,  public  debate  on  sustainable  government  finances  at  the  national  level.  This  was  the 
Riksbank’s approach ahead of Sweden’s referendum on the euro. We recommended in this context a 
model that drew on the experience we have gained from conducting a monetary policy with definite, 
clear targets, consistent openness regarding background material such as forecasts and regular and 
open assessments and debates. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2005
Key steps in this regard could be taken by any country that wants to do so. But increased support 
could  also  be  provided  by  way  of  common  decisions  at  European  level.  Technically,  the  Excessive 
Deficit Protocol already contains an explicit commitment to create national institutions with a view to 
developing a fiscal policy framework. The EU leaders can now realise this commitment. 
We  can  also  learn  from  each  other  in  this  process.  The  Commission  was  quick  to  perform 
benchmarking  of  budget  systems  in  different  countries  back  in  the  early  1990s.  This  was  of  use  to 
Sweden when we reformed our budget process after the crisis in the early 1990s. The Commission 
could start up this work again. Countries could be studied, compared and put under the spotlight if 
they have poor fiscal policy institutions. In this way the national debates could be influenced. 
Allow me now to conclude with one general reflection in relation to my introductory comments. 
Many  of  us  had  hoped  that  the  EMU  project  would  be  able  to  contribute  to  a  faster  change  of  our 
economies in a growth-oriented direction. In some countries there has also been less focus on short-
term  stabilisation  policy  issues  -  if  interest  rates  are  25  basis  points  up  or  down  -  which  are  not 
significant in the long run for economic performance, and more on long-term questions that are crucial 
to growth and prosperity. Comments from the Commission and the ECOFIN council have also had the 
desired effect in a number of countries. Policies have been put on the right course. 
But  the  exact  opposite  tendency  exists  in  other  countries.  The  problems  are  being  shifted  on  to 
monetary policy, which is being conducted at such a distance that the decision-makers can be blamed 
without repercussions. Politicians have also tried to take advantage of the situation domestically by 
making it appear that they are not bowing to Brussels. 
The crucial issue for EMU in the period ahead is which of the two approaches will gain the upper hand. 
If the first approach prevails it will go well. But if the second approach dominates the opposite will be 
the case. So the trick is to find a system for governance that pulls in the first direction; that focuses 
both national and European debates and policies on the real issues. 
Thank you. 
