T T Mboweni: South African Reserve Bank launches upgraded banknotes 
Speech  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  launch  of  the 
upgraded banknotes, Pretoria, 17 January 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Welcome  to  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank.  Today  we  take  great  pride  and  pleasure  in  unveiling 
South Africa’s upgraded banknotes. The preparation for the issue of this upgraded series has been a 
complex and a painstaking one and we are very proud of the result. 
The South African Reserve Bank has the sole authority to issue banknotes and coin in South Africa. 
The Bank has a concomitant responsibility to ensure that the public has confidence in the currency. To 
this end, the Bank will be issuing upgraded banknotes with improved security features and with some 
aesthetic changes to the design of the banknotes from 1 February 2005. Continuous improvements in 
currency design and security features protect the economy and your money. 
Banknotes, which are usually taken for granted, are not only a means of payment. They are pieces of 
craftsmanship that are a window on the country, its people, heritage and culture, portraying its national 
character.  The  big-five  theme  on  our  banknotes  is  a  reflection  of  our  African  heritage  whilst  the 
economic sector themes on the reverse of the banknotes more specifically reflect South Africa. The 
improved  security  features  and  the  modified  design  features  ensure  that  our  banknotes  remain 
credible and aesthetically pleasing, while reflecting in very concrete ways how far we have come as a 
democracy. Our banknotes have always been highly regarded, both nationally and internationally, for 
their  design  and  security  features  and  one  of  their  strengths  has  been  that  the  banknotes  have 
withstood any major counterfeiting threat over the years. 
According  to  international  best  practice,  the  security  features  on  banknotes  are  upgraded  or  new 
banknotes with new design and security features are issued every six to eight years. South Africa’s 
current banknotes series has been in circulation since 1992. With the advent of improved technology 
and  with  heightened  security  and  criminal  threats,  it  has  become  necessary  for  the  Bank  to  be 
proactive and to take the necessary steps to upgrade the security features in our banknotes. We have 
also utilised the opportunity to change some of the design features to align our banknotes with the 
changes in our country. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we wish to use this opportunity to thank the President and Cabinet for their 
endorsement of the upgraded banknote series. In particular, we would like to express our gratitude to 
the Minister of Finance and the National Treasury for their support and cooperation. Let me highlight 
some of the salient events in the extensive process leading up to this significant event. The design 
and  development  of  the  banknotes,  even  though  these  are  only  upgraded  banknotes,  has  been  a 
complex  and  intricate  task.  Our  team  has  spent  a  number  of  years  on  this  endeavour.  We  had  to 
obtain the services of international companies in the determination of the changes, both for the design 
and security features on the banknotes, as well as the supply of banknote paper, inks and security 
threads. 
The  changes  to  the  banknotes  have  been  widely  consulted  on  with  the  key  stakeholders. 
Consultations have taken place with the Department of Arts and Culture on the Coat of Arms, with the 
Pan South African Language Board (PANSALB) on the language changes, with the National Council 
for  the  Blind  on  the  changes  with  regards  to  the  features  for  the  blind  or  partially  sighted  and  with 
various  international  and  local  service  providers  and  the  banking  industry  on  the  utilisation  of  the 
security features in processing and vending machines that have become part of our daily lives. 
Today is a momentous day as the Bank unveils the upgraded banknotes to the public. Simultaneously, 
today we launch the communication campaign to inform and educate the public on the changes to the 
design  and  security  features  of  South  Africa’s  banknotes.  The  objective  of  the  communication 
campaign  is  not  only  to  inform  and  educate  the  public  on  the  security  features,  but  also  to  get  the 
public to habitually examine their banknotes to ensure that they have good money. I trust that our key 
partners in the private and public sectors will play a significant role in ensuring that their constituencies 
know about the new features and encourage them to check the features on their banknotes. 
BIS Review 3/2005 
 1
We trust that the media will also play its rightful role in informing and educating the public and in so 
doing protecting the public and ensuring that we give no quarter to criminals should they attempt to 
counterfeit our currency. 
All five denominations of the upgraded banknotes will go into circulation on 1 February 2005. The new 
banknotes will be issued gradually over time. We must therefore highlight that the upgraded banknotes 
and the current banknotes will circulate simultaneously. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  the  SA  Reserve  Bank  has  not  “demonetised”  any  of  its  currency.  This 
means we can all confidently continue to use all South African money, even if it is part of a previous 
series. 
We  encourage  all  South  Africans  to  know  the  security  features  and  make  the  checking  of  money 
second nature. The security features on South African Rands are only useful if people use them. It is 
every user’s responsibility to get to know the upgraded banknotes and check the security features. 
May we also take the opportunity to thank the team and their collaborators for their energy and effort in 
ensuring the success of the project as a whole and ensuring that the banknotes are distributed on time 
and for the efforts in ensuring public confidence in our banknotes. 
Thank you for coming here today and for your participation in this process and we wish to encourage 
all of you to spread the message about these very important changes to our banknotes. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2005
