Wilson Kamit: Current economic and financial conditions in Papua New Guinea 
Speech by Mr Wilson Kamit, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, to the Western Highlands 
Provincial Community, on the occasion of the Bank Board meeting, Mt Hagen, 15 June 2005. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Representatives of the Western Highlands Provincial Administration, leaders of the business and civic 
sectors of the Western Highlands community, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
On behalf of the Board and officers of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, I wish to express our great 
pleasure for us to be here and to have the opportunity to meet with you. Many of you are no strangers 
to the Central Bank through the Business Liaison Surveys you assist in. 
The  members  of  the  Board  comprise  the  Governor  as  Chairman,  the  two  Deputy  Governors,  Mr. 
Benny  Popoitai,  the  Deputy  Governor  for  Management  and  Operations,  and  Mr.  Loi  Bakani,  the 
Deputy  Governor  for  Policy  and  Regulations.  The  members  of  the  Board  (ex-officio)  who  are 
appointed in accordance with Section 27 of the CBA (2000), which specifies representation by various 
industry and community organisations are:  
Mr. John Mahuk, President of the PNG Trade Union Congress  
Mr. Michael Mayberry, President of the PNG Chamber of Commerce  
Mr. Kostas Constantinou – Managing Director of the Lamana Hotel  
Ms. Betty Palaso – Deputy Commissioner, IRC  
There  are  three  vacancies,  the  President  of  the PNG  Institute  of  Accountants,  the  Chairman  of  the 
Securities  Commission  and  another  appointee  of  the  Minister.  The  vacancy  in  the  PNG  Institute  of 
Accountants was due to the death of the son of the Western Highlands Province, the Late Mr Patrick 
Kolta.  
The Bank of Papua New Guinea has only its head office in Port Moresby. We do not have branches in 
the other centers. As such, the only time we have the opportunity to visit provincial centres is through 
our  business  liaison  trips,  visits  to  provincial-based  savings  and  loan  societies,  through  special 
awareness/training such as on Exchange Control Liberalisation, through special invitations to talk or 
make  presentations  at  conferences,  and  through  Board  meetings  such  as  today.  In  the  last  seven 
years,  we  have  had  the  opportunity  to  address  conferences/meetings  in  Mount  Hagen,  Kavieng, 
Kokopo, Goroka and Lae without the Board, and with the full Board in Lae, Alotau, Kavieng, Wewak, 
Goroka, and Kimbe. Today is another such meeting outside of Port Moresby.  
We have covered all the regions of Papua New Guinea – Highlands, Islands, Southern and Momase in 
our  visitation.  The  last  time  we  had  a  Board  meeting  were  in  Mt.  Hagen  was  in  the  1980s.  As  the 
Central Bank is a national institution that belongs to all the people of PNG, we will continue to go out 
to  them  in  this  manner.  These  visits  are  important  as  they  provide  an  opportunity  for  the  Board 
members and senior Bank officials to meet with community leaders and our business liaison and other 
business  contacts,  make  educational  presentations  to  provincial  high  schools  and  present  school 
materials, mainly books. These are opportunities by which the Central Bank also gets to spend some 
money in the outside centres. I also hope the Board members and officials will spend some money in 
the fresh food and craft markets so that I can confidentially reflect on our contribution to the tourism 
industry in Mount Hagen. 
Over these years in which the Board has met in Port Moresby and around the country, we have seen 
the  economy  turned  around  from  a  depressed  state  some  three  years  ago.  The  economy  has 
recovered and there is renewed confidence in the market. However, much of the fundamentals still 
have to be continuously nurtured, including that of transportation and other physical infrastructure. We 
therefore have to remain vigilant and work towards ensuring these gains are sustained. 
BIS Review 53/2005 
 1
Current economic conditions 
2.  
The Central Bank, in its March 2005 Quarterly Economic Bulletin, released on 31st May 2005, noted 
improvements  in  the  main  economic  indicators,  and  I  shall  not  spend  too  much  time  on  these 
developments. The Board has been brief on this. In brief: 
•  
 
 
•  
 
 
 
 
 
•  
 
 
 
•  
 
 
 
 
•  
 
 
 
•  
 
 
 
 
• 
 
 
 
 
Domestic Economic Conditions: Economic activity continued to improve in 2004, led by 
the  export  sector  with  higher  production  and  prices  of  most  mineral  and  non-mineral 
commodities, and increased employment. 
Inflation:  The  annual  inflation  rate  continues  to  trend  downwards  in  the  March  quarter  of 
2005,  to  negative  1.2  percent.  Over  the  year  to  March  2005,  inflation  was  0.1  percent, 
compared to 2.9 percent in March 2004. This reflected the positive impact of the stability in 
the  exchange  rate  and  fiscal  restraint  by  the  Government.  In  2005,  we  expect  inflation  to 
remain  low,  if  current  stability  in  macroeconomic  conditions,  particularly  exchange  rate 
prevails. 
Exchange  Rate:  The  positive  developments  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  since  the 
second half of 2003 with stable inflows from  both the mineral and agricultural sectors has 
resulted in the appreciation of the kina. The exchange rate appreciated from US$0.3200 at 
the end of December 2004 to US$0.3210 and from A$0.4106 to A$0.4197.  
Balance of Payments (BOP): The improved inflows of export receipts reflect higher prices 
and  volumes  by  the  non-mineral  sector,  which  is  an  encouraging  sign  that  growers  and 
exporters are responding positively to the improvements in commodity prices. The Central 
Bank’s  gross  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  currently  at  high  levels  of  US$600  million  or 
about K1.8 billion, equal to pay for over four months of total imports. 
Fiscal Operations: Preliminary estimates to March 2005 show a surplus of K113.2 million, 
compared to K13.8 million in the same period  in 2004, reflecting higher revenue and tight 
controls on expenditure. The Government has continued to use the surplus to retire treasury 
bills and re-structure its domestic debt. 
Domestic Interest Rates: Consistent with the easing stance of monetary policy since the 
second half of 2003, interest rates continued to trend downwards. The Treasury bill rates are 
currently around 3 – 4 percent, while the commercial banks’ indicator lending rates (ILRs) 
trended downwards to reach a range of between 9.95 and 11.00 percent. With the annual 
inflation rate at 0.1 percent, the real returns on Treasury bills are still positive. 
Lending:  Lending  by  the  commercial  banks  has  picked  up  in  recent  weeks,  which  is  an 
encouraging sign. We hope this will continue given the low interest rate environment. The 
Central  Bank  has  encouraged  the  commercial  banks  to  pass  on  the  benefits  of  the  low 
interest rates to their customers. In addition, the Bank partially liberalised exchange controls 
on 1st June 2005 to further encourage investment and business activity in the country. 
The Central Bank 
3.  
The reforms to the financial system, which commenced in 2000 have involved changes to the various 
Acts,  which  the  Bank  of  PNG  supervises  and  administers.  Besides  the  commercial  banks,  finance 
companies,  and  savings  and  loan  societies,  we  now  oversee  the  life  insurance  companies, 
superannuation  funds,  and  the  micro  finance  institutions.  Our  supervision  is  to  ensure  that  these 
institutions  comply  with  the  legislation  requirements,  world’s  best  practices  and  operational  work 
ethics. One of the on-going issues we continue to stress and assess is good governance and the ‘fit 
and proper’ test for the board and management of institutions we supervise.  
The partial liberalisation of exchange controls early this month is another major financial reform taken 
by  the  Bank.  It  opens  up  the  economy,  removes  one  of  the  administrative  impediments  to  doing 
business  in  Papua  New  Guinea  and  assists  in  the  Government’s  Export-led  Growth  Strategy.  All 
controls on current and capital account transactions have been liberalised, except for three. That is for 
approvals involving private capital account contracts between residents and non-residents, approvals 
to  open  and  operate  foreign  currency  accounts  outside  Papua  New  Guinea  and  the  licensing  of 
authorised  dealers  and  gold  exporters.  Where  tax  clearance  is  required,  this  will  now  be  the 
responsibility of the authorised dealers and the IRC. 
Staff from the Bank have undertaken public awareness campaigns around the major centers of the 
country prior to the liberalisation. We would like to work together with everyone concerned to ensuring 
the  reform  is  implemented  successfully.  Subsequent  announcements  on  the  liberalisation  of  the 
remaining controls will be made. 
Coverage, in terms of accessibility of banking services to most of our population is still lacking. Whilst 
this  is  an  area  outside  of  the  Bank’s  direct  influence,  it  is  pleasing  to  note  that  the  Government, 
through its District Treasury Rollout Program is attempting to address this issue at the moment with 
the provision of such services via the postal service network and District Treasury offices and Bank 
South  Pacific.  The  three  large  banks  (ANZ,  BSP  and  Westpac)  are  also  expanding  their  points  of 
representation. 
The  Central  Bank  also  encourages  the  establishment  of  savings  and  loan  societies  to  provide 
complementary financial services to those provided by the banks, finance companies and the existing 
Savings and Loan societies. This is one important mechanism of ensuring financial services reach our 
people  in  the  outside  centers  and  rural  communities.  As  at  the  end  of  December  2004,  there  were 
twenty-one  (21)  active  savings  and  loan  societies.  There  are  now  three  types  of  saving  and  loan 
societies: employer-based societies such as Teachers and Elcom; provincial-based societies like the 
East New Britain Savings and Loan society; and superannuation-based societies, such as NASFUND. 
Provincial-based  societies  are  designed  in  a  way  that  membership  is  open  to  those  living  in  the 
province as well as those who are from the province but are living or working outside the province. The 
workers outside the province who contribute to such societies find it beneficial when they go home for 
holidays and need to access financial resources. The Central Bank provides advice, ensures sound 
management practices, and systems support. 
The Bank has also embarked on addressing the issue of banking and financial service coverage in 
Papua New Guinea, by engaging as the Executive Agency of the PNG Micro-Finance & Employment 
Project  in  2000.  This  project  is  co-sponsored  by  the  Asian  Development  Bank,  AusAID,  the 
Government of PNG and the Central Bank. The contribution and assistance from commercial banks in 
this project is through the Institute of Banking and Business from where the Micro-finance Competency 
Centre  operates.  The  Institute  is  jointly  owned  essentially  by  the  banks  and  Bank  of  PNG.  A  pilot 
micro-bank which was launched in Wau, Morobe province, in 2004 has shown strong signs of growth 
by  expanding  its  operations  into  the  city  of  Lae  after  one  year  of  commencement.  This  venture  is 
technically owned by the PNG Institute of Banking and Business. 
Just recently, we issued a licence to the Papua New Guinea Micro Finance Company Limited, which is 
owned  by  Papua  New  Guinea  Sustainable  Development  Program  Limited,  the  Bank  South  Pacific 
Limited and the International Finance Company (IFC), the investment arm of the World Bank. This is a 
vote of confidence as it is the first time that the IFC is directly involved in our country as an investor or 
lender. 
All these initiatives are not in direct competition with the existing financial institutions, but are seen as 
complementary to the financial system. 
We have also used our legislation to deal with financial institutions not complying with the regulations, 
some  of  whom  have  been  placed  under  Statutory  management  with  the  aim  that  they  will  trade 
themselves  out  of  their  difficulties.  May  I  also  warn  against  the  fast-money  schemes  or  pyramid 
schemes.  The  Central  Bank  continues  to  work  with  the  law  enforcing  agencies  to  get  rid  of  these 
illegal schemes, which have created financial problems for many of our people. The Police Force has 
been helpful in this matter and I acknowledge and thank them for their assistance. We have also taken 
out  advertisements  listing  the  licensed  financial  institutions  and  warning  the  public  on  the  illegal 
schemes,  however  the  Central  Bank  can  only  do  so  much  –  we  need  the  public’s  support  –  your 
support  and  the  support  from  the  media  –  to  help  us  stop  and  prosecute  the  operators  of  these 
schemes. 
Acknowledgements 
4.  
May  I  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  business  houses  and  community  in  Mt.  Hagen  and  the 
Western Highlands province for your support in participating in the business and employment surveys 
conducted by the Bank – the support and co-operation that goes back some thirty years. 
Your continued support in providing us with up-to-date information enhances the accuracy and quality 
of our reports and forecasting for the formulation of monetary policy. The input together with that from 
other sources is compiled into the Quarterly Economic Bulletin and other Bank publications that are 
sought from within PNG and abroad. I can assure you that our QEB is read in cities like Washington 
D.C., Canberra, Tokyo, and Manila, to name a few. 
The surveys assist the Central Bank keep abreast of developments in the real economy. The result of 
the  surveys  enables  us  at  the  Central  Bank  to  design  monetary  policy,  and  importantly,  provides 
another source of information for the Government to compile its estimate of Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP). 
Whilst  we  can  obtain  information  from  headquarters,  there  is  always  input  from  actually  visiting  the 
regional centres and getting ‘first hand’ information. At present, a total of 496 companies are included 
in  the  survey  sample  covering  six  regions  and  eight  industries.  Of  these,  24  companies  that  have 
headquarters in Mt. Hagen participate in our survey, while others are covered by their head offices in 
Port Moresby or Lae. I look forward to your continued cooperation in providing the required information 
in the surveys. 
The  Western  Highlands  province  is  an  important  contributor  to  the  country’s  balance  of  payments 
performance, mainly through coffee. The Board members, Bank officials and I had the opportunity to 
visit one of the successful tea factories in this province, and are very encouraged by their products. It 
is important that producers and exporters continue to make use of any ‘window of opportunity’, with 
better commodity prices and stable economic conditions. This will ensure sustainability of the current 
improved macroeconomic environment. 
I wish to take this opportunity to also thank bank officers in Mount Hagen, especially those working at 
the  Currency  Distribution  Centre  (CDC)  in  the  BSP,  the  Police  and  escort  personnel  in  our  CDC 
operations. 
On behalf of the Board of the Central Bank, the two Deputy Governors, and the management and staff 
of the Central Bank, I would like to once again thank the Western Highlands Provincial Government, 
the Chamber of Commerce, staff of the Highlander Hotel, and all those who have made our stay here 
in Mount Hagen a very pleasant one. 
Thank you and God bless. 
