Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Further strengthening of the institutional structure for Islamic 
banking business operations  
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  launch  of  RHB 
Islamic Bank Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, 1 March 2005. 
 "Building on the strong foundations of a well-developed, comprehensive Islamic financial system and 
strengthening its international inter-linkages and thus its global integration, has enhanced Malaysia's 
potential to be an international centre for Islamic finance. Our first Islamic bank, established in 1983, 
marked  the  beginning  of  the  Islamic  banking  and  finance  chapter  for  our  country.  The  opening  of 
Islamic  banking  windows  by  financial  institutions  in  1993  paved  the  way  for  a  more  effective  and 
efficient distribution channel for lslamic banking services to achieve the critical mass on a nationwide 
scale. These developments have been reinforced by the progress achieved in the establishment of the 
Islamic  financial  infrastructure,  including  the  money  and  capital  markets,  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  structure,  and  most  importantly,  the  legal  and  shariah  framework.  Today  marks  the 
emergence of a new era, with the establishment of an Islamic subsidiary of a banking group as Islamic 
banking in our financial system enters into the third strategic phase of the institutional development of 
Islamic banking and finance in Malaysia".  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to be here this morning on the occasion of the official launch of RHB Islamic Bank 
Berhad. Indeed, today, we are witnessing the first transformation of an Islamic banking window to an 
Islamic subsidiary. This transformation reflects the coming-of-age of the Islamic banking industry after 
more than two decades of development. The move grants legal status to the Islamic banking business 
of the new entity, which is accorded a licence for its operations under the Islamic Banking Act 1983. 
The underlying philosophy of the incorporation of an Islamic subsidiary is primarily aimed at further 
strengthening  the  institutional  structure  for  Islamic  banking  business  operations.  The  Islamic 
subsidiary will also be able to assimilate the developments in the regulatory and supervisory standards 
governing the lslamic banking operations. It is envisaged that greater strategic focus and resources as 
well  as  higher  autonomy  and  governance  will  be  accorded  to  the  Islamic  banking  business.  The 
Islamic subsidiary  will  be  led  by  a  chief  executive  and  a  board  of  directors solely  dedicated  for  the 
Islamic  bank.  Placed  under  the  commercial  banking  arm  of  the  group,  the  Islamic  subsidiary  will 
continue to leverage on the synergies and operating infrastructures of the group, thus achieving cost 
optimisation  for  the  Islamic  subsidiary  and  the  group  as  a  whole.  For  bank  customers,  the  Islamic 
banking  products  and  services  will  continue  to  be  available  at  the  existing  branches  of  the 
conventional commercial banks.  
Given that it is a subsidiary with a more focused vision and business strategies, the potential that can 
be unleashed for the Islamic subsidiary will enhance value to its stakeholders. Being wholly-owned, 
the  incorporation  of  the  Islamic  subsidiary  will  provide  an  opportunity  to  the  group  to  enlarge  the 
Islamic  banking  market  to  potential  institutional  investors,  both  domestic  and  foreign,  who  wish  to 
participate  in  the  Islamic  financial  activities  through  direct  equity  participation.  The  divestment  of 
shares  in  the  Islamic  subsidiary  allowable  up  to  49%,  is  subject  to  the  condition  that  the  Islamic 
subsidiary  will  remain  as  a  subsidiary  of  the  commercial  bank.  This  option  will  provide  the  banking 
group with the opportunities to find a strategic partner for the Islamic subsidiary, thus diversifying the 
range of players available in the Islamic financial market. Indeed, foreign participation in the Islamic 
subsidiary would enable the group to tap on the regional and international business opportunities.  
In  going  forward,  the  move  to  issue  new  licences  and  accord  legal  status  to  the  existing  Islamic 
banking operations of the conventional banks is expected to accelerate the positioning of Malaysia as 
an attractive Islamic financial hub to the international financial community. In this regard, the Islamic 
financial  players  of  other  banking  groups  that  have  achieved  the  critical  mass  and  strength  are 
encouraged  to  explore  the  strategic  advantage  of  the  incorporation of  an  Islamic  subsidiary,  and  in 
elevating  the  industry  to  a  more  dynamic  and  advanced  phase  of  development  including  ventures 
abroad.  There  is  a  large  business  potential  to  be  tapped  in  an  environment  of  strong  and  rapid 
economic and financial development in the country and the region. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
BIS Review 13/2005 
 1
On  this  occasion  of  the  official  launch  of  RHB  Islamic  Bank  Berhad,  it  is  with  pleasure  that  I 
congratulate the RHB Group. With this structure, the management team of RHB Islamic Bank will now 
have  the  potential  to  maximise  the  full  advantage  of  the  universal  Islamic  banking  licence  issued, 
which allows a wide range of business to be undertaken ranging from retail and corporate banking to 
investment  banking  and  fund  management.  Such  Islamic  subsidiaries  are  expected  to  exploit  new 
growth  areas  such  as  wealth  management  and  profit  and  risk  sharing  ventures,  which  are  newly 
emerging as rewarding banking activities. In this connection, it is vital that, at the onset, the business 
strategies are aligned with the right people by developing a pool of the required skills and talent, and 
putting  in  place  the  proper  risk  management  systems  and  good  corporate  governance  practices.  I 
welcome the initiative to establish the Islamic subsidiary by the RHB Group and look forward to the 
contributions of RHB Islamic Bank to the growth of the Islamic banking industry.  
This  advance  forward  is  the  first  step  that  brings  us  to  the  third  strategic  phase  of  the  institutional 
development of Islamic banking and finance in the country. I wish RHB Islamic Bank every success in 
this endeavour. I trust that the Islamic financial community would look forward to benefit from this new 
development. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Dengan  lafaz  Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,  saya  dengan  sukacitanya  merasmikan  pelancaran  RHB 
Islamic Bank.  
Sekian, terima kasih. 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2005
