Lars Nyberg: Prices and costs in the Swedish payment market 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  Scandinavian  Card 
Markets, Stockholm, 25 January 2005. 
 To  begin  with,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  participate  in  this  conference.  In  my 
previous speech at this forum in 2003, I mentioned the pricing of card products and of other payment 
instruments as an area of special interest for us. I announced then that the Riksbank, in consultation 
with the banks, had launched a research project related to this issue. The aim was to examine how 
well the price structure for retail payments reflects the underlying production costs for these services. 
Today, given the short time at my disposal, I will confine myself to discussing the results of this study.1 
The evolution of card payments in Sweden and in the Nordic countries 
In order to achieve a more efficient payment system the prices for payment services should be based 
on  production  costs,  including  not  only  costs  in  the  producing  unit  but  also  the  end  users’  and  the 
intermediaries’  costs.  Other  things  equal,  transparent  and  cost-reflecting  prices  give  users  the 
information  they  need  to  choose  the  payment  instruments  that  cost  less  to  produce.  It  is  usually 
assumed that society’s total payment-related costs are lower the larger the use of electronic payment 
instruments. If you plot the share of electronic payments for a number of countries against the share of 
cash to GDP you get a broad measure of the cost efficiency of the different payment systems. The 
further  to  the  northwest  corner  of  such  a  diagram,  the  more  automated  the  payment  system  is. 
According to these measures, the Swedish payment market seems to be performing very well, as are 
the payment markets in the other Nordic countries.  
Swedes, however, seem to be using more cash than other Nordic countries. The Swedish M0/GDP 
ratio lies 1-2 per centage points higher than the other Nordic countries. As cash and card payments 
are close substitutes - in fact the only alternatives available for transactions at the point of sale2 - we 
would expect that the more widespread use of cash in Sweden would be reflected in a lower use of 
card payments. Payments data support this. Swedes use more cash and make fewer card payments 
per capita than other Nordic citizens. 
Why do we observe these differences in the use of cash and the use of card payments in countries 
that  otherwise  have  very  similar  payment  systems?  What  variables  influence  the  users’  choice  of 
payment instruments?  
Given that users’ choice is sensitive to prices, the price that consumers face for the use of different 
payment instruments is one such important variable. Indeed, there is a growing body of evidence that 
the choice of payment instrument is influenced by pricing. Norway experienced a rapid automation of 
the  payment  market  after  banks  altered  their  pricing  and  began  to  implement  transaction  fees  that 
better  reflected  banks’  own  costs.  In  Sweden,  the  introduction  of  transaction  fees  for  cheques 
contributed  to  bank  customers’  increased  use  of  debit  cards.  As  for  cash,  Swedish  banks  do  not 
implement  any  fees  for  cash  withdrawals  while  such  fees  do  occur,  for  example,  in  other  Nordic 
countries.  Thus,  differences  in  pricing  can  be  expected  to  be  an  important  factor  in  explaining  the 
differences we observe in the use of cash. 
Given this, the Riksbank together with the four major banks initiated a study on the pricing of payment 
services  in  Sweden.  Together  these  four  banks  account  for  more  than  90  per  cent  of  the  Swedish 
retail payment market. Our aim was twofold: we wanted to estimate the costs that banks have in the 
                                                      
1   Sveriges Riksbank (2004), “Prices and costs in the Swedish payment system”, in Financial Stability Report 2004:2. 
2   Cheques are no longer in use in Sweden. 
   1/3 
production  of  these  services,  and  we  wanted  to  see  whether  the  price  mechanism  is  working  well; 
whether prices provide users with information on what the different payment alternatives cost.  
Cost and price estimates 
The study was based on both fixed and variable cost and price data from 2002. Normally we would 
assume that users receive correct cost information when they face transaction fees that correspond to 
marginal costs in production.  Marginal costs are usually difficult to compute, but can be approximated 
by  estimates  of  variable  costs.  Data  on  variable  costs  and  prices  would  in  that  case  have  been 
sufficient for the purpose of our study. There are, however, economies of scale in the production of 
payment services. Under these circumstances, it is consistent with efficient pricing to use a two-part 
tariff structure - transaction fees that cover variable costs and fixed fees that cover fixed costs. Thus 
we  collected  data  on  both  fixed  and  variable  fees  and  costs.  However,  in  the  comparison  between 
prices  and  costs,  we  focused  on  the  variable  part.   After  having  paid  a  certain  annual  fee  for  the 
provision of a bank account, Internet services, or a payment card, transaction fees are the fees most 
likely  to  affect  the  users’  day-to-day  choice  of  payment  instrument.  We  also  collected  data  on 
transaction volumes for the different payment instruments. We used the banks’ transaction volumes as 
weights to compute costs and prices of a hypothetical average bank.  
As regards the relative cost efficiency of the different payment instruments, our cost estimates gave 
the  expected  results.  Variable  costs  appear  to  decline  as  the  degree  of  payment  automation 
increases. Variable costs for electronic credit transfers are lower than for paper-based credit transfers. 
Transfers initiated at the bank branch-office are the most expensive to produce. A comparison of the 
relative  cost  efficiency  of  payment  instruments  used  in  transactions  at  the  point  of  sale  shows  that 
debit card transactions have the lowest costs for the issuing bank. Not surprisingly, the comparison 
between different types of cards shows that debit card transactions cost less than those initiated with 
charge  and  credit cards. However,  the  comparison  is  not entirely  fair.  We should  bear  in mind  that 
these cards provide different types of services.  
Debit card transactions are also cheaper for the issuing bank than the distribution of cash to the public 
through the ATM system. The variable costs for cash withdrawals vary, depending on whether or not 
the ATM terminal and the card are owned by the issuing bank. On average, the variable cost for the 
bank  of  a  cash  withdrawal  is  1.30  Swedish  kronor,  to  be  compared  with  the  cost  of  0.23  Swedish 
kronor  that  the  issuing  bank  has  for  a  debit  card  payment.  Cash  withdrawals  are,  however,  less 
expensive than charge and credit card transactions.  
As  regards  the  second  question  we  posed,  regarding  the  functioning  of  the  price  mechanism,  our 
results  show  that  users  receive  very  little  information  through  the  price  structure  on  the  costs  that 
banks have in the provision of payment services. The average Swedish bank does implement a two-
part  tariff,  as  was  our  assumption.  However,  the  problem  is  that  for  a  large  number  of  payment 
instruments the variable fee is set to zero, although our study indicates that marginal costs are above 
zero.  On  the  whole,  with  the  exception  of  debit  card  transactions  (on  the  acquirer  side)  and  direct 
debits, variable costs and fees differ significantly. Private customers only face transaction fees when 
making payment transactions at the bank branch-office or when using cheques (although cheques are 
hardly  ever  used).  Transaction  fees  are  almost  exclusively  taken  from  corporate  customers, 
particularly merchants.  
Cross subsidies between card payments and cash distribution 
Using the average bank’s costs and prices and data on transaction volumes for the different payment 
instruments, we could estimate the average large bank’s profit from the provision of different payment 
services.  
Our  estimates  show  that  the  average  bank  makes  a  positive  profit  of  approximately  155  million 
Swedish kronor in the provision of payment services. This calls to question the often stated view that a 
low  interest  rate  is  needed  to  finance  a  payment  operation  that  is  running  at  a  loss.  All  payment 
services except for cash distribution generate net revenues for the bank. Credit transfers as a whole 
give a net revenue of about 160 million Swedish kronor. However, most net revenue is generated by 
card  payments,  in  particular  from  acquiring  services  for  charge  and  credit  card  transactions.  The 
average bank has an annual surplus of 460 million Swedish kronor in card payments. Interestingly, the 
bank has an almost equally large annual loss from the distribution of cash to the public, of which two-
   2/3 
thirds come from ATM services. We can conclude from this that there are cross subsidies between 
these two segments where card payment transactions finance distribution of cash to the public. 
Conclusions 
Summing up, our results imply that there might be considerable cost savings to be made by the banks 
through a more transparent and cost-based pricing This is because such a pricing strategy would lead 
to changes in the pattern of demand. Consumers would have economic incentives to shift to those 
instruments  that  are  less  costly  to  produce.  According  to  our  cost  estimates,  they  would  use  debit 
cards  more  and  credit  cards  and  cash  less  and  they  would  increase  their  use  of  electronic  credit 
transfers and direct debits at the cost of paper-based credit transfers.  
A more cost-based price strategy would result in private customers facing transaction fees on paper-
based and electronically-initiated credit transfers and in the introduction of transaction fees for cash 
withdrawals. Fees for acquiring services would have to decrease. The fact that Swedish banks do not 
take any fees whatsoever for cash withdrawals, while such fees can be observed in the other Nordic 
countries,  may  very  well  be  the  explanation  for  our  greater  use  of  cash  and  lesser  use  of  card 
payments.  
Based on the data on variable costs and volumes, the banking sector could lower their variable costs 
by around 560 million Swedish kronor annually if bank customers replaced charge and credit cards 
and  cash  with  debit  card  payments.  The  shift  from  paper-based  to  electronically-initiated  credit 
transfers could result in a further reduction in the banking sector’s variable costs of almost 200 million 
Swedish kronor annually.  
One interesting issue to consider is the reason for this pricing strategy. Banks are probably aware of 
the potential cost-saving effect of implementing more cost-reflecting prices. Banks might, however, be 
locked into a situation where they would benefit from a joint shift to more cost-based pricing, but no 
bank wants to be the first to make such a move. Being the first mover can be costly in terms of lost 
customers and market shares. An alternative explanation can be that banks view payment services as 
complementary to other business areas that are more profitable, such as saving products, mortgage 
loans, etc.  
Finally, we have to bear in mind that for the time being, we have considered banks’ costs only, so we 
confine  our  results  to  potential  cost  savings  within  the  banking  sector.  In  order  to  be  able  to  draw 
conclusions on potential efficiency gains for society as whole, we need to consider all costs associated 
with  payment  services;  the  costs  for  all  the  parties  involved,  ie  the  retail  sector,  banks  and  private 
consumers. This could be one important area for future research. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
   3/3 
