Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Brief overview of the Islamic financial system 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the launch of Commerce 
Tijari Bank Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, 15 April 2005. 
 Bismillahirrahmanirrahim 
Y.Bhg. Dr. Rozali Mohamed Ali, 
Group CEO, Commerce Asset-Holding Berhad (CAHB) 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
“Significant  milestones  have  been  achieved  in  our  endeavour  to  build  a  comprehensive,  efficient, 
dynamic, robust and resilient Islamic financial system. The Islamic financial landscape is now at the 
threshold of a new level of dynamism. The entry of foreign Islamic banking players, the transformation 
of  Islamic  banking  windows  into  Islamic  subsidiaries,  the  increasingly  more  vibrant  Islamic  financial 
markets,  the  enhanced  inter-linkages  with  the  global  financial  system,  the  enhanced  consumer 
awareness,  the  strengthened  regulatory,  legal  and  Shariah  infrastructure  as  well  as  the  more 
conducive tax environment have culminated to open up new frontiers for the Islamic financial services 
industry in Malaysia, promising significant opportunities that will further enhance wealth creation and 
the potential for growth and development of the nation.” 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  commemorate  the  official  launch  of  “Commerce  Tijari  Bank 
Berhad”. Indeed, the emergence of Commerce Tijari Bank Berhad in the Islamic financial landscape 
will further enhance the diversity of the players in the Islamic financial system and will contribute to 
spur the growth of the Islamic financial services industry. 
The rapid and profound changes that have occurred in the Islamic financial system in the recent five 
years have strengthened its position as an integral component of the overall financial system, as has 
been envisaged in the Financial Sector Masterplan. The strong growth in Islamic financial assets has 
been  sustained  to  constitute  10.5%  of  the  total  assets  of  the  banking  system  today.  The  Islamic 
financial system has now entered into the third strategic phase of institutional development where a 
number  of  domestic  banking  groups  are  now  in  the  midst  of  strategically  participating  in  the 
transformation process from Islamic banking windows into Islamic subsidiaries. The entry of foreign 
Islamic  banking  players  will  also  contribute  toward  further  increasing  the  level  of  innovation  and 
competition in the Islamic financial system. 
Indeed, Islamic financial products have become more diversified to include variable rate and equity 
based mechanisms as well as hedging instruments that strengthen the risk management capabilities 
of  Islamic  financial  players.  The  participation  of  multilateral  institutions  in  the  issuance  of  Islamic 
securities further diversifies the asset classes and the investment alternatives available to investors, 
expanding  the  breadth  and  depth  of  the  Islamic  financial  market  and  enhancing  its  liquidity.  The 
comprehensive Shariah and legal infrastructure that has been put in place has also increased the level 
of confidence in conducting Islamic financial transactions. In addition, the conducive tax regime which 
accords neutrality in treatment between Islamic and conventional financial products sets the stage for 
greater  innovation  to  take  place  to  support  the  progressive  development  of  the  Islamic  financial 
services industry going forward. 
With this strengthened Islamic financial infrastructure now being firmly achieved in the first phase of 
the  Financial  Sector  Masterplan,  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  is  poised  to  tap new  growth 
opportunities and maximize the full potential of Islamic banking and finance. The entry of Commerce 
Tijari  Bank  Berhad  into  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  at  this  juncture  is  indeed  timely.  The 
challenge  that  lies  ahead  calls  for  strategic  positioning  to  maximise  the  potential  that  a  universal 
Islamic  banking  licence  accords  in  tapping  new  growth  areas.  While  Islamic  retail,  corporate  and 
investment banking product offerings have grown in sophistication, financial activities such as private 
equity  investments,  real  estate  investments,  private  wealth  and  fund  management  are  now  rapidly 
gaining  prominence.  There  is  therefore  a  need  to  allocate  adequate  resources  to  build  distinct 
capabilities in these newly emerging areas. The move into these strategic niche markets would also 
increase the diversity of new asset classes for Islamic investment. This would not only contribute to 
further enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the financial intermediation process in the Islamic 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 1
financial  system  but  also enhance  Malaysia’s  potential  as  an  attractive  international  hub  for  Islamic 
finance. 
In addition to tapping the vast growth opportunities that reside within the domestic environment, the 
enhanced  economic  and  financial  linkages  between  Malaysia  and  the  rest  of  the  world  has  also 
opened up the potential for new opportunities by venturing abroad and thereby strengthen the global 
integration process. 
On this note, it is my pleasure to congratulate the Commerce Group on this occasion of the official 
launch of Commerce Tijari Bank Berhad. Significant potential exists for Commerce Tijari Bank Berhad 
to  achieve  a  quantum  leap  by  leveraging  on  the  integrated  financial  services  and  operating 
infrastructure  of  the  Commerce  Group.  I  wish  Commerce  Tijari  Bank  Berhad  every  success  in  this 
endeavour  and  I  look  forward  to  its  contribution  to  the  further  development  of  the  Islamic  financial 
services industry in Malaysia. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Dengan 
“Commerce Tijari Bank Berhad”. 
Terima kasih. 
lafaz  Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,  saya  dengan  sukacitanya  merasmikan  pelancaran 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2004
