Y V Reddy: Monetary co-operation in Asia 
Speech by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the IMF-MAS High-Level Seminar 
on Asian Integration, Singapore, 3 September 2005. 
 Mr. Chairman and distinguished participants, 
It  is  a  privilege  to  be  associated  with  the  deliberations  on  Asian  Integration.  Singapore  very  vividly 
signifies both the diversity and potential for prosperity of the Asian region. We deeply appreciate the 
hospitality and excellent arrangements made by the IMF and MAS for this High Level Seminar. The 
discussion paper circulated by the MAS is of high quality and is a very useful document. This session 
is devoted to subjects of special interest to Central Banks, namely “Enhancing Regional Surveillance 
and Monetary Co-operation in Asia”. I intend focusing on one of the topics flagged for discussion in 
this session by the organizers, namely “Is there scope for co-operation or co-ordination on exchange 
rate policies over the long term?” 
In  this  brief  presentation,  I  propose  to  explore  the  following  areas:  First,  changing  dynamics  of 
exchange rate regimes in Asia; second, importance of the Asian economies for global prosperity and 
stability;  third,  the  Asian  dynamics  of  financial  integration,  fourth,  the  scope  for  co-operation  or  
co-ordination on exchange rate policies; and finally, some thoughts specific to the Indian situation. 
Changing dynamics of exchange rate regimes in Asia 
In the period prior to the 1997 crisis, many of the Asian economies followed an exchange rate regime 
of fixed but adjustable pegs. During the East Asian crisis, it was realized that such pegs were quite 
vulnerable  to  speculative  attacks.  Several  East  Asian  economies  have  adopted  different  types  of 
exchange rate regimes in the post-crisis period. While some countries continued with pegged regimes, 
others moved over to some kind of managed floats. 
Thus, it appears that in most economies of Asia, the weight of experience seems to be tilted in favour 
of intermediate regimes, and post-crisis, the choice of the exchange rate regimes generally reveals a 
growing preference for relatively more flexible exchange rates than before. In this regard, given the 
current state of relatively benign international financial market conditions, it is possible to speculate 
that as the comfort level of forex reserves as self insurance is reached, and institutions and financial 
markets in Asian economies acquire further resilience, this shift in preference might grow stronger and 
wider. The recent moves by the Chinese and the Malaysian authorities would only substantiate such a 
notion. 
An intermediate managed floating regime may not sound technically a perfect system but, prima facie, 
it has proven to be the most pragmatic which explains its popularity. The built-in flexibility allows the 
domestic currency to be responsive to market forces, while it meets the concern of the authorities for 
‘basic stability’ and orderly movement in forex markets. In contrast to a pure float, this mechanism can 
prevent  excessive  exchange  rate  volatility  that  can  have  adverse  impacts  on  external  trade  and 
investment. In other words, rather than being distracted by a quest for the ‘perfect system’, perhaps it 
is  wise  to  focus  on  improving  the  working  of  any  given  float  regime.  The  real  issue  in  this  regard 
relates to how much of a float is envisaged and the nature, magnitudes as well as instruments of its 
management.  These  would  depend  on  several  factors,  especially  the  changing  contours  between 
flexibility and volatility in each economy. 
The  recent  record  of  very  impressive  growth  in  Asia  has  been  driven  by  trade  and  cross-border 
investment flows. The rapid strides achieved by China have provided a powerful stimulus for regional 
expansion.  But  it  is  the  nature  of  trade  flows  as  much  as  their  impressive  scale  that  is  shaping 
economic  relationships  and  prospects.  While  much  of  this  trade  involves  production  of  goods,  still 
ultimately destined for the North American and European markets, it also reflects an increased division 
of  labour,  product  specialization  and  integration  within  the  region.  Together  with  this,  fundamental 
shifts in economic relations are also taking place. 
Many of the intra-Asia trade flows, which correspond to the international division of labour between 
Asian countries, are flows of exports of components and spares but not of finished goods for their end 
consumers.  A  crucial  question  for  some  countries  in  the  region  is  the  level  of  income  that  would 
   1/4 
enable domestic demand to become the main driving force of growth. As domestic demand, notably 
household sector demand, becomes the driver of growth, movement to a more flexible exchange rate 
policy would be feasible. 
Similarly, as the corporates as well as financial intermediaries, especially banks equip themselves to 
manage  movements  in  exchange  rate,  greater  flexibility  would  be  feasible,  as  forex  markets  also 
would tend to become less volatile. It is also necessary in this regard to recognize the ‘insurance’ in 
the form of foreign exchange reserves needed against potentially volatile capital flows which should be 
sufficient  to  take  care  of  fluctuations  in  capital  flows  and  ‘liquidity  at  risk’.  It  is  generally  felt  that 
reserves would act as a circuit breaker for situations when unidirectional expectations become self-
fulfilling.  The  swap  arrangements  among  the  Central  Banks  such  as  the  one  under  Chiang  Mai 
Initiative (CMI) add to the level of ‘insurance’ and hence to the comfort factor to the Central Banks in 
dealing with excess volatility in capital flows. 
Recently there has been considerable expansion in global liquidity but this should not dilute the vigil of 
policy makers in regard to volatility in capital flows. Very often, it is difficult to assess, ex ante, whether 
capital  flows  are  temporary  or  permanent.  It  is  prudent  for  policy  makers  to  assume  that  they  are 
reversible  till  they  are  proven  to  be  enduring.  Impact  on  real  economy  of  significant  reverse 
movements  over  a  relatively  short  period  could  be  destabilizing  with  attendant  serious  welfare 
implications. We in Asia are acutely aware of these aspects. Recent sharp upward movements in oil 
prices  in  an  era  of  heightened  uncertainties  is  yet  another  reason  for  policy  makers  in  Asia  to  be 
vigilant. The hikes in oil prices tend to have adverse consequences for growth and prices in several of 
our economies but they also have significant impact on external sector, encompassing both current 
and  capital  accounts.  On  current  account,  the  trade  deficit  will  tend  to  widen.  On  capital  account, 
surpluses  generated  in  oil  exporting  countries  may  add  to  global  liquidity  and  lead  to  large  capital 
inflows to emerging markets that are net importers of oil. Hence, a careful assessment of the medium 
term sustainability would be imperative. 
Over  the  medium  to  longer  term,  the  exchange  rate  regimes  and  related  policies  are  likely  to  be 
influenced by (a) the confidence in the strength of Asian economies; (b) perceived resilience of their 
economic as well as financial systems; (c) growing economic and financial integration amongst Asian 
economies;  (d)  emerging  significance  of  Asian  economies  in  the  global  economy;  (e)  the  state  of 
international  financial  architecture  and  market  conditions  and  (f)  policy-induced  measures  for  
co-operation and co-ordination amongst Asian economies. 
Importance of Asian economies and policies 
The  fact  that  the  Asian  economies  have  recovered  swiftly  after  the  crises  of  1997  is  an  important 
consideration in viewing the future external developments. The growth rate of developing Asia, which 
had  plummeted  to  4.2 per  cent  in  1998,  recovered  quickly  to  6.2 per cent  in  1999,  rising  further  to  
6.6  percent  in  the  year  2000.  In  the  more  recent  period,  the  recovery  in  the  output  of  the  Asian 
economies has been robust with developing Asia growing by nearly 8 per cent in 2003 and 2004. It is 
widely recognized that the contribution of Asia to global growth has generally been very impressive in 
recent  years,  and  may  continue  to  be  so,  for  several  years  in  future.  The  current  account  on  the 
balance of payments has been in surplus for many if not all Asian economies. The private capital flows 
to the emerging Asia have recovered from an outflow of US $ 52 billion in 1998 to an inflow of US 
$151 billion in 2004. At the same time, the reserve build up in the region has been significant. 
In the backdrop of the resilience of the Asian economies and their ability to bounce back after a deep 
financial  crisis,  there  is  resurgence  of  confidence  in  their  future.  Strategies  in  the  form  of  having 
mutual swap agreements under the Chiang Mai initiative, to guard against speculative attacks, could 
now be enlarged, and could also be supplemented by greater co-operation and co-ordination in the 
exchange rate regimes and policies. 
Indeed,  from  a  longer-term  perspective,  we  must  note  that  Asia  is  appropriately  poised  in  terms  of 
abundance in factors of production – labour and capital – particularly labour, as the demography is 
clearly in favour of Asia to sustain a long- term growth. The emergence of surplus factors of production 
in  Asia  combined  with  financial  strength  would  impact  prices,  wages  and  exchange  rates.  Asian 
economies could explore strategies to evolve a system whereby they could not only prevent and, if 
necessary, manage financial crises on their own to the extent possible, but also play a more active 
role  in  co-ordinating  policies  with  other  major  developed  economies.  These  arrangements  could  be 
consistent with continued and an active role of IMF in international monetary cooperation. 
   2/4 
It is useful to recall that the acute sense of interdependence aroused by the financial “contagion” in 
1997 convinced the Asian economies of the importance of economic cooperation, one that reflected 
their common interests and priorities as well as strengthened their voice in the global arena. Among 
others, this led to two parallel movements – one in South Asia in the form of the SAARC Initiative and 
the other in East Asia reflecting the ASEAN+3 Initiative. 
The idea of having an integrated financial system so as to provide viable ‘safety net’ in times of crisis 
germinated.  As  a  result,  the  idea  of  “ASEAN  +  3”  Initiative1  gained  prominence.  This,  in  turn,  was 
reflected in two correlated developments. First, in 2000, ASEAN+3 countries mutually agreed to form a 
network  of  bilateral  swap  agreements  to  provide  mutual  protection  from  financial  emergencies, 
popularly  known  as  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative.  More  recently,  there  has  been  a  resurgence  in  the 
debate  on  the  formation  of  an  Asian  Monetary  Fund  and  the  adoption  of  an  Asian  Currency  Unit. 
Concomitantly,  reflecting  the  parallel  developments  under  the  ASEAN+3  Initiative,  there  has  been 
wider discussion and debate on the formation of a South Asian Economic Union and a South Asian 
Development  Bank2.  Second,  the  Asian  Bond  Fund  Initiative3  was  launched  in  2003  reflecting  the 
effort to develop a regional bond market for catering to the medium and long term financing needs of 
the Asian economies. 
Asian dynamics of financial integration 
It  is  useful  to  recognize  that,  there  are  several  important  factors  that  are  relevant  for  considering 
greater  financial  integration  in  Asia.  First,  the  wide  diversity  in  the  level  of  economic  development 
across  the  region.  Second,  the  divergent  level  of  financial  sector  development  across  the  region. 
Third,  the  limited  scope  of  the  existing  intra-region  resource-pooling  mechanism  and  the  lack  of 
institutional frameworks. Fourth, the presence of asynchronous business cycles amongst the countries 
in  the  region.  Such  divergences  are  aptly  reflected  in  the  asymmetric  transmission  of  demand  and 
monetary shocks in the region. 
There are significant developments that point to emergence of enabling factors for strengthening of 
economic integration in Asia. First, emerging Asia fares quite well in terms of factor mobility and wage 
and price flexibility. Second, the trade intensity ratios in emerging Asia, particularly the ASEAN region, 
are quite high and are likely to accelerate. Further, Foreign Direct Investment flows within the region 
are  significant.  Third,  tariffs  are  being  brought  down  rapidly.  Fourth,  the  free  trade  agreements  are 
expanding  and  deepening  making  the  prospects  of  tariff-free  and  virtual  trade  integration  in  Asia 
sooner  than  later.  Fifth,  there  is  a  strong  commitment  of  political  leadership  in  Asia  to  focus  on 
economic issues. There are regular and frequent close interactions among Central Bank Governors in 
Asia which should strengthen the process of cooperation. 
Scope for co-operation and co-ordination 
The Chiang Mai Initiative is a good starting point to build on the various existing initiatives. Although 
under the present dispensation the CMI is complementary to similar IMF initiatives, it has an important 
symbolic  value  in  as  much  as  it  can  signal  the  markets  a  regional  commitment  to  supporting  any 
member  country’s  currency  that  is  under  speculative  pressures.  It  also  recognizes  that  establishing 
swap arrangements does not obviate the need to address structural and financial sector weaknesses. 
It  may  also  be  added  that  while  CMI  might  have  contributed  to  the  exchange  rate  stability  in  the 
                                                 
1  The ASEAN + 3 was formed as a gathering of the governments of ASEAN members, China, Korea and Japan 
that were Asian members of ASEM, had its first leaders’ meeting in December 1997.  
2  The  SAARC  Council  of  Ministers  meeting  held  in  Islamabad  during  January  2-3,  2004,  desired  that  the 
SAARCFINANCE should prepare a concept paper on the proposed South Asian Economic Union and a South 
Asian Development Bank. 
3  The Asian Bond Fund is basically an arrangement for pooling of a portion of foreign exchange reserves of few 
East Asia and Pacific countries and the Fund portfolio is invested in the liquid US dollar denominated bonds of 
major Asian economies. 
   3/4 
region, it has also contributed to closer regional economic and financial integration and co-operation. It 
is useful to discuss ways of carrying this process forward. 
There  are  several  fora  already  established  for  regional  monetary  cooperation.  The  Asian  Clearing 
Union (ACU), which was established in 1974 at the initiative of the Economic and Social Commission 
for Asia and Pacific (ESCAP) has eight member central banks. The main objective of the ACU is to 
provide  a  facility  to  settle  current  international  transactions  among  members  on  multilateral  net 
settlement basis. The ACU mechanism also provides for a currency swap type mechanism amongst 
members for trade transactions. ACU aims to promote monetary co-operation amongst the members 
and has also resulted in closer relations across the banking systems of the member countries. During 
the last few years trade settled through ACU mechanism has grown at a rate higher than that of total 
international trade of the member countries.  
Yet  another  forum  for  exchange  of  views  and  experiences,  including  through  visits  and  training 
programmes,  is  SAARCFINANCE.  Areas  covered  in  recent  months  include  communication  policies 
and practices of Central Banks and Real Time Gross Settlement systems. 
The  recent  policy  shift  in  China  from  a  pegged  to  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  is  a  significant 
development in international finance. This step is a watershed in the financial sector reform process 
now  underway  in  China.  Going  by  the  available  indications,  China  has  long-term  plans  for 
development  of  deep  and  liquid  markets  in  financial  assets,  which  would  encompass  foreign 
exchange, bonds, and equities, as also commodities. 
Some thoughts on India’s approach 
It  may  be  useful  to  recall  our  experience  with  exchange  rate  management  in  India.  In  September 
1975,  the  Government  of  India  proposed  a  system  of  determining  the  exchange  rate  based  on  a 
basket of five currencies, with weighting, based essentially though not entirely, on trade weights. The 
permissible range for the exchange rate was 2.25 per cent on either side. The currencies chosen were 
US  Dollar,  Pound  Sterling,  Deutsche  Mark,  Japanese  Yen  and  SDR.  The  weights  were  revised  in 
1979,  1983  and  1984,  though  the  currency  composition  broadly  remained  the  same  with  only  one 
change in 1984 when French Franc replaced SDR. The band, however, was extended from 2.25 to 
5.0 per cent in 1979 and from 5 to 10 per cent in 1986. Soon after the devaluation of the rupee in July 
1991,  there  was  a  move  in  March  1992  to  a  regime  of  partial  convertibility  (essentially  a  dual 
exchange rate). In March 1993 the regime changed to a uniform exchange rate of the rupee which 
was market-determined – a system which remains in place to date. In August 1994, India moved over 
to  current  account  convertibility.  From  the  latter  part  of  1997,  India  moved  to  a  cautious  and  well 
calibrated move towards capital account convertibility. These developments tested the exchange rate 
regime which proved conducive to growth while maintaining stability. 
India  has  been  actively  participating  in  the  various  initiatives  in  SAARCFINANCE  and  ACU 
arrangements.  Exchange  of  views  and  co-ordination  in  policies  through  both  formal  and  informal 
mechanisms  have  been  the  main  characteristics  of  co-operation.  India’s  trade  links  with  Asia  are 
growing at an unprecedented scale. The stated policy in regard to tariffs is to bring them on par with 
those  of  East  Asia  as  soon  as  feasible.  Policy  on  Free  Trade  Agreements  with  countries  in  Asia, 
including  SAPTA  point  to  the  binding  forces  of  greater  integration  of  India  into  Asia.  Launching  of 
negotiations  of  Free  Trade  Agreements  between  ASEAN  and  India  is  of  historic  significance  for 
carrying forward Asian Integration. 
As part of our policy of communication and to aid researchers and analysts the Reserve Bank of India 
has  been  constructing  a  five-country  and  36-country  indices  for  Nominal  Effective  Exchange  Rate 
(NEER)  and  Real  Effective  Exchange  Rate  (REER).  We  have  decided  to  review  the  REER  and 
accordingly we expect a new six-country index to replace the present five-country one. The new index 
is likely to include the U.S.A., Eurozone, the U.K., Japan, China and Hong Kong. The new index would 
in that case have two new currencies, both Asian, namely, the Renminbi and the Hong Kong Dollar. 
The 36-country index already includes the key Asian countries, but its review is likely to result in some 
enhancement of their weights. This reflects an increasing recognition of the Indian economy’s rapidly 
growing integration with Asia. 
 
   4/4 
