David Dodge: How Canada is adjusting to global economic forces 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian Association of New 
York, New York, 15 April 2005.  
 The  Bank  of  Canada  has  been  examining  the  issue  of  how  the  Canadian  economy  adjusts 
movements in the exchange rate for a long time. Canada's economy is very open, so we always need 
to understand how exchange rate movements are affecting real economic activity and, in turn, what 
the implications are for monetary policy. And with a 25 per cent appreciation of the Canadian dollar 
over the past couple of years, this has been a major preoccupation. 
Of  course,  there's  much  more  to  the  story  than  just  the  exchange  rate.  Powerful  forces  have  been 
shaping the global economy. These include the emergence of the economic powerhouses of China 
and India, and large and growing financial imbalances in the United States and Asia. As a result, we 
have  seen  large  movements  in  relative  prices,  and  not  just  the  realignment  of  exchange  rates.  We 
have seen firming prices for non-energy commodities, rising oil prices, flat or falling prices for many 
consumer  goods,  and  dramatic  reductions  in  the  prices  of  communications  services  and  computer 
equipment. Today, I want to talk about the kinds of adjustments that the Canadian economy is making 
to these forces. I will start with a brief review of how our monetary policy operates, and how it helps 
with the adjustment process. I'll spend a few minutes talking about how the Bank takes exchange rate 
movements into account as we conduct monetary policy. Then, I will discuss the ways in which the 
real economy is adjusting to movements in the exchange rate and other global forces. Finally, I will 
recap the projections for the Canadian economy contained in the Monetary Policy Report. 
How monetary policy helps the economy adjust 
Let me begin with a few words about our monetary policy framework. The Bank of Canada Act calls on 
us to "mitigate fluctuations in the general level of production, trade, prices and employment, so far as 
may  be  possible  within  the  scope  of  monetary  action,  and  generally  to  promote  the  economic  and 
financial  welfare  of  Canada."  We  do  this  by  trying  to  foster  an  environment  of  low,  stable,  and 
predictable inflation. In particular, we aim to keep the annual rate of consumer price inflation at the 
2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range. This is the best contribution that we can make to 
achieving high, sustainable growth of output and employment. To be clear, inflation targeting is not an 
end in itself. Rather, it is the best means of fulfilling our commitment to promote the economic and 
financial welfare of Canadians. 
We pursue this objective by trying to keep the economy operating at full capacity; that is, we aim for a 
balance between total demand and supply in the economy. When the demand for goods and services 
pushes the Canadian economy against the limits of its capacity, and inflation is poised to rise above 
the  target,  the  Bank  will  raise  interest  rates  to  cool  off  the  economy.  And  when  the  economy  is 
operating below its production capacity, and inflation is poised to fall below the target, the Bank will 
lower interest rates to stimulate growth. So by maintaining low and stable inflation, monetary policy 
promotes greater stability in economic output. 
A flexible exchange rate is an important part of our monetary policy framework. I hasten to add that we 
do  not  have  a  target  or  preferred  level  for  the  Canadian  dollar.  I'll  come  back  to  the  topic  of  the 
exchange rate in just a moment.  
But  first,  let  me  talk  about  how  our  monetary  policy  helps  the  economy  to  adjust  to  the  powerful 
economic  forces  we  see  today.  To  begin  with,  low  and  stable  inflation  allows  businesses  and 
consumers  to  better  read  price  signals  in  markets,  which  helps  them  to  make  better  long-term 
decisions in the face of major economic developments.  
A  second  way  that  monetary  policy  helps  with  the  adjustment  process  comes  from  our  strategy  of 
keeping  total  supply  and  demand  in  balance.  In  these  circumstances,  economic  resources  that  are 
released by shrinking sectors where demand is weak can be absorbed by expanding sectors where 
demand is strong. Of course, adjustment is never simple or without pain, especially at the personal 
level.  But  from  a  macroeconomic  point  of  view,  adjustment  can  take  place  with  less  social  and 
BIS Review 25/2005 
 1
economic cost when inflation expectations are well anchored and the economy is operating close to its 
potential. 
Having a floating exchange rate is a third way in which our monetary policy framework helps with the 
adjustment  process.  Let  me  explain  how.  Changes  in  global  demand  for  a  country's  goods  and 
services  tend  to  bring  about  movements  in  that  country's  currency.  The  resulting  exchange  rate 
movements help to keep balance in the economy by offsetting the impact of the change in demand. 
For  example,  rising  global  demand  for  Canadian  goods  and  services  tends  to  lead  to  a  stronger 
Canadian dollar. The stronger currency, in turn, tends to restrain exports and to encourage imports. By 
restraining the demand for Canadian-produced goods and services, the floating exchange rate helps 
to  keep  total  supply  and  demand  in  balance.  Similarly,  when  there  is  falling  global  demand  for 
Canadian-produced goods and services, the floating exchange rate will encourage demand for these 
goods and services, again helping to keep total supply and demand in balance.  
Exchange rate movements and monetary policy 
This brings me to my next subject, which is how we at the Bank of Canada view movements in the 
exchange rate. As I said earlier, we do not have a target or a preferred level for the Canadian dollar. 
But this does not mean that the value of the currency is unimportant, far from it. The exchange rate is 
something that we at the Bank are always watching closely; looking for the valuable information that 
helps us to better interpret and predict the strength of total demand for Canadian goods and services. 
The way that we take the exchange rate into account as we conduct monetary policy is complicated. 
This  is  because  the  exchange  rate  can  move  for  different  reasons.  Sometimes,  movements  in  the 
exchange rate reflect changes in the demand for a country's goods and services. But sometimes, they 
do not. This distinction is important, because the two types of movements have different implications 
for demand in the economy and, hence, for monetary policy. Indeed, the reason behind a movement 
in the Canadian dollar can be just as important for monetary policy as the movement itself. 
Let me take a couple of minutes to explain. First, consider the type of currency movement that reflects 
changes in foreign demand. In 2003 and much of 2004, we saw a strong increase in the value of the 
Canadian dollar. This reflected, at least in part, the strong demand for Canadian exports, and a sharp 
rise in the global prices of many of these exports, particularly commodities. The stronger Canadian 
dollar,  in  turn,  encouraged  imports  and  discouraged  exports.  This  is  an  example  of  how  the 
appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  can  work  to  dampen  an  initial  increase  in  aggregate  demand. 
Were  this  dampening  effect  on  aggregate  demand  to  exactly  offset  the  initial,  direct  increase  in 
demand, all other things being equal, there would be no need for a monetary policy response. 
Now, consider the other type of exchange rate movement, which does not reflect changes in demand 
for a country's goods and services. Instead, it can reflect changes in foreign demand for that country's 
financial assets, or changes in domestic demand for foreign financial assets. For example, during the 
past  two  years,  investors  have  become  more  concerned  about  the  large  and  growing  U.S.  current 
account deficit which, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, hit a remarkable US$666 billion, 
or  5.6%  of  GDP,  in  2004.  And  so  we  have  seen  the  U.S.  dollar  depreciate  against  many  major 
currencies,  including  the  Canadian  dollar.  In  this  example,  the  stronger  Canadian  dollar  leads  to  a 
decline  in  net  exports,  just  as  in  the  previous  example.  But  in  the  absence  of  an  initial  increase  in 
demand to be offset, the overall effect on Canadian aggregate demand would clearly be negative. And 
this  decrease  in  demand  -  if  it  were  to  persist  -  would  generate  downward  pressure  on  Canadian 
prices and  employment  that  could push  inflation  below  our  target.  All  other  things  being  equal,  this 
would require monetary policy to be more stimulative than it otherwise would have been. 
To be clear, I don't want you to think that we at the Bank have a mechanical or formulaic approach to 
dealing with exchange rate movements. The truth is exactly the opposite. Analyzing foreign exchange 
movements  and  determining  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  response  is  a  complicated  business. 
When we look at the movement of the Canadian dollar against the U.S. dollar over the past couple of 
years,  it  is  clear  that  the  upward  movement  during  this  period  has  been  driven  by  both  stronger 
demand for Canadian goods and services, and by widespread weakness in the U.S. dollar. But there 
have been times during this period when the first factor appears to have been the strongest influence, 
and at other times, it appears that the second factor dominated. 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2005
How businesses are adjusting 
Now that I have talked about how the Bank of Canada deals with exchange rate movements, let me 
turn to how the real economy is adjusting to global economic developments, and to the large relative 
price movements associated with them.  
It is interesting to compare the experience of the past two years with that in the period from 1997 to 
2002. From the beginning of 1997 to the end of 2001, falling commodity prices led to a decline of more 
than 6 per cent in Canada's terms of trade - the ratio of the prices Canadians receive for their exports 
to  the  prices  Canadians  pay  for  their  imports.  At  the  same  time,  "irrational  exuberance"  about  the 
prospects for the U.S. economy led to heavy financial flows into the United States, and this helped to 
drive  up  the  value  of  the  U.S.  dollar  relative  to  other  currencies.  The  Canadian  dollar  fell  from  just 
under 75 cents US in early 1997 to a low of 61.8 cents US in January 2002, before ending the year at 
about 63.4 cents US. 
During this time, the cost of labour relative to capital goods declined in Canada because most capital 
goods are imported and priced in U.S. dollars, while labour is paid in Canadian dollars. Businesses 
reacted  appropriately  to  these  price  signals  by  increasing  their  production  of  services  and  of  those 
manufactured goods that require relatively more labour and less machinery and equipment.  
What we have seen over the past couple of years is, in many ways, a mirror image of the 1997-2002 
period. Commodity prices have risen, and our terms of trade improved by more than 16 per cent from 
the fourth quarter of 2001 to the fourth quarter of 2004. The cost of labour has increased relative to the 
cost  of  capital  goods.  Again,  Canadian  firms  are  responding  to  the  price  signals.  We  are  currently 
seeing  large  increases  in  investment  spending  in  oil  and  gas  extraction,  other  mining  activity,  and 
wood-product manufacturing. Firms have been motivated both by high prices for their products and by 
the expectation that these high prices will persist. 
We  are  also  seeing  rising  investment  spending  in  sectors  with  low  exposure  to  international  trade, 
such as electric power generation, finance and insurance, and information and cultural industries. In 
these cases, firms are reacting to recent substantial gains in Canadian domestic demand. 
For  both  of  these  groups,  a  crucial  point  to  note  is  that  a  large  part  of  the  planned  investment  is 
motivated by the desire to increase production capacity.  
But the story is somewhat different for those sectors that are highly exposed to international trade, but 
where the prices of their products are not rising. Here, I am referring to sectors such as auto parts, 
textiles,  and  clothing  manufacturing.  Firms  in  these  sectors  are  feeling  the  pressure  of  the  higher 
Canadian dollar, and are also facing increased competition from places such as China and India. 
The good news is that there is evidence that many of these firms are making adjustments in the face 
of adversity. Investment spending for these firms is being channelled toward increasing productivity 
and reducing costs, not increasing capacity. Because much of the productivity-enhancing machinery 
and equipment is produced abroad and priced in U.S. dollars, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar 
has lowered the cost of this machinery and equipment relative to that of labour. 
Other firms are using different strategies to adjust to the stronger Canadian dollar and to increased 
competition from abroad. A growing number of firms are looking to cut costs by importing more inputs. 
Others are phasing out production of goods and services with low profit margins and concentrating on 
those that yield higher returns. 
And of course, all of these adjustments have implications for the Canadian labour market. Overall job 
growth has been strong, but there have been important sectoral differences. We have seen job gains 
in commodity-producing sectors and in those that have low exposure to foreign competition. However, 
employment has fallen in a number of manufacturing sectors. This reflects, at least partly, the fact that 
some firms are now substituting capital for labour in order to reduce costs, which is the opposite of the 
situation we saw in the late 1990s and at the beginning of this decade.  
Canadian economic prospects 
Before I conclude, let me quickly review the projections for the Canadian economy that we set out in 
our Monetary Policy Report yesterday.  
The global economy has been unfolding largely as expected, and the prospects for continued robust 
growth  are  quite  favourable,  especially  over  the  near  term.  The  outlook  for  the  Canadian  economy 
BIS Review 25/2005 
 3
through to the end of 2006 is essentially unchanged from that in our January Monetary Policy Report 
Update. 
Our base-case projection calls for annualized growth of about 2 1/2 per cent in the first half of 2005 
and 3 per cent in the second half. Growth of about 3 1/2 per cent is expected through the four quarters 
of 2006, consistent with closing the output gap in the second half of next year. To express it in annual 
average terms, growth in 2005 is projected to be about 2 1/2 per cent, down slightly from the January 
Update, while the projection for 2006 is little changed at about 3 1/4 per cent. 
With  the  economy  expected  to  return  to  full  production  capacity  in  the  second  half  of  2006,  core 
inflation should move back to 2 per cent around the end of next year. Based on the scenario implied 
by oil-price futures, total CPI inflation is expected to remain above the 2 per cent target for some time, 
before moving slightly below 2 per cent in the second half of 2006. 
In line with this outlook, a reduction of monetary stimulus will be required over time. However, I want to 
stress again that the Bank is not committed to any particular interest rate path or timetable.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. As I noted at the beginning, there are powerful global economic forces at work, and 
economies  everywhere  need  to  make  adjustments.  In  Canada,  businesses  are,  indeed,  making 
adjustments to meet these challenges and to take advantage of emerging opportunities. At the Bank 
of Canada, we will continue to monitor these global forces closely and to assess their impact. We will 
continue to conduct monetary policy with the aim of keeping inflation close to target, and thus keeping 
the economy operating at full potential. In this way, we will do our part to facilitate the adjustments that 
Canadian businesses are making to changes in the global economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2005
