Jean-Claude Trichet: The challenges of economic and financial integration in 
the enlarged Europe 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the conference “Europe 
after the enlargement”, Center for Social and Economic Research (CASE), Warsaw, 9 April 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
First of all I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me here and having the opportunity to share 
some thoughts with the participants of this very stimulating conference.  
In  the  late  6th  century  BC,  Heraclitus  said  that  there  is  nothing  permanent  except  change.  This 
wisdom  seems  to  be  very  obvious  for  citizens  of  the  new  Member  States,  given  their  rich  and 
fascinating history, especially in the recent decades when rapid political, economic and social changes 
have  been  taking  place.  As  recently  as  at  the  end  of  the  1980s  –  many  countries  in  Central  and 
Eastern  Europe  were  still  behind  the  iron  curtain,  with  little  political  and  economic  freedom.  Today, 
they  are  members  of  the  European  Union  with  established  democracies  and  functioning  market 
economies. In some years they are expected to become members of Economic and Monetary Union.  
As we have just experienced the enlargement of the European Union and as we prepare for the future 
EMU enlargement, I would like to talk today about challenges for domestic economic policies ensuing 
from economic and financial integration in Europe. I would like to emphasise that these challenges are 
relevant both for current and prospective EMU members, though some particular characteristics of the 
new Member States add new dimensions to these challenges.  
In  my  speech  today,  I  will  first  briefly  describe  the  state  of  economic  integration  in  the  enlarged 
Europe, recalling on this occasion the main theories on the optimality of a currency area. Then I will 
address  the  role  that  domestic  economic  policies  must  play  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union, 
focussing in particular on fiscal and structural policies. 
Economic integration and the optimal currency area theory: policy implications 
The economic integration in Europe has already quite some history. After establishing a single market 
in the early 1990s, the integration culminated in 1999 with the introduction of the euro in initially 11 EU 
Member  States,  which  were  joined  by  Greece  in  2001,  and  with  the  conduct  of  a  single  monetary 
policy by the ECB. This ended the formal process of EMU integration for these countries, but not the 
underlying economic processes and adjustments as they are constantly evolving. The share of intra 
euro area trade of goods as a percentage of GDP increased for most of EMU countries and currently 
stands  on  average  at  around  38%.  Recent  years  witnessed  also  impressive  integration  in  financial 
market, in particular in money and government bond markets. At the same time, GDP growth among 
euro area countries continues to be closely correlated (with an average correlation coefficient close to 
70% over the past 10 years). In addition, the inflation differential declined. The unweighted standard 
deviation for 12 euro area countries dropped from close to 6 percentage points at the beginning of the 
1990s to around 1 percentage point in 1999-2004. The dispersion of annual inflation in the euro area 
is similar to that of the 14 US metropolitan statistical areas, which has hovered around 1 percentage 
point in recent years.  
Impressive economic integration has also taken place between the 10 new Member States and the 
previous 15 EU Member States and the euro area. Aspirations of the new Member States to join the 
European  Union  and  subsequently  to  enter  the  euro  area  served  and  still  serve  as  a  catalyst  for 
far-reaching economic changes. The extent of already achieved economic integration of the 10 new 
members  could  be  illustrated  by  several  facts.  Let  me  start  with  trade  integration.  The  trade  links 
among  current  EU  members  have  increased  considerably  in  recent  years.  The  share  of  the  new 
Member  States  in  the  euro  area’s  exports  and  imports  doubled  since  1995  and  stands  currently  at 
around 10-11%. In the new Member States, exports and imports to the euro area accounts on average 
for around 40-50% of total goods trade. These shares are even larger if one takes into account trade 
with the non-participating EU Member States. Economic integration in Europe has also provided new 
opportunities  for  investment  with  a  noticeable  increase  in  capital  flows  in  recent  years.  The  asset 
share of foreign-owned banks in the new Member States increased enormously in recent years and 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 1
now stands on average at 70%. Some empirical studies find an increasing synchronisation of business 
cycle among some new Member States and the euro area countries in recent years.1 As economic 
integration has been increasing new Member States made a significant progress with nominal and real 
convergence. Discrepancies in average HICP inflation rates between the new Member States and the 
euro area dropped significantly from on 7.6 percentage points in 1997 to close to 1 percentage point in 
the  last  three  years.  Similar  developments  are evident  for short-term  and  long-term  interest  rates – 
with  the  spreads  falling  on  average  to  below  3  percentage  points  and  above  1  percentage  point, 
respectively. It should be also mentioned that although the new Member States made a headway in 
closing the GDP per capita gap versus the euro area in recent years, most of them still have a far way 
to go. In 2004 the gap ranged from around 25% for Cyprus to around 60% for Latvia.  
Let me now turn to theoretical considerations and refer to the optimum currency area theory. Debates 
about  the  optimality  of  a  common  currency  area  intensified  with  the  envisaged  establishment  of 
Economic and Monetary Union in Europe. More recently similar discussions have been triggered by 
prospects of EMU enlargement by the new Member States. Let me focus on selected issues that in my 
opinion are of the essence in this debate. First, let me stress the fact that the traditional theoretical 
arguments  based  on  the  optimum  currency  area  theory  pioneered  by  Mundell  (1961),  McKinnon 
(1963),  and  Kenen  (1969)[2  dealt  primarily  with  the  preconditions  and  possible  costs  of  a  currency 
union and not so much with the benefits. According to the optimum currency area theory, homogenous 
countries  in  terms  of  this  economic  structure  should  experience  less  asymmetric  shocks  than 
heterogeneous countries. This, in turn, suggests that the costs of abandoning independent monetary 
policy in a group of homogeneous countries are low, therefore supporting the creation of a monetary 
union.  
The  traditional  optimum  currency  area  theory  has  been  challenged  by  endogeneity  arguments. 
Pioneering  this  strand  of  optimum  currency  area  theory  Frankel  and  Rose  (1998)3  suggested  that 
international trade patterns and business cycle correlations are endogenous to monetary integration. 
In other words, a country is more suited to join a monetary union ex post than ex ante as monetary 
unions boost trade which leads to more symmetric business cycles. Consequently, too much fixation 
on historical patterns of shocks and movement of business cycles could be misleading.  
Another  related  new  strand  of  intellectual  debate  shifted  the  focus  to  the  benefits  of  monetary 
integration.  More  specially,  it  stressed  the  importance  of  risk  sharing  in  the  analysis  of  the  positive 
effects  of  participation  in  a  monetary  union  in  case  of  heterogeneous  economies  and  the  positive 
implications of monetary integration on the level of trade and output.4 These new insights suggest that 
the  beneficial  effects  of  financial  and  trade  integration  on  the  level  of  output  could  be  larger  than 
previously expected.  
The key lesson we can draw from the theoretical debates about the optimality of a currency area is 
that  the  net  benefits  of  a  monetary  union  can  be  very  significant  and  may  well  increase  over  time. 
Moreover, the benefits of monetary integration depend strongly on national economic policies.  
Domestic economic policies in EMU 
Membership  in  a  monetary  union  has  important  implications  for  domestic  economic  policies.  In  the 
euro area monetary and exchange rate policies are no longer available to correct for country-specific 
imbalances and monetary authorities are primarily responsible for area-wide price stability. This is the 
key  channel  via  which  monetary  policy  contributes  to  long-run  growth.  Other  conditions  which  are 
                                                      
1   Z. Darvas and G. Szapary (2004), “Business Cycles Synchronization in the Enlarged EU: Comovement in the New and Old 
Members”, MNB Working Paper, No. 1/2004, February 
2   R.A.  Mundell  (1961),  “A  theory  of  optimum  currency  areas”,  American  Economic  Review,  Vol.  51,  509-17;  R.  McKinnon 
(1963),  “Optimum  currency  areas”,  American  Economic  Review,  Vol.  53,  September,  717-725;  P.  Kenen  (1969),  “The 
Theory of Optimum Currency Areas: An Eclectic View”, in Mundell, R. and A. K. Swoboda (eds.), Monetary Problems of the 
International Economy, University of Chicago Press, 41-60. 
3   F.  Frankel  and  A.  Rose  (1998),  “The  Endogeneity  of  the  Optimum  Currency  Area  Criteria”,  Economic  Journal,  Vol.  108, 
1009-1025. 
4   P.  Asdrubali,  B.  E.  Sörensen  ,  and  O.  Yosha  (1996),  “Channels  of  interstate  risk  sharing:  United  States  1963-1990”, 
Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  November,  1081-1110;  A.K.  Rose  and  E.  van  Wincoop  (2001),  “National  Money  as  a 
barrier to trade: the real case for currency unions”, American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), May, 386-390. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2005
equally  necessary  to  ensure  high  and  sustainable  long-term  growth  and  prosperity  lie  beyond  the 
purview of monetary policy. They depend on sound fiscal policy and comprehensive structural reforms. 
These policies, in my opinion, are among the most powerful policy tools for addressing and preventing 
problems that may arise within a currency area.  
The need for structural reforms and sound fiscal policies – two mutually reinforcing strategies – is not 
limited to members of a monetary union, but it applies to all countries. Flexible markets are a universal 
need  in  an  open,  science-  and  technology-driven,  highly  competitive  and  rapidly  changing  global 
economic environment. This also implies that the general call for structural reforms and sound fiscal 
policy is required in the euro area countries as well as the new Member States. However, in the latter 
case, consistent and stability-oriented domestic economic policies are essential not only for successful 
monetary integration but also for taking full advantage of the benefits of EU membership and for the 
catching-up process in per-capita income levels.  
Now  let  me  speak  in  more  detail  about  domestic  fiscal  policy  and  structural  policies  concerning 
financial, labour and product markets.  
Sound fiscal policy first 
In  EMU,  fiscal  policy  largely  remains  a  national  competency  and  may  be  used  for  coping  with 
country-specific conditions. This characteristic has to be noted with cautious, however, given that the 
past  experience  of  most  countries  shows  that  the  use  of  discretionary  fiscal  policy  for  short-term 
demand management is extremely difficult to implement successfully. This stems from considerable 
time lags involved in implementing fiscal measures. Nevertheless, a fiscal policy can have a positive 
effect  on  the  economy  via  the  “so  called”  automatic  stabilisers.  A  proper  functioning  of  automatic 
stabilisers  requires  sound  fiscal  policy.  This  issue  is  currently  of  a  significant  relevance  given  that 
many EU members exhibit considerable fiscal imbalances. In 2004, both some EMU Member States 
(Germany, Greece, the Netherlands and France) and six new Member States (the Czech Republic, 
Cyprus,  Hungary,  Malta,  Poland  and  Slovakia)  were  in  an  excessive  deficit  situation.  Although,  the 
new  Member  States  have  generally  lower  debt  ratios  than  the  euro  area  countries,  they  have  two 
additional incentives to lower their government budget deficits. First, the failure to fulfil fiscal Maastricht 
criteria  could  derail  the  entry  to  EMU.  Second,  reasonably  sound  public  finances  are  crucial  for  an 
effective and exhaustive use of structural EU funds.  
At this point let me make a few remarks on the Stability and Growth Pact. Since the very beginning of 
the  discussion  on  the  reform  of  the  Pact,  the  ECB  has  strongly  recommended  preservation  of  the 
integrity  of  the  corrective arm of  the  Pact,  with  the nominal  anchor  of 3%  and  the  excessive  deficit 
procedure, and to improve and make more effective the implementation of the preventive arm of the 
Pact.  
It has always been our position. After the decision of the Council of Ministers on 21 March we said that 
“it  is  imperative  that  Member  States,  the  European  Commission,  and  the  Council  of  the  European 
Union  implement  the  revised  framework  in  a  rigorous  manner,  conducive  to  prudent  fiscal  policies. 
And  I  said  last  Thursday,  on  behalf  of  the  Governing  Council,  that  it  is  now  “essential  that  the 
European  Commission  and  the  ECOFIN  Council  strictly  enforce  the  new  agreement  on  the 
implementation of the Pact so as to restore the framework’s credibility”.  
Now let me turn to the long-term role of fiscal policy. A fiscal policy that is set according to rules adds 
to macroeconomic stability by providing economic agents with expectations of a predictable economic 
environment. This reduces uncertainty and promotes longer-term decision-making, notably investment 
decisions, and economic growth. Furthermore, it is important to keep in mind that fiscal policy can also 
promote  growth  and  employment  via  appropriate  adjustments  of  the  level  and  composition  of 
government  taxes  and  expenditures.  Reducing  inefficient  public  spending  can  for  example  help  to 
finance tax cuts. Furthermore, public expenditures can be redirected towards productivity-enhancing 
physical  and  human  capital  accumulation  rather  than,  for  instance,  the  provision  of  subsidies  for 
declining  industries.  This  seems  especially  relevant  for  the  new  Member  Stats.  These  arguments 
demonstrate a clear and important link between fiscal and structural reforms.  
Financial reforms are a major challenge in the new Member States  
Starting with financial markets, structural reforms in this area should aim at facilitating a more effective 
allocation  of  savings  toward  the  most  rewarding  investment  opportunities  and  at  the  same  time  at 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 3
securing financial stability. The pace of recent reforms in the European Union, and in particular the 
euro  area,  has  been  impressive.  They  have  contributed  to  a  continuous  increase  in  cross-border 
financial and capital flows and in turn created an increasingly effective risk-sharing mechanism against 
regional divergences in the euro area.  
New  Member  States  have  also  been  participating  in  and  benefiting  from  financial  integration  in  the 
European  Union.  One  particular  aspect  of  financial  markets’  reforms  and  development  in  these 
countries,  related  to  the  catching-up  process,  deserves  attention.  Real  convergence  is  expected  to 
have sizeable effects on the financial sectors that may not always be easy to manage. The process of 
catching-up will lead to financial deepening and a strong expansion of the balance sheets of financial 
institutions.  In  this  context,  two  effects  will  be  operating  in  parallel:  the  deepening  of  financial 
intermediation  and  development  of  capital  markets  to  levels  that  are  comparable  with  those  of 
countries  with  similar  income  levels,  and  a  further  increase  in  the  relevance  of  non-bank  financial 
intermediaries such as pension funds or life insurance companies in the financial sector, as these are 
still underrepresented when compared to the previous EU Member States. As a result of these two 
factors, financial sector assets and liabilities are expected to expand substantially in most of the new 
Member States over the next two decades. Similarly, a strong development should be expected with 
regard to the insurance and pension fund sector and to the evolving bond and stock markets in the 
new Member States. Against this background, a key policy challenge in the new Member States is to 
ensure  robust  and  stable  development  of  financial  markets  with  an  important  role  for  supervisory 
bodies. 
No further delay with labour markets reforms 
Regarding labour markets, a major challenge for structural reforms is to find the right balance between 
social  considerations  and  individual  incentives  that  maximise  economic  welfare.  Areas  of  particular 
interest  are  the  social  transfer  systems,  employment  protection  laws  and  the  wage  setting 
mechanisms, including wage indexation. Equally important are policies supporting the creation of new 
businesses and housing policies that do not hinder labour mobility, e.g. through rent subsidies or high 
transaction  costs.  From  the  monetary  policy  point  of  view  it  is  also  important  that  labour  market 
reforms  facilitate  wage  adjustments  that  reflect  more  closely  regional  and  sectoral  productivity 
differences.  
Although labour markets in the EU are very heterogeneous many old and new Member States face 
severe problems. In many countries employment rates are low by international standards and in some 
cases even falling. There has been some progress with labour market reform over the past decade, 
however, labour market flexibility needs to be enhanced further, especially in view of the large number 
of  people  who  are  wastefully  underemployed  or  unemployed  in  Europe,  resulting  in  individual 
difficulties and welfare losses to society. A main focus should be put on the groups that face particular 
challenges  when  trying  to  enter  the  labour  market,  such  as  women,  the  youngest  and  oldest  age 
groups and the lowest educated. In the new Member States there is a particular need to address skill 
mismatches,  the  limited  domestic  labour  mobility,  and  to  constantly  upgrade  human  capital. 
Throughout  the  enlarged  European  Union  the  labour  market  performance  can  be  considerably 
improved,  what  calls  for  an  immediate  action  that  must  reflect  the  characteristics  of  national  labour 
markets. 
Fostering competition in product markets does pay off 
Turning to product market reforms, their key role should be to enhance innovation, ensure an efficient 
allocation of resources, and create business-friendly environment. In recent years, much headway has 
been  made  in  the  European  Union  regarding  integration  and  the  level  of  competition  in  product 
markets. 
In  light  of  empirical  research5  and  the  current  stage  of  product  market  reforms  in  the  new  Member 
States,  some  of  them  could  gain  significantly  thanks  to  further  regulatory  reforms  that  include  a 
                                                      
5   N. Giuseppe and S. Scarpetta (2003), “Regulation, productivity and growth: OECD evidence”, OECD Working Paper, No 
347, January 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2005
sustained reduction in state aid, and more generally state involvement in the economy – particularly if 
it constitutes economically questionable ad hoc and sector-specific measures.  
This will help to smooth the restructuring process in product markets by promoting the entry of new 
players and to reduce the tax burden. Fostering competition in product markets should also have a 
positive effect on price developments.6 
 
Effective reforms means comprehensive reforms 
Finishing the discussion about the right domestic policies in a monetary union and beyond, I would like 
to  stress  the  need  for  a  comprehensive  approach  to  structural  and  fiscal  reforms  as  opposed  to 
piecemeal measures. There is evidence that structural reforms are mutually reinforcing and essential 
for bringing welfare improvements. A removal of a bottle-neck in one market is not usually sufficient for 
achieving a flexible and smoothly working economy. The positive interactions with structural and fiscal 
reforms are also numerous. For instance, labour market reforms should go hand in hand with product 
market reforms and reforms of the pension and health care system. Such reforms are not only needed 
to  reduce  non-wage  labour  costs  and  increase  incentives  for  job  creation  but  also  to  ensure  the 
sustainability of the social security systems and lower the burden for public finances.  
Conclusions 
Ladies and gentlemen, sound and responsible domestic economic policies are a universal requirement 
in a competitive and constantly changing world, and participation in a currency union makes it even 
more  important.  Given  that  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  the  main  aim  of  the  single  monetary 
policy is price stability at the euro-area wide level and given that bilateral exchange rate adjustments 
are by definition no longer possible, the main responsibility for the domestic economic management 
falls on fiscal and structural policies. This in particular involves conducting a sound and credible fiscal 
policy  that  fosters  long-term  expectations  as  well  as  supports  an  efficient  public  sector  and  active 
implementation of structural reforms. The structural reforms should foster the flexibility of labour and 
product markets, encourage innovation activities, ensure smooth functioning of financial markets, and 
create business-friendly environment. I would like to stress again that the integration process and the 
need  for  economic  reforms  do  not  end  with  EMU  membership.  The  success  of  EMU  depends  on 
member states’ ability to adapt to a changing global environment and solve domestic problems.  
Let me conclude by expressing my confidence in the process of European integration, my confidence 
in  the  positive  consequences  of  enlargement.  I  am  convinced,  and  this  conviction  is  reinforced  by 
academic research, that enlargement will not only  bring additional dynamism and growth to the ten 
newcomers,  in  speeding  up  their  catching-up  exercise,  but  will  also  contribute  –  positively  and 
significantly  to  growth  in  the  previous  fifteen  members.  The  pessimism  that  we  observe  in  some 
sectors  of  the  public  opinion  are  not  founded.  Let  us  all  together  take  advantage  of  the  additional 
dynamism that Poland and the nine other new members are bringing to the European Union. Let us 
not forget that before the entry of Spain and Portugal we had the same gloomy sentiment in the public 
of the then previous “10”. After the “10” had become “12” that sentiment dissipated progressively in the 
face of all what Spain and Portugal had contributed to the “12” 
Thank very much for your attention. 
                                                      
6   M. Przybyla and M. Roma, “Does product market competition reduce inflation? Evidence from EU countries and sectors”, 
ECB Working Paper, No. 453. 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 5
