Ishrat Husain: Distributing benefits of growth to the majority 
Presidential address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the pre-budget 
seminar held by the Pakistan Observer, Islamabad, 28 May 2005. 
 The major recurring themes in the popular discussion on the economy have been shifting over the last 
six years. In the earlier years of the Musharraf period it was widely believed that the country was going 
to  default  on  its  external  obligations.  When  this  did  not  happen  there  was  a  loud  consensus  that 
Pakistan would not be able to comply with the stringent conditionalities of the IMF and would, sooner 
or later, get off the track. Since the country successfully completed the programme, the concern was 
raised  that  we  had  emphasized  too  much  on  macroeconomic  stabilization  such  as  large  foreign 
exchange  reserves  while  growth  rates  remained  quite  weak.  Now  that  the  growth  rates  have  risen 
consecutively for the last three years, there is an anxiety that the benefits of growth are confined to a 
small minority of the population and are not being shared widely. 
It should be admitted at the outset that the incidence of poverty in the country is quite high i.e. almost 
one-third of the population is living below the poverty line and unemployment and underemployment 
levels are also high, particularly among the urban educated youth. But, it must be realized that there is 
a well established empirical regularity in economic development – whenever economic growth rates 
are low, poverty and unemployment are high. Conversely, whenever a country records high growth 
rate, there is a general tendency for the level of poverty and unemployment to decline. This is also 
borne  out  by  the  past  economic  history  of  Pakistan.  For  thirty  years  i.e.  between  1960  and  1990 
Pakistan’s economic growth rate was an impressive 6 per cent per year and the incidence of poverty 
went down from 46 per cent to 18 per cent of the population. This happened at a time when there was 
no explicit policy emphasis on poverty targeted interventions and social indicators were not improving. 
But during the 1990s when the growth rate fell to 3 to 4 per cent per annum, poverty resurfaced and 
by the end of the decade it was up once again reaching 33 per cent. As the first three years of the 
present decade were devoted to putting the economy back on track after the crisis of 1998, growth 
rates remained low and poverty and unemployment remained high. It is only in the last three years that 
we  have  witnessed  growth  rates  of  5.4  per  cent,  6.6  per  cent  and  more  than  8  per  cent.  If  growth 
remains  on  this  trajectory  and  poverty  targeted  interventions  including  investment  in  human 
development are implemented, there is no doubt in my mind that we would once again see a reduction 
in poverty and decline in unemployment rates. 
What is the basis of this assertion? Higher growth rate in real terms means that all households in the 
economy with the exception of those not in labour force or not fully employed receive higher incomes 
after adjusting for inflation. Of course, these higher incomes accrue in proportion to the assets held by 
different income groups. Top 20 per cent of the population receives almost 50 per cent of the national 
income. So they receive higher incomes than the bottom 20 per cent who get only 7 per cent of the 
national income. But still this segment of the population is recipient of additional income generated as 
a result of faster growth compared to a situation where growth is low or stagnant. 
Higher  incomes  translate  into  increased  demand  for  goods  and  services.  This  puts  pressures  on 
prices in the short run as there are too many people chasing a limited supply of goods and services. 
But higher prices also signal to the producers that there are shortages and they should enhance their 
production so that they can meet these shortages. To increase their production, they have to invest in 
new plants & machinery and employ more people. As more people find jobs, they are moved out of the 
ranks of unemployed and unemployment rates decline. As incomes accrue to these previously jobless 
or underemployed households they are lifted out of poverty and hence the incidence of poverty falls. 
This is exactly what happened in Pakistan until 1988/89 and that is what is happening at present. 
Sixty per cent of our population relies on agriculture directly or indirectly. Those engaged in agriculture 
are  not  employed  in  the  strict  sense  of  terms  as  we  think  about  employment  in  factories,  firms, 
government departments, etc. In agriculture, higher incomes accrue to the landholders through higher 
output prices and higher productivity. Farm labour also benefits as the demand for their services also 
rises  and  poverty  declines  in  rural  areas  too.  Part  of  this  income  finds  its  way  into  demand  for 
consumer goods. Manufacturers seeing this upsurge respond by first increasing utilization of existing 
capacity and then expanding capacity through new investment. That is why we have seen double digit 
growth in investment, manufacturing production and sales and high overall growth rate of GDP. 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 1
But  it  must  also  be  admitted  that  poverty  is  not  only  a  phenomenon  of  low  incomes  but  that  of 
powerlessness, state of helplessness and lack of access and opportunities. In Pakistan, literacy rate is 
about 50 per cent and there is a high correlation between poverty and literacy. Those who are poor 
are preponderantly illiterate. Therefore, intensified efforts for education and literacy will certainly help 
in  alleviating  poverty.  The  educational  system  which  is  usually  leveler  of  incomes  has  created 
inequities  in  Pakistan.  The  children  of  the  well-to-do  families  study  in  English  Medium  Schools  go 
abroad  for  higher  education  and  return  to  occupy  high  positions  in  the  country.  The  children  of  the 
poor  families  remain  illiterate  or  go  to  madarsah  or  attend  Urdu  Medium  Schools  and  generally 
become clerks. This is not fair at all. We should have a system whereby those who are bright and 
talented  but  do  not  have  means  to  attend  the  best  educational  institutions  should  be  given 
scholarships by the government. It is gratifying to see that the talented students from backward areas 
of FATA have been able to get into the State Bank of Pakistan by dint of their merit and not sifarish. 
Drop out rates in our educational system are extremely high, the quality is poor and the skills imparted 
at government schools and colleges are highly irrelevant to the demands of the economy. The output 
from such educational institutions is, therefore, relegated to the ranks of the unemployed. While the 
economy has serious shortages of technical and professional manpower, we have surplus of ordinary 
BAs and MAs who do not have employable skills. This imbalance is one of the major factors for high 
unemployment  among  the  urban  educated  youth.  Gulf  States  and  Malaysia  are  also  looking  for 
engineers,  architects,  technicians,  mechanics,  para-medical  staff,  nurses,  etc.  but  we  do  not  have 
adequate numbers available in the country. 
Access to health facilities is also highly differentiated and parallels the story of educational facilities. 
The  government-run  hospitals,  clinics  and  dispensaries  are  in  terrible  shape,  devoid  of  basic  drugs 
and  equipment.  The  doctors  manning  these  facilities  concentrate  on  private  practice  and  are 
indifferent towards the patients from the poor households. The drugs supplied by the government for 
free distribution are sold in the market to earn private profits while private patients have to fend for 
themselves. 
Access to thana, kutchery and tehsil is also heavily tilted against the poor. They have to either seek 
the assistance of an influential person or offer bribes to get redressal of their grievances. As most of 
the time they do not have adequate financial resources, they resort to the first option. They, therefore, 
fall  in  the  trap  of  patron-client  relationship  or  mai-bap  relationship  that  makes  them  permanently 
subservient  to  the  well-to-do  and  influentials  of  their  areas.  They  lose  their  autonomy  and  the 
decisions  are  made  on  their  behalf  by  these  elite  groups.  This  loss  in  autonomy  is  translated  into 
electoral  support  at  the  time  of  the  elections  for  this  elite  class.  Thus,  powerlessness  and  loss  of 
autonomy perpetuate poverty even when incomes may rise in the short run. 
This  state  of  affairs  will  continue  to  prevail  until  we  bring  about  major  reforms  in  our  institutions 
particularly Civil Service, Judiciary and Police. Their orientation and mind set have to change and their 
performance  should  be  evaluated  on  the  basis  of  their  providing  access  to  the  poor  and  common 
citizens. In essence, it is a matter of good governance not only at the highest level but at all levels of 
the public institutions – legislature, judiciary and executive. 
The  legal  system  and  financial  rules  in  the  bureaucracy  are  also  highly  complex  and  full  of 
obfuscations. Even if some well-meaning top officials are committed to bringing about some changes, 
the  administrative  machinery  down  the  hierarchy  is  so  cumbersome  and  anachronistic  and  the 
financial  rules  are so outdated  and restrictive  that good policy  intentions  are  seldom  translated  into 
action. 
What is the way forward to end this powerlessness and lack of access of the poor?  
Good governance should therefore start with a review of the structure, processes, practices and rules 
and regulations of our administrative machinery and then bring about revisions wherever required. 
There  are  some  positive  changes  that  are  taking  place  or  are  underway.  Devolution  to  local 
governments, civil service reforms, police reforms and judicial reforms are being implemented and the 
sooner they take firm root the encumbrances on the poor of this country will be eased. 
Media – both electronic and print – have become more vigilant. They should undertake more in-depth 
investigative reporting and expose the malpractices prevalent in the system and ensure that the poor 
have better access to delivery of public services and institutions. 
Non-government and civil society organizations have become quite active in the fields of education 
and health care. Some of them are providing quality services without imposing severe financial burden 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2005
on the poor. Private-public partnership should be strengthened to scale up these activities whereby 
the government provides the facilities and finances while the private and not-for-profit sector delivers 
the services to the poor. 
Financial system is one of the most potent instruments for creating wealth and distributing benefits of 
growth to the poor. As financial sector has been restructured and competition introduced, there is a 
broadening  of  access  for  their  products  and  services.  Agriculture  credit,  consumer  financing,  SME 
loans, mortgages and microfinance are becoming quite widespread and the number of borrowers from 
middle and poor classes is gradually increasing. Although the number of beneficiaries is still between 
2 and 2.5 million household, the State Bank of Pakistan is committed to double this number in the next 
five years. 
In  addition,  public  accounts  committees  of  the  legislatures,  independent  regulatory  agencies,  the 
National Accountability Bureau, offices of the Auditor General of Pakistan, Chairman, Federal Public 
Service Commission, Wafaqi Mohtasib, Provincial Mohtasibs, Federal Tax Ombudsman and Banking 
Ombudsman are some of the elements that will improve governance in the country and take action 
against the misuse of office, misappropriation of funds, indulgence in corruption and also take actions 
for redressing the grievances of common people. 
Conclusion: 
The  government  has  provided  an  enabling  and  conducive  environment  for  growth  of  economic 
activities  in  the  future  and  foundation  has  been  laid  which  will  result  in  economic  prosperity  and 
stability. In the short term, we have to fight against inflation because it has hit the lower income groups 
and fixed wage earners the most. It will take five to ten years of sustainable high growth rates of 6 per 
cent  or  above  to  bring  the  incidence  of  poverty  down  to  16-17  per  cent  from  the  present  level  and 
improve  the  standards  of  living  of  the  majority  of  population.  This  is  possible  if  the  policies  are 
consistent  and  continued,  external  environment  remains  favourable  and  there  are  no  sanctions  or 
discrimination  against  Pakistan,  good  governance  is  practised,  institutions  for  delivery  of  basic 
services to the poor are devolved and strengthened but most important political stability is entrenched. 
All political parties should agree on a common agenda that economic policies would continue in the 
larger interest of the country whichever party comes to power. After all they are all agreed on the need 
for  rapid  economic  growth,  macroeconomic  stability,  poverty  reduction,  improvement  in  social 
indicators  and  prosperity  for  the  majority  of  the  population.  Of  course,  there  will  be  fine  tuning, 
adjustments and adaptation during the course of implementation, but the vision and direction would 
remain unchanged. 
China has set its path to economic progress as far back as 1980 and there have been changes in the 
leadership of the Party but the direction and policies have remained the same. They have proactively 
managed  the  policies  in  light  of  changing  external  and  domestic  conditions.  We  can  all  see  the 
spectacular results China has achieved in reducing poverty and bringing prosperity to the majority of 
their population. 
In Pakistan also, the policies have to be adjusted in the light of unforeseen or unanticipated events. 
When  inflation  was  low,  the  benefits  of  financial  sector  reforms,  liberalization  and  competition  were 
passed on to the borrowers as a policy aimed at kick start of the economy. As inflationary pressures 
have intensified in the recent months, the higher interest rates will raise the rates of return to the bank 
depositors who have been suffering for the last four to five years. State Bank of Pakistan will do its 
best to bring inflation under control but is also requires supply-side interventions. 
In the medium term, the agenda for reforms is quite tall but I am confident that honesty, hard work, 
straightforwardness can push the country and individuals forward. 
Our  own  religion  teaches  us  to  help  the  poor  and  hungry  residing  in  our  neighbourhoods.  Zakat 
system can transfer finances from the rich to the poor. If we follow these teachings of our religion we 
can provide stability to the social order and the future of the nation will become bright. 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 3
