Ian J Macfarlane: Payment imbalances 
Presentation  by  Mr  Ian  J  Macfarlane,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Chinese 
Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing, 12 May 2005. 
 My  talk  today  is  about  payments  imbalances  in  the  world  economy,  a  subject  that  has  received 
exhaustive attention over recent years. The reason for this is simple: it is not just that there are large 
imbalances  between  deficit  and  surplus  countries,  but  that  the  pattern  seems  to  have  become 
entrenched over recent years. Table 1 below summarises the results for the past five years.  
Most of the discussion has centred around the sustainability of the deficits, especially the deficit of the 
United  States.  Not  surprisingly,  the  United  States  Government  is  then  urged  to  adopt  policies  to 
reduce  its  deficit,  and  other  countries  are  also  encouraged  to  adjust  their  policies  with  the  aim  of 
reducing  the  US  current  account  deficit.  The  US  Administration  has  become  quite  vocal  on  this 
subject, but it is not clear that its outspokenness is helping to resolve the issue. I find this approach of 
starting with the US current account deficit not to be very constructive for several reasons which I will 
outline in this talk.  
 
Table 1: Current Account 
 2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
 
Memo USD billion  
2004 
Source: IMF  
 Per cent of GDP 
Other east 
Japan  China
1.9 
1.5 
2.8 
3.2 
4.2 
2.5 
2.1 
2.8 
3.2 
3.7 
    Asia 
4.7 
5 
5.5 
6.8 
6.6 
  Euro 
area 
-0.5 
0.2 
0.8 
0.3 
0.4 
  United 
States 
-4.2 
-3.8 
-4.5 
-4.8 
-5.7 
  Other
0.8 
0.4 
0.5 
1.3 
1.6 
  171.8 
70.0 
123.7 
35.6 
-665.9 
187.6 
Current versus capital deficits versus surpluses  
A balance of payments account measures two separate concepts, each of which is the mirror image of 
the other: 
 it identifies whether a country has absorbed more goods and services than it produced; and  
it identifies whether a country has lent to or invested more abroad than it has received from 
abroad.  
The  first  is  summarised  by  the  current  account  and  the  second  by  the  capital  account;  the  two  by 
definition have to add to zero. Attention is invariably concentrated on the current account rather than 
the capital account, and especially when the current account is in deficit. Why should we assume that 
the deficits are the problem? Why not assume that the surpluses are the problem?  
I  think  the  answer  is  that  there  is  a  belief  that  current  account  deficits  are  unsustainable,  whereas 
surpluses  could  go  on  forever.  This  was  a  reasonable  assumption  for  most  of  the  post-war  period, 
particularly under the Bretton Woods system, but may no longer be so. In a world of floating exchange 
rates and mobile international capital, the old rules may no longer apply. The discipline applied by the 
international  market  place  on  developed  countries  with  current  account  deficits  now  may  be  very 
weak.  
Even under earlier monetary regimes, there are examples of countries that have maintained current 
account deficits for long periods. The United States in the nineteenth century is a good example, as is 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 1
Australia in the twentieth. In the 1970s, Singapore ran a current account deficit which averaged 15 per 
cent for a decade. For developed countries with deep financial markets and little or no foreign currency 
exposure in their borrowing, current account deficits are not the problem they once were.  
The United States has now run a current account deficit for fifteen years. During the first phase, it was 
predominantly financed by private investment and the US dollar strengthened. During the more recent 
phase, the gross inflows have still been private, but financing from foreign central banks has also been 
important and nearly matches the size of the current account deficit. Over the past four years, the US 
dollar has depreciated, but after fifteen years of cumulative deficits, the effective exchange rate of the 
US  dollar  is  similar  to  what  it  was  at  the  start  of  that  period.  The  important  point  is  that,  despite 
widespread  predictions  to  the  contrary,  it  has  not  been  difficult  for  the  United  States  to  finance  its 
deficit.  
So the scenario whereby world financial markets react to the US current account deficit by withdrawing 
funding has disappointed those who thought it would come into play. It may happen yet, but people 
have been predicting it for a long time and yet it seems no closer. A large part of the reason for this is 
that investors who want to get out of US dollars have to run up their holdings of another currency – 
they cannot get out of US dollars into nothing. They have to take the risks involved in holding some 
other currency, possibly at an historically high exchange rate, and they may well be reluctant to do so.  
The  other  mechanism  that  could  bring  about  a  correction  would  be  if  the  United  States  chose  to 
implement  policies  aimed  at  reducing  its  current  account  deficit.  This  is  not  something  that  the 
Government  would  embrace  quickly,  as  the  population,  by  and  large,  is  not  complaining  about  the 
current situation whereby their consumption is subsidised by cheap loans from the rest of the world. 
Some of the appropriate policies may be worthwhile on other grounds, such as reducing the budget 
deficit, so I do not wish to argue against them. All I want to point out is that the usual policies which 
could  reduce  the  current  account  deficit  are  not  very  appealing  politically.  In  a  world  of  floating 
exchange rates, all the policies available to the US Government involve reducing domestic demand, 
increasing national savings and putting downward pressure on domestic prices and wages. They are 
all  restrictive  and  aimed  at  reducing  consumers'  purchasing  power.  Short  of  a  crisis,  most 
governments are reluctant to adopt such policies.  
Thus, my judgment is that the difficulties of sustaining current account deficits have been overstated 
for  any  country  whose  financial  markets  are  developed  enough  to  be  able  to  borrow  in  its  own 
currency.  Of  course,  this  is  even  more  so  if  its  own  currency  is  a  reserve  currency  which  foreign 
central banks are willing to accumulate.  
Current account surpluses and lending 
I  would  now  like  to  approach  the  subject  of  imbalances  from  the  side  of  the  surplus  countries, 
particularly Asian countries. The thing that stands out today is that Asian countries run large surpluses, 
which amount to a bit more than half the deficit run by the United States.1 As we have seen, when a 
country runs a surplus on its current account, it has to be exactly matched by capital outflows in the 
form of loans or investment abroad. Thus, we have the counter-intuitive situation of a region consisting 
predominantly of developing countries lending to the richest developed country in the world. Not only 
does this seem to be counter to economic logic, it is also contrary to historical experience.  
Developing countries are characterised by relatively small amounts of capital relative to labour, and 
hence relatively high rates of return on additions to their capital stock. It makes sense for funds to flow 
from the mature economies to the developing economies in order to receive a higher rate of return on 
those  funds.  To  some  extent,  this  is  happening,  principally  through  direct  investment,  but  this  is 
dwarfed by other flows in the opposite direction so that overall finance is flowing from the developing 
to the mature. Historically, it has gone the other way. In the nineteenth century, the main movement 
was from old Europe to the new and expanding United States, and this flow continued in the twentieth 
century as newer areas such as Australia, Argentina, Canada, etc. received funds from Europe and 
later the United States.  
                                                      
1   Another  comparison,  which  takes  in  private  capital  flows  as  well  as  the  current  account,  is  to  look  at  the 
accumulation  of  international  reserves  by  Asian  countries.  In  2004,  they  added  US$508  billion  to  reserves, 
which amounts to over 75 per cent of the US current account deficit. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2005
There are a number of explanations for this unusual pattern of capital flows. Many people attribute it to 
the desire by Asian countries to keep their exchange rates low in order to maintain competitiveness. I 
do not wish to argue that this has not been a factor, but I think there is a more important explanation. 
There are two relevant facts about this pattern of capital flows. The first is that it is a relatively recent 
phenomenon. Table 2 below compares the pattern in 1996 – the year before the Asian crisis – with the 
pattern now. In all cases, the Asian current account surpluses were much smaller (or were deficits) in 
the  earlier  period  than  now.  This  pattern  is  not  consistent  with  the  view  that  competitiveness 
considerations were the main driver, because if that were so, Asian countries would not have waited 
until the past five years to put them into effect.  
 Table 2: Current Account 
Per cent of GDP 
Other east 
 1992-1996 
2000-2004 
Source: IMF 
Japan 
2.4 
2.9 
 China 
0.4 
2.7 
  Asia 
-0.7 
5.7 
 United 
States 
-1.3 
-4.6 
 The second fact is that, as shown in Table 3, the predominant change in economic behaviour by the 
Asian countries between the two periods has not been to increase saving, but to reduce investment. In 
the case of Japan, investment has fallen by 5.2 per cent of GDP since 1996, and in the rest of Asia 
(excluding China), it has fallen by 8.7 per cent of GDP over the same period. China is different, in that 
both savings and investment have not changed by much.  
 
Table 3: Saving and Investment in Asia 
Japan 
 
 
1992-1996 
2000-2004* 
* Data for China only available till 2003 
Sources: CEIC; IMF; RBA  
Saving 
31.5 
27.6 
29.2 
24.8 
Investment 
Per cent of GDP 
China 
Investment 
Other east Asia 
Investment 
Saving 
40.8 
41.9 
40.2 
39.7 
Saving 
32.9 
30.6 
33.6 
24.6 
 
My conclusion is that because of the timing and the composition of the change in the Asian current 
account position, much of the reason behind it can be attributed to the fallout from the Asian crisis of 
1997/98 and the desire of Asian governments to avoid a repeat of it.  
After the devastation faced by Thailand, Korea and Indonesia (and observed with interest by China), 
Asian countries felt they had to make their economies more resilient to international capital flows. The 
simplest way of doing that was to cut expenditure (particularly investment expenditure), keep savings 
high,  run  current  account  surpluses  and  build  up  reserves.  Since  the  reserves  are  largely  in  US 
dollars, that means lending to the United States. There is a cost to this as it means forgoing spending 
and  building  up  savings  which  will  be  lent  at  a  low  interest  rate.  It  is  a  very  expensive  form  of 
insurance designed to reassure international investors of the ability of the country to withstand a crisis. 
I remember that up until a couple of years ago, officials from Asian countries (especially China) usually 
started  any  presentation  on  their  economy  by  referring  to  their  high  level  of  international  reserves. 
They do not do that any more since the level has become so high that they exceed any likely need.  
Thus, I think that in a world of floating exchange rates and mobile international capital, a number of 
emerging  market  economies  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  international  financial  system  was  so 
potentially  unstable  that  the  only  way  they  could  participate  was  by  paying  this  large  insurance 
premium in the form of cheap loans to the United States. I have a feeling that this sentiment is starting 
to change now, but it was a large part of the reason that we have ended up where we have.  
This is not a new thought of mine, because I was already worrying about it in 1998 when I wrote:  
“I fear that a number of emerging market countries will take…(the) safety-first policy…(of) building up 
large international reserves - a new type of mercantilism. The problem with this solution is that to build 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 3
up the reserves they would have to run current account surpluses for the foreseeable future. ...The 
final irony, if this situation eventuates, would be that we would have an international system in which 
the poor countries lend to the rich so they can spend more than their income.”2 
Sustainability of surpluses  
I  think  it  is  possible  to argue  that  for countries  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate, surpluses  may  be  more 
difficult to sustain in the long run than deficits are for some other countries. I speak from experience 
here as Australia faced this problem in the early 1970s and did not handle it successfully. At that time, 
Australia briefly experienced a current account surplus and also became a favourable destination for 
capital flows. As the money poured in from both these sources it had to be sterilised or it would flow 
directly  into  the  banking  system  and  through  that  into  money  and  credit  aggregates,  with  obvious 
inflationary results.  
The problem we found was that in order to sell the official paper in sufficient volumes to soak up the 
inflow,  interest  rates  had  to  be  raised,  and  this  induced  further  inflow.  In  the  end,  the  monetary 
aggregates  grew  too  quickly  and  inflation  soon  rose  to  an  unacceptable  rate.  We  came  to  the 
conclusion  then  that  it  was  not  possible  to  restrain  an  over-exuberant  and  inflation-prone  economy 
only by domestic tightening. Exchange rate adjustment was required in order to take away the 'one 
way bet' aspect of the exchange rate. We eventually did this, but we were too slow and the inflation 
had already become entrenched.  
So far, China has made a much better job of handling this situation than we in Australia did 30 years 
ago. And, of course, it is made easier by the fact that it is occurring in a world environment of low and 
stable inflation rather than the rising inflation of 30 years ago. But, ultimately, I think the point will be 
reached where domestic restraint has to be augmented by action on the exchange rate.  
Sterilisation  is  not  as  easy  as  it  sounds.  If  all  the  central  bank  does  is  sell  official  paper  to  the 
commercial  banks  at  a  below-market  interest  rate,  it  is  not  really  sterilisation.  It  merely  exchanges 
commercial banks' balances at the central bank for central bank paper, but does not offset the initial 
increase in bank deposits caused by the official purchase of foreign currency. For sterilisation to offset 
the initial rise in bank deposits, the official paper must be sold at an interest rate that attracts non-
banks to withdraw deposits from the commercial banks in order to buy the official paper. This is rarely 
done because it would push up interest rates and attract more inflow.  
Instead,  countries  usually  rely  on  a  combination  of  raising  reserve  requirements  and  direct  lending 
guidelines to limit the growth in banks' balance sheets, and hence the money supply. These have their 
own set of problems for both commercial banks and/or central bank profitability, and hence cannot be 
maintained indefinitely.  
Ultimately,  the  inflow  of  foreign  funds  through  the  current  and  capital  accounts  has  to  be  reduced 
through a higher exchange rate. It is in the country's own domestic interest to do so, but it is difficult to 
make  the  decision  at  the  right  time,  i.e.  before  the  inflationary  consequences  in  goods  and  asset 
markets show up. We in Australia did not pass that test, but I suspect China will handle it better than 
we did.  
Conclusion 
I have tried to make a number of points in this talk, but I may not have been as clear as I would like to 
have been. I will, therefore, conclude by restating my main points in the simplest of terms. 
   it is not fruitful to approach the current needs of international policy by asking what can various 
countries do to reduce the US current account deficit;  
it is not clear to me that current account deficits are less sustainable (for some countries at 
least) than are current account surpluses;  
the  current  level  of  reserves  in  Asia  owes  much  to  these  countries'  memories  of  the  Asian 
crisis, and their determination not to go through such a situation again;  
                                                      
2  
“Recent International Developments in Perspective”, Reserve Bank Bulletin, December 1998. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2005
 the  combination  of  rapid  economic  growth,  a  fixed  exchange  rate  and  persistent  current 
account surpluses is not sustainable into the medium term, and it is in the domestic interests 
of a country in this situation to adjust its exchange rate; and  
•  whether this has an appreciable influence on other countries' balance of payments position is 
of secondary importance.  
BIS Review 50/2005 
 5
