Norman Chan: Hong Kong as an international debt financing centre 
Remarks by Mr Norman Chan, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
cocktail reception of HKCMA Forum 2005, Hong Kong, 26 January 2005. 
 Mr Yiu, ladies and gentlemen: 
I am very pleased to be invited to speak at this Cocktail Reception today. Let me first congratulate the 
Hong Kong Capital Markets Association for successfully organising this Forum. I am glad to note that 
the  Forum  has  drawn  together  many  market  participants  to  discuss  a  number  of  important  issues 
related to the role of Hong Kong as an international debt financing centre. 
Over the years, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) has been working closely with the HKCMA 
in developing the debt market of Hong Kong. This co-operation has turned a new page last year with 
the  establishment  of  the  Hong  Kong  Treasury  Markets  Forum,  or  the  TMF  in  short,  on  which  the 
HKCMA is represented. As the Chairman of the TMF, I would like to take this opportunity to introduce 
how  the TMF  intends  to  work with  the  industry  associations,  including  the HKCMA,  to enhance  the 
competitiveness of the treasury markets in Hong Kong. 
As some of you may already know, the TMF was set up in March 2004 by restructuring the previous 
Foreign Exchange and Money Market Practices Committee. The newly formed TMF takes on a much 
broader mandate in that it focuses not only on the foreign exchange and money markets, but also the 
debt, derivatives and other treasury markets. 
With rapid financial innovations and rising demand from customers for a one-stop service, the dividing 
line  between  the  traditional  treasury  and  trading  functions  of  a  bank  with  other  types  of  financial 
market services has become rather blurred. In other words, the treasury departments now encompass 
a wider variety of functions that cut across different markets, notably forex, money, debt and derivative 
markets.  The  formation  of  the  TMF,  with  representatives  from  the  HKCMA  and  other  industry 
associations,  offers  great  synergy  in  helping  enhance  the  competitiveness of  Hong  Kong’s  treasury 
markets, thereby contributing to Hong Kong’s position as the premier international financial centre in 
the region. In carrying out its work, the TMF focuses on the “3 P’s”. That is: “People”, “Product” and 
“Profile”. Let me explain further. 
Firstly,  “people”.  As  with  other  service  industries,  financial  services  are  a  “people  business”.  The 
competitive  edge  of  a  financial  centre  depends  largely  on  the  availability  of  a  large  pool  of  highly 
professional market practitioners. A priority area for the TMF is therefore to work with the industry to 
enhance the professionalism of practitioners in the treasury markets. As you may be aware, with the 
support of the TMF, the Financial Markets Association of Hong Kong (ACIHK) has recently launched a 
new  membership  regime,  together  with  a  revamped  professional  training  and  accreditation 
programme. Under the new membership drive, ACIHK, traditionally consisted of practitioners drawn 
from  the  foreign  exchange  and  money  markets,  has  recruited  new  members  from  other  treasury 
markets. In particular, with the support of the HKCMA, many of you working in the debt origination as 
well as trading sides have now joined the ACIHK. The number of ACIHK members has by now grown 
to over 1,800. 
As part of the training and accreditation programme for ACIHK members, two new courses, one on 
dealing  and  the  other  one  on  debt  securities,  have  been  developed  together  with  the  Chinese 
University of Hong Kong and the University of Science and Technology respectively. The HKCMA has 
provided  very  useful  contributions  in  designing  the  debt  securities  course,  which  commenced  last 
November. 
Secondly, “product”. Here I’m not referring to the wide array of financial products that are offered to the 
investors,  which  should  best  be  left  to  individual  financial  firms  to  develop.  What  the  TMF  and  the 
HKCMA  can  help  is  to  seek  to  develop  the  necessary  infrastructure  so  that  new  products  can  be 
launched in Hong Kong. For example, the TMF, together with the HKCMA and the HKMA, have been 
seeking to develop the HK dollar repo market in Hong Kong. For the repo market to kick off, we will 
need the necessary repo settlement facility operated by the Central Moneymarkets Unit. As a result of 
BIS Review 6/2005 
 1
this  effort,  an  efficient  and  highly  automated  platform  for  repo  settlement  has  been  made  available 
since December 2004. This is an example of how the TMF can help promote product development in 
Hong Kong. 
The  TMF  has  also  worked  on  other  issues  to  facilitate  market  development.  Examples  include  the 
NDF documentation for Asian currencies, promotion of overnight index swaps and constant maturity 
swaps, review of electronic prime broking system, and work on standard documentation in Chinese for 
use by Mainland and other customers who prefer to use their mother tongue as the working language 
in financial transactions. 
Last  but  not  least,  the  “profile”.  Even  with  good  people  and  product,  it  is  important  to  promote  the 
profile  of  our  financial  markets  to  the  Mainland  and  overseas  markets.  As  the  Mainland  gradually 
liberalises  its  markets,  the  demand  for  treasury  market  products  and  services  from  the  Mainland 
customers is likely to grow. Hong Kong has a clear niche in tapping this huge potential with our unique 
advantages  in  geographical  proximity,  culture  and  language,  as  well  as  a  talented  pool  of 
professionals and a highly efficient marketplace. 
With this in mind, the TMF has started reaching out to the Mainland. For example, TMF organised a 
seminar for the Mainland regulators last October to deepen their understanding of financial markets in 
Hong Kong. HKCMA representatives, including the Chairman, Brian, also participated as a speaker in 
the seminar. As the seminar was very well received, plans are underway to organise similar seminars 
this year to promote the exchange with Mainland officials and major financial institutions. In the past 
year,  the  TMF  also called  on  the  financial regulatory  bodies and  financial  institutions  in  Beijing  and 
participated in a Financial Services Expo in Shanghai to promote the treasury markets in Hong Kong. 
In  addition  to  the  Mainland,  the  TMF maintains close contact  with  our  overseas counterparts  in  the 
major financial centres, such as the foreign exchange committees in London and New York. The TMF 
will continue to arrange regular meetings and visits with our overseas counterparts to keep abreast of 
global developments and to exchange views on matters of mutual interest. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in less than a year since its establishment, the TMF, with the support from the 
industry and market practitioners, has made very impressive progress in its work. Looking ahead, with 
the numerous and valuable opportunities offered by the gradual opening up of the Mainland markets, it 
is up to all of us to try our best to seize such opportunities to ensure that Hong Kong will remain the 
hub for financial services and intermediation for Mainland China and the rest of the region. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2005
