Wu Xiaoling: Improving monetary policy transmission, creating a sound 
financial environment 
Speech  by  Ms  Wu  Xiaoling,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  Annual 
Conference of China Economic Forecast, Analysis and Outlook, Beijing, 20 March 2005. 
 In the first two months of 2005, the economy ran smoothly as the supply of money and credit grew 
steadily.  By  the  end  of  February,  M2  increased  by  13.9  percent  yoy;  the  RMB  loans  went  up  by 
13.4 percent  with  newly  issued  mid-  and  long-term  loans  accounting  for  46.7  percent,  or 
4.5 percentage  higher  yoy,  but  13.8  percentage  points  lower  than  that  of  last  year  as  a  whole, 
indicating some structural change. 
During January and February, the fixed investment in the urban areas increased by 24.5 percent yoy. 
Real estate investment grew by 27 percent, lower than that of the same period last year, but still at a 
rather high level. New starts continued to grow and projects under construction were of large scale. 
In January and February, the CPI went up by 2.9 percent. According to the statistics of the NBS, the 
PPI jumped by 7.2 percent yoy. With prices of raw materials, labor and land trending upward and their 
downstream impacts growing, the inflation pressure is on the rise, even though inflation is still seen as 
can be controlled within 4 percent for the year. 
The People’s Bank of China (PBC) will do its best to maintain a stable growth of money and credit 
through using a range of monetary policy tools. 
In  2005,  the  PBC  will  improve  monetary  policy  transmission  to  increase  the  effectiveness  while 
strengthening  the  preemptive  and  scientific  approach  in  conducting  monetary  policy.  Being  an 
important  part  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  process,  the  commercial  banks  shall  enhance 
promptness  in  responding  to  macro-developments  and  contribute  to  financial  stability  when 
maximizing profits and controlling risk. 
The commercial banks shall respond to macro-developments promptly 
I. 
A. Generally speaking, legislation and macro-policies aim at maintaining fair competition and efficient 
allocation of resources, reflecting the overall interests of the whole society. Under this framework, a 
positive  interaction  is  formed  among  the  legislative  bodies,  macro-adjustment  departments  and  the 
public, which would also contribute to cushioning big shocks to the economic and social development. 
Policy circumvention may in some cases reflect the reactions of micro-entities to the deficiencies in 
macro-policies. However, with the goals of national economic and social reform becoming clear, and 
with  market  mechanism,  government  administrative  capacity,  macro-policies  transparency  being 
improved and more channels reflecting problems in the economy, in coordinating macro-policies our 
aim is to make the commercial banks pay more attention to macro-policies. We should also enhance 
the effectiveness of monetary policy through better transparency and stronger credibility of the central 
bank. 
B.  Commercial  banks  shall  pay  more  attention  to  various  legislations  and  incorporate  state  laws, 
regulations and supervisory requirements to their internal controls, guided by the business philosophy 
of maximize profits within the legal framework. 
• 
• 
• 
Most financial risks stem from malpractice; 
Legal risks and regime risks are greater than operational risks; 
Legal  department  and  auditing  department  should  become  two  of  the  most  important 
departments of commercial banks. 
C.  Commercial  banks  shall  put  more  emphasis  on  national  industrial  policy  and  credit  policy  in 
conducting industrial analysis, allocating loans, seeking profitable opportunities and avoiding risks. 
The  sustainability  of  China’s  economy  is  restrained  by  limited  supply  of  primary  energy,  land  and 
water.  In  building  a  well-being  society,  the  government  advocates  scientific  development  approach. 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 1
Industrial policies will definitely be oriented to energy-efficiency. Commercial banks should keep this in 
mind while lending in order to avoid future losses. 
In  industrial  analysis  commercial  banks  can  also  consider  outside  sources,  such  as  credit  policy 
guidance of the central bank and research of consulting firms. 
II. 
The commercial banks shall improve risk pricing ability while implementing 
differentiating lending policy 
A.  It  is  essential  for  macroeconomic  adjustment  that  commercial  banks  enhance  loan-pricing  ability 
and control risks using economic capital in their efforts to improve credit structure. 
Loan pricing requires proper risk identification and measurement that rely heavily on accumulation of 
historical  data.  In  transitional  period,  it  is  a  practical  choice  for  commercial  banks  taken  into 
consideration  changes  in  industrial  policy,  trends  in  sectoral  development  and  the  advantages  and 
disadvantages of businesses in decisions concerning asset pricing and capital allocation. 
B. It is crucial to cultivating potential customers and generating profits that the commercial banks to 
take full advantage of risk pricing and differentiate customers. 
Although mature clients provide banks with stable sources of profit, with the development of the capital 
market, good businesses obtain financing by tapping corporate bond market and issuing commercial 
papers in a way to lower their costs. As a result, banks cannot avoid competing for a handful of good 
customers unless they turn to find potential customers among a sea of small and medium businesses. 
Small- and medium-sized businesses are an important engine for social economic development and 
provide a crucial source of jobs. The sound operational requirements of banks have made it difficult for 
them to extend credit to these businesses at their starting stage. As they grow and expand, banks can 
come  in  to  help  by  charging  higher  risk  premium  and  providing  financial  advice.  As  competition 
intensifies, to expand market is not only required by economic development but also meets banks own 
interests. As serving the society and return its kindness is the responsibility of all businesses, and the 
reason of the success of age-old brands, it should become the aim of financial sector too. 
III. Efforts should be made to lay the foundation of monetary policy transmission through promoting 
interest rate liberalization, financial innovation, and formation of a government bond yield curve. 
The  yield  curve  of  government  securities  provides  a  benchmark  for  pricing  of  financial  products.  At 
present,  the  term  structure  of  government  securities  cannot  form  a  complete  fixed  income  product 
yield curve. PBC’s issuing of central bank bills of one-month, 3-month, half-year and one-year terms 
takes place of the absence of short-term treasury bills. Even though central bank bills and treasury 
bonds  are  of  same  risk  category,  the  segmentation  of  treasury  market  hampers  the  formation  of  a 
complete yield curve. In order to form a benchmark yield curve, management of securities issuance 
should be replaced by management of outstanding debt, and improvement in securities registration is 
required as well. 
B. For the financial products and costs of funds to reflect changing market conditions, further efforts 
are needed to promote market-oriented interest rates. 
Progress  achieved  by  the  PBC  in  moving  toward  market  oriented  interest  rates  in  2004  included 
removal lending rate ceiling and deposit rate floor. In the meantime, the PBC still controls the interest 
rate spread of  deposit  and  lending  and  a  number of  specific  interest  rates. This  is  because spread 
income still dominates commercial banks’ income and their internal controls are still weak. The aim of 
interest rate liberalization is to eventually let the central bank control the benchmark rate and leave the 
discretion of spreads to commercial banks. 
The interest rate of excess reserves was lowered to guide the money market rate. 
C.  Financial  innovation  of  commercial  banks  should  be  encouraged  to  create  more  instruments  for 
asset and liability management and increase their adaptability to macro-adjustments. 
The discretion of financial innovation shall be left to the commercial banks as the PBC proceeds with 
interest rate reform that creates conditions for them to price their products. Efforts shall be added to 
promote CDs, financial bills, subordinated bonds and asset-backed-securities, and issuing and trading 
of corporate financing bills and corporate bonds. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2005
