Lucas Papademos: Presentation of the European Central Bank’s Annual Report 
for 2004 
Introductory statement by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, to the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 26 April 2005.  
 Madam Chairman, members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, it is an honour for 
me to present to you today the ECB’s Annual Report 2004. The presentation of the Annual Report is 
an essential part of the ECB’s accountability vis-à-vis the European Parliament. As you know, the ECB 
accords  the  utmost  importance  to  the  fulfilment  of  its  accountability  obligations,  and  I  am  looking 
forward to a fruitful dialogue with you. 
In my introductory statement, I will first briefly review economic and monetary developments over the 
past year and give our assessment of the economic outlook and the monetary policy stance. I will then 
focus on a number of policy issues examined in the Annual Report which I consider to be of particular 
importance. 
Economic and monetary developments 
Looking back to 2004, the ECB’s monetary policy operated in an environment of gradual economic 
recovery  and  subdued  domestic  inflationary  pressures  in  the  euro  area.  The  recovery  in  economic 
activity,  which  had  started  in  the  second  half  of  2003,  continued  in  2004  at  what  was,  overall,  a 
moderate  but  uneven  pace.  The  euro  area  economy  grew  strongly  in  the  first  half  of  the  year,  in 
particular  as  a  result  of  robust  global  economic  expansion.  However,  partly  on  account  of  rising  oil 
prices, growth moderated in the second half of 2004. Nevertheless, on a working day-adjusted basis, 
euro  area  real  GDP  grew  by  1.8%  in  2004,  a  markedly  higher  average  annual  rate  than  the  0.5% 
recorded in 2003. 
Against  this  background  of  relatively  modest  economic  growth,  underlying  domestic  inflationary 
pressures remained contained throughout 2004 and early 2005. Continued wage moderation played a 
key  role  in  this  respect.  However,  increases  in  administered prices  and  indirect  taxes  and  renewed 
rises in oil prices, particularly in the second half of the year, had a sizeable impact on inflation. Overall, 
annual HICP inflation was 2.1% in 2004, unchanged from the previous year. 
All in all, the Governing Council continued to take the view throughout 2004 and early 2005 that the 
outlook for price developments was consistent with the maintenance of price stability over the medium 
term.  Key  ECB  interest  rates  were  therefore  kept  unchanged  at  historically  low  levels.  Across  the 
entire maturity spectrum, the levels of both nominal and real interest rates remained exceptionally low, 
lending substantial support to economic activity. 
At the same time, a number of upside risks to price stability emerged in the course of 2004. These 
risks related mainly to developments in oil prices, potential second-round effects on wage and price-
setting  behaviour  and  uncertainty  about  further  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices. 
Moreover, strong monetary and credit growth and the accumulated stock of excess liquidity in the euro 
area increasingly gave cause for concern.  
Turning  to  the  current  economic  situation  and  the  outlook  for  the  future,  recent  data  and  survey 
indicators suggest continued moderate economic growth in the first half of 2005, with no clear signs of 
a  strengthening  in  underlying  economic  dynamics.  Looking  further  ahead,  the  conditions  remain  in 
place for real GDP growth to increase towards trend rates. On the external side, euro area exports 
should continue to be supported by foreign demand. On the domestic side, investment is expected to 
benefit  further  from  the  prevailing  very  favourable  financing  conditions  and  the  robust  corporate 
earnings currently being observed. Consumption growth should evolve broadly in line with expected 
developments  in  disposable  income.  Accordingly,  the  Governing  Council  anticipates  continued 
economic growth in 2005 and 2006. This is consistent with the ECB staff projections of March 2005 
and with forecasts made by international and private sector organisations. This outlook is subject to a 
number of uncertainties. Notably, the persistently high level of oil prices and the possibility of further 
rises pose downside risks to economic growth.  
BIS Review 29/2005 
 1
With  regard  to  consumer  prices,  the  outlook  for  price  developments  over  the  medium  term  has 
remained  broadly  in  line  with  the  ECB’s  definition  of  price  stability.  At  the  same  time,  annual  HICP 
inflation has exhibited a relatively high degree of short-term volatility, mainly caused by changes in oil 
prices  and  developments  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices.  There  is  so  far  no  significant 
evidence of underlying domestic inflationary pressures building up in the euro area. Wage increases 
have remained contained over recent quarters and, in the context of moderate economic growth and 
weak labour markets, this trend should continue. This assessment is also supported by the ECB staff 
projections of March 2005.  
However, risks to price stability remain on the upside, calling for continued vigilance on the part of the 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  These  risks  relate  again  to  oil  price  developments,  particularly  if 
second-round effects on wage and price-setting behaviour were to materialise. Upside risks to price 
stability  are  also  signalled  by  the  ECB’s  monetary  analysis.  Concerns  relate  to  continued  strong 
monetary and credit growth, which reflects the sustained stimulative effect of the historically very low 
level of interest rates in the euro area. Since monetary dynamics are driven mainly by developments in 
the most liquid components of M3, the stock of excess liquidity which has built up over the past few 
years may increasingly entail upside risks to price stability in the medium to longer term as economic 
activity gains momentum. Finally, the strong monetary and credit growth and, in particular, the marked 
growth in loans for house purchase require careful monitoring in view of the strength of house price 
dynamics in some regions of the euro area. 
The Stability and Growth Pact 
I  should  like  now  to  address  a  number  of  economic  policy  issues,  starting  with  the  EU  fiscal 
framework.  In  2004  the  debate  concerning  a  reform  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  intensified, 
subsequent  to  the  judgement  of  the  European  Court  of  Justice  annulling  the  conclusions  of  the 
ECOFIN  Council  of  November  2003  and  following  the  Commission’s  proposals  to  strengthen 
economic governance and clarify the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure. Throughout 
that  debate,  the  ECB  clearly  and  consistently  stated  its  position,  namely  that  improvements  in  the 
implementation of the Pact, particularly the strengthening of its “preventive arm”, were possible and, 
indeed, welcome. At the same time, the ECB warned against any weakening of the Pact’s “corrective 
arm” and of the provisions governing the excessive deficit procedure, as these could be detrimental to 
the credibility of the fiscal framework. In March 2005 the European Council unanimously approved a 
number of changes to the Pact. There are some aspects of the reform which can potentially help to 
strengthen the “preventive arm” of the Pact, provided they are implemented effectively. The agreed 
amendments, however, also allow – against the advice of the ECB – for greater flexibility as regards 
the “corrective arm” of the Pact. Specifically, the reform of the excessive deficit procedure implies a 
shift  towards  a  more  judgemental  approach  to  the  enforcement  of  fiscal  discipline,  for  example  by 
allowing the Commission and the Council to take into account “other relevant factors” or by making the 
time frame for correcting excessive deficits more conditional. I should recall that the ECB has stressed 
the  vital  importance  of  implementing  the  new  framework  in  a  manner  conducive  to  prudent  fiscal 
policies. 
It  is  essential  that  decisions  and  actions  to  be  taken  in  the  context  of  the  reformed  Pact  do  not 
undermine confidence in the European fiscal framework and in the sustainability of public finances in 
the euro area. It is imperative that Member States, the Commission and the Council, in fulfilling their 
respective  responsibilities,  implement  the  revised  framework  in  a  rigorous  and  consistent  manner. 
Sound  fiscal  policies,  together  with  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy,  are  fundamental  to  the 
success of Economic and Monetary Union. For its part, the ECB will not waver in its commitment to 
delivering price stability. 
The Lisbon strategy 
Let me now turn to the recently concluded mid-term review of the Lisbon strategy. Five years after the 
launch of the strategy, there is broad agreement that progress in structural reforms has been mixed. 
On  the  positive  side,  some  EU  Member  States  have  made  good  progress  towards  implementing 
reforms  in  recent  years.  However,  much  still  needs  to  be  done  if  Europe  as  a  whole  is  to  face 
successfully the challenges of technological change, globalisation and ageing populations.  
In this context, the ECB welcomes the Presidency Conclusions of the Brussels European Council of 
22 and 23 March 2005, which state that “it is essential to relaunch the Lisbon strategy without delay 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2005
and  refocus  priorities  on  growth  and  employment”.  Member  States  urgently  need  to  promote 
innovation  and  human  capital  formation,  establish  a  regulatory  environment  which  is  friendlier  for 
businesses,  accelerate  market  liberalisation  and  increase  labour  utilisation  and  labour  market 
flexibility.  
Against this background, attention must now shift towards implementing the newly refocused Lisbon 
agenda.  Closing  the  implementation  gap  in  all  Member  States  is  essential  in  order  to  reap  the  full 
benefits of structural reforms in terms of a higher growth potential and a higher employment rate in the 
medium  term,  as  well  as  improved  consumer  and  business  confidence  in  the  short  term.  The  new 
governance framework introduced by the European Council should support this process by fostering 
effective decision-making and priority-setting, and by increasing national ownership. Peer support and, 
where  necessary,  peer  pressure  need  to  be  employed  to  push  the  Lisbon  strategy  forward.  In  this 
context,  benchmarking  on  the  basis  of  sensibly  defined  quantitative  indicators,  taking  account  of 
national circumstances, would be a useful tool and a welcome driver for public discussion. Moreover, 
this would raise public awareness of the fact that successful implementation of structural reforms is 
indeed  possible  in  EU  Member  States  and  would  show  that  structural  reforms  lead  to  important 
benefits. 
As for the ECB, we will continue to support the Lisbon process by maintaining price stability, which 
fosters sustainable output growth, employment and social cohesion. At the same time, comprehensive 
structural reforms aimed at increasing flexibility and competition in labour, product and capital markets 
would  significantly  improve  the  prospects  for  non-inflationary  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area, 
thereby facilitating the conduct of monetary policy and enhancing its effectiveness. 
EU enlargement 
I should like to conclude by commenting briefly on the event that marked 2004 as a milestone in the 
history  of  European  integration,  namely  the  accession  of  ten  new  Member  States  to  the  European 
Union. With this step, Europe has passed another landmark along the road to ever closer union.  
Since  1  May  2004,  these  ten  countries  have  been  full  members  of  the  European  Union  and  have 
assumed the rights and responsibilities associated with that membership. The national central banks 
of  these  countries  have  become  members  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB),  and 
their governors participate in the meetings of the General Council of the ECB. The integration of the 
ten new national central banks into the ESCB proceeded very smoothly, thanks to the comprehensive 
preparation and the active assistance provided by the ECB in various fields. 
The economic integration of the new Member States has been progressing at an impressive pace. It is 
notable that the new Member States’ share in euro area exports and imports has doubled since 1995 
and  that  direct  investment  from  the  euro  area  in  these  countries  has  increased  significantly.  The 
potential economic benefits of enlargement are substantial, both for the fifteen old and for the ten new 
Member  States,  just  as  previous  rounds  of  enlargement  have  also  benefited  the  entire  European 
Union. 
As described in detail in the convergence reports issued respectively by the ECB and the Commission 
in October 2004, the new Member States have also made substantial progress in terms of nominal 
convergence. However, these convergence reports concluded that none of these countries have yet 
fulfilled all the conditions required for adopting the single currency.  
One  of  these  conditions  is  participation  in  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  II  (ERM  II).  Three  new 
Member  States  –  Estonia,  Lithuania  and  Slovenia  –  joined  ERM  II  in  June  2004.  In  this  respect,  I 
should  like  to  reiterate  the  importance  of  undertaking  major  policy  adjustments  –  in  particular  with 
regard to price liberalisation and fiscal policy – prior to participation in the mechanism, as this is key to 
ensuring smooth membership of ERM II.  
The  2004  accession  process  does  not,  however,  mark  the  end  of  the  EU’s  enlargement.  Indeed, 
yesterday  we  witnessed  the  signing  of  the  Accession  Treaty  with  Bulgaria  and  Romania.  I  am 
convinced that, as past experience has demonstrated, the prospect of EU membership will continue to 
serve as a catalyst for macroeconomic stabilisation and structural reforms in these countries. 
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 29/2005 
 3
