Zdeněk Tůma: Forecasting and its role as an information source in the 
decision-making of the central bank 
Speech by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the Forecasting Dinner 2005, 
Czech National Bank, Prague, 18 February 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
Last year when I was speaking on the occasion of the Forecasting Dinner, I discussed several points 
connected with the forecasting processes at central banks and at the CNB in particular. Tonight I shall 
talk about some aspects of uncertainty in forecasting and in particular about the role market forecasts 
can play as an information source in the decision-making of the central bank.  
The  essential  question  I  have  in  mind  is  to  what  extent  should  the  central  bank  follow  market 
forecasters’  expectations  about  the  future  development  of  the  economy.  In  other  words,  should  the 
central  bank,  in  order  to  achieve  its  target,  follow  the  market’s  expectations  or  can  it  surprise  the 
market from time to time?  
To your common knowledge, the CNB nowadays operates under the inflation targeting regime, which 
is a monetary policy regime that considers the forecasting process to be the heart of monetary policy 
decision-making.  
Although the forecasting process pays main attention to the future development of prices, this does 
not  necessarily  mean  that  central  bankers  are  obsessed  with  inflation.  In  fact,  inflation  targeting 
requires us to look for and use a broad range of information, including market expectations. On the 
other hand, since the inflation forecast is not only an important internal decision-making tool, but also a 
crucial  communication  device,  market  participants  have  a  good  knowledge  of  the  central  bank’s 
forecast and can compare their own view on the economy with the central bank’s one. This implies 
that both the central bank and the market are well informed about each other’s forecast.  
It is clear that a huge portion of uncertainty is inherent to any practical forecasting. Moreover, from the 
monetary  policy  perspective  this  uncertainty  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the  results  of  today’s 
monetary policy action will be effective with a significant lag. On top of that, from the economic theory 
we  know  not  only  that  today’s  monetary  policy  decision  is  important,  but  also  that  the  expectation 
about future monetary policy has an important impact.  
With  a  certain  degree  of  simplification  we  can  state  that  in  general  any  future  value  of  inflation 
depends  on  three  main  factors.  These  are  the  current  state  of  the  economy  and  its  underlying 
inflationary  pressures,  current  and  future  monetary  policy  actions  and,  of  course,  future  economic 
shocks. Consequently, the surrounding uncertainty can also be divided into similar parts.  
Let  me  first  shortly  address  the  last  point,  something  we  can  call  the  “shocks”  uncertainty.  It  is 
necessary to admit that both today’s central bank forecast and today’s central bankers’ decision are 
deterministic from this point of view. This means that no shock that the economy will face in the future 
is incorporated into both the forecast and the decision. In other words, there is no way of avoiding the 
last-mentioned uncertainty connected with future shocks and neither the central bank nor the markets 
have any superior information about them.  
The  uncertainty  surrounding  the  first  two  mentioned  points  –  the  current  state  of  the  economy  and 
future  monetary  policy  –  will  be  the  heart  of  my  remarks  tonight.  Being  forecasters  we  all  face 
uncertainty  surrounding  the  knowledge  about  the  current  state  of  the  economy.  This  current  state 
should be thought of as a shortcut to all the inflationary determinants brought from the past, but due to 
the transmission lags having an impact on future developments. Every forecaster, and of course also 
the central bank, has his own opinion about the economy’s current state.  
One question arises immediately: Should the central bank look at market forecasts and use them as a 
source of information about the economy’s current state and for its decision-making? My answer is: 
Market  forecasts  should  not  be  neglected.  On  the  other  hand  they  cannot  be  the  core  for 
decision-making and the central bank must rely primarily on its own structural modelling. This implies 
that despite all the transparency and communication, the central bank will – from time to time – have 
to surprise other forecasters and the market.  
BIS Review 10/2005 
 1
Let me now briefly explain why this is the case. In their article “Inflation forecasts and monetary policy”, 
Ben  Bernanke  and  Michael  Woodford  discuss  the  case  of  the  central  bank  fully  relying  on  market 
forecasts for its decision-making. They conclude that relying only on the market inflation forecast the 
central bank cannot perfectly stabilise inflation on the target. In the economist’s technical jargon, it can 
be shown that the rational expectations equilibrium under such circumstances does not exist.  
Although such a statement looks suspicious, there is quite a simple intuition behind it. Let’s assume 
that the central bank can infer the current state of the economy only from the market forecasts. Then, 
following the market forecasts, the central bank will clearly settle monetary policy in order to achieve 
its target. Consequently, at the end of the day inflation will in fact be equal to the target. In the world of 
rational expectations, the market forecasters immediately accommodate this experience and their next 
forecasts will already be equal to the target. Facing market forecasts equal to the target, the central 
bank  can  infer  nothing  about  the  economy’s  current  state,  which  is  of  course  inconsistent  with  the 
initial  supposition  that  the  central  bank  can  infer  the  information  about  the  economy’s  current  state 
from  the  market  forecasts.  Put  differently,  once  we  admit  that  expectations  are  formed  rationally, 
market forecasts cannot be used as pure information about the economy’s current state.  
Understandably, we live in a world of information asymmetry and the rational expectations theory does 
not  hold  in  its  “strong”  version.  But  in  this  case  it  can  be  shown  that  the  rational  expectations 
equilibrium  does  exist  but  is  not  unique.  Intuitively,  the  fact  that  the  central  bank  uses  for  its 
decision-making  market  forecasts,  which  already  implicitly  assume  certain  central  bank  behaviour, 
could produce huge output and inflation volatility. Former Fed Vice-Chairman Alan Blinder wrote about 
this issue: “This can create a dangerous ‘dog chasing its tail’ phenomenon wherein the market reacts, 
or rather overreacts, to perceptions about what the central bank might do, and the central bank looks 
to  the  markets  for  guidance  about  what  it  should  do.”  Bernanke  and  Woodford  call  the  situation  a 
“sunspot  equilibrium”  in  which  the  central  bank  responds  to  random  variables  only  because  it  is 
expected to do so.  
The  main  message  I  would  like  to  pass  on  to  you  tonight  is  that  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the 
evaluation of the economy’s current state cannot be solved simply by following the market expectation. 
As a straightforward implication I would like to stress that the central bank must rely primarily on its 
own evaluation of the economy’s current state. The central bank must both develop its own structural 
model of the economy and gather relevant information from a variety of sources. As a consequence, 
surprising  the  market  is  nothing  the  central  bank  should  be  blamed  for,  and  the  market  should  be 
prepared to face such surprises from time to time.  
2 
 BIS Review 10/2005
