Meir Sokoler: The time has come for a new Bank of Israel law 
Lecture  by  Dr  Meir  Sokoler,  Acting  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  scholarships  award 
ceremony at the Technion, Haifa, 17 March 2005. 
 First, I would like to thank you for inviting me to address such a distinguished gathering in such an 
eminent institution as the Technion. 
Many  years ago  I was a student  of  economics  here,  and  I remember  the excellent students  of  this 
august institute and the wonderful experience of outstanding instruction I received. 
I am sure that you have all heard of the Bank of Israel, the country's central bank. It appears, however, 
that many Israelis do not know much about it, apart from the fact that it prints Israel's money. A few 
months ago a 6-year-old from an Israeli primary school wrote to the Governor. In the carefully drafted 
letters of a child who had just learnt how to write, he asked: "Mr. Governor of the Bank of Israel, I 
heard that you in the Bank of Israel print the country's money. Why don't you print more money so that 
there  won't  be  any  more  poor  people,  and  there  will  be  more  roads  and  schools?"  It  might  seem 
natural that such a young child would not know the answer to the question, but it transpires that many 
citizens, adults as well as children, ask us the same question in one form or another. At first glance the 
question seems to be justified. You might think that operating the banknote printing machines for a few 
more hours would solve all the economy's problems. In fact, that is how Israel's governments acted 
until the mid-1980s. Till then the Bank of Israel printed huge quantities of banknotes for all sorts of 
purposes, some of them highly commendable. The results, however, were disastrous. The value of the 
notes at the time eroded rapidly, with catastrophic economic consequences. 
What led the Bank of Israel to print so many banknotes at that time? Why did it allow such a rapid 
increase  in  the  money  supply  and  the  monetary  base?  Didn't  it  know  that  this  would  create  high 
inflation that would rapidly erode the purchasing power of the currency? It is clear that to the governors 
of the Bank at that time, to the Bank's economists, and to many other people the outcome was very 
obvious. This was something that had been known for hundreds or even thousands of years, certainly 
since the first central bank was established - that of Sweden which was established at the beginning of 
the seventeenth century - and started printing notes that served as legal tender. 
Until  1985  the  Bank  of  Israel  was  not  independent,  and  it  had  to  print  money,  at  the  government's 
request, to finance the government's deficit, with no upper limit (they called it lending the government 
money, even if the government did not actually pay it back). In 1985 - a milestone in Israel's economy, 
with the introduction of the Economic Stabilization Program that significantly lowered inflation, but only 
to between 15 percent and 20 percent a year, higher than the level in the advanced economies - the 
Bank of Israel Law was amended, and the government was prohibited from asking the Bank to print 
money for it. This legislative change (known as the Non-Printing Law) is the only one introduced since 
the establishment of the Bank in 1954. In contrast to us, many advanced and emerging economies 
have  changed  their  central  bank  laws  in  the  last  two  decades,  all  moving  in  the  same  direction  in 
several major aspects:  
• 
Price stability was set as the major objective of interest policy. This means that the central 
bank  has  full  control  over  the  rate  at  which  money  is  printed,  in  most  cases  by  means  of 
control  over  the  very  short  term  rate  of  interest,  known  as  the  central  bank  interest  rate, 
which is the cost of money. In addition, the central bank must help in the area of long-term 
growth, as long as price stability is maintained.  
Secondly,  the  independence  of  the  central  bank  in  its  use  of  the  policy  instruments  to 
achieve the target was clearly specified. The central bank must have complete freedom to 
exercise its discretion regarding the various instruments it has available to control the money 
supply in the economy and thereby to meet the price-stability target.  
Thirdly,  the  entity  deciding  on  the  central  bank's  policy  was  defined  -  a  monetary  council 
comprising professionals who are independent of the business and political establishment.  
Fourthly, a framework for reporting and transparency of the central bank's policy vis-à-vis the 
government, the  legislature  and  the  public was determined.  In  this context communication 
with the public is important as a means of increasing the effectiveness of the policy. 
   BIS Review 19/2005 
 1
In Israel, the main target of the Bank of Israel's interest-rate policy is in the area of inflation, and since 
the beginning of the current decade it has been in the sphere of maintaining price stability. Hence - 
since  banknotes  have  been  printed  sparingly,  starting  with  the  governorship  of  the  late  Professor 
Michael Bruno, and in the periods of office of his successors Professor Jacob Frenkel and Dr. David 
Klein,  and  to  be  continued  under  the  newly  appointed  Governor  Professor  Stanley  Fischer  -  the 
purchasing power of the banknotes in your pockets is maintained long term. This is a relatively novel 
experience for us in Israel. The annual inflation rate since 1999 has averaged 1.7 percent, i.e., close 
to  the  2  percent  midpoint  of  the  target  range  of  between  one  and  three  percent.  You  probably  all 
remember the beginning of the 1980s, with two- and even three-digit inflation, which reached more 
than 500 percent a year. It is important to remember that the banknotes in your pockets are only part 
of the money supply or monetary base: the rest is the money in your current accounts. 
It is true that in the old law other objectives are mentioned, apart from that of preserving the value of 
the currency (or in modern terminology, maintaining price stability) - objectives such as a high rate of 
employment, and a high level of investment - without price stability being specifically granted priority. 
However, there is no contradiction between focusing on price stability on the one hand and objectives 
regarding employment and investment on the other. Quite the opposite: price stability is a sine qua 
non  for  sustainable  economic  growth  and  for  long-term  high  employment  and  buoyant  investment. 
This said, to remove any possible doubt the Law should be changed to specify price stability as the 
Bank of Israel's prime objective. It is worth noting that experience both here and abroad has shown 
that specific mention of price stability as the major purpose of the central bank increases its credibility, 
and  the  greater  its  credibility,  the  more  freedom  it  has  to  support  the  other  objective  of  long-term 
growth without jeopardizing price stability. 
In the area of independence in the use of monetary instruments too it would be well worth introducing 
some  order  in  Israel,  and  formalizing  the  Bank's  freedom  of  action.  Another  considerable  change 
required  in  this  field  relates  to  the  exchange-rate  regime.  Since  the  Law  was  passed  in  1954,  the 
reality  has  changed  completely:  there  is  no  foreign-currency  control,  the  Bank  of  Israel  has  not 
intervened in the foreign-currency market for almost ten years, and the exchange rate is determined 
by the market forces of supply and demand. This situation should be reflected in the new law. 
With regard to a monetary council, the Bank of Israel is in favor of the establishment of such a body 
that  would  make  decisions  on  interest  policy  and  would  also  bear  responsibility  for  it.  The 
establishment  of  such  a  council  is  desirable  as  part  of  a  system  of  checks  and  balances  for  an 
independent  central  bank.  At  the  same  time  the  tremendous  importance  of  the  creation  of  a 
mechanism  to  ensure  the  appointment  of  the  most  suitable  people  to  the  council  must  be  borne  in 
mind:  they  must  have  no  axe  to  grind,  and  cannot  come  from  the  business  sector,  government,  or 
politics. 
Turning to the issue of transparency and reporting, the Bank of Israel already publishes a half-yearly 
inflation report which explains the interest policy to the public, its results, and the implications of the 
developments during the previous half year, and describes the policy likely to be adopted in the future. 
The  Bank  of  Israel  continues  to  cooperate  fully  with  the  Prime  Minister's  Office  and  the  Ministry  of 
Finance in discussions devoted entirely to the drafting of the new Bank of Israel Law. This legislation, 
firmly founded on the principles outlined above, will propel Israel and its economy further along the 
path towards joining the family of modern countries and economies. The importance of this for Israel 
lies in its ensuring the existence of a proper framework for the government and the Bank of Israel to 
operate macroeconomic strategy intended to create long-term growth and employment as a sine qua 
non  for  raising  residents'  standard  of  living  and  level  of  welfare.  Such  a  strategy  will  provide  the 
necessary resources and the correct framework for promoting a welfare policy for the weaker sections 
of the population that will not leave them out in the cold. 
To summarize: the Bank of Israel today has in practice a not inconsiderable degree of independence. 
This independence derives from changes in economic thinking and in experience gained in setting and 
implementing interest policy both in Israel and world wide. The legal environment in which the Bank of 
Israel  operates,  however,  is  outdated  and  should  be  amended  to  make  it  compatible  with  the  new 
reality. If we enact a new central bank law here in Israel, we will join the many countries that have 
done so successfully. 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2005
