Mervyn King: Jackson Hole Conference - remarks to the Central Bank 
Governors’ Panel 
Remarks by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at a symposium sponsored by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27 August 2005. 
 Jackson  Hole  speakers  normally  draw  out  the  lessons  of  economic  theory  for  one  specific  area  of 
policy. But this year we are trying to distil lessons from the practice of monetary policy in the United 
States - over an extraordinarily successful quarter century under the leadership of Alan Greenspan – 
for the theory of monetary policy. 
At most celebrations of a long and successful career, invited speakers talk at length and the great man 
himself is allowed a few minutes at the end. It is a remarkable tribute to Alan that on this occasion the 
tradition  has  been  turned  on  its  head.  We  all  remain  intrigued  by  what  he  has  to  say.  In  the  few 
minutes  I  am  allowed,  I  want  to  describe  the  three  important  lessons  that  I  have  learnt  from  Alan 
during my time at the Bank of England. 
First, to be a successful central banker requires an extraordinary degree of objectivity. The key is to 
recognise that economics tells you how to think, not what to think. It is not a set of settled conclusions 
about issues. Above all, it is vital never to confuse the world with a model. The whole point of a model 
is to abstract from a wide range of factors in order to think clearly about one particular issue. 
Let me describe an example of what I shall call “the Greenspan approach to economics”. It concerns 
the  ‘Lucas  critique’.  Robert  Lucas’  1976  paper  encouraged  economists  to  construct  models  which 
incorporated  explicit  optimising  behaviour  by  households  and  firms.  Unfortunately,  some  of  them 
urged  policy-makers  to  apply  the  lessons  from  their  models  as  literally  as  the  enthusiasts  of  the 
engineering approach to macroeconomic policy had done so in the 1950s and 1960s. The Greenspan 
approach to economics would advise great caution. The insight of the Lucas critique is that we need to 
think  about  the  responses  of  rational  households  and  firms  when  analysing  the  consequences  of 
alternative policies. But the likelihood that any particular model captures how the real economy would 
respond to a given change in policy is vanishingly small. Lucas did not pretend that there existed a 
single  “true”  model  from  which  could  be  drawn  unequivocal  predictions  about  the  impact  of  policy 
changes. 
The  second  lesson  from  Alan’s  time  at  the  Federal  Reserve  is  that  empirical  knowledge  is  not 
confined to the econometric analysis of official statistics. There are other and often crucially important 
pieces  of  information  that  come  to  us  in  more  qualitative  form.  These  include  information  from 
businesses about what they see happening in the economy. Perhaps the most famous example of this 
in  recent  years  is  the  productivity  acceleration  in  the  US  in  the mid-1990s.  The  extensively  revised 
official US data now show that productivity began accelerating in 1995. However, that was not visible 
until the vintages released in 1998. But as Alan Blinder and Ricardo Reiss have reminded us at this 
conference,  Chairman  Greenspan  did  not  wait  until  1998  to  conclude  that  the  underlying  rate  of 
productivity growth might be increasing. The key reason was that he talked with and listened to people 
who  work  in  business.  Already  in  May  1996,  when  the  Fed’s  model  was  forecasting  increasing 
inflationary pressures going forward, Alan said “it is very difficult to take the existing structure of the 
NAIRUs, capacity limits, and the usual potential analysis that we do and square it in any measurable 
way with what we sense from anecdotal reports”.1 In the UK, there does not seem to have been a 
productivity miracle. But we have had many examples of the importance of qualitative data in making 
judgements.  For  instance,  there  have  been  significant  flows  of  migration  that  have  expanded  the 
potential labour force. By their nature, such flows are not accurately reflected in official data. But the 
Bank of England’s business contacts were able to tell us that the ability to recruit new migrant workers 
was a growing and significant response to a tight labour market. 
The third lesson that Alan has taught us is that it is the consistency over time of a policy framework 
that sustains a market economy, as the achievements of the United States over the last 200 years 
show  very  clearly.  Alan,  of  course,  has  stressed  this  in  the  context  of  price  stability.  But  it  applies 
                                                      
1  Transcript of FOMC meeting 21/05/1996. 
BIS Review 56/2005 
 1
equally well to the system of taxes, property rights and public goods provision on which prosperity in a 
market economy relies. Alan famously defined price stability in the following terms: “price stability is 
best thought of as an environment in which inflation is so low and stable over time that it does not 
materially enter into the decisions of households and firms.” 2 I would suggest that implicit in this is a 
prescription  that  Alan  might  write  for  all  economic  policies,  not  just  monetary  policy:  namely,  that 
economic policy stability is best thought of as an environment in which the decisions of households 
and  firms  are  not  materially  affected  by  the  need  to  insure  against  future  arbitrary  or  mischievous 
changes in government policy. Just as Alan would define a good monetary policy as one which leads 
people to stop talking about inflation, I think he would call a good tax policy one under which people 
stop talking about the tax system.  
In  the  last  decade  we  have  had  a  debate  about  whether  such  stability  should  be  implemented  by 
quantitative  targets  or  not.  In  monetary  policy  we  have  seen  the  spread  of  ‘inflation  targets’,  and 
targets have begun to permeate other areas of economic policy too. You will not be surprised to learn 
that  I  think  that  such  numerical  targets  have  a  role.  But  whether  they  are  appropriate  or  not  is  a 
subsidiary  question,  and  it  is  one  that  is  related  to  the  political  economy  of  how  to  ensure  the 
transparency of policy, the accountability of those responsible for it, and the way in which households 
and  firms  form  expectations  of  policy:  monetary,  fiscal  or  other.  Since  the  political  economy  varies 
from one country to another, so will the appropriate method of achieving price stability in particular, 
and  economic  policy  stability  in  general.  The  crucial  and  overriding  point  is  that  a  market  economy 
cannot  flourish  if  policymakers  behave  in  ways  that  lead  private  agents  to  expect  future  economic 
policies – be those future monetary, fiscal, or legal policies – to be subject to arbitrary or capricious 
changes.  
Of course, an expectation of a stable regime will rarely translate into stable outcomes, and it would be 
irresponsible of policymakers to let such a misconception take hold. A well designed set of institutions 
will lead to responses being predictable, but cannot guarantee that outcomes will be.  
And there is a pressing issue here. In the US, inflation has been both low and rather stable. Over the 
past decade it has varied between 1.0% and 3.8%, so we can with some justification say that inflation 
no longer “materially enter[s] into the decisions of households and firms.” In the UK inflation has, if 
anything, been even more stable. But this success carries a risk for the future. Inflation expectations 
may be sensitive to a large but temporary shock that moved inflation outside the range within which it 
has  remained  for  some  years.  With  their  belief  in  stability  jolted,  households’  inflation  expectations 
might move by much more than was justified by the temporary nature of the shock. That would make it 
more difficult for the central bank to bring inflation back to target. The moral of this particular story is 
that it may be risky to infer from the observation that inflation expectations are stable that all is well. 
There  will  be  times  when  large  and  persistent  shocks  occur,  and  it  would  be  unwise  to  count  on 
inflation  expectations  remaining  stable  when  actual  inflation  starts  to  deviate  substantially  from  its 
recent range. 
So those are the three lessons that I have learnt from Alan: (i) a recognition that economics is not a 
set  of  doctrines  but  a  way  of  thinking;  (ii)  the  importance  of  using  qualitative  and  quantitative 
information from a range of sources; (iii) there are a small number of fundamental objectives that are 
crucial and which we can judge by the Greenspan yardstick of whether we have freed businesses and 
households from the burden of expending resources to deal with unnecessary policy volatility. 
Alan’s departure from the central banking scene will deprive us of a source of wisdom, inspiration and 
leadership.  To  be  sure,  Alan’s  words,  whether  spoken  or  written,  will  surely  still  reach  us  from  the 
sidelines.  To  use  a  tennis  analogy,  I  see  Alan as  the  central  banking  equivalent  of  the  non-playing 
captain of a Davis Cup team, encouraging the younger and less talented members, and stressing the 
importance of footwork, timing and getting into position early. 
Alan,  thank  you  for  raising  the  respect  which  others  give  to  our  discipline  of  economics  and  our 
profession of central banking. 
                                                      
2  Transparency  in  monetary  policy.  At  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis,  Economic  Policy  Conference,  St.  Louis, 
Missouri, October 11, 2001. This definition was set out much earlier, in similar terms, in Alan Greenspan’s statement before 
the Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives, January 25, 1990.
2 
 BIS Review 56/2005
