Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Capital market - a cornerstone of BSP financial reform 
agenda 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines,  to  the 
Investment House Association of the Philippines (IHAP), Manila, 23 August 2005. 
 Distinguished officers and members of the Investment House Association of the Philippines (IHAP), 
ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon!  
Allow me to first of all congratulate the incoming board of directors and officers of IHAP. Let me also 
thank you for this invitation to be your keynote speaker and inducting officer.  
Since 1973, investment houses under the IHAP umbrella have carved their place in the economy as 
important  financial  intermediaries.  You  are  therefore  a  vital  partner  of  the  BSP  in  building  a  more 
resilient  and  efficient  financial  system  and  a  more  expedient  capital  market  development.  More 
recently,  your  participation  in  establishing  the  fixed  income  exchange  is  one  manifestation  of  your 
significant contribution toward taking the steps to develop the local securities market.  
Former  BSP  Governor  Paeng  Buenaventura  has  laid  down  the  blueprint  of  capital  market 
development as a vital component of the country’s financial reform agenda for sustainable economic 
growth.  As  his  successor,  I  am  equally  committed  to  ensure  the  continuity  and  consistency  of  our 
policy reforms.  
This afternoon, I will discuss the policies and programs of BSP on capital market development.  
Economic overview  
To put things in perspective, let me first give you an assessment of the economy.  
Overall, our economic fundamentals remain generally sound in the midst of political noise. For the first 
quarter of 2005, the country’s gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 4.6 percent and driven primarily 
by growth in the services and industrial sectors.  
BSP’s prudent monetary policy, anchored on inflation targeting, kept key overnight policy rates steady. 
Ample liquidity in the market and improvement in the government’s fiscal position served to push the 
yields of bellwether 91-day Treasury bill rates down to 5.6 percent.  
Headline  inflation  decelerated  to  7.1  percent  in  July,  posting  an  average  of  8.2  percent  for  the  first 
seven months of the year. 
Our peso has been relatively resilient, trading below the P56/US$ level.  
In the external sector, the balance of payments (BOP) posted a surplus of US$783 million for the first 
quarter of 2005l this is a turnaround from the US$378 million deficit in the same quarter last year.  
Meanwhile, remittances from overseas Filipino workers sustained double-digit growths. inflows for the 
month  of  June  2005  posted  a  32.1  percent  growth  (US$935  million)  compared  to  same  month  last 
year. the cumulative level of remittances for the first semester reached US$4.9 billion, 21.5 percent 
higher than a year ago’s level. This is due to increased deployment of higher-paid skilled professionals 
and improved access to formal remittance channels.    
Accordingly, we continue to enjoy a comfortable reserve position with our gross international reserves 
(GIR) at us$17.7 billion in July 2005.  
Impetus for capital market reform  
A  growing  economy,  such  as  ours,  requires  a  steady  flow  of  financing  from  both  local  and  foreign 
sources. In sustaining this development, the economy needs a healthy financial system. A financial 
BIS Review 55/2005 
 1
system  that  is  built  upon  two  strong  pillars:  a  robust  banking  system  and  a  fully-functioning  capital 
market.  
Why is it necessary to develop our domestic capital market simultaneous with the restructuring of the 
banking system?  
A fully developed capital market can stimulate domestic savings and provide investment opportunities. 
compared to our Asian neighbors like Malaysia and Thailand, we have a smaller savings-to-GDP ratio 
at  21  percent.  Domestic  savings  onshore  are  channeled  to  productive  output  crucial  to  economic 
development like infrastructure projects.  
A sound capital market also improves the financial environment with the offer of alternative financial 
instruments. At present, government papers dominate the local capital market with minimal alternative 
for other financial instruments. A marked difference with other countries where private debt issuance is 
far more significant.  
Also, the 1997 Asian financial crisis was a painful reminder of our vulnerability to external shocks due 
to our excessive dependence on the local banking system.  
BSP initiatives  
Cognizant of this challenge, Bangko Sentral has laid down a broad range of financial system reforms 
to complement and accelerate the development of the capital market.    
We  initiated  the  groundwork  through  asset  clean-up  of  banks  to  restore  the  credit  supply  to  the 
economy.  For  the  first  semester  of  2005,  the  non-performing  loan  (NPL)  ratio  of  universal  and 
commercial banks1 was back to a single-digit level at 9.2 percent. This is a reversal from a peak of 
18.8 percent in October 2001 due to asset dispositions under the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) Law. 
Hopefully,  we  can  restore  asset  quality  to  pre-crisis  levels  once  the  extension  of  the  SPAV  Law  is 
accomplished.  
As the financial environment becomes increasingly global and liberalized, BSP saw the need to align 
the  local  banking  practices  with  internationally  accepted  standards.  We  are  upgrading  the  banking 
system’s capitalization and risk management standards to be fully compliant with Basel II by 2007l we 
are also institutionalizing corporate governance and financial transparency. By yearend, the banking 
industry will adopt the new international accounting standards (IAS/IFRS). The Monetary Board very 
recently approved the implementing guidelines.  
We are likewise improving the current regulatory framework through close coordination with other local 
and foreign financial regulators. I am happy to report that the Financial Sector Forum, our partnership 
with local financial regulators (SEC, IC and PDIC), is now fully operational with major projects currently 
underway.  These  projects  include  conglomerate  mapping,  information  sharing,  joint  examination 
arrangements, rules harmonization and financial literacy.    
The domestic capital market remains shallow and underdeveloped. In response, the BSP has issued 
various circulars diversifying the financial products available in the capital market. traded papers like 
unsecured subordinated debts (as Tier 2 supplementary capital), long-term negotiable certificates of 
deposits  or  LTNCDs,  documented  repos,  and  securitization  structures  create  market-oriented 
opportunities for banks and other players and deepen the capital market.  
The BSP has also been fully supportive of the establishment of the Fixed-Income Exchange (FIE) as 
an infrastructure for the secondary trading of fixed income and other debt securities. This envisages 
the  trading,  clearing,  settlement  and  delivery  of  securities  in  a  transparent  and  efficient  manner. 
Recently, the BSP issued the implementing rules of Circular No. 392 to fully operationalize the rules 
on proper delivery of securities including the role of third party custodians. We are just awaiting the 
last missing step that is the interconnection of all key debt market participants to ROSS2] to create a 
truly seamless infrastructure for fixed income.  
                                                      
1   Combined resources of which account for almost 90 percent of the total resources of the banking system. 
2   Registry of scriptless securities of the Bureau of Treasury. 
We have also started revitalizing the trust business to widen investor base with the gradual phase out 
of  common  trust  fund  (CTF)  for  a  better  product  called  unit  investment  trust  fund  (UITF).  UITFs 
enhance  the  credibility  of  pooled  funds  to  investors  as  the  value  of  investments  is  mark-to-market, 
paving the way for long-term investment opportunities.   
Finally, we are encouraging the entry of more rating agencies to complement the establishment of an 
exchange traded papers. Rating agencies play an important role in guiding investors towards informed 
decision-making and in ensuring the proper disclosure of investment information.  
Future directions  
We have done much of the groundwork. What we need now is a decisive follow through. I must admit, 
we  have  encountered  some  resistance  and  minor  set-backs  along  the  way.  But  as  Chinese 
industrialist Yin Ming Shan puts it, “Purest gold fears no fire”. This also speaks for our intentions to 
make the capital market work.    
Although we have made some milestones with the passage of the Securitization Law, the SPV Law 
and the elimination of documentary stamp tax in secondary trading, there are remaining measures in 
our  legislative  agenda  that  need  to  be  pursued:  the  amendment  of  the  BSP  Charter,  Corporate 
Recovery  Act,  Personal  Equity  and  Retirement  Account  (PERA)  Bill,  Revised  Investment  Company 
Act  (RICA),  Credit  Information  System  Act,  revised  Corporation  Code  of  the  Philippines,  Iinsurance 
Code of the Philippines and Pre-Need Code of the Philippines. These pieces of legislation are central 
to capital market reform and IHAP’s support can strengthen our stand against the grueling legislative 
mill.  
In addition, a larger pool of institutional investors like insurance companies, mutual funds, UITFs and 
pension funds can also provide the required boost to the market.  
Our  capital  market  also  needs  strong  issuers  to  expand  the  variety  and  supply  of  instruments  for 
investors.  Using  government  papers  as  basis  for  pricing  other  long-term  issues,  I  am  encouraging 
private  corporations  whose  leaders  are  present  in  the  audience  today,  to  issue  quality  papers  and 
advance our advocacy on capital market development.  
Concluding remarks  
As a final note, I thank IHAP for this opportunity to share our advocacy on creating a well functioning 
capital market. Leadership is believing in causes and accepting the responsibility of motivating others 
to  act  on  those  causes  with  the  same  faith.  Your  enthusiasm  and  continuing  support  inspire  us  to 
pursue the remaining points in our overall financial reform package with renewed vigor.  
Thank you and more power! 
