Alan Bollard: New Zealand payment system 
Address by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Institute of Finance 
Professionals New Zealand, Auckland, 11 August 2005. 
 Introduction 
Today I'm going to talk about one of our key pieces of infrastructure - our payment system. I believe it 
is the first speech by an RBNZ Governor dedicated to that topic. I'm pleased to take it up, because it's 
an area where we have spent quite a bit of effort in recent years, and because it is of very significant 
importance to the functioning of the economy. It is also closely linked to one of the Reserve Bank's 
statutory objectives - "avoiding significant damage to the financial system that could result from the 
failure of a registered bank". I'm certainly hoping that I never have to deal with a bank failure in New 
Zealand, but we do need to be very well-prepared for such an event because of the need to act very 
quickly and confidently in order to minimise systemic impacts.  
Most of the time, the various elements of the payment system work very well and are very reliable - 
and we often take this pretty much for granted. However, any kind of disruption can be at best very 
inconvenient for  users  -  as  any  of  you  who  have  been  in  a  supermarket  queue when  the EFTPOS 
system goes down will know well. Some events can quite quickly cause more serious disruption, and 
have  an  impact  on  economic  activity.  Some  of  you  will  have  been  affected  by  the  recent  Telecom 
outage,  which  prevented  some  entities  from  accessing  payment  systems  for  a  period,  and  which 
disrupted both trading and settlement activities. There have been other incidents like this from time to 
time, sometimes affecting only one participant directly, sometimes affecting many. I will return later to 
the lessons we have learned from these experiences. 
The payment system 
The payment system consists of all the diverse arrangements that we use to transfer money, whether 
using currency, paper instruments such as cheques, or a variety of electronic channels. It is something 
we all use every day - whether to purchase a book from someone using cash, buying it on Lambton 
Quay with our EFTPOS card, buying it from Amazon using our credit card, or - for many of you - to 
settle trades in the equity, debt or foreign exchange markets, in a number of different ways. And these 
transactions  add  up  to  quite  a  lot  -  on  average  more  than  $35  billion  per  day  in  the  "wholesale" 
systems last year, and about $6 billion per day in the "retail" systems. The numbers of transactions are 
also striking - only a little over 4,000 per day in the wholesale systems, but more than 4 million per day 
in the retail systems. 
I might note at the outset that those transactions I just mentioned are all actually quite different in their 
characteristics. The first one - buying something with cash - is very simple: it just involves handing 
over some currency.  No bank  or  settlement system  is  involved,  and  no record  of  the  transaction  is 
necessarily  kept.  That  makes  it  all  very  quick  and convenient,  but  the  anonymity  can  lead  to  some 
problems as well, in respect of money laundering for example. That is a topic for another day. Note too 
that  the  Reserve  Bank  is  a  key  participant  in  cash  transactions,  in  the  sense  that  it  is  providing  a 
medium of exchange of undoubted quality. Aside from forgeries, no-one has to think about whether 
the money is "good". 
The  second  transaction  -  buying  a  book  on  Lambton  Quay  -  introduces  some  new  elements.  First, 
typically a couple of banks get involved in the process - the ones where the bookseller and ourselves 
have our accounts. There's a pipeline going from one account to the other which is not instantaneous, 
and the bank receiving the money will often not let the recipient draw on it until it is sure that it has 
itself received the money from the paying bank. 
Secondly,  customers  wishing  to  make  or  receive  payments  need  to  maintain  a  transaction  account 
with a bank - and this does involve them in accepting some risk in the event that their bank gets into 
trouble. In this sense, money "in the bank" is not quite as safe as Reserve Bank money.  
Thirdly,  a  merchant  is  now  involved,  and  merchants  participate  in  things  like  card  schemes  on  a 
different basis from cardholders - for example, merchants may bear some risks of losses when cards 
are used fraudulently; and banks may bear some risks when merchants do not deliver the goods paid 
for.  
The third example, buying the book from Amazon, adds another dimension, the cross-border element 
of the transaction - now a local and a foreign bank are involved in the "pipeline", and the payments 
may  be  governed  by  legal  and  contractual  arrangements  that  differ  from  country  to  country.  As  an 
aside, the ease with which we can now conduct international transactions, and pay for things when we 
are traveling overseas, would have been the envy of previous generations. 
In the wholesale financial markets, a final consideration comes into play - typically a local "payment" is 
made in exchange for the "delivery" of a security, or of some foreign currency. Not so long ago, there 
were  often  quite  extensive  delays  between  payment  and  delivery,  implying  significant  risks  for 
purchasers if the counterparty responsible for delivery failed in the interim. As I'll discuss more later, 
we have now moved to the happy position where most of these transactions can now be conducted on 
a simultaneous delivery-versus-payment (DVP) basis. 
There are two main lessons to draw out of these examples. 
First, the payment system is not a single entity. It is, in fact, quite a complex collection of disparate 
arrangements, with different participants, different rules, and different processes in each place. While 
there are similarities in the way things work internationally, each country also has its own idiosyncratic 
elements, reflecting its legal and banking history. The arrangements overlap and intersect at various 
points,  and  I  have  more  than  once  heard  them  described  as  spaghetti.  Of  course,  there  is  nothing 
wrong with serving spaghetti as long as you know how to handle it.  
Secondly, some of the key features I have described - in particular, the existence of sometimes-long 
pipelines  between  customers  and  banks,  and  the  dependence  on  banks  and  their  infrastructure 
providers - create risks for all the participants in the system, and those risks need to be understood 
and managed appropriately. 
I'm now going to talk about some of the significant changes in the payment system in recent years, 
and then about the various different roles that the Reserve Bank plays in this area, and how we go 
about some of them. I'll talk a bit too about the very successful risk-reduction programme that we have 
been  pursuing.  On  the  way,  I'll  have  a  few  things  to  say  about  unfinished  business  and  future 
business. 
Recent innovations 
There have been some fairly dramatic changes to the payment system over the last 20 years. Prior to 
about 1984, the system was almost entirely based on "paper", with currency and cheques being the 
dominant  forms  of  payment  for  both  retail  and  wholesale  transactions.  The  first  credit  cards  were 
issued in 1979, but these were also paper-based initially. The electronic era began about 1984, when 
EFTPOS emerged in the market. New Zealanders were enthusiastic adopters of EFTPOS, and New 
Zealand was - and still is - a world leader in the penetration of this technology. More recently, the use 
of  PC-banking  and  the  internet  to  initiate  transactions  have  been  growing  rapidly  in  popularity. 
Cheques  are  progressively  disappearing,  but  -  contrary  to  longstanding  predictions  of  a  "cashless 
society" - the use of currency has continued to grow. 
In  the  wholesale  markets,  the  Kiwi  Interbank  Transfer  System  (KITS)  began  in  1987,  to  handle 
electronically some payments between the four big banks. It was replaced in 2000 by the Same-day 
Cleared Payment service (SCP), which can handle interbank payments and payments between bank 
customers on a real-time basis. In 1990, the Reserve Bank commenced to operate the Austraclear 
system under licence. This system, as you know, provides a depository for debt and equity securities, 
the  facility  to  transfer  these  securities  on  a  real-time  delivery-versus-  payment  basis,  the  facility  to 
make cash payments, and a platform for the automated provision of intra-day liquidity to the banking 
system. 
Settlements amongst the banks in respect of each day's transactions used to take place on the books 
of the Reserve Bank - everything was netted down to a single number that each bank either owed to 
the system, or was owed by the system, and the banks' accounts at the Reserve Bank were debited 
and credited accordingly. No doubt this procedure started with a ledger, a clerk and a quill pen, and it 
didn't change much until 1998 when the electronic Exchange Settlement Account System (ESAS) was 
introduced. This system enabled three main changes: 
• 
Large interbank transactions could now be settled on the Reserve Bank's books at any time 
during  the  day,  without  having  to  wait  until  the  end  of  the  day,  and  without  having  to  be 
included  in  the  end-of-day  netting  wash-up.  This  is  called  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement 
(RTGS)  
Austraclear  transactions  were  now  also  settled  using  ESAS,  giving  the  securities  market 
delivery-versus-payment  in  central  bank  money  (Austraclear  had  previously  been  DVP  in 
commercial  bank  money).  New  Zealand  was  one  of  the  earliest  countries  in  the  world  to 
achieve this outcome.  
Reserve Bank operations to provide intra-day liquidity to enable these real-time transactions 
were automated though an "autorepo" facility  
  Finally,  late  last  year,  the  New  Zealand  dollar  entered  the  CLS  system,  which  provides  a  payment 
versus  payment  service  for  settling  foreign  exchange  transactions.  This  substantially  reduced  the 
largest  remaining  settlement  risk  for  the  New  Zealand  banking  system,  and  the  design  also 
significantly  economises  on  the  liquidity  required  to  make  foreign  exchange  settlements.  CLS  is 
connected to ESAS in order to achieve this. CLS has been very successful in New Zealand, and has 
already achieved a higher penetration in the New Zealand market than in any other country, some of 
which joined CLS back in 2002. 
Overall, it would seem that New Zealanders and New Zealand businesses get pretty good payment 
services by international standards - they are efficient, up-to-date, reliable and accessible. Our small 
size may have actually be an advantage, in that it has been relatively easier to innovate when a small 
number  of  similar  institutions  are  involved.  In  addition  to  improving  customer  services,  some  of  the 
innovations I have talked about have been motivated by the need to reduce risks, and I will return to 
that topic. 
The Reserve Bank's roles 
The Reserve Bank has been part of the payment system from its inception, but for most of the period 
had little involvement in a policy or operational sense. The various entities involved in the clearing and 
settlement of payments were owned and operated by the private sector. Of course, in the days when 
we were the Government's banker, we looked rather like other banks, with tellers and ledgers and all 
that stuff, and we were heavily involved with cheque processing and so on. We also had some other 
significant clients, like the former Dairy Board. But those parts of the business largely left the Bank 
during the 1980s reforms. 
Currently,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  a  number  of  roles  in  the  payment  system,  and  I  have  mentioned 
some of them already: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
We  are  very  conscious  that  we  are  wearing  all  these  different  hats,  and  that  they  could  involve 
somewhat  different  interests.  We  therefore  manage  each  of  these  roles  separately,  although  with 
close co-ordination, and in practice we find that they rarely come into any conflict.  
Almost  all  of  the  roles  are  core  businesses  for  central  banks.  The  only  exception  to  this  is  the 
Austraclear operation, which is more commercial in nature, and may not be an essential component of 
the  Reserve  Bank.  We  picked  up  the  Austraclear  business  in  the  first  place  because  we  were 
interested  to  ensure  that  the  New  Zealand  market  is  as  well-served  as  possible,  in  terms  of  the 
Issuer of currency - coin and paper (or these days polymer) "money"  
Provider of exchange settlement accounts - electronic "money"  
Provider and operator of ESAS - the facility to use our accounts for real-time transactions  
Provider and operator of Austraclear - securities trading and settlement  
Provider of liquidity to the banking system  
User of the system for FX and securities trading and settlement  
Regulator of banks and overseer of the payment system 
efficiency and integrity of the clearing and settlement systems, the quality of risk management, and the 
recognition of the interests of all stakeholders. Those outcomes remain our long-term goals. We are 
committed to maintaining the quality of the Austraclear service for so long as it has a role to play, and 
we have recently committed to a major upgrade of the Austraclear system. 
Risk reduction and dealing with settlement failures 
Our  regulatory  role  started  to  develop  around  1990,  a  few  years  after  we  had  entered  the  field  of 
formal bank supervision for the first time in 1987. That responsibility, together with an increased focus 
on the issues internationally, awakened our interest in the size and nature of payment system risks. 
We developed the view that the existing understandings about what would happen in the event of a 
bank failure were probably not very workable or satisfactory, and initiated a dialogue with the industry 
aimed at ensuring that payment system risks were identified, monitored and managed appropriately. 
We were also keen to ensure that the status of transactions, including those in the various "pipelines", 
was  certain  at  all  times,  and  that  payment  system  arrangements,  including  failure-to-settle 
arrangements,  were  legally,  financially  and  operationally  robust.  In  other  words,  the  arrangements 
have to work both in theory and in practice, and under acute time pressures. By financial robustness, I 
mean  that  any  losses  which  do  occur  can  be  absorbed  without  strain  by  those  bearing  the  losses. 
These remain our goals. 
Much  has  been  achieved  over  the  last  15  years.  The  moves  to  real-time  gross  settlement  and  the 
entry of the NZ dollar to CLS were both landmarks in stripping large risks out of the system. They have 
been supported by some legislative changes that have underpinned them, and which provide a high 
level of certainty. A New Zealand Bankers' Association project to review the failure-to-settle rules for 
retail transactions has led to significant improvements and greater clarity. I am grateful to everyone 
who has contributed to these developments - our payment system has become much more resilient as 
a result. 
In terms of our goals, we have now achieved a high degree of legal robustness, and much improved 
financial robustness. I think there is further scope to move some large payments which still go through 
the deferred settlement systems into the real-time systems, in order to further reduce financial risks for 
both banks and their customers, and this might require some changes to bank customer behaviour. A 
few other things may also need to be tidied up, but reasonably soon we ought to be able to reach a 
point where we can say that financial risks arising within the payment system itself are no longer of 
systemic significance. 
However, operational robustness remains a systemic issue, and it is probably going to be our main 
pre-occupation in future. Two main things are driving us here. First, we have all seen enough incidents 
where operational failures have disrupted the payment system to cause us concerns. Some of these 
have arisen in individual banks, both large and small, but have had the potential to spill-over and affect 
other participants, and/or require emergency liquidity support. Others have affected a whole system or 
network, including the recent Telecom outage and some brief disruptions to New Zealand's access to 
the SWIFT network. What these experiences have shown is that: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
serious problems can arise without warning,  
they can escalate quickly if not resolved promptly  
there is sometimes inadequate appreciation of the impact on other participants  
communications to affected parties are not always adequate  
diagnosis and repairs take time  
there are not many - or any - fallbacks when some kinds of disruption occur  
business continuity arrangements do not always provide the answers in a sufficiently timely 
manner 
The incidents have also sometimes provided confirmation that Murphy is alive and well - problems with 
completely unrelated causes can pop-up simultaneously, with nasty consequences. 
Another area of operational risk is fraud, and we have all seen reports of new kinds of fraud emerging. 
The New Zealand financial system has not been a major fraud target to date, but no-one can afford to 
be complacent about the potential risks as our electronic dependence continues to grow. Sometimes 
there  is  a  difficult  balance  to  be  struck  between  making  things  as  easy  as  possible  for  genuine 
customers  and  as  hard  as  possible  for  fraudulent  customers.  Banks  and  other  payment  system 
participants have plenty of incentives to protect the systems from fraud, and to detect it as quickly as 
possible when it happens, and the Reserve Bank may not have a great deal to add. The important 
thing  from  our  perspective  is  that  risks  should  be  managed  by  those  best  placed  to  manage  them, 
typically  the  banks  themselves.  We do  not  think  that  bank customers  should be  unduly  exposed  to 
risks that they are not reasonably able to identify or manage.  
Our second driver comes from our ongoing work on bank failure management, which some of you will 
be  familiar  with.  While  we  are  not  expecting  any  banks  to  fail,  we  do  want  to  be  in  a  position  to 
discharge  our  legal responsibilities  if one  does  get  into  trouble. And  one  of  the  things  we  may well 
want to do is to continue to operate a bank in statutory management, and keep it as a full participant in 
the payment system. We also need to be able to act quickly in respect of transactions that are in the 
various pipelines at the point where a statutory  management is declared. To do this, we potentially 
need fast access to New Zealand management, technological and payment system resources. 
I  noted  earlier  the  complexity  of  the  payment  system  overall,  and  I  don't  think  that  some  of  these 
questions have particularly easy answers. We are addressing some of them through our outsourcing 
policy, but others are likely to require alternative approaches, and some further co-operation with the 
industry. The goals include ensuring that key systems are designed to be "high availability" ones; that 
robust  back-up  arrangements  are  in  place  wherever  feasible;  that  business  continuity  plans  are 
effective  and  mutually  consistent;  and  that  rapid  decision-making  and  communication  capability  is 
readily available. For us, this is very much "work in progress" at this point. 
Legislative powers 
Finally, in talking about regulation, I should note that in 2003 the Reserve Bank was given some formal 
legal jurisdiction over the payment system for the first time, in a new Part 5B of the Reserve Bank Act. 
The powers basically give us the right to obtain and publish information, and thus to throw a spotlight 
on any issues of public interest. They do not give us the kind of authority to scrutinise and determine 
prices,  for  example,  that  the  Payment  System  Board  has  in  Australia:  here,  that  kind  of  role  is 
performed by my former colleagues in the Commerce Commission, and we are very comfortable with 
that  division  of  labour.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  an  advocate  for  competition  and  suitably-open  access 
rules in the payment system. 
In  practice  the  new  legislation  provides  a  more  formal  basis  for  the  kinds  of  things  we  have  been 
doing, and does not signal any change in direction. We decided recently to publish the principles we 
would follow in our payment system oversight work, and these have been put on our website today. 
You  will  be  able  to  read  them  there,  so  I  won't  go  into  them  in  detail.  They  do  include  a  largely-
unchanged restatement of the goals we set ourselves a decade ago: 
They state that a sound and efficient payment system is one: 
• 
that does not generate high levels of risk to participants or to users of financial services, and 
in which any risks that are generated are managed appropriately by system participants;  
that  can  continue  to  operate  without  disruption  in  the  event  of  the  sudden  financial  or 
operational incapacity of a participant, or following other types of financial crises or natural 
disasters, etc;  
that incorporates delivery-versus-payment arrangements where appropriate, and especially 
with respect to high-value transactions;  
in  which  the  status  of  payments  is  certain  at  all  times,  and,  in  particular,  in  which  the 
attributes of "finality" and "irrevocability" are supported;  
in  which  payment  services  are  efficient  and  reliable,  and  are  responsive  and  relevant  to 
customer needs; and  
that is open, flexible and competitive, with no unwarranted barriers to entry. 
• 
We have noted in the document that these goals are not an exhaustive list and may evolve over time. 
They do reflect recent and currently significant payment system issues. They also overlap substantially 
with  the  main  international  standard  in  this  area,  the  Core  Principles  for  Systemically  Important 
Payment Systems released by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems in 2001. 
    that  we  have  seen  develop 
Conclusion 
Our aims have been to achieve a payment system that is sound and efficient, and - in particular - that 
is  legally,  financially  and  operationally  robust.  We  have  made  excellent  progress  in  improving  legal 
certainty, reducing financial risks, and improving some aspects of operational robustness. However, 
the system now involves increased interdependence amongst all the participants, and more stringent 
timing  requirements,  particularly  since  the  entry  into  CLS.  Moreover,  the  increased  dependence  on 
technology 
increased 
commensurately,  and  probably  now  pose  the  greatest  potential  systemic  threat  to  the  payment 
system.  
It is clearly in all of our interests that we fully understand these issues and risks, and ensure that we all 
have  the  capacity  to  manage  them  properly,  so  that  the  payment  system  meets  the  needs  of  the 
financial system and the wider economy well, and is fully resilient to stresses and strains. I am grateful 
for the good co-operation with the industry which has enabled the progress we have made, and I look 
forward to that co-operation continuing. 
 
technological 
risks  have 
implies 
that 
