Jaime Caruana: Basel II - back to the future 
Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  7th  HKMA  Distinguished  Lecture,  “Basel  II  -  Back  to  the  Future”, 
Hong Kong, 4 February 2005. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Let me begin by expressing my gratitude for this invitation to participate in the “Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority  Distinguished  Lecture”.  I  am  honoured  to  join  the  list  of  prestigious  speakers  who  have 
discussed critical issues in economics and finance in this forum, issues made especially prominent by 
the important role that the Hong Kong Monetary Authority plays in promoting financial stability under 
the leadership of Joseph Yam. From my perspective as Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision, I am indebted to Mr Yam for his support and initiative in contributing to the development, 
and now the implementation, of the new bank capital framework, or “Basel II”. 
 “Nothing  endures  but  change,”  wrote  the  ancient  Greek  philosopher  Heraclitus  more  than  two 
thousand years ago. In a world where change is the only constant, success depends on the depth of 
our  awareness  of  the  risks  and  rewards  on  the  horizon  and  on  the  quality  of  our  preparations  to 
respond to them appropriately. That is true not just in the banking industry, but certainly also in the 
formulation of public policies geared to promoting more sustainable economic growth through greater 
financial stability.  
Today I would like to address the importance of adopting a forward-looking approach in our framework 
for financial stability. At the same time, following the advice of the Italian statesman and philosopher 
Machiavelli that “whoever wishes to foresee the future might consult the past”, I would like to make the 
case  that,  to  ensure  a  sound  regulatory  system  for  the  future,  we  must  look  carefully  back  at  the 
lessons of the past.  
It seems especially appropriate to discuss, here in Asia, the important relationship between financial 
stability  and  sound  growth.  After  enduring  a  period  of  regional  financial  distress  in  the  late  1990s, 
Asia’s re-emerging dynamism and growing stature can be seen in many indicators: for example, in its 
capacity  as  an  importer  of  raw  materials  and  foreign  direct  investment,  and  as  an  exporter  of 
manufactures, financial capital, etc. Asia is a central partner with the rest of the world through its roles 
both in trade and finance. 
Indeed,  in  a  recent  address  at  the  Centre  for  Banking  and  Monetary  Studies  in  Geneva,  Mr  Yam 
offered an accurate overview of Asia’s vibrant potential. He set out some impressive figures such as 
the amount of foreign reserves held by Asian economies, the amount of portfolio and direct investment 
going into and coming out of the region, and the high level of rates of private-sector saving, which is 
increasingly institutionalised and professionally managed. Certainly, Hong Kong is a prime example of 
the enormous potential that is being realised in Asia. Because of the openness of its economy and the 
vitality of its business environment, Hong Kong serves as an important reference point for the world.  
Hong Kong has captured the world’s attention artistically as well, especially through the recent work of 
the screenwriter and director Wong Kar-wai. His recent film, 2046, has rightly enjoyed acclaim, but it is 
the  film’s  unique  perspective  on  time  that  might  be  interesting  to  contemplate  today.  In  his  film,  as 
many of you may know, an author writes a book about the future, but gradually we realise that he is 
actually exploring his past. With apologies to Mr Wong and with deep respect for his beautiful film, I 
might  venture  to  say  that  we  can  draw  some  parallels  with  our  discussion  today.  As  I  have  just 
suggested,  I  believe  that  in  order  to  secure  financial  stability  in  the  future,  we  must  explore  and 
understand the risks that have endured since the past.  
If I may draw on my own artistic license, I’d like to reinterpret the premise of Mr Wong’s film slightly. 
Let’s consider an author, perhaps a central banker or a supervisor, who lives in the year 2046 and has 
the benefit of the perspective provided by the passage of the first half of this century. What might such 
an  author  write  about  the  main  determinants  and  evolution  of  financial  stability  during  the  first  five 
decades of the twenty-first century? 
It is my hope that in that book of the future, the Basel II framework would be portrayed as a revolution 
in  our  approach  to  financial  regulation.  It  would  represent  the  introduction  of  a  new  regulatory  and 
BIS Review 8/2005 
 1
supervisory  paradigm,  one  premised  on  the  need  to  begin  to  depart  from  blunt  requirements  and 
instead to develop rules that incorporate nuance, rules that align capital requirements more closely to 
the actual degree of economic risk a bank faces. Our author might write that Basel II represented an 
important step forward in continuing to replace static rules with rules that offer incentives for firms to 
improve constantly their internal governance and management of risk. And that it marked a milestone 
in the trend toward leveraging the power of the market place to exert discipline over firms’ decisions 
and  strategies,  such  that  other  marketplace  participants  can  better  serve  as  effective  allies  of 
regulation and supervision to achieve financial stability.  
Yet  I  must  confess  that,  with  the  evolution  in  practices  and  technology  that  can  reasonably  be 
expected by the year 2046, the Basel II capital framework released in June 2004 might well be judged 
to be excessively simple. Still, its greatest virtues might be considered its forward-looking nature and 
its  flexibility,  and  its  ability  to  adapt  to  new  circumstances  and  to  the  emergence  of  better  risk 
management practices.  
I was tempted by this flight of the imagination to frame my remarks today as the views of that author 
looking back at the work we are undertaking in 2005. In truth, though, I thought it might depart too 
much  from  the  usual  field  of  play  of  central  bankers  and  supervisors.  Instead,  I’d  like  to  share  my 
views on how the elements of Basel II take us “back to the future,” not unlike the journey of Mr Wong’s 
author in 2046 from the future to the past. In many ways, Basel II brings us back to a traditional focus 
on risk, but with the benefit of the most advanced techniques emerging today and into the future. 
Overview 
2. 
Specifically, I would like to try to address four key points. 
Firstly, I would like to consider the current framework for promoting financial stability. I will argue that, 
despite  significant  progress,  our  policy  and  decision-making  framework  for  financial  stability  is  still 
incomplete, especially if we draw a comparison with the framework for monetary stability. That said, 
there are a number of lessons we have learned in recent years that can be useful for the future, and 
which we have taken into account in designing the new Basel II capital framework. One of the most 
important of these is the very real and positive contribution that sound risk management practices can 
make to promoting financial stability.  
Therefore, in the second part of my intervention, I would like to explore in more detail some of the 
most important recent trends and developments in risk management theory and practices, and also 
the impact that these developments can have both on individual firms and on the economy as a whole. 
I will cover three trends in particular: firm-wide assessment of risk, risk aggregation and risk transfer. 
This will lead me to the third part of my intervention: the challenge of devising a supervisory response 
which harnesses these developments for the benefit of financial stability. As I will argue, it is critical to 
ensure  that  our  supervisory  and  regulatory  structures  are  compatible  with  the  best  practices  in  risk 
management today. But I believe that our structures must go beyond that and actually encourage firms 
to continue to improve their measures of risk exposures and their approaches to mitigating them in the 
future. This forward-looking approach forms the basis of Basel II.  
In the final part of my intervention, I will explore some of the implications of Basel II that received some 
attention in recent times: namely, the potential impact of the new framework, both on capital flows and 
on global competition. 
My purpose today is not to describe Basel II in detail, but rather to highlight the dynamic processes 
that it stimulates. I do not claim that Basel II covers all the areas and refinements needed to complete 
the framework for financial stability, but it does make a landmark contribution by incorporating a new 
forward-looking  approach,  to  banking  regulation  and  supervision,  which  is,  at  the  same  time, 
consistent with the lessons of the past. 
Framework for financial stability. 
3. 
Beginning with my first topic - the framework for financial stability - allow me to make a final reference 
to the hypothetical book that might be written in 2046. I would not be surprised if the author of that 
future  book  noted  an  interesting  contrast  that  existed  at  the  beginning  of  the  twenty  first  century. 
Although  we  have  a  well-developed  framework  for  debating  and  conducting  monetary  policy,  our 
thinking on financial stability is less advanced.  
2 
 BIS Review 8/2005
As an example, in the monetary field we have agreed on a definition of monetary stability – namely 
price stability. We have a framework of analysis that allows the causes and consequences of price 
instability to be studied. And, moreover, we have a highly developed decision-making framework for 
pursuing  monetary  policy,  which  has  almost  universally  adopted  the  principles  of  central  bank 
independence and primacy of price stability as the goal of monetary policy.  
In comparison, and despite significant progress during the last decades, we are not nearly as far along 
with financial stability, and there are areas where we still have something to learn. We don’t have a 
clear and measurable definition of the term financial stability and, in most cases, nor do we have a 
clear policy or decision-making structure for pursuing financial stability, unlike in the field of monetary 
policy, in which many central banks follow well-defined strategies which in one form or another respect 
the principle of “constrained discretion”.  
Achieving a coherent approach to financial stability may be challenging, if only because it requires a 
consistent combination of macro and micro elements and because of the large number of interested 
and participating parties. Also, it should foster financial innovation, and ensure a level playing field. 
However, I think that our future author might take some comfort from the fact that supervisors, central 
bankers, policymakers and others learned valuable lessons in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, 
which will remain valid for the rest of the century. Let me outline four of those lessons. 
First, we have learned of the need for businesses and consumers to have access to credit on fair and 
reasonable terms, through all stages of the business cycle, so that the economy can grow through the 
financing of the best opportunities. 
We have learned that we need an efficient and resilient payments system to maintain the flow of funds 
through  the  economy  at  all  times.  We  need  financial  markets  to  remain  active,  liquid  and  trusted, 
regardless  of  events  in  the  economy.  And  we  know  that,  for  all  these  things  to  occur,  our  financial 
institutions  must  be  led  by  responsible  individuals,  must  operate  transparently,  and  must  serve  the 
interests of depositors and shareholders alike.  
Second,  we  have  identified  some  characteristics  of  financial  instability.  For  example,  financial 
instability may reveal itself via excessive volatility in asset prices, which can move substantially away 
from the value which, in principle, their fundamentals would warrant. To be sure, a certain degree of 
volatility  in  asset  prices  is  simply  the  reflection  of  the  normal  workings  of  markets.  Likewise,  poor 
results  posted  by  a  specific  financial  institution,  even  its  bankruptcy,  may  not  have  systemic 
implications. However, financial instability may be very costly if it is on such a scale as to cause harm 
in the real economy. 
These considerations allow us to draw a relevant conclusion: the pursuit of financial stability calls for 
increased attention to a combination of micro and macro factors and must be based on a broad range 
of tools which we should all seek to strengthen. 
Third,  we  have  learned  the  importance  of  sound  macroeconomic  policies  and  an  appropriate 
institutional framework, as well as of prudential regulation and supervision, and consumer awareness 
and understanding. This is an extremely important point and even though it is not my main subject 
today, I would like to briefly underline two elements. 
Firstly,  there  is  a  broad  consensus  about  the  importance  of  promoting  the  implementation  of 
appropriate macroeconomic policies. Nobody has any doubts today about the need to promote price 
stability. However, this is not a sufficient condition for ensuring financial stability, which demands other 
additional measures.  
These include, for instance, fiscal discipline, and the design of exchange rate policies that ensure the 
consistency  of  the  exchange  rate  system  chosen  with  domestic  policies,  and  that  contain 
vulnerabilities  associated  with  exchange  rate  instability  in  the  different  sectors  of  the  economy. 
Macroeconomic  policies  must  also  be  consistent  and  sustainable  over  time.  Indeed,  unstable 
macroeconomic settings are one of the main causes of excessive volatility on financial markets. 
Secondly, an appropriate institutional framework is also needed. In particular, a set of mercantile and 
civil laws must be in place, including the treatment of bankruptcy situations; accounting obligations that 
ensure  the  uniform  representation  of  economic  events;  external  auditing  requirements;  guarantee 
funds providing appropriate safeguards; independent supervisors with operational capacity, etc. The 
legal  structure  and  its  application  by  the  judiciary  should  ensure  the  respect  of  property  rights  and 
equality before the law; in sum, legal security.  
BIS Review 8/2005 
 3
The  need  for  this  set  of  minimum  prerequisites  is  reinforced  by  the  "Core  Principles  for  Effective 
Banking Supervision”, which are invaluable as a tool for the evaluation of supervisory systems. In this 
respect, let me mention also the excellent work of the Financial Stability Forum over the last years in 
bringing together various standards issued by a number of bodies. 
In summary, even though the framework for financial stability is not as comprehensive as in the case 
of price stability, significant progress has been made in all of these areas in recent years. 
There is a fourth lesson that is particularly relevant for this presentation, and it is a lesson that we have 
learned from periods of bank resilience in times of stress. During the past few years, financial markets 
have experienced a series of significant shocks. However, the banking system has been able to cope 
with  them  successfully.  Financial  innovation,  the  existence  of  deeper  financial  markets  with  a  great 
variety and availability of instruments to transfer risks, and the improvement of the capacity of financial 
institutions to understand and manage their risks are key ingredients in explaining the resilience of the 
financial system during the period of shocks. And that leads me to my next point: important trends in 
risk management. 
Recent trends in risk management 
4. 
Financial  stability  is  a  key  precondition  for  sustained  growth.  It  is  crucial,  therefore,  to  find  reliable 
ways of identifying risks to financial stability and, in particular, to banking stability, and to try to manage 
these risks in the most effective way. Indeed, as experience has repeatedly shown, both inside Asia 
and elsewhere, having a solid and well-run banking system not only greatly reduces the likelihood of 
shocks  originating  inside  the  banking  system  but  also  makes  it  less  likely  that  shocks  arising 
elsewhere in the economy are amplified through the banking system. 
Financial  service  providers  have  long  competed  on  their  ability  to  provide  products  and  services 
tailored  to  each  customer’s  needs  and  profile.  Traditionally,  a  bank’s  balance  sheet  and  earnings 
offered  insight  into  the  quality  and  results  of  its  transactions  with  customers,  but  those  historical 
measures reflect only the outcome of past decisions. A bank’s ability to thrive in the future – and the 
ability of the banking sector to act as a source of credit to businesses and consumers alike – depends 
instead  more  on  the  kinds  and  levels  of  risk  that  its  transactions  entail.  For  most  of  the  history  of 
banking,  banks  could  assess  those  risks  only  in  a  highly  subjective  manner  and  without  significant 
confidence in the quality of such assessments. 
However,  financial  innovation  and  advances  in  the  measurement  and  management  of  risk  have 
fundamentally changed how banks and other financial service providers approach their businesses. 
Three trends are particularly prominent and have been analysed by the Joint Forum. 
First, one of the most notable advances in risk management is the growing emphasis on developing a 
firm-wide assessment of risk. 
Firm-wide risk assessment 
Improvements in technology and telecommunications have made it easier for firms to gather, collect 
and  analyse  large  amounts  of  data  on  their  exposures  and  business  activities  efficiently  and 
increasingly  in  near  “real  time.”  To  make  the  best  use  of  firm-wide  data,  many  organisations  have 
established  a  dedicated  risk  management  function  to  foster  more  highly  integrated  and  systematic 
approaches to risk measurement and management. The risk management function typically promotes 
the use of common risk measures across business lines. It can then report the firm-wide risk data to 
senior management.  
Even  though  no  single  model  for  organising  an  integrated  risk  management  function  has  become 
dominant, all firms that establish integrated risk management units are highly dependent on the quality 
of their information technology to collect, analyse and report firm-wide data efficiently and effectively. 
Some  participants  have  found  that  the  greatest  challenge  in  developing  a  centralised  risk 
management structure lies in constructing compatible and efficient management information systems 
across all of their businesses. As a result, they devote substantial resources in terms of personnel and 
expenditures to the maintenance and enhancement of their management information systems. 
This trend is important for two reasons.  
For one thing, comprehensive firm-wide assessment of risk and consistent reporting helps to ensure 
that the firm is aware of the wide range of risks to which it is exposed, that it understands the relative 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2005
importance of various risks and how they may interact, and that the firm is less likely to ignore material 
sources of risk. This facilitates early detection and resolution of problems.  
For another, this integrated risk management function requires a balance between the centralisation of 
some functions within the group as a whole, and the need to be close to local markets to incorporate 
better  knowledge  of  local  needs,  risks,  sensitivities  and  regulations.  This,  in  turn,  raises  issues  of 
co-ordination  and  communication  for  both  internationally  active  banks  and  also  supervisors,  about 
which I will say more later.  
Risk aggregation and quantification 
Collecting  risk  data  across  many  business  lines  has  catalysed  further  efforts  to  aggregate  those 
measures  of  risk  by  quantifying  them  in  a  more  rigorous  and  more  consistent  fashion.  This 
quantification of risk is the second major risk management trend identified in the Joint Forum report. It 
is not a new concept. In the insurance industry, for instance, actuaries have long sought to estimate 
the  likelihood  of  various  events  taking  place.  What  is  new  is  that,  in  recent  years,  financial  risk 
managers and researchers apply mathematics, statistics and modelling to many risk exposures that 
were previously not thought to be readily quantifiable.  
In the banking industry, for example, statistical and computational analyses developed for evaluating 
exposures to market risk led, over the past decade or so, to the application of similar techniques to 
credit risk. The introduction of increasingly reliable estimates of the drivers of credit risk, such as the 
probability of default, led to many of the proposals that form the basis for the new Basel II bank capital 
framework.  
The Joint Forum found that the “ultimate expression” of risk aggregation is the summation of many 
types of risk into a single risk measure. This measure, often called “economic capital,” estimates the 
amount of capital a firm requires to protect itself against all risks with a certain degree of confidence. 
The  benefits  of  developing  more  aggregated  measures  of  risk  across  diverse  business  lines  are 
especially appealing to complex financial organisations whose activities span many kinds of activities. 
As a result, it is not surprising that large, mixed financial conglomerates have tended to invest most in 
the development of economic capital estimates. 
Using  the  concept  of  economic  capital  and  its  elements,  banks  can  develop  sound  policies  for 
monitoring exposure limits, risk-adjusted pricing policies and sound provisioning practices based on 
the  inherent  risks  of  the  portfolios.  They  can  also  measure  returns  and  assign  capital  on  a  risk-
adjusted basis. 
Let me add a word of caution. Despite the significant progress made in the banking industry in the use 
of  models  and  new  technologies,  banks  still  depend  largely  on  risk  managers’  expert  judgement. 
Quantifying  risk  involves  making  assumptions  and  judgements.  And  no  model,  and  no  software 
package,  no  matter  how  sophisticated,  can  ever  replace  the  skills  of  a  trained,  experienced  and 
conscientious risk manager. That is why we have made sure that the Basel II framework is much more 
than  numbers  and  models.  Such  judgement  should  be  reinforced,  however,  with  the  best  possible 
information, techniques and tools for processing that information. To the extent that risk assessment 
and control methods become more formalised and rigorous, this will lessen the likelihood of making 
bad  decisions.  It  will  also  contribute  to  the  prompt  detection  of  errors  and  deviations  from  targets, 
allowing banks to implement corrective measures at an early stage.  
The  first  two  trends  that  I  have  cited  relate  to  the  internal  efforts  firms  undertake  to  identify  and 
measure their risks. The third trend I’d like to highlight concerns the dramatic increase in the use of 
transactions designed to transfer exposures to risk, especially to credit risk, to outside counterparties 
and even to investors. 
Credit risk transfer 
This past autumn, the Joint Forum released for public comment a study on the current use of credit 
risk transfer activities among financial service providers, along with a series of recommendations on 
how to promote sound risk management practices in this area. In recent years, the markets for credit 
derivatives,  credit  default  swaps,  collateralised  debt  obligations  and  other  products  have  grown 
tremendously,  providing  financial  service  providers  with  new  mechanisms  through  which  they  can 
reduce their direct exposure to credit risk. Such tools may also help to reduce concentrations of risks 
in particular firms.  
BIS Review 8/2005 
 5
I think that the emergence of these new channels for re-packaging and selling off credit risk serves as 
another means of looking forward to the future to manage risk. In this sense, the rapidly expanding 
secondary  market  for  new  credit-risk  related  instruments  bears  witness  to  the  innovation  and  the 
search for new ways of managing risk that is so vital to the continued evolution of the financial sector.  
However, we must remember to look back at the fundamental risks involved in these practices. The 
sale to outside parties of credit risk packaged into new instruments helps, of course, to transfer the 
risk, but the credit risk still exists.  
While  the  transfer  of  risks  to  institutions  or  households  that  are  better  able  to  withstand  them  is  a 
positive factor, and one of the structural explanations for the resilience of the banking sector during 
recent periods of stress, we should be conscious that this development may introduce some new risks 
into the system, such as operational risks, which require adequate treatment. Sellers of credit-related 
instruments face some degree of legal risk, for example, when new instruments are issued and their 
enforceability in courts has not yet been tested. Likewise, the creation and management of the new 
products  can  put  strains  on  legacy  risk  measurement  and  management  systems  that  were  not 
intended to handle them, creating new possibilities for operations to fall short or even to fail in some 
way, creating losses.  
These advances in the technology and practice of risk management introduce unique opportunities for 
public authorities to promote greater stability. I’d like now to turn to the efforts that banking supervisors 
are undertaking to respond to these recent trends. This represents the next topic I’d like to address 
today. 
The supervisory response: Basel II 
5. 
Against  this  background  of  increasingly  sophisticated  risk  management  practices,  heightened 
complexity  in  the  financial  markets  and  stronger  interaction  between  the  real  and  the  financial 
economy,  the  Basel  II  process  started  more  than  5  years  ago.  Rather  than  simply  resetting  the 
quantitative  standards,  we  sought  to  develop  a  new  forward-looking  approach  that  would  be  more 
sensitive to the actual risks that banks take on, one that would ensure a level playing field for banks 
that  compete  globally,  one  that  would  be  better  able  to  evolve  with,  and  indeed  encourage,  future 
improvements in the measurement and management of risk, and one that would be well-anchored on 
a solid corporate governance structure and a sound risk culture.  
If you allow me, I will draw one more parallel between monetary stability and financial stability. I would 
say  that  Basel  II  incorporates  some  of  the  key  basic  principles  that  are  also  built  in  modern 
approaches to monetary policy and which have successfully resolved the debate between rules and 
discretion: a flexible and forward-looking approach, anticipatory rather than reactive behaviour to risk, 
and the need to take into account market views. 
The new capital framework is much more comprehensive than the 1988 Accord for many reasons: it 
applies to a wider scope of entities within banking groups; it offers a menu of different alternatives to fit 
different  circumstances;  it  encompasses  additional  risks,  in  particular  operational  risk;  it  widens  the 
recognition  of  credit  risk  mitigation  techniques;  it  sets  out  a  thorough  framework  for  securitisation 
transactions; and, most importantly, it is based on three mutually reinforcing pillars. 
The first pillar aligns the minimum capital requirements more closely to banks’ actual underlying risks. 
Qualifying  banks  will  rely  partly  on  their  own  measures  of  those  risks,  a  rule  that  helps  to  create 
economic incentives for banks to improve those measures. 
The  second  pillar,  supervisory  review,  captures  the  view  that  capital  supervision  requires  banks  to 
enter into a dialogue with their supervisors on the processes and internal estimates that they develop 
to determine how best to navigate the risks and rewards that they encounter. That includes making 
decisions on how much capital beyond the minimum requirement a firms should hold. 
The  third  pillar,  market  discipline,  strengthens  external  incentives  for  prudent  management.  It 
strengthens  the  ability  of  marketplace  participants  to  reward  well-managed  banks  and  to  penalise 
poorly managed ones by enhancing transparency in banks’ financial reporting 
By relying on an “efficient frontier” of three very different policy approaches, Basel II is intended to help 
supervisors  to  promote  the  adoption  of  sound  practices  today,  to  support  efforts  to  improve  those 
practices tomorrow, and to nurture a stronger risk management culture overall. In many ways, Basel II 
6 
 BIS Review 8/2005
brings  us  back  to  a  traditional  focus  on  risk,  but  with  the  benefit  of  the  most  advanced  techniques 
emerging today and into the future. 
As I noted at the beginning of my intervention, my purpose today is not to describe Basel II, but rather 
to highlight those elements of the framework that set in motion dynamic processes that will enhance 
banks’ safety, efficiency and soundness, thereby strengthening the stability of the financial system as 
a whole and ensuring that it can better serve as a source for credit and growth for the economy.  
The comprehensive framework of Basel II provides four transmission channels for influencing financial 
stability:  first,  by  setting  more  risk-sensitive  minimum  regulatory  capital  requirements,  so  that 
regulatory capital is both adequate and closer to economic capital; second, by providing incentives to 
encourage  improvements  in  banks’  internal  risk  management  processes;  third,  the  enhanced 
mechanisms  to  encourage  the  marketplace  to  exert  external  discipline  on  banks  and  the  banking 
sector; and fourth, the necessary greater co-operation among supervisors across jurisdictions. 
Through these channels, Basel II should remove distortions potentially hindering capital flows, improve 
the efficiency of the allocation process, and increase the stability and resilience of the financial system. 
The way I see this improved dynamic “risk-based efficiency”, as I would call it, is that, given the same 
situation of an economy in terms of risk appetite and risk absorption capacity, the financial system will 
be able to provide more and better allocated financing flows, something that may help to increase the 
potential growth of the economy, without reducing the safety and soundness of the system.  
All in all the potential impacts of this new regulatory approach may be profound and wide-ranging. I 
would like to explore some of these implications that have received some attention. 
How Basel II will affect the flow of capital across borders. 
6. 
Let me start reflecting on how Basel II will affect the flow of capital across borders. Some observers 
suggested  that  the  new  capital  framework’s  heightened  sensitivity  to  risk  may  reduce  the  flow  of 
foreign investment in developing economies, since exposures to those economies might typically be 
considered of higher risk.  
I believe that, in the short run, Basel II will not have a material effect on the flow of capital, whereas in 
the medium and long term Basel II’s forward-looking elements will probably take over and higher risk 
efficiency will improve the financing of all kinds of economies. 
The first part of this comment, the lack of any short-term material effect on capital flows, is based on 
the  notion  that  Basel  II  seeks  to  align  capital  regulations  more  closely  to  banks’  current  practices, 
which  today  are  already  risk-sensitive.  Therefore,  it  will  not  change  the  way  that  banks  actually 
evaluate risk to decide whether to invest in emerging market economies. 
Yet some observers have assumed that a more risk-sensitive approach might drive up not just capital 
requirements, but also the pricing of credit to emerging market countries. This argument assumes that 
regulatory  capital  drives  individual  loan  pricing  decisions.  However,  while  regulatory  capital  is 
important  and  may  represent  an  overall  constraint,  research  and  discussions  with  banks  actually 
suggest  that,  when  determining  the  price  of  a  loan,  banks  consider  all  of  the  economic  risks 
associated with a particular borrower. It seems that factors such as “economic capital” and the level of 
competition are much more influential in individual loan pricing than regulatory capital.  
That finding should be no surprise to any banker or supervisor – banks that are managing their risks 
appropriately are already considering the risks that they face when they lend to higher-risk borrowers, 
and thus lower credit quality is already priced into a loan, even under the existing less risk-sensitive 
capital rules today. 
Furthermore, there are additional elements in Basel II that can contribute to alleviating concerns about 
the impact on capital flows to emerging markets. Let me mention the reduction in capital charges for 
retail lending, residential mortgages, small and medium enterprises (exposures below € 1 million) and 
well-provisioned past-due loans. Also, the recognition of credit risk mitigants, such as collateral and 
guarantees, is significantly better in the new framework of Basel II. 
If  we  take  a  medium  or  longer-term  perspective,  the  different  channels  that  I  mentioned  before  will 
ensure better access to financial flows for the same risk. Furthermore, market dynamics may reinforce 
this  process  and  those  banks  that  adopt  higher  standards  of  risk  management  and  capital  and 
countries that embrace the new supervisory approach could be perceived by markets as less risky, 
resulting in lower risk premiums and better access to financial markets.  
BIS Review 8/2005 
 7
Given  the  advantages  of  Basel  II,  it  may  be  that  the  timetable  set  by  the  markets  for  banks  and 
countries  to  evolve  to  Basel  II  will  perhaps  be  more  demanding  than  the  soft  transition  that  the 
supervisory community and other institutions are proposing. 
From a different perspective, I think that what should be of concern to emerging markets is not just the 
level  of  capital  flowing  into  a  country,  but  also  the  volatility  of  the  level  of  capital  inflows.  Abrupt 
changes in capital flows can be just as harmful as lower levels of flows. Volatility erodes confidence in 
the future supply of credit, rendering long-term planning meaningless.  
I believe that banks adopting especially the advanced approaches to credit risk will increasingly take 
longer-term  views  of  their  international  investments,  as  stress  testing  and  other  requirements  will 
ensure that they consider how their risks would react to certain changes in the market environment. 
More  formalised  and  disciplined  risk  assessment  processes  may  provide  for  early  detection  of 
deviations or mistakes, and that may facilitate making smoother corrections at an early stage, reducing 
the  probability  of  sudden  changes  in  investment  decisions.  This,  in  turn,  should  benefit  emerging 
market  economies  by  improving  the  degree  of  confidence  that  they  can  have  in  the  future  level  of 
capital inflows. 
This  is  very  much  related  to  the  discussion  about  procyclicality,  an  important  issue  that  we  at  the 
Committee  have  taken  up  and  addressed  seriously.  In  particular,  some  have  suggested  that  the 
ratings-based  approaches  will  drive  up  the  cost  of  credit  for  borrowers  precisely  at  times  when  its 
supply is falling, namely during downturns in the business cycle. 
This is a very complex point and deserves a whole lecture in itself. Given the time constraints today, I 
would like just to summarise my own views. Of course, I fully respect the different opinions that may 
exist on this issue, but in my opinion, there are some elements that make me think that the concerns 
over  procyclicality  are  exaggerated.  There  is  some  degree  of  procyclicality  inherent  in  banking 
behaviour.  The  question  that  we  should  consider  is  whether  Basel  II,  or  any  regulation,  will  unduly 
exacerbate this behaviour. Furthermore, it is also important to consider the trend around which cycles 
will fluctuate. I think that under Basel II, in the context of a more efficient and sound financial system, 
fluctuations  will  occur  around  a  superior  trend.  This  superior  trend  represents  a  better  relationship 
between the capacity of the economy to absorb risks and the ability of the banking system to provide 
credit. 
Furthermore,  one  cause  of  pro-cyclical  behaviour  is  low  capitalisation  and  weak  risk  management. 
Undercapitalised  banks  will  tend  to  make  abrupt  decisions  to  cut  lending  when  there  is  news  of  a 
downturn, and banks which have not assessed risks properly may likewise be forced to react abruptly. 
Pillar  2  of  Basel  II  requires  banks  to  have  a  capital  strategy  that  takes  into  consideration  the 
fluctuations of capital through the cycle and to hold additional buffers of capital that will help to offset 
potential problems. 
Basel  II’s  more  forward-looking  approach  to  granting  credit  introduces  “risk  awareness”  and  “early 
detection”  factors  that  will  provide  additional  defence  against  credit  disruptions  and  procyclicality.  I 
also  believe  that  when  banks  have  the  right  incentives  to  manage  their  risks  appropriately,  to  hold 
sufficient capital and to improve transparency, the banking system will become more resilient, more 
stable and better able to serve as a source for credit and growth 
Nonetheless,  the  Committee  recognises  that  any  risk-sensitive  capital  framework  will  cause  the 
minimum  capital  requirement  to  fluctuate  for  the  same  exposure  if  a  borrower’s  creditworthiness 
strengthens  or  weakens.  To  mitigate  excessively  wide  swings  in  capital  requirements,  the  new 
framework incorporates a number of elements such as the requirement to use longer time horizons in 
the design of internal rating systems and in the average calculations of key variables, and also the 
need to carry out stress tests and conduct calculations in downturn conditions. All these elements will 
ensure that bank managers are conscious of how risk-drivers change through the cycle and in stress 
conditions, and that they incorporate these elements into their decision-taking processes and capital 
strategies. 
Let  me  add  a  final  comment  to  this  important  issue.  It  is  clear  to  me  that  we  could  also  do  more, 
beyond  the  strict  solvency  standards,  and  study  how  other  regulations,  such  as  those  related  to 
provisioning, can contribute to reducing pro-cyclicality. 
8 
 BIS Review 8/2005
Basel II impact on global competition. 
7. 
Another  broad  concern  that  the  Committee  has  worked  to  address  is  Basel  II’s  impact  on  global 
competition.  In  particular,  some  have  asked  whether  banks  that  choose  Basel  II’s  advanced 
approaches  will  enjoy  benefits  over  those  that  choose  simpler  approaches  or  remain  on  the  1988 
Accord. 
Basel  II  reflects  also  the  existing  diversity  of  banks  and  jurisdictions  and  the  sense  that  no  single-
policy  approach,  and  no  single  hard-and-fast  rule,  could  be  applied  to  all  banks  of  all  shapes  and 
sizes. Consequently, the Basel Committee sought something bolder than a single, universal rule. The 
so  called  “menu  approach”  of  Basel  II  offers  different  alternatives  to  different  kinds  of  banks  and 
jurisdictions,  but  in  developing  this  approach  significant  efforts  were  made  to  ensure  that  the  level 
playing field is maintained. 
We should understand that adopting an advanced approach requires significant investments and does 
not  automatically  reduce  a  bank’s  capital  requirements.  In  a  more  risk-sensitive  capital  framework, 
capital requirements for an advanced bank may actually rise relative to the current rules if the bank’s 
exposures  are  actually  riskier  than  the  measures  under  the  1988  Accord  would  have  suggested. 
Furthermore, some national supervisors in emerging economies may set higher capital requirements 
than implied by Basel I, perhaps even higher than  those implied by Basel II, depending on the risk 
environment.  
The  issue  of  competition  between  banks  has  also  come  up  in  the  context  of  competition  between 
countries.  Here,  we  should  remember  that  Basel  II  is  intended  to  help  ensure  that  international 
competition in banking markets is driven by the strengths of each bank, rather than by differences in 
each country’s rules. 
One way that the Committee has sought to promote a consistent application of the new framework is 
by providing detailed requirements where necessary. As I have already mentioned, these details may 
add  to  the  appearance  of  length  and  complexity,  but  a  balance  is  necessary  to  ensure  greater 
consistency and a more level playing field. 
However, given the need for a framework which can be adapted to a wide range of circumstances, co-
operation  among  supervisors  is  clearly  the  most  important  tool  in  achieving  an  appropriate  level  of 
consistency. To a large extent, the need for greater collaboration is a natural result of the increased 
level  of  internationalisation  and  integration  in  the  financial  sector.  We  have  seen  some  structural 
developments over recent years that certainly pose challenges for both home and host supervisors 
alike, such as the emergence of locally significant - and systemically important - subsidiaries of foreign 
banks. Also, a local unit in a foreign country may be systemically important for the group. 
But I think that, at least in some areas, Basel II will act as a kind of catalyst for action. Under the new 
framework, internationally active banks will use systems whose recognition and on-going validation will 
indisputably require vastly increased collaboration among supervisors. Co-operation is a key word, but 
so  too  are  convergence,  communication  and  confidence.  Communication  is  vital  not  only  between 
supervisors or between supervisors and the industry but also, and very importantly at this stage, within 
banking groups so that all units are aware and understand the implementation plan. 
Additional co-operation and communication among supervisors will enhance confidence, reliance and 
convergence  of  supervisory  practices.  And  some  reliance  and  convergence  will  be  necessary  if  we 
want  to  avoid  redundant  work,  inefficiencies  in  the  use  of  supervisory  resources  and  an  excessive 
burden  for  the  industry.  We  are  placing  great  emphasis  on  all  these  issues  in  our  “Accord 
Implementation Group”, which is working together with many supervisors on what we call “real” case 
studies, and which is making good progress. 
Conclusion 
8. 
Let me take a few moments to draw some conclusions. What I have tried to do today is to highlight the 
anticipatory and forward-looking elements of Basel II. But, as with many things, I think that the real 
value  of  Basel  II  will  be  best  evaluated  with  the  benefit  of  perspective.  This  brings  me  back  to  our 
author of 2046.  
It may be that Basel II does not cover all the areas and refinements that are necessary to complete the 
framework for financial stability. It may be that Basel II raises new issues and requires a lot of work to 
be implemented. However, it is my view that Basel II cannot be assessed in a static way.  
BIS Review 8/2005 
 9
I  believe  that  we  will  need  some  time  to  be  able  to  fully  judge  the  real  benefits  of  Basel  II.  In  my 
opinion,  the  main  strengths  of  the  framework  do  not  come  from  its  quantitative  regulatory 
requirements, although these are certainly important. Neither do I believe that the most fundamental 
aspect is when exactly the new framework will be implemented in different countries. This will just be a 
transitional issue.  
One of the essential strengths of the incentive-based approach of Basel II is the dynamic way in which 
it will contribute to financial stability by promoting risk sensitivity and strong risk management practices 
across  banks,  reinforcing  market  discipline  and  enhancing  cooperation.  These  are  key  elements, 
because, in the end, no regulation in itself can prevent problems in badly-managed banks. 
 And  Basel  II  represents  a  tremendous  opportunity  for  banks  themselves.  By  stimulating  them  to 
upgrade and  improve  their  systems,  business  models,  capital  strategies,  risk  management  systems 
and  disclosure  standards,  Basel  II  should  improve  their  overall  efficiency  and  ability  to  compete 
globally.  
It is my view that, if supervisors and banks in 2046 look back at the evolution of financial regulation 
over the years, they may well think in terms of "before Basel II" and "after Basel II". 
10 
 BIS Review 8/2005
