Philipp Hildebrand: SNB overview of financial market activity 
Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 16 June 2005. 
 Developments in the financial markets 
1.  
Financial market activity has been dominated in recent months by three key developments. Firstly, the 
US dollar started to strengthen. Secondly, long-term capital market yields declined further despite their 
already  low  levels.  Thirdly,  changes  in  credit  risk  premiums  in  the  different  debtor  categories  have 
been more mixed than in the preceding months. 
Despite  the persistently  high current  account deficit  in  the US,  the  dollar  has  appreciated since  the 
beginning of the year by roughly 12% against both the euro and the Swiss franc, and by approximately 
7% against the yen. The dollar benefited in particular from the willingness of foreign investors to back 
US  financial  investments.  In  2004,  net  purchases  of  US  securities  were  dominated  by  the  strong 
demand from certain Asian central banks. While such purchases have remained significant so far this 
year, private investors outside the US, too, have bought more US securities. This surge in demand is 
due in part to the fact that the markets continue to rate the growth prospects in the US better than 
those  in  Europe  and  Japan.  The  growing  yield  spread  in  favour  of  dollar  investments  as  well  as 
political uncertainty regarding the future development of the European Union have also contributed to 
the relative attractiveness of the greenback. 
At  present,  there  are  few  indications  of  any  unusually  pronounced  imbalances  between  the  real 
exchange  rates  of  the  currencies  of  the  large  economic  blocs.  Looking  at  their  development,  it 
becomes apparent that they are all close to their long-term averages (cf. Graph 1). This suggests that 
the US current account deficit is not primarily a product of exchange rate distortions. It is mainly due to 
a comparatively high growth momentum and a low savings rate in the US. 
Yields  in  the  capital  markets  continued  to  fall.  While  this  decline  was  weakest  in  the  US,  yields  in 
continental  Europe  hit  historical  lows.  In  Switzerland,  for  instance,  the  yields  on  ten-year  Swiss 
Confederation bonds reached an all-time low of less than 2%. 
The  extraordinarily  low  capital  market  yields  reflect  the  market’s  low  inflation  expectations.  During 
recent  months,  certain  concerns  about  economic  growth  have  triggered  a  further  decline  in  yields. 
Both strong demand for long-term debt securities in industrialised countries (driven by demographic 
factors) and high savings rates in the emerging markets – particularly in China – have probably also 
contributed to the generally low level of interest rates. 
While 2004 was characterised by a steady and uniform decline in credit risk premiums in the different 
debtor categories, the past six months saw a less even trend in the credit risk premiums of individual 
bonds. In the corporate bonds area, the market’s attention focused on the two major US automakers. 
Their downgrading to junk bond status sent a small shockwave through the relevant market segments; 
other segments have so far remained largely unaffected, however. The credit risk premiums of other 
corporate  debtors  rose  only  slightly  and  have  remained  at  a  historically  low  level  (cf.  Graph  2). 
Meanwhile, those of emerging markets have developed in line with the economic fundamentals of their 
respective countries. 
Investment policy 
2. 
A large proportion of the SNB’s assets comprise currency reserves. An internationally accepted means 
of payment in crisis situations, they serve as a safety net for the Swiss economy and the Swiss franc. 
In order to fulfil this function, these reserves need to be invested in foreign currencies – primarily in the 
reserve currencies such as the dollar and euro – and in gold. The Bank’s leeway for investment was 
extended considerably with the entry into force of the new National Bank Act in May 2004. This has 
allowed  the  SNB  to  invest  part  of  its  currency  reserves  in  foreign  equities  and  corporate  bonds.  In 
mid-February 2005, the SNB – having already invested in corporate bonds since June 2004 – turned 
its attention to the expansion of its equity portfolios. At present, a little over CHF 3 billion are invested 
in  internationally  diversified  equity  portfolios.  As  the  equities  are  index-managed  by  external  asset 
BIS Review 46/2005 
 1
managers,  the  SNB  takes  no  active  decisions  regarding  the  weighting  of  individual  sectors  or 
securities. 
In principle, the National Bank does not invest in Swiss equities and corporate bonds, thus avoiding, 
from the outset, any potential conflicts of interest which could jeopardise the SNB’s independence. As 
a  shareholder  in  Swiss  companies,  the  Bank  would  risk  being  confronted  with  structural  issues.  It 
could also lead to a conflict between its monetary policy and investment policy goals if an interest rate 
hike by the SNB were to erode the domestic companies’ profits. Furthermore, such a move could have 
an adverse effect on prices should the SNB have to liquidate securities of Swiss businesses at short 
notice. And finally, it is conceivable that the National Bank could gain access to privileged financial 
market information through its activity in the area of system stability. This would make investing in the 
Swiss financial sector even more problematic. 
The  influence  of  equity  portfolios  and  corporate  bonds  on  the  National  Bank’s  risk  profile  is  only 
moderate.  The  overall  risk  attached  to  assets  –  as  measured  by  value-at-risk  –  has  not  changed 
greatly  since  the  introduction  of  these  investment  options.  Gold  and  exchange  rates  are  still  the 
biggest  factors  contributing  to  overall  risk.  Equities  account  for  less  than  5%  of  the  total  risk,  while 
corporate  bonds  contribute  only  a  negligible  proportion.  The  current  investment  structure  and  the 
performance of the SNB’s assets are published online on a quarterly basis in an updated appendix to 
the Investment Policy Guidelines of the Swiss National Bank. 
Risk measurement and management 
3. 
The return on the SNB’s assets – particularly on currency reserves – fluctuates dramatically from year 
to year. The absolute loss can be considerable. While it is true that earnings fluctuations have been 
reduced  by  the  scaling-back  of  dollar  and  gold  holdings  in  recent  years  along  with  the  improved 
diversification of currencies and investment categories, it is not possible to continue reducing risks ad 
infinitum. Hence, hedging the currency reserves’ dollar and gold risks to a high degree, for instance, is 
impracticable, as these reserves would then no longer serve their intended purpose. Professional risk 
measurement and management is thus crucial for the SNB. 
The risks attached to the National Bank’s assets are primarily assessed using the value-at-risk (VaR) 
method.  This  widely  used  risk  indicator  quantifies  the  level  of  loss  that  will  most  probably  not  be 
exceeded within a specific period of time. The SNB calculates the VaR based on a 95% probability 
and a time horizon of one year. Value-at-risk analyses are undertaken both for individual portfolios and 
the  total  assets.  The  current  VaR  for  the  total  assets  of  approximately  CHF  100  billion  amounts  to 
roughly CHF 4.5 billion. 
A value-at-risk analysis gives no indication of how much could potentially be lost beyond the specified 
level of 95%. Furthermore, it is based on current risk and correlation structures that are not necessarily 
an  accurate  reflection  of  future  risks.  This  is  particularly  the  case  at  the  moment  –  at  a  time  when 
market volatility is low by historical standards. The SNB therefore backs up the VaR calculations with 
stress and scenario analyses. These simulate extreme market fluctuations and examine the impact of 
such fluctuations on the assets. Scenarios that have an especially severe impact on the SNB’s assets 
include a fall in the gold price and a depreciation of the dollar and euro. Such scenarios show that 
serious losses could potentially be sustained. The volatility of the SNB’s earnings therefore remains 
high despite the new investment universe. Experience has shown, however, that major losses tend to 
even themselves out in the medium term, i.e. over a period of three to five years. 
 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2005
  BIS Review 46/2005 
 3
