Y V Reddy: Implications of global financial imbalances for the emerging market 
economies  
Remarks by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the round table discussion at 
the International Symposium organised by the Bank of France, Paris, 4 November 2005. 
Please also refer to the website of the Reserve Bank of India for annex that accompanies this speech. 
 I am thankful to the Banque de France for inviting me to the international symposium on Productivity, 
Competitiveness and Globalisation to enable me to share my thoughts on financial stability. I intend 
speaking  on  the  possible  implications  of  global  imbalances  for  the  emerging  market  economies 
(EMEs) with special focus on India. 
Although  fast  growing  economies  are  generally  grouped  together  as  EMEs  ,  some  of  their  major 
macroeconomic  indicators  present  a  wide  spectrum.  While  some  of  the  EMEs  are  running  large 
current  account  surpluses  (such  as  China,  the  Russian  Federation,  South  Korea,  Venezuela, 
Malaysia,  Taiwan  and  Brazil),  some  others  are  running  current  account  deficits  (such  as  Turkey, 
Hungary,  South  Africa,  Mexico,  India  and  the  Czech  Republic)  and  their  current  account  balances 
range from a deficit of US$ 20 billion to a surplus of US $ 69 billion. While savings rates for select 
EMEs1  range  from  nine  per  cent  to  43  per  cent  of  the  GDP,  in  most  of  the  EMEs  the  rates  have 
increased and overtaken those of the industrial countries, with particularly high savings rates in China, 
Malaysia and Russia.  Likewise, while some of the EMEs have fiscal surplus (Russia), several others 
have  fiscal  deficit  (Turkey,  India,  the  Philippines,  Argentina  and  several  other  EMEs).    Also,  while 
some of the EMEs such as India are largely domestic-demand driven, some other EMEs, particularly 
in  the  East  Asia  (Malaysia  and  the  Philippines)  are  largely  dependent  on  exports  to  sustain  their 
growth and their exports of goods and services range from 15 per cent to over 120 per cent of GDP.   
It is useful to note that while some of the EMEs are net oil exporters, some others are net oil importers. 
Thus, given the diverse nature, macroeconomic conditions and policy regimes of the EMEs, it may be 
difficult  to  treat  all  of  them  as  contributing  to  global  financial  imbalances,  in  the  same  manner,  nor 
would all the EMEs be identically affected by the adjustment of global financial imbalances. It may, 
therefore, be somewhat difficult to speak about the implications of global financial imbalances for the 
EMEs  as  a  group.    I  would,  therefore,  focus  primarily  on  India,  but  the  analytic  framework  could 
perhaps be of some help in appreciating the implications for different EMEs.  
It is worthwhile to mention that there are some factors which could adversely impact the EMEs as a 
group,  though  with  varying  intensity.  Global  developments,  particularly  those  in  the  world  financial 
markets, have the most direct and serious impact on the financing conditions in the emerging markets. 
An  abrupt  and  sharp  adjustment  of  the  currencies  may  potentially  lead  to  a  significant  portfolio 
rebalancing by the foreign investors, which could cause sharp changes in the long-term yields.  This, 
in  turn,  could  result  in  volatility  in  the  level  and  cost  of  capital  flows  with  direct  implications  for  the 
EMEs. 
Volatility in financial markets could adversely affect the EMEs in many ways, and also in a complex 
and interrelated fashion. For convenience of analysis, the impact may be classified broadly into: (i) the 
impact on the financing conditions in which EMEs operate; (ii) impairment of the balance sheets of the 
banking sector, and (iii) hampering of the growth prospects in the real sector. Even within the same 
EMEs, the impact could vary across different entities such as the Government, the corporate sector, 
the households and the financial sector, depending upon the country-specific and institution-specific 
operating environment, the stage of development and the degree of integration with and exposure to 
the international financial markets. In view of the diversity of the EMEs and the complexity of impact of 
                                                      
1   There is no single acceptable definition of EMEs, although they are commonly referred to as economies with high growth 
prospects. The IMF in its latest Global Financial Stability Report has categorised the following countries as EMEs: Latin 
America  –  Argentina,  Brazil,  Chile  Colombia,  Mexico,  Peru,  Venezuela;  Asia  –  China,  India,  South  Korea,  Indonesia, 
Malaysia,  Pakistan,  the  Philippines,  Taiwan  Province  of  China  and  Thailand;  Europe,  Middle  East  and  Africa  –  Czech 
Republic, Egypt, Hungary, Israel, Jordon, Morocco, Poland, Russia, South Africa and Turkey. Select economic indicators of 
select EMEs are furnished in the Annex. 
   1/6 
any unpredictable unwinding of global imbalances, it is proposed to analyse the possible implications, 
illustratively, with reference to India  
Recent macroeconomic developments in India 
There  are  several  noteworthy  features  of  India’s  recent  macroeconomic  performance.  First,  the 
investment  climate  has  improved  and  industrial  and  service  sector  activity  has  picked  up.  Second, 
buoyant  exports  have  emerged  as  the  driver  of  demand  for  a  broad  spectrum  of  industries.  Third, 
there has been a modest attempt at and a commitment to achieve fiscal consolidation.  Fourth, the 
trend inflation has declined over the years and inflation expectations stabilised. Fifth, India has been 
successful  in  managing  liquidity  against  the  backdrop  of  continuing  capital  flows.  Sixth,  India  has 
emerged as a preferred destination for foreign investors and received about a quarter of the global 
portfolio flows to the EMEs in 2004. Seventh, India’s foreign exchange reserves are in excess of the 
total  outstanding  external  debt  of  the  country.  Eighth,  the  performance  of  the  corporate  sector  has 
improved  and  some  corporates  are  now  listed  on  the  international  stock  exchanges.  Ninth,  India’s 
financial  markets  have  deepened,  widened  and  become  vibrant  over  the  years  with  a  robust 
institutional  framework  and  market  infrastructure  in  place.  Tenth,  the  profitability  and  soundness 
indicators  of  the  banking  sector  have  improved.  Finally,  India  has  been  adopting  international 
benchmarks for financial standards and best practices with suitable adaptations for Indian conditions.  
The  Indian  economy  today  is  characterised  by  an  environment  of  confidence,  positive  business 
expectations,  a  renewal  of  rule-based  fiscal  consolidation,  stable  and  orderly  financial  markets  and 
institutions  and  progressive  integration  with  the  global  economy.  Real  GDP  growth  for  2005-06  
(April-March)  has  been conservatively  projected at  around  7.0  per  cent,  and more recently,  revised 
upwards to a range of 7.0 to 7.5 per cent. Despite the sustained strength of export performance, the 
merchandise trade deficit is expected to be somewhat higher in 2005-06 than in the previous year, 
mainly on account of substantially higher oil prices and non-oil import demand for investment. For the 
year  as  a  whole,  while  invisibles  may  finance  a  large  part  of  the  enlarged  trade  deficit,  the  current 
account deficit is expected to widen during 2005-06 but to remain within acceptable limits that can be 
financed by normal capital flows. The headline inflation is expected to lie in the range of 5.0-5.5 per 
cent.  Consolidation  of  Central  Government  finances  is  the  goal  of  fiscal  policy  at  the  Centre  –  the 
targets are: the gross fiscal deficit (GFD) of 3.0 per cent of GDP and the elimination of the revenue 
deficit  by  2008-09.  The  fiscal  position  of  State  Governments  also  continues  to  undergo  slight 
correction in terms of key deficit indicators. 
Against this background, it may be useful to analyse the implications of global financial imbalances for 
India in terms of the likely impact on four separate balance sheets - of the government, of the Reserve 
Bank of India, of the corporate sector and of the banking sector. 
Impact on the government 
The Government of India does not raise resources from the international capital markets to finance the 
fiscal  deficit,  though  the  bilateral  and  multilateral  sources  do  provide  moderate  amount  of  foreign 
currency funds.  The Government could, therefore, be affected indirectly through the spill-over impact 
of external developments on domestic interest rates. What is of relevance, inter alia, is the nominal 
international interest rates and domestic interest rates, adjusted for inflation differential.  To the extent 
there  is  a  rise  in  domestic  interest  rates,  there  could  be  an  increase  in  the  cost  of  government 
borrowings of the Government. Since most of the outstanding debt is at fixed rates and not on floating 
rates, the rise in the borrowing cost will be incremental. This situation also provides greater headroom 
for  a  flexible monetary  policy  to  adjust  policy  rates, as  and  when  warranted,  without  any excessive 
impact on the fiscal deficit.  
Impact on the Reserve Bank's balance sheet 
The  fiscal  position  of  the  Government  could  also  be  indirectly  impacted  through  the  nature  of 
management  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  held  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  Volatility  in  the  foreign 
exchange  market  exposes  foreign  exchange  reserves  to  both  operational  and  market  risks. 
Depreciation in the value of any reserve currency vis-à-vis the domestic currency would result in an 
equivalent  decline  in  the  value  of  the  reserves  held,  though  the  impact  may  be  mitigated  to  some 
extent  through  appreciation  of  other  currencies  in  which  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  held.  Also, 
   2/6 
increase  in  global  interest  rates  would  entail  capital  losses  on  the  corresponding  assets,  including 
fixed income securities.  Valuation and capital losses could impact the income of the Reserve Bank of 
India  and  thus,  its  surplus  transferable  to  the  Government  which,  in  turn,  would  have  fiscal 
implications. It is pertinent to mention that the Reserve Bank of India, as a matter of prudent practice, 
follows  conservative  accounting  norms  whereby  the  valuation  gains/losses  on  foreign  exchange 
reserves and gold are not taken to the profit and loss account, but instead, booked under a separate 
reserve head.  
Impact on the Indian corporates 
As  a  result  of  deterioration  in  global  financial  market  conditions,  spreads  on  corporate  debt  might 
widen  suddenly  due  to  shift  in  investor  confidence  in  the  global  financial  markets.  Increase  in  the 
global interest rates may also have impact on other benchmarks such as LIBOR. A sharp rise in yields 
may entail an increase in cost of variable-rate debt contracted by the corporates. This, to some extent, 
could be offset if there is a depreciation of the relevant currency and consequent decline in the value 
of the existing debt contracted by corporates in that currency.  
Indian corporates as also some of the public sector enterprises raise resources from the international 
capital markets. While a part of their external commercial borrowings is at variable interest rate, a part 
is at fixed interest rates. In order to avoid any serious impact of changes in the exchange rate on the 
balance sheet of the corporate sector, Reserve Bank has been advising banks to regularly monitor the 
unhedged position of the corporates and has also been exhorting corporates to hedge their foreign 
exchange exposures. Thus, India's corporates could be affected by the deterioration in the financing 
conditions only to the extent they are not hedged either by foreign-currency cash flows in the normal 
course of business or through recourse to appropriate hedging products. Corporates would, however, 
be affected to the extent interest rates firm up in the domestic market, depending on their exposure to 
debt relative to other liabilities. 
Impact on the banking sector 
Banks  in  India  are  dependent  mainly  on  domestic  deposits,  predominantly  at  fixed  rates,  for  their 
resource  requirements.  They  would,  therefore,  be  impacted  significantly  only  if  the    adverse 
developments in the international capital markets are particularly severe.  Banks, in general, also do 
not hold stock of securities in foreign currency. Banks in India have, thus, relatively small exposure to 
the foreign exchange market. Their foreign currency borrowings are subject to the prudential limit of  
25 per cent of their Tier-I capital and they are also required to maintain capital against the net open 
position. Foreign currency borrowings by the banks are permitted beyond this ceiling, which is linked 
to the net worth, exclusively for the purpose of export finance. 
Like many other emerging market economies, credit extended by banks in India has increased sharply 
in  recent  times.  Credit  growth,  which  was  earlier  seen  largely  in  housing  and  retail  loans,  has  now 
turned quite broad-based with agriculture and industry also joining to drive up the credit demand.  The 
credit  growth  in  some  sectors,  specially  those  related  to  assets  which  are  experiencing  price 
volatilities, is being monitored closely.  
Banks are allowed to lend to resident exporters in foreign currency at internationally competitive rates 
of  interest  from  their  foreign  currency  lines  of  credit  as  well  as  out  of  funds  available  in  exchange 
earners'  foreign  currency  accounts,  resident  foreign  currency  accounts  and  foreign  currency  
non-resident (banks) accounts. These loans are intended to finance domestic and imported inputs for 
export production. Foreign currency loans to exporters are generally hedged against credit risk since 
they  are  extended  for  bona  fide  underlying  activity  viz.,  export  production.  They  are  also  usually 
covered for exchange risk since they are denominated in foreign currency. Banks are also allowed to 
extend  loans  in  foreign  currency  to  non-resident  Indians  against  their  FCNRB  deposits.  Funds  in 
foreign currency deposits can also be utilized for lending to domestic corporates for working capital 
requirements in India, import financing, purchase of indigenous machinery, repayment of rupee term 
loans and external commercial borrowings.  
Banks have also been extending credit for investment in the asset market.  Like many other EMEs, 
asset prices in India have also risen sharply in the last couple of years.  Should there be reversal of 
capital  flows,  asset  prices  may  decline  sharply  exposing  the  banks’  balance  sheets  to  credit  risk.  
There  is  a  risk  that  rise  in  interest  rates  in  general  could  impact  housing  prices  and  expose  the 
   3/6 
balance  sheet  of  the  households  to  interest  rate  risk,  leading  to  some  loan  losses  for  banks.  The 
overall  banking  sector’s  exposure  to  housing  loans  is  relatively  small  and  may  not  have  serious 
systemic  implications.  Likewise,  the  equity  market  has  also  seen  a  sustained  uptrend.  Reversal  of 
capital flows could impact the equity market and some of the advances extended for investments in 
the equity market might turn non-performing.  Again, Indian banks do not have large exposure in the 
asset market though, in the recent past, it has been increasing.  Decline in asset prices could cause 
loan losses and capital losses, if the decline is significant, though the impact on banks’ balance sheets 
might be muted, given their small exposure to the asset market.  
The most significant impact on banks’ balance sheet, however, could be felt through their investment 
portfolio. Banks in India hold substantial investments in Government and other fixed income securities. 
Such investments amounted to US $ 173 billion, constituting 35.1 per cent of their total assets as on 
September 16, 2005.  To the extent a rise in international interest rates impacts the domestic interest 
rates, it would entail marked-to-market losses on the investment portfolios.  
The  banking  sector,  however,  has  acquired  some  added  strength  to  absorb  such  probable  shocks, 
largely aided by regulatory actions. Apart from having built up a significant capital base reflected in the 
capital to risk-weighted assets ratio (CRAR) for the sector of 12%, specific steps have been taken to 
meet  the  interest  rate  risk.  First,  separate  provision  for  capital  against  market  risk  has  been 
introduced. Second, a gradual building up of Investment Fluctuation Reserve up to 5% of the marked-
to-market portfolio (out of tax-free profits) by March 2006 has been mandated, and several banks have 
already achieved the target. Third, an enabling risk management environment has been provided to 
banks  to  hedge  their  risks  through  vanilla  derivative  instruments.  Fourth,  Conservative  accounting 
norms  followed  did  not  allow  banks  to  book  unrealized  gains.  Fifth,  as  a  one  time  measure,  banks 
were allowed to transfer securities to HTM, after booking the MTM losses against these. Thus, banks 
in India, in general, have the resilience to withstand some rise in interest rates. 
Impact on the real sector 
Readjustment  of  the  currencies  would  also  have  implications  for  the  real  sector.    Significant 
readjustment of the currencies and rise in interest rates could slow down the global growth. This would 
entail a reduction in export opportunities and reduction in investment demand for EMEs, in general, 
many of which depend on export demand to sustain their growth. Rise in interest rates, by slowing 
down spending, may have a negative impact on the global economic growth.  Thus, readjustment of 
the currencies may affect several EMEs in a significant way.   
The  impact  of  any  slowdown on  India may  be  assessed with reference  to  two  factors.  First,  India's 
economy is largely domestic-demand driven. While India’s exports constituted 11.5 per cent of GDP, 
its share in the world trade is only 0.8 per cent. Second, India's exports basket is fairly diversified.   
Some  concerns  arise  with  regard  to  the  implications  for  employment  in  case  of  a  slowdown  in  the 
exports  sector,  especially  with  regard  to  the  significant  specialisation  in  BPO/IT  Enable  Services.  
Rapid job growth that absorbs the huge supply of agricultural labour into its industrial work force is 
necessary  for  socio-economic  stability  in  India.  Any  negative  impact  on  employment  resulting  in 
substantial decrease of real earnings and widening income inequality is likely to reduce overall welfare 
and  increase  the  cost  of  structural  adjustments  required,  especially  in  the  absence  of  meaningful 
social safety nets.   
Monetary and prudential measures as responses 
The  outlook  for  output  growth  in  India  has  improved  in  the  recent  months,  particularly  with  the 
momentum gained in manufacturing sector. However, persistence of global imbalances and high oil 
prices with a significant permanent component do pose some risks.  Furthermore, the credit growth 
has  recently  been  extremely  strong  possibly  impacting  credit  quality,  while  money-supply  is  over-
shooting  the  anticipated  trajectory  and  strong  investment  demand  coupled  with  high  oil-prices  is 
turning  the  current  account  surplus  into  a  deficit,  though  modest  and  manageable  through  normal 
capital flows.  These developments pose new challenges to maintaining price and financial stability 
while  ensuring  momentum  in  growth.    Consequently,  in  the  Mid-Term  Review  of  Annual  Policy 
Statement  for  the  year  2005-06,  released  on  October  25,  2005,  several  measures  have  been 
announced to contain and manage the downside risks.   
   4/6 
First, the reverse-repo rate (overnight liquidity absorption by Reserve Bank) has been increased by 25 
basis points to 5.25 per cent, keeping the spread between reverse repo and repo at 100 basis points.  
The Bank Rate, being the signalling rate for medium term, is retained at 6.00 per cent.   
Second, rationalization of limits on banks’ exposure to capital market has been announced, restricting 
it to 40 per cent of a bank’s net worth while simplifying the exemptions and coverage.   
Third,  the  general  provisioning  requirement  for  standard  advances  has  been  enhanced  from  the 
present level of 0.25 per cent to 0.40 per cent except in regard to Banks’ exposures to laggards in 
credit-growth, namely, Agriculture and Small and Medium Industries.   
Fourth, a decision had been taken to treat the entire balance under Investment Fluctuation Reserve as 
Tier I capital, thus providing some head-room to banks to raise Tier II capital in future.   
Fifth,  revised  guidelines  are  being  issued  on  corporate  restructuring  mechanisms  to  be  followed  by 
banks in the light of experience gained.   
Sixth, having regard to the recent trends in the credit markets, RBI is initiating a supervisory review 
process  with  select  banks  having  significant  exposure  to  some  sectors,  namely,  real  estate,  highly 
leveraged non-banking financial companies, venture capital funds and capital markets.  The purpose 
of such a review is to ensure that effective risk mitigants and sound internal controls are in place for 
managing such exposures. 
Some reflections 
From the above discussion, it is clear that the Impact on India would depend on the pace and extent of 
currency and current account readjustments, and changes in global interest rates. While India by itself 
hardly contributes to global financial imbalances, any large and rapid adjustments in major currencies 
and  related  interest  rates  or  current  accounts  of  trading  partners  could  indirectly  impact  the  Indian 
economy.  
From the case of India, it is also clear that readjustment of the currencies and rise in interest rates 
would  impact  different  EMEs  differently.  Despite  rise  in  short-term  interest  rates,  long-term  interest 
rates, instead of rising, have moderated, leading to a further flattening of the global yield curve and 
narrowing  down  of  credit  spreads.  EMEs  have  taken  advantage  of  favourable  financial  conditions. 
During the first half of 2005, EMEs focused on operations aimed at meeting domestic and external 
obligations  and  lengthening  maturities.  However,  higher  global  interest  rates  could  contribute  to 
widening of emerging market bond spreads, particularly those with high debt to GDP ratio. In view of 
expected deceleration in financial conditions, some emerging markets have cushioned by advancing 
their  external  financing,  taking  advantage  of  current  benign  financial  market  conditions.  Emerging 
market  economies  have,  however,  continued  to  improve  their  debt  structures  in  an  effort  towards 
reducing  their  vulnerability  to  external  shocks.  EMEs  have  carried  out  active  liability  management 
operations  aimed  at  meeting  their  financial  requirements  while  minimising  the  cost  of  debt  and  its 
risks. Some countries have taken steps to develop their local markets and have reduced the amount 
of foreign currency-linked domestic debt, while gradually improving the maturity profile. Some of the 
EMEs have also reduced the share of domestic debt indexed to the exchange rate.  
Compared to the past crises, the EMEs, in general, are now resilient and in a better position to absorb 
a  financial  shock.  They  have  developed  resilience  to  shocks  by  improving  their  macroeconomic 
conditions and regulatory frameworks. EMEs have been achieving a healthy growth with more or less 
stable  inflation  and  have  reduced  their  dependence  on  external  demand.  There  has  also  been  an 
improvement in fiscal positions, supported by the development of domestic securities markets.  The 
external  debt  burden  has  declined  and  the  composition  of  financial  flows  has  changed  with  lower 
reliance on borrowings from international banks. Several EMEs have addressed the weaknesses that 
led  to  the  earlier  crisis  by  strengthening  prudential  regulation  and  supervision  more  in  line  with 
international  best  practices.  Banks’  balance  sheets  have  improved  and  capital  ratios  have  risen. 
Corporate governance practices have also improved. To the extent EMEs have introduced flexibility in 
their  exchange  rates,  their  vulnerability  to  external  shocks  has  declined.  All  these  factors  have 
reduced the vulnerability of EMEs.  Large reserves held by EMEs should also enable them to cope 
with the volatility arising out of a sudden shift in market sentiment. 
While macroeconomic fundamentals of several EMEs are strong, placing them in a relatively better 
position to withstand deterioration in international financing conditions, economic performance of some 
EMEs has been found to be less robust. The conditions in these economies may get accentuated by 
   5/6 
adjustment of global financial imbalances and high and volatile oil prices. A possible volatility in the 
global  financial  markets  emanating  from  a  rise  in  interest  rates  could  magnify  and  propagate  the 
problems  associated  with  less  than  satisfactory  performance  in  some  of  the  EMEs,  making  them 
vulnerable to sudden reassessment of country risk. Such threats are real as the default rates of sub-
investment grade borrowers could increase. Credit derivatives, which have proliferated in recent years 
and whose pricing has depended on relatively untested models and default correlation assumptions, 
may in particular be vulnerable to corrections.  
The  main  challenge  for  EMEs  is  to  continue  to  take  advantage  of  the  current  favourable  external 
financing  conditions  and  at  the  same  time  pursue  domestic  macroeconomic  and  structural  reforms 
necessary for long-term stability. In fact, some EMEs have well-advanced external financing, in some 
cases even including prefinancing for 2006 .  EMEs have made significant gains in terms of healthy 
growth, stable inflation, large trade surplus, greater exchange rate flexibility and lower debt burden.  
While  EMEs  are  preparing    themselves  to  face  sudden  shocks,  efforts  need  to  be  made  by  all 
concerned for an orderly adjustment of global financial imbalances. While co-ordinated policy action 
would minimise the cost of rebalancing, perhaps, a stress testing by all the concerned regulators in the 
EMEs to assess the extent of the resilience could be helpful. 
The  EMEs,  despite  their  diversity,  seem  to  generate  expectations  of  high  growth  and  are  generally 
characterized by less-than-fully developed markets, specially financial markets.  Consequently, there 
are significant cross-border capital flows, with market perception of high risk and high reward in EMEs.  
It is useful to note that implicit in the word “emerging” in the very title given to the EMEs as a group, is 
the notion that they are undergoing a rapid change or transition.  We must recognize that the transition 
embraces  demographics,  political  institutions,  social  dimensions  and  related  attitudes.    These  all-
encompassing changes have an in-built potential for uncertainties, possibly some volatility, but it gets 
exacerbated by the international capital flows, particularly when the changes in such flows happen to 
be unrelated to domestic fundamentals.  In such a situation, managing the transition turns out to be a 
critical challenge for policy making, and the management requires a more difficult and dynamic trade 
off between commitment and flexibility in policy. 
Overall, while added risks – both upside and downside – are inevitable with increasing global financial 
and  economic  integration,  the  EMEs  may  consider  strengthening  their  resilience  through  not  only 
sound  macroeconomic  management  but  also  by  adopting  appropriate  prudential  measures.  Over  a 
period, co-ordinated efforts, both at regional as well as global levels, could also help EMEs to cushion 
themselves better against the risks of financial globalisation.    
Thank you. 
 
   6/6 
