Lucas Papademos: Interview with Financial Times and Financial Times 
Deutschland 
Interview  with  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  conducted  by 
Mr Ralph  Atkins  and  Mr  Marc  Schieritz  and  published  in  the  Financial  Times  and  Financial  Times 
Deutschland on 19 December 2005. 
 Mr  Papademos,  you  have  responsibility  as  ECB  Vice-President  for  financial  stability  issues. 
Are the risks to financial stability of interest rates remaining low greater than the risks involved 
when short-term rates are rising?  
A comparison of the risks involved when short-term rates are rising with the risks to financial stability 
of rates remaining low is not easy, as it depends on the relative assessment of the two types of risks 
and on the magnitude of a potential increase in short-term rates.  
On the whole, I would expect that potential increases in global interest rates – not necessarily in the 
euro area – that are moderate and anticipated should not involve risks to financial stability. Needless 
to add, the size of possible risks will differ across countries and sectors. Let me elaborate. 
When interest rates remain at a low level for a long period of time, they may entail risks to financial 
stability as a result of their effects on households, corporations and financial institutions. For example, 
low interest rates have contributed to the rapid rise in household debt and the fast increase in house 
prices  in  many  countries  in  the  euro  area,  but  also  elsewhere.  The  sustainability  of  household 
indebtedness and related credit risks when interest rates rise depend on the ability of households to 
service their debts and on their buffers. 
In the euro area, despite increased indebtedness, households have comfortable buffers. Debt-to-asset 
ratios are sufficiently low in the euro area as a whole, and the ability of households to service their 
debt  is  not  expected  to  be  substantially  affected  by  potential  future  increases  in  interest  rates.  Of 
course, the impact of higher rates on household debt-servicing costs will differ across countries and 
socio-economic groups. 
Among  investors,  the  low  level  of  global  interest  rates  has  contributed  to  the  so-called  “search  for 
yield” and the flattening of the yield curve. At least some investors have tended to acquire assets of 
higher risk without requiring a commensurate higher rate of return. The low interest rates may have 
influenced investors’ risk-return preferences. And in an environment of higher interest rates, there may 
be a readjustment of these preferences with consequences for the level of long-term interest rates. 
For  corporations,  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  has  helped  to  improve  their  balance  sheets  after  a 
period  of  excessive  investment  and  borrowing.  This  restructuring,  or  repair  of  balance  sheets,  has 
been  very  important  in  the  euro  area.  More  recently,  however,  low  interest  rates  have  fuelled  an 
increase in borrowing and a tendency of firms to borrow short term, rather than long term. But despite 
this development over the past year, the ratio of short-term to long-term obligations of euro area firms 
is not high.  
The flattening of the yield curve has exerted some pressure on bank profits. However, the profitability 
of euro area banks has evolved in a very satisfactory manner as a result of the positive influence of 
other  factors,  increased  lending,  especially  mortgage  lending,  higher  non-interest  income  and  as  a 
consequence  of  cost  cutting  and  a  reduction  in  the  flow  of  provisions.  Low  interest  rates  may 
encourage banks to increase their holdings of more risky assets and this could have implications if 
credit conditions change when interest rates increase.  
Is that the same as saying that there are no risks to economic growth of rising interest rates?  
It is not the same thing, but under the present circumstances the consequences would be similar. With 
respect to the specific adjustment in the monetary policy stance of the ECB that took place earlier this 
month, I would not expect this to have a significant adverse effect, if any, on the ongoing economic 
recovery in the euro area. 
Will the general global monetary policy tightening have an impact on euro area growth?  
BIS Review 87/2005 
 1
In  principle,  a  tightening  of  monetary  policy  –  global  and  domestic  -  would  be  expected  to  contain 
aggregate demand growth. The extent, however, of this effect depends on the initial conditions and on 
the influence of a variety of other factors. In the US, despite the substantial increase in interest rates 
since the middle of 2004 which followed a fairly long period of low interest rates, economic growth has 
remained robust because of the cumulative impact of the previous monetary accommodation and of 
other factors that have at least partly counterbalanced the effects of higher interest rates. 
An important channel through which monetary policy influences the economy is through its effects on 
long-term interest rates. If long-term interest rates  remain at a low level – as a result of favourable 
inflation expectations influenced by a credible monetary policy oriented towards price stability and as a 
consequence of the impact of other factors– then the effect on economic activity of a rise in short-term 
interest  rates  is  going  to  be  more  muted.  Moreover,  the  expected  strength  of  euro  area  economic 
growth in the coming year is mainly based on the projected evolution of internal demand. 
Which  effect  is  stronger  -  the  impact  of  higher  short-term  rates  on  growth,  or  the  beneficial 
effects of low long-term rates?  
Well,  it  depends  of  course  on  the  term-structure  of  debt  and  the  proportion  of  long-term  debt  with 
variable rates. But the general point that I would like to emphasise is that although a higher level of 
short term rates can be expected to dampen growth in principle, it may not dampen growth in practice 
because  of  the  influence  of  other  factors,  including  those  that  determine  the  functioning  of  labour 
markets and productivity growth.  
Could it be that the recent move by the ECB represents a case where increase interest rates 
might stimulate growth?  
I would agree with this. Public perceptions and expectations of future inflation should be favourably 
influenced by a change in the monetary policy stance that aims at preserving price stability. It [a higher 
level of interest rates] could foster expectations of lower inflation and higher real disposable incomes, 
and increase confidence, particularly in countries where public perceptions of current inflation are less 
favourable than actual inflation and financial markets’ inflation expectations. 
[So] you expect the adjustment to higher interest rates to be orderly?  
Your question suggests that it is a certainty that higher interest rates are coming. I think that we have 
clarified that we have not decided, ex-ante, to engage in a series of interest rate increases. 
So I will answer the question in a general way, as a hypothetical question on whether an evolution of 
interest rates towards a higher level will be orderly? 
As far as policy rates [set by central banks] are concerned, it is important that any future changes are 
well  understood  by  the  markets  and  the  public  and  are  predictable.  As  regards  changes  in  market 
rates,  particularly  potential  adjustments  in  long-term  rates  partly  in  response  to  a  change  in  the 
monetary policy stance, I would say that the likely scenario would be one of an orderly adjustment, 
although the relationships between long-term and short-term rates are complex.  
Although there is a risk of an abrupt correction in the level of long-term interest rates as a result of the 
impact  of  other  developments,  this  is  not  the  likely  outcome  on  the  basis  of  currently  available 
information. 
Is there a risk of house price bubbles bursting?  
It is always difficult to identify whether property price rises are indicative of a bubble because property 
prices are influenced by changes in fundamentals as well as by speculative behaviour. We know that 
in a number of countries, including those where house prices have increased at a fast pace, such as 
France, Spain or Italy, fundamental factors can account for at least a substantial part of the change in 
prices. 
On the basis of some estimates that have been made to try to assess the extent to which bubbles 
exist, one can say that in some countries there are indications of an overvaluation of property prices, 
but there are many caveats associated with these estimates which have to do with the difficulties in 
disentangling fundamental and speculative effects. 
On the whole, I would say that a slowdown in the pace of increase of house prices is likely but the risk 
of a correction – that is, of a decline – is small in the period ahead. Needless to say, conditions in 
housing markets and the size of associated risks differ considerably across countries, and even across 
regions within countries, in the euro area. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2005
Will the ECB raise interest rates again in coming months?  
The change in the ECB’s monetary policy stance in early December was both necessary and prudent. 
It was necessary in order to preserve price stability over the medium term in view of several upside 
risks  to  price  stability  that  had  been  identified  and  in  order  to  send  a  clear  signal  that  the  ECB  is 
determined  to  continue  pursuing  a  credible  policy  that  will  preserve  price  stability  over  the  medium 
term and continue to anchor inflation expectations to price stability. 
It  was  prudent  to  act  promptly  in  view  of  increased  upside  risks,  taking  into  account  the  long  lags 
involved  between  a  change  in  monetary  policy  and  its  effects  on  price  developments.  It  was  also 
prudent to decide on a moderate change in the stance, taking into account the uncertainty surrounding 
the evolution and effects of other determinants of inflation dynamics. 
With regard to the future, we did not decide ex ante to engage in a series of interest rate increases. In 
the  future  we  will  assess,  as  usual,  all  relevant  information  and  analyse  it  in  order  to  reach  a 
conclusion about the outlook for price stability over the medium and long term. On the basis of this 
assessment, decisions will be taken with regard to the monetary policy stance but there is no reason 
or case for communicating anything more than what we have said. 
What  should  be  perfectly  clear  is  the  ECB’s  commitment  and  determination  to  fulfil  its  mandate  to 
deliver price stability. 
In general, is the ECB following a different strategy to that followed by the US Fed in raising 
interest rates? Do the differences relate to changes in economic circumstances, or conceptual 
differences?  
The difference is mainly related to the economic circumstances and, to be more precise, to differences 
in the assessments about the economic outlook and in particular the outlook for price stability. In the 
US, the policy stance changed and the decision to preannounce a measured increase in interest rates 
was made at a time when interest rates were at the very low level of 1 per cent and had stayed at that 
level for a considerable period and also at a time when it was assessed that inflationary pressures 
were building up on both the demand and the supply sides of the American economy.  
Our case is somewhat different. First, we had a higher level of interest rates when the decision was 
taken  to  change  the  monetary  policy  stance.  Second,  our  assessment  about  the  outlook  for  price 
stability is that inflation is expected to stay above 2 per cent for a period of time but it is expected to 
moderate  gradually..  In  the  absence  of  second-round  effects,  the  relatively  modest  increase  in  unit 
labour costs, partly related to the fact that the pace of the recovery is moderate and there is still an 
output gap and a high rate of unemployment, is expected to help contain inflationary pressures. But 
several and significant upside risks surround this assessment.  
It is therefore important that second-round effects of oil prices are avoided and that monetary policy 
helps to minimise the likelihood that other risks materialise.  
From a conceptual point of view, I agree that monetary policy predictability is a desirable feature that 
enhances  policy  effectiveness.  However,  predictability  does  not  require,  in  general,  giving  explicit 
signals or pre-announcing the medium-term evolution of the monetary policy stance. 
What  is  your  perspective  for  the  long-  term  growth  potential  of  the  eurozone?  Have  you 
lowered your estimates?  
In the past, we reported a range of estimates for potential growth of 2 to 2.5 per cent in the euro area 
that  had  been  obtained  by  academic  research.  There  is  a  risk  that,  unless  there  are  changes  in 
policies  –  more  reforms  in  labour  and  product  markets  -  as  well  as  in  the  behaviour  of  private 
economic agents, this range may have to be revised downwards. But it is not our working assumption 
that no action will be taken to strengthen potential growth in the euro area.  
To cut a long story short, the main way that potential growth could increase is through policies that 
boost productivity growth and raise labour utilisation by increasing the average hours worked and the 
participation rate in the labour market and by making this market more flexible and adaptable. I would 
agree  that  the  pace  of  reform  in  these  areas  has  been  relatively  moderate,  but  progress  has  been 
made in a number of countries and the overall sentiment on the need for, and the support of, reforms 
is changing in the right direction.  
The experience of the Nordic countries illustrates that it is possible to implement reforms that have a 
significant  positive  impact  on  employment  and  growth  without  at  the  same  time  changing  in 
fundamental ways the social model that is in place. 
BIS Review 87/2005 
 3
What are the implications of your assumptions about potential growth and productivity for the 
what economists would see as the neutral level of eurozone interest rates?  
A simple concept of the neutral, or natural, rate of interest over the long term is the one derived from 
models  of  long  term  economic  growth  in  which  the  equilibrium  real  interest  rate  is  determined  by 
productivity  growth,  demographics  and  saving  preferences.  Estimates  of  this  concept  of  the  natural 
real interest rate have ranged between 2 and 3 per cent. The estimated range suggests that there is 
uncertainty  about  its  value  –  and  the  uncertainty  is  greater  than  that  implied  by  the  fact  that  I 
mentioned a range and not a number. 
Another,  more  short-term,  concept  of  the  natural  interest  rate  is that  it  is  the  real  rate  that  ensures 
macroeconomic equilibrium at every point in time at the potential output level and it is consistent with 
price  stability.  This  real  rate  can  fluctuate  considerably  precisely  because  the  different  factors  and 
shocks that impinge on supply and demand in product and asset markets vary over time. Estimates of 
this concept of the real interest rate are broadly similar to the range that I mentioned earlier [2-3 per 
cent], though closer to the lower limit. But the uncertainty surrounding these estimates is higher. 
These  are  useful  concepts  to  monitor  and  see  how  they  evolve  over  time,  but  they  do  not  play  a 
prominent  role  in  the  ECB’s  strategy  for  determining  the  monetary  policy  stance.  They  are  useful 
benchmarks – not intermediate objectives – that can be used together with other measures – such as 
the  output  gap  and  the  difference  between  the  unemployment  rate  and  what  could  be  labelled  the 
‘natural’ rate of unemployment – to provide information about the strength of inflationary pressures in 
the economy. 
At what unemployment rate do inflationary pressures start to build up in the eurozone?  
There  are  various  estimates.  Recent  research  at  the  ECB  and  by  academic  economists  and 
international  institutions  suggests  that  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  or  the  NAIRU  [non-
accelerating inflation rate of unemployment] is currently close to 8 per cent. This is surprisingly and 
disappointingly high, because it implies that, other things equal, there are certain limits imposed by the 
functioning  of  the  labour  market  on  the  conduct  of  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy.  These 
estimates emphasise the importance of reforms that would contribute to reducing the unemployment 
rate that is compatible with price stability. If the NAIRU is reduced, a higher level of employment and a 
lower  rate  of  unemployment  can  be  supported  by  monetary  policy  without  creating  inflationary 
pressures.  
Some eurozone politicians suggest that the eurozone or eurogroup could form the basis for 
enhanced cooperation within the European Union. If the eurozone does not develop a political 
character, can it survive over the longer term?  
There  are  suggestions  that  may  be  potentially  useful  but  I  have  not  seen  precise  proposals  that 
specify the framework and mechanisms for achieving enhanced cooperation in practice. As a central 
banker I feel that it would not be appropriate to comment on means of enhancing political integration in 
the euro area. 
If there are no changes in the institutional structure or deeper political integration within the euro area, 
can  monetary  policy  function  effectively?  My  answer  would  be  a  straightforward  yes,  without  this 
implying  that  certain  institutional  improvements  on  the  economic  and  political  front  would  not  help 
enhance the functioning of the European monetary union. What is important is that economic policies 
and,  in  particular,  fiscal  policies  are  consistent  with,  and  supportive  of,  the  objectives  of  monetary 
union, including the objective of price stability. The present institutional framework is overall adequate 
to allow the ECB to perform is tasks effectively.  
Otmar Issing steps down as executive board member next may. Would you like to take over his 
role as ECB chief economist?  
I have read the speculation in the press but I prefer not to comment. The decision will be taken by the 
Executive Board together with our new colleague. 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2005
