Vittorio Corbo: Monetary policy under inflation targeting in Chile and around 
the world 
Speech by Mr Vittorio Corbo, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the ninth annual conference of 
the Central Bank of Chile, “Monetary policy under inflation targeting”, Santiago, 20 October 2005. 
 Dear First Deputy Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, 
Dear Central Bank Governors, 
Dear Central Bank officials, professors and economists visiting from abroad, 
Dear friends, 
I am very pleased to welcome you to this Ninth Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile, which 
has  become  a  traditional  event  in  the  discussion  of  central  banking  policies  and  for  the  economic 
development of our countries. This Annual Conference focuses on the subject “Monetary Policy under 
Inflation  Targeting,”  the  monetary  system  that  is  gradually  being  adopted  in  countries  around  the 
world.  I  am  not  surprised  at  the  great  participation  of  central  bankers  from  inflation  targeting 
economies in this Conference. Thank you so much for coming down. 
This year, our annual conference coincides with the eightieth anniversary of the creation of the Central 
Bank of Chile. The occasion calls for a brief retrospective account of our Bank, which will help to better 
understand its path to the present monetary policy framework in Chile. Next I will review some of the 
challenges  facing  monetary  policy  in  Chile  today,  which  motivate  several  of  the  topics  that  will  be 
discussed during this conference, which I will also list shortly later on. 
Eighty years of the Central Bank of Chile and how inflation was conquered in Chile 
The  Central  Bank  of  Chile  was  created  in  1925  as  an  entity  apart  from  the  Executive  Power.  That 
year, also two laws related with the Bank’s startup were enacted: the Monetary Law and the General 
Banking Act. The former established a gold standard, while the latter created the Superintendency of 
Banks to supervise commercial banks. The Central Bank was granted the monopoly for printing bills, 
which under said Monetary Law would be gold convertible. 
But  the  foreign  exchange  regime  and  the  Bank’s  institutionality  as  set  forth  in  1925  weren’t  strong 
enough to cope with the Great Depression with some success (it had enormous impact on the Chilean 
economy)  and  the  growing  demands  for  fiscal  funding.  These  forced  the  abandonment  of  the  gold 
standard, the imposition of foreign exchange controls, the creation of multiple exchange rates and the 
beginning  of  trade.  Since  the  Great  Depression  –  except  for  very  short  spans  of  relative 
macroeconomic stability –, the country suffered decades of high, volatile inflation. The ultimate cause 
of this was the systematic expansion of credit on the part of the Central Bank, both to state-owned 
organizations  and  to  the  private  sector.  Inflation  followed  inevitably  and  caused  the  failure  of 
stabilization attempts in the years 1950 and 1960. 
The  deterioration  of  the  fiscal  and  monetary  situation  culminated  in  the  early  1970s  in  a  short 
hyperinflation.  Fiscal  stabilization  adopted  in  1976,  later  associated  to  a  new  fixed  exchange  rate 
experiment  with  financial  liberalization,  without  proper  regulation  and  supervision,  resulted  in  only 
temporary  inflation  control,  a  generalized  collapse  of  the  banking system  and a  profound economic 
recession. By 1985, the main macroeconomic concerns were to regain fiscal order, normalize external 
payments, restore the financial system and prevent the acceleration of inflation. 
In  1989,  a  new  Central  Bank’s  Constitutional  Organic  Law  was enacted  that  mandated  it  to  secure 
monetary  stability  and  domestic  and  external  payments,  and  granted  it  considerable  autonomy  to 
comply with this mandate. 
When the renewed Central Bank began operating in 1990, inflation was close to 30% per annum. The 
new autonomous Board designed a strategy to gradually bring down the inflation rate and adopted, 
beginning in January 1991, a partial regime of explicit inflation targets announced each year. All that 
took place in a context of a foreign exchange band that still lacked the institutionality and transparency 
that any full-fledged inflation targeting regime must have. Despite these limitations, the Central Bank 
   1/5 
was  very  successful  in  achieving  inflation  rates  very  near  its  annual  goals,  along  a  gradual  but 
monotonic convergence path to single-digit inflation. Average annual inflation dropped from 12.1% in 
the five years from 1991 to 1995 to 4.8% in 1996-2000. 
With the adoption of a floating exchange rate in 1999, the inflation target emerged as the only nominal 
anchor of monetary policy. Simultaneously, in 1999-2000, the Central Bank formalized the conduct of 
its monetary policy into monthly meetings, it increased its capacity for analysis and projections and 
enhanced  the  transparency  of  its  policies  through the  publication  of  a  four-monthly  monetary  policy 
report (with forecasts for inflation and growth) and the dissemination of communications and minutes 
of its monthly monetary policy meetings. It also adopted a target range for annual inflation, of 2% to 
4%, centered in 3%, that would be in force indefinitely since 2001. The formalization of this inflation 
targeting scheme has continued in recent years, along with advances in the transparency of monetary 
policy. During the period 2001-2004, average annual inflation was 2.2%, and for the twelve months to 
September 2005 it rose to 3.9%, largely influenced by the recent oil price shock. In fact, core inflation 
rates are still below 3% per year. 
Today  Chile  has  an  IT  regime  in  place  that  is  proven  and  credible,  and  that  includes  a  floating 
exchange rate within an increasingly deep market to provide coverage against foreign exchange risks. 
Also, its fiscal accounts are in order, the financial system is robust and fully integrated into the world’s 
capital markets. As a result, our country is more prepared than ever before to deal with external or 
internal shocks, and has the capacity to use a countercyclical monetary policy, which it has reinforced 
since the beginning of this decade. 
Hot topics for monetary policy under inflation targeting – in Chile and elsewhere  
A central bank’s tasks never end. The experience accumulated over the past several years, both in 
Chile and in other countries, has brought new challenges and posed new questions on the conduct of 
monetary policy under inflation targeting. Among these burning questions, let me single out a few: 
(1) 
How  uncertainty  affects  all 
decisionmaking 
the  dimensions 
that 
influence  monetary  policy 
In Chile—as in any other country—monetary policy is subject to several sources of severe uncertainty. 
To the classical doubts about the timeliness and quality of statistical data necessary to gauge the state 
of the economy, one must add imperfect knowledge about the nature and persistence of the intense 
shocks that hit our economy, uncertainty on how appropriate are the models we use to understand 
economic  signals  and  make  projections  and,  ultimately  uncertainty  on  the  value  of  the  models’ 
parameters. Knowledge is also imperfect on the preferences of the society and of those responsible 
for  the  policies  applied.  Does  this  generalized  uncertainty  that  permeates  central  banks  around  the 
world justify slower policy reactions to shocks to inflation or GDP? How must dissimilar projections, 
coming from different models, be weighted in policy decisions? These and other questions raise the 
need to invest heavily in data, models and economic projections and research, a task to which the 
Central Bank of Chile devotes great efforts. 
(2)  
Alternative  assumptions  for  projections  and  public  communication  of  the  monetary 
policy interest rate and exchange rate 
In the projections on the future course of the economy and the inflation rate, in the Central Bank we 
have shifted from using a fixed future MPR to a projection of future rates consistent with a monetary 
policy  reaction  equation  that  is  part  of  the  model  used  to  project  inflation  and  growth.  For  the  real 
exchange rate, considering that it is not too distant from the estimated equilibrium real exchange rate, 
we  now  use  the  assumption  that  the  long-term  real  exchange  rate  will  equal  the  average  real 
exchange rate observed during the last fifteen days until the statistics closing date for projections. In 
our public communication we deliver approximate boundaries for the assumed future trend of these 
variables. In the light of our own experience and that of other central banks, it is necessary to evaluate 
the practicality of using alternative assumptions and the advantages of a possible public dissemination 
of those assumptions. 
   2/5 
Range and horizon of the inflation target 
(3) 
The  Central  Bank  has  a  2-4%  target  range  for  annual  CPI  inflation,  but  directs  monetary  policy  to 
achieve the center of the range, that is, 3%, in a policy horizon defined at 12 to 24 months. The target 
range and the length of the policy horizon reflects that the Bank will tolerate deviations away from the 
target  range,  particularly  if  caused  by  temporary  supply  shocks  that  raise  headline  inflation  and 
recognizes that a tradeoff exists between the length of the policy horizon and the volatility of output 
and employment. This raises several questions, such as: Is the present combination of a 2-4 target 
range for annual inflation and a 12-24 month policy horizon optimal? How flexible should the extent of 
the  policy  horizon  to  the  type  of  shocks—temporary  vs  persistent—of  supply  vs  demand?  Is  it 
advisable to review the length of the policy horizon as a way to consider asset prices or, in general, 
financial stability concerns in the conduct of monetary policy? 
Measurement and implications of inflation expectations 
(4)  
Of  all  monetary  schemes,  the  one  based  on  inflation  targeting  is  the  most  sensitive  to  private 
expectations regarding future inflation, because this is the main anchor of inflation and, together with 
output gaps, is also the main determinant of medium-term inflation. In addition, central banks have no 
direct  control  on  such  expectations.  Inflation  is  the  result  of  pricing  decisions  of  a  large  number  of 
decentralized  agents,  whose  actions  are  significantly  influenced  by  their  views  of  what  the  future 
aggregate inflation rate will be. Recognizing this, in our Central Bank we assign great weight to direct 
measures of expected inflation and to inflation compensation derived from the differentials between 
nominal and inflation-indexed interest rates. Here, new concerns arise: How do we remove he inflation 
expectation  component  from  said  inflation  compensation  measures?  Why  do  inflation  expectations 
and compensation apparently overreact to specific shocks? What is the most appropriate horizon for 
spending decisions by the private sector and for monetary policy decisions? 
The policy horizon and the response to supply shocks 
(5)  
The classical tradeoff in monetary policy’s response to supply shocks in general, and to an oil price 
shock in particular, is being experienced since the last few days and months all over the world, and in 
Chile. Actually, the ongoing oil shock has resulted in the highest total inflation rate of many years. This 
shock has been the main determinant of the recent inflation leap to 3.9% in the 12-month period to 
September in Chile, to 2.6% in the Euro Zone, and to 4.7% in the US in the same period. Setting aside 
the  uncertainty  with  respect  to  the  shock’s  persistence,  must  we  react  to  the  shock?  The  Bank’s 
position is that its monetary policy does not react (materially) to the direct or first-round effects of the 
oil  hikes.  But  it  does  react  if  the  shock  has  indirect  or  second-round  effects  on  the  prices  of  other 
goods, if a passthrough of higher production costs or prices indexed to past inflation threaten to drive 
projected inflation away from the center of the target range over the policy horizon. Monetary policy 
can also react if the shock unanchors inflation expectations over the policy horizon. However, these 
general  responses  are  tinted  by  the  intense  uncertainty—observed  both  in  Chile  and  around  the 
world—regarding the shock’s persistence, its actual consequences and the magnitude of its indirect or 
second round effects. 
Optimal response to foreign exchange shocks 
(6)  
The above considerations can apply to the optimal response of monetary policy to parity shocks. In 
general,  in  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the  Central  Bank  does  not  react  to  exchange  rate 
movements beyond their effects on inflation and output. This because of the favorable response of the 
Chilean economy to increased exchange rate volatility that has been present since the late nineties. 
First,  the  pass-through  coefficient  from  exchange  rate  depreciation  to  inflation  has  dropped 
substantially in Chile, to very low figures in the range of 20% to 30%, in the policy horizon. Second, 
the  currency  mismatch  has  been  reduced  in  non-financial  firms  which,  in  turn,  are  being  insured 
against residual parity risks generated by short-term exchange rate volatility in an increasingly deep 
market.  Finally,  the  Central  Bank  reserves  the  option  to  intervene  directly  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market with sterilized operations and in publicly announced conditions, if it evaluates that a temporary 
exchange rate volatility or misalignment so warrants. 
   3/5 
Central banks’ summit on inflation targeting 
Some of the topics I just listed were discussed yesterday, Wednesday 19 October, in the Summit that 
the Central Bank of Chile organized with governors, board members and head economists from 25 
central banks that either have inflation targeting regimes in place or are considering the adoption of 
one  in  the  near  future.  Discussions  were  very  fruitful,  because  they  allowed  for  a  constructive 
exchange  of  experiences  and  challenges  among  the  attending  central  bankers,  IMF  officials  and 
renowned academics, also present at this conference. Four issues were covered at the Summit: (i) the 
refinement  of  requisites  for  a  successful  adoption  of  inflation  targeting,  (ii)  the  influence  of 
considerations such as financial stability and asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy, (iii) the 
assumptions  behind  and  communication  of  future  policy  interest  rates  and  parities,  and  (iv)  how 
various forms of uncertainty affect the way monetary policy is conducted. 
initial  conditions  and 
The ninth annual conference of the Central Bank of Chile 
The purpose of this ninth annual conference of the Central Bank of Chile is to promote and discuss 
advances in economic research of interest for central banks, in matters relating with the conduct of 
monetary policy in inflation targeting regimes. The conference will gather new results from analytical 
investigation and empirical evidence on the conduct of monetary policy under inflation targeting and its 
effects on the Chilean economy and the world at large. 
Anne Krueger, First Deputy Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund will follow me in this 
initial  session,  presenting  the  invited  lecture  of  this  conference,  which  will  deal  with  IMF  policies 
relating to the scope of price stability in member countries.  
The  second  session  is  centered  around  theoretical  works,  with  important  implications  of  monetary 
policy, on optimal inflation targeting schemes. Lars Svensson will analyze an optimal inflation targeting 
(or inflation forecasting) system, examining the convenience of using and publishing the path of future 
monetary  policy  rates  consistent  with  the  projection  model  used  by  the  central  bank.  Pierpaolo 
Benigno and Michael Woodford study the optimality of inflation targeting under various fiscal regimes, 
including  cases  of  incompliance  with  the  intertemporal  budget  constraint  and  when  taxes  have 
distorting effects. 
Session III focuses on reviewing the inflation targeting regime in emerging economies. Nicoletta Batini 
and  Douglas  Laxton  evaluate  compliance  with 
the  macroeconomic 
consequences of adopting inflation targeting in developing countries, on the basis of a recent survey 
taken  by  themselves  to  31  emerging  economies’  central  banks.  Luis  Céspedes  and  Claudio  Soto 
present  new  evidence  that  inflation  dynamics  in  Chile  has  changed  in  the  recent  past,  which  they 
ascribe to the credibility gained by monetary policy. Rodrigo Caputo, Felipe Liendo and Juan Pablo 
Medina  analyze  interaction  between  the  monetary  policy  and  the  structure  of  the  Chilean  economy 
during  the  inflation  targeting  period,  estimating  and  calibrating  a  new  dynamic  stochastic  general 
equilibrium model. 
The  following  session  presents  new  evidence  on  the  world’s  experience  with  inflation  targeting. 
Sebastián Edwards analyzes the relationship between inflation targeting and exchange rates in three 
areas: the exchange rate’s effectiveness as a shock absorber, the exchange rate’s volatility and the 
role of parities in the conduct of monetary policy. Stephen Cecchetti and Stefan Krause examine the 
optimality and the practice of weighting inflation rate targets and price level targets, providing evidence 
from countries with and without inflation targets. Frederic Mishkin and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel present 
evidence on the macroeconomic and monetary policy effects in all inflation targeting countries, and  
compare 
times  and  with  non-inflation-targeting  developed  economies. 
Refet  Gürkaynak,  Andrew  Levin  and  Eric  Swanson  present  evidence  for Canada  and  Chile,  on  the 
contribution of inflation targets to the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations, in comparison with 
a country that has no explicit target, the United States.  
The  Conference’s  fifth  and  last  session  will  analyze  the  relationship  between  the  optimal  monetary 
policy and inflation targeting. Athanasios Orphanides and John Williams, using a model estimated for 
the US, show how under conditions of imperfect information the optimal policy rules are modified and 
how  a  monetary  scheme  based  on  the  key  elements  of  an  inflation  targeting  regime  seems  to 
contribute  to  a  higher  macroeconomic  equilibrium.  Carl  Walsh  analyzes  the  relationship  between 
inflation  targeting  and  transparency,  showing  how  the  quality  of  central  bank  projections  and  their 
public communication can affect the outcome of monetary policy. To finish, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé 
and  Martín  Uribe  derive  optimal  but  operational  rules  for  monetary  policy  in  a  general  equilibrium 
them  with  earlier 
   4/5 
model  calibrated  for  the  US,  under  different  initial  conditions  and  different  degrees  of  indexation  to 
past inflation. 
I would like to end these words by thanking Frederic Mishkin and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel for their hard 
work  in  putting  together  this  magnificent  conference,  and  Mauricio  Larraín  and  Mónica  Correa  for 
valuable  assistance  in  organizing  it.  I  also  thank  the  large  number  of  discussants  of  the  papers  for 
their  dedication  in  preparing  their  remarkable  interventions,  which  will  undoubtedly  contribute  even 
more to our understanding of these important issues. To you all, dear participants, I wish two days of 
fruitful discussions and much learning. 
 
   5/5 
