Lars Nyberg: House price developments and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Evli  Bank,  Stockholm, 
19 December 2005. 
 Thank you for your invitation to Evli Bank. 
I intend to devote the bulk of my speech to a subject that has been under discussion for a fairly long 
time but that nevertheless has not become less topical or important, namely the developments in the 
housing market and the rise in household debt. These factors have potentially significant implications 
for both of the tasks assigned to the Riksbank – both the assignment of safeguarding financial stability 
and  the  monetary  policy  objective  of  price  stability.  That  of  course  means  that  they  also  have 
consequences for the efforts to keep the real economy in good balance. 
Thereafter, I intend to say a few words about the current monetary policy situation and the decision 
that we took a few weeks ago to leave the repo rate unchanged. As you know, the Executive Board on 
that occasion – incidentally for the first time in over one and a half years – was not unanimous in its 
decision. Since I was one of those with a different opinion it may be appropriate for me to elaborate 
somewhat  on  my  line  of  reasoning.  I  want  to  underline,  however,  that  it  was  a  question  of  subtle 
differences in our assessments which there is no reason to overdramatise. 
House prices and financial stability 
Households have been increasing their borrowing at a rapid rate for a fairly long time now. The rise in 
household debt has been accompanied by a fast upswing in prices in the house market. There have 
been no clear signs to date that this development has begun to moderate in earnest. In all likelihood, 
there is a limit to how long it can continue. The Riksbank’s assessment is also that the rate of increase 
will slow down in the coming years as interest rates rise. 
Developments in the property market, chiefly as regards commercial properties but also housing, play 
an important part in the Riksbank’s analysis of factors that affect the stability of the financial system. A 
central question when judging whether house price developments have the potential to pose a threat 
to financial stability is the extent to which they can be assumed to be driven by exaggerated optimism 
and speculation. If such driving forces are significant then there is a risk that households could have 
difficulty meeting their interest payments when interest rates rise; further, the downward adjustment in 
prices  could  be  very  dramatic  when  the  lack  of  realism  in  estimates  finally  becomes  evident.  The 
combination  of  households’  payment  difficulties  and  sharp  falls  in  collateral  values  could  potentially 
cause problems for the banks. 
However,  this  is  unlikely  to  happen  in  Sweden  for  several  reasons.  One  is  that  house  price 
developments in the country as a whole – as indicated by the analyses in the Financial Stability Report 
we  published  about  a  month  ago  –  seem  to  be  explained  pretty  well  by  normal  underlying  factors. 
These include of course the interest rate level, which for a relatively long period has been low. At the 
end  of  1996,  when  house  prices  began  to  rise  again  after  the  crisis  years,  the  average  nominal 
mortgage  rate  for  households  was  around  9  per  cent.  Today,  it  is  approximately  4  per  cent. 
Furthermore, households’ disposable incomes have grown firmly during this period. Another factor, of 
course,  is  the  developments  on  the  supply  side,  where  construction  of  new  homes  has  been  very 
modest. This fell dramatically in conjunction with the crisis in the 1990s and has only begun to pick up 
in recent years. So it appears that the upswing in house prices has not been driven by general over-
optimism among households and lenders. It might also be worth mentioning here that one reason why 
the elements of pure speculation probably are small is that Swedish households, unlike those in some 
other countries, mainly buy homes to live in and not as an investment. The risk of speculative price 
formation  increases  in  countries  where  it  is  common  to  buy-to-let,  with  the  investor  waiting  for  the 
home  to  rise  in  value  before  realising  a  capital  gain.  This  kind  of  speculation  has  likely  pushed  up 
house prices in above all Australia, but presumably also in the UK, the US and Ireland. 
BIS Review 88/2005 
 1
Another  reason  why  the  developments in  the  housing  market  and  households’  high  debt  levels  are 
unlikely to pose a threat to financial stability is that households’ ability to service debt is good. On the 
whole, households are judged to have financial margins that enable them to cope with rises in interest 
rates or a temporary loss in income without encountering payment difficulties. In addition, the banks’ 
earnings are good. Past experience also shows that it is unusual for the household sector to cause the 
banks’  particularly  large  loan  losses. This  is  fairly  natural  in one  sense.  The  decision  to  invest  in  a 
home is one of the most important a household makes, and when the decision has been taken the 
household is often prepared to make rather big sacrifices to meet its obligations. It is worth noting that 
during  the  crisis  years  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  losses  on  loans  to  the  household  sector 
accounted for only 7 per cent of the banks’ total loan losses. 
Instead,  it  was  the  commercial  property  market  that  accounted  for  the  major  losses  in  the  banking 
system during the property crisis. This, too, has fairly natural explanations. An office building differs 
from a home in the sense that interest expenditure is intended to be covered by rental income, i.e. 
income  that  is  generated by  the  investment  itself.  If  the  offices  cannot be  let,  this  income does  not 
materialise and the company that made the investment may be forced into bankruptcy. A household, 
instead, pays its interest with income from other sources. 
Moreover,  in  the  early  1990s  the  prices  of  commercial  properties  had  been  pushed  up  over  a  long 
period without any corresponding increase in rental income. The price rises were obviously driven by 
expectations of a continued strong upswing in prices in the future. When it eventually became clear 
that these expectations were not going to materialise and it became more difficult to let the premises 
as economic conditions weakened, the prices fell dramatically. 
Today, though, the situation in the commercial property market is significantly different. There has not 
been a prolonged price upswing of the kind seen in the housing market. In connection with the equity 
market  decline  in  2000,  demand  for  office  premises  weakened  again  and  rents  and  prices  in  the 
market  for  office  properties  began  to  drop.  The  price  fall  appears  today  to  have  moderated  and  in 
some regions prices of office premises have risen. Vacancy levels are still high, though, which has 
contributed  to  restraining  a  more  general  upswing  in  rents  and  prices.  At  the  same  time,  property 
companies’  earnings  and  ability  to  pay  are  good.  Our  assessment  therefore  is  that  the  commercial 
property market does not either pose a threat to the stability of the financial system. 
However, the fact that we presently cannot see any general overvaluation in the housing market does 
not rule out the possibility that some households may have based their decisions on overly optimistic 
estimates. For example, they may have interpreted the currently very low interest rates as a more or 
less  permanent  state,  rather  than  as  an  exception.  These  households  could  of  course  run  into 
problems when interest rates normalise. One question that might at least be worth reflecting on in this 
context is whether such over-optimism among some households could be an undesirable “side-effect” 
–  albeit  a  temporary  one  –  of  the  successful  low-inflation  policies  in  many  countries.  What  has 
happened in the past ten years is that interest rates have come down fairly dramatically at the same 
time  as  the  real  economic  performance  in  many  areas  has  been  remarkably  good  compared  with 
previous periods. It presumably cannot be ruled out that this situation has lulled some households into 
a  false  sense  of  security,  causing  them  to  make  overly  optimistic  investment  decisions  that 
subsequently  prove  to  be  less  well-founded.  To  the  extent  such  over-optimism  exists,  though,  it 
should,  as  I  mentioned,  be  a  temporary  phenomenon  that  disappears  as  households  gain  more 
experience of how the economy functions under a low-inflation regime. 
That  households  –  and  lenders  –  must  endeavour  to  base  their  decisions  on  realistic  estimates  is 
something that we have recommended many times recently, but it is worth repeating. So it is not that 
we envisage problems for the financial system or the economy as a whole but rather that individuals 
and households could run into difficulties. That of course is unfortunate enough. 
That there does not appear to be any general overvaluation in the housing market does not in any way 
mean that prices cannot fall in the future either. At least from some media reports in conjunction with 
the  Financial  Stability  Report  the  impression  was  that  the  Riksbank  was  almost  guaranteeing  that 
future  price  declines  would  not  happen.  That  of  course  is  something  we  cannot  do.  In  our  main 
scenario we do expect average house price inflation to moderate gradually – but still to remain positive 
– when interest rates normalise, but that does not mean that house prices cannot fall in parts of the 
country where they are highly elevated. Nor does it rule out a more general drop in prices in the period 
ahead, even though any such decline is likely to be less drastic than if prices had shot up in a way that 
could not be explained by developments in underlying factors. That could be the case if, for example, 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2005
incomes were to fall in a way that we cannot foresee today. Of course, things can also happen beyond 
the forecast horizon that cause house prices to drop. 
Allow me to come back to that in a moment and just say here that even in the event of such a more 
general price fall we do not deem there to be any immediate risk of problems for financial stability. The 
reasons again are those I gave earlier, chiefly that households on the whole can afford their homes 
and that experience shows that the household sector seldom causes any significant problems for the 
banks. So the Riksbank does not view the developments in house prices and household debt as a 
danger to the stability of the payment system. 
House prices, demand and inflation 
As  I  indicated  in  the  beginning,  developments  in  house  prices  are  important  to  monitor  also,  and 
perhaps even mainly, because they have potential implications for the Riksbank’s second objective – 
price  stability.  If  house  prices  fall,  households’  willingness  to  consume  goods  and  services  –  their 
demand–  declines.  If  prices  drop  at  a  measured  rate  over  a  long  period  it  does  not  have  to  be  a 
problem. If the price decline occurs rapidly there is reason for greater vigilance. 
How then do house prices affect the activity level in the economy? This can happen through various 
channels. One such channel – which I only intend to mention in passing – is housing construction. The 
higher  house  prices  are,  the  more  profitable  it  is  to  build  them,  all  other  things  being  equal.  In  all 
likelihood, the fast upswing in prices has contributed to the fact that housing construction now appears 
to  have  picked  up  in  earnest,  although  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  that  has  kept  down  financing 
costs has probably also played an important role. 
Changes  in  house  prices  also  affect  household  consumption  by  altering  the  size  of  households’ 
wealth.  Since  household consumption  comprises about  half  of  total  economic demand  the potential 
effects  on  inflation  can  be  considerable.  The  impact  on  consumption  of  an  increase  in  wealth  can 
come about in different ways. One is that households feel richer and therefore become more inclined 
to consume. In addition, the size of their wealth can affect their ability to obtain loans. The larger the 
collateral a household can put up for its loans, the greater its chances to borrow and thus to consume. 
When the value of the home owned by a household rises, it also creates the possibility to mortgage 
the home further, e.g. to build an extension or renovate and further raise the value of the home or to 
consume other goods. Another effect is that a higher valuation enables a household to refinance its 
second mortgage as part of its first mortgage and thereby reduce the interest costs of the debt. 
Historically, there has been an almost surprisingly strong relationship between changes in the value of 
households’ real wealth – houses and tenant-owned apartments – and how large a proportion of their 
incomes that households choose to consume, the so-called consumption ratio. When wealth has risen, 
consumption also has done so. In the current decade, though, this relationship seems to have been 
weaker  than  in  previous  decades.  The  exact  causes  of  this  are  not  entirely  clear.  A  number  of 
hypotheses exist.1 One is that the sharp equity market decline that began in 2000 may have played a 
part.  Households’  financial  assets  decreased  substantially  in  value  at  that  time.  This  may  have 
prompted  many  households  to  have  high  saving  in  financial  assets  in  order  to  rebuild  their  wealth. 
That in turn has countered the positive effect on consumption of rising house prices. 
Another hypothesis is that the weaker relationship between developments in wealth and consumption 
reflect the fact that labour market growth has been relatively weak despite comparatively high GDP 
growth.  That  may  have  given  rise  to  greater  uncertainty  about  future  labour  market  conditions  and 
future incomes, which may have induced households to have high precautionary saving. 
In the assessment we make in our main scenario, with a continued economic upturn, equity prices will 
continue to rise while the labour market situation will finally begin to improve in a more marked way. 
That  is  anticipated  to  induce  households  to  scale  back  their  saving  and  to  cause  a  rise  in  the 
consumption ratio. At the same time, as I said earlier, we expect the rate of increase in house prices to 
gradually moderate as interest rate levels normalise. Nonetheless, there is no getting away from the 
fact that the house price developments and their effects on consumption are an uncertainty factor in 
the assessment of the future economic situation. 
 1  
See the box “Households’ consumption, debt and saving” in Inflation Report 2005:3.     
BIS Review 88/2005 
 3
The debate on the role of asset prices in monetary policy 
Before I go on to the current monetary policy situation, let me briefly say a few words about a debate 
that has been ongoing in recent years in both academic circles and in the central bank world and that 
has some relevance to what I have spoken about so far. I am referring to what role asset prices should 
play more generally in the conduct of monetary policy. 
It has been claimed in some quarters that a monetary policy that focuses on keeping inflation low and 
stable is not enough to guarantee a favourable macroeconomic outcome. This claim is based on the 
observation that asset prices have fluctuated fairly sharply also under the regime of low and stable 
inflation. An example is the build-up of the IT bubble in the equity market and the subsequent dramatic 
decline in that market. Some have even argued that the risk to financial stability increases under a 
low-inflation  regime.  Against  that  background,  a  number  of  economists  have  recommended  that 
inflation-targeting  central  banks  should  not  only  adjust  interest  rates  on  the  basis  of  forecasts  for 
inflation and the real economy but also should respond ”separately” to changes in assets prices. 
The  debate  on  this  subject  has  not  been  all  that  easy  to  follow,  not  least  because  the  various 
conclusions from the debate are based on different models with their specific assumptions.2 However, 
I think you can say that the dominant view today, at least in the central bank world but – as I have 
understood  it  –  also  in  academic  circles,  can  be  described  as  follows.  A  flexible  inflation-targeting 
policy is a sufficiently good “tool” for dealing with problems that can arise via price developments in 
asset markets. A forward-looking central bank should keep in mind the long-term consequences of, for 
example, a prolonged rise in asset prices when making interest rate decisions, but there is no reason 
to take account of asset prices over and above their consequences for the ultimate objectives – price 
stability and real stability. On the other hand, in some situations it may be necessary for the central 
bank to attempt to look further into the future than normal in order to ”include” the impact on inflation 
and  the  real  economy  that  asset  price  developments  may  give  rise  to  in  the  long  term.  This  is  an 
important dimension of the flexibility in a flexible inflation-targeting policy. 
The reason I have brought up this problem is that it, in my opinion, has at least some bearing on the 
monetary policy considerations we face today. I will come back to that in a moment. 
The current monetary policy situation 
Let me now proceed to the current economic and monetary policy situation. The outlook presented in 
the  latest  Inflation  Report  can  briefly  be  summarised  as  follows.  On  the  whole,  the  situation  looks 
bright for the Swedish economy. The recent months’ data releases have reduced the uncertainty over 
economic developments, both in Sweden and internationally. Growth is expected to be firm in the next 
few years, partly on account of expansionary economic policy and firm export market growth. Much 
also suggests that demand for labour is now finally beginning to pick up more markedly. 
As regards price developments, we can note that inflation is still low, largely because various supply 
factors  are  contributing  to  low  cost  pressures.  However,  inflation  is  expected  to  rise  in  the  period 
ahead when resource utilisation increases in Sweden and abroad, albeit at a relatively slow rate. The 
forecast  in  the  Inflation  Report’s  main  scenario  means  that  inflation  a  couple  of  years  ahead  is 
estimated  to  be  roughly  in  line  with  the  target  of  two  per  cent.  The  risks  of  a  higher  inflation  rate, 
though,  which  mainly  stem  from  uncertainty  over  the  oil  price  and  developments  in  the  krona,  are 
currently deemed to be larger than the risks of a lower inflation rate. 
As  you  know,  we  in  the  Executive  Board  decided  to  leave  the  repo  rate  unchanged  at  our  latest 
monetary  policy  meeting.  At  the  same  time,  however,  we  were  in  agreement  that  the  Swedish 
business  cycle  is  fairly  close  to  the  point  at  which  it  is  reasonable  to  give  monetary  policy  a  less 
expansionary  stance.  Although  we  all  endorsed  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  the  economy  in  the 
Inflation  Report  a  number  of  us  were  of  the  opinion  that  it  provided  scope  for  somewhat  different 
interpretations of exactly when the interest rate needs to be raised. I myself and two other members 
                                                      
2  
For a more detailed overview of the debate; see Bean, C. (2003), "Asset Prices, Financial Imbalances and Monetary 
Policy: Are Inflation Targets Enough?", speech at a BIS conference on "Monetary Stability, Financial Stability and the 
Business Cycle", 28-29 March 2003, Basel, Switzerland. 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2003/speech200.pdf) 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2005
interpreted the analysis in such a way that we deemed an increase of 0.25 percentage points to be 
warranted already at the time of the monetary policy meeting. 
Allow me to say something about the reasons that, in my opinion, suggest that it would have been 
appropriate  to  take  a  first  step  towards  less  expansionary  monetary  policy  at  the  beginning  of 
December. One is that there hardly can be any doubt now that we are in the midst of a strong, stable 
cyclical  upswing.  The  economic  climate  has  improved  in  the  US  and  Asia  and  the  Swedish  labour 
market is showing clear signs of a recovery – not least statistics from staffing companies are pointing 
to a pick-up in demand for labour. Another reason is that an interest rate rise would reduce the risk of 
the krona weakening further as monetary policy in other countries gradually becomes less and less 
expansionary. The interest rate differential in relation to the euro area and the US seems recently to 
have had great significance for developments in the krona exchange rate. 
A third reason – perhaps the most important – has to do with what I have spoken about here today. My 
assessment is that house prices and household debt may very well have reached levels at which there 
is a risk of there arising a self-reinforcing negative spiral with falling house prices and weak demand 
growth when the business cycle eventually turns down. Even if it were not – as I already pointed out – 
a case of a correction of an overvalued market, such an adjustment could be comparatively abrupt. In 
my opinion, an earlier initiated and more gradual raising of interest rates would increase the chances 
of a more orderly slowdown in the rate of price increases, in roughly the same way as in the UK and 
Australia. 
If I may take the liberty of making my own, perhaps slightly partial and favourable, interpretation of this 
argument you could say that it is fairly well in line with what, as I maintained earlier, appears to be the 
prevalent view of asset prices’ principal role in a flexible inflation-targeting regime – that developments 
in asset prices in some situations might make it necessary for the central bank to try to take account of 
what can happen beyond the normal forecast horizon. So in this situation, in my opinion, an earlier 
initiation  of  a  shift  in  policy  would  help  to  reduce  the  risk  of  a  negative  self-reinforcing spiral  in  the 
cyclical  slowdown  that  sooner  or  later  will  come.  Thus,  seen  in  a  longer-term  perspective,  such  a 
measure could foster stability in the real economy and inflation. 
I want to underline that I of course do not mean by this that my colleagues in the Executive Board 
have  not  taken  these  kinds  of  considerations  into  account,  but  only  that  we  have  made  somewhat 
different assessments of what the risks are and what currently may be the appropriate action. So it is a 
question – as I noted initially – of subtle differences in our opinions rather than a case of completely 
different ideas about how the economy will develop and what fundamentally needs to be done. When 
the Executive Board convenes in January, however, we shall have two new members, and it remains 
to be seen what their views are on this matter. 
Thank you! 
BIS Review 88/2005 
 5
