Lars Heikensten: The economic situation and inflation 
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Lund University, Malmö,  
13 October 2005. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for your invitation to Malmö. 
My  intention  today  is  to  give  a  broad  picture  of  how  I  view  the  economic  situation  abroad  and  in 
Sweden. By way of conclusion I will also say a few words about the inflation outlook and monetary 
policy. 
Continued strong international growth 
During  the  spring  there  were  a  number  of  signs  that  international  economic  activity  had  slackened. 
The assessment that we made in connection with the June Inflation Report was that it probably was a 
temporary slowdown in activity. The information flow during the summer and at the beginning of the 
autumn essentially suggests that this was a correct assessment. Both macro data and measurements 
of  business  expectations  in  a  number  of  countries  indicate  that  international  economic  activity  has 
gained new impetus. 
A  continued  strong  economic  performance  in  the  United  States  and  continued  rapid  economic 
expansion in China and the rest of Asia are currently the engine driving global growth. The Japanese 
economy also seems more robust that it has done for a long time. 
The performance in the euro area, however, remains worrisome, particularly in the major economies. 
Recently, though, there have been some signs that growth is about to pick up there as well. These 
signs include a recovery in manufacturing activity. 
All in all, it appears that GDP growth abroad will continue to be high this year, albeit somewhat lower 
than last year. In coming years, too, the prospects for continued high global growth are bright. The fast 
productivity  growth  in  Asia  seems  able  to  continue  and  thereby  give  added  fuel  to  world  trade.  A 
number of countries are conducting expansionary economic policy, which also will contribute to a rise 
in resource utilisation. 
This is essentially the same assessment of international economic activity that we made in June. We 
may need to take account of the fact that the effects of the hurricanes in the Mexican Gulf will dampen 
growth  in  the  United  States  somewhat  in  the  near  term.  When  the  rebuilding  process  gets  going, 
however,  it  should  contribute  to  somewhat  higher  growth.  It  is  of  course  difficult  to  estimate  the 
economic effects of such a catastrophe, but most indications are nevertheless that the effects on the 
US economy will not last that long. 
Uncertainty surrounding the oil price and its effects 
One factor that has not developed in line with our assessment in June is the oil price. In June, we 
estimated that the oil price would have fallen back to under 50 dollars per barrel in August. Instead, it 
rose to new record highs during the summer. It is true that it has dropped somewhat recently but it is 
still above our previous forecast. Even the expected future oil prices, the forward rates, have risen. 
How the high oil price will affect the world economy and price levels at different stages of production is 
hard to judge. The effects that can be expected to arise will depend, among other things, on whether 
the  high  price  first  and  foremost  reflects  rising  demand  or  whether  it  is  due  to  supply  shocks.  The 
upturn in the oil price in recent years has been accompanied by an increase in oil production, which 
indicates that the price increase was mainly due to high demand. Mounting demand from countries 
with rapidly increasing industrial production, such as China and India, has probably played a part. At 
the same time, it is evident that there have been supply shocks. The conflict in Iraq and the recent 
storms in the Gulf of Mexico and the southern United States are just a few examples. 
What is worth observing is that the rise in the oil price, of almost 40 dollars per barrel, since 2002 does 
not  appear  to  have  dampened  global  growth  to  any  appreciable  extent.  This  can  probably  be 
explained in some measure by the fact that the upswing thus partly seems to be a result of the sharp 
   1/4 
expansion  in  Asia  and  by  the  fact  that  economic  policy  has  become  more  expansionary.  That  the 
industrialised  countries  in  particular  are  not  as  dependent  on  oil  as  before  should  also  have 
contributed to the effects so far being less than in previous oil crises. However, it is also conceivable 
that the full impact of the supply shocks has not yet become evident on growth and inflation. To sum 
up, the oil price and its effects on growth and inflation are a significant source of uncertainty that we 
are grappling with in our assessment of growth prospects and the inflation outlook. 
Low long-term interest rates 
In the financial markets recent developments have been characterised by a continuation of low long-
term  interest  rates  and  a  stable  krona.  The  low  bond  yields  are  somewhat  puzzling.  Even  though 
corporate earnings have continued to increase in line with the continued strengthening of international 
economic  activity,  investment  in  many  countries  has  not  picked  up  to  the  same  extent.  While  the 
willingness  to  invest  has  been  relatively  low  in  industrialised  nations,  regarded  from  a  cyclical 
perspective,  saving  has  also  been  high  in  certain  oil-producing  countries  and  in  several  Asian 
economies. The combination of a restrained willingness to invest and a high saving rate could, in other 
words, have contributed to the low bond yields. 
In  addition,  however,  interest  rates  around  the  world  in  recent  years  may  have  been  depressed  by 
more transitory factors such as temporarily low risk premiums, effects of changed rules for pension 
saving  and  Asian  countries’  build-up  of  their  foreign  exchange  reserves.  A  fast  rise  in  bond  yields 
cannot be ruled out when these conditions normalise. That in turn could have repercussions for the 
real economy, partly through the effect on housing prices, household wealth and consumption. 
The large deficits on the US current account and federal budget are another element that has long 
been one of the key risk factors in the international outlook. The question is not so much whether this 
situation  is  sustainable  or  not.  There  are  many  reasons  to  expect  that  the  deficits  will shrink  in  the 
period ahead. A weaker dollar and higher US interest rates are likely to be natural features of such a 
development.  The  concern  revolves  mainly  around  how  big  the  changes  in  interest  rates  and 
exchange rates might have to be and how quickly they might come about. 
Domestic demand to take over in Sweden 
Like abroad, the Swedish economy showed signs of a slowdown around the turn of the year following 
a high growth rate last year. As regards the Swedish economy, too, our assessment in June – that it 
was a question of a temporary slowdown – seems to have been correct. Economic growth seems to 
have increased over the course of the year. Revised statistics have also shown that developments at 
the beginning of the year were not quite as weak as was first indicated. During the second quarter 
GDP  growth  picked  up  as  we  forecast  in  June.  One  question,  of  course,  is  whether  we,  with  the 
benefit of hindsight, overdid it when we cut the repo rate in June. I don’t think so. Even though the 
start of the year did not turn out quite as weak as it seemed in June when we lowered the repo rate, it 
still appears that economic growth and resource utilisation this year will be markedly lower than we 
expected at the beginning of the year. 
In  the  period  ahead we  expect  that  the  cyclical  upswing  to  a  greater  extent will  be  associated  with 
increasing domestic demand. There are currently a number of signs that such a change is on the way. 
During the second quarter this year, growth in household consumption seems to have picked up and it 
appears that consumption continued to grow strongly in the third quarter as well. Moreover, the upturn 
in investment that began last year has also continued during the first half of 2005. 
Export growth, however, was somewhat weaker than expected during the first half of the year owing to 
the  dip  in  international  economic  activity.  However, monthly  data  for  goods  exports  and  the  NIER's 
business tendency data for new export orders point to a slight pick-up recently. 
The high productivity growth in recent years indicates continued good growth in the Swedish economy 
in the coming years. It has meant that companies have been able to increase their production with 
their existing work forces. This in turn has improved the cost situation for companies and held back 
price  increases  in  the  economy.  The  low  inflation  rate  has  made  it  possible  to  conduct  an 
expansionary monetary policy for a comparatively long period. At the same time, the high productivity 
and relatively good corporate profitability can be expected to be reflected in favourable wage growth in 
the  period  ahead.  Altogether,  this  means  that  the  prospects  for  good  for  firm  growth  in  domestic 
demand and employment over the coming years. 
   2/4 
Compared  with  the  assessment  in  June,  we  today  have  somewhat  more  expansionary  monetary 
policy. The budget bill that was presented in September also suggests that fiscal policy, particularly in 
2006, will be slightly more expansionary that we anticipated then. That indicates that we might have to 
revise up our growth forecasts for the Swedish economy somewhat in the years ahead. 
All in all, this means that growth appears able to remain firm in the coming years. Gradually, however, 
growth should slacken somewhat, which is in line with a normal cyclical pattern with a normalisation of 
growth  in  investment  and  productivity.  Less  expansionary  economic  policy  is  also  expected  to 
contribute to somewhat lower growth in 2007 and 2008. 
Capacity pressures to rise gradually 
As regards developments in the labour market, the assessment of the current tendencies has been 
made more difficult by the change in methods in the labour force survey. With this reservation, it can 
nevertheless  be  said  that  there  are  signs  that  the  situation  in  the  labour  market  is  improving. 
According to the National Accounts the number of hours worked began to rise in the second quarter 
this  year.  However,  we  have  not  yet  been  able  to  see  any  marked  increase  in  employment  since 
average working hours have risen. When there is an upturn in the economy existing staff are initially 
used more intensively, and only at a later stage do firms add to their workforces. 
Labour market indicators, however, are pointing to a gradual pick-up in employment. For instance, the 
number  of  redundancy  notices  is  dropping  and  the  number  of  new  job  vacancies  is  increasing. 
Relatively strong growth in domestic demand in the period ahead, in combination with the fact that it 
should  become  increasingly  difficult  for  companies  to  boost  output  without  also  adding  to  their 
workforces,  means  that  we  foresee  a  rise  in  the  demand  for  labour  in  the  coming  years.  The 
Government’s recently announced labour market policy programmes for next year can be expected to 
entail  that  total  employment  will  increase  considerably  more  than  regular  employment.  But  there 
should  also  be  a  rise  in  the  number  of  regular  jobs,  among  other  things  in  construction,  the  public 
sector and the private services sector. 
It is, as always, difficult to assess how total capacity pressures in the economy will develop in coming 
years,  and  thereby  what  inflation  impulses  we  may  expect  from  wage  formation  and  companies'  
price-setting behaviour. Cost pressures have recently been low, which is partly due to the relatively 
high  productivity  growth.  However,  the  reasons  behind  this  are  not  entirely  clear,  which  makes  the 
assessment  of  future  productivity  growth  more  difficult.  It  does  appear  likely  that  the  high  level  of 
productivity growth has to some extent been cyclical and a result of the composition of growth. It is 
reasonable to believe that productivity will increase at a slower rate in future as growth is expected to 
be  linked  to  a  greater  extent  to  strong  domestic  demand  and  increased  production  in  the  private 
services sector. 
All in all, declining productivity growth and higher wage increases as the labour market improves ought 
to  lead  to  a  gradual  rise  in  companies'  production  costs.  However,  the  cost  increases  look  to  be 
moderate, and we expect that cost pressures will remain relatively low over the coming years. 
It should be emphasised that it is difficult to determine exactly how far productivity growth will slow 
down  and  thereby  how  much  companies’  costs  may  increase  in  future.  It  is  likely  that  the  rate  of 
increase in productivity has risen as a result of the large-scale investment in information technology 
made by companies at the end of the 1990s and due to the effects of globalisation on competition and 
output. However, it is fully possible that we will have reason to revise up our forecast for productivity 
growth even more in coming years. It is just as conceivable that productivity growth will prove to be 
weaker than estimated. 
Gradually rising inflation 
Inflation has remained low since the end of 2003. Both increases in prices of consumer goods that are 
mainly  imported  –  imported  inflation  –  and  increases  in  prices  of  domestically-produced  goods  – 
domestic inflation – have remained low for some time. 
There  have  probably  been  several  different  factors  contributing  to  the  low  inflation  in  recent  years, 
including rapid productivity growth, relatively low capacity pressures and a stronger krona. Imported 
inflation  also  appears  to  have  been  held  down  by  import  substation,  i.e.  a  shift  from  imports  from 
countries with relatively high prices to countries with relatively low prices. Clothing prices, for instance, 
   3/4 
have shown unusually weak growth and over the past two years they have actually fallen. The EU’s 
new regulations for clothing and textile imports have contributed to keeping down the rate of increase 
for clothing prices. Furthermore, stiffer competition in the food industry has led to food prices falling. 
Inflation has recently been slightly higher than we had calculated on in the June Inflation Report. This 
is primarily due to the unexpectedly high price of oil. However, the domestic inflation rate was slightly 
lower during the summer than we assumed in our earlier assessment. 
As before, our assessment is that inflation will rise in the near future. Increased cost pressures and 
rising capacity pressures should contribute to an increase in domestic inflation. At the same time, the 
factors  that  have  dampened  inflation  over  the  past  year  –  rapid  productivity  growth  and  increased 
competition – will continue to hold back price rises. We are therefore assuming that domestic inflation 
will rise at a slow rate over the forecast period. 
Regarding the forecast for imported inflation, our assessment is that the effect of the price-dampening 
factors will decline somewhat. Although it can of course be assumed that the substitution for cheaper 
goods  in  imports  will  continue,  rising  global  capacity  pressures  are  expected  to  lead  to  higher 
international price pressures. Nor do we expect the krona exchange rate to continue to have the same 
price-dampening effect as it has had in recent years. 
The  fact  that  cost  pressures  and  capacity  pressures  will  rise  in  Sweden  is  also  judged  to  affect 
consumer prices of imported products since these are processed and distributed before being sold on 
in  the  Swedish  market.  All  in  all,  therefore,  there  is  reason,  in  my  opinion,  to  believe  that  imported 
inflation excluding oil will rise gradually over the coming year. However, I believe that it may remain 
relatively low. 
Future monetary policy 
The assessment is thus that inflation will rise over the coming years, but at a relatively moderate rate. 
Compared with the assessment we made in June, it now appears that inflation may turn out somewhat 
higher. In the short term, this is primarily due to the higher oil price. In the longer term, it is the higher 
growth rate that indicates a slightly higher inflation rate than we had forecast in June. However, this is 
partly counteracted by the fact that the underlying productivity growth in the economy may need some 
upward revision. 
In the forecast of inflation that we will be presenting in the Inflation Report to be published next week, 
we will no longer be basing our forecast on the assumption of an unchanged repo rate. The point of 
departure instead is the policy rate expected by the market in the period ahead, as reflected in implied 
forward interest rates. With this point of departure - and taking into account the different risks that we 
envisage - it is reasonable to believe that inflation one to two years ahead will approach our inflation 
target of two per cent. 
When  the  Executive  Board  convenes  to  discuss  monetary  policy  on  Wednesday  next  week,  future 
inflation prospects will of course will the decisive factor for our decision. It is likely that we also will 
have a discussion regarding how we should view the continued rise in house prices. Personally, I do 
not think that there is any immediate hurry to raise the repo rate, something that the Executive Board 
also communicated in August. But it is clear nonetheless that this is the next natural step if the current 
outlook  remains  unchanged.  When  it  may  become  appropriate  to  modify  the  currently  very 
expansionary monetary policy depends, of course, as usual primarily on economic developments in 
the period ahead and on the assessment of future inflation. 
 
   4/4 
