Lucas Papademos: Presentation of indicators of financial integration in 
the euro area 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, to 
the press briefing, Frankfurt am Main, 30 September 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Welcome to the European Central Bank and thank you for attending this press briefing on 
“Indicators  of  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area”.  We  will  start  with  some  introductory 
remarks from  my side.  My colleague on the ECB’s Executive Board  Ms Gertrude Tumpel-
Gugerell will then present the indicators of financial integration in more detail. With us on the 
podium  are  the  Director  General  Statistics,  Mr  Steven  Keuning,  and  the  Deputy  Director 
General Economics, Mr Philippe Moutot. All of us will be available to answer any questions 
that you might have regarding this publication. 
The publication of the indicators for financial integration in the euro area is a first for the ECB. 
For this reason, and also in order to underscore the importance which the ECB attaches to 
European  financial  integration  and  to  highlight  the  particular  informative  value  of  these 
indicators, we considered it appropriate to mark the publication of this report by inviting you 
to this event. 
Let  me  begin  by  addressing  some  fundamental  questions  which  might  be  asked  in  this 
context: Why did the ECB decide to produce such a set of indicators? What is the purpose of 
this publication? The ECB seeks to foster further integration in European financial markets in 
various ways and through a number of initiatives for the following reasons. 
First,  financial  integration  is  important  for  the  smooth  and  effective  implementation  of  the 
single  monetary  policy.  It  also  facilitates  and  speeds  up  the  transmission  of  the  effects  of 
monetary  policy  on  the  euro  area  economy.  Moreover,  a  financial  system  with  well-
developed capital markets, being intrinsically forward-looking, can provide us with useful and 
timely information about future economic developments.  
Second,  financial  integration  has  implications  for  financial  stability.  As  you  are  certainly 
aware,  the  Treaty  (Article  105(5))  calls  upon  the  Eurosystem  to  contribute  “to  the  smooth 
conduct  of  policies  pursued  by  the  competent  authorities  relating  to  the  prudential 
supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  the  stability  of  the  financial  system”.  To  this  end,  an 
understanding  of  the  links  between  financial  integration  and  financial  stability,  and,  in 
particular, of the implications of financial integration for financial stability is essential. On the 
one  hand,  deeper  and  more  integrated  financial  markets  offer  better  opportunities  for 
financing  and  risk  diversification,  and  thus  also  help  to  improve  the  capacity  of  the 
economies to absorb shocks. On the other hand, intensified cross-border financial links also 
harbour the potential that shocks could be transmitted more rapidly through the euro area. A 
potentially increased risk of financial contagion alters the challenges to financial stability that 
we  are  facing.  Against  this  background,  the  monitoring  of  progress  towards  more  fully 
integrated markets – as we are seeking to do with this new set of indicators – is useful for our 
assessment of the outlook for financial stability. 
Finally, and more generally, financial integration can help to promote the development and 
modernisation of financial markets, institutions and infrastructures, thereby helping, through 
various channels, to support economic activity and raise the potential for economic growth. 
Deeper  and  wider  markets  encourage  savings,  offer  more  and  better 
investment 
opportunities,  reduce  the  cost  of  capital  and  intermediation,  and  facilitate  a  more  efficient 
allocation of  financial  resources.  In this  way,  they  contribute  to  higher growth.  It  is  for  this 
reason  that  the  objective  of  fostering  financial  integration  in  the  European  Union  is  a  key 
aspect of the Lisbon agenda. In fact, financial integration has arguably been one of the most 
   1/3 
successful components of the Lisbon strategy and further progress towards more integrated 
financial markets is undoubtedly desirable.  
The ECB has taken a proactive stance towards, and has been involved in several initiatives 
aimed at fostering, financial integration, given its importance not only for the performance of 
the  basic  tasks  of  the  Eurosystem  but  also  for  the  welfare  of  European  citizens.  It  goes 
without saying that we are also in close cooperation with the European Commission in our 
efforts  to  promote  financial  integration.  The  pertinent  initiatives  of  both  institutions  support 
and  complement  each  other.  Regarding  the  specific  fields  of  activity  and  expertise  of  the 
ECB and the Eurosystem, we distinguish between four kinds of contribution. 
First,  public  authorities  can  make  a  contribution  by  fostering  collective  action  to  overcome 
possible coordination problems in the private sector. Right from the start of Monetary Union, 
the ECB has sought to play this “catalyst role”. The most recent example in this respect is 
our support of the initiative for a Single Euro Payments Area.  
Second, we provide central banking services that are conducive to financial integration, most 
prominently  by  operating  Europe’s  leading  large-value  cross-border  payment  system, 
TARGET. 
Third, we offer advice on the legal and regulatory frameworks for the financial system. For 
example, the Eurosystem recently commented on the review of the Lamfalussy process1 and 
on  the  European  Commission’s  priorities  for  financial  services  policy  over  the  next  five 
years.2
 Finally,  the  ECB  also  seeks  to  provide  economic  analysis  and  research  on  financial 
integration, in order to raise the awareness of economic agents and policy-makers about the 
benefits of financial integration for the euro area economy. The ECB is in a unique position to 
produce  in-depth  economic  analysis  and  comprehensive  statistics  for  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole,  by  drawing  on  the  expertise  of  its  staff,  by  relying  on  direct  interaction  with  major 
financial players and by building on its role as a supranational institution at the helm of the 
Eurosystem. 
The  publication  we  are  presenting  today  belongs  to  this  fourth  type  of  initiative.  In 
discussions  on  European  financial  integration,  the  relevant  arguments  are  often  of  a 
qualitative  nature.  However,  in  order  to  properly  monitor  and  assess  the  state  of  financial 
integration, quantitative information in the form of indicators – as contained in our report – is 
not only useful, but essential. We wanted to devise a way in which to capture, in quantitative 
terms, the various dimensions of financial integration and to have a toolbox at our disposal to 
monitor developments, measure progress and assess the state of integration of the different 
components of the European financial system, that is, financial markets, financial institutions 
and financial infrastructures. 
The indicators that we have compiled focus on markets and cover the main financial market 
segments  of  the  euro  area,  ranging  from  the  money  market  to  retail  loans  and  wholesale 
equity trading. The statistics indicate that the degree of integration varies greatly depending 
on the market segment. The unsecured money market has been fully integrated since shortly 
after the introduction of the euro. The repo market is also highly integrated, albeit to a lesser 
extent.  Government  bond  markets  have  integrated  significantly.  The  indicators  for  the 
corporate  bond  market,  which  has  grown  considerably  since  the  introduction  of  the  single 
currency,  also  point  to  a  high  degree  of  integration.  Progress  has  also  been  made  in  the 
                                                 
1   See http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/lamfalussy-reviewen.pdf. 
2   See http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/ecgreenpaperfinancialservicespolicy2005en.pdf. 
   2/3 
integration of euro area equity markets, in which equity returns are increasingly determined 
by common factors. However, banking markets are generally much less integrated. 
These  general  findings  –  and  I  only  wanted  to  refer  to  them  very  briefly  –  already 
demonstrate  that  the  indicators  contained  in  the  report  will  contribute  to  enriching  the 
discussion on the progress of financial integration with tangible evidence. I would now like to 
give the floor to Ms Tumpel-Gugerell, who will present in greater detail these new indicators 
and the report. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
   3/3 
