Seung Park: The Asian economy in the 21st century 
Speech  by  Mr  Seung  Park,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  Korea  Economic  Institute  of 
America, Washington DC, 26 September 2005. 
 Greetings 
I. 
President Joseph Winder of the Korea Economic Institute of America,  
Director Richard Bush III of the Brookings Institution, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today  at  the  joint  invitation  of  the  Brookings  Institution  and  the  KEI.  I 
particularly welcome the chance to meet again with President Winder and all members of the KEI after 
one  year  has  gone  by.  I  also  feel  myself  privileged  to  meet  Director  Bush  of  the  world  renowned  
think-tank, the Brookings Institution, and all those associated with it. 
Today I would like to speak to members of your two institutions, which act to build bridges between the 
United States and Asia, including Korea, on the theme of 'the Asian Economy in the 21st Century.' 
I am sure that all members of this distinguished company will have remarked that nowadays, wherever 
senior figures involved in economic affairs get together, the topic of conversation quickly turns to the 
Chinese  and  Indian  economies.  World  interest  is  now  focused  on  China  and  India,  which  have 
recently continued to show rapid economic development, following on from Japan, which has grown to 
be  the  world's  second  largest  economic  power,  and  the  four  Asian  dragons  including  Korea,  which 
experienced  a  successful  process  of  industrialization  within  a  very  short  period  of  time.  Strikingly, 
several experts foresee that before too long the Asian economy will eclipse those of North America 
and Europe in terms of economic scale.  
At the Bank of Korea, we have been carrying out research into the progress of economic development 
in the Asian region over the next half-century. We are now almost ready to wrap up this research, and 
today I would like to speak about the Asian economy of yesterday, that of today and that of tomorrow, 
based on the statistical forecasts derived in the course of the research. 
Why did the Asian economy suffer long-term stagnation? 
II. 
From  historical  perspective,  Asia  witnessed  the  meteoric  rise  of  three  of  the  four  great  human 
civilizations  of  antiquity.  In  many  and  arguably  most  aspects  of  science,  culture  and  so  on,  it  was 
ahead of the Western world. In spite of the brilliance of these ancient civilizations, until about 50 years 
ago most Asian regions had sunk deeply into poverty and their development presented a picture of 
stagnation. On the other hand, although not the origin of human civilization, the Western world, which 
lagged far behind in its historical development, became an advanced region. How did such an irony of 
history come about? Why did Asia miss out on industrialization? 
To my mind, the Asian countries, unlike the Western countries, were unable to respond adequately to 
the challenges and changes of a new civilization. For a long time, the Asian countries were unable to 
respond suitably to the changes in economic and social environment. 
Firstly, Asia was densely populated compared to other continents. This made the intensive farming of 
small  plots  of  land  inevitable.  Accordingly,  it  was  scarcely  feasible  to  accumulate  a  surplus  from 
agriculture  or  to  expand  markets.  In  such  a  situation  successful  industrialization  was  necessarily 
difficult. 
Secondly,  Buddhism  or  Confucianism  that  flourished  in  most  regions  of  Asia  also  hindered 
industrialization.  As  you  may  know  very  well,  these  two  religions  share  very  static  philosophies  in 
seeking quiescence and avoiding harsh reality. They place greater emphasis on spirit rather than on 
material, and favor the Middle Way tolerating the coexistence of the strong and the weak over rational 
choices and the exclusive pursuit of self-interest. Accordingly, honest poverty is respected and only 
those  physical  possessions  required  for  subsistence  recognized  as  desirable.  Moreover,  the 
accumulation of the wealth was considered as immoral. 
   1/6 
Lastly, history and tradition, being deeply rooted in the Asian region, consequently put up considerable 
resistance to change. The primacy of agriculture in Confucianism or the Hindu caste system together 
with other systems of social discrimination can be taken as examples of this. Such clinging to culture 
and  tradition  appears  to  stand  in  the  way  of  a  fresh  response  to  changes  in  the  economic 
environment. This is similar to the simple fact that it is much quicker to build a new town rather than to 
redevelop one that has been in existence for a long time. 
In contrast to the situation in Asia where economic development was long at a standstill, the Western 
world witnessed the spreading of the industrial revolution starting from Britain in the mid-18th century, 
and accompanied by a rapid shift from agrarian societies to industrial ones. There was a big increase 
in the economic power of those countries that had already undergone successful industrialization and 
they underwent a shift toward imperialism. With the expansion of imperialism the Asian countries were 
degraded  to  colonies  of  the  Western  powers.  And  although  they  had  natural  resources,  they  were 
unable to respond effectively to industrialization so that the Asian countries saw a weakening of their 
economic and military power, finding themselves the plunder of imperialism. They sank more deeply 
into poverty and industrialization came to be looked upon as being exclusive to the Western powers. 
The background to the high growth of the Asian economy 
III. 
This being the case, how did the Asian economy, dormant for so long, achieve the dynamic economic 
growth that it now displays? Let me now tell you my version of what has happened.  
After the Second World War the more open international order came into being and the way was clear 
for  solving  the  problems  of  shortages  of  capital  and  technology  through  their  importation.  Asia's 
abundant human resources that had previously stood in the way of development, combined with the 
advanced countries' capital and technology, metamorphosed into the driving force for industrialization. 
In this way, the Asian economy came to exemplify Arthur Lewis's model of development through the 
harnessing of the productive power of its excess population. In a paper published in 1954, Professor 
Lewis  pointed  out  that,  in  the  case  of  an  economy  with  overpopulation,  once  capital  is  supplied 
through the import of foreign savings, for example, and combined with the domestic low-waged human 
resources, an economic environment of low wage cost with high return in industrial sector would be 
formed, making it possible to achieve high growth. 
Notably not only is the Asian region's supply of labor practically unlimited, but it is well educated and 
shows  a  strong  tendency  toward  the  virtue  of  self-discipline  thanks  to  the  influence  of  religion  and 
education.  Consequently  once  industrialization  had  been  set  in  motion,  the  overpopulation  of  the 
Asian region confirmed more than the predictions of ewis's model by transforming itself into an engine 
of growth dynamism. Such characteristics of human resources of the region also seem to explain the 
fact  that  the  Asian  countries  are  showing  a  high  degree  of  responsiveness  in  tune  with  the  
knowledge-based and information industry era of the 21st century.   
Besides this, the Asian region only started its industrialization more than a century later than the West. 
The  time  needed  for  economic  development  could  therefore  be  greatly  shortened  through  the  
late-comer advantage of imitation. The Asian countries could achieve within a period of only 50 years 
what it had taken the Western countries some 100-150 years to do. This point was well explained by 
Alexander  Gerschenkron  in  his  development  theory  of  relative  backwardness.  In  his  seminal  work 
published  in  1966,  Professor  Gerschenkron  pointed  out  that  the  greater  a  country's  degree  of 
backwardness  compared 
its  outset  of 
industrialization, the greater would be the pace of progress once the process began. 
To  sum  up,  nowadays  the  Asian  economy's  process  of  development  can  be  said  to  successfully 
exemplify the development theories put forward by Professor Lewis and Professor Gerschenkron. 
the  advanced  countries  and 
the  more  belated 
to 
Characteristic features of Asia's economic development  
Ⅳ. 
What  characteristics  distinguish  the  process  of  economic  development  in  the  Asian  region  as 
compared to other regions? Let me run through a summary of these features. 
Firstly, the major resource that Asia has in abundance is low-cost labor force. In contrast to the human 
resources of other region, those of Asia are relatively well educated and possess a higher degree of 
moral discipline. 
   2/6 
Secondly,  the  needed  capital  and  technology  whose  domestic  supply  was  problematic  has  largely 
been introduced from abroad. It was possible to shorten the length of time needed for development by 
maximizing  late-comer  advantage  in  imitating  advanced  countries'  technology  and  systems.  This  is 
one of the fruits of economic openness.  
Thirdly, the products manufactured by combining domestic labor and imported capital and technology 
targeted mostly on export market rather than on local market.  
Lastly, governments have played an activist role by, for example, setting up plans and lending support 
for development rather than just leaving things to the free play of the markets.  
While making the most of late-comer advantage, Asia's economic development has proceeded in file 
order, moving from Japan, to Korea and then to China and India lately.  
Japan 
1. 
Japan's  industrialization  began  in  the  latter  part  of  the  19th  century,  about  120  years  after  that  of 
Britain. Spurred on by the Meiji Restoration in 1868, feudalism was cast aside and a modern country 
came to be established with power centrally concentrated. A national development strategy was put in 
place under government direction. This involved the introduction of capital and technology from the 
advanced countries of the Western world, the active encouragement of trade and the forced savings 
on the part of the agricultural sector for the success of the modernization policies. These placed Japan 
at the forefront of Asian industrialization. 
After  the  Second  World  War,  on  the  foundation  of  its  plentiful  labor  power  and  high  savings  rate, 
Japan successfully promoted major key industries, turning itself into a global manufacturing base. In 
the course of this, it registered continued high growth rates, averaging over nine per cent annually in 
the years of 1950-73. By 1967 it had become second only to the United States as an economic power. 
After the collapse of the bubble economy in the early part of the 1990s, though, Japan's growth stalled 
out, with GDP growth marking time at an average 1% level for some 10 years. Even so, Japan still 
remains  the  world's  second  economic  powerhouse  on  the  basis  of  its  strong  manufacturing 
competitiveness. 
Korea 
2. 
Korea began industrialization at the start of the 1960s when Japan was already entering the ranks of 
the advanced countries. Although lacking many resources for development, Korea had the abundant 
underutilized manpower of its rural areas. Consequently, it put in place a government-led development 
strategy,  also  involving  the  import  of  capital  and  technology  and  a  drive  for  exports.  From  the  late 
1970s  it  embarked  on  heavy  and  chemical  industrialization  on  the  basis  of  the  success  of  its  light 
industries.  In  consequence,  from  the  early  1990s  Korea  was  able  to  become  internationally 
competitive  in  the  steel,  shipbuilding  and  petrochemical  sectors.  More  recently  it  has  gained  a 
competitive  edge  in  the  automobile  industry,  and  in  a  range  of  fields  in  the  information  technology 
industry including semiconductors and mobile phones. Korea's per capita GDP stood at merely $80 in 
1960. However, it has grown by an average of over 7% a year for a period of some 40 years, to rank 
11th in terms of economic scale worldwide, and its per capita GDP is running at the $17,000 level in 
2005. 
What  is  even  more  striking  about  this  achievement  is  that  the  Korean  economy's  success  came 
despite its having been a backward agricultural country that had suffered under colonial rule and from 
the Korean War, which devastated the country, and despite its lack of capital and natural resources. 
China  
3.  
China, the slumbering giant, shifted to a full-blown stage of industrialization at the end of the 1970s 
with  the  introduction  of  market  economic  principles  to  its  socialist  system.  The  low-cost  labor  force 
acted  as  the  fundamental  driving  force  for  economic  growth.  Imports  were  relied  on  for  capital  and 
technology, and a growth strategy of government direction coupled with dependency on exports as the 
engine of growth was adopted. This can be seen as essentially similar to the growth model chosen by 
the four Asian dragons including Korea. 
   3/6 
As a result China has been able to maintain outstanding growth averaging over 9% a year from the 
end of the 1970s until the present day. The scale of its external trade has risen from 25th in the world 
ranking at the end of the 1970s to stand third in 2004, trailing only the United States and Germany. In 
terms  of  the  scale  of  its  production  and  exports,  it  already  ranks  first  in  the  electronic  household 
appliance,  textiles,  clothing,  footwear  and  iron  and  steel  sectors.  China  has  risen  to  become  the 
'workshop  of  the  world'  nowadays,  and  it  accounts  for  the  seventh  largest  share  of  the  global 
economy. It also holds the world's second largest foreign exchange reserves, trailing only Japan. This 
means it is well on its way to having a substantial influence in the international financial markets. 
India 
4. 
Around the year 1991, India finally abandoned its long cherished system of a planned and self-reliant 
economic  system.  With  the  promotion  of  its  New  Industrial  Policy,  industrialization  based  on  the 
market  mechanism  and  economic  openness  really  got  underway.  The  framework  of  India's 
development  model  broadly  coincided with  those  of  the  Asian  countries  already  described  in  that  it 
relied on low-wage human resources and on imports of capital and technology.  
India's  potential  became  all  the  more  obvious  with  the  advent  of  the  knowledge  and  information 
technology  era.  Barriers  of  space  for  the  delivery  of  services  were  dissolved  by  the  information 
technology  revolution,  and  international  outsourcing  became  a  sharply  increasing  worldwide  trend. 
India readily adapted to these environmental changes. As well as its abundant low cost manpower and 
outstanding scientific and engineering human resources, the country's historical and cultural legacy of 
the common use of English could also be transformed into a competitive strength. In this way, by 2004 
India has emerged as the world's 10th largest economy in terms of scale. 
V.  
The Asian economy's prospects in the world 
The Asian economy's growth potential   
1. 
I would now like to talk about the likelihood of the Asian economy's high growth being sustained. This 
question is directly linked to the Asian economy's growth potential.  
The  high  growth  of  Japan  after  the  war  and  that  of  Korea  from  the  1960s  is  frequently  termed  a 
'miracle.' Although the industrialization of China and India so far holds out brilliant promise, it may still 
be  thought  of  as  something  of  a  'vast  experiment  in  economic  development',  given  that  so  much 
uncertainty surrounds its future course. The population of China and India together makes up one third 
of the world. In recent history there is no example of a country on this scale successfully carrying out 
industrialization. 
Besides this, the two countries have a strong tradition of socialism. This has been pointed out by some 
as a factor underlying the uncertainty. The historical experience has been that the development of a 
market  economy  has  tended  to  prompt  demands  for  a  change  toward  greater  political  and  social 
democracy.  Apart  from  this  we  cannot  exclude  the  possibility  of  stumbling  blocks  in  the  path  to 
continued  economic  growth.  They  may  accompany  the  course  of  industrialization  in  the  form  of  a 
widening  gap  between  rich  and  poor,  environmental  and  energy  problems  and  the  possibility  of 
financial insolvencies. Geopolitical risks are also obviously present.  
Despite these possible caveats, I would like to emphasize the stronger probability that by the mid-21st 
century they will rank as economic powers on a par with the United States.  
I  think  it  is  possible  firstly  because,  in  case  of  China  and  India,  the  economic  growth  models  of 
Professor  Lewis  and  Professor  Gerschenkron  can  be  applied  for  some  considerable  time  to  come. 
Both  China  and  India  possess  large-scale  reserves  of  unemployed  and  underemployed  labor  that 
have not committed as inputs to economic development. Besides this, although it is very difficult to get 
industrialization  started,  once  it  is  underway  it  moves  forward  at  a  rapid  pace.  Korea  and  other 
countries  demonstrate  the  validity  of  Gerschenkron's  argument  and  it  also  appears  to  apply  in  the 
case of China and India. 
Secondly, and in contrast to the past, Asia shows a high degree of adaptability to the rapidly shifting 
economic  environment.  The  market  order  has  been  realigned  since  the  1990s  through  the  IT 
revolution  and  the  rapid  progress  of  globalization.  Competition  has  become  fierce  just  in  order  to 
   4/6 
survive  and  new  technology  sectors  such  as  IT,  biotechnology  and  nanotechnology  have  rapidly 
spread  while  the  previous  smokestack  industries  are  being  squeezed  out.  The  Asian  countries, 
however,  have  not  trailed  behind  the  advanced  countries  in  some  of  these  areas,  which  is  a  stark 
contrast with the industrialization period in the past. 
Japan and Korea are already competing with global producers at the forefront of the IT industry. Japan 
is already at the leading edge, and devoting huge efforts to catch up or overhaul the United States, in 
sectors such as nanotechnology, biotechnology and aerospace. Korea too is throwing itself into the 
search  for  new  growth  momentum  in  new  areas  of  technology.  The  recent  news  of  the  stem  cell 
research of Woo Suk Hwang, Seoul National University Professor, astonished the world. 
China and India, with their vast high-quality human resources, are seeing the rapid growth of their new 
technology  industries  such  as  information  technology.  These  two  countries  graduate  half  a  million 
trained engineers and scientists every year, eight times the number emerging from the US colleges. 
China  already  ranks  second  only  to  the  United  States  as  a  producer  of  IT  hardware.  It  has  the 
scientific and technological capacity for the launching of manned spacecraft. For its part, India boasts 
world-class competitiveness in the IT-based service sectors so that already by 2002 software and IT 
related services accounted for a greater share of exports than textile products. It is a further testimony 
to the scientific and technological capacity of India that 100 out of the Fortune 500 companies had 
already established an R&D centre there.  
The  Asian  economy  possesses  an  almost  limitless  supply  of  human  resources  together  with  its  
late-comer advantage. At the same time it has shown itself well able to adapt to the changes in the 
economic environment. Before too long there is a good likelihood that it will rise to a position alongside 
North America and Europe. 
Asia's weight in the global economy 
2. 
With all of its vast growth potential, what will Asia's part in the global economy look like in the future? 
Let me say something about this question now. 
As of 2003 the population of Asia, excluding Russia and the Middle East, made up roughly half the 
world total. Asia's GDP, however, accounted for only 23% of that of the world. In contrast, three North 
American  countries  (the  US,  Canada  and  Mexico)  and  Europe  had  7%  and  6%  of  the  world's 
population  respectively,  but  accounted  for  34%  and  29%  of  world  GDP.  In  other  words,  while  the 
combined share of North America and Europe in world population was merely 13%, they accounted 
for two-thirds of world GDP. 
As I mentioned earlier, however, there are big future changes in the world economic map coming, in 
line with the continuing development of the Asian region. Asia's dynamism began to reveal itself as 
long  ago  as  the  1970s,  and  since  that  time  Asia's  rate  of  economic  growth  has  been  considerably 
higher  than  the  world  average.  Since  the  1980s,  strikingly,  average  Asian  GDP  growth  has  been 
double the global average, making Asia a locomotive of world growth. Asia's exports have increased 
by  an  average  of  about  9%  a  year  since  the  1970s,  some  3  percentage  points  above  the  global 
average. Asia's weight in the global economy has consequently risen continuously from 12% in 1960 
to 14.5% in 1970, 17% in 1980 and 23% in 2003. 
These trends are likely to continue, as well. According to a study by the Bank of Korea, in the latter 
part of the 2010s, the scale of the Asian economy will be similar to that of the pre-enlargement EU. In 
the first half of the 2020s, it will match that of the three North American countries. Picturing the world 
economy in 2040, Asia's share in world GDP is forecast to be 42%, while the shares of North America, 
Europe, and Other regions are expected to be 23%, 16%, and 20% respectively. Meanwhile, in terms 
of  per  capita  GDP,  as  of  2003  Asia  recorded  an  average  of  $2,400  -  less  than  one-tenth  of  the 
average $29,000 in North America and $27,000 in Europe. By around 2040, however, this difference 
is likely to be greatly reduced with Asian per capita GDP being expected to be one-fourth of the figure 
in North America or in Europe.  
Looking at the big picture by country, in terms of overall national GDP, China is forecast to overtake 
Japan by around 2020 and be on a par with the US by approximately 2040, to account for about 1/5 of 
global  GDP.  India  would  overtake  Japan  by  about  2030,  and  by  2050  or  so  is  projected  matching 
Europe's  12%  global  GDP  share.  By  about  2040,  Korea's  share  in  global  GDP  is  forecast  to  have 
increased slightly to 2% from 1.7% in 2003, while that of Japan, due to its relatively slow growth, is 
estimated to have shrunk to about half its current 12% share. In terms of per capita GDP, by around 
   5/6 
2040, China is expected to be 1/4 of the figure in the US or in Japan, and 1/3 of that in Korea, while 
Indian per capita GDP is, like today, estimated to be half of the figure in China. 
The effect of the rise of the Asian economy on the world economy 
3. 
How then will this high growth of the Asian economy influence the world economy? It is already having 
a big impact on the global economy and this will increase in the future. This is because Asia can offer 
an inexhaustible supply of labor to the world economy, which is rapidly integrating under the influence 
of  information  technology  development  and  economic  openness.  A  vast  market  that  was  once  
self-sufficient  is  joining  the  world  economy.  A  number  of  effects  are  expected  to  arise  from  the 
integration of the Asian economy with the open world economic order. 
First of all, labor costs will be reduced. With the lowering of the capital-labor ratio, the returns to capital 
will be augmented. In addition, a huge consumer market will emerge. Furthermore, from China, the 
manufacturing  workshop  of  the  world,  and  India,  the  source  of  the  provision  of  services,  a  flow  of 
inexpensive goods and services will flow out to the world, heralding an age of low prices.  
Such  changes  in  the  economic  environment  will  undoubtedly  have  a  large  impact  on  the  world 
economy. The world economy will be rejuvenated and gain new growth momentum. From a worldwide 
perspective, investment will be boosted thanks to the lowering of labor input costs and the raising of 
the returns to capital, and through the coming into being of a vast market with huge effective demand.  
Secondly,  welfare  will  be  enhanced  for  the  common  people  around  the  world.  Clearly  standards  of 
living will be greatly improved in China and India, which make up one third of the world's population, 
with  the  raising  of  income  levels  for  their  own  citizens.  At  the  same  time,  the  supply  of  low-priced 
goods and services will act to boost effective disposable incomes throughout the world. 
There will also be less welcome effects. There is the likelihood of a worsening of income distribution. 
In  the advanced  countries  and  today's NIEs,  there will  be  a  deepening  of  the  income  gap between 
expert and skilled workers on the one hand, and manual and unskilled workers on the other. The rise 
of the Gini coefficient of the OECD countries by about two percentage points over the last 10 years or 
so to stand at 29.1% in 2000 is said to be caused by the supply of low-cost labor power from China 
and India. However, this should not be seen purely negatively, provided that the imbalance is due to 
the faster increase in incomes on the part of high income earners while income as a whole rises. This 
kind  of  negative  effects  should  disappear  in  time  as  they  are  transitional  phenomena  arising  in  the 
course of the entry of these vast countries into the global market economy. 
Closing remarks 
Ⅵ.  
Drawing to the end of my speech, I should like to round off with some concluding remarks.  
The Asian economy can maintain its dynamic development in the 21st century, becoming the driving 
force for world economic growth. Before too long the scale of the Asian economy will be on a par with 
those  of  Europe  and  North  America.  Having  played  only  a  minor  supporting  role  on  the  world 
economic stage for a long time, Asia should now assume a major role jointly with Europe and North 
America. In this connection, the peoples of Asia must strive to carry out the responsibilities befitting 
that  leading  role.  These  include  maintaining  and  enlarging  their  economic  openness  and  mutual 
cooperation to ensure the sustained development of the world economy. The states of other regions, 
meanwhile, should take advantage of the dynamism of the Asian economy as a new frontier for their 
economic development. 
A pressing task for the world of the 21st-century is to bring about international cooperation directed 
toward the raising of living standards and welfare for all. This must replace the pattern of development 
of state power for the purpose of aggressive attacks on other countries and to exercise control over 
them,  as  we have  sometimes witnessed  in  the  past.  In  this  regard,  the  highest  value should  in  the 
future be placed on economic rather than military power. In today's open world economic order, what 
is needed to push world economic development forward is not an exclusive monopoly on economic 
power, but efforts to share economic power together with neighbors. In closing, I would like to stress 
again  the  great  importance  of  cooperative  and  complementary  relationships  between  the  Asian 
economy, driving global economic growth in the 21st century, and other regions, which should make 
full use of the opportunities presented by this Asian dynamism. 
   6/6 
