Xiang  Junbo:  Medium-term  strategy  to  strengthen  financial  stability  and 
promote financial development 
Speech by Mr Xiang Junbo, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Seventh Meeting 
of IIF Asian CEO Summit, Hong Kong, 26 October 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure to address the Seventh Meeting of IIF's Asian CEO Summit. It provides us with 
a good opportunity to exchange views about important issues relevant to Asia and the whole world. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  introduce  to  you  the  People's  Bank  of  China's  medium-term  strategy  in 
strengthening financial stability and in promoting financial development.  
Finance is the core of modern economy, and maintaining financial stability is the foundation for sound 
and  stable  economic  development  and  long-term  social  security.  Financial  stability  is  an  important 
agenda  for  all  governments  in  the  world.  As  China's  economy  and  financial sector  grow steadily,  a 
stable financial system will hold great significance not only in China, but also in Asia and the world.  
Over the past more than two decades, China's opening-up and reforms and socialist market economic 
development have achieved remarkable accomplishments and realized economic, political and social 
stability,  creating  favorable  macro  environment  for  financial  stability.  Chinese  government  paid  high 
attention to financial stability. In 2003, Chinese government restructured financial management regime 
by  establishing  China  Banking  Regulatory  Commission  to  supervise  banking  industry.  At  the  same 
time, the Law of the People's Republic of China on the People's Bank of China was revised to confirm 
and strengthen the PBC's function in prevention and mitigation of financial risks and in safeguarding 
financial stability. The PBC and other government agencies carry out national guidelines and policies 
by close collaboration and collective efforts to proactively prevent and mitigate financial risks, promote 
financial reform, safeguard financial stability and advance financial development.  
Financial stability situation in China  
I. 
Since  the  opening-up  and  reform  of  the  Chinese  economy,  China  has  established  rather  complete 
financial institutional system. As of the end 2004, China has 4 wholly state-owned commercial banks, 
3  policy  banks,  12  share-holding  commercial  banks,  112  city  commercial  banks,  681  city  credit 
cooperatives, 32,854 rural credit cooperatives, 8 rural cooperative banks, 7 rural commercial banks, 
211  foreign  bank  branches,  220  foreign  bank  representative  offices,  4  financial  asset  management 
companies,  59  trust  and  investment  companies,  74  finance  companies,  12  financial  leasing 
companies,  3  auto  financing  companies  and  a  large  number  of  postal  savings  institutions.  In  the 
securities industry, China has 131 securities companies, 43 fund management companies, 187 future 
brokerage companies and 111 securities -investment consulting agencies. In the insurance industry, 
China has 6 insurance groups and holding companies, 69 insurance companies, 4 insurance asset 
management  companies,  1317  specialized  insurance  intermediaries  and  more  than  110  thousand 
insurance  intermediaries.  According  to  the  PBC  statistics,  at  end-2004,  the  total  financial  assets 
reached RMB41.28 trillion yuan. 
Thanks to close cooperation and joint efforts by the PBC and other government departments, financial 
risks emerged in the transition process of Chinese economic and financial development are properly 
controlled  through  improving  socialist  market  economic  system  and  financial  deepening.  Financial 
systems in China broadly remain stable with bright prospects.  
1. 
Political and economic environment is favorable. Stable and favorable foreign, political, 
economic  and  financial  policies  produce  sound  international  environment  for  financial 
stability.  Timely  and  effective  macro  adjustment  policies  have  helped  lessen  shocks  of 
economic  cyclical  movements  to  financial  stability.  Healthy  macro-economic  development 
has created a favorable environment for financial system to remain stable. Sound monetary 
policy buttressed domestic currency stability and laid the foundation for financial system to 
develop steadily. 
Financial Markets remained broadly stable. Money market developed rapidly and orderly so 
that  its  ability  to  allocate  resources  increased  evidently.  Bond  market  innovation  and 
2. 
   1/5 
3. 
4. 
5. 
development speeded up and market operation remained stable. Stock markets developed 
gradually  in  the  process  of  reform  and  its  direct  financing  function  was  basically  realized. 
Foreign  exchange  market  was  further  improved  and  deepened.  Gold  market  started  to 
develop and was gradually turned into an investment platform. Financial market developed 
rapidly  in  the  process  of  innovation  and  financing  structure  further  improved,  creating  a 
stable market environment for financial institutions sustainable and healthy development.  
Financial risks accumulated in history were broadly resolved. Under the steering of the State 
Council,  the  PBC,  the  MOF,  the  financial  supervisory  bodies  and  local  governments 
collaborated  closely  to  advance  risk  disposal,  restructuring  and  reform  of  the  financial 
institutions, resolved effectively financial institutions' risks, protected investors' interests and 
raised public confidence in financial institutions. 
Financial  institutional  reform  achieved  evident  results  and  financial  institutions  remained 
broadly  healthy  and  sound.  Financial  institutions  endeavored  to  become  modern  financial 
enterprises by meeting the requirements such as on sufficient capital, strong internal control, 
safe  operation,  good  services  and  profitability  etc.  Financial  institutions'  operational 
performance was broadly improved with enhanced assets quality, contained financial risks 
and  strengthened  corporate  governance.  In  particular,  banking  industry's  reform  has 
achieved  significant  results.  The  share-holding  reform  of  wholly  state-owned  commercial 
banks  made  a  big  stride.  Both  Bank  of  China  and  China  Construction  Bank's  financial 
situation  improved  significantly,  with  main  financial  ratios  already  close  to  that  of  the 
international big commercial banks and modern corporate governance mechanism beginning 
to produce good results. The financial restructuring of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of 
China  are  basically  finished  and  the  ICBC  will  be  restructured  to  become  a  share-holding 
company within this year. The pilot reform of rural credit cooperatives has extended to 29 
provinces  (region  and  municipalities),  with  improved  operation  and  strengthened  capital 
quality.  Guidelines  for  restructuring  of  the  securities  companies  have  been  clarified  and 
preliminary  results  have  been  achieved  in  relevant  reform  areas.  Insurance  industry  has 
made great progress in reform and development with the restructuring of the stated-owned 
insurance  companies  basically  completed.  At  the  same  time,  China  continued  to  fulfill  its 
WTO-entry commitments by further opening-up and reforming the financial industry. 
Financial  infrastructure  and  financial  ecological  environment  were  improved  gradually. 
Modern payment and settlement system has been preliminarily established, and the building 
of  financial  legal  system,  financial  institutions'  corporate  governance,  accounting  and 
auditing standards has achieved considerable progress. Financial safety network has been 
preliminarily  established  as  well,  and  prudential  supervision  was  becoming  increasingly 
important.  The  PBC  and  the  MOF  have  strengthened  their  coordination  and  information 
exchange  with 
financial  stability 
coordination  mechanism  is  underway,  with  insurance  protection  system  and  securities 
investors'  protection  system  preliminarily  established  and  deposit  insurance  system 
establishment  initiated.  At  the  same  time,  Chinese  government  strengthened  legal 
enforcement  and  accelerated  the  establishment  of  credit  registration  system  to  improve 
social credit culture and financial ecological environment.  
three  supervisory  commissions.  The 
formation  of 
Concerns about financial system stability. 
II. 
Finance  is  the  core  of  modern  economy  and  interlaced  closely  with  economic  operation.  In  the 
process of establishing socialist market economy as well as of reform financial globalization, the main 
concerns of Chinese government about financial stability are focused on the following ten aspects. 
1. 
Economic growth model transformation. Currently, economic growth is highly dependent 
on investment and export and the development of different industries is unbalanced. Given 
changes in economic environment, industrial structural adjustments, deterioration of terms of 
trade,  overheating  in  sectors  like  real  estate  industry,  real  economy's  profitability  and 
sustainable  development  may  be  affected,  so  as  the  sound  operation  of  the  financial 
institutions and financial markets.  
Coordination between direct and indirect financing. At present, direct financing develops 
rather  slowly  in  China  compared  with  the  development  of  indirect  financing,  in  particular, 
bond  market and stock  markets  development broadly  lags  behind,  and  business  financing 
2. 
   2/5 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
highly depends on the banking system which results in a concentration of financial risks in 
the  banking  industry.  Capital  markets  face  many  historical  problems  and  institutional 
drawbacks and listed companies need to timely disclose true information, improve corporate 
governance  and  fully  resolve  the  state  shares  problem  while  the  securities  companies  all 
need to strengthen operation. 
Implicit fiscal deficits. Implicit fiscal deficits arising from inadequate funding of the pension 
system and mounting local governments debts might be transferred to financial systems and 
affect financial stability. 
Control and deregulation of capital prices. In the process of interest rates liberalization 
and the reform of the exchange rate regime, business, financial institutions, households and 
other  market  participants  must  adapt  to  the  changes  from  a  controlled  to  a  deregulated 
environment and hedge interest rate risks and exchange rate risks. However, the financial 
markets are not adequately developed and require more financial derivatives and financial 
products for market participants to hedge financial risks. 
Improving  financial  institutions'  corporate  governance.  The  corporate  governance  of 
financial institutions still has problems like insider control, insufficient information disclosure, 
deviated business targets, lack of clear and effective disciplines and market incentive which 
affect  financial  institutions'  risk  management  capability  and  are  likely  to  trigger  credit  risks 
and operational risks. 
Monitoring  and  supervision  of  risks  from  cross-sector  financial  businesses.  Cross-
sector  financial  businesses  contain  cross-institutional,  cross-markets  and  cross-regional 
risks which investors' are lack of full knowledge, financial institutions have not established 
effective risk prevention and internal control system as well, and supervision system requires 
to be further improved.  
Prevention of moral hazards in financial institutions' risks resolution. In recent years, 
governments  often  underwrite  individual  claims  when  financial  institutions  are  rescued  or 
closed because of the incomplete investor protection mechanism and investors' lack of risk 
knowledge. Such a method doesn't help to enhance investors' risk awareness and market 
disciplines on financial institutions business operation, and it can even encourage financial 
institutions to irrationally expand and engage in vicious operational activities. It is an urgent 
task to maintain financial stability and at the same time to prevent moral hazard risks.   
Strengthening  financial  infrastructure.  The  market-oriented  operational  mechanism  for 
payment  services  are  not  soundly  established  and  payment  and  settlement  management 
skills require further improvement. Besides, financial legal system, accounting and auditing 
standards, 
further 
strengthening and financial safety networks need to be improved. Information exchange and 
coordination mechanism among the PBC, the MOF and financial supervisory authorities also 
needs to be cultivated. 
Improving financial ecological environment. Credit culture is not well developed in China 
and needs to improve along with the social and economic development. There are still cases 
of law violation and improper law enforcement in China, which affects financial stability and 
even the social stability. 
The spillover effects of economic and financial globalization. With the development of 
economic  and 
increasingly  affected  by 
international  economic  and  financial  situation  and  uncertainties  such  as  rising  oil  prices, 
global interest rates increasing, US dollar depreciation, geographical conflicts etc. With the 
depth  and  scope  of  China's  participation  in  international  production,  trade  and  capital 
movements gradually enlarged, uncertainties accompanied globalization gains are increased 
accordingly.  Besides,  because  global  financial  system  integration  is  strengthened,  cross-
border contagion effects of financial risks will be increased as well. Such kind of "spill-over" 
effects will bring many uncertainties for Chinese financial stability. 
registration  system  requires 
financial  globalization, 
information  disclosure 
financial  stability 
level,  credit 
is 
   3/5 
III.  
Medium-term  strategy  to  strengthen  financial  stability  and  promote  financial 
development 
It is a systematic project to maintain financial stability, and therefore it involves many aspects. In line 
with the fundamental principle of maintaining stability by reform and development, the PBC will closely 
collaborate with other departments to strengthen macro financial control, properly deal with historical 
burdens,  mitigate  financial  risks,  optimize  financial  structure,  promote  financial  institution  reform, 
improve 
financial  ecological 
environment,  establish  appropriate  a  long-term  financial  stability  mechanism  to  maintain  financial 
stability and promote financial development. 
financial  markets,  strengthen 
infrastructure, 
financial 
improve 
(1) Improve macro financial control system to provide favorable environment for financial 
stability.  
We will continue to adopt economic and legal instruments to strengthen and improve macro financial 
control  system  in  order  to  promote  steady  and  relatively  fast  economic  development.  The  PBC  will 
enhance  the  timeless,  effectiveness  and  forward-looking  aspects  of  monetary  policy,  smoothen 
monetary policy transmission and promote the market-oriented interest rates reform. We will promote 
RMB  exchange  rate  regime  reform  in  a  sequenced  manner  to  gradually  establish  the  managed 
floating rate regime based on market supply and demand so as to maintain the RMB exchange rate 
basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.  
(2) Speed up financial reforms to increase financial institutions' competitiveness.   
In the coming period, China will continue to reform the financial system, clarify ownership structure, 
improve  corporate  governance,  transform  operating  mechanism,  strengthen  internal  control  so  that 
commercial banks, securities companies and insurance companies could be transformed as modern 
financial  enterprises  with  sufficient  capital,  strict  internal  control,  safe  operation,  good  services  and 
profitability. 
First, China will continue to conduct the share-holding reform of the wholly state-owned commercial 
banks,  and  deepen  rural  credit  cooperatives  reform,  promote  city  commercial  banks,  city  credit 
cooperatives and non-banking financial institutions to restructure and consolidate, encourage private 
funds  to  participate  in  the  restructuring  of  urban  credit  cooperatives  and  city  commercial  banks, 
promote  assets  management  companies  market-oriented  operation,  restructure  and  consolidate 
securities  companies  and  improve  insurance  companies  reform  so  as  to  establish  a  multi-layer 
financial institutional system. 
Second, efforts will be made to further improve corporate governance of the financial institutions and 
strengthen internal control system. We will promote financial institutions' ownership structure reform, 
establish  incentives  for  the  financial  institutions  to  introduce  strategic  investors,  board  of  directors, 
management and market participants and put in place risk management system and internal control 
system.  
Third,  financial  innovation  will  be  fostered.  Financial  institutions  should  enhance  their  financial 
innovation  and  strengthen  their  pricing  capability.  Commercial  banks  need  to  pay  attention  to 
developing  their  fee-based  business;  securities  companies  need  to  develop  seller's  business; 
insurance companies need to diversify investment channels and cultivate sustainable growth model. 
Supervisory authorities need to provide policy to support financial innovation.  
(3) Optimize financing structure and improve capital markets.  
Efforts will be made to promote capital markets reform and stable development. In particular, historical 
burdens will be properly dissolved and institution building will be strengthened. Bonds market will be 
further developed and pilot-program of credit securitization will be conducted, corporate bonds market 
will  be  developed,  capital  market  structure  will  be  improved  and  capital  market  instruments  will  be 
diversified.  Besides,  we  will  improve  interactions  among  the  money  market,  capital  market  and 
insurance market to maintain broad stability of financial operation and financial market.  
(4) Strengthen financial risks monitoring and early warning. 
Risks of banks, securities firms and insurance companies as well as the cross-sector, cross-country 
and cross-region risks will be closely monitored. Financial stability indicator system and early warning 
   4/5 
system  will  be  established  to  improve  the  monitoring  and  assessment  of  financial  vulnerability  and 
enhance  monitoring  and  warning  of  financial  risks.  To  strengthen  the  monitoring  and  prevention  of 
systemic  financial  risks,  the  PBC  will  periodically  issue  Financial  Stability  Review  from  2005  to 
evaluate the financial system risk profile in China.  
(5) Accelerate the establishment of financial safety networks. 
Financial safety networks include prudential financial supervision, central bank's lender of last resorts 
function,  deposit  insurance  system,  securities  investors  protection  system  and  insurance  protection 
system. Currently,  we will  focus  on  the  establishment  of  deposit insurance  system which covers  all 
depository  financial  institutions.  At  the  same  time,  we  will  collaborate  with  other  departments  to 
establish and improve the securities investors protection system and insurance protection system.        
(6) Improve financial legal system and financial legal environment. 
At  present,  the  PBC  is  speeding  up  the  relevant  financial  legislation  work,  which  include  Rules  for 
Credit Registration and revision of the Enterprise Insolvency Law and the Criminal Law. In line with the 
principle  of  the  Insolvency  Law,  the  PBC  will  promote  to  stipulate  Rules  for  Financial  Institutions 
Insolvency  to  emphasize  on  the  special  feature  of  financial  institutions.  Furthermore,  the  PBC  will 
make efforts to coordinate the revision of the Securities Law and draw up the Anti-money Laundering 
Law  as  well  as  study  relevant  legal  issues  related  to  financial  institutions'  market  exit,  deposit 
insurance, legislation of the financial-holding company law, asset securitization and trust investments 
etc.  The  PBC  will  endeavor  to  publish  these  laws  and  rules  as  soon  as  possible  to  improve  law 
enforcement and at the same time, clean up the financial legal system in accordance with Chinese 
situation. 
(7) Promote financial infrastructure and create favorable environment for financial industry. 
The  PBC  will  continue  to  promote  the  improvement  of  payment  and  settlement  system  and  the 
establishment  of  credit  registration  system  so  as  to  increase  public  credit  awareness  and  credit 
culture.  The PBC  will strengthen anti-money  laundering work  and  expand  international  cooperation. 
Furthermore, the PBC will explore to establish financial supervision coordination mechanism among 
the PBC, the MOF and the supervisory authorities.  
Currently,  China  is  mapping  out  its  11th  Five-year  plan  for  National  Economic  and  Social 
Development.  I  believe,  with  the  fulfillment  of  scientific  development  concept,  the  improvement  of 
macro  economic  management,  acceleration  of  reform  and  opening-up,  deepening  of  economic 
restructuring and transformation of growth model, Chinese financial system will be maintained stable 
and enjoy further development.  
Thank you. 
 
   5/5 
