Jean-Claude Trichet: The state of European financial integration 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the third euro fixed 
income forum, Euromoney Conferences, Paris, 28 November 2005.  
 1. 
Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the organisers of Euromoney Conferences for inviting me to speak to you today 
on the occasion of the Third euro fixed income forum.  
I  am  impressed  by  the  wide  range  of  topics  that  you  will  deal  with  in  the  course  of  this  event, 
addressing developments in financial markets and financial infrastructures as well as EU policy issues. 
The  conference  also  addresses  in  a  comprehensive  manner  past  and  future  developments  and 
geographical comparisons between the euro area market and the US market. 
In my speech today, I will assess the state of European financial integration. I will therefore not only 
deal  with  a  subject  matter  that  is  of  primary  interest  to  the  ECB,  but  at  the  same  time  touch  upon 
several of the conference themes that will be discussed in workshops and round tables.  
Why European financial integration is important 
2. 
Financial  integration  is  directly  relevant  for  the  ECB’s  tasks.  A  well-integrated  financial  system  is 
important  as  it  enhances  the  smooth  and  effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses 
throughout  the  euro  area.  The  financial  system  is  composed  of  financial  markets  and  their  related 
infrastructures, and of the financial institutions that are active on these markets. We can be very proud 
of the euro money market, in particular the unsecured interbank market that has been almost perfectly 
integrated  since  shortly  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999.  Our  TARGET  system,  the  large-
value payment system that has been operational since the first day of Monetary Union as a platform 
for balancing liquidity surplus and deficits within the euro area, has been instrumental in this respect. A 
financial market also needs an integrated market infrastructure in order to achieve full integration. The 
Eurosystem helps in this respect by providing central banking services that are conducive to fostering 
financial  integration.  Our  decision  to  move  to  TARGET2,  where  the  launch  of  the  single  shared 
platform is planned for November 20071, is a clear example of this. 
Furthermore, financial integration has implications for our task of safeguarding financial stability, for 
which the Eurosystem’s contribution has been called upon by the Treaty establishing the European 
Community. Being aware of the links between financial integration and financial stability is therefore of 
the  essence.  As  we  know,  on  the  one  hand,  more  integrated  financial  markets  offer  better 
opportunities for financing and risk diversification, and thus help to improve the capacity of economies 
to  absorb  shocks.  On  the  other  hand,  the  structural  transformation  of  the  financial  system  through 
enhanced  financial  integration,  including  the  creation  of  intensified  cross-border  financial  links, 
necessitates that we closely follow the process of financial integration. 
But we should also bear in mind that financial integration is relevant for all of us, for financial market 
professionals  and  for  all  citizens  of  Europe  alike,  because  of  the  economic  benefits  that  arise  from 
financial integration. In fact, financial integration is a key factor in the development and modernisation 
of  the  financial  system,  which,  in  turn,  increases  the  potential  for  greater  and  more  sustained  non-
inflationary  economic  growth.  I  will  give  here  a  direct  answer  to  the  question  you  posed  in  the  first 
round  table  discussion  this  morning  concerning  the  possibilities  of  enhancing  sustained  economic 
growth in Europe. 
It  is  generally  accepted  that  financial  integration  fosters  financial  development  and,  ultimately, 
economic  growth.  Financial  integration  allows  for  economies  of  scale  and  increases  the  supply  of 
funds for investment opportunities. It also fosters competition and the expansion of intermediation and 
                                                      
1  See Second progress report on TARGET2, ECB press release dated 21 October 2005, available from the ECB website. 
BIS Review 81/2005 
 1
markets.  This  financial  development  in  turn  leads  to  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital  and  thus 
increases the potential for higher economic growth.  
We  can  also  note  the  interesting  development  with  regard  to  the  theory  of  optimal  currency  areas, 
where it has been put forward that the optimality of a currency area is not necessarily something that 
needs  to  be  achieved  fully  before  monetary  union  takes  place  but  rather  is  the  result  of  monetary 
union itself. In fact, the euro acted as a major catalyst for the integration of the euro financial markets.  
Still,  we  are  also  aware  that  the  degree  of  integration  differs  between  market  segments,  with 
integration  being  more  advanced  in  those  market  segments  that  are  closer  to  the  single  monetary 
policy, above all the money market. Integration could still be enhanced for other segments. 
In this context, it is interesting to look at studies that quantify and estimate the economic benefits of 
financial integration. By way of example, let me mention a study that estimates the potential resulting 
from the integration of European bond and equity markets in terms of additional GDP growth, which is 
predicted to be around 1 % over a ten-year period, or around EUR 100 billion.2 
Coming back to the question of the possibilities for enhancing sustained economic growth in Europe, I 
would like to stress the importance of realising the potential inherent in European financial integration 
in order to reap its economic benefits in full. 
 
3. 
In  order  to  realise  the  existing  potential  of  financial  integration  for  economic  growth,  the  immediate 
question  to  ask  is:  where  is  such  potential  to  be  found,  in  which  parts  of  the  financial  system  is 
financial integration more advanced, where is it still lagging behind? In sum: what is the state of play of 
financial integration in Europe?  
A prerequisite for any action is the analysis of the state of financial integration in the euro area and the 
monitoring  of  the  progress  of  financial  integration  over  time.  Because  the  relevant  arguments  in 
discussions on this topic are often of a qualitative nature, the ECB sought to devise a way to capture, 
in  quantitative  terms,  the  state  of  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area.  Two  months  ago,  the  ECB 
published, for the first time, a set of indicators regarding the state of integration of euro area financial 
and banking markets. With the accompanying explanatory report, which we will publish on an annual 
basis, the ECB aims to measure and monitor financial integration in the euro area over time.3 
I  will  now  describe,  on  the  basis  of  several  of  the  20  indicators  published,  the  state  of  financial 
integration  in  the  main  euro  financial market  segments,  namely  the  money market,  the  government 
bond market, the corporate bond market, the equity market and banking markets.  
Measuring the state of European financial integration 
Money market 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  we  have  good  reason  to  speak  of  success  when  we  look  at  the  degree  of 
integration of the money market, in particular the unsecured interbank market and the repo market.  
Our  indicators  measure  financial  integration  of  the  euro  money  market  based  on  the  dispersion  of 
lending  rates  for  actual  transactions  or  rates  offered  by  EONIA,  EURIBOR  and  EUREPO  panel 
banks.4  
When we recall that only one year before the start of Monetary Union, in January 1998, the cross-
country  standard  deviation  of  the  average  overnight  lending  rates  among  euro  area  countries  was 
higher than 130 basis points, it is impressive that this indicator was as low as three basis points in 
early 1999 and has since decreased even further to just one basis point. 
Indicators  for  the  one-month  and  12-month  maturities  also  consistently  show  a  highly  integrated 
unsecured money market. While the respective cross-country standard deviation of EURIBOR lending 
                                                      
2   London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macro-economic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to 
the European Commission. 
3   The  ECB’s  report  and  the  statistics  underlying  the  financial  integration  indicators  can  be  accessed  under  Statistics  > 
Indicators of financial integration on the ECB’s website. The financial integration indicators will be updated semi-annually. 
4   Data  referring  to  the  time  before  the  introduction  of  EONIA  and  EURIBOR  are  average  overnight,  one-month,  12-month 
rates, respectively, of euro area countries. 
rates among euro area countries stood at more than 100 basis points for the one-month maturity, and 
at  around  50  basis  points  for  the  12-month  rates  in  January  1998,  since  early  1999  both  of  these 
indicators have shown values not higher than, and normally below, one basis point.  
Last but not least, our indicators also confirm a high degree of integration for the repo market. The 
EUREPO index was launched in March 2002, and since then, the euro area cross-country standard 
deviation  of  the  one-month  EUREPO  rates  has  been  around,  and  normally  below,  one  basis  point. 
The indicator for the 12-month maturity shows a standard deviation of around, and normally below, 
two basis points.  
The absolutely decisive role of the euro in enhancing financial market integration is also visible in the 
interest  rate  derivatives  markets.  Let  me  highlight  the  success  of  the  euro  overnight  index  swap 
market. As an example of a market that came into existence after the launch of the euro and having 
been  integrated  from  the  outset,  this  relatively  young  market  is  not  covered  by  our  initial  set  of 
indicators – which does not exclude the fact that we may add it at some stage. But what is sure is that 
it is a successful market – as also attested by the launch of the EONIA Swap Index in June this year. 
Later in this conference the issue of what the euro area market does better than the US market will be 
addressed. One such example is the euro interest rate swap market, which is the largest interest rate 
swap market in the world – about one third larger than the equivalent US dollar segment.5 
But we know that there are also examples where the euro area market lags behind the US market. 
The least integrated money market segment is the short-term securities market. Compared with the 
equivalent US commercial paper market, which has an outstanding amount of around EUR 1.3 trillion 
and which is indeed integrated, the aggregate size of the commercial paper and certificates of deposit 
markets in Europe is around EUR 0.8 trillion. Furthermore, these markets remain segmented within 
Europe. Here, I expect that the Short-Term European Paper (STEP) initiative, which aims to promote 
the  convergence  of  standards  and  practices,  will  provide  an  impulse  towards  integration,  thereby 
increasing the depth and liquidity of this market in Europe. The Eurosystem supports this market-led 
initiative. I would like to express my appreciation to the promoters of the STEP exercise and would like 
to encourage them to keep up the momentum for the last stage, as the first STEP-labelled programme 
is expected in early 2006. 
Government bond market 
Let me now turn to the bond markets, where I would like to begin with the government bond market.  
Government  bond  markets  have  achieved  a  very  high  degree  of  integration,  mainly  due  to  the 
disappearance of intra-euro area exchange rate risk. Since then, government bond yields in different 
euro  area  countries  have  been  driven  exclusively  by  euro  area-wide  factors  and  news,  and  by  the 
appreciation of the risk inherent to the various signatures of the Governments concerned.  
Our  indicators  of  the  integration  in  government  bond  markets  encompass  the  standard  deviation  of 
government  bond  yield  spreads,  measures  based  on  regressions,  such  as  the  evolution  of  beta 
coefficients,  and  variance  ratios.  They  point  to  a  very  high  degree  of  integration  of  the  euro  area 
government bond market.  
Corporate bond market 
Noteworthy is the emergence of a euro corporate bond market, which has grown considerably since 
1999. While this market had been predominantly open to the highest quality credits in that year, the 
market has since broadened to facilitate the funding needs of riskier issuers. In general, a maturing 
euro  corporate  bond  market  adds  to  the  diversification  of  corporate  financing  and  leads  to  greater 
benefits from having multiple avenues of corporate finance. The gap with the US market is, however, 
still  large  in  terms  of  absolute  size,  with  the  outstanding  volume  of  bonds  issued  by  non-financial 
corporations of around EUR 2.5 trillion in the United States being around three times larger than in the 
euro area.  
                                                      
5   The euro interest rate swap market has a daily turnover of almost EUR 250 billion, while the equivalent US dollar segment is 
around EUR 160 billion. See BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey - Foreign exchange and derivatives market activity in 2004 
(March 2005). 
The reasonably  high degree  of  integration  of  the  euro corporate bond market is,  however,  positive. 
The  yield  on  a  corporate  bond  depends  typically  on  a  number  of  factors,  such  as  the  credit  rating, 
time-to-maturity, liquidity and cash flow structure. Our indicators for the state of integration of the euro 
corporate bond market are based on (econometric) model estimation, investigating whether or not risk-
adjusted yield spreads have a systematic country component. In an integrated market, the proportion 
of the total yield spread variance attributable to country effects should be close to zero. Our studies 
suggest that this market segment is fairly integrated in the sense that the country of issuance is only of 
marginal importance in explaining yield differentials.  
Equity market 
Other market segments have even more potential for further advances in the level of integration. In 
fact,  the  euro  area  equity  markets  are  still  quite  fragmented,  but  a  gradual  integration  process  is 
ongoing.  
For  example,  our  indicators  show  that  stock  prices  across  the  euro  area  increasingly  react  to  euro 
area-wide factors and news. Another indicator to measure the degree of integration in euro area equity 
markets is the relative importance of sector versus country-based investment strategies. The indicator 
is derived by calculating and comparing the cross-sector dispersion with the cross-country dispersion 
of equity returns. The more integrated the euro area equity market is, the greater the pertinence of 
spreading investments across sectors as opposed to country-based equity investment strategies. Our 
statistics show that the elimination of intra-euro area currency risk has encouraged integration in the 
sense  that  the  “home  bias”  in  the  equity  holdings  of  institutional  investors  has  been  significantly 
reduced. For the first time since 1973, the concept of sector diversification has, since January 2001, 
surpassed  geographical  diversification  among  euro  area  countries.  Nevertheless,  the  importance  of 
the country effect is still too great for it to be concluded that the equity market is fully integrated at the 
level of the single currency area.  
Banking markets 
A  further  example  where  integration  is  generally  lagging  behind  is  banking  markets,  whereby  the 
degree  of  integration  is  also  different  for  the  types  of  banking  activities,  i.e.  capital  market-related 
activities, interbank (or wholesale) activities, and retail banking.  
Cross-border  interbank  loans  and  holdings  of  securities  have,  in  relative  terms,  experienced 
substantial growth. While securities issued by non-monetary financial institutions of another euro area 
country  accounted  for  only  16%  of  the  securities  held  by  euro  area  monetary  financial  institutions 
(MFIs) at the end of 1997, this share has now reached almost 40%, pointing to a higher degree of 
capital market integration in the euro area. And although loans granted between domestic MFIs still 
account for more than 50% of the total EU MFI loans, the respective euro area cross-border activity 
has increased from only 15% at the end of 1997 to around 23% at present. 
Last but not least, integration in retail banking has, by contrast, not progressed to any great extent, as 
shown by both price and quantity-based indicators. 
For example, while the share of euro area cross-border MFI loans granted to non-MFIs stood at 2% at 
the end of 1997, this figure has risen to no more than 3.5% today. Also, taking a price-based indicator, 
the  cross-country  standard  deviation of  interest  rates  on consumer  credit has been rather high  and 
constant, on average 0.9% over the last three years. And, to give a last indicator for the level of retail 
banking  integration,  the  cross-country  dispersion  of  interest  rates  on  lending  for  house  purchase 
amounts to, on average, 0.5% over the last three years, with no clear declining trend visible as yet, 
thereby confirming the picture of hesitant euro area credit market integration.  
Before I conclude on the state of financial integration in the main euro financial market segments, I will 
mention that, after having produced the first publication of indicators of financial integration this year, 
the  coverage  of  our  indicators  will  be  further  enhanced  next  year,  in particular  by adding  indicators 
relating to the integration of financial institutions and financial market infrastructures.  
4. 
The role of EU policies to foster financial integration and the Eurosystem’s 
contribution  
I  would  like  first  to  stress  that  the  provision  laid  down  in  the  Treaty  that  the  Eurosystem  acts  in 
accordance with the principle of an open market economy with free competition, favouring an efficient 
allocation  of  resources,  also  determines  the  Eurosystem’s  view  that  financial  integration  is  first  and 
foremost a market-driven process. 
In addition, we see it as a basic task of public authorities to create a framework conducive to fostering 
financial  integration.  This  framework  should  be  such  that,  generally  speaking,  all  potential  market 
participants in a given financial instruments or services market are subject to a single set of rules when 
they  decide  to  deal  with  those  financial  instruments  or  services,  have  equal  access  to  this  set  of 
financial  instruments  or  services  and  are  treated  equally  when  they  operate  in  the  market.  If  the 
opportunities thus created have been exploited by market forces, true financial integration will have 
been achieved and its benefits can be reaped. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  European  Commission’s  agenda  for  the  financial  services  policy  over  the 
coming  years.  Incidentally,  I  have  also  made  a  contribution  in  this  respect  to  the  Euromoney 
Yearbooks  “European  Single  Financial  Market  2005/2006”,  published  at  the  start  of  October.6  This 
contribution is to be seen within the context of the Eurosystem’s response, provided in August, to the 
European Commission’s consultation on the priorities for financial services policies over the next five 
years.7  As  we  explained,  the  Eurosystem  supports  the  key  policy  orientation  of  the  Commission’s 
Green Paper. Let me give a brief summary of what we deem to be some basics for the further shaping 
of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  of  the  European  financial  system  in  order  to  foster 
financial integration. I would like to highlight two points. 
First,  there  is  a  need  to  proceed  with  the  adoption  of  the  remaining  measures  envisaged  in  the 
Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) in order to complete the regulatory framework, and hence, with 
the  effective  implementation  and  enforcement  of  such  measures  at  national  level.  The  field  of 
securities clearing and settlement is an area in which further integration is needed to exploit in full the 
benefits  arising  from  a  pan-European  securities  market.  A  recently  published  paper  by  ECB  staff 
summarised the situation of the integration of securities market infrastructures in the euro area.8 The 
Eurosystem supports the Commission’s intention to put forward a proposal for a Directive on securities 
clearing and settlement to complement the market-led removal of the “Giovannini barriers”. 
Second, we agree with the Commission’s proposal for “better regulation” based on open, transparent 
and evidence-based policy-making, including an ex ante evaluation of possible costs and benefits. In 
its  Green  Paper,  the  Commission  in  particular  put  forward  retail  financial  services  and  asset 
management  as  areas  where  such  efforts  could  potentially  be  made.  In  the  case  of  retail  financial 
services,  I  mentioned  earlier  our  assessment  based  on  quantitative  indicators  that  integration  is 
generally lagging behind in the field of retail markets. In the case of asset management, I would like to 
mention  the  Eurosystem’s  recent  contribution  in  response  to  the  Commission’s  public  consultation 
regarding  the  enhancement  of  the  EU  framework  for  investment  funds.9  The  Eurosystem  fully 
endorses the Commission’s reflections to assess the possible need for further Community initiatives in 
the area of asset management. We also stand ready to support any further work the Commission may 
undertake  in  this  field.  By  way  of  example,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  we  advised  the  Council  on 
amendments to the UCITS Directive, and stand ready to advise it on any future legislative initiative in 
the  field.  Furthermore,  the  ECB  is  developing  harmonised  and  comprehensive  statistics  about 
investment funds which may also be helpful to the Commission in its further work. 
                                                      
6   See “European Single Financial Market 2005/2006”, Euromoney Yearbooks, 1 October 2005, p. 1-4 (Foreword). 
7  
“Eurosystem contribution to the public consultation by the European Commission on the Green Paper on Financial Services 
Policy (2005-2010)” dated 1 August 2005, 72 kb en. See the ECB’s website under Publications > Publications by activity > 
Financial stability and supervision. 
8   See “Integration of securities market infrastructures in the euro area”, H. Schmiedel and A. Schönenberger, ECB Occasional 
Paper No 33, July 2005. 
“Green paper on the enhancement of the EU framework for investment funds. Eurosystem contribution to the Commission's 
public  consultation”  dated  17  November  2005,      76  kb  en.  See  the  ECB’s  website  under  Publications  >  Publications  by 
activity > Financial stability and supervision. 
9  
large 
institutions  spanning  several  Member  States  and 
With regard to the supervisory framework, the policy objectives are twofold. First, in order to realise 
economies  of  scale  and  scope,  the  framework  should  facilitate  the  development  of  cross-border 
consolidation  of  financial  institutions  and  the  cross-border  exchange  of  services  and  products.  The 
second  objective  is  to  maintain  the  effectiveness  of  supervisory  standards  and  action  in  a  more 
integrated  financial  system.  The  current  institutional  set-up,  and  in  particular  the  Lamfalussy 
framework, provide the appropriate structure for achieving these broad policy objectives, if it is used to 
the maximum extent possible. This entails pursuing two operational goals. 
First, to achieve supervisory convergence by the Level 3 committees which should deliver supervisory 
action that is consistent on a cross-border basis. The experience thus far is encouraging. 
Second,  to  achieve  a  strengthening  of  the  cooperation  between  home  and  host  authorities  for  the 
supervision of financial groups operating across borders. This is essential for reconciling the interests 
of supervisory authorities and the financial sector. A lack of progress could fuel demands to revise the 
current institutional set-up, as the financial industry occasionally points out. 
The  work  of  the  Level  3  committees  is  expected  to  strongly  promote  supervisory  convergence  and 
cooperation.  Further  developments  in  financial  integration,  especially  the  increasing  prominence  of 
both  complex  cross-border 
foreign 
establishments  in  host  countries,  may  pose  challenges  to  the  current  arrangements.  Furthermore, 
financial  integration  calls  for  increased  supervisory  cooperation  across  financial  sectors.  In  this 
respect,  I  recall  that  the  three  Level  3  committees,  i.e.  the  Committee  of  European  Banking 
Supervisors (CEBS), the Committee of European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Supervisors 
(CEIOPS) and the Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR), signed last Thursday a joint 
protocol that aims to foster cooperation and coordination in their tasks of common interest.10 
As  I  already  mentioned,  the  Eurosystem  is  of  the  view  that  the  potential  of  the  existing  framework 
should be fully exploited. Furthermore, the review of the Lamfalussy approach due by the end of 2007 
should provide the opportunity to form a comprehensive judgement about the progress made. 
I  have  now  discussed  EU  policies  and  have  spoken  about  the  Eurosystem’s  view  on  shaping  the 
regulatory and legislative framework. We see the provision of such advice as one contribution we can 
make to support the process of financial integration. It is also in line with the Treaty provision in Article 
105 that the Eurosystem shall support, without prejudice to the objective of price stability, the general 
economic policies in the Community, of which financial integration is a priority objective. 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  mention  another  contribution  the  Eurosystem  can  make  to  foster  financial 
integration, which is for the central bank to act as a catalyst for collective private-sector activities. This 
is  a  straightforward  illustration  for  the  joint  effort  undertaken  by  market  participants  and  public 
authorities,  like  the  Eurosystem,  to  foster  financial  integration.  Since  competition  among  private 
financial agents is also necessary, coordination of interests can be facilitated with the aid of a catalyst. 
Being a central bank, we are also a market participant, having both the necessary knowledge and the 
numerous  contacts  with  market  participants.  I  would  just  like  to  mention  the  two  most  important 
catalyst  activities  that  are  ongoing  at  present,  namely  the  Short-Term  European  Paper  (STEP) 
initiative as well as the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) project. 
In fact, the STEP initiative, which I mentioned earlier in my assessment of the degree of integration of 
the money market, was first discussed at the meetings of the ECB Money Market Contact Group by 
ACI – The Financial Markets Association, which has led the initiative since then. The Eurosystem’s 
support, together with that of the European Commission, for the banking industry’s initiative to create 
the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) is another case in point. By 2008 we expect European citizens 
to be able to make payments throughout the euro area from a single bank account, using a single set 
of payment instruments, as easily and safely as in the national context today.  
                                                      
10   See  “Banking,  insurance  and  securities  supervisors  enhance  EU  wide  cooperation”,  press  release  dated  24  November 
2005, at www.c-ebs.org, www.ceiops.org, www.cesr-eu.org. 
Concluding remarks 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it was a pleasure to give you our assessment of the state of European financial 
integration as well of the various contributions that the ECB, and the Eurosystem as a whole, make in 
fostering this process. 
Let me put today’s theme in the context of the Lisbon strategy to which the ECB is inflexibly attached. 
Creating well functioning, competitive and efficient markets is a key aspect of the Lisbon goals. The 
benefits  from  the  internal  market  in  terms  of  growth  and  employment,  the  two  clear  objectives  on 
which the Lisbon strategy focuses, are still to be fully exploited. Financial integration is one tool with 
which to achieve these benefits. The ECB, for its part, will continue to make its contribution. Thank you 
for your attention. 
