Ardian Fullani: Inflation targeting in practice 
Greeting address by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the regional seminar on  
Inflation targeting in practice, Tirana, 10 October 2005. 
 Dear participants,  
 
It is a great honour for me to address the opening speech of the regional seminar “Inflation targeting in 
practice” organized by the Centre of Central Banking Studies in association with the Bank of Albania. I 
am delighted to see that the audience has an international composition. At the same time, I would like 
to take the opportunity to give my cordial thanks to Mrs. Gill Hammond, CCBS Deputy Director and all 
speakers  accompanying  her  during  the  proceedings  of  this  seminar.    I  would  also  like  to  thank  the 
Bank  of  England  and  in  particular  the  Director  of  the  Centre  of  Central  Banking  Studies,  
Mr Mario Blejer, an old friend of mine, who continues to give his contribution to the improvement of the 
Albanian image in the world, just like many years ago.  
 
This seminar is being organized in a very opportune  time for the Bank of Albania. In less than two 
months, I shall be once more in front of a very distinguished international audience, to address the 
opening speech of the Open Forum on “Pre-conditions for launching inflation targeting in Albania". The 
object of this forum is to discuss the prime pre-conditions to be met by the Bank of Albania before 
launching  the  implementation  of  a  new  monetary  policy  strategy,  with  a  particular  emphasis  on 
Albania’s membership to the European Union in the long-term run.  
 
The fact that we have been successful in controlling inflation during the last years holds true. We have 
managed to attain a general stability and I believe the policy adopted by us has been one of the key 
factors. Another fact which holds true is that, for some time, we have been considering to take another 
step,  attempting  a  more  sophisticated,  effective  and  certainly  a  more  responsible  and  transparent 
monetary policy approach. To this aim, we have come to the conclusion that the actual framework of 
the  monetary  policy  requires  the  necessity  of  being  further  completed  and  perfected  with  standard 
elements, adopted by other countries in the world and where the targeting inflation regime has proven 
to be successful.   
 
We are aware that this is not an effortless initiative to be seized. Therefore, I consider that this is a 
great  fortune  for  the  Bank  of  Albania  to  have  the  possibility,  on  the  verge  of  discussing  the  pre-
conditions of adopting this regime, to closely discuss and consult the distinguished guests present in 
this seminar. I trust straight opinions and recommendations shall be brought forth, be they challenging 
to be accomplished.    
 
According to theory, inflation targeting is a direct regime. The Central Bank forecasts the forthcoming 
inflation performance; this forecast is then compared to the targeted inflation rate; and the difference 
between  the  forecast  and  target  determines  the  proper  adjustment  of  the  monetary  political 
instrument. But, unfortunately or perhaps, fortunately, this relatively new monetary regime is not the 
rescue solution of a central banker’s affliction. I am confident that the honourable participants who are 
speaking  during  the  three  days  of  the  seminar,  shall  enlighten  in  more  details,  based  on  the 
experiences  of  the  central  banks  they  represent,  the  complex  issues  and  challenges  they  had  to 
encounter, while adopting this regime.   
 
The agenda of this three-day seminar seems promising, and the interweaving of theory and practice is 
outstanding.  It  begins  with  the  theoretical  considerations  on  inflations  targeting,  proceeds  with  the 
three main pillars of monetary policy communication: independence, transparency and accountability. 
Not by accident, the new approach required by the inflation targeting regime has been defined as the 
“forecast  path”.  The  distinguished  economists  from  the  Centre  of  Central  Banking  Studies  shall 
introduce us to the econometric techniques, which come to help during the inflation forecast process. 
To conclude, the Czech National Bank, shall bring the experience of an economy in transition adopting 
this regime.   
 
And last but not least, on behalf of the Bank of Albania, I would like to thank the Centre of Central 
Banking Studies (Bank of England) for the opportunity granted to the institution I govern, to cooperate  
   1/2 
and to consent the holding of this regional  seminar in our country. This activity is the first in its kind, 
and I express my highest considerations for the trust that the Bank of England has put to the Bank of 
Albania. The Centre of Central Banking Studies is internationally recognised as a centre of intellectual 
excellence in the area of central banking studies. Considering the goal that this centre has set to itself, 
as an opportunity provider to central banking employees to be endowed with ampler perspectives in 
the respective areas of expertise, I call for your attention to listen to what the distinguished experts 
shall say. Their professional achievements and the central banks they represent guarantee this.  
 
Thank you and good proceedings! 
 
   2/2 
