Sir Andrew Large: Monetary policy - significant issues of today 
Speech by Sir Andrew Large, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to West London Business, 
London, 1 December 2005. 
 Introduction 
This  is  the  last  official  speech  I  will  make  while  at  the  Bank and  a  member  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee (MPC). So perhaps as my term draws to a close you will permit me to make a few personal 
observations, both on the process of the MPC itself and on a few of the significant issues we face 
The process 
You cannot fail to be impressed by the integrity and substance of the framework. It has a well defined 
and measurable target. It is independent of Government. Each of the nine members is chosen for their 
particular area of expertise and to give breadth of experience.  They are individually accountable. And 
a  real  strength  is  the  transparency  of  the  process.  Communication  through  the  publication  of  the 
minutes  of  each  meeting,  including  details  of  each  member’s  vote,  Treasury  Select  Committee 
appearances,  the  Inflation  Report,  and  speeches  such  as  this  today  provide  the  markets  and  the 
public with an understanding of decisions and, importantly, how they are reached. Furthermore, it has 
delivered: however much we are aware of perils that could blow us off course.  
For me being a member of the MPC has been a steep, but incredibly rewarding, learning curve. The 
process  itself  poses  some  challenges.  In  particular  how  best  to  assess  the  sometimes  bewildering 
quantity and variety of data; yet to keep a sense of perspective in relation to the big issues. There is 
for example the need to understand the implications of the frequent data revisions and updates: how 
to think about them and what conclusions we need to draw ahead of the next policy decision.  
But it is the big picture issues, all of which have puzzling unknowns, which have fascinated me most. 
We spend considerable time reflecting on these in our quarterly forecast round, when we estimate the 
course of the economy and inflation three years ahead. The November Inflation Report was published 
a  couple of weeks  ago  and  provided an  analysis  of  the  UK  economy,  the  factors  influencing  policy 
decisions and the MPC's latest forecasts for inflation and output growth.  
The models of the economy that we use to produce these projections provide a framework to organise 
thinking  on  how  the  economy  works  and  how  different  economic  developments  might  affect  future 
inflation. The forecasts need to reflect the uncertainty in the economy. The technique we rely on is “fan 
charts”. [Chart 1] They show the Committee’s best collective judgement about the balance of risks and 
uncertainty  around  the  central  case.  It  means  that  members  can  agree  on  the  overall  outlook  and 
balance of risks, even though they may come to that view for slightly different reasons.  
BIS Review 81/2005 
 1
Chart 1: Fan chart, current GDP projection based on market interest rate expectations 
Source: Bank of England, November 2005 Inflation Report 
 Four significant issues 
In contributing to the forecast rounds and when voting I have considered the likely course and impact 
of  a  whole  range  of  important  developments  and  trends.  Today  I  would  like  to  make  a  few 
observations  on  four  such  areas,  which  for  me  have  been  particularly  fascinating.  For  each  I  will 
comment on the key monetary policy issues that seem most relevant. The first is oil – a continuing 
interest for me having started my career in that industry - and clearly of immense significance today. 
The second is debt – and in particular the rise of household debt, perhaps because I have studied 
debt as a practitioner in my banking life, and have observed its impact on borrowers and lenders. The 
third is the labour market – in part because the subject encompasses broad issues affecting all of us 
such  as  globalisation  and  the  entry  into  the  modern  world  economy  of  Asian  countries.  And  fourth, 
something both  highly  topical  today  and  of  fundamental  relevance  for  all our  futures,  is  the  area  of 
longevity and pensions. 
I shall keep my remarks to the key issues which each of these raise for me in relation to monetary 
policy. Consequently, I will try not to trespass on political or social issues, or on your lunch break. 
Oil 
You will not be surprised that the increases in the oil price have featured highly in many recent MPC 
discussions. We have observed the significant increase in demand for petroleum products, particularly 
from  China  and  the  USA.  But  did  you  realise  that  China’s  average  annual  consumption  of  oil  is 
currently almost two barrels per capita per year, but Brazil’s is about 4 barrels, and the USA’s just over 
25?  Depending  on  the  assumptions  one  makes,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  plausible,  despite  efficiency 
gains  and  possible  replacement  of  oil  by  other  sources  such  as  nuclear  power,  that  China  with  its 
growth rate of 9% per annum will reach Brazil’s per capita level in just over 15 or so years. And with its 
population of 1.3 billion that could mean an additional demand of some 3.5-4 billion barrels per annum 
roughly equivalent to the 2004 production of Saudi Arabia or around 13% of global production. Add 
India  in  with  a  slightly  lower  growth  rate  and  you  easily  approach  5-5.5  billion  barrels  per  annum  - 
which  is  not  far  off  the  2004  production  of  the  whole  of  the  North  American  continent  -  getting  on 
towards 20% of world production. So on the demand side there is clearly a challenge. 
There is also great complexity in assessing the evolution of supply. The supply and price of crude is 
complicated by OPEC politics, and the length of time that it will take to get non-OPEC production such 
as  Canada’s  tar  sands  significantly  on  stream.  And  due  to  under-investment  there  is  evidence  of 
bottlenecks in the refinery arena which will take time to be rectified. So supply constraints too are for 
the time being a real possibility.  
The November 2005 Inflation Report explained that the oil futures curve indicated in early November 
that the oil spot price would remain around current levels for the next few years. However, there was 
considerable uncertainty around this. The Report cited illustrative estimates that market participants 
thought there was a one in four chance that oil prices would be $10 per barrel higher or lower in six 
months time. This is a significant increase from February 2004, when the probability of such a change 
was thought to be less than one in fifty [Chart 2].  
Chart 2: Market beliefs about oil prices six months ahead (a) 
 
Source: Bank of England, November 2005 Inflation Report 
This shows that although the central case has oil prices essentially flat over the forecast horizon there 
is  still  a  possibility  we  will  see  prices  above  those  of  today  at  some  date,  with  corresponding 
significance for monetary policy. 
In the UK it is difficult to say with certainty what proportion of the last year’s rise in CPI inflation (that is 
from 1.1% in September 2004 to 2.5% in September 2005) was due to oil. But estimates suggest that 
up to around half the pick up can be explained by oil. The key issue for me is the possible impact of oil 
prices on inflation expectations. Any signs of expectations becoming dislodged would be a signal that 
policy might need to be tighter than otherwise, in order to provide insurance that expectations remain 
on track. I will revert to this theme later.  
Over recent years long term inflation expectations have remained anchored close to the target level. 
This is important in delivering price stability: the fact that people think the MPC will be successful in 
sticking to the target conditions their behaviour in a number of ways. Higher prices for oil products, and 
indirectly other goods and services, leaves less disposable income for other things. Whilst the MPC 
takes  comfort  from  the  observation  that  so  far  inflation  expectations  and  earnings  growth  have  not 
risen, it is nonetheless possible that this could lead to demands for higher wages. Such demand, if 
granted, could be inflationary and even result ultimately in increased unemployment. 
The  likelihood  of  this  happening  may  be  slight  and  there  is  no  real  sign  of  expectations  presently 
becoming dislodged in the UK. And it is striking that although the effects of oil may have some impact 
in  today’s  modest  slowdown  of  consumption,  that  we  have  nonetheless  managed  to  weather  a 
significant price increase with so little disruption to the economy. Quite different from the late 1970s. 
But I think it is still too early to relax in relation to inflation expectations, and I think that the subject of 
oil will feature as a significant issue for some time to come in the monetary policy arena. 
Debt 
There has been much comment on the build up of domestic debt in recent years. In aggregate, the 
ratio of household debt to disposable income is now over 150%, having risen from around 100% in the 
late 1990s. This upward trend is not unique to the UK, although the debt-income ratio here is a little 
higher than in most countries [Chart: 3]. 
Chart 3: Debt-income ratio across countries 
France
Germany
Netherlands
Spain
US
UK
Australia
Per Cent
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
97
98
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
 Source: Data from Eurostat, the Federal Reserve and data sent direct from Reserve Bank of Australia. 
There  are  a  number  of  key  reasons  for  the  increase,  coming  from  changes  both  in  demand  and 
supply. 
Supply  side  factors  include:  a  liberalised  financial  market  place  with  new  categories  of  lender  and 
greater  competition;  new  technology,  in  particular  the  widespread  adoption  of  credit  scoring 
techniques and data sharing that have given confidence to lenders in granting unsecured loans; and 
greater securitisation, enabling firms to write more business by diversifying and laying off the risk onto 
third parties without burdening their own balance sheets.  
On the demand side, there appears to have been a change in social attitudes towards debt that has 
made people more willing to borrow. This might in part be due to low inflation and nominal interest 
rates that have helped to keep the cost of debt payments down particularly in interest terms [Chart 4], 
while greater macroeconomic stability and low unemployment have given households the confidence 
to borrow and lowered the risk to lenders. There has also been a decline in real interest rates that has 
reflected many factors, including to some degree the accomodatory actions of monetary policymakers. 
And  the  rise  in  house  prices  has  led  to  a  natural  increase  in  debt  as  people  need  to  borrow  more 
money to finance the purchase of a house.   
Chart 4: Aggregate income gearing 
Interest and mortgage 
principal repayments
Per cent
Interest only 
87
93
91
89
Source: ONS and Bank of England 
95
97
99
01
03
05
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 As far as debt levels are concerned, for me the key issue for monetary policy is that the more capital 
gearing or leverage increases the greater the vulnerability to shocks and the consequent adjustment 
to consumption behaviour. I think this is true for individuals and for the economy at large.  
Let me explain why it might matter if capital gearing rises. Imagine two states of the world. In the first 
an individual has assets of £1 million, and debt of £900,000. In the second an individual has assets of 
£100,000,  and  debt  of  zero.  In  each  case  the  individual’s  net  worth  or  equity  is  the  same.  Then 
imagine a shock that causes the average level of asset prices to fall by 10%. In the former case the 
wealth is wiped out, whereas in the latter the wealth has fallen but only to £90,000 [Chart 5]. This is of 
a course a stylised example, but it makes the point that the more leveraged you are, the more your 
wealth will be impacted by a given shock. 
Chart 5: An illustration of the effects of leverage 
High leverage
£,000
No Leverage 
£,000
 1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Assets
Debt
Net Wealth
Assets
Debt
Net Wealth
Label:   
 Original Situation 
`  After 10% fall in asset prices 
 1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
 In my experience as leverage increases, so the level of debt ceases to be a mere residual and 
becomes more of a determinant of behaviour in its own right, and hence becomes of real 
consequence for monetary policy. Until recently domestic debt in the UK has been increasing at rates 
of around 12% per annum, or approximately 8% per annum above the increases in post tax nominal 
income implying significant increases both in leverage and income gearing [Chart 6].  
Chart 6: Annual growth rate of total debt and post tax Income 
Total Debt
Income
Percent
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2004
2005
 2001
2002
2003
 
Chart 10: www.Statistics.gov.uk
It  is  interesting  to  reflect  on  whether  this  increase  has  been  a  factor  in  the  recent  turndown  in 
consumption. We cannot prove it, but I have been struck by two things. Firstly, has the stabilisation in 
house prices led homeowners to become more conservative or precautionary in their borrowing habits, 
realising that they can no longer assume that their debt will be offset by significant increases in house 
prices?  Secondly,  could  the  attitude  of  lenders  have  contributed  to  the  downturn,  through  the 
withdrawal of credit? To my mind the jury is out as to whether their attitudes have yet had any impact. 
But  I  do  believe  that  they  could  do  so  over  time,  as  they  change  their  behaviour  in  response  to 
changes  in  their  perception  of  risks:  and  recent  press  coverage  suggests  that  lenders  are  looking 
seriously at their lending policies. 
Given my interest in leverage, I also spend time thinking about what could happen to consumption in 
the  event  of  a  set  of  shocks  to  the  economy.  In  this  respect  the  Minutes  of  the  February  2002 
Monetary a Policy Committee meeting - seven months or so before I joined the Bank - are to my mind 
revealing.  
‘Persistently  rising  debt  levels  potentially  increased  the  probability  that  any 
adjustment to household balance sheets would be abrupt rather than smooth, with 
an  attendant  risk  of  a  fall  in  asset  prices  and,  thus,  in  the  value  of  collateral.  In 
those circumstances, there might also be implications for financial sector behaviour 
and associated constraints on household credit availability, which could feed back 
into  spending  and  so  somewhat  amplify  the  effect  on  aggregate  demand.  In  the 
view of some members, therefore, rising debt levels risked increasing the volatility 
of output and so of inflation in the medium term, potentially making future inflation 
outturns more uncertain. Other members placed little or no weight on this’. 
Had I been there I have little doubt that I would have aligned myself with the first group, and given this 
it will not surprise you that my policy decisions have from time to time been influenced by my attitude 
to the build up of debt vulnerability and leverage. In my view there are circumstances which can justify 
monetary  policy  being  tightened  in  advance  of  potential  shocks,  a  form  of  insurance  or  risk 
management if you like: keeping interest rates a little higher to prevent potential risks crystallising at 
some  point  in  the  future.  It  is  sometimes  important  to  have  in  mind  possible  trade  offs  between 
deviations of inflation in the near term from deviations from target further ahead. 
So this was a factor on a number of the occasions when I voted in the minority. For the statisticians 
among  you:  I  have  voted  in  38  MPC  meetings  since  I  joined  the  Bank.  In  this  time  there  were  9 
occasions  when  I  did  not  vote  with  the  majority  –  7  times  I  voted  for  a  rise  when  rates  were 
maintained, and twice I voted to maintain rates when they were reduced.    
In  concluding  this  section  on  debt,  I  should  say  that  I  am  moderately  encouraged  by  the  present 
trends. The rates of increase in domestic debt have recently slowed, and continue to do so [Chart 7]. I 
do take some comfort from this adjustment, which now seems to be in train. In policy terms I would like 
it to continue so that leverage continues to adjust downward as incomes rise. And if there were signs 
of a reacceleration in debt per capita, it would once again weigh on my mind, and perhaps, if I were 
still there, on my policy decision.  
Chart 7: Annual growth rate of household debt 
Per cent
Unsecured borrowing
Total borrowing
Secured borrowing
94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05
Source: Bank of England 
24
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
0
 Labour market 
Throughout my time on the MPC we have been thinking about the reasons behind what seems to be a 
remarkably benign labour market environment with little pressure for higher wages, and yet with levels 
of unemployment that are at their lowest since the mid-1970s. This situation continues, and there are 
two dimensions, which mean that in assessing the size of the market we can no longer think of the 
labour market being constrained by the UK as a geographic entity.  
The first dimension concerns migration. For a while now on our regular visits to the different regions in 
the UK, MPC members have been struck by the extent to which migrant labour is active in a number of 
sectors of the economy, particularly people from the EU accession countries such as Poland. In my 
own case the reality of this was reinforced by what I heard during a visit to Poland earlier this year. 
Furthermore,  reports  which  we  regularly  receive  from  the  Bank’s  Agents  have  painted  a  sustained 
picture of a significant increase in supply to the labour market, which did not always show up in the 
official statistics. The MPC began to think about this some time ago, and although we couldn’t see it in 
the statistics, we took account of what we thought was happening in our policy discussions. 
So if we have already allowed for this increase in migrant workers, a key question is whether the rate 
of influx will continue and, if it does, what will the net effect be on demand and supply in the economy? 
The  UK  has  been  in  the  forefront  of  accepting  citizens  of  the  Accession  8  countries,  but  other 
European  countries  are  due  to  remove  barriers  to  entry.  The  exact  timing  of  the  relaxation  of 
restrictions is unclear, but once it occurs we could find that this has an impact on this supply source, 
with potential consequences for monetary policy. Another unknown is the impact on demand in the UK 
economy. It seems pretty clear that migrant workers will spend at least a proportion of what they earn 
here, even if many will also repatriate savings to their home countries.  
The second dimension is bigger picture and less direct. Indeed some may not categorise it in terms of 
the labour market as such as it has an impact in a number of ways. But I like to think of it in labour 
market terms. I am talking about the entry of the new Asian economies, and in particular China and 
India into the world economy, and the ability of countries such as the UK to benefit from the much 
cheaper  wages  paid  in  those  countries  by  sourcing  the  production  of  both  goods,  and  increasingly 
services, to such countries. 
There is nothing new about the process, based as it is on the age old law of comparative advantage. 
But  what  is  new  is  the  sheer  size  of  those  economies,  containing  as  they  do  over  three  times  the 
number of people in the EU and USA combined on the one hand, and the willingness and ability of 
management of firms in the UK to benefit from them. Small wonder that there are many who feel that 
this development is in economic terms the most significant event since the industrialisation and entry 
of the USA on the world economy in the late 19th Century. You can think in some ways of China as 
the centre of the offshoring of manufactured goods, whilst India has shown the potential for offshoring 
services  –  and  these  include  operational  services  with  high  intellectual  content  as  any  visit  to 
Bangalore, Mumbai or an increasing number of other places in India will quickly show. 
For me there are several key issues for monetary policy. Firstly we should recognise the reality of the 
effective  globalisation  of  the  supply  of  labour,  even  if  it  does  not  involve  the  physical  movement  of 
people. Secondly we need to understand the effect on wage dynamics from a large external supply of 
labour which this gives rise to in wage bargaining, where the strength of the position of employers is 
added  to  by  the  threat  that  if  higher  wages  are  demanded  the  goods  or  services  will  no  longer  be 
supplied by those with jobs in the UK but will be shifted offshore. Not only is this the case in unskilled 
jobs and in manufacturing, but also in services such as the medical profession and IT specialists. 
But thirdly, and crucially, how long will this process continue, and for how long will its effects be felt? 
Will there be sudden changes along the way as, for example, China’s own economy and social context 
changes? Or will protectionism rear its head?  
Although these may be slow burn, gradual issues, they could over time have a significant effect on 
labour supply. I would expect that those involved with monetary policy will have this area on their radar 
screens for many years to come. Such a new way of thinking about the labour market alters how we 
need to think about capacity in the economy in general and indeed the output gap in so many areas of 
the economy.  
Pensions and longevity 
The last of my four areas today is longevity and pensions. I hesitate to mention it, because for many 
this is an area more for social policy than for monetary policy. But for me there is a clear monetary 
policy dimension. I will not attempt a long commentary on the underlying issues. We are all familiar 
with  the  facts,  both  as  they  relate  to  the  need  to  anticipate  working  longer;  and  to  the  policy  of 
governments  in  many  countries  of  transferring  risk  in  pension  provision  from  the  state  towards  the 
individual.  In  addition  we  are  increasingly  aware  that  returns  on  many  asset  categories  that  are 
suitable for inclusion in pension funds have been more modest in recent years. 
For  monetary  policy  the  key  issue  is  how  and  over  what  timeframe  will  these  changes  impact  on 
savings,  which  at  a  domestic  level  are  likely  to  have  to  increase  to  provide  adequate  income  in 
retirement. This could at one level be influenced by the fact that significant increases in housing wealth 
in recent years may have postponed people’s consideration of these issues, though they may now feel 
more pressing looking ahead.  
It  is  pretty  clear  that  the  changes  are  likely  to  be  spread  over  a  period  of  years,  and  from  that 
perspective policy implications are likely to be gradual and manageable. Over time though the degree 
of change in savings habits – and therefore the impact on consumption and demand – may be quite 
significant. And the question is whether these changes will be smooth trends, or whether there will be 
more sudden, and perhaps unpredictable shifts or discontinuities in behaviour. And if the latter, will 
they be of sufficient magnitude to be relevant to shorter-term monetary policy? 
The challenges here are considerable, both of measurement, timing, and of our ability to anticipate 
any relevant changes. But to my mind we certainly need to remain alert. Policy makers in Germany 
have for some time now wondered if the sluggish performance of domestic demand in recent years is 
in part the result of such precautionary saving, and here in the UK we have wondered if this could 
have been one factor in the recent consumption slowdown. While the data will not confirm this for a 
while at least, the greater public awareness of the issues, brought about by initiatives such as Lord 
Turner’s report, suggests it is plausible that this has been a contributory factor.   
Conclusion 
So I am leaving the scene of monetary policy with some truly fascinating issues unresolved, just as 
other colleagues will surely do when it is their turn to leave. 
As  a  final  comment  I  am  very  conscious  that  I  have  collected  the  description  of  being  a  ‘hawk’:  of 
erring on the side of rate rises. Certainly my willingness to allow thoughts about insurance to influence 
decisions at the margin, has meant that on the occasions when I have voted with the minority it has 
been on the upside for rates. But equally the longer term issues, such as those of labour supply and 
pensions  saving,  are  more  likely  to  manifest  themselves  on  the  downside.  I  am  certainly  very 
conscious of these factors too and perhaps my concern about these slower burn issues attracts less 
attention  from  commentators  on  monetary  policy.  Because  one  thing  I  have  discovered  about 
monetary policy is that downside issues are just as important for us as the opposite. 
No matter; I for one shall after January watch from the sidelines how things progress, but with a feeling 
of gratitude and privilege for the welcome improvement of my understanding of this fascinating area. 
