Su  Ning: 
innovation, boost financial development 
Improve 
financial  ecological  environment,  promote 
financial 
Speech by Mr Su Ning, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the First China Financial 
Forum, Shanghai, 3 November 2005. 
 Honorable guests, 
It is my pleasure to attend the Financial Ecological Environment Forum co-sponsored by the China 
Society  for  Finance  and  Banking  and  the  Financial  News.  Based  on  their  local  practices,  several 
Mayors  and  Governors  have  just  elaborated  on  the  significance  of  improving  financial  ecological 
environment  in  terms  of  promoting  harmonious  financial  and  social  development.  Improvement  of 
financial  ecological  environment  holds  great  importance  not  only  to  financial  stability,  but  also  to 
financial  innovation  and  development.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  my 
observations  on  the  relationship  among  improving  financial  ecological  environment,  promoting 
financial innovation and boosting financial development.  
With huge increase of financial assets and more diversified financial institutions, on one hand, China's 
financial  industry  developed  rapidly  since  opening-up  and  reform.  On  the  other  hand,  the  overall 
financial  development  is still  at  low  level  and  lack of  competition.  We have  the  highest  saving  ratio 
globally,  but  we  have  not  fully  and  rationally  utilized  those  savings,  particularly,  we  have  rather 
unsatisfied  financial  structure  that  cannot  meet  the  investment  and  financing  needs  of  multi-layer 
economic agencies, with the banking sector taking a dominate position over other financial sectors, 
low proportion of direct finance and limited breadth and depth of financial market. Furthermore, due to 
the simplified financing structure and lack of financial instruments, financial risks were concentrated 
excessively  and  financial  stability  is  under  threat  as  well.  The  situation  roots  from  not  only  China's 
current  economic  and  financial  development  stage,  but  also  from  some  fundamental  conditions, 
especially  financial  ecological  environment  conditions.  As  a  result,  the  improvement  of  financial 
ecological  environment  plays  an  important  role  in  encouraging  financial  innovation  and  creating  a 
favorable external environment for the financial industry. 
1. 
An improved legal environment. An ideal legal environment can promote financial innovation. 
Basic legal rights, like property right and creditor's right, could provide clear definition and 
sufficient protection in the process of financial innovation. Take the Enterprises Insolvency 
Law as an example. It was stipulated mainly to deal with state-owned enterprises' insolvency 
more than 20 years ago. Currently, many state-owned enterprises have been transformed 
into  companies  with  different  ownership  structures,  thus  we  need  a  standard  Enterprises 
Insolvency Law consistent with the socialist market economy. A good Enterprises Insolvency 
Law  will  define  and  protect  the  rights  of  shareholders  and  creditors  when  firms  go  into 
insolvency process.  Corporate bonds  issuance  and other  financial  innovations will  enjoy a 
secure environment too. The Company Law and Securities Law currently either have many 
constrains  on  or  unclear  definition  of  private  placement  and  OTC  market,  affecting  the 
establishment  and  development  of  multi-layer  capital  markets.  Some  of  the  shortcomings 
have been amended in the recent revised version of the two laws. Besides, the Guarantee 
Law  and  the  Property  Right  Law  could  affect  the  effectiveness  of  guarantee,  pledge,  and 
property rights applications in financial innovation if they have unclear definition of secured 
interests and property rights. There are many other similar cases that show the importance 
of such basic laws to financial ecological environment improvement as well as to financial 
innovation and development.  
An orderly institutional environment. China is still in the transitional period to establish and 
improve  socialist  market  economy,  during  which,  how  to  clarify  the  relationships  among 
government,  market  and  enterprises,  especially  the  administrative  scope  and  ways  of 
government,  exerts  great  impact  on  financial  innovation  and  development.  On  one  hand, 
compared with the developed countries, China's governmental administration covers a much 
wider  scope  and  has  strong  influence,  which  could  promote  financial  innovation  and 
development significantly if well organized. On the other hand, if the functions of the strong 
government  are  not  properly  fulfilled,  it  could  also  impede  the  improvement  of  financial 
ecological  environment.  For  instance, currently,  excessive  administrative  approval,  unclear 
2. 
   1/4 
3. 
4. 
approval  standards  and  undefined  accountabilities  still  exist  in  the  financial  industry. 
Reflecting China's financial innovation process in 1980's to mid-1990's in the 20th century, 
China once detoured in financial products innovation, experienced some financial risks and 
even  tried  to  mitigate  these  risks  by  strengthening  administrative  control,  because  of  the 
underdevelopment  of  qualified  personnel,  technology  and  management  skills.  It  was 
unavoidable in a certain period of time, but, with the improvement of the market economy, 
we need to encourage and regulate financial innovation by making more use of market tools. 
A  good  credit  environment.  A  credit  environment  weighs  much  on  financial  ecological 
environment. In terms of credit information, financial innovation is a process in which credit 
information is collected and managed with various financial instruments to avoid risks and 
get returns. Sound credit information system, true and effective information disclosure, real 
default  accountabilities  are  fundamental  factors  to  the  success  of  financial  innovation.  At 
present, China's social credit system is still under construction and far from able to meet the 
needs  of  socialist  market  economy  development.  The  development  of  the  social  credit 
registration system and credit reference agencies is still in its infant stage, credit information 
of firms and individuals are not effectively collected and accurately assessed and financial 
institutions cannot make accurate business decisions based on credit information provided 
by the clients. Effective penalty mechanism for credit slippage has not been established and 
all relevant parties in the society are yet to clarify and build consensus on the basic concept, 
function  and  development  orientation  of  the  social  credit  system.    Rules  and  regulations 
concerned with credit registration are rather lagging behind, in particular, there is no clear 
distinction  between  reasonable  credit  information  collection  and  protection  of  individual 
privacy  and  commercial  secrets.  In  such  an  environment,  financial  innovation  will  be 
inevitably suppressed.  
An  excellent  environment  of  intermediary  services.  Intermediaries  will  affect  financial 
innovation in the sense whether they could timely and accurately expose the value and risks 
of financial products to the investors. With the socialist market economy gradually improved, 
markets  will  increasingly  strengthen  its  basic  role  in  resource  allocation.  Accordingly, 
financial  innovation  will  be  gradually  transferred  from  relying  on  administrative  approval  to 
market  discipline  based  on  standard  information  disclosure  and  credit  rating,  which  set 
higher  requirements  on  intermediary  services,  such  as  on  payment  and  settlement,  credit 
rating,  accounting  and  legal  advice  etc.  Frankly  speaking,  compared  with  international 
standards, China still has a long way to go not only in improving its accounting, auditing and 
rating standards, but also in providing the related intermediary service and fostering code of 
conducts  and  business  integrity.  Strengthening  infrastructure  and  improving  intermediary 
services,  particularly  integrity  of  the  intermediaries,  become  an  urgent  task  to  improve 
financial ecological environment.   
I listed the above basic conditions for financial innovation from the perspective of financial ecological 
environment. To cultivate those conditions, we need to further push changes in mindset, institutions 
and  operating  mechanisms.  Therefore,  we  should  further  improve  financial  ecological  environment 
associated with institution building, law enforcement, credit system and intermediary services so as to 
create a favorable platform for financial innovation.  
First, establishing a market-driven financial innovation system. Basically speaking, financial innovation 
originates  from  the  intrinsic  needs  of  economic  and  financial  market  development.  Governments  at 
different  levels  and  financial  regulatory  authorities  could  only  play  positive  roles  by  improving  legal 
system  and  relevant  mechanisms  and  maintaining  market  orders.  Take  the  corporate  bond  as  an 
example. Corporate bond is a matured financial product in market economies and a direct financing 
tool that market players bear relevant risks themselves; therefore, we can adopt more market-oriented 
strategy and measures to foster its development. In line with the principle of openness, fairness and 
equality,  we  should  gradually  create  conditions  for  market-oriented  corporate  bond  issuance  by 
regulating information disclosure, cultivating qualified institutional investors and strengthening market 
infrastructure  building-up.  Once  institutional  investors  are  developed,  information  disclosure  and 
intermediary services are improved and the trading platform as well as payment & settlement system 
are enhanced, investors could more efficiently manage financial risks by making use of the market, 
more corporations could have opportunities to issue bonds and market innovation could be developed 
further. In the future, we should improve market infrastructure and create a good and market-friendly 
institutional  environment  to  develop  internationally  matured  financial  products,  particularly  those 
products targeted institutional investors.  
   2/4 
Second, improving legal system protecting financial innovation. Improving financial legal system lays 
the  foundation  for  the  establishment  of  financial  ecological  environment  and  the  encouragement  of 
financial innovation. We should improve the Enterprises Insolvency Law and the Guarantee Law that 
are relevant to financial credit protection. With regard to improving the Enterprises Insolvency Law, it 
should become  the  last  resort  for  lenders  to protect  their  rights. The  legal status  of creditors  in  the 
process  of  enterprises  bankruptcy  and  restructuring  should  be  strengthened,  particularly  creditors 
should be endowed with the right to apply for entering into liquidation of the debtors. With regard to 
improving the Guarantee Law, secured creditors' priority in debt repayment should be strengthened so 
that the securities could become the effective protection to avoid relevant risks. Movables, especially 
enterprises' account receivables and inventories, should be incuted in guaranty and mortgage and the 
role  of  guarantee  and  security  should  be  adequately  fulfilled  in  financial  innovation,  in  particular, 
supporting the small & medium-sized enterprises' financing. As to improving the Company Law and 
the  Securities  Law,  market  entry  threshold  for  stock  companies  should  be  lowered  to  lay  a  good 
foundation for the development of private placement and OTC market and to make enough room for 
the  establishment  of  multi-layer  capital  markets.  As  to  improving  the  Patent  Law,  the  intellectual 
property right of financial products innovation should be protected in the form of registered patents. At 
the  same  time,  law  enforcement  environment  should  be  improved  to  remove  administrative 
interference.   
Third,  improving  credit  environment  to  promote  financial  innovation.  Credit  environment  is  the  key 
factor  to  financial  innovation  and stability.  For  example,  informal financing  exists  in  various  parts  of 
China, but with great regional differences in terms of the business size. Coastal areas, like Zhejiang 
province, are homes to not only very active informal financing, but also to many financial innovations 
in supporting small & medium-sized enterprises' credit needs and the risks are generally under good 
control. But in other parts of China, informal financing is very risky, and it even falls into disguise for 
intentions cheating. The reason behind such phenomena is the different credit environment in different 
regions. Economic development in Zhejiang is based on private enterprises, full market competition 
and completed transformation of governmental function, which hold great significance to the cultivation 
of  credit  culture.  With  regard  to  improving  social  credit  system,  the  focus  should  be  placed  on  the 
establishment  of  enterprise  and  individual  credit  registration  system  by  accelerating  legislation  of 
credit  registration  laws  and  regulations  so  as  to  set  up  a  regulated  credit  registration  market.  The 
establishment  of  credit  registration  system  and  market  cultivation  should  be  accelerated  via  unified 
planning  and  staged  implementation;  collection  of  basic  credit  information  should  be  properly 
centralized to avoid duplicated system construction and information segregation; value-added credit 
reference services, such as credit rating and appraisal, should be fostered in principle of diversity and 
fair play. The core technics and business standards in credit registration should be unified to promote 
information  sharing.  Credit  registration  market  supervision  system  should  be  established  which 
combines regulation by the respective authorities and self-discipline by the industry.  
Fourth,  improving  fundamental  services  for  financial  innovation.  In  order  to  establish  the  market-
oriented  financial  innovation  system,  intermediaries,  like  these  engaging  in  payment  &  settlement, 
accounting,  auditing  and  legal  services  should  be  allowed  to  play  adequate  role.  First,  the 
establishment  of  payment  &  settlement  system  should  be  strengthened,  and  the  basic  services, 
including  registration,  custody,  trading  and  settlement  should  be  improved  to  facilitate  financial 
transactions and promote enterprises' financial management and information transparency. Second, 
international accounting and law standards should be studied and learned so as to create a foundation 
for  learning  from  international  practice  in  financial  innovation  and  improving  risk  prevention  of  the 
financial institutions. Third, building of the intermediary services system should be promoted by taking 
legal, institutional and market-based measures to enhance service quality. 
In November 2006, the transitional period of China's WTO accession will come to an  end. More and 
more  foreign  financial  institutions'  joining  will  not  only  bring  advanced  financial  products  and 
management skills, but also promote China's financial innovation. 
The just concluded 5th Plenum of the 16th CPC Central Committee has adopted the 11th Five-Year 
Program which focuses on the next five-year development by taking a scientific approach to economic 
development. I believe, with further transformation of China's economic growth model and the gradual 
improvement  of  the  socialist  market  economy,  a  financial  ecological  environment  that  facilitates 
financial innovation, development and stability will be built up. As the central bank, we are ready to 
make efforts with other social sectors to transform function, improve rule by law, maintain credit order 
and  improve  services  to  create  a  favorable  financial  ecological  environment  for  financial  innovation 
and development.  
   3/4 
    4/4 
