Zhou Xiaochuan: Speeding up financial reform to support economic 
development of the west region in China 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the High-Level Forum on 
Economic  Development  and  Financial  Services  in  the  Three  Gorges  Area,  Chongqing,  China, 
15 November 2005. 
 Honorable Secretary Huang, Mayor Wang, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I feel very pleased to participate in this high-level forum. Within a short period of 6 years since the 
central government took a decision to implement the strategy to develop the west region, tremendous 
changes have taken place in Chongqing, a city with long history located in Southwest China. Though 
less  developed  in  terms  of  economic  success,  the  west  region  boasts  of  great  potentials  for  future 
development. On today’s occasion, I would like to share with you my observations on how we could 
improve financial services to support sustainable economic development in the west region through 
financial system reform and innovation. 
Development of the Three Gorges area plays a special and significant role in the development of the 
whole west region. Through discussions at this forum, the People’s Bank of China and other financial 
institutions will gain a better understanding of this particular area as well as its financing needs. On the 
other  hand,  many  issues  encountered  in  the  process  of  economic  development  in  this  area  are 
characteristic of the problems found in the development of the whole west region which merit attentive 
research by the financial sector for good solutions via reform and innovation. 
As we can see, there exists a strong demand in the west region for enhanced financial services as 
many  enterprises  face  difficulties  like  insufficient  capital,  difficult  access  to  direct  financing  and 
relatively  high  asset-liability  ratio  etc.  In  recent  years,  despite  the  fact  that  both  the  policy  and 
commercial financial institutions have made great contributions to the economic development of the 
west region, constrained by natural conditions and other factors such as high cost and long period of 
investment as well as  a relatively large proportion of traditional industries in the GDP, strengthened 
financial  support  is  needed  in  this  region  to  modernize  the  agricultural  industry,  develop  small  and 
medium-sized  enterprises  and  promote  economic  restructuring.  With 
the  national  economy 
increasingly  run  by  the  market  principles,  we  shall  neither  rely  on  the  conventional  wisdom  of 
“allocating  funds  and  credit  quotas”  ,  nor  shall  we  excessively  use  policy  loans  to  meet  financing 
needs  of  the  west  region.  But  rather  we  shall  forcefully  promote  financial  reform  to  put  in  place  a 
financial organization system with good functions and strong competitiveness that can provide quality 
financial services. At the same time, we shall make efforts to further improve financial eco-system in 
the  west  region  and  cultivate  good  market  environment  so  as  to  retain  and  attract  more  financial 
resources and give the market a full play of its fundamental role in financial resource allocation. 
Improving financial service in the west region shall be integrated into the overall reform strategy of the 
Chinese financial system. In 2003, under the steering of the central government, reform of the state-
owned  commercial  banks  was  officially  launched, with  important  progress  already  made  on  various 
fronts.  In  particular,  the  Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of  China,  the  Bank  of  China,  China 
Construction  Bank  and  the  Bank  of  Communications  have  all  completed  financial  restructuring  and 
been  transformed  into  join-stock  companies.  The  Bank  of  Communications  and  China  Construction 
Bank  successfully  went  public.  Through  the  reform  measures,  financial  situation  of  these  banks 
evidently improved, internal control mechanisms were strengthened and corporate governance started 
to play its disciplinary roles. These banks each maintain a large branch network in the west region, 
and  these  branch  offices,  as  I  believe,  will  persistently  improve  their  business  management  and 
adaptability to the market economy with the deepening of financial reform, and thus will provide better 
financial services to economic development of the west region. 
Consistent  with  steady  growth  of  the  Chinese  economy,  the  policy  banks  also  face  the  problem  of 
business transformation. For a foreseeable long period of time, the policy banks are still needed to 
strengthen their support to economic development in the west region, however, due to limitations of 
BIS Review 88/2005 
 1
these banks in efficient resource allocation and business development, these traditional policy banks 
face  the  challenges  in  the  transformation  of  business  mode.  From  the  perspective  of  international 
experiences, we  can see  that  starting  in  1990s,  policy  banks  in  various  countries embarked  on  the 
journey of business transformation. Generally, these policy banks have transformed themselves into 
universal  development  financial  institutions.  Successful  examples  include  the  Korea  Development 
Bank and the German Development Bank (KFW). In line with the inherent requirements of the market 
economy,  policy  banks  in  China  shall  be  transformed  into  development  financial  institutions  with 
financial viability and strong competitiveness which mainly engage in providing development financing 
for the medium and long-term projects while continuing to provide policy financial services subject to 
the fiscal situation of the state. In this case, the policy banks could serve financing needs of industrial 
restructuring, infrastructure construction and the implementation of “overseas investment strategy” by 
enterprises in the west region and the country at large in a more sustainable way. 
Though limited in asset size and capital strength, local financial institutions also play an important role 
in supporting the regional economic development. On this account, we need to make great efforts to 
promote reform of the local financial institutions and encourage social participation in the restructuring 
of these institutions so that new mechanisms featuring self-discipline and self-development could be 
fundamentally established to ensure healthy growth of financial business and strengthened financial 
services to regional economic development. 
In  recent  years,  rural  economic  development  has  set  higher  standards  for  financial  services.  In 
particular in the west region where the agricultural industry accounts for a large proportion of the GDP, 
there exists an urgent need to improve financial services in the rural areas. The central government 
has been standing highly attentive to financial work in the rural area and on many different occasions 
stressed the need to “introduce reform and innovation of the rural financial system”. Financial reform in 
the rural area shall be carried out in line with the local conditions focusing on exploring a new path for 
the development of rural finance. Efforts shall be strengthened to construct a rural financial system 
with improved functions, rationalized division of labor, clear ownership and effective supervision, and 
to pioneer in developing new cooperative financial institutions in the rural area as well as an effective 
business  model  ensuring  combined  policy  and  commercial  financial  support  to  rural  economic 
development. In 2003, pilot reform program of the Rural Credit Cooperatives (RCCs) was conducted in 
8  provinces  and  municipalities.  Chongqing  as  one  of  the  municipalities  participating  in  the  pilot 
program  has  so  far  made  good  progress  in  the  reform,  creating  a  sound  foundation  for  future 
endeavors. With support of the government, the RCCs have been released from financial burdens, but 
this  does  not  mean  we  have  completed  the  reform.  Whether  we  could  make  further  progress  in 
reforming  the  RCCs  depends  critically  on  the  transformation  of  the  operating  mechanisms  and  the 
financial sustainability of the RCCs. Success in these areas holds great significance not only for the 
viability  and  development  of  the  RCCs  themselves,  but  also  for  the  realization  of  the  broad  rural 
economic development strategy. 
With regard to supporting economic development in the west region and in the Three Gorges area, we 
think that financial support should be tilted towards the development of the small and medium-sized 
enterprises, particularly those non-public SMEs, and to the development of the external sector. 
As  many  have  observed,  in  the  government  orchestrated  reform  process  of  the  large  commercial 
banks  and  the  RCCs,  the  large  banks  and  some  medium-sized  banks  tend  to  emphasize  on  their 
services  to  the  large  corporate  clients,  emphasize  on  restructuring  the  used-to-be  loose  credit 
management  system,  and  emphasize  on  strengthening 
internal  control  and  consolidated 
management.  However,  we  should  not  neglect  our  financial  support  to  the  SMEs,  especially  to  the 
non-public SMEs. I very much appreciate the proposals Mayor Wang just highlighted, and I have more 
or less some similar viewpoints and would like to summarize as follows: 
First, financial institutions should be organized in a way more capable of providing financial services to 
the SMEs. 
Second, while continuing to provide quality service to the big corporate clients, large banks which are 
taking a high proportion of the financial markets should also strengthen internal research and establish 
new department units to improve credit services to the SMEs. 
Third, large enterprises are more likely to turn to capital market (equity market and bond market) to 
meet their financing needs in the future and this change will exert greater market pressures on the 
commercial banks. Therefore, in order to improve business efficiency, the commercial banks should 
pay more attention to serving the small and medium-sized clients. 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2005
Fourth,  market-based  interest  rate  reform  should  be  promoted.  Under  the  leadership  of  the  State 
Council, the People’s Bank of China has gained important progress in advancing the market-based 
interest  rate  reform  in  recent  years.  In  the  days  to  come,  we  will  continue  to  deepen  the  reform 
process.  Determining  interest  rate  following  market  principles  will  enable  the  lending  institutions  to 
better cover their risks and thus to improve their credit services to the small and medium-sized clients. 
Fifth, as Mayor Wang just mentioned, great efforts should be made to more effectively promote micro 
credit business. While the micro credit business has made certain progress in the rural areas, there is 
still a long way to go before it can meet the financing needs of the rural economy. In recent years, 
many developing countries in the world have gained useful experiences in growing their micro credit 
business and some are worth learning. We need to make careful study and research on this matter 
and advance the micro credit business prudently. 
Sixth,  financial  products  innovation  should  be  encouraged.  The  financial  industry  is  an  industry 
featuring  brisk  innovation  activities.  The  frequent  change  and  introduction  of  new  products  aim  to 
improve allocation of economic resources and better meet the financing needs of the market. In terms 
of developing new financial products, we have gained in the past some unsuccessful experiences and 
lessons which we need to draw from to improve the innovation capacity of the financial institutions. 
Only  with  improved  capability  in  product  innovation,  can  the  financial  institutions  better  serve  the 
financing needs of the SMEs, the non-public enterprises and the economy of the Three Gorges area. 
Finally, I would like to stress that the receipt of financial resources in a region is closely associated 
with  the  condition  of  its  financial  eco-system.  Whether  it  be  development  or  commercial  financial 
business, a sound financial eco-system is the prerequisite to ensure its success. In recent years, with 
steady improvement of the internal control and risk management systems, some national banks have 
started to set up internal ratings system in accordance with stipulations of the Basel Capital Accord II, 
and  adopted  such  an  approach  to  assess  the  condition  of  financial  eco-systems  across  various 
regions, so as to guide their exercise in internal fund allocation, credit planning or the authorization of 
credit  lines.  This  will  to  a  large  extent  determine  the  direction  and  amount  of  financial  resources 
movement across the regions. In the west region where the industrial foundation is relatively weak and 
the economic development is backward, greater efforts should be made to improve the local financial 
eco-system  to  attract  financial  resources.  Of  course,  backwardness  in  economic  development  does 
not necessarily imply a poor financial eco-system. But if the financial eco-system of the west region 
could be more effectively improved, it would be helpful to quickly develop a comparative advantage in 
attracting  financial  resources  to  provide  sustained  credit  support  to  the  industrial  development  and 
restructuring of the region. In terms of building a sound financial eco-system in a region, apart from the 
efforts  by  the  central  government  in  establishing  a  good  legal  and  enforcement  system,  the  local 
governments should also create a favorable platform to ensure justice of the judiciary system so as to 
provide  better  protection  for  the  claims  of  the  financial  institutions,  improve  credit  environment  and 
foster a mutually beneficial relationship between the banks and the enterprises. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  many  issues  remain  to  be  deeply  studied  and  deliberated  with  regard  to 
accelerating  financial  system  reform  and  giving  the  financial  industry  a  greater  role  in  resource 
allocation to more effectively support economic development of the west region and the Three Gorges 
area  in  particular.  In  this  respect,  I  would  like  to  commend  the  valuable  research  and  experiments 
conducted by provinces and municipalities in the Three Gorges area. I have also read some excellent 
research papers containing good proposals presented at this conference. I think the financial industry 
should support the favorable polices tailored by the State to facilitate development of the west region 
and the Three Gorges area in a bid to improve financial services to this end. I also believe that under 
the leadership of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council and with concerted efforts of all 
relevant  parties,  the  vast  west  region  including  the  Three  Gorges  area  will  definitely  be  able  to 
embrace an economic take-off at an early date. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 88/2005 
 3
