Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Inflation, expectations and current challenges to 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the European Inflation-Linked Conference 2005, Rome, 10 October 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  start  by  thanking  the  organisers  for  the  invitation  to  speak  at  this  European  
Inflation-Linked Conference.  
As  you  know,  inflation  is  the  “Enemy  no.1”  of  central  bankers.  Participating  in  a  conference  on 
inflation-linked instruments thus makes me feel a bit like a fire-fighter invited to speak at a convention 
on home insurance. But rest assured: I won’t try to convince you that there is no need for insuring 
against inflation…but maybe that the premium should be lowered!  
Indeed,  we  have  been  experiencing  times  of  historically  low  and  stable  inflation,  not  only  in  major 
industrialised countries, but also in emerging markets.1 Inflation expectations are well contained and 
probably close to their lowest levels of the last forty years.  
Nevertheless, the market for inflation-linked bonds has been rapidly expanding and reached around 
800  billion  euro  worldwide.  Inflation-linked  instruments  have  become  a  useful  instrument  also  for 
central banks, not to invest in but to help measuring inflation expectations, in real time and with high 
frequency. These expectations are used as an approximation of central banks’ credibility.  
I would like to focus my remarks today on how inflation expectations can be useful for the conduct of 
monetary policy, in particular in the current conjuncture. 
I would like to start with the current challenges to monetary policy, arising in particular from the recent 
oil  shock.  I  will  then  touch  on  how  the  central  bank  and  market  participants  interact  in  shaping 
expectations. I will finally try to explain how the institutional framework in which central banks operate 
affect the way in which they interact with market participants.  
Monetary policy reaction to the current oil shock 
All industrial economies, and in particular the euro area, are currently facing a major supply shock, 
stemming  from  the  increase  in  oil  and  energy  prices.  This  type  of  shock  is  the  worse  for  a  central 
bank, because it affects the price level and income in opposite directions.  
What  is  the  most  appropriate  response  to  such  a  shock?  Let  me  start  by  an  intuitive,  but  wrong 
answer, which I would characterise as follows: 
“The monetary policy reaction to an oil shock depends on the objective pursued by the central bank. 
The more a central bank gives priority to fighting inflation, rather than supporting growth, the more it 
will raise interest rates at the detriment of growth.” 
This answer is wrong, and I would like to explain why the optimal policy reaction to a shock as the one 
we are currently experiencing does not depend on the mandate that the central bank has. 
The  argument  is  wrong  because  it  does  not  take  into  account  expectations  and,  more  generally, 
uncertainty and the functioning of markets.  
Before doing that, let me recall something that should be clear to everybody: a permanent rise in the 
price of oil leads to a reduction in the terms of trade (the ratio of export to import prices) and therefore 
                                                      
1   Ciccarelli  and  Mojon  (2005)  compute  an  index  of  “global  inflation”  comprising  a  large  selection  of  OECD  countries  from 
1961. The global inflation rate in the most recent years has been the lowest or very close to the lowest of the whole sample 
period. 
   1/6 
to a permanent reduction in the equilibrium level of income (at least for oil importing countries). This is 
a fact. 
Some may not accept this conclusion and may try to do something about it. For instance, if a central 
bank tries to counteract the effect of the higher oil price by stimulating aggregate demand, as most 
central banks did in the mid-1970s, the only result will be to increase inflation. Inflation will rise as long 
as  monetary  policy  will  remain  expansionary  in  trying  to  avoid  the  adjustment  of  income  to  its  new 
level.  The  closer  is  the  economy  to  full  employment,  the  quicker  the  oil  shock  will  spread  to  other 
prices into an inflation spiral. 
If economic agents, consumers and firms, know that the central bank will react in this way to an oil 
shock, trying to stimulate income and employment, inflationary expectations will increase very rapidly, 
reducing  expected  real  income  and  thereby  nullifying  the  effects  of  the  monetary  expansion.  If  the 
central bank persists in this policy, the only result will be a price-inflation spiral, with no positive impact 
on growth.  
If the economy embarks in such a path, bringing back inflation will require a substantial tightening of 
monetary  policy  that  will  produce  a  substantial  output  loss.  This  is  the  experience  of  the  monetary 
reactions to the oil shocks of the 1970s, in particular in the US, with the Volcker disinflation of the early 
1980s, but also in many European countries.  
The  first  conclusion  that  I  would  draw  to  your  attention  is  that  if  monetary  policy  aims  primarily  at 
stabilizing  income  in  the  face  of  a  permanent  supply  shock,  it  will  produce  the  opposite  result,  i.e. 
unstable output and inflation.  
Let’s  consider  now  the  case  in  which  the  central  bank  aims  primarily  at  price  stability,  instead  of 
stabilizing  income.  What  would  a  central  bank  do  in  this  case?  It  will  depend  on  markets’  initial 
reaction to the shock and on their expectations. Let me consider two cases. 
A first case is one in which economic agents fully accept the fact that the oil price shock is like a tax to 
be paid to oil producing countries, that cannot be avoided and which will lead to a reduction of their 
disposable  income.  There  are  no  requests  for  compensation  for  the  effects  of  the  higher oil  prices. 
There is no pass-through to wages or other prices. There are no expansionary budgetary measures to 
try to support income.  
In this case, that I would call the virtuous case, the increase in the price of oil and other energy prices 
does not lead to a parallel increase in other prices. Headline inflation increases only temporarily, to 
record  the  increase  in  the  price  of  fuel  and  energy products,  and  falls  thereafter.  Inflation net  of  oil 
prices, the so called core inflation, remains unchanged. In this virtuous case, given that the increase in 
prices is a temporary phenomenon, monetary policy does not need to be tightened and the stance can 
remain unchanged.  
This is the best outcome, both in terms of inflation and output stabilization, much better than the one in 
which the central bank explicitly tries to stabilize income. 
A different case, that I would call the vicious case, is one in which agents do not accept that the oil 
shock  reduces  their  disposable  income  and  try  to  be  compensated  in  terms  of  higher  wages  or 
budgetary support measures. If this case materialises, oil price increases might be passed through to 
higher wages and other prices. Inflation increases, not temporarily but persistently, even excluding oil 
and energy products.  
If this vicious case materialises, the central bank must react very quickly and tighten monetary policy 
by raising interest rates to counter inflationary pressures. The increase in interest rates will inevitably 
have a negative effect on output, that adds up to the initial (and unavoidable) negative effect produced 
by the higher oil price.  
The  slower  is  the  central  bank  in  reacting  to  inflationary  pressures,  i.e.  the  more  it  tolerates  the  
pass-through  from  oil  prices  to  wages  and  other  prices  to  occur,  the  more  it  will  have  to  increase 
interest rates down the road, and the larger will ultimately be the negative impact on growth. 
I would like at this stage to point to two additional conclusions.  
First, the greater is the resistance by economic agents to the negative consequences of a negative oil 
shock, the more the central bank will have to increase interest rates and the worse will be the impact 
on growth.  
   2/6 
Second, the slower is the central bank to increase interest rates in the emergence of a pass through 
from  higher  oil  prices  to  other  wages  and  prices,  the  worse  will  be  the  impact  of  the  oil  shock  on 
growth. 
To sum up, any output loss produced by an oil shock is minimised if the central bank focuses primarily 
on price stability rather than trying to stabilize income and employment and if economic agents fully 
believe  that  the  central  bank  will  behave  accordingly.  In  other  words,  monetary  policy  can  better 
support growth if the primary target is price stability and if the central bank is credible in pursuing its 
commitment.  
The  credibility  of  a  central  bank  in  pursuing  price  stability  is  certainly  enhanced  if  price  stability  is 
clearly identified as the primary mandate in the Bank’s statutes. If the statutory mandate is less clear, 
the central bank will have to make special effort to convince market participants that price stability is 
indeed its primary objective. This is the way in which some recent statements by Fed officials can be 
interpreted. I would refer to a recent one by Governor Santomero, who was quoted in the Financial 
Times  (30  September)  as  saying:  “The  Fed  has  a  dual  mandate:  to  oversee  price  stability  and 
potential growth, in that order”. 
The priority to price stability inscribed in the ECB’s statutes can thus be considered as an advantage 
in the current conjuncture.  
It is thus a bit surprising to hear calls - by some politicians and, more astonishing, by academics - for 
changing the mandate of the ECB to make it more balanced in supporting growth. Such calls reveal a 
failure to understand how monetary policy operates in a world of forward-looking economic agents and 
financial markets. 
If  you  want  to  take  away  only  one  point  from  my  intervention  today,  I  would  like  it  to  be  this:  
a  price  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  enables  to  deliver  more  stable  output.  If  the 
commitment  is  credible,  monetary  policy  can  afford  not  to  overreact  to  shocks  and  to  maintain  a 
steady course, which is the most supportive of growth.2  
This conclusion is consistent with the developments of the last two years. In 2003-2005 the euro area 
was hit by repeated oil shocks, with a doubling of prices. Yet, no second round effects materialised. 
HICP inflation increased only temporarily. Long term inflation expectations remained subdued.3 This is 
the  reason  why  interest  rates  remained  unchanged,  providing  considerable  support  to  economic 
activity at a time of a huge negative supply shock.  
Will this virtuous scenario continue? Will favourable conditions continue to prevail going forward?  
The  answer  is  clear.  It  will  depend  on  the  continuation  of  no  pass-through  from  the  oil  and  energy 
price  increases  to  other  prices  in  the  economy.  This  is  why  the  central  bank  has  to  monitor  very 
closely  wage  and  price  setting  behaviour  as  well  as  any  other  policy  that  may  affect  disposable 
income, in particular budgetary policy.  
A  corollary  to  this  answer  is  that  monetary  policy  has  to  be  tightened  as  soon  as  signs  emerge  of 
possible  pass  through  to  wages  and  inflation  and  if  agents  have  doubts  about  the  anti-inflationary 
stance of the central bank. 
Monetary policy and the shaping of expectations 
One lesson to be drawn from analysis and experience is that in order to achieve their goal, central 
banks  have  not  only  to  implement  policies  consistent  with  price  stability  but  must  also  interact  with 
economic agents and make sure that the latter fully understand their policies.4  
                                                      
2   See in particular Leduc and Sill (2004), who evaluate the performance of different policy rules following a rise in oil prices in 
a calibrated stochastic dynamic general equilibrium model of the US economy. Leduc and Sill find that interest rate rules 
that place a high weight on inflation lead to a smaller loss in output, a lower inflation rate, and a lower nominal interest rate 
than rules placing a larger weight on output stabilization. Indeed, the authors also find that the recessionary consequences 
of oil price shocks are smallest when the central bank targets the price level. 
3   This is reported, for example, by Barclays Capital Research, Is the ECB part of the problem?, 22 September 2005. 
4   See Winkler (2000) for a survey. 
   3/6 
This requires intense communication with market participants, of at least two sorts.  
First,  the  central  bank  has  the  duty  to  warn  market  participants  when  their  own  behaviour  is  not 
consistent with price stability and may lead to a tightening of monetary policy which would lead to a 
worse outcome for all. This has to involve communication with the public at large: unions, employers, 
budgetary  authorities.  This  type  of  communication  is  in  the  interest  of  all,  since  any  inconsistency 
would lead in the end to a worse result in terms of economic growth. It is also in the interest of the 
central bank as price stability can be more easily maintained if agents act consistently.  
Warning economic agents openly about their behaviour is not easy and does not make central banks 
popular. These warnings are not nice to hear either and often irritating for the addressees who feel like 
being lectured on their own behaviour. It is nevertheless the statutory responsibility of the central bank 
to  make  all  agents,  private  and  public,  aware  of  the  consequences  of  their  behaviour  on  monetary 
policy. Making this clear at the outset, in public, is the best way to coordinate expectations around the 
best possible outcome. It is also a way to ensure accountability by the central bank. 
For instance, if unions request higher wages to compensate for oil and gasoline price increases, the 
central bank cannot abstain from warning that this would lead to a vicious scenario and ultimately to 
higher interest rates, which would produce the worse outcome for all. Calls for wage moderation and 
avoidance of pass-through are therefore to be expected after an oil shock.  
Another  example  is  when  fiscal  authorities  intend  to  take  measures  aimed  at  compensating  the 
reduction in purchasing power produced by higher gasoline prices. If these measures are not financed 
by  parallel  restrictive  measures,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  central  bank  to  warn  that  this  would  have  an 
expansionary  impact  on  income  and  delay  the  adjustment  to  the oil  shock,  thus  fuelling  inflationary 
pressures. This would ultimately lead to tighter monetary policy and higher interest rates. 
The second component of the communication is the analytical framework underlying the central bank’s 
policy decisions. The central bank should explain to economic agents what the key parameters that 
will be followed to shape future policy decisions are. The first parameter is of course a clear definition 
of what is meant by price stability.  
Much  has  been  said  and  written  on  central  bank  communication.  I  would  like  just  to  mention  two 
examples  of  challenges  faced  by  central  banks  in  communicating  their  strategies  in  the  current 
conjuncture. 
A first example is when market participants tend to form their inflation expectations not on underlying 
economic  developments  but  exclusively  on  their  expectation  that  the  central  bank  will  deliver  price 
stability.  If  the  central  bank  is  very  credible,  market  participants  will  expect  that  price  stability  will 
always  prevail,  ignoring  underlying  inflationary  pressures.  In  these  circumstances  financial  markets 
may  not  provide  the  right  signal  to  the  central  bank  about  inflationary  pressures.5  This  leads  to 
phenomena called conundra, whereby long term rates do not react to underlying fundamentals or to 
changes  in  short  term  rates.  Hence,  the  central  bank  has  to  look  at  other  indicators  and  use  its 
communication to explain the case for changing monetary conditions.  
The opposite example may arise if market participants expect the central bank to tighten sooner than 
what  the  central  bank  instead  deems  appropriate.  This  may  happen  in  particular  when  the  central 
bank  expresses  concern  about  potential  inflationary  risks  which  have  nevertheless  not  yet 
materialized.  If  the  central  bank  does  not  tighten  as  expected,  market  participants  may  be 
disappointed and lose confidence in the anti-inflationary stance of the central bank (“barking without 
biting”).  
Here, again, the central bank has to communicate to market participants why it believes that it is not 
appropriate to raise rates in light of its own assessment of fundamentals. It is not easy to explain at the 
same time that there is no immediate need to change rates but that there is readiness to do so if risks 
materialise. The word “vigilance” has been used to describe attention to risks to the baseline scenario, 
rather  than  a  determination  to  implement  a  specific  unconditional  policy  action.  When  the  risks  do 
materialize, vigilance stops and action starts. 
                                                      
5   See  Bernanke  and  Woodford  (1997)  on  the  risks  stemming  from  an  excessive  reliance  on  market  forecasts  in  setting 
monetary policy. 
   4/6 
Vigilance can thus be communicated to the public even if policy rates remain unchanged, in particular 
if  risks  emerge  or  increase  but  have  not  materialised  and  if  underlying  developments  justify  the  
no-change option. This explains why communication intensity can at times increase, as measured by 
what some call “hawkish-ness” indicators, while policy rates remain unchanged, as happened in the 
first half of 2004.6 If the communication strategy is successful, expectations converge over time back 
to the level of unchanged policy rates.  
Institutional constraints for monetary policy 
The  main  objective  of  communication  policy  is  to  make  monetary  policy  predictable.  There  are  not 
many  analyses  looking  at  the  predictability  of  central  banks.  Those  that  I  have  seen  suggest  that 
central banks of major countries have achieved a high degree of predictability in recent years, and are 
performing quite similarly in this respect.7
Analyses tend to focus more on the means and instruments to achieve predictability, than the result 
itself.  These  analyses  often  fail  to  take  into  account  the  institutional  and  political  context  in  which 
different central banks operate. They also at times entail the risk of suggesting superficial and naïve 
prescriptions that are simply not realistic, not because the central bank does not want to implement 
them prescriptions, but because they are not available within the prevailing institutional or political set 
up.  
I  would  like  to  touch  briefly  upon  this  issue  because  I  am  repeatedly  confronted  with  it,  since  my 
confirmation hearing in the European Parliament, and have not seen signs of a full understanding of 
the arguments.  
The  point  that  I  would  like  to  submit  for  a  serious analysis  of  central  bank  transparency  is  that  the 
latter  is  inextricably  linked  to  accountability.  The  means  and  instruments  for  implementing 
transparency in any country depend on its institutional and political framework for accountability.  
Just to point to one relevant aspect, a system in which accountability is collegial is different from one 
in  which  accountability  is  individual.  The  way  in  which  transparency  is  implemented  cannot  be  the 
same in the two systems.  
The European Union, which is obviously a very peculiar entity, not comparable to a Federation or a 
State,  has  a  specific  system  of  accountability  for  its  institutions,  in  particular  the  Commission,  the 
Court of Justice or the European Central Bank, where the appointment of the decision-making bodies 
is  partly  a  responsibility  of  the  Member  States.  Such  a  system  foresees  collegial,  not  individual 
accountability. In such a system, the publication of individual decisions, votes or opinions cannot be 
foreseen, except for historical purposes. Only the result of the collegiate decision can be made public. 
This  is  currently  the  case  for  the  European  Commission,  the  Court  of  Justice  and  the  European 
Central Bank. 
To be sure, the institutional and political framework underlying the European Union is a complex one 
and  maybe  not  easy  to  understand.  But  this  framework  cannot  be  ignored  in  any  meaningful  and 
realistic analysis on the way in which the ECB ensures transparency.  
To move to a system in which the detailed minutes and votes would be published, the ECB Statutes 
would have to be modified to allow for individual accountability, rather than a collegial one. This would 
require  several  modifications,  including  the  compositions  of  the  decision-making  body  and  its 
nomination  procedure.  It  would  also  most  likely  require  changes  in  the  EU  institutional  and  political 
framework. 
Differences  in  the  structure  of  economies  represent  another  issue  which  is  often  forgotten  in  the 
assessment of central bank policies. Divergences in the degree of economic flexibility, in particular, 
can affect the degree of intrinsic inflation persistence, namely the inertial character of inflation which 
cannot  be  reduced  by  the  central  bank  despite  its  best  efforts.8  Two  central  banks  with  similar 
                                                      
6   See for example Ubide (2005). 
7   See for instance Ehrmann and Fratschzer (2005). 
8   See Erceg and Levin (2003) and Levin and Piger (2004). 
   5/6 
credibility and policy strategy might have to implement two different policies, with quite different results 
in terms of price stability and growth, because of substantial differences in the underlying rigidities of 
their economies, in particular with respect to the reaction to exogenous shocks, such as an oil price 
increase.  
Yet,  one  popular  way  to  conduct  this  comparative  analysis,  often  presented  in  market  analysts’ 
newsletters, is to estimate policy reaction functions of different central banks (for example Taylor rules) 
to infer central bank preferences. This may be a quite misleading exercise, because it does not take 
into account the differences in the structure of the economies.9  
Just  to  give  an  example,  several  studies  analysing  ECB  policy  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  has 
reacted timidly to inflation. This may appear somewhat counterintuitive given the importance attached 
to price stability in the ECB mandate.10
This  result  is  instead  quite  consistent  with  what  I  have  explained  earlier,  i.e.  the  optimal  policy 
response to a shock depends very much on how economic agents themselves react to such a shock 
and  on  their  expectation  of  the  central  bank’s  reaction.  If  a  shock  does  not  lead  to  a  permanent  
pass-through on inflation and the central bank is credibly committed to price stability, it is optimal for a 
central  bank  not  to  react.11  Looking  at  the  estimated  Taylor  rule  coefficients  only,  the  central  bank 
would appear as quite dovish, while it is instead quite hawkish and expected to be so.12  
 Moving  to  the  end  of  my  talk,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  interacting  with  markets  and  trying  to 
shape expectations is not an easy job. Central banks are highly committed to this, and they try to do it 
with all the instruments that are available to them. However, it would be misleading to think that central 
banks  act  in  a  vacuum,  with  no  constraints.  As  I  have  tried  to  explain,  central  banks  have  to  face 
several constraints, most of which - I have to say - are often forgotten by analysts, commentators and 
academics. 
Effective communication is essential because it enables the central bank to guide agents’ behaviour 
and  expectations,  thereby keeping  its  policy  line  consistent  with  its  objective and  its assessment  of 
economic  conditions.  This  may  require  specific  skills,  although  I  would  not  go  to  the  extreme  of 
associating central bankers to artists or famous athletes, as Mervyn King did in a recent speech, in 
which he associated a steady-hand monetary policy to the straight line followed by Diego Armando 
Maradona when he scored his second goal against England in a famous 1986 World cup game (in 
fact,  that  game  became  famous  for  Maradona’s  first  goal).13  Maradona  did  it  by  fooling  the English 
defence  into thinking  that  he  would  move  in  different  directions,  instead  of  going  through a  straight 
line. Central banks cannot even try to act in this way. First, market participants are much smarter than 
the English defence and cannot be easily fooled. And even when they are fooled, they get back at you 
in a rather painful way.  
I  thus  much  prefer  an  earlier  quote  of  Mervyn,  in  which  he  refers  to  Milton  Friedman’s  1968 
Presidential address, according to which “successful monetary policy should be boring, and successful 
central  bankers  should  be  seen  neither  as  heroes  nor  villans,  but  simply  as  competent  referees, 
allowing the game to flow and staying out of the limelight”.14  
For central bankers to stay out of the limelight in the present circumstances, with an oil shock as the 
one we are currently experiencing, we need the cooperation of all, from unions to employees, from 
market participants to budgetary authorities. It depends largely on them. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                      
9   See Hetzel (2000). 
10   See for example Gerdesmeier and Roffia (2004). 
11   See, among others, Giannone, Reichlin and Sala (2002). 
12   This is related to the idea that once an instrument is used effectively to influence a target variable, the correlation between 
the two disappears. This is sometimes referred to as “Goodhart’s law”. 
13   See M. King’s Mais lecture (2005). 
14   See M. King (1998). 
   6/6 
