Ishrat Husain: The perils of higher skill shortages for Pakistan’s economy - 
what can we do about it? 
Chief  guest  address  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Prize 
Distribution Ceremony of the Institute of Bankers, Karachi, 26 November 2005. 
 It is highly paradoxical that in a developing country such as Pakistan, we are experiencing serious skill 
shortages and, at the same time, high rates of open and under employment. A lot has already been 
said  about  the  causes  of  the  mismatch  between  the  skills  required  by  the  economy  and  the  skills 
generated by the educational institutions. In this paper, I am also not going to focus on technical and 
vocational  skills  such  as  carpenters,  masons,  electricians,  plumbers,  automobile,  air  conditioning, 
refrigeration mechanics, medical technicians, nurses, foremen, etc. but mostly on higher skills such as 
needed by the I.T. and telecommunications industry, aviation industry, financial sector, accountancy, 
engineering  goods 
industries,  bio-medical  sciences  and  bio-medical 
engineering,  media  industry,  etc.  A  box,  containing  my  assessment  of  where  the  shortages  and 
surpluses are, is presented for provoking further refinement and discussions. (Box I). 
infrastructure 
industry, 
 BIS Review 78/2005 
  1
 The basic thesis of this paper is that in absence of an integrated model of skill formation, upgradation 
and maintenance, the adhoc and piecemeal approaches will remain unproductive and inadequate. It is 
true that the start-up costs and time involved in getting this integrated model up and going are high but 
we  have  already  wasted  so  much  time  and  energy  that  we  are  lagging  behind  other  countries. 
Moreover, this proposed model has been tested and  applied in case of the State Bank of Pakistan 
(SBP). We should, therefore, adopt a bootstraps approach and lay solid foundations for reliable flows 
of high quality skilled manpower responsive to the changing needs of the economy. The pipeline we 
have  constructed  in  the  State  Bank  in  the  last  six  years  has  already  produced  400  out  of  800 
professional staff  easing  the  shortages  of  skills  in  the  Central  Banking segment.  These  young men 
and women, I am very proud to say, are in heavy demand both within and outside the country. From a 
situation that we were stuck with people who could not be used anywhere now there is a high degree 
of  mobility  and  the  SBP  professionals  recruited  and  trained  in  the  recent  years  are  commanding 
premiums  in  the  market  place.  We  have  not  adopted  a  myopic  approach  by  preventing  them  from 
leaving  the  SBP  as  this  will  be  highly  counter-productive;  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  enlarging  the 
capacity of our pipeline by increasing the number of recruits and training and developing the staff in-
house and outside. We are keen to maintain the quality of intake as once the quality is compromised 
then the model which I am proposing will become dysfunctional. 
The  structural  reforms  in  the  banking  industry  have  brought  about  some  unintended  consequences 
that are creating serious pressures on the future growth of the industry. From a situation where the 
movement in and out of the banks was almost non-existent and life-time secure tenure was assured 
for  all  the  insiders,  the  industry  is  going  through  a  major  upheaval  in  achieving  stable  and  cost 
effective  work  force.  During  my  recent  farewell  visits  to  more  than  30  banks  in  the  country,  the 
common  theme  was  the  complaints  about  the  widespread  poaching  of  staff  among  the  banks,  the 
unwarranted escalation in compensation packages to attract and retain the staff and the consequent 
instability in the work force. In a way it is extremely satisfying to witness that the banking industry is 
going through the early pangs of professionalization where the market is able to discern and reward 
people on the basis of their output and performance and hunt for the talent. Another positive aspect is 
that this process gives signals to the rest of the employees and potential entrants that they should also 
acquire and master  the skills  that  are in  short  supply  if  they  have  to  advance  their careers  or  earn 
more  money.  Overtime,  the  expansion  in  the  supply  brings  back  the  equilibrium  in  the  market  and 
normalizes compensation packages. But in the transition period the pains are felt by everyone. In this 
transition phase, this instability gives rise to dangerous trends of out pricing of banking products with 
adverse impact on the consumers, the widening gaps between the marginal and average salary scales 
in  the  industry  and  thus  the  consequences  for  motivation  of  the  majority  staff  and  the  perpetual 
struggle by the senior management to manage the scarcity and mobility of human resources. 
What can be done to smoothen this transition and enhance the requisite supply of skills? Let me first 
say  that  there  is  no  short  cut  and  it  will  take  time,  efforts,  coordination  among  various  players  and 
agencies  and  continuous  monitoring  and  follow-up.  The  business  model  for  the  skill  formation, 
upgradation and maintenance process is presented graphically below. There are three distinct stages 
of this process with spheres of responsibilities and inputs. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2005
The  starting  stage  is  the  quality  and  quantity  of  student  intake  into  our  universities,  professional 
colleges  and  institutes,  along  with  strong  accreditation  bodies.  In  Pakistan,  we  all  have  become 
familiar,  with  the  passage  of  time,  as  to  which  institutions  are  the  breeding  grounds  for  quality  raw 
materials of skills for various industries. The problem at this stage is that the numbers being produced 
from the quality institutions are totally inadequate in relation to the demand. For example, the banking 
industry is now moving to second tier educational institutions for sourcing their recruitment. This may 
give a false sense of complacency to these institutions that as their graduates are finding jobs in the 
market they have attained the required standards of acceptance. Nothing could be far from the truth. 
The banking institutions have no other alternative but to scrape at the bottom of the barrel to bring 
people on board to meet their rapidly growing demands.  
At  this  stage,  the  Universities  should  work  closely  with  the  Industry  Associations  such  as  Pakistan 
Banks Association to revise the curriculum, attract qualified faculty and instructional staff, and modify 
the testing and examination methodology to produce the required number and quality of graduates. 
There should be no compromises and short cuts by the universities to meet this upsurge in demand. 
Linkages should be established to train the trainers at world class institutes of learning. This will have 
a multiplier effect in producing both the numbers and quality. 
 
 The Industry Associations or individual large firms can help upgrade the quality of our Universities and 
institutes by setting up endowed chairs and attracting world class scholars, establishing competitive 
research grants for exploring practical issues of interest to them, funding scholarships for the best and 
brightest, who cannot otherwise afford to study at the top private universities and provide travel grants 
to teachers to attend international conferences, symposia, etc. These initiatives will not cost very much 
in  terms  of  actual  outlays  but  produce  highly  desirable  results  in  enhancing  the  quality  of  our 
educational institutions and promoting scientific and technological disciplines needed by the economy. 
The second stage is the recruitment process and post-induction period after the professionals have 
entered the industry. The recruitment should be based on merit through a highly competitive process. 
The  written  test  should  be  more  a  test  of  applying  knowledge  and  techniques  to  solving  problems 
rather than reproduction of memorized material. The interviews should be structured to find out the 
interpersonal  communication  skills,  suitability  to  work  in  a  team  environment  and  the  values  and 
BIS Review 78/2005 
 3
attitudes. At this post induction stage, the responsibility shifts from individual company to the industry 
associations  which  should  develop,  certify  and  help  maintain  excellent  centers  for  imparting 
standardized, uniform, theoretical, applied and hands-on training to the new recruits. In some cases, 
passing of professional examinations such as the Diploma in Banking may also be the pre-requisite for 
career progression. 
The  experience  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  in  this  regard  may  be  illuminating.  The  recruitment 
practices  initiated  by  SBP  several  years  ago  have  been  adapted  by  almost  all  the  banks  and  are 
becoming  industry-wide  standard  practices.  Post-entry  training  is  also  catching  on  rapidly  but  the 
efforts of individual banks should be supplanted by a collective effort of Pakistan Banks Association 
(PBA) and the Institute of Bankers, Pakistan (IBP) to develop standardized curriculum, approved list of 
trainers,  pedagogical  tools,  testing  methodology,  and  minimum  acceptable  grading  system.  The 
training delivery can then be decentralized under these parameters and quality control and assurance 
can be centralized by the PBA and IBP. 
The process of value addition does not end simply with the post-entry training. We have found that the 
direct  linkage  of  intermediate  training  courses  and  advanced  training  courses  and  passing  of 
professional  examinations  linked  with  promotion  plays  a  critical  role  in  the  continuous  improvement 
and voluntary upgradation of skills. As there is overall shortage of trainers in these areas, the PBA and 
IBP  should  enter  into  strategic  alliances  or  joint  ventures  with  foreign  and  international  banks  or 
training institutions. This will minimize the costs to individual member banks and also relieve them of 
the search and organizational costs. 
Another  clever  way  of  skill  upgradation  is  to  send  the  rising  stars  in  the  industry  or  profession  for 
attachments  to  foreign  banks  for  short  periods  of  time  to  acquire  the  state-of-art  knowledge  and 
practices. They should be expected, on their return, to disseminate and share their learning with their 
peers and colleagues and take the lead in applying those practices in their own institutions. The SBP 
has so far sent almost one half of their 800 professional staff for foreign training and attachments and 
the results are for everyone to see. Those Chief Executives, who only focus on the cost side of the 
equation and miss the benefit side, are indeed doing a great disservice to their own organizations as 
the competition will sooner or later beat them because of this inadequacy in the skill acquisition by 
their staff. 
The  universities  should  organize  Executive  Development  Programs  such  as  being  done  by  the 
business schools. The banks should also avail of these courses and work with the business schools to 
tailor them to their requirements. Institutions such as GIK, NED, UET, NUST, FAST, etc. should not 
only organize refresher technical courses for the executives working in engineering profession but also 
hold management courses for the middle level managers of various companies. 
There is an acute shortage of project management skills in this country. To begin with, our engineering 
universities  can  bring  in  foreign  trainers  or  institutions as  partners  and  then  gradually  build  up  their 
own capacity. Continuous collaboration with leading universities such as Caltech, Georgia Tech, etc. 
would be the best way to value addition of our engineering professionals. 
At  the  last  stage,  the  finished  product  rising  from  within  the  organization  or  recruited  from  outside 
should remain engaged in learning and skill upgradation. At this stage, the job content emphasizes 
less  of  technical  skills  but  more  of  leadership  and  managerial  skills.  We  do  not  realize  how  much 
difference  a  good  manager  can  make  to  the  efficiency  and  productivity  of  an  organization.  But  our 
senior  managers  feel  they  have  reached  the  nirvana,  they  know  everything  and  nobody  can  teach 
anything to them anymore. I believe they are sadly mistaken as they do not realize how much they are 
missing in terms of their own personal and professional growth. Management Development Programs 
both at our universities and institutes of higher learning and at foreign institutes should be encouraged 
and made an integral part of their career management. 
The model that I have laid out is nothing new or spectacular. The different elements of this model do 
exist  in  bits  and  pieces  and  have  been  applied  in  varying  intensity  across  many  companies  in 
Pakistan. I have mostly relied upon the examples of banking industry as I am more familiar with the 
developments there. I do not know very much about the other sectors and I am sure a lot must be 
happening there. If it is not happening, then I will urge the universities, institutes, industry associations 
to  work  together  and  test  this  model,  adapt  it  and  apply  it  widely  and  in  a  systematic  say.  I  am 
confident that the skill shortages, which we are observing today in Pakistan, will not only disappear 
domestically but we will become the conduit for supplying these skills to other countries and a magnet 
for outsourcing business. 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2005
