Jean-Claude Trichet: Developing the work and tools of CEIOPS: the views of 
the ECB 
Keynote speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the CEIOPS 
Conference  “Developing  a  New  EU  Regulatory  and  Supervisory  Framework  for  Insurance  and 
Pension Funds: The Role of CEIOPS”, Frankfurt am Main, 16 November 2005. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I accepted with great pleasure the invitation to speak today at this conference organised by CEIOPS 
and to share with you the views of the ECB about the work and tools of CEIOPS within the Lamfalussy 
framework in which the Committee is an essential element. 
Indeed, CEIOPS and the ECB have a common interest in safeguarding financial stability. I would like 
to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  organisers  for  providing  me  with  the  opportunity  to  explain  why  I 
consider the role of CEIOPS to be very important in achieving this objective. 
The  ECB  considers  financial  stability  as  an  important  precondition  for  an  effective  transmission  of 
monetary policy and for a smooth operation of payment systems. Moreover only a stable and healthy 
financial  system  fosters  economic  growth  through  an  efficient  allocation  of  savings  to  investment 
opportunities. The strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory frameworks of the insurance and 
pension fund sectors contributes to this aim. 
I would like to start by discussing the importance of insurance and pension funds for financial stability. 
I  will  then  highlight  the  potential  role  of  the  CEIOPS  against  the  background  of  creating  the  Single 
Market,  also  bearing  in  mind  the  current  debate  about  how  to  further  develop  the  Lamfalussy 
framework.  
Insurance and pension funds and financial stability 
2.  
Let  me  start  by  telling  you  that  I  am  impressed  by  the  recent  strong  interest  in  the  activities,  and 
financial  conditions,  of  insurance  and  pension  funds.  With  a  predominantly  bank-based  financial 
system in Europe, until some years ago some may have argued that it was not so obvious that the 
condition of insurance companies and pension funds mattered for financial stability.  
I think that two main points have to be understood in this respect. First, it is important to recognise that 
these financial institutions, owing to their balance sheet structure and their long-term horizon may play 
a positive role in safeguarding the stability of the overall financial system. Second, they may also be 
sources  of  vulnerabilities  through  their  increased  interdependences  and  linkages  with  the  banking 
sector.  
The positive role of insurance companies and pension funds for financial stability 
2.1 
Insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  are  sub-components  of  the  financial  system  and  their 
linkages  with  the  banking  sector  and  the  securities  markets  have  grown  significantly  over  the  past 
decade. In the euro area, together their assets now represent slightly less than 60% of GDP, with the 
insurance sector accounting for more than two thirds of it. They are thereby the second most important 
group of financial institutions after banks which represent close to 270% of GDP.  
It  is  likely  that  the  size  of  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  will  continue  growing  at  a  rapid 
pace as ongoing public reforms in pension funds will encourage an ageing population to allocate an 
increasing  proportion  of  their  savings  to  these  institutions.  Currently,  insurance  companies  and 
pension funds manage more than a quarter of all household financial wealth in the euro area. Hence 
in the assessment of the resilience of the financial system it is important that financial risks in these 
institutions are accurately assessed, priced and efficiently managed. As central banks have a strong 
and natural interest in safeguarding financial stability, they also tend to extend their financial stability 
monitoring of financial institutions beyond the sole banks.  
BIS Review 76/2005 
 1
Let me now turn to the positive role of insurance companies and pension funds for financial stability.  
These institutions are traditionally considered to be a stable segment of the financial system. Just as 
banks, they mobilise savings from household and firms - although the savings vehicles are different - 
and they finance investment in the corporate sector. However, the main difference with the banks lies 
in their balance sheet structure. The liabilities of life insurers and pension funds have a long maturity 
and  are  significantly  less  liquid  than  bank  deposits.  They  are  therefore  less  vulnerable  to  customer 
runs. The possibilities of savings withdrawals are clearly restricted in most insurance contracts and are 
also more costly for customers. Regarding possible contagion effects from financial distress arising in 
one insurance company or one pension fund, they also appear to be limited a priori. These institutions 
are  not  directly  connected  to  the  interbank  market  or  the  payment  system.  With  the  exception  of 
course of the bancassurance, these institutional investors are less likely to generate a liquidity crisis in 
the interbank market.  
In the medium term we could also expect insurance companies and pension funds to play a growing 
role in the financing of the corporate investment. Due to their long-term liability, they may have a larger 
role  in  the  development  of  bond  markets.  They  would  possibly  be  a  more  stable  source  of  funding 
when compared to the highly cyclical patterns seen in bank lending. 
Furthermore over recent years insurance companies and pension funds, as net sellers of credit risk 
protection instruments, have increased the capacity of the banking system to absorb adverse shocks. 
This example illustrates how a better risk sharing among financial institutions, in this case through a 
risk spreading, may lead to a potential reduction of the overall risk and to a strengthened resilience of 
the financial system. A better risk sharing may also been achieved via risk diversification; this is one of 
the  arguments  underlying the  rapid  expansion  of  the  bancassurance  model  in Europe,  and another 
potential benefit of tightening relationships between banks and the insurance industry.  
Therefore,  the  increased  linkages  between  banks,  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  might 
have  positive  implications  for  financial  stability.  However,  this  may  also  increase  potential 
vulnerabilities and I would like to share with you some of my thoughts about the possible channels 
through which these linkages may endanger financial stability. 
Interplay with the banking sector  
2.2 
The  first  contagion  channel  involves  the  credit  risk  exposure  of  banks  to  insurance  companies  and 
pension funds; the second is related to specific risks associated with the bancassurance model. In the 
third  contagion  channel,  the  link  with  the  banks  is  rather  indirect  as  it  concerns  the  potential 
destabilising impact of these institutions on financial markets.  
1- Direct credit risk exposures  
Let me consider now the first contagion channel: the credit risk exposures of banks to insurers and 
pension funds.  
Over the last few years, the increasing exposure of banks to insurance companies through credit risk 
transfer  instruments  as  well  as  the  incomplete  transparency  on  the  nature  and  the  amount  of  risk 
effectively transferred had fuelled some concerns for the stability of the banking sector. However, such 
credit risk transfers appear to be somewhat less a source of concern than was previously thought. In 
most  cases  the  effective  transfer  of  risk  appears  to  have  been  limited  to  the  less  risky  parts  of 
structured products, with the riskiest parts being kept by banks. Moreover since the end of 2003 there 
have  been  signs  of  a  retrenchment  of  insurance  companies  from  the  credit  risk  transfer  market 
possibly related to the new accounting and regulatory environment.  
However, if we look at the concentration of credit risk exposures of some banks to the insurance and 
pension fund sector in the euro area – through direct lending and securities holdings -, which is the 
adequate measure to assess risks to financial stability, then the credit risk represented by institutional 
investors  appears  to  be  significant.  To  a  certain  extent  this  reflects  the  development  of  the 
bancassurance model, with the acquisition of majority and minority shareholding between banks and 
insurers being a frequent form of cooperation.  
2 
 BIS Review 76/2005
2- Bancassurance  
This brings me  up  to  the  second  potential  source of  vulnerability.  Growing  linkages  between  banks 
and  insurance  companies  via  the  bancassurance  model  could  under  certain  conditions  present  a 
threat to financial stability.  
In the euro area, the significant presence of insurers in the capital of some large banks constitutes a 
potential  contagion  channel  to  the  banking  sector.  Increasing  cross-capital  interlinkages  could 
potentially provoke a negative contagion spiral if equity prices were to fall, putting both sectors under 
pressure, thus reducing the diversification benefits for bancassurance undertakings.  
A  second  concern  may  be  related  to  accounting  and  regulatory  arbitrage  between  the  two 
subcomponents of the conglomerate. As insurance companies are under a different regulation than 
banks, risk transfers from the banking entity to the insurance part may lower the capital charge of the 
group without reducing the overall risk, thus potentially increasing the fragility of the group.  
3- Impact on financial markets  
Turning  to  the  third  channel  through  which  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  can  affect  the 
banking  sector,  I  would  like  to  highlight  that  significant  portfolio  reallocation  or  unwinding  of  major 
derivative positions by such entities might have a potential destabilising impact on asset prices. This 
source of vulnerability may arise as institutional investors hold a growing proportion of overall financial 
assets. In the euro area, their possible impact on equity market appears so far rather limited as their 
equity  holdings  only  represent  14%  of  total  euro  area  stock  market  capitalisation.  However,  some 
years  ago  there  has  been  some  evidence  that  the  slump  in  equity  prices  led  some  insurance 
companies to liquidate part of their equity portfolios in order to reduce regulatory capital need. Such 
forced sales would have contributed to adverse market dynamics by driving down equity prices even 
further, thereby also affecting banks’ equity portfolios.  
By contrast, insurance companies and pension funds in the euro area may have a more significant 
influence on long-term interest rate as their bonds holding is about 40% of the amounts of long-term 
euro  area  government  bonds  outstanding.  Against  the  background  of  the  introduction  of  new 
accounting standards and the envisaged move to Solvency II, the recent risk rebalancing of insurers 
and pension funds in favour of bonds is likely to have put downward pressures on long-term interest 
rates in the euro area.  
These three sources of vulnerabilities create the potential for problems in the insurance and pension 
fund sector to significantly disrupt the smooth functioning of the financial system. This of course calls 
for an adequate regulatory and supervisory framework so as to avoid the vulnerabilities to materialise 
in  the  future.  We  therefore  welcome  from  the  financial  stability  point  of  view  the  project  of  the 
European Commission to provide a new prudential framework for insurance companies to which the 
CEIOPS is currently contributing.  
3.  
3.1  
The role of CEIOPS  
General  consideration  on  the  state  of  achievement  of  the  internal  market  in  the 
different financial sectors  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  current  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  at  the  European  level.  More 
specifically, today I would like to make some reflections: first about the existing differences in the EU 
regulatory framework among financial sectors; second, on the Lamfalussy framework and the specific 
work carried by CEIOPS in the insurance sector; thirdly, on cross-sectoral issues.  
I will start with the remark that the pace of the harmonisation process had a different speed among the 
three  sectors.  Although  the  general  principles  enshrining  the  internal  market  for  financial  services, 
namely the mutual recognition and the home State control as basis for the European passport, have 
been common to all the three sectors, the level of Community-wide harmonisation has been different. 
This was due to both historical and political reasons. For the banking sector the role and contribution 
of  the  Basel  Committee  which  provided  an  internationally  accepted  common  framework  is  to  be 
acknowledged. As we all know, the European capital adequacy rules for banks – which in the EU are 
also applied to investment firms – draws largely on the Basel framework. To also note that the recent 
revision of the Basel Accord had prompted the review of the European prudential framework, and the 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 3
new Capital Requirements directive has been adopted in a quite short time considering the technical 
complexities involved. The Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) is now working on a 
number of projects related to the implementation of the new regime. 
In the securities sector the pace of regulatory harmonisation accelerated thanks to the political impetus 
given for the completion of the ambitious agenda laid down by in the Financial Services Action Plan 
(FSAP).  Also  the  Committee  of  European  Securities  Regulators  (CESR)  has  been  very  effective  in 
helping the Commission to settle difficult technical issues. With the adoption of the remaining Level 2 
measures for the MIFID and the Transparency directive, a brand new regulatory framework will be in 
place.  
The FSAP was initially less focused on other financial sectors, such as insurance and pension funds. 
However, harmonisation is quickly gaining speed.  
Just few weeks ago the EU Council adopted a directive on reinsurance supervision. This directive fills 
the gap in current European insurance legislation which does not provide for regulation of specialised 
reinsurers whilst activities of reinsurance carried out by direct insurers are subjected to regulation. As 
the  reinsurance  industry  is  considered  as  a  potential  source  of  systemic  risks,  the  new  directive  is 
expected to contribute to financial stability. This development is very welcome from the ECB’s point of 
view. 
As regards insurance, the Commission with the important contribution of CEIOPS will put in place a 
new solvency system to be applied to life assurance, non-life insurance and reinsurance undertakings 
(the so called Insurance Solvency II).  
Finally,  as  regards  the  occupational  pensions  sector,  the  recent  directive  on  the  activity  and 
supervision of occupational pension funds represents the first step in the construction of a harmonised 
EU regulatory framework. I just recall here that upon request of G10 Governors the Joint Forum has 
recently  released  a  report  in  which  it  is  highlighted  that  regulatory  and  supervisory  developments 
should aim at influencing and supporting the trend towards more rigorous risk management, greater 
transparency, and better governance at private pension funds1. 
Thus, it is clear that every financial sector has been developing an EU harmonised framework within a 
different schedule. However, I note that with the establishment of the Lamfalussy committees for all 
the three sectors, there has been a clear acknowledgment by the Council that the three sectors should 
be on equal footing as part of an integrated European financial market. Indeed, the links among the 
different financial sectors are such that nobody could doubt regulatory and supervisory convergence 
should be pursued with the same vigour and in a consistent way across them.  
The Lamfalussy framework and the role of CEIOPS  
3.2  
Turning to the Lamfalussy framework, I would like to start by highlighting that the Eurosystem has from 
the outset supported the adoption of this approach.  
The Eurosystem’s position is that the present institutional arrangements established on the basis of 
the Lamfalussy framework can provide the appropriate setting to achieve the degree of supervisory 
cooperation  required  in  the  present  market  environment.  In  particular,  striving  towards  effective 
supervisory  convergence  would  play  an  important  role,  as  the  developments  of  common  standards 
and guidelines will provide a consistent framework for financial supervision and reduce the respective 
compliance burden for cross-border institutions. 
In order to get the best out of the Lamfalussy process, there is a need for a strong commitment from 
all involved parties, and in primis by national supervisory authorities. This model could work effectively 
only  if  all  authorities  endeavour  to  allocate  enough  resources  and  contribute  to  enhancing  the 
effectiveness of the Level 3 committees. 
There is currently an on-going debate on how to better exploit all the potentialities of the Lamfalussy 
approach, by further developing existing tools. I note that in some directives recently issued for the 
securities  sector  new  methods  of  supervisory  cooperation  have  been  introduced,  such  as  the 
possibility to delegate responsibilities (in the Prospectus directive) and the role of Level 3 committee 
                                                      
1 
Joint Forum, Ageing and pension system reform: implications for financial markets and economic policies, September 2005. 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2005
as mediator (in the Market Abuse directive). The potentialities of these new instruments have to be still 
tested, and it is under discussion whether some of them could be introduced in other financial sectors. 
I note that each one of the Level 3 committees is at the moment mainly working - let me put it in this 
way - at a different level of the Lamfalussy approach. To be more precise, the CEIOPS is currently 
focusing  on  finalising  the  advice  to  the  Commission  for  the  preparation  of  the  Level  1  Solvency 
directive; CESR so far has been very busy with the preparation of the Level 2 implementing measures 
in  the  securities  field;  CEBS  is  working  hard  mainly  on  finalising  Level  3  guidelines  for  the 
implementation  of  the  EU  capital  requirements  framework.  Therefore,  given  the  different  focus  and 
orientation of its main stream of work, each sectoral committee might have different experience and 
possibly views as regards both limits and strengths of the Lamfalussy approach.  
Overall, I think that the experience gained so far by each committee may benefit the others as regards 
both  the  added  value  and  the  possible  limits  of  the  Lamfalussy  approach.  Thus  I  consider  very 
important in the current discussion that all stakeholders share openly their concrete experience gained 
so far and benefit from each other’s views as to the potentialities and possible limits of the Lamfalussy 
framework. I hope that the conference of today about the role of CEIOPS could bring important and 
thoughtful elements to the on-going debate. 
Let me now express my considerations as regards your committee, the CEIOPS. 
I think that CEIOPS is presently at the same time in a very challenging and quite privileged situation.  
It  is  in  a  very  challenging  situation  because  it  is  preparing,  as  requested  by  the  Commission,  the 
advice  on  the  development  of  a  new  solvency  system  to  be  applied  to  life  assurance,  non-life 
insurance and reinsurance undertakings. This work will lay down the foundation for the preparation of 
a  completely  new  prudential  framework,  to  be  enshrined  in  a  framework  Directive  and  subsequent 
implementing measures.  
However, CEIOPS is somehow in a privileged position. It can benefit from the experience of the other 
sectoral  committees  (already  active  in  level  2  and  level  3  measures)  and  help  the  Commission  to 
prepare the Level 1 Solvency directive in a way that can optimise the use of different supervisory tools 
according to practical needs and the best state of art supervisory practices. 
Also from a different perspective the work made by other Committees could be helpful for CEIOPS.  
I  understand  that  the  new  solvency  system  for  the  insurance  sector  takes  its  starting  point  in  a 
three-pillar structure inspired by the Basel II regime: quantitative requirements (Pillar 1), supervisory 
review  (Pillar  2)  and  supervisory  reporting  and  public  disclosure  (Pillar  3).  Indeed  I  think  that  it  is 
important that the new prudential regimes in the two sectors will be inspired by the same principles to 
the extent possible.  
In  this  vein,  CEIOPS  might  benefit  from  the  important  work  under  way  by  banking  supervisors  to 
set-up the new standards for capital requirements. A consistent treatment of the same risks among the 
two  sectors  will  ensure  the  level  playing  field  and  help  to  avoid  any  regulatory  arbitrage,  although 
structural differences among the two sectors should be carefully assessed and taken into account.  
Furthermore, I recall that the Capital Requirements directive will strengthen the role of the authority 
responsible for supervision on a consolidated basis – the “consolidating supervisor” – which will be 
entrusted  with  specific  tasks  related  to  the  approval  of  group-wide  advanced  approaches  for  risk 
measurement and will also be responsible for gathering and disseminating information regarding the 
group  and  for  planning  and  coordinating  supervisory  activities.  The  legal  provisions  concerning  the 
exchange  of  information  and  coordination  between  the  consolidating  supervisor  and  the  host 
(subsidiary) supervisors are also significantly enhanced, inter alia by specifying items of relevant and 
essential 
to  be  shared  and  by  requiring  written  coordination  and  cooperation 
arrangements. Notwithstanding the importance of ensuring that this provision should be consistently 
and effectively implemented in practice, I think that they could represent a useful point of reference for 
the CEIOPS’ work under way. 
information 
Cross-sectoral issues  
3.3 
I will now turn to make some considerations on cross-sectoral issues. I have already mentioned the 
direct  and  indirect  channels  through  which  exposures  in  insurance  sector  may  have  an  impact  on 
financial stability. 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 5
I note here that the blurring of boundaries between financial sectors in terms of financial institutions’ 
activities,  markets  and  financial  instruments  –  which  represents  a  major  development  of  financial 
integration  –  constitutes  an  additional  challenge  for  the  authorities  both  for  supervision  and  for 
financial stability monitoring. 
From the supervisory point of view, I note that in the last years there has been an increasing attention 
on  a  number  of  challenges  affecting  more  than  one  financial  sector,  such  as  outsourcing,  the 
development of hybrid financial products and credit transfer activity. It is very important to minimise 
potential inconsistencies in the supervisory treatment across the three sectors to avoid that allocation 
of  risk  would  be  decided  simply  on  the  ground  of  lower  cost  for  compliance,  and  not  for  sound 
business considerations. Therefore, close cooperation among sectoral committees and authorities is 
important to ensure an effective and consistent supervisory response.  
Furthermore,  close  cooperation  is  required  for  the  “supplementary  supervision”  of  financial 
conglomerates.  I  note  here  that  the  three  Level  3  committees  have  recently  made  a  proposal  for 
carrying on the work needed to implement the Financial Conglomerates directive, without the need for 
establishing  an  ad-hoc  level  3  committee.  I  just  recall  here  the  main  principles  underlining  the 
Lamfalussy approach, namely full transparency and accountability towards all political institutions and 
market participants, which should be always in the forefront and fully respected whatever arrangement 
is going to be put in place.  
As regard financial stability monitoring, in the ECB Financial Stability Review, produced twice a year, 
the monitoring of risks to financial stability includes also a review of the relevant developments in the 
insurance  sector.  This  assessment  benefits  extensively  from  the  close  co-operation  between  the 
ESCB Banking Supervision Committee (BSC) and the CEIOPS, through mutual participations in the 
committees.  The  analysis  of  risks  of  a  cross-sector  nature  is  set  to  take  advantage  as  well  of  the 
recent agreement among the Level 3 committees to intensify their co-operation in a more organised 
way through a joint structure.  
Concluding remarks  
4.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me summarise my main messages today.  
First,  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  play  a  positive  role  for  financial  stability.  Any  new 
regulatory  projects  should  recognise  the  long-term  horizon  of  these  institutions  if  we  want  them  to 
remain the historically stable segment of the financial system and to enable them to act as possible 
shock  absorbers.  However,  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  can  also  be  sources  of 
vulnerabilities. They have  the potential to impact  on asset price dynamics and circumstances could 
arise where they could also destabilise the banking sector owing to the tightening of links with banks. 
This  explains  to  a  large  extent  the  recent  interest  of  central  banks  in  these  institutions  and  the 
extension of their financial stability monitoring frameworks to them.  
Second, the Eurosystem is fully supportive of the Lamfalussy approach, whose potentialities should be 
fully exploited. I noted that the current debate about how to further develop existing supervisory tools 
is  partially  influenced  by  the  different  pace  of  regulatory  harmonisation  across  sectors  and  by  the 
different  and  rich  experience  of  the  Level  3  committees  so  far.  CEIOPS,  which  is  working  on  the 
formidable task of advising on a new solvency framework, might profit from the experience gained in 
other sectors. 
Finally,  a  well-established  cross-sector  exchange  of  information  is  essential  for  a  comprehensive 
monitoring of potential risks to financial stability and possible channels of contagion. I acknowledge 
that  a  good  network  of  co-operation  already  exists  between  the  BSC  and  CEIOPS  and  that  the 
interplay between the three Level 3 committees is planned to be more structured.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 76/2005
