R Jayamaha: Basel II and operational risk 
Keynote address by Dr R Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 10th 
SEACEN-FSI Regional Seminar for Bank Supervisors and Regulators, Colombo, 12 December 2005. 
 It  is  indeed  an  honour  to  have  been  invited  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  this  SEACEN  -  FSI 
Regional  Seminar  for  Bank  Supervisors  and  Regulators  on  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  and 
Operational  Risk.   I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  share  some  thoughts  on  this  important 
subject,  which  is currently  engaging  the  attention  of  the  Bank  regulators,  not  just  in  our region,  but 
worldwide.  I will first deal with why Basel II requires a separate capital allocation for operational risk 
and what it intends to accomplish.  Next, I will discuss how Basel II deals with operational risks and 
how it contributes to financial system stability.  Finally, I wish to mention a few steps regulators can 
take in preparation for adopting Basel II and mitigating operational risk.  
2.  Deregulation  and  globalization  of  financial  services,  together  with  the  growing  sophistication  of 
financial technology are making the activities of banks and their risk profiles more complex.  In this 
context,  not  only  well  known  credit,  interest  rate  and  market  risks,  but  also  other  risks  can  be 
substantial  and  threaten  the  stability  of  a  financial  system.  A  growing  number  of  high-profile 
operational losses worldwide have led banks and supervisors to increasingly view operational risk as 
an  integral  part  of  risk  management  policy.    Management  of  specific,  more  common  or  day-to-day 
operational  risks  is  not  a  new  practice;  it  has  always  been  important  for  banks  to  prevent  fraud, 
maintain the integrity of internal controls and reduce errors in data transaction processing, ensuring 
the availability of information technology infrastructure and their back up systems when needed. More 
often  than  not,  operational  risks  are  taken  as  given  and  very  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  it. 
Operational risk is intrinsic to financial institutions and it should be an important component of their 
firm-wide risk management systems. However, operational risk is harder to quantify and model than 
market and credit risks. Operational risk differs from other banking risks.  It is a risk that is not willfully 
incurred in return for an expected reward but is implicit in the ordinary course of banking business and 
has the potential to affect the risk management process.  However, ignorance of operational risks or 
failure  to  properly  manage  such  risk  can  result  in  a  misstatement  of  an  institution's  risk  profile  and 
expose the institution to significant losses.  Such institutions can become a regulatory burden. These 
and a few other factors have led the Basel Committee to recommend a separate capital for operational 
risk.  
3. Definition of operational risk has evolved rapidly over the past few years.  First, it was commonly 
defined as every type of unquantifiable risk faced by a bank, which has been refined considerably to 
include modern day risks. According to the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, operational risk 
is the “risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from 
external events”. This definition is based on the underlying causes of operational risk at the broadest 
level and includes legal risk, but it excludes strategic and reputational risks.  The Basel Committee has 
also asserted, “the most important types of operational risk involve breakdowns in internal controls and 
corporate governance.” That’s why Basel II aligns with a variety of other regulations and supporting 
frameworks  for  enhancing  corporate  governance.   'Management  of  operational  risk  is  thus  taken  to 
mean the 'identification, assessment and / or measurement, monitoring and control of mitigation of this 
risk.  While  many  of  these  risks  are  inherent  and  visible  in  day  to  day  operations  of  banks,  some 
components are applicable to supervisors and regulators.  
4. The banking industry’s awareness of operational risk and efforts to manage it have accelerated in 
recent years, driven in part by an increasing desire to improve operating efficiency, reduce earnings 
volatility,  rationalize  the  allocation  of  capital  between  competing  businesses.   It  is  not  easy  to  get 
banks to identify and assess the operational risk inherent in all material products, activities, processes 
and  systems  and  in  particular  to  follow  such  practices  when  new  products  are  introduced.   To 
encourage  banks  to  focus  attention  on  assessment  of  operational  risk  on  products  and  processes, 
regulators should be aware of new products, improvements in management information systems and 
computing  technology  that  have  opened  the  way  for  improved  operational  risk  measurement  and 
BIS Review 88/2005 
 1
management. In the next few years, financial institutions and their regulators will continue to develop 
various approaches for operational risk management and capital budgeting techniques.    
5.  Let  me  focus  on  some  key  areas  of  operational  risks  and  regulatory  responsibility  in  the 
interest of financial system stability.  
6. Sound management of operational risk is particularly important in payment, clearing, and settlement 
systems  as  such  risks  can  spread  across  systemically.   All  owners  and  operators  of  payments, 
clearing and settlement systems face operational risks but the degree may vary from system to system 
and from country to country. Operational problems in a payment, clearing, and settlement system may 
impede the control of, or even exacerbate, other types of risk such as market, liquidity, or credit risk in 
an  unanticipated  way  that  could  pose  a  systemic  risk,  resulting  in  participants  incurring  significant 
losses.  It  may  not  stop  there.   Payment  and  settlement  related  operational  risks  could  filter  into 
businesses  of  banks’  clients,  governments  and  the  country’s  international  correspondents  as  well.  
This aspect of banking operations was ignored for many years and it is fairly recently that regulators 
and banks started addressing payment and settlement related operational risks.  Today’s consensus is 
that payments, clearing, and settlement systems must be safe, reliable, efficient, and secure, which 
are  critical  to  financial  system  stability.  That’s  why  most  regulators,  the  central  banks  in  particular, 
have become owners and operators of clearing and settlement systems. Although the tendency is to 
outsource  this  function,  many  regulators  at  some  stage  or  other  have  owned  or  operated  these 
systems.  
7.  Another  technology  related  risk  is  the  desire  of  banks  to acquire  the  leading  edge  with propriety 
systems,  stand  alone  systems  and  specific  IT  systems.     Banks  tend  to  hang  onto  this  short-lived 
approach.  Individual  systems  are  costly  not  only  to  banks  themselves,  but  also  to  customers.  The 
norms  should  be  not  attracting  customers,  but  reducing  their  operational  risks  and  reduction  of 
transaction costs to customers. Both are often forgotten or ignored by banks and continuous reminding 
has  become  a  regulatory  responsibility.   Despite  moral  suasion  banks  in  many  countries  have  not 
realized  the  gains  of  having  common  ATM  platforms,  back-up  sites,  disaster  recovery  sites  and 
sharing of costs.  
8. It may also be necessary to for banks to recognize that different risks matter in different lines of 
businesses.  A comparison of business unit economic capital requirement by risk type indicates that 
operational risk is highest in fund management, private banking, and in retail banking when compared 
to corporate banking, insurance business (if banks are allowed to engage in). The new operational risk 
element is expected to hit banks specializing in areas - such as custodian arrangements and asset 
management.   The  regulators  should  be  mindful  of  high  operational  risks  in  these  businesses  and 
bring them to the attention of banks.     
9. Uncertainties, regulatory challenges in promoting banks 
In a lighter vein, operational risks can be categorized into two, i.e. man-made risks (mistakes, faulty 
models,  frauds,  terrorism,  wars  etc.,)  and  god-made  risks  (earthquakes,  floods,  Tsunami  disasters, 
electrical blackouts, telecom interruptions etc.)  Some of these are well known and banks handle them 
in their own ways.  Complexity of the assessment process and required changes to it, uncertainty in 
the  implementation  date  of  Basel  Accord,  the  US  and  some  European  banks’  attitude  towards 
implementing the Accord, variability in data reporting are a few factors that have created uncertainties 
in banks as well as regulators’ minds.  I believe that these challenges can be overcome if banks can 
be encouraged to adopt a systematic approach as set out in Basle II.  First and foremost, regulators 
have  to  get  banks  to  commit  to  a  risk  mitigation  cycle  which  consists  of  (a)  risk  diagnosis  (i.e. 
prioritization  of  objectives,  documentation  review/meetings  and  building  up  of  a  risk  control  culture 
profile); (b) risk identification within a framework; (c) risk assessment and preparation of action plan; 
and (d) risk reporting.    
10. The choice of the approach/models banks wish to adopt may have significant implications.  Score 
card, loss distributions and internet modeling are some of the popular risk models. All of them have 
implementation challenges, in particular, skills shortage, non-availability of reliable data and suitable IT 
systems.    In-house  training  courses  tailored  to  each  business  unit,  commitment  by  senior 
management  of  banks,  understanding  of  benefits  of  implementing  Basel  II  by  all  stakeholders  and 
hiring of right skills would help in mitigating skills shortage related risks. Regulators and supervisors 
have to be at it to assess progress within a reasonable  time frame.    
2 
 BIS Review 88/2005
11. Without data, there are no models and without models, the risk management capability is reduced. 
This does not mean that commonsense approach in handling matters should be discarded altogether.  
Given the heavy competition and highly leveraged nature of businesses, banks, at minimum, should 
record historical data for computing the probability of default loss, and operational risk losses.  This is 
a difficult task. The challenge for banks is to build up databases for operational losses, both historical 
and potential future losses. The challenge for regulators is to ensure that banks start collecting this 
type of data in a systematic manner.  Banks often see regulators as a pain in the neck due to constant 
nagging. Perhaps, moral suasion and organizing peer pressure might encourage banks. 
12.  Unbundling  risk  related  capital  charges  in  the  new  Basel  II  Capital  Accord  requires  an  explicit 
capital  charge  for  operational  risk.   Calculating  such  a  capital  charge  has  proved  extremely  difficult 
because  of  a  lack  of  an  accepted  methodology  and  credible  industry  data.   This  has  required  the 
adoption of a strategy to permit banks to use their own internal measurement approaches – subject to 
quantitative and qualitative criteria and, on a transitional basis, to a minimum or floor capital charge. 
Assessing and validating different internal risk mitigation measures would be a regulatory challenge.   
13.  The  Basel  Committee  has  put  forward  a  framework  consisting  of  three  options  for  calculating 
operational risk capital charges in a ‘continuum’ of increasing sophistication and risk sensitivity. There 
are  three  approaches  under  Pillar  I:  (i)  the  Basic  Indicator  Approach  for  Operational  Risk  I,  which 
requires  a  flat  rate  of  15%  or  a  fixed  percentage  of  gross  annual  income;    (ii)  the  Standardized 
Approach  for  Operational  Risk  II  which  requires  a  risk  charge  based  on  annual  income  per  each 
business line, multiplied by a risk factor per business line; and (iii) Advanced Measurement Approach 
for Operational Risk III which requires full reliance on bank’s internal risk management system subject 
to supervisory  review.  Many Central Banks including the Central Bank of Sri Lanka propose to initially 
allow banks to adopt the Basic Indicator Approach for computing regulatory capital for operational risk. 
They are expected to move along the range towards more sophisticated approaches as they develop 
acceptable operational risk management systems and practices, which meet the prescribed qualifying 
criteria.   According  to  DC  Independent  Survey  2003  and  KPMG’s  2nd  Global  Survey  on  Basel 
Readiness Assessment of 190 institutions in 19 countries, increasingly, banks appear to be moving 
towards  Advanced  Measurement  Approach  rather  than  Standardized  Approach  in  dealing  with 
operational  risk.  As  for  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  we  have  decided  to  follow  a  consultative 
process  while  implementing  Basel  II  norms  and  move  in  a  gradual,  sequential  and  co-coordinated 
manner,  for  which  dialogue  has  already  begun  with  the  banks.  A  steering  committee  comprising 
representatives of banks and supervisors is taking stock of all issues relating to its implementation.    
Here too, the regulators need to be on top of things to assess readiness of banks.    
14. Conclusion 
Let  me  sum up  the  key  messages  of  this  address.   Today,  the  degree  of  sophistication  in  financial 
markets urge all market participants, including regulators and supervisors, to increase their focus on 
risk  management  in  an  effort  to  build  more  robust  and  sound  financial  systems  and  to  position 
themselves  to  participate  more  fully  in  this  complex  and  fast-paced  financial  environment.   In  that 
sense,  Basel  II,  aiming  at  further  strengthening  of  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  international 
banking system, offers a unique opportunity to respond to all these concerns and pay attention to the 
main sources of risk and vulnerability that could pose challenges for the financial system stability. 
15.  Implementation  of  Basel  II  has  been  described  as  a  long  journey  rather  than  a  destination  by 
itself.   The journey is certainly tougher than we thought.  Undoubtedly, it would require commitment of 
substantial  capital  and  human  resources  on  the  part  of  banks  and  the  supervisors.  For  banks,  the 
main challenges appear to be the skills shortages and data inadequacies coupled with uncertainties 
regarding  costs  associated  with  implementation.    Banks  all  over  the  world  have  started  to  voice 
concerns over the mounting regulatory costs.  It is a regulatory responsibility to encourage banks to 
have a phased implementation programme starting from a traditional baseline scenario of identification 
of  operational  risks,  assessment,  and  awareness  monitoring  and  integrating  these  elements  over  a 
period.   Basle  II  implementation  and  operational  risk  mitigation  process  puts  heavy  burden  on 
supervisors to detect problems in banks, to stay on top of the latest advances in risk management and 
to avoid abuses of many powers that are given to supervisors.  All these are too much for supervisors 
to bear as many of us are still on the learning curve.  Exchange of information both within and outside 
the region would be very important particularly in capacity building for evaluation and validation of risk 
assessment models of banks.   This seminar is one such joint effort by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
BIS Review 88/2005 
 3
and the SEACEN Centre, which would provide a good opportunity to exchange information and learn 
from each other. 
16.  Basel  II  is  expected  to  foster  financial  stability  through  its  risk  sensitive  framework  through 
encouragement of banks to adopt improved risk management practices. Supervisors and regulators 
are  required  to  review  the  efficiency  of  banks’  risk  management  practices  and  capital  allocation 
methodologies,  and  empower  market  participants  to  make  informed  judgments  on  the  efficiency  of 
banks.   Despite  challenges,  many  researchers  suggest  that  Basel  II  leads  to  rising  rewards  and 
discipline in banking industry.  The indicators are that pay back for getting Basel II right and for looking 
beyond  mere  compliance  to  the  real  business  benefits  will  be  greater  than  originally  anticipated.  
Encouraging banks to understand and believe that enhanced economic capital framework would be 
the key to high performance is undoubtedly a regulatory challenge. 
17.  I  believe  the  deliberations  of  this  seminar  will  improve  our  knowledge  on  ways  and  means  of 
dealing with regulatory challenges posed by Basel II and operational risk mitigation measures.  I wish 
the seminar a success and thank you all for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 88/2005
