Christian Noyer: Productivity, competitiveness and globalisation 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the international symposium on 
“Productivity, competitiveness and globalisation”, Paris, 4 November 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  open  this  symposium,  which  brings  together  central  bankers  and 
representatives  of  international  institutions,  prominent  academics  and  high-ranking  managers  of 
private banks from both mature and emerging economies to discuss a subject that is of interest and 
concern to all. 
A  large  body  of  theoretical  and  empirical  literature  has  been  devoted  to  the  issues  of  productivity, 
competitiveness  and  globalisation  in  response  to major  macroeconomic  and  financial  changes.  The 
following changes, in particular, may be cited: the end of the catch-up with US productivity levels by 
the other industrialised countries, the emergence of new players in the international division of labour 
and  world  trade  and,  lastly,  the  considerable  increase  in  capital  flows.  The  Banque  de  France  has 
taken part in the research on these subjects through its work on productivity and offshoring. 
This rich body of work may now be summarised and the speakers at this symposium will contribute to 
this  in  the  course  of  three  sessions  and  a  round  table.  The  first  session,  chaired  by  Jean-Claude 
Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  will  focus  on  developments  in  productivity  and 
competitiveness and aim to present the main concepts and stylised facts in these areas. The second 
session,  chaired  by  Axel  Weber,  President  of  the  Bundesbank,  will  analyse  the  impact  of  these 
developments on international capital allocation and global imbalances. The third session, chaired by 
Rodrigo de Rato, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), will consider economic 
policy responses and the spontaneous adjustment of markets and economic agents. Lastly, the round 
table, chaired by Roger Ferguson, will draw out the consequences in terms of international financial 
stability.  Stanley  Fischer  has  agreed  to  take  on  the  difficult  task  of  summarising  this  symposium. 
Stanley, like a few others here, is a symbol in himself of the diverse backgrounds of the participants in 
this symposium: he is a former Professor at MIT, an ex-Deputy Managing Director of the IMF, ex-Vice-
Chairman of Citigroup and currently Governor of the Bank of Israel. 
As an introduction, I will touch briefly on a few of the questions raised by each of these sessions. 
The  first  session  will  consider  some  of  the  decisive  changes  in  trends  in  productivity  and 
competitiveness that occurred in the 1990s. First change: as from the mid-1990s, productivity growth 
accelerated  in  the  United  States  as  a  result  of  the  gains  arising  from  the  production  and  use  of 
information  and  communication  technologies  (ICT)  but  slowed  down  in  Europe  and  Japan.  For 
instance,  over  the  last  ten  years,  productivity  growth  in  Europe  has  been  more  than  one  annual 
percentage point below that of the United States. This gap may be ascribed to structural rigidities that 
are  thought  to  have  hampered  European  sectoral  specialisation  and  the  spread  of  information 
technologies,  while  labour  policies  designed  to  help  low-skilled  workers  re-enter  the  job  market 
reduced the measured growth of European productivity.  
Bart Van Ark, Professor at the University of Groningen and Director at the Conference Board, will kick 
off  the  discussions  of  the  first  session.  Bart  is  one  of  the  first  academics  to  have  described  these 
developments through studies based on international comparisons of macroeconomic or sectoral data. 
His research has brought to light the importance, in the European lag, of the lower gains in total factor 
productivity in ICT-producing sectors, and especially in the services that use these technologies. The 
European countries’ inadequate specialisation in ICT-producing sectors limits the gains that may be 
expected from the sharp drop in the cost of computing power. In addition, the difficulties that services 
using ICT have in making full use of these technologies could be traced to the structural rigidities of 
European labour and product markets. 
One  of  the  issues  raised  by  this  first  change  is  the  impact  of  these  developments  on  the 
competitiveness  of  the  mature  economies  and  on  capital  flows.  There  are  indeed  numerous  links 
between competitiveness and productivity. In the short term, relative changes in unit labour costs are a 
component of cost competitiveness. In the long term, according to Paul Krugman, the concept of the 
competitiveness  of  an  economy  merges with  that of  its productivity:  the  increase  in  the standard  of 
living in the United States, Japan or Europe, which, in keeping with Professor Laura d’Andrea Tyson’s 
BIS Review 80/2005 
 1
definition,  is  the  ultimate  indicator of  a  country’s competitiveness,  has  in  fact,  excluding  all  external 
factors, tracked developments in national productivity over several decades. In addition, the flexibility 
that  enables  an  economy  to  specialise  in  promising  sectors  determines  both  developments  in  its 
productivity  and  its  competitive position:  several  recent  studies  show  that  labour  or  product  market 
rigidities may thwart the emergence of an ICT-producing sector and limit the use of these technologies 
in the other sectors, which holds back productivity growth and the development of exports of products 
that are in high demand. 
Second  change:  the  advent  of  new  players  in  international  trade  of  goods  and  services  and 
international division of labour. Of course, this is not an unprecedented development – it has occurred 
several times since the Second World War, with Japan and also with the newly industrialised Asian 
countries. It has nevertheless taken on a new dimension due to the newcomers’ size and competitive 
edge, the liberalisation of capital flows and the decrease in transport and communication costs. The 
new international division of labour thus affects every stage of the production process; it influences the 
localisation  of  added  value  and  raises  the  question  of  the  financing  of  the  external  imbalances  of 
economies that focus on the design and marketing of products rather than their manufacture.  
The  second  session  will  deal  with  the  impact  of  trends  in  productivity  and  competitiveness  on 
international  capital  allocation  and  global  imbalances.  These  trends  may  have  contributed  to  the 
increase in global imbalances reflected in current account balances, and highlight several paradoxes.  
The first paradox is that of the US economy, which combines the structural surge in its productivity 
with a possible loss in competitiveness illustrated by the increase in its external deficit. This paradox is 
perhaps only apparent if we consider that the improvement in the US’ relative productivity performance 
is mainly in the non-tradable sector and as compared to the industrialised rather than the emerging 
economies.  In  addition,  while  this  pick-up  in  productivity  does  boost  the  profitability  of  investments, 
logically,  it  goes  hand  in  hand  with  an  excess  of  investment  over  national  savings  that  calls  for 
increasing foreign capital inflows. 
However, the predominant nature of capital inflows to the United States changed at the start of the 
2000s, switching from mainly purchases of equities and foreign direct investment by the private sector 
to  purchases  of  government  securities by  central  banks,  which  are  not  motivated  by  the  search  for 
increased profitability. 
This leads us to the second paradox, a twin to the first, i.e. financing mature economies’ expenditure 
with world savings. Does this situation correspond to the efficient allocation of capital and if not how do 
we explain it? 
More  generally,  is  there  any  likelihood  that  a  chain  that  hinders  balancing  mechanisms  has  been 
established? The foreign exchange intervention operations carried out by several central banks help to 
finance the US budget and external deficits. In the United States, the corresponding maintenance of 
long-term interest rates at a low level fosters the US domestic savings-investment imbalance. In the 
Asian countries, and particularly China, the increase in trade surpluses and its corollary, the worsening 
of  the  US  imbalance,  exerts  upward  pressure  on  the  currencies  while  swelling  foreign  exchange 
reserves  increase  the  costs  of  an  appreciation  vis-à-vis  the  US  dollar.  Does  this  configuration 
correspond to a mutually advantageous and sustainable situation?  
In  this  second  session,  Bill  White,  Economic  Adviser  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  will 
clarify these paradoxes in the light of the work carried out by the latter organisation, which makes a 
vital contribution to the analysis and promotion of macro-financial stability.  
In  the  third session, which  will  tackle economic  policy  adjustment  and responses  to  the  increase  in 
global imbalances, we will examine private and public players’ ability to adapt to the current situation. 
Can  the  behaviour of  private  agents,  through  a  change  in  their savings or  the  redirection  of  capital 
flows,  lead  to  a  spontaneous  decrease  in  global  imbalances  without  engendering  destabilising 
adjustments  on  the  financial  markets?  More  specifically,  can  greater  foreign  exchange  flexibility  in 
certain areas, and particularly the emerging economies, help to restore some balance? In Europe and 
Japan, we expect an increase in potential output following structural reforms on financial, product and 
labour markets. Beyond the mechanical effect of a reduction in the growth differential, what would be 
the  impact  on  capital  flows?  In  the  United  States,  bearing  in  mind  the  savings  behaviour of  private 
agents,  what  lever  should  be  used  in  addition  to  the  tightening  of  the  policy  mix  to  substantially 
improve the savings-investment balance? Lastly, could international institutions play a bigger role in 
the management of global imbalances? 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2005
In this third session, Otmar Issing, former Professor at the University of Würzburg and Member of the 
Executive Board of the European Central Bank, will explore the avenues for finding a way out of the 
current global imbalances notably by presenting the analyses developed by his institution in the areas 
of fiscal and foreign exchange policy and structural reform.  
The  last  session  will  focus  on  the  consequences  of  these  developments  for  international  financial 
stability against the backdrop of the liberalisation, the increase in and redirection of capital flows. The 
emerging  economies  have  on  several  occasions  borne  the  brunt  of  erratic  capital  flows.  The  Asian 
crisis of 1997 thus brought to light the risks associated with the accelerated liberalisation of short-term 
capital  flows,  particularly  where  prudential  supervision  structures  were  inadequate.  What  is  the 
appropriate global financial integration policy for an emerging economy? For mature economies, the 
LTCM investment fund crisis in 1998 illustrated not only the risks of the spill-over of crises in emerging 
areas  but  also  the  fragility  created  by  the  advent  of  new  players  and  the  development  of  financial 
derivative instruments. This fragility was further underscored by the failure of Enron in 2001. What are 
the  prudential  issues  at  stake  in  the  recent  developments  in  financial  markets,  particularly  in  the 
greater interdependence of national markets, the emergence of new instruments and new categories 
of economic operators in a context of increasing trading volumes?  
To  find  answers  to  some  of  these  questions,  the  last  session  will  take  the  form  of  a  round  table 
bringing together speakers from mature and emerging economies at different stages of integration into 
international trade, be they central bankers and/or from the private sector. It will afford an opportunity 
to  discuss  the  consequences  of  the  increasing  global  imbalances  on  international  financial  stability. 
Stanley Fischer will then provide a summary of the day’s work. 
It remains for me, Ladies and Gentlemen, to express my wish for this symposium to enable the further 
development and convergence of assessments of the current state of affairs and of economic policies. 
I wish you a fruitful day of discussions and now give the floor to President Jean-Claude Trichet. 
BIS Review 80/2005 
 3
