Mr  Ardian  Fullani:  Towards  a  solid,  sound  and  efficient  banking  system  in 
Albania 
Greeting  address  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  5th  anniversary 
ceremony of the privatisation of the National Commercial Bank, Tirana, 18 October 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Today I am honoured to see in this jubilee meeting how the National Commercial Bank has grown and 
consolidated and together with it the whole banking system in Albania. I am delighted to consider that 
after a long restructuring period the banking system is now taking its proper role in the economy, that 
of the provision of free funds to the growing needs of the Albanian business and consumer, improving 
at the same time the number and quality of services. 
For this reason, I am honoured to have the opportunity of taking the floor in this meeting, to address 
and discuss jointly with you some present and future issues, which, I estimate, are important for the 
further enhancement of the banking system contribution to the country’s economic development.  
Allow  me  to  start  discussing  first  about  the  work  we  are  doing  as  Bank  of  Albania  to  create  a 
favourable climate for the business and economy development.  
Monetary policy followed during the recent years in succession has targeted to further reduce money 
price in order to give aspiration to the economy, while we have been successful in keeping inflation 
under  control.  As  a  consequence,  I  deem  that  we  have  created  essential  incentives  towards 
establishing  a  sustained  business  climate  where  business  decisions  and  plans  are  not  exposed  to 
risks arising from the uncertainty of inflationary erosion.  
Since almost a decade, Bank of Albania has been engaged in using all the capabilities to set up a 
modern payment infrastructure, in order to bring the banking system closer to the clients, making it 
open in relations with them. Thus, after implementing the Real Time Gross Settlements (RTGS) and 
Automated Electronic Clearing House (AECH) systems, we have already mobilised all our efforts to 
create the credit register. Currently, after the implementation of AECH system, we have provided one 
more  opportunity  not  only  to  the  banking  system  but  also  to  periodic  service  businesses,  so  as  to 
enhance its economic efficiency. On this occasion, we appeal to both parties, banks and businesses, 
to  cooperate  with  each  other  for  making  more  effectively  use  of  the  priorities  provided  by  this  new 
system.  
Bank of Albania deems that a banking system supports the economic growth when it is first of all a 
financially sound system. The emerging economies, like our economy, are generally characterized by 
a fragile stability. For this reason, Bank of Albania has attempted to take all-encompassing measures 
aiming  at  strengthening  its  supervisory  capacities,  in  order  to  ensure  a  solid,  sound  and  efficient 
banking system.    
The banking system performance: 
During 2005 impressive developments have been highlighted. The up-to-now data indicate that credit 
to  the  economy  has  increased  by  about  3-4  percentage  points  of  GDP,  giving  clear  signals  for  a 
promissory  excitement  of  the  economy  financing  in  the  future.  Till  August  2005,  compared  to  last 
year’s end,  the  system  assets  increased  further by  14.5  per  cent,  while  there  was  augmentation  of 
banking products as well as extension of their network. Compared to yearend of 2004, the banking 
system  has  attained  an  increasing  profit  level,  at  ALL  4.65  per  cent.  Return  on  equity  (ROE)  has 
resulted  24.8  per  cent,  while  credit  quality  expressed  as  a  ratio  between  (net)  bad  credit  and  total 
credit portfolio is only 2.39 per cent, from 4.2 per cent it was at the end of 2004. However, there is no 
room  to  be  excited  by  figure  euphoria,  because  credits  are  still  new  and  their  quality  will  have  to 
carefully be examined.   
Another significant development of the banking system relates to the client’s service, which through 
the electronic terminals is being obviously accompanied   by the increased number of electronic cards 
in circulation. Banks already provide debit and credit cards in cooperation with international companies 
such  as  Visa  Card,  MasterCard  and  Diners  Club.  Six  banks  provide  the  ATM  service  and  ATMs 
   1/4 
reached the number of 180 by the end of August 2005, while points of sale reached the number of 
391. 
Of course, an important aspect remains also the further expansion and consolidation of the banking 
system. The geographical extension of territory coverage by the banking business, the strengthening 
of competitiveness, the introduction of new products without mentioning other recent developments, 
constitute an additional argument in the vital role the banking system has and will have to play in the 
future. The country’s map covering the banking business expanded further, including new regions ever 
covered before. At the end of August, the total number of branches reached 109 or 21 branches more 
than the end of the previous year. 
I seize the opportunity of this event to express that positive assessments about the banking system 
have been given also in the report prepared by both the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, 
after  conclusion  of  the  assessment  they  formulated  on  the  financial  system  in  Albania  (FSAP).  
Of course, this is good news. The conclusions of FSAP, of this important international passport, are an 
indication  of  our  earlier  conclusions  that  the  Albanian  financial  system  is  characterized  by  a 
supervised  and  effective  banking  system  and  by  the  other  segments  that  are  still  in  the  initial 
development stages where the core issue remains their regulation and supervision.  
Despite  the  positive  developments  there  is  still  much  to  do.  The  degree  of  financial  intermediation 
continues to be relatively low (about 11 per cent of GDP). Some economy sectors, like agriculture, still 
continue  to  be  less  or  not  at  all  credited.  The  contribution  of  bank  crediting  to  the  production 
investments is still low and furthermore, considering the high share the credit takes in supporting trade 
activity, we can come out with the conclusion that the major part of credit is going for the financing of 
imports. Likewise, the degree of using the banking system is not within the required parameters of the 
time and, furthermore, the degree of cash use continues to be high.  
In  addition,  the  financial  markets  continue  to  remain  superficial  and  subject  of  speculations.  The 
restricted alternatives of investing free funds are indeed a reason to this situation. The financing of 
budget deficit continues to be still as the best alternative. However, the banking system should think 
seriously of enriching the market with other instruments rather than of using at maximum this riskless 
investment.  
To  be  more  concrete,  I  will  highlight  further  on  some  directions,  which,  I  think,  in  the  medium-term 
perspective are of priority to further stimulate and activate the bank credit in the economy, as the main 
instrument  through  which  the  banking  system  promotes  the  economic  development  of  a  market 
economy.   
Beginning  with  the  Bank  of  Albania  contribution,  it  relates  first  to  the  duty  of  meeting  the  legal 
obligations to achieve the overall macroeconomic stability with a special emphasis on inflation control. 
We remain determined in our position that inflation under control is a valuable contribution to achieve 
the  objectives  of  the  country’s  economic  growth, the  enhancement  of  employment  and of  the  living 
standard in general.    
On  the  other  side,  Bank  of  Albania  will  encourage  and  support  without  any  hesitation  the  further 
development  and  consolidation  of  the  banking  system  in  particular,  and  of  the  financial  sector  in 
general.  We  are  deeply  committed  to  undertake  the  necessary  steps  to  implement  all  the 
recommendations given by FSAP. For this purpose, we are ready to offer all our human capacities to 
contribute  in  this  direction.  I  use  this  opportunity  to  appeal  on  taking  immediate  actions  towards 
redesigning the licensing and supervisory process of the other parts of the financial sector.    
Bank  of  Albania  will  continue  to  pursue  a  prudential  policy  in  performing  its  function  as  a  licensing 
authority  of  financial  entities  that  are  involved  in  the  crediting  activities.  In  the  spirit  of  what  I  have 
stated above, I use the opportunity to express our commitment to involve in our supervisory structure 
all those credit companies or institutions, which one way or another mobilise the population’s funds or 
manage public funds in the crediting process.    
Assessing the information issue as a critical element in facilitating the lending activity, I would like to 
point out that Bank of Albania has already included the project of establishing the credit register in its 
immediate  plans  and  we  are  strongly  committed  to  implement  it  as  soon  as  possible.  This  register 
shall be under administration of Bank of Albania and the participation of other member banks of the 
system will be compulsory. Only in this way, the information evasion can be minimized as well as its 
integrity can be ensured, and it would be simultaneously available for each of member banks of the 
system.  
   2/4 
Being aware that credit issue is complex and connected with many obstacles arising from inaccuracy 
and misadministration of the mortgage system, from deficiencies in the civil procedure for mortgage 
execution,  which  make  the  operation  of  Executor  Office  difficult  in  administering  correctly  these 
procedures, we will undertake initiatives aiming at enhancing the effectiveness of mortgage system, as 
a guaranteeing and selective instrument of great importance.  
The  banking  system  has  a  primary  role  in  creating  a  warm  climate  in  the  relationships  between 
business and bank.    
Above all, I would like to request that the banking system be more transparent and open to the public. 
Transparency is one of the most important factors, which strengthens the relations between client and 
bank  and,  furthermore,  it  gives  a  wider  meaning  to  the  reciprocity  concept  in  the  bilateral  relations 
bank-depositor  and  bank-business.  I  think  that  most  of  the  common  people  still  manifest  a  certain 
hesitation to refer to banks. One cause might be also the lack of detailed information. Banks should be 
more active, not only for advertising new products and services, but also for explaining more correctly 
the prices/costs they hold and the necessary requirements that are to be met for their benefit. There 
are not a few cases when clients are not well informed on the interest rate they have to pay for their 
loans  or  on  the  criteria  applied  by  the  banks  to  benefit  credit.  Communication  from  depositors  is 
neither the best. While small changes of deposit interests may be justified by the changes of market 
conditions,  changes  somewhat  stronger  need  to  be  accompanied  by  full  relevant  information  and 
explanations. The strengthening of this transparency should be accomplished not only in the name of 
ethics but also in the name of the increase of market competition.  
The  system  can  play  a  greater  role  in  reducing  cash  in  the  economy,  by  increasing  and  improving 
further  the  level  of  services.  The  positive  recent  developments  have  given  their  effects  in  reducing 
cash quantity in the economy. On the other hand, we have conducted an intense public activity, of 
informative and promotional character, where meetings of another nature have frequently been held 
and in which we were concretely involved as a banking system. Allow me just to remind you the open 
meetings we have already organised with the business of utility services and with that of Treasury bills 
primary  market.  I  hope  that  now,  after  finalising  the  Automated  Electronic  Clearing  House  project, 
each bank should think seriously of increasing the benefit degree from this new facility offered by the 
Bank  of  Albania.  After  the  implementation  of  this  project,  I  estimate  that  we  should  think  more 
seriously of increasing the number and the quality of electronic payments. For this purpose, I would 
appeal  to  start  thinking  from  this  moment  on  of  future  projects  in  the  payment  infrastructure.  I 
personally will insist that even in this direction we should focus as a banking system on the European 
Union  directives,  so  that  to  orient  every  step  in  the  future  towards  the  country’s  integration  in  the 
European  Union.  Short  time  ago  I  was  informed  about  a  new  initiative  of  EU,  which  requires 
establishing within a certain period of time, a unified payment system within the euro area, including 
payments  with  cards.  For  this  purpose,  I  would  suggest  that  respective  specialists  from  the 
Association and Bank of Albania be informed as soon as possible about this project and they should 
come  out  with  their  relevant  suggestions.  Also,  I  remain  persistent  in  my  position  that  we  have  to 
adopt  in  Albania  the  most  advanced  solutions  for  all  the  infrastructure  projects  we  are  going  to 
implement. I believe that we don’t need to examine and consider old-fashioned models, which besides 
the initial cost would require all the time new funds for their maintenance and modification. 
In addition, now when the public administration became a client of the system, I think that there are 
real opportunities to solve the payments of utility services through the banking system.  
Returning  to  the  financial  markets,  I  think  that  in  spite  of  the  above-mentioned  restrictions  there  is 
room for improving competitiveness among banks even under the current conditions. I would like to 
draw your attention on the following topics: 
• 
The system should be more active and keep its public promises to put its windows at 
the  service  of  selling  Treasury  bills  directly  to  the  interested  public.  We  as  Bank  of 
Albania  have  kept  our  promises,  applying  a  commission,  which  is  supposed  to  cover  the 
transaction cost, while this measure will be accompanied by the inhibition of cash receipts at 
the Bank of Albania windows. Also, banks should invest in modern technology to enable the 
reallocation  of  funds  of  their  customers  in  various  investment  alternatives,  by  electronic 
means and not as it happens more frequently today that individuals still move carrying cash 
bags. 
Banks should be more active in the T-bills secondary market. We should clearly inform 
the public that whoever is interested can discount his/her bills at any time like each individual 
    3/4 
  who has put little money aside can refer to the banking system not only to deposit but also to 
purchase Treasury bills.    
The interbank market can and must improve. Nowadays, commercial banks exchange a 
big  quantity  of  liquidity  with  the  central  bank.  But,  even  exchange  of  this  liquidity  among 
commercial  banks  must  be  intensified.  This  would  ensure  more  financing  and  investing 
opportunities for individuals and companies, including banks.  
Banks should give more attention to foreign exchange and Treasury bills markets, to 
further  deepen  and  expand  them.  Thus,  besides  the  introduction  of  new  financial 
instruments, it would be also necessary to activate the utilisation of the existing instruments. 
These  improvements  would  be  for  the  benefit  of  the  economy  in  general,  that  is  for  the 
benefit  of  individuals,  companies  and  banks  themselves,  but  also  of  the  central  bank  and 
government.  Thus,  individuals  will  have  more  opportunities  to  invest  their  savings, 
companies would have to make better use of new business activities, banks would have to 
gain higher benefits and the central bank with government would become more efficient in 
implementing their policies.  
Allow me now to concentrate myself a little bit on the honoured businessmen guests, who, in spite of 
the  modest  financial  support  offered  in  the  beginning  of  transition  period,  have  showed  a  really 
impressive performance. In my position as Governor of one of the most important institutions in the 
decision-making of economic policies, I would like to present you, using the opportunity of this event, 
some  suggestions  that  I  sincerely  hope  you  will  welcome  and  well-understand.  First  of  all,  I  would 
require  more  professional  performance  in  the  relations  between  businesses  and  banks.  Without 
exaggerating, I would say that we are still far away from the best practices and standards, and as a 
consequence  all  the  economic,  political,  financial,  social  segments  still  leave  to  be  desired.  The 
relations to be established between you and banks should be reciprocal, open and legal cooperative 
relations. More concretely, business should understand that bank is an integral part of its activity, if it 
is willing to be successful for a long-term period.  
Finally,  I  would  encourage  more  institutionalised  links  of  the  banking  system  with  various 
business organisations. Maybe it is time that Association of banks establishes regular contacts with 
business representations, contacts that would certainly upgrade the relations between business and 
bank to a higher level.   
Also, I use the opportunity to renew the Bank of Albania commitment to participate in this initiative by 
offering its expertise in projects, round tables, forums, debates, etc., which will aim at improving the 
business climate as well as increasing and channelling more efficiently the bank credit.  
Thank you. 
 
   4/4 
