T T Mboweni: A financial and economic review of the year 
Remarks by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Annual Dinner in 
honour  of  the  Ambassadors  and  High  Commissioners  accredited  to  the  Republic  of  South  Africa, 
Pretoria, 24 November 2005.  
 Your Excellency, the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps 
Your Excellencies, Ambassadors and High Commissioners 
Your Excellency, the Chief of State Protocol 
Your Excellencies, Heads of International Organisations represented in the Republic of South Africa 
Deputy Governors of the South African Reserve Bank 
Senior officers of the South African National Defence Force 
Senior Management of the South African Reserve Bank and their spouses/partners 
Editors and other media representatives 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Dear Friends 
Welcome once again to this annual dinner in honour of the Ambassadors and High Commissioners 
accredited to the Republic of South Africa. It has been yet another challenging year for South Africa on 
many  fronts,  and  although  you  are  no  doubt  familiar  with  many  of  these  issues,  I  wish  to  highlight 
briefly the most noteworthy international and domestic financial and economic developments that have 
transpired since the Bank was honoured by your presence last year. 
Economic  and  financial  conditions  in  the  international  economy  have  remained  generally  benign  in 
recent months although there have been a number of challenges. Led primarily by China, India and 
the United States, the world economy continued to grow at a solid rate although growth projections for 
2005 in most countries have been revised downward slightly – with the important exceptions of key 
Asian  economies.  The  major  global  imbalances,  such  as  the  difference  between  the  US  and  Asian 
propensities to save, show no significant signs of reversal. However, underlying inflationary pressures 
in most countries generally have remained muted, resulting in little transmission of price pressures to 
the South African economy. 
Real gross domestic product growth in the US economy remained strong during the first three quarters 
of 2005. However, real economic growth in the euro area, South Africa’s largest trading partner, was 
comparatively disappointing, while growth in most developing countries exceeded expectations. The 
relatively  strong  world  economy,  favourable  prices  of  commodity  exports  and  improved  policies 
contributed  to  an  acceleration  in  growth  on  the  African  continent.  Non-oil  commodity  prices  have 
continued  to  rise  during  2005,  with  strong  demand  for  metals  from  the  US  and  China  -where  the 
manufacturing and construction sectors are recording robust growth - driving prices higher. Prices of 
iron ore, copper and uranium in particular have risen significantly in recent months. The gold price in 
dollar terms has also shown a significant increase over the same period as a result of fears of rising 
global  inflation;  concerns  about  geopolitical  security;  mounting  speculation  regarding  a  possible 
reversal in central bank gold sales; declining mining supply; and strong fabrication demand for gold.  
Global real gross domestic product grew by about 5 per cent in 2004 and is projected to increase by 
4½ per cent in 2005. Growth in some of the developed economies slowed in the second quarter of 
2005  while  emerging-market  economies  continued  to  record  robust  growth.  However,  to  date  the 
impact on global growth of higher oil prices has been moderate, reflecting in part the fact that higher oil 
prices have been  largely  the  result  of  strong  global  demand.  Even  though  core  inflation rates  have 
remained  benign,  overall  inflation  rates  in  most  countries  have  already  increased  somewhat  in 
response  to  the  sharp  rise  in  oil  prices.  The  world  economic  outlook  therefore  remains  somewhat 
clouded by large global imbalances and rising crude oil prices. 
Crude oil prices have risen significantly over the past year and have on occasion touched US$70 per 
barrel. This can mainly be related to robust demand for oil emanating from particularly the economies 
of China and the US, notable supply side shocks emanating from the hurricane season, and continued 
geopolitical  concerns.  The  oil  price  is  likely  to  continue  exhibiting  considerable  volatility  and  is 
expected to remain at relatively high levels in the near term mainly due to strong demand and supply-
side  tightness.  The  rise  in  global  energy  prices  will  continue  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  the 
purchasing power of households and international inflation is likely to continue edging upwards in the 
BIS Review 81/2005 
 1
next few months. World inflation is projected to increase to 3,9 per cent in 2005 from 3,7 per cent in 
2004.  Fortunately,  relatively  well-anchored  inflationary  expectations  and  declining  oil  intensity  in 
production have served to soften the blow to the global economy so far. Single-digit inflation – and low 
single-digits , at that – is the norm for the overwhelming majority of countries represented here tonight. 
If  the  oil  price  continues  to  escalate,  second-round  effects  of  price  rises  could  become  more 
prominent,  thus  leading  to  a  further  acceleration  in  global  inflation.  However,  the  short-  to  medium 
term  global  inflation  outlook  remains  positive,  particularly  in  view  of  the  fact  that  inflationary 
expectations remain  somewhat well anchored  and  output  gaps  in  most countries  are not subject  to 
undue pressure. Notwithstanding these slightly adverse developments, global economic expansion is 
expected to remain broadly on track against the background of continued supportive global financial 
conditions.  
Turning to developments in South Africa, it is pleasing to note that the record upswing in economic 
activity continues apace. What is particularly gratifying is that the rapid expansion in economic activity 
in the second quarter of this year marked the twenty-third consecutive quarter of uninterrupted growth 
since the economy began the current upswing in 1999. This is the longest upswing in the recorded 
economic history of our country, and is a truly remarkable achievement given the domestic, regional 
and international challenges that have confronted South Africa during the course of the upswing.  
The consolidation of inflation at low levels has enhanced macroeconomic stability and contributed to 
the strong growth in the South African economy and the record upswing is testimony to an increasingly 
stable and transparent macro-economic policy framework that has been developed meticulously over 
the  past  decade.  This  has  resulted  in  increasing  levels  of  domestic  and  international  investor 
confidence  in  South  Africa  that  augurs well  for  the  domestic economic  growth outlook.  Allow  me  to 
highlight  a  number  of  the  most  important  domestic  developments  since  I  had  the  privilege  of 
addressing you last year. 
A  significant  milestone  was  reached  at  the  end  of  last  year  when  the  rand  was  included  in  the 
Continuous  Linked  Settlement  (CLS)  system  –  currently  being  one  of  only  15  currencies  settling 
through  CLS.  It  is  now  possible  to  make  a  payment  here  in  South  Africa  and  have  it  immediately 
transferred to a beneficiary abroad in one of the other 14 currencies’ areas without the risks attached 
to delay in settlement. 
The  sustained  capital  inflows  into  the  country  have  allowed  for  a  continued  build-up  of  the  official 
foreign reserves and have contributed to increased exchange rate stability. The South African Reserve 
Bank’s gross reserves now stand at almost US$20 billion - more than US$5 billion higher than a year 
ago. This was despite a fairly large deficit on the current account of the balance of payments. As you 
are  aware,  South  Africa  currently  imports  more  than  it  exports.  This  is  to  be  expected,  given  the 
growing  economy  which  requires  more  capital  goods  –  often  imports  –  and  which  allows  for  more 
consumption,  some  of  which  also  involves  purchases  of  imported  goods.  However,  the  financial-
account inflows have exceeded the current account shortfall.  
Your  Excellencies  would  know  only  too  well  that  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  has  depreciated 
somewhat,  on  balance,  since  the  end  of  last  year.  Against  the  US  dollar,  for  instance,  the  rand 
depreciated notably: a US dollar cost less than R5,70 towards the end of last year, but currently would 
put you back about R6,60. Against a basket of currencies, the rand has depreciated by roughly 6 per 
cent since the end of last year. The relatively moderate amplitude of the exchange rate movements of 
the rand – against a basket of currencies, at least – should be welcomed. 
Prices in the financial and real-estate markets have reached new record highs. The financial and real-
estate markets remained buoyant, but with the changed outlook for mortgage interest cost, the rate of 
increase in real estate prices, which at times exceeded 35 per cent on a year-on-year basis, tapered 
off over the course of 2005. Its most recent reading is still a quite strong 16 per cent. So embassy 
property must have turned out to be well-performing investments indeed.  
The  price  stability  objective  in  South  Africa  continues  to  be  strongly  supported  by  government’s 
management  of  its  financial  affairs  with  the  National  Government  Budget  for  fiscal  2005/06  again 
formulated  within  a  framework  of  fiscal  discipline  but  with  more  emphasis  on  infrastructure 
development and a budget deficit for 2005/06 now projected to amount to only 1,0 per cent of GDP, 
compared to the 3,1 per cent of GDP projected in February. 
The government debt consolidation process has allowed the cost of borrowing to decline markedly. 
Even  though  debt  issuance  has  increased  since  2003/04,  sound  debt  management  has  been  such 
that  new  issuance  is  spread  across  the  maturity  spectrum  of  the  yield  curve.  The  latter  normalised 
somewhat  in  recent  months  owing,  among  other  things,  to  the  fact  that  the  National  Treasury 
increased supply at the longer end of the curve. 
With  the  cost  of  borrowing  falling  as  dramatically  as  it  has,  the  bond  market  has  become  a  more 
appealing  corporate  finance  tool  and,  as  such,  corporate  bond  and  commercial  paper  listings  have 
become  more  popular.  The  corporate  bond  market  has  increased  considerably  in  size  – expanding 
from just under R40 billion in 2002 to over R130 billion today – an increase of over 200 per cent! 
The  improvement  in  South  Africa’s  long-term  foreign  currency  debt  rating  from  BB  (high  risk, 
speculative grade credit) in 1994 to BBB+ in 2005 (investment grade rating), made South Africa’s debt 
much more attractive to the international investing community. The most recent upgrades by Fitch and 
Standard and Poor’s contributed towards tighter spreads on South African debt. The yield spreads on 
South African foreign-currency denominated bonds continue to remain substantially lower than those 
of emerging markets in general (the Emerging Market Bond Index), indicating that investors share the 
confidence  expressed  by  international  rating  agencies  and  regard  South  Africa  in  an  increasingly 
positive light in comparison to competitors.  
Non-residents have been very active participants in the domestic bond and equity markets this year. 
Non-resident participation in trading on the Bond Exchange, measured as the sum of their purchases 
and sales as a percentage of total purchases and sales of bonds, increased markedly from a level of 
about 9 per cent in early 2004 to as high as 18,9 per cent in early 2005. Furthermore, non-resident 
participation in share trading on the JSE averaged approximately 20 per cent in both 2004 and 2005 
thus far.  
The Eurorand bond market witnessed a flurry of activity this year, with a total net issuance size for 
2005 of close to R6 billion, the highest net issuance since 1999. The issuance of rand-denominated 
bonds by non-resident borrowers in the Japanese Uridashi market also continued to grow during 2005. 
Rand-denominated bonds were first issued in that market in July 2004 and total issues for that year 
amounted  to  R2,5  billion,  while  issuance  amounted  to  R7,5  billion  in  2005.  The  demand  for  rand-
denominated bonds issued by highly rated non-resident institutions contributed positively to the value 
of both the rand and domestic bonds.  
We  also  witnessed  some  secondary  listings  of  foreign  companies  on  the  JSE  Limited  and  the  first 
listing of a non-resident bank on the Bond Exchange, again displaying confidence in South Africa (the 
relations between South Africa and so many countries in the rest of the global village, evidenced by 
the  number  of  embassies  and  high  commissions  stationed  in  South  Africa,  bears  testimony  to  this 
confidence). 
The  South  African  banking  sector  benefited  greatly  from  the  improved  macroeconomic conditions – 
profitability, efficiency and the asset quality of banks improved despite continued strong growth in the 
total loan book. An important structural change also occurred in South Africa’s banking sector after an 
international bank obtained a controlling share of a major local bank by means of the largest single 
foreign  direct  investment  into  South  Africa  to  date  –  together  with  other  significant  foreign  direct 
investment announcements which are also indicative of an increasingly positive investment outlook for 
South Africa.  
Broadening access to financial services and targeted investment remain high priorities on the agenda 
for  South  Africa  and  our  financial  sector,  and  the  Bank  continued  to  monitor  and  support  new 
initiatives.  In  terms  of  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  banking  sector  and  the 
Department of Housing, the banking sector will advance R42 billion in low-income housing finance by 
2008. 
The  Bank  continued  to  make  a  significant  contribution  to  economic  co-operation  in  Africa  by  for 
expample liaising closely with the Association of African Central Banks regarding the implementation 
of the African Monetary Cooperation Programme and participating in an ongoing study outlining the 
costs  and  benefits  of  the  creation  of  a  common  central  bank  for  Lesotho,  Namibia,  Swaziland  and 
South Africa (the decisions in this regard will be taken by the political leaders of these countries).  
In  February  2005  the  Bank  hosted  a  Seminar  with  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  attended  by 
Southern African Development Community (SADC) Central Banks in which views on the road towards 
a Single Central Bank for SADC were discussed against the background of the ECB experience. The 
MoU on the Harmonisation of Legal and Operational frameworks of SADC Central Banks was finally 
approved  by  Ministers  for  Finance  at  their  meeting  held  on  5  August  2005  after  extensive 
consultations. At their September 2005 meeting, the Committee of Central Bank Governors (CCBG) in 
Information  and 
SADC  signed  Memoranda  of  Understating  (MoUs)  on  Exchange  Control, 
Communications Technology and Payment, Clearing and Settlement Systems. 
In May 2005, the Bank was privileged to host the first Financial Stability Forum (FSF) African Regional 
Meeting.  Participants  included  ministers  of  finance,  governors  of  central  banks  and  senior  officials 
from  finance  ministries,  central  banks  and  regulatory  authorities  from  various  countries  in  Africa  as 
well as members of the FSF.  
In  June  2005  the  Bank  participated  in  workshops  on  a  SADC  cross-border  settlement  model.  The 
Bank, in conjunction with other central banks in the SADC region, is investigating options to facilitate 
the settlement of cross-border payments within the region.  
The  Bank  contributed  significantly  to  the  development  and  deployment  of  the  Bank  Supervision 
Application solution, a computerised system which was developed on behalf of SADC and some East 
African countries. This application was deployed in all eleven participating countries and is utilised to 
supervise commercial banks and other financial institutions.  
International involvement obviously extends beyond Africa and the Bank continued participating and 
collaborating in the activities of a number of international organisations, central banks and universities. 
For example, a highly successful G-20 seminar on economic growth, co-hosted by the Bank along with 
the People’s Bank of China and the Banco de México, was held in Pretoria in August 2005, and the 
findings were discussed at the meeting of deputy finance ministers and deputy central bank governors 
in China in September and ultimately at the meeting of finance ministers and governors in October at 
the Grand Epoch City, Xianghe, Hebei Province, China. 
In August I mentioned in my address to shareholders of the Bank that closer economic co-operation in 
the SADC region and the African continent will increasingly become a key strategic focus area in the 
years ahead. The Bank has for example during the course of the year once again rendered technical 
assistance to various other central banks in the region. The pursuit of price stability will nevertheless 
remain the primary objective of the Bank. The consolidation of inflation at lower levels and with lower 
variability is by far the most important contribution the Bank can make to the economic development of 
South Africa and by implication that of the subcontinent.  
Of particular importance therefore from a monetary policy perspective is that CPIX-inflation remains 
within the target range of 3 to 6 per cent. Considerable success has been achieved in pursuit of major 
policy objectives and the South African Reserve Bank remains committed to ensuring that the hard-
won gains in the fight against inflation are not forfeited. Inflation has extended its stay within the 3-to-
6-per-cent target range to 26 months – more recently amid a strongly growing domestic economy and 
robust domestic demand. The inflation outlook has deteriorated moderately over the past few months, 
mainly as a result of developments in international crude oil prices. Although domestic demand and 
output  remain  buoyant  and  point  to  some  additional  upward  pressure  on  inflation,  there  is  still  little 
evidence of demand pressures or second-round effects of oil price increases impacting on inflation. Oil 
prices, domestic demand and output developments nevertheless pose significant risks to the inflation 
outlook and monetary policy will have to remain vigilant.  
Finally,  you  would  have  noticed  during  the  course  of  the  year  that  increasing  prominence  is  being 
given  by  government  to  investigating  all  the  feasible  ways  of  achieving  stronger  economic  growth. 
Whereas  growth  in  real  gross  domestic  product  amounted  to  3,7  per  cent  in  2004,  the  October 
Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement  provided  for  real  growth  of  4,4  per  cent  in  2005  and 
approximately  the  same  rate  of  growth  in  2006.  Despite  some  progress  made  in  recent  years, 
continued high levels of unemployment necessitate even more ambitious steps to strengthen South 
Africa’s growth potential in order to achieve sustainable higher economic growth. The South African 
Reserve Bank is committed to doing its part by containing inflation, thereby providing a launching pad 
for  enhanced  growth,  development  and  employment  creation.  But  as  I  have  mentioned  on  various 
occasions  during  the  course  of  this  year,  this  is  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  stronger  growth. 
Enhanced  infrastructural  development,  the  implementation  of  education  and  skills  development 
programmes  which  deliver  the  skills  necessary  for  a  modern  economy,  and  careful  land  and 
agriculture reform, greater infusion of technology in the economy, and labour market reforms are some 
of the most important prerequisites for boosting economic performance and employment creation. The 
macroeconomic policy setting is appropriate. Going forward, structural reforms will be key to unlocking 
the  economic  growth  and  development  potential  of  South  Africa.  The  authorities  are  on  the  correct 
path.  All  of  these  reforms  need  to  be  nurtured  carefully  as  it  takes  a  while  before  they  bear  fruit. 
However, it is crucial that they be supported throughout by a stable and transparent macroeconomic 
policy framework. 
As always, the senior staff of the Bank present at your tables will be available if required to clarify any 
of the remarks I have made during this evening. Meanwhile, a hearty welcome once again and thank 
you  for  accepting  our  invitation  to  this  Annual  Dinner  in  honour  of  Ambassadors  and  High 
Commissioners accredited to the Republic of South Africa. Your attendance is much appreciated.  
Thank you. 
