Rachel Lomax: UK monetary policy – the international context 
Speech  by  Ms  Rachel  Lomax,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  APCIMS  Annual 
Conference, London, 17 October 2005.  
 Those of you who have logged on to the Bank of England’s website recently will have noticed that it 
has turned a cheerful shade of orange. It is a lovely website and we are very proud of it. But perhaps 
now was not the best time to major on pictures of happy shoppers clutching bulging carrier bags! The 
fact is that website design – like monetary policy - is beset by information problems and lengthy lags. 
These make it very hard to get the timing of changes just right. 
When the organisers of this conference pressed me for a title some weeks ago, I decided to talk about 
the  international  context  for  UK  monetary  policy  for  two  reasons.  First,  I  was  fresh  from  a  summer 
spent reading this year’s top business books, whose key theme is the dizzying pace of change in the 
global economy. But second, I wanted look beyond the shopping story that – understandably – tends 
to  dominate  the  press,  to  some  of  the  other  factors  that  have  to  be  weighed  when  the  MPC  sets 
interest rates. 
But let me start with the recent weakness in retail spending. Judging by the latest indicators, this looks 
like persisting, at least in the near term. But while spending on retail goods has been virtually flat since 
last autumn, total consumer spending, including services and utilities, has continued to grow, though 
quite slowly. And while the prospects for consumption are clearly important, so too are those for other 
key  drivers  of  the  economy,  such  as  business  investment  and  net  exports.  The  question  is:  if 
consumers decide to save more, are the conditions in place for other sources of demand to take up 
the slack? The answer depends in part on what is happening in the rest of the world. 
Plainly, developments in the rest of the world will influence domestic monetary policy. The UK is a very 
open economy, exposed to trends and shocks that affect supply as well as demand, and our financial 
markets are fully integrated with global markets. Sterling is one of the world’s most liquid currencies, 
and the FTSE 100 is heavily weighted with multinational companies. 
Let me give one example of what this can mean in practice. Over recent years, the progressive shift 
toward sourcing from low cost producers has been depressing import prices, and improving the terms 
on which we trade. This has exposed domestic producers to intense competitive pressures, but it has 
been unambiguously good news for consumers. And it has probably meant that the MPC has been 
able to set somewhat lower interest rates to meet its inflation target. 
The  establishment  of  global  markets  in  key  asset  classes  has  created  complex  linkages  between 
economies as well as facilitating better risk sharing. On the one hand, the transmission of shocks has 
been  speeded  up  –  a  generation  ago,  for  example,  who  would  have  supposed  that  devaluation  in 
Thailand would have set off a chain reaction that rippled through financial markets from New York to 
Tokyo? 
On  the  other  hand,  the  absorptive  capacity  of  financial  markets  has  massively  increased.  This  has 
helped  to cushion  the  impact of  major  shocks  on  the wider  economy.  But  it has  also  facilitated  the 
financing of huge current account imbalances. These have been the number one issue on the IMF’s 
worry list for the past few years and now constitute a significant source of risk to the world economic 
outlook.  
So  you  might  expect  the  MPC’s  policy  rate  to  respond  to  changes  in  the  world  economic  outlook, 
though you might speculate that the relationship could be quite complex. What does recent experience 
show? 
Between 2000 and 2004, there was, on the face of it, a very close relationship between fluctuations in 
world GDP and the policy rate; as all main regions of the world slowed after the stock market crash 
and the ending of the IT boom, the MPC first cut its policy rate sharply – and then held it down until the 
world economy had clearly turned the corner in the second half of 2003. 
But  it  would  be  quite  wrong  to  infer  that  the  MPC  ignored  domestic  demand  during  this  period  – 
though the data have now been so heavily revised it is difficult to generalise about past decisions. The 
important  point  is  that  the  MPC’s  approach  then,  as  now,  is  to  form  an  overall  judgement  about 
demand relative to supply and, as far as it can, to set the policy rate to keep the two in balance, so 
   1/3 
that inflationary pressure is broadly constant. So with external demand very weak – and recall that by 
the  end  of  2001  world  imports  were  actually  falling  –  the  logic  of  that  approach  pointed  to  leasing 
policy to encourage a faster growth in domestic demand. 
This approach worked well in the sense that it helped to ensure that the UK went on growing steadily 
through the world slowdown, while consumer price inflation remained close to the Chancellor’s target. 
But there were side effects. One was a marked increase in the UK’s trade deficit. Another was the 
creation  of  a  monetary  climate  conducive  to  strong  rises  in  house  prices  and  consumer  borrowing 
relative  to  disposable  incomes  –  an  experience  shared  with  other  countries  such  as  Australia  and 
more recently the United States. Together with structural and demographic trends, this has helped to 
push  the  ratio  of  both  house  prices  and  consumer  borrowing  to  household  disposable  incomes  to 
levels well outside the range of previous experience. 
If, against the background of a much flatter housing market, households now go through a period of 
rather  subdued  spending,  strong  external  demand  would  help  to  support  activity  and  rebalance  the 
economy. But is that in prospect? And what are the risks? 
On some measures, last year – 2004 – saw the strongest growth in the world GDP in 30 years. While 
there has been some reduction in growth this year, most forecasters’ central expectation is that it will 
not prove very marked. 
From a UK perspective however, the external conjuncture has been significantly less supportive than 
this implies. 
The key point is that the upturn in world growth has been very unbalanced, being driven largely by the 
US  and  China.  Measures  of  world  activity  which  give  a  high  weight  to  these  two  countries  paint  a 
pretty buoyant picture, especially those which use purchasing power parities. However, less than 2% 
of UK exports go to China and rather less than 20% to the US. Fully 50% go to the euro area, which 
has  grown  only  sluggishly,  and  whose  growth  forecasts  have  persistently  been  revised  down.  And 
Germany, Italy and the Netherlands – countries which between them take around 25% of UK exports 
– have underperformed the euro average. As a result world GDP weighted by countries’ importance in 
UK export markets has shown much a weaker recovery. 
World price pressures have also been stronger than in recent previous cycles. This largely reflects the 
sharp  rise  in  the  price  of  oil  since  early  2004  –  a  development  which  seems  to  have  taken  almost 
everyone by surprise. This is a complex story. On the demand side, the relative importance of China 
and the US in powering the world economy may help to explain why world oil demand grew quite so 
strongly relative to world GDP last year. This year, however, the sharp rise in prices owes at least as 
much to supply factors. 
Allowing for these caveats, this is still a much stronger world economic background than, say, 2001. 
But there are several important risks to this outlook. 
The first concerns oil prices. So far the world economy has apparently taken a tripling in oil prices in its 
stride, thanks to the much lower oil intensity of output, and the greater flexibility in labour markets, in 
most advanced economies compared with a generation ago. It is also true that the short term capacity 
of oil producing countries to spend their increased revenues is now much greater than it was in the 
70s. This helps to explain why consensus forecasts for world GDP growth next year have remained 
remarkably steady. 
But there is a very high level of uncertainty about future oil prices. Judging by the oil futures curve, the 
central view is that prices are likely to remain high, at around $60 per barrel for the next few years at 
least. This is in contrast to 2000, when the oil futures curve was downward sloping. But the range of 
current Consensus forecasts is very wide – from around $45 and $75 per barrel. And oil option prices 
–  admittedly  a  very  imperfect  measure –  suggest  that  there  is a  15%  probability  of  oil  prices  rising 
above $80 a barrel and a 5% probability of them falling below $40 in six months time. 
If  oil  prices  rise  no  further  their  impact  on  headline  inflation  should  be  temporary.  But  a  series  of 
positive  oil  shocks  might  have  the  effect  of  pushing  up  headline  inflation  for  an  uncomfortably  long 
period. In contrast to the 1970s and 1980s, inflation expectations in major oil consuming nations have 
been well anchored for the best part of a decade. But there’s no room for complacency. The unfamiliar 
experience  of  higher  inflation  might  well  dislodge  those  expectations,  if  there  was  any  wavering 
incentral  banks’  perceived  commitment  to  keep  inflation  low.  This  could  also  prove  damaging  to 
consumer and business confidence. 
   2/3 
I claim no special insight into the oil market, and especially into its likely short term movements. But it 
is hard to miss the longer term challenges which the rapid economic development of China – and India 
– pose for resource markets, and especially energy markets. China is now the world’s second largest 
oil importing country after the US, and last year alone it accounted for nearly a third of the net increase 
in world oil demand. In per capita terms, its own oil resources account for less than 10% of the world 
average. Yet its oil demand is set to grow strongly in the longer term. Oil supply is traditionally slow to 
respond to changing prices – lead times for developing new fields are often around 3-7 years; and 
there are constraints on refinery capacity which may influence petrol prices. 
This is bound to have implications for the UK and for our European markets. Over the past decade, we 
have benefited from the downward pressure on imported goods prices exerted directly and indirectly 
by low cost production in Asia. Even if these trends continue, as in principle they could for some time, 
it  is  becoming  increasingly  clear  that  consumers  may  also  need  to  contend  with  upward  price 
pressures as world energy markets adapt to meet the needs of emerging Asia. 
The second key area of risk is global imbalances. These pose risks to foreign exchange markets and 
to world activity. Higher oil prices have intensified the scale of the problem. Yet we seem no closer to 
a  denouement  –  indeed,  as  the  US  current  deficit  topped  6%  of  GDP,  the  dollar  has  tended  to 
strengthen. What does this mean for the UK? I find it extremely hard to predict how sterling’s effective 
rate  would  be  affected,  were  there  to  be  a  major  re  rating  of  the  dollar.  But  a  resolution  of  global 
imbalances which was accompanied by global recession would represent a major challenge for us – 
one to which, I suspect, we are now less well placed to respond than we were in 2001. 
Finally, there is the puzzling matter of long term interest rates; last year, as central banks raised their 
policy rates, long term nominal and real rates fell to levels not seen in 40 years (though of course, US 
rates have now ticked up a bit recently). At the same time, risk premia of all kinds – bond spreads and 
term premia – have been sharply compressed. 
This state of affairs has caused a great deal of head scratching, and nowhere more than in central 
banks. Plausible explanations for low risk free real rates include the possibility that there is a global 
savings  glut. It  is  also  argued  that  there  has been  an  investment  ‘strike’ almost  everywhere  except 
China and maybe the US, perhaps reflecting a persistent overhang from the East Asian crisis or the 
last  IT  cycle.  These  are  speculative  explanations,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  discriminate  between  them. 
However, they all seem to point to a more or less prolonged period of low rates.  
More worryingly, compressed risk premia of all kinds may reflect a belief that the world is no longer 
such a risky place, a belief fostered by the period of low inflation that many economies have enjoyed 
in the past decade. Hopefully, low inflation is here to stay. But in some countries, notably the US and 
the UK, low inflation has been coupled with an unusually low degree of output volatility; and this may 
have  encouraged  an  exaggerated  notion  of  the  role  that  central  banks  can  play  in  achieving 
exceptionally benign outcomes, in different circumstances. 
Unrealistic expectations invite disappointment. And disappointment – if it dawns suddenly – is liable to 
have a disruptive effect on financial markets and potentially on real economies. 
That is the dark side. But for now, low real interest rates are supporting activity, and the main puzzle is 
why  companies  are  not  taking  more  advantage  of  favourable  financing  conditions  to  increase  their 
investment – though once they do, past experience suggests that spending could rise could rise quite 
quickly. 
Let me sum up. The immediate prospects for the world economy are still robust, despite the sharp rise 
in oil prices. The outlook for UK weighted activity is less rosy, with relatively subdued growth in the 
euro area – though even here the latest business surveys are brighter than they have been for some 
time. The UK is fully exposed to the impact of more adverse world pricing trends, notably higher oil 
prices.  And  there  are  some  significant  risks,  with  considerable  uncertainty  about  oil  prices.  This 
outlook could provide some support for a rebalancing of the UK economy. But there is no guarantee of 
that. 
The MPC may face some hard choices in the coming months. Looking back on my summer reading 
for inspiration – that list of the year’s top business books – I am reminded of the mission statements of 
two  of  the  companies  under  scrutiny.  One  was  Disney  –  whose  aim  is,  famously,  to  ‘Make  People 
Happy’. The other was Google – whose mission statement urges, somewhat austerely, ‘Don’t be Evil’. 
One thing is for sure: the MPC must not set out to rival Disney. So let Google be our guide, as we 
search for a way through the policy maze. 
   3/3 
