Villy Bergström: The labour market and wage formation 
Speech by Mr Villy Bergström, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the Association of Swedish 
Engineering Industries' HR director conference, Rimbo, 22 November 2005. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  your  invitation  to  come  and  speak  here.  Today,  I  will  not  be  touching  upon  current 
economic policy in Sweden or the weakening of the krona exchange rate. I will return to those issues 
in a couple of days in a different speech. 
The shift in economic policy at the start of the 1990s has entailed better conditions for wage formation 
in Sweden. Among other things, the adoption of the inflation target has reduced uncertainty over future 
price developments. Wage-earners do not have to worry that their wage increases will be eroded by 
excessively fast price rises, while it is easier for employers to determine their scope for wage costs. 
The  lower  uncertainty  over  inflation  is  reflected  in  the  fact  that  inflation  expectations since  the  mid-
1990s have been firmly anchored around 2 per cent. 
It  is  important  to  remember  that  the  current  conditions  for  wage  formation  in  Sweden  –  a  floating 
exchange rate and inflation target – are considerably different from our previous regime with a fixed 
exchange rate. A fixed exchange rate was the norm in Sweden for some 130 years, even though the 
systems for maintaining it changed. 
Background to the current system 
During the post-war era the exchange rate norm was supervised by international agreements through 
Sweden’s membership of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the Bretton Woods system. That 
meant  that  devaluations  were  only  allowed  in  the  event  of  fundamental  structural  problems  or 
imbalances. So the Bretton Woods system limited the opportunities for individual countries to devalue 
their way out of a cost crisis. Instead, the countries were offered loans from the IMF on tough terms. 
For Swedish wage formation, this was a successful period. The Swedish Trade Union Confederation 
and other employee organisations/trade unions, as well as the Swedish parliament and government, 
were  aware  that  the  strict  regulations  did  not  permit  devaluation, which  had  a disciplinary  effect  on 
Swedish wage formation. 
The Bretton Woods system was based on an arrangement whereby the US dollar had a fixed value in 
terms  of  gold  and  the  currencies  of  the  other  countries  in  turn  were  pegged  to  gold  via  a  fixed 
exchange rate with the dollar. When the US was forced to abandon its dollar peg to gold in the early 
1970s after having borrowed large amounts to finance the Vietnam War, the Bretton Woods system 
collapsed. 
Thereafter,  Sweden  independently  adopted  other  exchange  rate  regimes,  all  of  which  gave  greater 
freedom than the Bretton Woods system. That resulted in less discipline in wage formation. 
What then does it mean to have a fixed exchange rate? A fixed exchange rate means that the central 
bank,  with  the  aid  of  currency  market  interventions  or  its  policy  rate,  stabilises  the  exchange  rate 
around a target, e.g. a price for the dollar, gold or an average of currencies, whereas under a floating 
exchange rate regime the exchange rate is determined by supply and demand in the currency market. 
With a fixed exchange rate, you avoid some of the uncertainty in world trade when countries exchange 
currencies with each other. There is a limit to how much a currency’s exchange rate can vary, which is 
good for importers and exporters when they are forecasting income and expenditure. 
The fixed exchange rate can also be seen as a way to achieve price stability. With a fixed exchange 
rate, inflation in the long term cannot be higher or lower than the inflation rates in the countries with 
which you have tied your exchange rate. For example, a fixed exchange rate against the dollar would 
”force” us to maintain the same inflation rate in the long run as the US and the other countries whose 
currencies are pegged to the dollar. Were that to fail, our current account balance would deteriorate 
and we would have to devalue. 
BIS Review 84/2005 
 1
Sweden  devalued  five  times  between  1976  and  1982  under  a  fixed  exchange  rate  (1976,  twice  in 
1977, 1981 and 1982). That was because Sweden in the 1970s and 1980s had higher inflation than 
the  other  countries.  Between  1975  and  1995,  Swedish  inflation  averaged  8  per  cent  a  year.  Real 
wages  rose  by  only  0.5  per  cent  a  year.  Swedish  companies’  competitiveness  deteriorated  and 
industrial production dropped. Sweden slipped from 4th place in the OECD’s standard-of-living league 
to 18th place – below the average for OECD countries. We became a relatively poor country in Europe 
and the industrialised world. 
Meanwhile, deregulation in the credit market during the 1980s resulted in a sharp expansion in credit, 
with  an  accumulation  of  debt  among  the  general  public  as  a  consequence.  Demand  increased  but 
supply  was  weak  and  productivity  growth  low.  The  economy  overheated,  inflation  picked  up  and 
competitiveness  was  eroded.  In  1990,  the  international  economy  began  to  weaken  and  prices  of 
assets and property fell. The economic climate deteriorated dramatically and eventually the banking 
crisis hit the country, with large loan losses as a result. 
The Riksbank defended the fixed krona exchange rate to the very last, but after large currency flows 
and extreme rises in interest rates the fixed exchange rate was abandoned on 19 November 1992. 
The outcome of the performance during the 1970s and 1980s was that we slipped down the standard-
of-living league, suffered mass unemployment and saw a drop in GDP of 4-5 per cent. It was at this 
juncture that an explicit inflation target was introduced. 
The depreciation of the krona in 1992-93 of almost thirty per cent gave the manufacturing industry a 
powerful boost. Since all other demand components were falling, the manufacturing sector was able to 
attract resources and expand. We have not had a current account deficit since 1993. 
Why 2 per cent inflation and a floating exchange rate? 
That  two  per  cent  is  the  optimal  inflation  target  has  no  scientific  basis.  However,  this  level  gives  a 
reasonable trade-off between the negative consequences of high inflation and the problems entailed 
by deflation. Furthermore, two per cent is a common target internationally. 
It is necessary, you see, to have a certain margin from zero inflation if price and wage formation are to 
work well. Separate prices and wages have to be able to grow at different rates if it is to be possible to 
allocate resources such as labour to their correct use. Since it is difficult to cut nominal wages, some 
inflation  creates  the  possibility  for  relative  changes  in  wages  without  having  to  reduce  the  nominal 
level for any group. 
The scope for wage increases given the inflation target is around 4 per cent. (2 per cent + 2 per cent: 
Inflation plus productivity growth, at a given profit share.)1 This holds if we, like the National Institute of 
Economic  Research,  assume  that  average  productivity  growth  is  around  2  per  cent  for  the  whole 
economy in the long term. 
If one occupational group gets 5 per cent in order to attract labour, another group has to get less than 
the average increase. If the inflation target were lower, a relative increase for some might necessitate 
lower nominal wages for others. 
So,  two  per  cent  inflation  serves  as  an  anchor  for  the  economy.  The  inflation  target  should  be  the 
basis for wage negotiations, rent agreements, tax increases, etc. Thus, it is necessary that the target 
is credible, that people trust that it will be met. Before, the idea instead was that the fixed exchange 
rate would imply an inflation target in line with the inflation rates of our competitor countries. But this 
approach never worked in the same way as the inflation target. 
Does monetary policy affect economic growth? 
It  is  fairly  obvious  that  when  inflation  is  around  10  per  cent  the  economy  becomes  unhealthy. 
Economic agents seek to profit from the inflation. Much depends on how the tax system is designed. 
In  Sweden,  it  encouraged  borrowing  and  speculation  in  real  property  and  shares.  Investment 
                                                      
1   Strictly speaking it should be the price developments for output, i.e. the GDP deflator, but since the GDP deflator can be 
estimated to increase by around 2 per cent a year if consumer prices rise in line with the inflation target (2 per cent), this 
approximation works. 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2005
decisions take on a different focus than when macroeconomic conditions are stable. In Sweden, we 
saw a property boom in the 1980s and an overheated economy that had to be dampened. 
Monetary policy is unable to affect the economy’s long-term output capacity, which we judge to grow 
at somewhere around 2-2.5 per cent a year. But stability in the government finances and credibility for 
the  inflation  target  give  low  interest  rates  and  a  safe  investment  climate,  which  in  turn  lays  the 
foundations for a good economic performance in the long term. What monetary policy in fact can do is 
to stabilise demand growth in the short run and avoid a stop-go situation like in the 1980s. 
Let  me  describe  this  in  somewhat  simplified  terms.  One  of  the  variables  with  which  the  Riksbank 
works is the output gap, which is the difference between the economy’s actual output and potential 
output. The output gap reflects cyclical variations in the economy. 
• 
A negative output gap means that demand for goods, services and the factors of production 
is  low  and  there  are  plenty  of  spare  resources  in  the  economy.  Increases  in  prices  and 
wages are small and inflation is usually below target. 
A  positive  gap  means  that  actual  output  –  demand-driven  –  exceeds  potential  output,  the 
resource situation is tight, demand for labour exceeds supply, wages are being pushed up 
and inflation is normally above target. 
 So the output gap gives a picture of demand pressures in the economy, and demand pressures in turn 
influence  inflation.  Monetary  policy  is  essentially  about  choosing  an  interest  rate  level  that  affects 
demand in such a way that the size of the gap becomes as small as possible. If actual output equals 
potential output so that the output gap is closed, inflation is often in line with the Riksbank’s target, 
provided that monetary policy and the inflation target are credible. 
The Riksbank and employment 
That  there  is  no  negative  long-term  relationship  between  inflation  and  unemployment  is  fairly 
uncontroversial  today,  not  least  shown  by  the  developments  since  the  introduction  of  the  inflation 
target  –  unemployment  and  inflation  dropped  in  parallel  during  the  1990s.  Since  1995,  when  the 
inflation target came into effect, CPI inflation has averaged 1.4 per cent, while real wages have grown 
by around 2.6 per cent. The Riksbank’s formulation of monetary policy has its critics, of course – for 
example, at the Social Democratic Party’s latest congress the inflation target’s superordinate status 
over other targets was called into question. 
Attempts  to  get  the  economy  to  grow at  a  faster  pace  than  is  sustainable  in  the  long  term  through 
more expansionary and inflation-tolerant monetary policy would, in the long run, only result in higher 
inflation without any rise in output or employment. In the short term, though, monetary policy can, as I 
mentioned, through interest rate changes designed to stimulate or cool down economic activity, affect 
output and thereby also employment. 
In  the  highly  simplified  output-gap world  that  I  just described,  there  is  a  straightforward  relationship 
between monetary policy, the output gap and employment – if the Riksbank does not hit the inflation 
target then employment will be affected. But reality is more complicated than that. 
Firstly,  monetary  policy  is  not  able  to  precisely  fine-tune  the  output  gap  or  employment.  As  I  said 
earlier, it takes times for monetary policy to have an impact on inflation, which is why the Riksbank’s 
monetary  policy  decisions  are  based  on  a  forecast  of  expected  price  developments  in  the  future. 
Furthermore, our knowledge of the output gap even now is not exact, and even less so for the coming 
years. 
In reality, shocks to supply and demand are occurring all the time, which influence both actual and 
potential output. As a result, the output gap is almost never zero. In addition, each forecasting period 
has  its  events  and  political  decisions  that  not  only  are  difficult,  but  impossible,  to  foresee,  a  good 
example being the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001. For that reason all forecasts will be more 
or less inaccurate, and the output gap will be positive or negative for long periods. 
The important thing is that the Riksbank, in attempting to stabilise inflation, strives to achieve as small 
and as short-term deviations from the inflation target as possible. With a symmetric inflation target like 
the  Riksbank’s,  the  incentives  and  our  efforts  to  avoid  missing  the  target  on  the  upside  and  the 
downside are equally strong. Short-term deviations from the inflation target thus will even themselves 
out  over  time  and  will  not  result  in  any  permanent  gains  or  losses  in  terms  of  growth  or  jobs.  The 
BIS Review 84/2005 
 3
average inflation rate over the ten years since the inflation target was introduced does not indicate any 
systematic deviation. 
The second factor that complicates the picture of a simple relationship between monetary policy and 
employment is that inflation is not influenced by the output gap only but also by inflation expectations, 
which  in  turn  depend  on  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy.  If  there  is  confidence  in  the  Riksbank’s 
monetary policy it is often enough to make small changes in interest rates to signal that the Riksbank 
is keeping a close eye on inflation tendencies. If inflation expectations instead deviate sharply from the 
Riksbank’s target, more potent measures may be required. 
Thirdly, inflation and employment are not always affected by the same factors. Many short-term factors 
have a strong impact on inflation but only a marginal effect on the output gap and employment (e.g. 
the impact of mad cow disease on meat prices or the rapid rise and fall of electricity prices due to how 
the  weather  had  affected  reservoir  levels).  Likewise,  certain  factors  and  policy  decisions  affect 
registered  open  unemployment  more  than  they  influence  the  output  gap  (e.g.  the  National  Labour 
Market Board’s decision to scale back labour market policy measures in 2003). 
In  addition,  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  unemployment  sometimes  deviates  fairly 
sharply  from  previous  historical  patterns.  The  most  recent  episodes  when  inflation  has  been  below 
target  –  at  the  end  of  the  1990s  and  the  start  of  this  decade  –  have  been  characterised  by 
unexpectedly high productivity, unexpectedly low imported inflation and other more temporary supply 
shocks.  The  low  inflation  has  not  been  because  we  have  actively  tightened  monetary  policy  and 
dampened demand. In reality, monetary policy has been very expansionary. 
With  the  aid  of  the  repo  rate  the  Riksbank  can  influence  demand.  How  companies  then  meet  this 
demand  by  varying  the  number  of  employed  depends  on  how  productivity  develops,  and  that  is 
nothing  that  monetary  policy  can  control.  Nor  have  we  any  possibility  to  govern  how  many  people 
enter or leave labour market policy measures. 
Is Swedish wage formation competitive? 
When an economy is in balance, with wage and profit shares constant, companies’ real wage costs 
increase  in  parallel  with  productivity  growth.  But  the  relationship  between  wage  increases  and 
competitiveness  is  different  under  a  fixed  and  floating  exchange  rate.  With  a  fixed  exchange  rate, 
competitiveness  is  determined  first  and  foremost  by  how  big  wage  increments  in  Sweden  are 
compared with other countries. If wage costs increase too rapidly, costs crises arise that can result in 
higher  unemployment  or  that  force  the  country  into  devaluations  with  a  view  to  restoring 
competitiveness,  as  was  the  case  in  Sweden  during  the  1980s.  The  problem  with  the  repeated 
devaluations was that they eroded the fixed exchange rate’s credibility. Wage-earners and employers 
expected to be bailed out when competitiveness was weakened by the excessively fast wage rises. 
Under a floating exchange rate, however, relatively higher increases in nominal wages do not have as 
much  significance  for competitiveness, if  the  exchange  rate  adjusts.  We can  have  higher price  and 
cost  growth  than  our  trading  partners  without  seeing  our  competitiveness  deteriorate,  if  the  krona 
functions  as  a  shock  absorber.  So,  companies  do  not  bear  the  direct  burden  of  excessive  wage 
increases,  since  the  exchange  rate  adjusts  over  time  so  that  profits  are  maintained  in  the  sectors 
exposed to competition. 
Also, a floating exchange rate often dampens cyclical fluctuations. In 2001, the Swedish IT sector – 
including Ericsson and Telia – was hit by a deep decline. But the decline was partly compensated for 
by the weaker krona exchange rate, so that profits were sustained in the paper and pulp industry, the 
iron and steel industry, and in other parts of the manufacturing sector. 
Under a floating exchange rate, the inflation target is the nominal anchor for price and wage formation, 
rather than the rate of wage increases abroad. Wage-earners and employers know that the Riksbank 
has to immediately intervene with interest rate adjustments if inflation deviates clearly from target. So, 
excessively high wage increments can lead to tighter monetary policy. 
For  an  individual  company  or  industry,  developments  in  wage  costs  in  other  countries  nonetheless 
have great significance, since the exchange rate in these cases can be taken as given. A Swedish 
company that raises wages sharply risks being driven out of business. As globalisation continues, new 
markets  are  being  opened  in  which  wage  costs  differ  from  the  level  in  Sweden.  Companies  get 
increased opportunities to outsource their activities to countries with lower wage costs. The question is 
if wage growth in Sweden is competitive in relation to other countries? 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2005
The large surplus on the current account, SEK 48.1 billion during the second quarter this year, equals 
around  7.7  per  cent  of  GDP  and  can  be  seen  as  an  indication  that  Swedish  wages  and  costs  in 
general  are  competitive.  Otherwise,  Swedish  goods  and  services  would  not  be  in  such  demand  in 
other countries. 
At the same time, Swedish companies have outsourced a considerable proportion of their production 
from Sweden to reduce costs. The stiffer competition from low-wage countries is found mainly in the 
manufacturing industry. However, the pace of this production outsourcing has decreased rather than 
increased  since  the  end  of  the  1990s.  One  possible  explanation  for  that  is  the  global  economic 
slowdown at the start of the current decade. Swedish companies give outsourcing as the reason for a 
lower number of employees to a lesser extent now compared with a few years ago.2 That could also 
be  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  cost  of  Swedish  labour  has  fared  relatively  well  after  all  in  the 
increasing international competition that has resulted from globalisation. 
When  the  new  regime  with  a  floating  exchange  rate  and  inflation  target  was  introduced  in  the 
beginning  of  the  1990s,  it  entailed  new  macroeconomic  conditions  for  collective  bargaining 
agreements. During the 1970 and 1980s, inflation averaged around 8 per cent and real wage growth 
was almost non-existent. The slowdown in inflation coupled with a relatively stable rate of increase in 
nominal wages meant that real wages rose sharply between 1995 and 2004, see Table 1.3 Not since 
the 1960s has there been such a long period of regular real wage increases. 
In 2004, around 450 collective bargaining agreements were concluded for some 2 million employees, 
most of them spanning three years. This year, approximately 70 collective bargaining agreements will 
be signed for just over 1.3 million employees. Municipalities and county councils account for 1.1 million 
of  these,  and  an  agreement  covering  just  over  two  years  has  already  been  concluded  for  them. 
Recently, agreements have been signed for some 75 000 workers in the construction sector and about 
60 000 employees in banking and insurance. The latter group received more than what has become 
the  norm  in  the  current  agreement  period.  Worth  noting  is  that  almost  the  entire  economy  has  an 
agreement  period  that  runs  up  to  some  time  in  the  middle  of  2007.  Given  that  no  agreements  are 
cancelled prematurely, 2007 will be a very busy agreement year, since the majority of the collective 
bargaining agreements concluded in the business sector and the central government sector in 2004, 
as well as the municipal sector from 2005, will be due for renegotiation.4 
The social partners and individual companies have gradually adjusted to the low inflation rate. Wage 
setting  also  has  become  more  decentralised,  entailing  increased  opportunities  to  change  relative 
wages within the scope of a given rate of wage increases. But despite this, we have a compressed 
wage structure in Sweden in comparison with many other countries. 
Wage  structures  differ  between  blue-collar  and  white-collar  workers.  Blue-collar  employees’  wage 
structure  is  considerably  more  compressed  and  constant  across  age  groups.5 The  wage  spread  for 
white-collar workers is larger and increases up to 45 years of age, after which it gradually decreases. It 
is  mainly  in  the  higher  income  groups  that  the  wage  differences  between  blue-collar  workers  and 
white-collar employees are large. In the lower-income groups the differences are very small.6 But on 
average  white-collar  employees  have  long  been  pulling  away  from  blue-collar  workers,  which  risks 
building up tensions in the labour market ahead of future negotiations. 
Wages can also vary across different regions. But this wage spread is not especially large in Sweden 
either.  It  is  mainly  Stockholm,  Jämtland  and  Gotland  that  have  a  clearly  different  wage  situation. 
Stockholm has the country’s highest wage level, while Jämtland’s and Gotland’s wage level is below 
the national average. 
                                                      
2   See Wage Formation in Sweden 2005, National Institute of Economic Research. 
3  For 2004, some data in Table 1 might be changed since all agreements have not yet been concluded. 
4  See Wage Formation in Sweden 2005, National Institute of Economic Research. 
5   The  quotient  between  the10th  and  the  90th  percentile  is  considerably  higher  for  white-collar  employees'  wages,  see 
"Lönespridning i näringslivet 2004" (Wage spread in the business sector in 2004), Confederation of Swedish Enterprise. 
It is primarily in the quotient between the 90th percentile and the median wage that blue-collar workers and white-collars 
workers'  wages  differ,  unlike  the  quotient  between  the  10th  percentile  and  the  median  wage,  see  "Lönespridning  i 
näringslivet 2004" (Wage spread in the business sector in 2004), Confederation of Swedish Enterprise. 
6  
BIS Review 84/2005 
 5
On the whole, though, the wage spread has widened in Sweden over the past 25 years, at the same 
time as wage formation has been decentralised. But despite the increase in the wage spread, it is still 
low by international standards. It is still smaller than it was in 1970 and in a comparison of 17 OECD 
countries  the  wage  spread  in  Sweden  is  lowest.  High  minimum  wages  likely  mean  that  many  jobs 
never get created. The services sector is also affected by this, and many low-productive work duties 
are not performed since nobody is willing to pay what they cost, with our high minimum wages. 
Table 1. Nominal and real wage growth, 1995-2004 
 
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001  2002  2003  2004
BUSINESS SECTOR 
Blue-collar workers 
White-collar workers 
 WHOLE ECONOMY 
           4.7 
 5.4 
 4.7 
 3.4 
 2.6 
 3.3 
 3.8 
 3.6 
 3.1 
 2.6 
 3.5 
 6.4 
 4.2 
 4.7 
 3.7 
 4.1 
 4.5 
 4.1 
 3.3 
 3.2 
                    Blue-collar and white-collar workers 
 3.3 
 6.0 
 4.5 
 3.7 
 3.4 
 3.7 
 4.4 
 4.1 
 3.5 
 3.3 
 CPI 
 REAL WAGE GROWTH 
 BUSINESS SECTOR 
Blue-collar workers 
White-collar workers 
 WHOLE ECONOMY 
           2.5 
 0.5 
 0.7 
-0.3 
 0.5 
 0.9 
 2.4 
 2.2 
 1.9 
 0.4 
                                         2.2 
 4.9 
 4.1 
 3.7 
 2.1 
 2.4 
 1.4 
 1.4 
 1.2 
 2.3 
 1.0 
 5.8 
 3.5 
 5.0 
 3.3 
 3.2 
 2.0 
 1.9 
 1.4 
 2.8 
                    Blue-collar and white-collar workers 
 0.9 
 5.4 
 3.9 
 4.0 
 2.9 
 2.8 
 1.9 
 1.9 
 1.5 
 2.9 
 Sources: National Mediation Office, Statistics Sweden and Sveriges Riksbank. 
Structural unemployment 
Developments  in  the  labour  market  have  been  weak  despite  several  years’  firm  economic  growth, 
historically  low  interest  rates  and  strong  public  finances.  So  far,  the  growing  economy  has  not 
managed to create enough jobs. Moreover, our current account surplus essentially means that we are 
exporting capital on a large scale; in somewhat more extreme terms, you could say that the jobs being 
created by our growth are largely ending up outside Sweden's borders. 
So the low employment growth does not appear primarily to be a result of weak demand. Instead, the 
explanation must be sought among longer-term structural factors. 
This is reflected in particular by the fact that the employment rate, in spite of historically high economic 
growth,  has  not  completely  recovered  since  its  sharp  fall  in  connection  with  the  crisis  in  the  early 
1990s. Moreover, the fact that open unemployment did not drop more during the economic upswing in 
the 1990s suggests that the labour market is not functioning satisfactorily. One example of rigidities in 
the labour market is that unemployment has remained around 8 per cent in the construction sector, 
6 
 BIS Review 84/2005
even though it is one of the few sectors where activity has risen and labour shortages have begun to 
appear. 
Another sign that the unemployment problems are structural in nature is the large differences across 
regions and occupational categories. In spite of a single monetary policy for the whole of the Swedish 
economy, unemployment figures in some regions are twice as high as in others, while the proportion 
of  people  receiving  benefit  from  their  unemployment  fund  is  twice  as  high  in  some  occupational 
categories as in others. These differences seem to last over long periods, indicating that the problems 
are partly due to low mobility in the labour market. 
In  addition,  the  need  for  labour  market  mobility  is  growing  as  a  result  of  structural  change.  The 
previously typical cyclical pattern, where jobs are shed during a slump and then are recreated when 
the  economy  turns  around,  no  longer  generally  holds  true  in  all  industries.  Jobs  that  are  lost  in  a 
slowdown are being replaced, especially in manufacturing, by increased productivity and information 
technology. Growth is leading to new jobs but in different places than before. That means that more 
people have to change workplace or sector, and results in the need for considerable adaptability. More 
jobs have to be created in, for example, the services sector, perhaps in completely new companies. 
The structural change that occurred when farmers and forestry workers went into manufacturing was 
relatively  easy.  Now  the  change  often  entails  manufacturing  workers  having  to  go  into  the  services 
sector, a transition that may be more difficult. 
To  the  extent  that  the  weak  growth  in  employment  is  due  to  structural  change  in  the  Swedish 
economy, from manufacturing jobs to services, there is reason to discuss how the functioning of the 
labour  market  can  be  improved  and  how  the  driving  forces  for  new  business  creation  can  be 
strengthened. Several proposals have been put forward in the public debate – among other things, 
there have been calls for a tax deduction to subsidise certain domestic services, as well as calls for a 
reduction  in  compensation  levels  to  increase  people’s  willingness  to  take  lower-paid  jobs.  Other 
solutions  being  discussed  are  lower  income  taxes  for  low-income  and  middle-income  employees,  a 
reduction in employers’ contributions and a cut in payroll taxes. These are important political issues, 
but issues that we at the Riksbank do not have any obvious reason to take a stance on. 
The way the whole economy functions has of necessity changed since the post-war period and it is 
unlikely that the current economic policy regime with a floating exchange rate and inflation target can 
deliver  both  2  per  cent  inflation  and  an  unemployment  rate  equivalent  to  the  levels  we  had  then. 
During  the  post-war  period  we  had  a  unique  expansion  in  public  sector  employment  and  very  high 
demand pressures, something that was not sustainable in the long run and that is not possible with 
free movement of capital, an inflation target and an independent Riksbank. 
BIS Review 84/2005 
 7
