T T Mboweni: Monetary policy and sustainable economic growth 
Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the BER conference on 
Growing the South African Economy, in Somerset West, Pretoria, 9 November 2005. 
 Thank you for your invitation to speak at this conference on Growing the South African Economy. Over 
many  years  the  Bureau  for  Economic  Research  (BER)  has  in  numerous  ways  helped  to  inform 
economic analysis and policy in South Africa. It has for instance in recent years been commissioned 
by the South African Reserve Bank to survey inflation expectations in South Africa. This has been very 
helpful  in  the  deliberations  of  the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee.  But  apart  from  this  narrower 
interest which the Bank has developed in the activities of the BER, the Bureau and its respondents 
provide a wide range of economic indicators which warrant the attention of analysts and policymakers 
alike.  The  BER  also  stirs  debate  on  highly  relevant  topics,  as  again  demonstrated  by  today’s 
conference.  
The  economic  situation  in  and  outlook  for  South  Africa  have  already  been  covered  earlier  today, 
alongside the possible direction of political developments. Industrial policy and fiscal policy have also 
already been discussed. My remarks on monetary policy and sustainable growth will consist of some 
thoughts on enhancing the tempo of growth and development in general, before narrowing in on what 
monetary policy can do and cannot do in this regard and reflecting on some developments which are 
important in informing current monetary policy decision-making. 
Sustainable economic growth 
Vibrant growth, sustained over lengthy periods of  time, opens up exciting possibilities. Some of the 
most dynamic  examples  in  this  respect  are  Korea,  where  real  gross  domestic  product  per capita  is 
now  four  times  its  level  in  1980,  and  Botswana,  where  the  same  comparison  yields  an  increase  to  
3.3 times what it was 25 years ago. In South Africa real gross domestic product per capita has been 
rising steadily since 1993, but this followed a gradual decline during the preceding 13 years, resulting 
in  real  per  capita  production  at  present  being  quite  close  to  its  level  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago. 
Stepping  up  the  tempo  of  per  capita  gains  of  the  past  11  years  is  an  important  focal  point,  and  is 
currently receiving the attention of government, business, labour and community.  
A G-20 conference on economic growth, co-organised by the South African Reserve Bank together 
with  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  and  the  Banco  de  Mexico,  was  hosted  in  the  Bank’s  conference 
centre in August this year. It might be worthwhile recalling some of the points made at that meeting of 
minds.  
While it was generally agreed that economic growth is one of the most important challenges facing all 
countries,  it  was  emphasised  that  no  universal  recipe  for  growth  exists  since  each  country  faces  a 
different set of constraints. There is more to growth than good macroeconomic policy. To obtain higher 
growth does not seem to require a large set of very fundamental or deep reforms, but rather a more 
effective  focus  on  a  small  set  of  binding  constraints.  It  is  extremely  important  that  appropriate 
strategies  be  developed  to  properly  identify  such  binding  constraints.  Such  action  requires  an 
institutional setting that allows for a dynamic process where problems are identified, on the one hand, 
but also effectively addressed, on the other. In doing so not only government failures have to be dealt 
with, but also market failures, such as large externalities, that require government action.  
The  list  of  possible  binding  constraints  is  virtually  endless.  Some  studies  have  suggested  that  high 
levels  of  taxation  discourage  growth  through  their  effect  on  incentives  to  work,  save  and  innovate. 
Others have pointed to the importance of protecting private property rights if growth is to be dynamic. 
Still others note the importance of human capital, and highlight the role of education as a determinant 
of  economic  growth.  Excessive  rules  and  regulations  can  stifle  economic  progress,  slowing  fixed 
capital formation, undermining flexibility and discouraging productive enterprise. Establishing which of 
these, and many more candidate constraints, is most relevant and then getting policies right is crucial 
if trend growth is to be increased. As these examples illustrate, many of the things that impact on the 
quantity  and  efficiency  of  the  factors  of  production  are  quite  broader  than  monetary  policy  and  the 
ambit of central bank influence. 
   1/4 
As  we  all  know,  economic  growth  might  be  a  necessary  but  not  a  sufficient  factor  in  employment 
creation. 
is 
formation 
in  an  environment  where  expectations 
What monetary policy can do 
Sound  monetary  policy  can  provide  a  stable  platform  for  sustainable  economic  and  employment 
growth.  This is recognised  in national  economic  policy  and  in  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  Act, 
both  of  which  assign  to  the  Bank  the  objective  of  achieving  and  maintaining  price  stability  in  the 
interest of balanced and sustainable economic growth in the Republic.  
High inflation causes numerous well-documented distortions and frictions in the economy. The higher 
inflation  is,  the  more  variable  it  also  tends  to  be,  adding  further  uncertainty  to  economic  decision-
making. Low inflation enhances predictability and planning, reduces the uncertainty premia built into 
nominal and real interest rates, and thereby supports sustained and balanced economic growth. The 
view that a monetary policy aimed at keeping inflation low is anti-growth is simply wrong. There is no 
permanent trade-off between inflation and unemployment, and even the short-run trade-off tends to be 
elusive 
increasingly  sophisticated  and  
forward-looking. 
That  said,  getting  from  high  inflation  to  low  inflation  requires  a  sustained  tight  monetary  policy.  It 
cannot  be  denied  that  a  tightening  of  policy  will  tend  to  hurt  short-term  growth,  just  as  getting  fit 
invariably requires some sacrifice by the athlete. But South Africa’s experience under formal inflation 
targeting  has  been  relatively  favourable.  When  in  late  2001  and  during  2002  the  inflation  targeting 
framework was severely tested on account of an extraordinary depreciation of the exchange rate of 
the  rand  which  fuelled  inflation,  the  Bank  had  to  raise  short-term  interest  rates  by  a  total  of  4 
percentage points. Alongside a conservative fiscal policy and a recovery in the exchange value of the 
rand, this was enough to first brake and later on reverse the acceleration in inflation. 
This was done with quite limited loss of real output, partly because of the stimulation to the tradables 
sector imparted during 2002 by the over depreciated exchange value of the rand, and partly because 
policymakers  deliberately  refrained  from  raising  interest  rates  excessively,  mindful  of  the  lags 
characteristic  of  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  economy.  Thorough  investigation  of  the 
business  cycle  reveals  that  the  economy  remained  in  an  upward  phase  of  the  business  cycle 
throughout the period of tighter policy in 2002 and 2003. In fact, the upswing has now been sustained 
for some six years.  
Being directed at combating inflation with a medium-term orientation, the other side to the coin of the 
inflation  targeting  framework  which  has  been  adopted  in  South  Africa  is  that  real  interest  rates  are 
likely to remain positive under virtually all circumstances. This supports balanced and sound growth, 
inter alia by ensuring that the relative prices of the factors of production are reasonably aligned with 
their true scarcities. Previous experimentation with negative real interest rates in the 1970s and 1980s 
contributed  to  suboptimal  allocation  of  scarce  capital,  excessive  capital  intensity  in  production  and 
weak growth outcomes. Avoiding this obvious pitfall is a very important contribution which monetary 
policy  can  make,  at  the  same  time  helping  to  ensure  fair  returns  to  savers  and  combating  the 
deterioration in the national saving rate. 
What monetary policy cannot do 
Unrealistic expectations regarding what monetary policy can do abound. While monetary policy can 
contain inflation, reduce inflation risk and uncertainty premia in the economy, ease the cash flow of 
borrowers once interest rates have adjusted to the low-inflation environment, and contribute towards 
sound factor allocation, it cannot do any of these things overnight. Allowance should be made for long 
and variable lags in the operation of monetary policy. 
A stable environment of low inflation is no guarantee that the private sector will be willing to take risk 
and establish enterprises, in the process employing resources and producing more output. Neither can 
it guarantee that government will produce the public goods and services necessary to support sound 
growth  and  development.  Efficiency  in  such  production,  whether  by  the  private  sector  or  by 
government,  can  also  not  be  guaranteed.  Nevertheless,  the  absence  of  distortions  arising  from 
inflation  significantly  improves  prospects  that  these  very  deserving  things  will  happen  and  will  be 
reflected in improved growth and employment outcomes. 
   2/4 
Monetary policy in our case does not simultaneously target inflation and the exchange rate. Once the 
inflation  targeting  framework  was  introduced,  the  exchange  rate  has  essentially  been  left  to  be 
determined  by  supply  and  demand  forces  in  the  market.  Not  that  there  is  no  relationship  between 
inflation and the exchange rate: If inflation is kept low as it is in our significantly large trading partner 
countries, the exchange rate is mostly likely to move sideways over the long run. But this does not 
constitute exchange rate targeting.  
To  develop  this  point  further,  one  of  the  calls  frequently  made  is  for  deliberate  depreciation  of  the 
exchange value of the rand in order to retain and expand employment in the tradables sector and to 
enhance  overall  growth.  To  realise  such  a  goal  in  practice  would  conceivably  require  some 
combination of significant exchange rate interventions by the Bank, a radical lowering of interest rates, 
abolishing of exchange controls and pronouncements by the Bank that it views the external value of 
the  rand  as  too  strong.  Each  of  these,  however,  has  its  own  challenges.  Foreign  exchange 
interventions of the kind demanded of the Bank involve payment of rand by the Bank to the private-
sector banks for such foreign currency. In order not to flood the money market with excessive rand 
liquidity, the rand created has to be sterilised. This involves an interest cost on the instruments used to 
sterilise the excess liquidity, such as the Bank’s debentures or government bonds. Having raised the 
Bank’s gross reserves from US$8 billion two years ago to almost US$20 billion at present, the interest 
cost of sterilisation – ultimately for the account of the taxpayer – has been considerable. 
Lower interest rates could lead to exchange rate appreciation if expectations of increased short-term 
profitability  and  higher  share  prices  overshadow  the  conventional  mechanism  which  is  based  on 
comparative  interest  rates  on  bonds  and  loans,  and  these  expectations  are  reflected  in  substantial 
share  purchases  by  non-residents.  Similarly,  further  relaxation  of  exchange  control  could  boost 
confidence in the rand and prompt inflows rather than outflows of foreign currency, thereby leading to 
appreciation of the rand. Finally, pronouncements on an appropriate level for the rand’s external value 
might need to be backed up by currency interventions if they are to be taken seriously by the market. 
But in any case the desired outcome may not arise. 
Despite these complications, the Bank has a preference for a relatively stable and competitive level of 
the external value of the rand. Large movements in the exchange rate disrupt resource allocation and 
economic  growth,  while  an  overvalued  exchange  rate  would  disqualify  deserving  exporters  from 
entering  international  markets  on  a  sustainable  basis.  Nevertheless,  experience  with  large-scale 
intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  has  been  unfavourable.  With  1½  days’  turnover  in  the 
South African foreign exchange market equal to the entire US$20 billion gross reserves currently held 
by  the  Bank,  and  with  numerous  forces  outside  of  the  South  African  authorities’  control  having  an 
important  bearing  on  supply  and  demand  in  the  market  for  foreign  exchange,  caution  is  warranted 
before entering the market with an exchange rate objective in mind. Accordingly, the Bank prefers to 
leave the determination of the exchange rate essentially to market forces.  
The  Bank  of  course  helps  with  price  discovery  in  the  market  by  disseminating  data  on  its  foreign 
exchange  reserves  and  international  liquidity  position,  and  on  the  balance  of  payments  and  foreign 
debt  situation.  The  Bank  participates  in  the  market  on  a  moderate  scale  to  cream-off  any  excess 
foreign exchange. Since other countries with similar characteristics tend to have more reserve assets 
relative to imports than South Africa, the Bank has over the past two years, on balance, accumulated 
an additional US$12 billion in foreign exchange – not without at least some impact on the level of the 
exchange rate. This is common knowledge in the market. 
Further constraints and risks 
Fiscal policy has been prudent over the past decade and has contributed to the stable macroeconomic 
environment.  There  is  currently  no  fiscal  dominance  over  monetary  policy  decision  making. 
Government  lowered  its  debt  ratio  and  debt  service  ratio,  thereby  freeing  resources  for  productive 
service delivery, and the public sector borrowing requirement has been maintained at low levels.  
However,  there  is  widespread  agreement  that  higher  economic  and  employment  growth  on  a 
sustained basis would require stronger capital formation. Currently the ratio of fixed capital formation 
to gross domestic product is around 17 per cent, and the real fixed capital stock is growing by 2 per 
cent per annum. It is calculated that this ratio should ideally rise to 22 per cent in order to boost the 
rate  of  growth  in  the  capital  stock  to  4½  to  5  per  cent  per  year  –  as  seems  necessary  in  order  to 
sustain a real growth rate of around 6 per cent. Stepping up the investment ratio is set to entail much 
higher  levels  of  fixed  capital  formation  by  government,  public  corporations  and  the  private  sector. 
   3/4 
There  are  encouraging  signs  that  this  is  starting  to  happen,  although  not  without  delays  and  some 
frustration. In many instances financing seems not to be the binding constraint, but skills - in particular 
project  management  and  other  real-sector  implementation  capacity  issues.  Fortunately  the  public 
sector’s debt ratio is favourably low. Insofar as capital formation will be import intensive, the country’s 
level  of  international  indebtedness  is  also  quite  low,  at  around  71  per  cent  of  one  year’s  export 
proceeds. This provides latitude on the balance of payments front, alongside the fact that South Africa 
has a flexible exchange rate which can adjust to changing circumstances.  
Training, education and productive employment of all the people wishing to work is probably the most 
crucial  factor  on  which  sustained  long-term  growth  depends.  The  challenges  in  this  area  are 
enormous.  Sparkling  growth  requires  utilisation  of  all  those  skills  that  are  in  short  supply, 
entrepreneurship,  adequate  and  relevant  training,  and  a  dedicated  workforce  using  those  acquired 
skills  productively  and  ploughing  back  whatever  has  been  learnt.  Six  years  of  economic  expansion 
have been drawing idle resources into the growth process in South Africa, thereby allowing “learning 
by doing” to take place and building up considerable momentum. But numerous concerns related to 
human capital formation remain.  
With  the  sustained  upswing  in  the  economy  and  more  favourable  financial  conditions  there  is  of 
course  the  risk  that  South  African  consumers  will  get  carried  away  as  real  household  disposable 
income rises briskly and real estate and share investments yield high returns. The level of household 
debt relative to annual disposable income has already risen to almost 62 per cent, marginally higher 
than its previous peak value. While currently debt service ratios are undemanding on account of the 
reduction in interest rates since mid-2003, households would be well-advised to remember the ever-
present  risk  of  a  deterioration  in  inflation  prospects,  which  could  result  in  a  tightening  of  monetary 
policy and the stresses and strains of servicing that debt at a higher interest rate. 
And  talking  of  deterioration  in  inflation  prospects,  the  latest  BER  inflation  expectations  survey  of 
course showed higher expected inflation than before. In the wake of oil price trends during the past 
year,  this  did  not  really  come  as  a  surprise.  However,  25  months  of  CPIX  inflation  within  the  
3-to-6-per-cent  target  range  has  demonstrated  that  low  and  stable  inflation  can  be  achieved  and 
remains a priority of economic policy. The Monetary Policy Committee will not allow price shocks to 
develop into sustained inflation spirals, but will be vigilant, safeguarding the gains made in combating 
inflation.  
Conclusion 
Central  banks  combat  inflation  precisely  in  order  to  nurture  economic  and  employment  growth  – 
balanced growth of the sustainable types. The South African Reserve Bank will certainly not neglect 
its duty in this regard. 
But let the debate continue. Maybe in the process all of us will learn new lessons on how to do things 
in a nuanced manner. 
Once  again,  thank  you  very  much  for  affording  us  this  opportunity  to  interact  with  such  an  august 
gathering of people interested in high economic growth and employment creation. 
Thank you very much.  
 
   4/4 
