Glenn Stevens: Financial challenges and opportunities in the Asia-Pacific 
region for the 21st century 
Opening remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to The 
18th Australasian Finance and Banking Conference 2005, Sydney, 14 December 2005. 
 It is a pleasure to be here to open the 18th Australasian Finance and Banking Conference.  
Our national and international financial markets play an increasingly prominent role in day-to-day life. 
They are certainly in the news. Not a single television or radio news bulletin passes without us being 
informed of the latest daily, or even intra-daily, movement in the US stock market, the exchange rate, 
the price of gold and – probably of more interest to the average person – the price of crude oil.  
I suspect that, to no small extent, this almost obsessive focus on short-term price movements reflects 
the need for a high-capacity media to have a large amount of apparent 'news' to convey, even when 
the quantity of genuine information is small. The high-frequency nature of financial market trading – a 
new piece of 'news' every minute – is a natural source of grist for this particular mill. How useful this 
actually is, on the other hand, one could debate.  
Likewise,  the  short-term  reporting  schedule  of  corporate  and  fund  management  results  is  perhaps 
understandable, viewed from the perspective of accountability in an era in which trust in management 
has  been  weakened.  But,  at  the  same  time,  it  probably  exacerbates  the  natural  human  tendency 
toward myopia and impulsive decision-making by investors, while the attendant pressure on managers 
to deliver steadily improving results period by period hardly seems conducive to far-sighted decisions. 
It  remains  to  be  seen,  moreover,  what  will  be  the  effect  on  behaviour  of  changes  to  accounting 
standards which will almost certainly increase the apparent short-term volatility of corporate results. 
Some have argued, I think persuasively, that an undue focus by investors and managers on the short 
term is a significant impediment to long-run performance. This seems an issue worthy of further study. 
Hopefully, you might spare some time for that at this conference.  
In any event, there is no doubt that the functioning of our financial systems is very important. Once 
upon a time, when asked what was the role of a financial system, we might have answered: to match 
the resources of savers and the needs of entrepreneurial types, so as to enable the deployment of 
capital in some prospectively profitable venture. That (rather 19th-Century-sounding) definition, with an 
emphasis  on  intermediation,  is  still  correct  as  far  as  it  goes.  But  these  days,  with  an  increasing 
proportion of society's capital – even our infrastructure – held in marketable form, the role of markets 
in pricing assets is key. We would add, as well, that the role of a financial system is to price risk, in 
ever more finely defined bundles, and to allow people to adjust their portfolios so as to be exposed to 
just those risks, and opportunities, that they desire – no more and no less.  
The system's efforts to provide just that set of possibilities has led to a plethora of sophisticated and 
increasingly complex products. This development, in turn, has raised questions by various observers 
and regulators as to whether those who have ended up holding certain risks are fully aware of them. 
Questions  have  also  been  asked  of  late  about  the  back-office  infrastructure  supporting  the  most 
complex transactions, and there is a degree of concentration in some of these markets which could 
conceivably be problematic under less benign market conditions.  
Nonetheless,  these  functions  beyond  pure  intermediation  seem  only  likely  to  grow  further  in 
importance  for  various  reasons,  not  least  among  them  demographic  trends.  As  people  confront 
longevity risk, in addition to the usual battery of market risks, the search will be on for new instruments 
and practices which enable this risk to be priced and managed. While it is highly doubtful, in my view, 
that ageing can be addressed simply by financial engineering, the financial system will have a role to 
play.  Its  effectiveness  and  efficiency  in  that  role will  be  a  focus  of  discussion  in  years  to  come.  It's 
appropriate,  therefore,  that  some  parts  of  the  conference  program  will  be  devoted  to  topics  in  the 
retirement income area.  
It is also fitting that the conference has adopted the title 'Financial Challenges and Opportunities in the 
Asia  Pacific  Region  for  the  21st  Century'.  The  Asia-Pacific  has  been,  and  remains,  a  source  of 
economic  dynamism  –  that's  the  'opportunity'  part.  But  it  has  also  been  a  scene  of  considerable 
financial turmoil over the past decade – that is the 'challenge' part.  
BIS Review 85/2005 
 1
You have had some thoughtful presentations this morning on some of the issues. I could not do justice 
to all of them in brief remarks. Allow me to touch briefly on just a couple of themes. 
The first is the potential, and need, for financial development in Asia. It has been apparent for some 
time that east Asia's weight in global production of goods and services is increasing (Japan aside). 
Non-Japan  east  Asia,  including  China,  has  seen  its  share  of  global  GDP  almost  double,  to  about 
20 per cent, since 1990. It is likely to rise further in the period ahead. The extent of merchandise trade 
within the region has also grown rapidly, as trade barriers have declined and cross-border component 
sourcing has increased. So Asia is, these days, a powerful force in international trade.  
Yet, according to many east Asian people themselves, the development of Asia's financial system has 
not kept pace. It is not so much the size of the banking systems which is in mind here – in a number of 
cases, these are actually quite large (though there are some important exceptions like Indonesia, or 
the Philippines). Rather, it is the depth, resilience to shocks and capacity to intermediate the region's 
savings within the region that is at issue.  
With  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  of  1997–98,  it  was  apparent  that  Asia  was  not  resilient  to 
disturbances in international capital markets. Foreign capital had flowed into east Asia – something 
which  made sense  then,  and  still  makes  sense  now.  The  exchange rate  risk  associated with  these 
flows, however, was being borne mostly in the recipient countries: they had borrowed foreign currency 
unhedged.  The  result  of  these  exposures  was  that,  when  exchange  rates  moved,  the  pain  was 
concentrated in banks and/or their customers in Asia, something which exacerbated the crisis and put 
policy-makers in an impossible position. Because of heavy reliance on bank funding, with somewhat 
under-developed  general  capital  markets,  this  was  very  damaging  for  a  number  of  regional 
economies.  
Post  crisis,  still  keen  on  a  fair  degree  of  exchange  rate  stability,  but  unsure  of  the  extent  of  likely 
support from the international community in the event of another crisis, the countries of east Asia have 
opted for greater self insurance against volatility of international capital flows. This takes the form of 
vastly increased holdings of official reserve assets, mainly the US dollar. While this response has been 
understandable, some even in Asia have questioned whether it makes sense for Asia to operate, in 
effect, as an extension of the US dollar zone.  
Joseph Yam,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  laments  the  situation  in  the 
following terms:  
Whether  we  like  it  or  not,  we  now  find  ourselves  in  the  unenviable  position  of 
holding a substantial part of our savings in the financial liabilities of an economy 
that  does  not  save,  fearing  that  a diversification of  a  small  part of  such holdings 
might lead to a sharp fall in the value of the rest, thus shooting ourselves in the 
foot.  We  also  find  ourselves  somewhat  stuck  with  recycling  a  large  part  of  our 
savings  through  the  developed  markets  back  into  the  region  in  a  much  more 
volatile form, occasionally creating havoc in our monetary and financial systems.1  
The challenge for Asia then, according to its own financial leaders, is to develop a financial system 
which can allocate local savings to local needs more directly, can be resilient to the risks associated 
with international capital flows, and be somewhat less dependent on banks as a funding channel.  
This  is  no  small  task.  Thus  far,  apart  from  managing  the  fall-out  from  the  crisis,  efforts  have  been 
made  to  strengthen  banking  systems.  A  good  deal  of  work  has  also  occurred  to  improve  capital 
markets, particularly bond markets. 
One of the key breakthroughs will be when Asian governments and corporates can borrow as needed 
in open markets, in their own currency and at an acceptable price, leaving any currency risk to others 
willing to bear it – like foreign investors. Australian borrowers have been in this happy position for a 
long time now, like their counterparts in other advanced economies. For emerging market countries to 
enjoy the same opportunity would be a major improvement on the past.  
For this to occur, there needs to be a confluence of high-quality issuers, informed investors, and well-
functioning  markets  to  allow  hedging  and  swaps.  As  Asian  authorities  seek  to  facilitate  the 
                                                      
1   Remarks made at the recent Global Bond Summit, Hong Kong. Available at 
http://www.info.gov.hk/hkma/eng/speeches/speechs/joseph/20051115e1.htm
2 
 BIS Review 85/2005
that 
their  demand 
for  more  sophisticated  asset  and 
development  of  these  markets  by  removing  impediments,  and  the  occasional  modest  official 
transaction, opportunities will presumably exist for capable market players in Australasia to play a role.  
Opportunities might also lie, perhaps over a longer horizon, in the area of household finance, since the 
number of middle-income Asian households is rising quickly, and their income growth is rapid. It could 
be  anticipated 
liability  products  will 
correspondingly grow. One would think that Australasian institutions would be well placed, given the 
skills acquired in their home markets, to take part in any such development.  
A second, not unrelated, theme is the so-called 'global imbalances' issue. There is no time to rehearse 
all the arguments here, but one simple point can be made. As the size of capital flows from Asia to the 
US  increased  over  the  past  decade  or  so,  the  price  –  the  interest  rate  –  declined.  Hence,  it  would 
appear  that  developments  on  the  supply  side  of  this  market  were  very  important  in  driving  the 
phenomenon. That is a reminder that if the capital is to flow more slowly to the US, adjustments to 
Asian behaviour will be part of the process.  
The increased net supply of saving from Asia reflected a sharp decline in corporate investment in the 
Asian  region  (outside  of  China)  after  the  crisis.  At  some  point,  Asian  corporate  investment  will 
presumably  recover.  One  would  also  imagine  that,  in  some  cases,  there  is  a  need  for  upgrades  to 
public  infrastructure,  and  a  case  for  higher-quality  private  housing.  Hence,  in  due  course,  the  net 
supply of Asian saving to international markets, other things equal, will decline. Just when that will be, 
of  course,  and  what  other  changes  might  accompany  such  developments,  no-one  can  say.  But  no 
discussion of the challenges in the Asia-Pacific region would be complete without some coverage of 
such issues.  
Let me conclude by saying how fitting it is that the conference takes place in Sydney, one of the Asia-
Pacific's major financial centres. As the first largish market to open in the world trading day and as the 
financial centre of a medium-sized, developed economy, Sydney plays a prominent role in the region's 
financial trading, even though some other markets are somewhat larger. It is the leading market for the 
world's  sixth  most  actively  traded  currency.  Australia's  share  of  global  foreign  currency  trading,  at 
about  3½ per  cent,  is  higher  than  in  a  number  of  comparably  sized  economies,  and  is  about  three 
times Australia's weight in world GDP. Markets here are sophisticated and liquid, and the participants 
innovative. Sydney, and Australia more generally, has much to offer the region in financial services 
expertise. That said, participants here would be only too aware that financial market operations are 
highly competitive and the local players need to remain on their toes. So it is good to see some local 
market  participants  thinking  about  how  to  contribute  to  the  development  of  vibrant  markets  in  the 
region.  
These and other interesting issues will no doubt be covered in the conference, if they have not already 
been. I wish you well in your deliberations.  
BIS Review 85/2005 
 3
