Heng Swee Keat: Singapore’s investment banking industry and capital markets 
Keynote address by Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the Singapore Investment Banking Association 30th Anniversary Dinner, Singapore, 6 October 2005. 
 I  am  honoured  to  address  this  distinguished  audience,  and  to  join  you  in  celebrating  the  30th 
anniversary  of  the  establishment  of  SIBA.    May  I  thank  the  Chairman  and  the  Committee  for  this 
honour. 
Global investment banking trends 
In the 30 years since SIBA's predecessor body, the Merchant Bankers Association, was set up, the 
business of underwriting and trading has been dramatically transformed. The globalization of capital 
markets,  driven  by  liberalisation  and  technological  advances,  has  created  a  web  of  interconnected 
markets.  This  has  facilitated  innovation  and  sharpened  competition.      Financial  transactions  now 
transcend  sovereign  borders  as  well  as  traditional  product  lines.  Investors  have  also  become  more 
sophisticated and demanding, and a new array of products has evolved to meet complex needs.  This 
has led to significant growth, for example, of derivatives instruments to complement the cash markets, 
including within Asia.   
Responding to these new challenges, investment banks have deepened capabilities, and many have 
also  undergone  significant  consolidation,  to  achieve  scale  and  depth.    Beyond  the  traditional 
underwriting business, advisory and fees-related businesses have expanded.  Investment banks also 
structure, market and trade in a full range of financial instruments - equities, fixed income, derivatives 
and hybrid instruments. 
Recognizing these changes, SIBA enlarged its membership, and took on its current name in 2000 to 
reflect its role in representing a wider group of members. That was a very timely move. 
Developments in Singapore's capital markets 
In the last 3 decades, Singapore's capital markets have grown in tandem with the growth in the global 
markets.    New  listings  have  grown,  and  the  Singapore  Exchange  has  attracted  many  foreign 
companies.  Foreign  listings  now  account  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  total  listings,  making  SGX  the 
most  international  among  Asian  exchanges.    Our  debt  market  has  also  grown,  with  outstanding 
corporate debt issuance rising from S$23 billion in 1995 to S$123 billion in 2004. 
SIBA  and  its  members  have  contributed  to  our  success  in  developing  our  capital  markets.    The 
association  has  not  only  represented  the  interest  of  the  investment  banking  community  well;  its 
initiatives  have  also  facilitated  the  development  of  investment  banking  activities  in  Singapore.    The 
professionalism and integrity of SIBA members in executing financial transactions have ensured that 
we maintain investor confidence in our markets.  
Going  forward,  capital  markets  worldwide  will  continue  to  evolve  and  present  new  challenges.    For 
Singapore's capital markets to capitalize on fresh opportunities, we must all, as regulators, as market 
participants and as an industry body, do our utmost to keep up with changes.  I hope we can work in 
close partnership to break new grounds for the industry here.  
I believe there are 3 fundamental factors that will enable our capital markets to stay ahead.  Firstly, a 
high  standard  of  industry  practice,  enabled  by  high  industry  standards,  and  a  strong,  responsive 
supervisory framework.  Secondly, a strong pool of market participants with deep expertise.  Thirdly, a 
good network among the players and regulators to promote collaboration and the introduction of new 
products; as well as to promote Singapore as the choice location for capital raising and trading.  All 
these are to be done without of course undermining competition or investors' interests. 
I believe SIBA can play key roles in each of these areas. Allow me to elaborate. 
   1/3 
High standards to maintain confidence  
A  fundamental  building  block  of  a  good  capital  market  is  trust  and  integrity.    Investors  must  have 
confidence that the market is clean, transparent, and provides fair dealing for all participants.  They 
demand  a  high  standard  of  corporate  governance,  timely  disclosures,  and  compliance  with 
regulations. 
Hence,  MAS,  as  well  as  other  relevant  agencies  like  the  Accounting  and  Corporate  Regulatory 
Authority  and  the  Singapore  Exchange,  have  actively  worked  on  various  initiatives  to  enhance 
disclosure,  strengthen  market  discipline  and  improve  corporate  governance  of  listed  companies. 
These efforts included the Code of Corporate Governance, revisions to the SGX listing rules, as well 
as the introduction of the new civil penalty regime under the Securities and Futures Act that provides 
an alternative enforcement mechanism.  
In September 2005, MAS released the Guidelines on Corporate Governance to provide guidance on 
the  best  practices  for  financial  institutions  on  corporate  governance.    For  banks,  and  direct  life 
insurance  companies  above  a  certain  size,  requirements  that  MAS  considers  essential  for  sound 
corporate governance are now embedded in directives for compliance.  
In response to the growing interest in Islamic finance, we also amended our regulations to facilitate the 
growth  of  specific  segments  of  the  market.    These  changes  will  enable  financial  institutions  to  use 
Singapore as a base to reach out to clients and investors beyond the region, especially in the Middle 
East. 
Clear regulatory treatment and tax rules can help to catalyse the development of markets.  The rapid 
development of Real Estate Investment Trust, or REITs, is a good example.  Since the launch of the 
first REIT in July 2002, this segment has developed rapidly.  Today, the total market capitalization of 
REITS is close to S$12 billion, making Singapore the second largest REIT market in Asia, after Japan.  
Singapore is now a preferred location for property owners to structure their REITs.   
To further strengthen our regulatory framework for REITs, so that this market segment can maintain its 
high reputation and grow in a sustained way, we have recently embarked on a consultation exercise to 
review  the  Property  Fund  Guidelines  governing  REITs.  We  expect  to  announce  the  results  of  our 
review soon, which will provide greater clarity on how we will be strengthening the REITs  regime to 
promote better governance of REITS and further facilitate the growth of the industry.  
As market players, SIBA members understand commercial realities and market practices well.  SIBA 
therefore plays a very important role in complementing MAS to ensure that high standards and best 
practices are upheld in the market.  I am therefore very glad that SIBA has taken this role seriously.  
In Aug 2004, SIBA released the Due Diligence Guidelines, which set out the basic principles on due 
diligence  to  be  performed  by  issuer  managers  for  initial  public  offerings.    The  Guidelines  raise  the 
professional standards of issue managers, and help maintain investors' confidence in the quality of the 
issue.   MAS endorses these Guidelines as a valuable guide to issue managers and underwriters on 
the level of due diligence expected of them as professional advisers and in meeting their obligations 
under the Securities and Futures Act and SGX listing manual.  
MAS  appreciates  that  SIBA  is  now  currently  working  to  release  a  Code  of  Best  Practices  on  Debt 
Issuance.    This  Code  will  serve  as  guidance  on  debt  issuance.    I  believe  this  will  enable  issue 
managers to discharge their mandates better, and to address potential concerns of investors. Such a 
code will be beneficial to issuers and issue managers, as well as to investors.   
Developing deep expertise 
The  second  key  factor  in  developing  our  market  is  expertise.    Investment  banking  is  a  
knowledge-intensive,  innovation-driven  industry.  A  deep  pool  of  highly  trained  and  committed 
professionals is critical to enable the industry to thrive.  The nurturing of these professionals should 
start  from  academic  education,  where  knowledge  and  theories  of  investment  banking  could  be 
imparted.    This  provides  the  foundation,  to  allow  professionals  to  deepen    knowledge  and  skills 
through on-the-job training and professional upgrading courses that focus on commercial issues and 
execution skills. 
With the experience and expertise among its members, SIBA is well-positioned to spearhead efforts to 
develop the pool of investment banking professionals in Singapore.  The association's collaboration 
with  SMU  in  2002  to  introduce  an  executive  course  on  fixed  income  markets  serves  as  a  good 
   2/3 
foundation  for  future  training  initiatives.    I  understand  that  SIBA  is  also  working  on  introducing  a 
corporate finance course.  SIBA's collaboration with the SMU, as well as its role in spearheading the 
FICS (Financial Industry Competency Standards) in corporate finance, will help the industry to develop 
expertise in this core area.  
Promoting Singapore as a preferred location for capital raising, exploring and developing new 
growth areas 
The third key ingredient in developing our capital markets is effective promotion and innovation.  The 
continued  development  of  Singapore's  capital  markets  will  significantly  depend  on  industry 
practitioners, including SIBA members, taking an active interest in promoting Singapore as a preferred 
capital-raising location.  Industry players like the SGX and our investment banks can undertake more 
promotional trips, to market the strengths of the Singapore markets.  
I  am  therefore  delighted  to  announce  that  the  Singapore  Exchange  will  be  launching  its  Global 
Depository Receipt programme soon. This innovative new product would provide an alternative means 
through which foreign companies can access institutional funds from Singapore.   
Similar  to  the  American  Depository  Receipts    or  Global  Depository  Receipts  offered  in  many  other 
American  or  European  exchanges,  the  Global  Depository  Receipts  to  be  offered  by  SGX  will  allow 
foreign  companies  greater  exposure  in  the  Singapore  market  and  provide  them  with  a  wider 
international shareholder base.  It will help to boost the company's prestige in its local market, in being 
traded internationally, while also encouraging greater liquidity for the company's shares.  We believe 
that  this  new  product  will  provide  investment  bankers  in  Singapore  with  a  wider  range  of  solutions 
when advising companies keen on tapping Singapore's capital markets for fund raising.  
MAS is also considering how best we can treat corporate bonds as regulatory liquid assets of banks.  
This is in response to market feedback from SIBA, and is expected to increase demand from banks in 
Singapore for corporate bonds.  This will eventually attract more corporate debt issuance in Singapore 
and further the development of our debt markets.  MAS will be consulting the industry on this initiative 
in due course.   
To help generate further buzz in the Singapore market, SIBA can make use of its extensive network of 
experts  to  organize  seminars  and  conferences  to  bring  investors,  bankers  and  other  market 
practitioners to discuss new areas of interest and to gain wider understanding of the developments in 
the Singapore capital markets.  
SIBA and its members can also help to identify investment instruments that will better service clients' 
needs,  and  facilitate  the  development  of  such  instruments  in  Singapore.    For  instance,  equity 
derivatives  is  a  rapidly  growing  area,  as  it  offers  a  more  flexible  alternative  to  investing  in  the 
underlying assets.  This is especially attractive to institutional investors and hedge fund managers.   
To  this  end,  SIBA  is  establishing  a  task  force  to  explore  the  potential  of  equities  derivatives  and 
structured  products.    I  understand  the  task  force  will  identify  the  range  of  derivative  products  that 
Singapore could focus on, study the competitiveness of Singapore as an equity derivative centre, and 
determine  the  infrastructure  necessary  to  support  the  growth  of  this  industry.    I  look  forward  to  the 
active participation of SIBA members in helping to grow the product offerings available here. 
Conclusion 
Over  the  last  30  years,  SIBA  has  made  significant  contributions  to  the  development  of  Singapore's 
investment  banking  industry  and  capital  markets.    Going  forward,  it  is  vital  for  the  association  to 
remain relevant in the ever-changing market environment in order to ensure its continued success. 
MAS is committed to working in partnership with SIBA, to develop Singapore's financial sector and to 
raise industry standards and best practices.  We look forward to working closely with SIBA, and trust 
that  SIBA  will  emerge  as  an  even  stronger  industry  champion  of  investment  banking  activities  in 
Singapore in the years to come.  
Thank you.  
 
   3/3 
