Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Paris Match 
Interview  of  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  conducted  by 
Ms Elisabeth Chavelet (Paris Match) on 7 December 2005 and published in the edition of Paris Match 
dated 15-21 December 2005. 
The publication of the translation was authorised by Paris Match. 
 Paris  Match.  After  two  uneventful  years  at  the  head  of  the  ECB,  in  December  you  became 
embroiled in  your first political storm. Political leaders, economists, bosses and trade union 
representatives lined up to condemn the 0.25% increase in your headline rate on 1 December. 
They accuse you of threatening Europe’s fragile recovery. Has this manning of the barricades 
made you think again?  
Jean-Claude  Trichet.  I  would  not  say  that  the  last  two  years  have  been  uneventful.  It  has  been 
necessary  to  safeguard  price  stability  in  a  period  made  very  difficult  by  the  increase  in  oil  prices. 
Moreover, it is only to be expected in large and exemplary democracies that different opinions should 
be voiced. It is up to us to speak out tirelessly and marshal the most convincing arguments. That said, 
I believe that the public debate did not reflect the true feelings of the 311 million European and 60 
million French citizens. All the indications are that that our fellow European citizens require us to be 
vigilant with regard to price stability and that they are not overly content with the situation as it stands. I 
would have preferred at least part of the public debate in Europe and France to have focused on what 
our fellow citizens want. We believe that, by remaining faithful to our mandate – which is to safeguard 
price stability and preserve the euro’s purchasing power – we are doing what 311 million Europeans 
require of us while, at the same time, by doing so we are supporting growth and job creation.  
P.M. Many Europeans label the euro a factor of inflation after seeing the price of a loaf of bread 
rise  from  five  French  francs  to  €1,  an  espresso  from  five  French  francs  to  €1.20,  or  a 
scratchcard from ten French francs to €2. What do you think of this?  
J.-C. T. You are exaggerating the increase in the cost of a loaf or an espresso on 1 January 2002! In 
some economies, the idea that the euro is inflationary remains rooted in the collective consciousness 
because,  at  the  time  of  the  changeover  to  the  single  currency,  a  very  few  prices  increased 
disproportionately. But all our analyses show that this effect was minimal and has now disappeared. 
That said, we must remain vigilant. 
P.M.  Nevertheless,  well-respected  figures  were  highly  critical  of  you  on  the  eve  of  your 
decision to increase rates. Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the Euro Group, and Thierry 
Breton, the French finance minister, said “inflation is under control” and “there is no risk of a 
resurgence in the euro area”. Are you speaking a different language?  
J.-C. T. The ECB, together with the whole of the Eurosystem, including the national central banks and, 
in  France,  the  Banque  de  France,  is  responsible  for  price  stability.  There  is  an  essential  difference 
between  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council,  which  must  demonstrate  to  our  fellow  citizens  that  price 
stability  is  safeguarded  effectively,  and  the  leaders  you  mention,  who  have  different,  albeit  very 
important responsibilities. Furthermore, we must not wait until inflation has become established before 
we tackle it. Prevention is always better than cure. Finally, if you compare what was said before and 
after our decision, you will see that the tone alters substantially. 
P.M. So your critics were won over by your arguments?  
J.-C. T. That you might ask them. 
P.M. While not disputing the threat of inflation, no less an institution than the OECD sent you 
an SOS pleading “OK, increase rates, but give the economies a breathing space. The recovery 
recorded  in  the  euro  area  in  the  third  quarter  of  the  year  is  fragile.  So  why  not  wait  until 
Autumn 2006?” Why is the ECB in such a hurry?  
J.-C. T. After two and a half years of interest rates below the lowest rates ever achieved by the most 
credible  currencies  of  Europe  in  the  past  fifty  years,  to  accuse  us  of  haste  is  at  the  very  least 
paradoxical. The Governing Council decided unanimously to increase rates because this move was 
warranted by an increase in the inflation risks.  
BIS Review 87/2005 
 1
P.M. What criteria served to justify this rate rise? There has of course been a rise in prices due 
to the leap in oil prices. Did you also take account of the boom in property prices and the surge 
in consumer credit?  
J.-C.  T.  We  increased  rates  as  a  preventative  measure,  thereby  strengthening  saver  confidence, 
because we identified these inflation risks. This allows us to continue to profit today from the lowest 
medium and long-term market interest rates for fifty years. It’s a remarkable contribution to growth and 
job creation, thanks to our credibility in delivering price stability. 
P.M. By anticipating a resurgence of inflation in the medium term, don’t you, as Jean-Claude 
Juncker fears, run the risk of triggering a round of wage rises that would work counter to your 
desire to fight inflation?  
J.-C.  T.  No,  not  at  all.  By  being  credible  in  our  task  of  safeguarding  price  stability,  we  protect  the 
purchasing power of Europe’s citizens and therefore move in the direction that everyone desires. 
P.M. So, you would say that everything is “under control”?  
J.-C. T. We will do at all times what is necessary. 
P.M.  If  you  are  so  certain  that  the  ECB  is  safeguarding  purchasing  power,  growth  and 
employment, why are these three areas doing so poorly throughout most of the euro area?  
J.-C. T. The ECB does well to satisfy one of the necessary conditions for growth and employment. But 
this does not suffice in itself. Monetary policy cannot do all on its own! There are many other factors 
that  contribute  to  growth,  in  particular,  economic  reforms,  budgetary  policies  and  also,  very 
importantly, the confidence of households and entrepreneurs. For our part, we do everything possible 
to give people this confidence by safeguarding their purchasing power, giving them a sound currency 
and, in the case of companies, by bringing them historically low medium and long-term market interest 
rates. 
P.M. What you are saying is that the ECB is doing its job, but others are not.  
J.-C. T. We are not singling out anyone. The European and global situation is very complex, and there 
are huge challenges to be overcome. 
P.M. But growth hasn't materialised. Why is that?  
J.-C. T. There is consensus in Europe, and certainly the ECB, the European Commission and all of the 
governments agree that the implementation of the structural reforms which form part of the well-known 
Lisbon Programme would lead to higher levels of growth and create more jobs. 
P.M. Is it the case that there are good and bad students within Europe?  
J.-C. T. Within the euro area, we have some shining examples of success achieved through various 
means.  Take  Ireland,  for  example.  This  country  has  a  higher  standard  of  living  than  the  European 
average,  overtaking  the  standard  of  living  in  France  and  England.  It  constitutes  an  outstanding 
example of growth and full employment, thanks to the courageous reforms which were implemented 
with broad-based popular support. Another success is Denmark, which is de facto in the euro area, 
with its combination of high but very well managed social protection and a very flexible labour market. 
It has achieved both growth and full employment under remarkable conditions. 
P.M. If the Maastricht Treaty could be rewritten, would you be among those who would prefer 
the ECB, like its American counterpart, the Federal Reserve System, to act as a doctor at the 
bedside of growth and employment, in addition to carrying out its task of policing inflation?  
J.-C.  T.  First,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  is  not  to  be  rewritten.  Second,  in  this  respect,  it  rigorously 
incorporates  the  features  of  French  and  German  law  and  the  laws  of  the  various  nations  which 
decided to merge their currencies to create the euro. It was not, therefore, something new. By the way, 
almost all countries worldwide have adopted a principle of monetary policy whereby the central bank is 
assigned the task of guaranteeing price stability. 
P.M. The Federal Reserve System being, therefore, an exception?  
J.-C. T. The Federal Reserve System is not in itself a real exception. Whenever my colleague, Alan 
Greenspan,  speaks,  he  always  says,  as  we  do,  that  price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
sustainable growth and job creation. You will see that he makes this point in most of his speeches. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2005
P.M. Following the interest rate hike of 1 December 2005, you said, “we are not engaging, ex 
ante, in a series of interest rate increases.” Does this mean that you are promising that there 
will be no further increase in interest rates in the coming months?  
J.-C. T. As regards future monetary policy, I reiterate what I said on behalf of the Governing Council 
following our most recent decision: “We did not decide “ex ante” to engage in a series of interest rate 
increases. We will in the future take the decisions that will be necessary to deliver price stability, to be 
credible  in  delivering  price  stability  over  time  and  to  preserve  the  solid  anchoring  of  inflationary 
expectations  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability”.  I  would  not  say  anything  else.  This  is  the 
Governing Council’s position. 
P.M. Since France voted “no” to the referendum on the Constitutional Treaty, Europe seems to 
be totally paralysed. Does that worry you?  
J.-C.  T.  Europe  has  experienced  and  is  experiencing  a  complex  historical  episode  in  a  rapidly 
changing  world.  I  remain  very  optimistic.  I  believe  that  the  progress  of  Europe,  which  is  a  colossal 
historical undertaking, has temporarily hit a difficult patch that probably in itself results from its truly 
phenomenal success. Who could have predicted the fall of the Soviet Union, and that the whole of 
Communist  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  would  join  Western  Europe  very  quickly?  I  think  that  in 
Europe we are in a maturing phase. As far as we are concerned, Europe has not come to a standstill. 
Rather, it is very dynamic. We work with the twelve countries of the euro area, and the other eight 
countries whose currencies are directly pegged to the euro by means of the European exchange rate 
mechanism.  In  order  to  prepare  well  for  the  success  of  the  European  Union  and  enlargement,  27 
nations  are  working  together  in  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks,  including  Romania  and 
Bulgaria as observers. We are proud that we have given Europe a credible currency and a historically 
unparalleled financial environment with medium and long-term interest rates at levels that hundreds of 
millions of Europeans could only have dreamed of prior to the euro. 
P.M. You still have six years left of your mandate as President with a very hectic life. Don't you 
sometimes wish that you could go fishing in your beloved city of Saint-Malo?  
J.-C. T. Along with my colleagues on the Executive Board, the Governing Council, the entire ECB staff 
and the Eurosystem, I am very privileged to take part in such an immense historical endeavour that is 
of great benefit to Europe. It is inspiring. This justifies all of the hard work that we do. That said, I love 
going to Saint-Malo. For me, the Rance estuary is one of the most beautiful places on earth. 
BIS Review 87/2005 
 3
