Ardian Fullani: Microfinance in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Euro Mediterranean Conference 
on Micro Credit, Rome, 5-6 December 2005. 
 Distinguished  participants!  I’m  glad  to  participate  in  the  Euro  Mediterranean  Conference  on  Micro 
Credit, an important event associated with the announcement of the Year 2005 as the “International 
year of micro credit” by the United Nations.  
Authorities  of  a  country  usually  aim  at  achieving  sustainable  economic  growth  in  a  non-inflationary 
environment.  Ideally,  in  a  free  market,  capital will  go  to  those  opportunities  that  represent  the  most 
efficient and profitable investments. But, in a developing country, markets have several imperfections 
and issues and capital could easily be misallocated. It could go in those investment opportunities that 
provide  high  but  risky  quick  returns  and  on  other  low  efficiency  ventures  that  are  nearly  safe.  This 
behavior could  however  be  problematic  for  future  economic  growth  of  the country.  Many  sectors of 
enormous  long  term  growth  potential  can  be  left  unexploited.  This  means  that  some  areas  of  the 
economy  will  be  booming,  while  other  areas  will  be  considerably  lagging  behind  leading  to  a  very 
unbalanced  economic  development.  Also,  various  groups  of  population,  particularly  low  income 
groups, will most probably be excluded from financing opportunities increasing the odds of becoming 
poorer.  As  a  result,  social  problems  and  issues  may  arise  such  as:  job  losses,  loose  population 
movements and illegal establishments, etc, which will stretch public facilities to cope with this situation. 
Therefore,  it  is  important  to  find  ways,  to  ensure  more  balanced  development  opportunities  to  all 
sectors of the economy and groups of population. 
Albanian economy, by large relies, on micro-businesses. Nearly all enterprises in Albania fall into the 
category of small and medium enterprises SME-s. More than 90 percent of Albanian enterprises can 
be classified as small or medium-size according to our INSTAT data. The majority of these companies 
are engaged in trade and services, reflecting their micro business nature, and less in industry. As for 
employment, SME-s account for more than 40 % of total employment in the enterprise sector. There is 
a  high  concentration  in  the  region  of  Tirana-Durres  of  private  enterprises  than  other  regions,  while 
industry  is  concentrated  mainly  in  Elbasan.  This  new  private  sector  especially  SME-s  needs  the 
financial  support  to  grow.  Until  now  banking  sector  has  not  been  able  to  meet  these  needs.  The 
situation is more problematic because SME-s do not have very developed financial sectors. Usually, 
these countries also have difficulties to access international financial markets. 
I  don’t  want  you  to  get  me  wrong  about  the  role  of  financial  sector.  Financial  sector  has  made 
considerable steps in Albania. Today, our financial sector includes many banks and non-bank financial 
institutions,  savings  and  loans  associations  and  unions,  insurance  and  reinsurance  companies, 
pension funds. One should say though that the development of the financial sector institutions is more 
noticeable in the banking sector and the insurance sector. The banking system currently comprises 16 
operating institutions, with total assets of around 53 per cent of the country’s GDP. The system is well 
capitalized  and  liquid.  Its  intermediation  role  is  increasing.  The  lending  activity  although  small 
(accounting for around 23 percent of total banking assets and around 12 percent of GDP), is strongly 
picking  up.   Other  financial  institutions  are  trying  hard  to  increase  and  modernize  their  activity. 
However, many problems primarily legal and property rights related which are outside financial sector 
are making it difficult for them to increase their credit lines. 
Microfinance has proved to be a more effective way to deal with these problems. With its inventive 
formulas  it  makes  financial  resources  become  accessible  to  small  and  medium  businesses  that 
account  for  most  of  aggregate  production  during  these  development  stages.  These  resources  are 
often used to finance small projects in areas like agriculture, livestock or services like handicraft, small 
food stores etc.  
The first microfinance institutions in Albania, were set up in 1994 as development projects co-financed 
by the Albanian Government and the World Bank. 13 donors cooperate with the Albanian government 
in  supporting  the  development  of  SME-s  in  Albania.  From  1992  a  large  share  of  funds  has  been 
allocated in Albania as donation, but only a portion has been spent. Most of these funds has been 
BIS Review 88/2005 
 1
given  as  soft  loans  for  Albanian  government.  Aid  represents  around  30  %  and  only  5  %  are  direct 
commercial  loans  to  co-finance  the  private  investment.  This  sort  of  finance,  called  “Development 
Projects”, is mainly used to finance SME-s’ credit needs accompanied with technical assistance. The 
credit line funds are given from donors as soft loans and the government allocates them to banks to be 
used as commercial loans without harming the banking practice and the use of own bank capitals. As 
a consequence, a larger part of financial crediting sources is converted into commercial funds. 
Today,  the  microfinance  institutions  are  operating  as  self  sustained  institutions  with  an  increasing 
customer base. In the last 5-7 years several other institutions have been focusing on microfinance. 
Currently  we  have  133  individual  savings  and  loans  associations  organized  under  2  Unions,  which 
operate  in  rural  areas.  The  number  of  their  members  is  around  18  thousand  and  the  stock  of  their 
outstanding loans is around 12 million euro. In addition, we have 7 microfinance institutions with total 
assets  amounting  to  50  million  euros,  and  loans  of  43  million  euros.  Banks  are  also  getting  more 
active  in  microfinance  despite  their  little  interest  so  far.  This  can  be  explained  with  tightening 
competitive conditions in the market and the need to explore new investment opportunities. Now we 
see  an  increasing  amount  of  credit  going  to  small  businesses,  which  often  helps  them  in  the  initial 
stages. Banks are particularly active for the microfinance in the urban areas. In fact, one of the banks 
has  initially  started  to  operate  as  a microfinance  institution.  It  still  holds  a respectful  position  in  this 
market segment, particularly in the urban areas. Lending to microfinance sector now counts for more 
than 10 per cent of the whole lending portfolio of the banking system. 
The  quality  of  the  microfinance  loans  has  been  satisfactory.  On  average,  the  portfolio  at  risk  is 
between 1.5-2 percent, according to their reports. This is not only because of their small size (usually 
under  1.5  thousand  euros  each),  but  also  because  of  the  diversity  of  the  projects,  ensuring 
diversification  of  the  loan  portfolio.  One  should  also  say  that  the  experience  gained  by  the 
microfinance institutions in this area, have also played an important role for this good quality. 
The legal framework on microfinance was completed in 1996, with the approval of a special law that 
defined the principles upon which such institutions could be found and operate. Such principles for the 
specialized  institutions  included  free  will,  reciprocal  cooperation,  capitalization  of  the  profit  and 
reinvestment  in  the  community  etc.   Later  developments  made  it  necessary  for  the  Law  to  change. 
Hence, a new Law “On Savings and Loans Associations and their Unions” was approved in Parliament 
on May of 2001. Several changes supported this new law. Besides the principles that were restated, 
the Law has defined the legal personality of the microfinance institutions, their permitted activities, the 
rights  and  the  obligations  of  the  members  of  the  association,  the  managing  structures  of  the 
associations and their functions, other important supervisory financial requirements and ratios, the role 
of  the  Unions  and  that  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  as  the  regulatory  and  the  supervisory  authority. 
Mandated  with  this  role,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  approved  several  regulations  focusing  on 
microfinance  institutions  and  development.  This  regulatory  framework,  comprises  the  supervisory 
requirements  to  start  and  operate  a  Saving  and  Loan  association,  the  indicators  that  enable  their 
reporting  and  their  financial  analysis,  and  the  principles  based  on  which  the  on-site  examination  of 
such institutions occurs.   
The  regulation  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  “On  licensing  the  Savings  and  Loans  Associations  and  their 
Unions”,  is  the  first  document  issued  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  in  this  area,  representing  a  big  step 
forward into the formalization of these institutions. It defines the documentation requirements for the 
license application, the deadlines and the authority that should grant the license. These requirements 
are directed to the single associations, to the Union, and to the Union member association. It has been 
recognized  the  role  of  representing  Union  proposed  member  associations  in  the  licensing  process, 
meant also as an important tool to induce single SLA to become Union members. The number of the 
Unions is certainly not limited. The other important regulation is that of “The Supervision of Savings 
and  Loan  Associations  and  their  Unions”.  In  this  regulation,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  defined 
supervisory  indicators  for  certain  typologies  of  risk  that  are  characteristic  of  current  stage  of 
development  of  the  microfinance  institutions  in  Albania.  Counterparty  risk  is  assessed  through  the 
requirements for a consistent process of loan portfolio analysis. These includes the ways the loans are 
classified,  their  provisioning  requirements,  their  potential  individual  or  group  guarantees,  the 
supervisory norms of the loan quality etc.. In addition, the counterparty risk is indirectly controlled by 
the requirements in capital adequacy of the institution. There are also other risks that are considered 
in the regulation, for which certain requirements have been defined. For the liquidity risk, there have 
been set up various norms for maintaining sufficient liquid assets and limiting the duration of the loans. 
For the concentration risk, the regulation requirements focus on the lending activity, and set out the 
norms for the net exposure in relation to the total assets of the institution. This regulatory framework is 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2005
meant to be actively orienting the activity of the microfinance institutions, and as such, will be revised 
as the developments may require. Besides these two regulations, the examinations manual of these 
institutions has been prepared. It is based on the CAMELS system we use for banks, and is aiming at 
assessing the adequacy of the internal policies and procedures, the quality of the management and 
the identification, assessment and monitoring of risks. The Accounting Manual is also prepared and is 
based on the national accounting standards, adjusted for the microfinance activity. We retain current 
regulatory  framework,  after  some  expected  changes  and  approval,  is  adequately  monitoring 
microfinance activity in Albania while not becoming an impediment for its development.  
While  acknowledging  the  role  of  the  microfinance  as  an  important  tool  for  ensuring  development 
opportunities  to  small  businesses  that  otherwise  may  never  access  financial  resources,  one  should 
keep  in  mind  that  microfinance  is  sound  if  it  is  provided  by  sound  institutions.  There  is  not  much 
benefit  if  such  institutions  fail  because  of  lenience  of  their  internal  rules  and  procedures,  and/or 
because the supervisory authority has closed an eye on them because of their social role. This will 
also make other institutions become hesitant in engaging in microfinance.   
The  relationship  between  the  microfinance  institutions  and  the  banking  sector  regarding  their 
interaction in the economy financing, is a delicate issue. Their coexistence is certainly “peaceful” at the 
early development stage of at least one of these groups of institutions, but as the economy grows and 
competition  increases,  they  tend  to  move  toward  each-other.  At  that  stage,  it  is  important  to  pay 
special  attention  for  ensuring  clear  “rules  of  the  game”  for  their  activity  and  to  provide  adequate 
policies that allow for structural reforms of these institutions and of their market influence.  
In  conclusion,  microfinance  is  a  very  important  mean  to  achieve  a  balanced  economic  growth,  by 
providing financial support to small and medium businesses which are vital for the medium and long 
term economic growth. Compared to some other countries in the region, microfinance in Albania have 
shown higher growth rates with good quality. However, there is ample room for enhancing it further. 
Maintaining a stable macroeconomic environment, and the improvement of the level for a better law 
and order, and land and property rights, fair competition, are very important factors that will improve 
business financing in Albania. As supervisory authority we will try hard for microfinance future growth 
to be sound. The credit bureau project that our bank is undertaking shortly is also expected to boost 
credit through ameliorating information problems. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS Review 88/2005 
 3
