  30 March 2017 
 
Speech 
 
Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank, 
delivered at the 56th Annual Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, 30 March 
2017. 
 
 
Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs,  Speaker  of 
Parliament, bank directors, foreign ambassadors, ladies and gentlemen! 
 
We have come together today for the 56th Annual Meeting of the Central Bank 
of  Iceland.  At  the  time  of  last  year’s  meeting,  the  domestic  economy  was 
considered relatively strong. GDP had risen above the pre-crisis peak. National 
income had risen even more in recent years because of improved terms of trade. 
Unlike  many  previous  periods  of  full  employment,  the  economy  was  well 
balanced  internally  and  externally,  as  could  be  seen  in  a  two-year  period  of 
inflation at or below target and a sizeable current account surplus. This was a 
good position, but we also realised that it could be fragile, as demand pressures 
were  mounting  and  there  was  a  real  risk  of  overheating.  Developments 
internationally had been favourable for us in many ways, but the tide could turn. 
We therefore needed to be on the watch, and economic policy had to take this 
risk into consideration.  
 
Then  what  do  we  say  now,  when  growth  has  accelerated  even  further  and 
demand  pressures  are  even  greater,  yet  inflation  has  remained  below  target, 
inflation expectations have subsided to target, the 2016 current account surplus 
was at a historical high, and we own more than we owe abroad? In addition, the 
policy interest rate was lowered by 0.75 percentage points last year, the króna 
has appreciated by over 16%, the Central Bank has bought more than 350 b.kr. 
worth of foreign currency, the foreign exchange reserves have grown by over a 
third in foreign currency terms, and capital controls have been almost completely 
lifted  in  three  large  steps.  These  are  substantial  changes  in  a  single  year  – 
changes that will presumably take their place in economic history.  
 
What lies behind these developments? How could the domestic economy grow 
by  more  than  7%  in  2016  without  overheating  and  unleashing  inflation?  Five 
major factors are presumably of considerable significance whose mechanism it 
is  important  to  understand  in  order  to  assess  what  comes  next  and  formulate 
appropriate economic policy responses.  
 
First of all, the supply side of the economy is more flexible than before, owing 
to  increased  economic  integration  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  EEA 
Agreement plays a large role here, but so do other trade related agreements and 
 1 
 general  market-driven  developments  in  the  global  economy.  Because  of  this, 
when demand pressures start to develop, it is easier than before to mitigate them: 
by  importing  labour  and  other  production  factors,  by  using  foreign  inputs  in 
domestic  production  chains  to  a  greater  degree,  or  by  moving  a  portion  of 
operations  out  of  the  country.  Last  year,  for  instance,  net  migration  among 
foreign nationals was closing in on the previous peak from 2006.  
 
The second important factor is understanding the nature of the largest shock to 
the economy in the recent term and how it interacts with the countercyclical role 
of the exchange rate. The surge in tourism has been one of the main drivers of 
GDP growth in recent years. In part, the tourism industry utilises infrastructure 
and capital that were underutilised before growth in tourism took off; therefore, 
the impact on the level of domestic demand was less pronounced than it would 
have  been  if  the  surge  had  necessitated  an  immediate  increase  in  investment. 
Now,  however,  we  have  probably  reached  the  endpoint  as  far  as  this  is 
concerned. In addition, increased tourism brings with it foreign currency inflows 
that, other things being equal, will push the exchange rate upwards. This will cut 
into activity elsewhere, shift demand outside the domestic economy, and reduce 
inflation.  To  a  degree,  then,  after  full  employment  is  reached,  an  automatic 
counterweight develops, offsetting the pressures caused by growth in tourism.  
 
Third, global economic developments have remained favourable to us. Terms of 
trade for goods and services have improved in recent years, and foreign currency 
prices of imports have fallen.  
 
Fourth, a larger share of income is being channelled towards savings than has 
often been the case in the past. Last  year, gross national saving  – the share of 
GDP not used for private or public consumption – was nearly one-third of GDP, 
one of the highest national saving rates in our history. This high level of saving 
explains  why  last  year’s  current  account  surplus  was  so  large  even  though 
investment  had returned  to  its historical  average.  Underpinning it is  increased 
saving  by  households,  businesses,  and  the  public  sector,  which  in  turn  stems 
from several factors: increased caution following the experience of the financial 
crisis; an improved public sector outcome; the housing market situation, where 
more capital is required for a first home purchase; and the level of interest rates. 
A higher level of saving reduces excess demand in the economy.  
 
The fifth factor is the success of monetary policy in the recent term. This can be 
seen in  short-  and long-term inflation expectations, which have been at  target 
since  mid-2016.  In  addition,  expectations  appear  more  firmly  anchored  to  the 
target  than  before,  which  shows  in  the  fact  that  exchange  rate  volatility  and 
unexpected changes in inflation have less impact than they did in the past. The 
inflation target has therefore gained credibility. As a result, it takes more to move 
inflation away from the target than in the past, and inflation can be kept at target 
over the medium term with lower interest rates than was previously possible. By 
the same token, the possibilities for monetary policy to mitigate fluctuations in 
economic activity without jeopardising the inflation target are greater.  
 
 2 
 What is the current situation, in light of these explanations? In some respects, 
the current situation is similar to that a year ago. For this year, it is forecast that 
GDP growth will remain well above long-term growth in potential output and 
demand  pressures  will  still  increase,  but  that  inflation  is  projected  to  remain 
below  target  for  most  of  the  year.  This  is  uncertain,  however,  and  various 
changes have taken place and others  may lie ahead, which could affect future 
developments.  The tradable sector is  now  experiencing  stronger crowding-out 
effects from tourism, after the rapid growth of the latter in recent years. Sizeable 
pay increases in the recent term and last year’s strong appreciation of the króna 
cut  into  profits,  and  companies  now  have  less  scope  to  absorb  pay  rises.  The 
recent  appreciation  of  the  króna  is  a  result  of  growth  in  tourism  and  other 
favourable  developments,  and  it  tends  to  shift  demand  outside  the  domestic 
economy, thereby reducing the positive output gap.  
 
Although forecasts based on given assumptions and available models indicate 
that the exchange rate will continue to rise, it should be noted that this is highly 
uncertain.  Capital  account  liberalisation  could  contribute  to  either  a  higher 
exchange rate or a lower one in the short run, depending on how expectations 
develop. The special reserve requirements imposed last June on capital inflows 
to  the  bond  market  and  high-interest  deposits  have  contained  the  rise  in  the 
exchange  rate  and  will  reduce  the  likelihood  of  a  steep  carry  trade-related 
appreciation  in  the  near  term.  From  12  March,  when  capital  account 
liberalisation was announced, through yesterday’s official listing, the exchange 
rate of the króna had fallen by 3.8%. 
 
At present, there are changes taking place in the global economy that will change 
the situation to some extent. Global GDP growth is on the rise, particularly in 
industrialised  countries.  Commodity  prices  are  rising,  and  inflation  in 
industrialised countries appears to be increasing as well. Interest rates have been 
raised in the US, and the period of very low or even negative interest rates in the 
euro area may be coming to  an  end. This  has various effects  on the  Icelandic 
economy.  It  is  not  a  given  that  terms  of  trade  will  continue  to  improve,  and 
imported deflation will subside as well. Domestic inflation could therefore rise 
above target more quickly unless domestic pressures ease commensurably. On 
the other hand, the interest rate differential with abroad will narrow, other things 
being equal, and this will make the conduct of monetary policy less difficult and 
reduce the Central Bank’s accounting loss due to the foreign exchange reserves, 
as I will discuss more fully in a moment.  
 
Monetary policy conduct is generally much more complicated during times of 
significant change than under calmer conditions. The signposts of the policy – 
such as equilibrium interest rates, output, unemployment, and the exchange rate 
– could begin to move. However, because these variables are not observable but 
must be derived from developments in other variables, it is highly uncertain at 
any  given  time  how  much  they  have  changed  once  they  start  to  move. 
Furthermore,  relative  prices  change  more  than  they  did  before,  but  monetary 
policy cannot affect them except in the short term. Sometimes it can be difficult 
to distinguish between such relative price changes and a general rise in the price 
 3 
 level, which depends in the long run on monetary policy. In addition to this, it 
can  often  be  difficult  to  determine  at  any  given  time  which  changes  are 
temporary and could possibly be mitigated through economic policy and which 
ones are more permanent and nothing much can be done about, at least through 
monetary policy.  
 
These are exactly the conditions we are experiencing at present. There are clear 
indications that the equilibrium real exchange rate has risen with improved terms 
of trade, increased national saving, and a vastly improved external position. In 
addition,  there  are  indications  that  equilibrium  interest  rates  have  fallen  since 
before the crisis, and they have probably fallen still further as monetary policy 
has grown more  credible and inflation expectations have been anchored  more 
firmly  at  the  target.  In  both  instances,  the  question  of  how  much  remains 
unanswered.  
 
As far as the exchange rate is concerned, conventional measuring methods do 
not indicate that the real exchange rate is clearly above its equilibrium level. This 
is  supported  by  the  Bank’s  analysis,  to  be  published  next  week  in  Financial 
Stability, which shows that 85% of inflows into the foreign exchange market in 
2016 were attributable to the current account surplus and transactions between 
residents. Capital inflows from non-residents are much less important, and in the 
latter half of the  year, when the króna was appreciating the most, carry trade-
related  inflows  were  virtually  non-existent.  Estimating  the  equilibrium  real 
exchange rate is very uncertain, however, and as a precaution, the Central Bank 
has leaned against potential overshooting of the exchange rate by buying large 
amounts of foreign currency.  
 
In this light, it is difficult to conclude otherwise than that the appreciation of the 
króna has been largely benign, in that it is based on economic fundamentals and 
contributes to a better balanced economy. The Central Bank’s scenario analysis 
indicates  that  if  the  Bank  had  used  policy  instruments  to  halt  the  currency 
appreciation  in  recent  years,  economic  imbalances  would  have  been  much 
greater and inflation considerably higher.  
 
It has been a long time since the Central Bank of Iceland could fix the exchange 
rate unilaterally on a day-to-day basis. The exchange rate is determined in the 
interbank  market  and  reflects  underlying  supply  and  demand  for  foreign 
currency.  But  the  Bank  can  affect  the  exchange  rate  through  interest  rate 
decisions,  foreign  exchange  transactions,  and  the  application  of  capital  flow 
management  measures  such  as  the  one  currently  in  place:  the  special  reserve 
requirements on certain types of capital inflows. The exchange rate would have 
been much higher if the Bank had not applied these instruments and bought large 
amounts of foreign currency.  
 
But could the Bank have gone further; for instance, by buying even more foreign 
currency  or  by  lowering  interest  rates  more  than  was  warranted  by  economic 
conditions and the inflation outlook? Certainly it could have done so; it could 
even have gone as far as to more or less halt the appreciation of the króna. But 
 4 
 then  large  interest  rate  cuts  would  probably  have  been  needed  alongside  the 
foreign  currency  purchases,  perhaps  even  bringing  real  rates  into  negative 
territory, which is ill-suited to an economy with a positive output gap and very 
strong GDP growth. The reason is that in order to lower interest rates enough to 
materially  increase  residents’  appetite  for  investment  in  foreign  securities,  an 
interest rate cut of 0.25 or 0.5 percentage points would not be sufficient because 
of how wide the interest rate differential currently is. It is not a given, either, that 
long-term interest rates in the bond market would have followed suit in full, and 
bond market rates are more important for investments by pension funds and other 
investors than the Central Bank’s short-term rates are. The reason for this would 
have been that inflation expectations had risen, and if the reduction in short-term 
interest rates had not been in line with economic developments and prospects, 
expected short-term interest rates would have increased.  
 
This  would  not  have  occurred  without  severe  side  effects.  In  this  context,  it 
should be borne in mind that in the long term, central banks can affect inflation 
and  can  have  a  corresponding  impact  on  the  nominal  exchange  rate,  but  they 
cannot affect the real exchange rate in the long run. If the real exchange rate rises 
because of an increase in the equilibrium real exchange rate and the Central Bank 
halts the rise in the nominal exchange rate, the real exchange rate will ultimately 
rise in any case, through larger wage increases and inflation.  
 
If the Bank had halted the rise in the exchange rate at all costs, inflation would 
probably be well above the target already, and it is very unlikely that inflation 
expectations would be at target. This would also have been inconsistent with the 
Bank’s legally mandated price stability objective. It would also have been quite 
costly, as the credibility of monetary policy would have been gone and interest 
rates in the future would need to be higher in order to restore that credibility. If 
there  is  the  will  to  impede  the  rise  in  the  real  exchange  rate  and  mitigate  the 
crowding-out effect that tourism has on other sectors, which is certainly needed, 
but without sacrificing price stability, it must be done with policy instruments 
that can have a lasting impact on the real exchange rate, such as tighter fiscal 
policy. In this context, it gives cause for concern that the fiscal stance in terms 
of the cyclically adjusted primary balance has eased over the past two years and 
appears likely to do so again this year. It is also possible to address the currency 
appreciation at its source by applying what some representatives of the tourism 
sector have appropriately referred to as “access restrictions and pricing”.  
 
In  the  recent  past,  numerous  observers  have  expressed  the  opinion  that  the 
Central Bank’s key interest rate is too high under current conditions. As grounds 
for  their  arguments,  they  cite  much  lower  interest  rates  in  trading  partner 
countries, the fact that inflation in Iceland has been at or below target for three 
years,  and  the  Central  Bank’s  overforecast  of  inflation  in  recent  years. 
Discussing whether the monetary stance is in line with the Bank’s objectives and 
current  economic  developments  and  prospects  is  normal  and  appropriate. 
Opinion varies, sometimes even within the Monetary Policy Committee itself, 
because reliable data on current and recent developments become available with 
a time lag and the future is always uncertain.  
 5 
  
The Bank’s key nominal interest rate is now 5%, and the corresponding real rate 
is about 2½%. In view of the business cycle position and the fact that inflation 
is  below  target,  this  implies  an  equilibrium  real  rate  of  1½%,  which  must  be 
considered  low,  given  that  long-run  growth  potential  is  significantly  higher. 
Current nominal and real interest rates are not high in historical terms, although 
they are high in current international context. The explanation, however, lies in 
historically very low interest rates abroad rather than abnormally  high rates in 
Iceland. In many economies around the world, inflation has been below target 
levels  and  central  banks  have overforecast  inflation in  the recent  past, largely 
irrespective of the level  of interest  rates  and the  economic cycle in  individual 
countries. This indicates strongly that there are global factors at work, such as 
low  commodity  prices  and  resistance  to  wage  increases  in  industrialised 
countries, partly in  response to increased direct and indirect competition from 
the labour forces of other economies and uncertainty about the future in the wake 
of the financial crisis.  
 
The  current  monetary  stance  is  not  affected  by  the  Bank’s  previous 
overforecasting of inflation. The MPC takes account of forecasts but does not 
blindly set  interest  rates  in  accordance with  them, and it adjusts the monetary 
stance  in  view  of  developments.  The  forecasts  themselves  are  revised  each 
quarter.  One  to  two  years  ago,  forecasts  were  based  both  on  the  technical 
assumption  that  the  exchange  rate  would  remain  unchanged  at  far  below  the 
current level and on expectations of a turnaround in global commodity prices, 
which international forecasts had assumed would be stronger and come sooner 
than has actually been the case. These forecasts were accompanied by a future 
interest rate path that never materialised. It is therefore necessary to assess the 
monetary stance at any given time on its own merits. The MPC has done this and 
will continue to do so. Near-term developments in nominal and real interest rate 
will  be  determined  by  economic  developments  and  the  inflation  outlook.  The 
MPC attempts at all times to keep interest rates no higher than they must be in 
order  to  hold  inflation  at  target  over  the  medium  term.  Based  on  these 
considerations and assuming that there are no major unforeseen changes in the 
current situation, the scope for further reductions in nominal interest rates could 
develop in the near future.  
 
The Government has initiated a review of the monetary policy framework. The 
Central Bank of Iceland supports this process and will participate actively in it. 
It is important both to take into account what monetary policy can achieve and 
to  acknowledge  what  it  cannot  do.  It  is  also  important  to  bear  in  mind  that 
significant changes have already been made in monetary policy conduct since 
the  pre-crisis  period,  as  I  have  discussed  in  detail  in  this  setting  in  the  past. 
Nevertheless, various additional changes need to be considered, and the Central 
Bank cannot change the most important element of the equation: that monetary 
policy, fiscal policy, other economic policy, and decisions taken in the labour 
market must pull together to the maximum extent possible. I would also like to 
emphasise the importance of preserving the monetary policy achievements that 
I have discussed.  
 6 
  
Honoured  guests:  The Central  Bank’s foreign exchange  reserves totalled  over 
810 b.kr. or 7½ billion US dollars, at the end of February. This is equivalent to 
about one-third of GDP. The reserves were above the minimum aimed at during 
the prelude to capital account liberalisation. Relative to GDP, Iceland’s reserves 
are currently at their largest since the end of World War II.  
 
There is no doubt that we have already benefited greatly from these relatively 
large reserves. They have enabled us to lift the capital controls without taking 
excessive risk with economic and financial stability. The reserves play a key role 
in  Iceland’s recent  credit rating upgrades, as can  be seen in  the press  releases 
from  the  rating  agencies.  The  upgrades  will  lead  to  an  improvement  in  the 
borrowing  terms  offered  to  the  Treasury,  the  banks,  and  large  companies  in 
foreign  credit  markets.  And  last  but  not  least,  large  reserves  provide  a  buffer 
against  shocks  in  the  future.  They  greatly  increase  the  probability  that  if  the 
króna  depreciates  because  the  equilibrium  exchange  rate  has  fallen  and  the 
positive  output  gap  has  closed,  it  will  not  pose  a  threat  to  stability.  Many 
countries  have  undergone  such  an  adjustment,  and  a  sudden  collapse  of  the 
currency  such  as  that  occurring  in  Iceland  during  the  financial  crisis  is  the 
exception rather than the rule.  
 
The benefits deriving from the reserves are therefore significant. The problem, 
however, is that the benefits are distributed widely, while the Central Bank bears 
the costs alone. Last year the Bank recorded an operating loss of 35 b.kr. This 
was due to an exchange rate loss of nearly 90 b.kr. on the reserves, owing to the 
appreciation  of  the  króna  during  the  year.  However,  it  is  an  unrealised 
accounting loss, and it would reverse if the exchange rate should move in the 
opposite direction. No assets have been lost. The foreign currency value of the 
reserves is unchanged, and the purchasing power in terms of what the reserves 
would be used for is intact.  
 
Other  aspects  of  the  matter  are  of  greater  concern:  the  negative  interest  rate 
differential  resulting  from  investing  the  reserves  at  historically  low  foreign 
interest rates and the interest expense on the Central Bank’s króna-denominated 
liabilities, which bear much higher interest. Extrapolations to 2025 indicate that, 
other things being equal, the Central Bank will record losses of 18 b.kr. per year 
from 2018 onwards, and the Bank’s equity will be negative thereafter. This in 
and of itself is not Armageddon, and many central banks have functioned quite 
successfully  with  negative  equity.  Nevertheless,  it  is  better  for  a  number  of 
reasons  if  the  Central  Bank  has  an  acceptable  capital  position.  Extrapolations 
carried  out  by  the  Bank  show  that  with  various  measures  and  appropriate 
distribution of the cost of the reserves among the parties that benefit from them, 
the  gap  can  be  closed.  Among  the  measures  is  the  possibility  of  increasing 
returns on the reserves by splitting them up into two or more tranches based on 
term and yield.  
 
The question has arisen whether the foreign exchange reserves are too large, or 
in other words, whether the costs outweigh the benefits. Examining comparable 
 7 
 countries  and  the  risks  facing  them  suggests  that  this  is  not  clearly  the  case. 
Furthermore, we must not forget that foreign exchange reserves can grow rapidly 
in small countries, as our own history illustrates, but they can also be depleted 
more rapidly than in large countries when shocks strike. Various small countries 
with their own currency and independent monetary policy have reserves equal 
to a third or more of GDP, among them Israel, Peru, Singapore, Switzerland, and 
the  Czech  Republic.  Iceland  is  currently  in  the  middle  of  the  one-third  of 
countries with the largest reserves but, with one exception, it has proportionally 
the  least  foreign  currency  reserve  assets  among  the  countries  that  have 
established a sovereign wealth fund.  
 
Honoured guests: I have spoken at length about monetary policy, the exchange 
rate, and the foreign exchange reserves, three topics of current interest. I have 
devoted less time to the financial system, which I discussed in greater depth last 
year.  The  Bank’s  Financial  Stability  report  will  be  published  next  week, 
however, and risks in the financial system will be covered thoroughly there. It is 
no secret that there are growing concerns about the housing market, and it may 
well be that macroprudential tools will be activated in the near future so as to 
mitigate  the  risks  attached  to  it.  The  Bank’s  Financial  Market  Infrastructure 
report will be issued early in June, and much is happening in that arena with the 
renewal of payment systems and the impact of technological developments on 
banks and payment intermediation.  
 
Honoured guests: The legacies of the financial crisis have now by and large been 
dealt with. We are now embarking on a new period of capital account openness. 
This  entails  both  opportunities  and  risks.  We  must  seize  the  opportunities, 
analyse  the  risks,  and  take  appropriate  action.  To  the  best  of  its  ability,  the 
Central Bank will contribute to this process where appropriate.  
 
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Supervisory  Board  and  the  Monetary 
Policy Committee for their work over the past  year,  and  I  wish to  thank  the 
Central Bank’s many colleagues and collaborators for their cooperation – not 
least  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Affairs, and the Financial Supervisory Authority. I would also like to thank the 
financial  institutions  with  which  the  Bank  interacts  for  their  cooperation. 
Furthermore, I would like to thank the Parliament of Iceland, particularly the 
Economics  and  Commerce  Committee,  for  their  collaboration.  And  last  but 
certainly not least, I want to thank the staff of the Central Bank for a job well 
done over the past year.  
 
 
 
 
 8 
