  Governor Agus D.W. Martowardojo 
At the High-Level International Seminar 
“Global Economic Outlook in ASEAN Perspective” 
Bank Indonesia 
April 28, 2017 
 Learn from the Past, Seize Opportunities,  
and Enhance Synergy 
Keynote Speech 
  
Distinguished Speakers, Mr. Maurice Obstfeld, Economic Counsellor and the 
Director of Research of the International Monetary Fund;  
Deputy Governor Diwa Guinigundo from Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Deputy 
Managing Director Ong Chong Tee from Monetary Authority of Singapore, 
Deputy Governor Sukhdave Singh from  Bank Negara Malaysia,  Deputy 
Governor Mathee Supapongse from Bank of Thailand, Deputy Governor Perry 
Warjiyo from Bank Indonesia;  
Other Members of Board of Governors of Bank Indonesia; 
Mr. Chatib Basri, former Finance Minister of the Republic of Indonesia, who will 
be chairing the seminar; 
Department Heads and Senior Officials from Bank Indonesia;  
Colleagues from Ministries, Government Institutions, Embassies, International 
Organizations, Financial Institutions, and Academia;  
Participants of Bank Indonesia International Workshop on Policy Mix; 
Ladies and Gentlemen;  
  1 
1.  First, allow me to welcome you to Bank Indonesia and to the High Level 
International Seminar on “Global Economic Outlook in ASEAN Perspective.” 
We are very privileged with the presence of Mr. Maurice Obstfeld to share 
his opinion and thought on the development and prospect of the global 
economy,  especially  concerning  ASEAN  region,  and  its  challenging  path 
ahead. We are also delighted to have speakers from ASEAN central banks 
who  will  share  their  views  on  a  number  of  key  issues  surrounding  the 
economic development in ASEAN.  
2.  The half-day seminar we are having today serves as the regional kick-start 
event  for  a  series  of  seminars  and  other  activities  under  the  Voyage  to 
Indonesia theme designed to lead up to the 2018 IMF-World Bank Annual 
Meetings in Nusa Dua, Bali, Indonesia.  
3.  This  particular  seminar  is  aimed  to  showcase  ASEAN  as  a  reformed, 
resilent and progressive region to the world. Therefore, the discussion will 
touch  upon  how  ASEAN  countries  have  progressed  in  various  areas 
especially in central banking policy making, and in furthering the ASEAN 
economic integration process to form what we call the ASEAN Economic 
Community.  
 [Global economy and challenges ahead] 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
4.  The global economy has entered the interesting yet still challenging stage. 
Among  the  key  takeways  from  the  recently  concluded  IMF-World  Bank 
Spring Meeting is that, in the near term, the global economic recovery is 
better  than  expected  for  the  first  time  after  some  years  of  downward 
revision, with the resurgence of commodity prices, and less pressure on 
2 
 deflationary trend. The IMF has revised its assessment in April pointing to 
the 2017 growth of 3.5% vis-a-vis 3.4% in the previous projection, and by 
3.6%  in  2018.  The  economic  recovery  is  happening  both  in  Advanced 
Economies  and  Emerging  Market  Economies,  including  ASEAN  region. 
Emerging  Market  Economies  have  remained  the  source  of  engine  of 
growth. 
5.  However,  the  positive  outlook  is  still  facing  huge  challenges  stemming 
from  uncertainty  in  the  political  and  economic  policies,  such  as  general 
election  in  major  European  economies,  as  well  as  in  the  policy  fronts, 
including  trends  towards  trade  protectionism  by  some  Advanced 
Economies. The downside risks would produce some degree of financial 
tightening,  causing  more  volatility  of  capital  flows  while  generating 
negative  spillovers,  especially  to  Emerging  Markets  Economies.  In  the 
longer term, global economy is also facing persistently low productivity in 
both Advanced Economies and Emerging Market Economies.  
6.  Clearly,  we  should  remain  vigilant  on  the  global  economy,  especially  its 
fundamental  issues  such  as  how  to  improve  productivity  and  deal  with 
aging population. Given the complex nature of the current global economic 
environment, it is important for policy makers to use all policy levers to 
ensure that growth benefits each and every layer of society. 
7. 
In fact, the issue of inequality has been occupying the attention of policy 
makers, while some have been challenging the concept of multilateralism 
that we all have known. Debates on the inward-looking policy have come 
forward.  The  situation  has  definitely  caused  uneasiness  to  Emerging 
Market Economies who have adopted the the open economy concept, and 
have contributed to the improved global growth. The question is that, in 
the current global setting, how ASEAN would cope with such challenges.  
3 
 [ASEAN during the crisis]  
8.  Two decades ago, Asia experienced a heavy financial crisis. A very deep 
economic  contraction  was  shared  by  every  country  in  the  region,  with 
Indonesia,  Thailand  and  Korea  bearing  the  greatest  brunt.  Currency 
depreciation, growth slump and shooting inflation were widespread.  
9.  The  crisis  also  destabilized  financial  sector,  leading  to  a  mounting 
government debt from blanket guarantee and bank restructuring. It even 
set in motion social and political unrest as public confidence diminished.  
The full blow of the crisis also  brought  Indonesia and Thailand to enter 
into IMF programs.   
10.  With  the  crisis,  ASEAN  as  a  region  suffered  heavy  losses  not  only  in 
economic performance, but also in global perception. The spillover effects 
in the crisis was paramount and had played a massive role. Therefore at 
that time, ASEAN was seen as a fragile group of economies. 
 [ASEAN recent developments] 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, 
11.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  ASEAN  countries  conducted  vast 
restructuring  towards  recovery.  ASEAN  economy  rebounded  with 
improved  economic  structure.  The  region  quickly  learned  from  the 
unfortunate  experience.  ASEAN  strived 
to  regain  domestic  and 
international  confidence.  And  now,  the  region  has  revived  with  healthy 
growth and stable financial sector. 
12.  On average, ASEAN grew at 5.5% per annum in the last 15 years, higher 
than the growth of the global economy of 3.9%. This higher growth rate 
 4 
led to ASEAN’s rising share of world GDP. In 2016, the share of ASEAN 
GDP is 6.1% relative to that of the global economy.  
13.  The ASEAN share of world trade also increased significantly. ASEAN trade 
value  as  a  share  of  the  world  trade  value  rose  to  6.9%  in  2015.  The 
growing  trade  value  indicates  an  evolving  structural  change  within  the 
region  where  the  economy  is  becoming  more  open.  The  similar 
improvement also happens in foreign direct investment.  
14.  On average, foreign direct investment in ASEAN amounted to USD121.9 
billion  annually  within  the  period  of  2011–2015,  increased  significantly 
from around USD 29.8 billion per annum in 2001–2005. Good economic 
performance  with  relatively  high  GDP  growth  has  been  a  pull  factor  for 
FDI in this region. ASEAN has become once again an attractive investment 
destination. The confidence to the region is back.  
 [ASEAN integration] 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, 
15.  The  ASEAN  rapid  and  successful  recovery  is  only  the  first  main 
achievement of the region. With economic stability firmly gained, countries 
in the region have further progressed the regional economic integration to 
be  able  to  play  bigger  roles  in  the  future  global  economy,  which  is  the 
second main achievement. After 20 years since the Asian financial crisis, 
we now proudly see ASEAN as a region of promising world power with a 
strong  cohesion  and  togetherness,  owing  to  the  ASEAN  economic 
integration  agenda.  The  regional  integration  project  acknowledges  and 
takes care of different levels of preparedness by ASEAN member states. It 
also upholds harmony and synergy by employing ASEAN own values. 
5 
 16.  The  initiative  of  ASEAN  economic  integration  has  reached  an  important 
milestone in 2015 with the establishment of ASEAN Economic Community 
2015.  After  the  2015  graduate,  the  economic  integration  agenda  in 
financial sector is now being pushed to be more balanced and inclusive. 
Indeed, ASEAN financial integration does not treat integration as a matter 
of liberalisation, but provides focus on stability and inclusion as its equally 
important  pillars.  The  three  pillars  of  financial  integration,  financial 
inclusion  and  financial  stability  ensure  that  the  strength,  resilience  and 
inclusiveness of the benefits of regional integration in the financial sector 
are pursued and subsequently achieved.  
17.  A  number  of  financial  integration  initiatives  in  the  form  of  endorsed 
strategic action plans are put forward. These include the ASEAN Banking 
Integration Framework, the safeguard measures of capital flows, and the 
build-up  of  financial  inclusion  infrastructure.  A  more  recent  initiative  on 
Local Currency Settlement is another clear contribution from central banks 
to advance inter-ASEAN trade and investment.  
18.  Under the ASEAN+3 financial cooperation, ASEAN has reached significant 
progress  in  strengthening  the  regional  self-help  mechanism,  especially 
compared to the time of Asian financial crisis. The continuously improved 
Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multilateralisation  as  a  reginal  financial  safety  net 
arrangement with the support of AMRO has made the region more ready 
to any risks, vulnerabilities and spillovers from the external sector.  
19.  Moving  forward,  ASEAN  will  consistently  maintain  and  improve  its 
framework as a unique economy group with strong visions. ASEAN is ready 
to  move  to  the  next  level,  that  is  to  become  a  highly  integrated  and 
cohesive  economy;  a  competitive,  innovative  and  dynamic  region;  with 
enhanced  connectivity  and  sectoral  cooperation;  as  well  as  a  resilient, 
6 
 inclusive,  people-oriented  and  people-centered  orientation;  and  at  the 
same time being truly a global player.  
 [Key takeaways] 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, 
20.  Global economy has been far more integrated than 20 years ago, and yet 
the  challenges  are  also  increasingly  multifaceted.  Although  in  the  near 
term the outlook is promising, some downside risks remain, requiring us 
to  live  with  prudence.  Protectionism  and  anti-multilateralism  are  taking 
shape, but I believe that ASEAN have enough experiences since the 1997-
98 crisis to stay strong and vigilant.  
21.  First, ASEAN is an agile and adaptive region and it has entered once again 
into a group of emerging market economies with strong macroeconomic 
performance, good policy formulation as well as high external confidence. 
In  this  regard,  central  banks  are  playing  a  crucial  role  in  managing  the 
stability  of  the  economy  by  facilitating  the  recovery  from  the  crisis, 
ensuring price and financial stability along the way, and preparing for the 
rainy days with multiple layers of defence and solid track-record of policy 
making. 
22.  Second,  with  ASEAN  Economic  Community  2025  agenda  underway,  the 
region  will  be  increasingly  integrated,  stable  and  inclusive.  Our  regional 
integration  is  well-organized,  and  this  will  bring  ASEAN  to  play  greater 
roles  in  the  global  economy.  ASEAN  financial  integration  is  now  fully 
equipped with visions, action plans, and performance indicators, ready to 
be a region with responsibility and become a winning global player. ASEAN 
7 
 is a region that always learns from the past, seizes opportunities ahead, 
and enhances synergy towards shared visions. 
23. Indonesia would certainly play a part in this process, with the consistent 
adoption of the three-pronge approach combining monetary policy, fiscal 
policy  and  structural  reform  with  the  right  mix.  Despite  the  global 
economic  slowdown,  Indonesia’s  economy is  able  to  advance  by  5.02% 
yoy in 2016 supported by strong domestic consumption, reviving export 
and investment. Although this is still below our historical growth rate of 
5.8% during 2005-2015, this rate of growth is still favorable compared to 
peer countries. Our robust economic growth is also supported by stable 
macroeconomic environment. In 2016, inflation was registered at 3.02%, 
a continued record of contained inflation period after charted an inflation 
hike  in  2013  of  8.4%  yoy  and  2014  of  8.4%  yoy.  Our  latest  figure  of 
inflation for March 2017 is 3.61% yoy, which is still within our target range 
of 4±1%.    
24.  On  the  external  front,  we  consistently  recorded  smaller  current  account 
deficit over the years, moving from minus 3.19% in 2013 to minus 1.8% 
in 2016. We also retain an adequate level of reserve position whereby at 
end-March 2017 reached USD121.8 billion which can adequately cover 8.6 
months of imports and servicing of government external debt repayments. 
Meanwhile  financial  system  stability  was  maintained  along  with  banking 
system resilience. In January 2017, the Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) was 
recorded at 23.0% and non-performing loans (NPL) stood at 3.1% (gross) 
or  1.4%  (net).  Moreover,  our  banking  system  is  among  the  most 
capitalized and profitable in EMs, which provides strong buffers to support 
financial stability.  
 8 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and gentlemen 
25.  To conclude, as I have mentioned in the beginning, this seminar is part of 
a series of activities organized as the groundwork for the IMF-World Bank 
Annual Meetings 2018 in Bali. These activities are interwoven under the 
theme “Voyage to Indonesia”, a journey that will bring the world to the 
renewed  Indonesia  and  ASEAN  region.  It  is  my  hope  that  all  of  us  will 
continue to be engaged in various programs of the “Voyage to Indonesia.” 
We  also  hope  that  you  will  attend  and  experience  the  IMF–World  Bank 
Annual Meetings in Bali along with its enriching back-to-back programs in 
October 2018.  Finally, I wish you all a pleasant and fruitful seminar and 
let me stop here. Thank you. 
 9 
