Andreas Dombret: Heading towards a "small banking box" – which
business model needs what kind of regulation?
Presentation  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the Bavarian Savings Bank Conference, Erlangen, 29 June 2017.
 1. Introduction
Minister President Seehofer
Mr Netzer
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  come  and  speak  at  the  Bavarian  Savings  Bank
Conference today – it’s really great to be here. The Bundesbank and the savings banks have built
up a strong tradition of close interaction, and that is something that’s important to me.
The topic of my presentation is the effects of regulation on smaller banks and savings banks. But
I’d  like  to  start  by  talking  about  confidence  and  trust.  These  are  very  crucial  elements  in  the
business models of banks and savings banks – smaller and medium-sized institutions are no
exception here.
Confidence and trust play a very special role for these smaller and regionally based banks. The
fact  that  private  customers  and  companies  place  their  trust  in  regional  presence  and  long-
standing relationships became very clear during the last financial crisis: while confidence in the
financial markets faded in general, deposits with cooperative banks and savings banks grew at a
rapid pace. I think this is a sign of strong faith in the sustainable business models of these locally
based institutions.
But  even  these  business  models  have  challenges  to  face.  This  ties  in  with  the  name  of  this
year’s  Savings  Bank  Conference:  “Modern  banking.  Successful  business  model.”  Despite  the
strength of their business model to date, savings banks need to ensure they have a successful
and modern business model in place. The challenges facing them can mainly be seen by the
fact that branches are still closing and banks are still dying – and that includes savings banks
and cooperative banks as well. Last year, the total number of German institutions fell by 72 to
1,888  –  that’s  3.7%  fewer  banks,  which  is  not  exactly  a  small  number.  While  the  decline  in
savings banks was not quite so serious, at 2.4%, it was still significant. Out of the 413 savings
1
banks in existence in 2015, ten disappeared due to mergers.
With all these banks falling by the wayside, many people are starting to get concerned – they’re
worried  about  a  lack  of  diversity  in  the  banking  sector.  Others  realise  that  this  reduction  in
numbers  is  a  necessary  evil  for  the  German  banking  sector,  which  has  been  described  as
“overbanked". These people see a market consolidation as inevitable and essential.
As is so often the case, the truth lies somewhere in the middle. Sure, a certain loss of business
is unavoidable and also makes sense in the current environment, but this doesn’t necessarily
mean that the number of banks and savings banks needs to drop; there’s no reason why larger
banks couldn’t just get smaller.
A severely consolidated sector is surely not in our country’s best interests – at least, that’s the
way I see it. I am convinced that a diverse banking system – made up of small, medium-sized
and  large  institutions  and  with  a  range  of  different  business  models  –  is  the  best  thing  to
guarantee stability and to make sure that the various customer needs are met.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
That’s why I take it very seriously when banking regulation is cited as one of the main reasons
banks are shutting down. If people think that regulation is creating competitive disadvantages for
small banks, as an involved party, that’s not an accusation I can, or should, just brush aside.
And that’s why I’d like to talk to you today about the outcomes of the regulatory reforms since the
financial crisis, and particularly, their significance for smaller, regionally based savings banks and
banks. I will explain where I see the reforms adding real value, but I’d also like to explore whether
and where the new rules might be asking too much of the smaller banks. I’ll finish by saying a
few words about how we might be able to relieve some of the pressure on smaller institutions,
focusing in particular on the “small banking box".
2. Banks and savings banks in a state of transition
But before we move onto regulation and supervision, let’s take a quick look at the challenges
facing  the  German  banking  sector.  Banks  and  savings  banks  are  currently  in  the  throes  of
transition.  The  overcapacity  that  has  built  up  over  the  years  needs  to  be  reduced  again,  the
business and market environment has become considerably tougher, and the drop in interest
rates  makes  things  much  more  difficult  for  those  whose  business  models  depend  heavily  on
interest income. And finally, digitalisation is demanding a completely new level of efficiency and
innovation.
In  other  words,  the  forces  of  the  market  economy  and  of  progress  are  seriously  challenging
banks and savings banks.
But now I’m hearing more and more often that the new regulatory regime is the main problem
facing banks and savings banks in Germany. I’ll put it bluntly: that’s pretty much the same as
saying that the coal industry could be revived if only there were less government regulation again.
There’s no doubt about it: the banking sector is facing huge challenges – challenges that have
nothing to do with regulation. And it’s highly likely that the sector will shrink even more.
This means two things. First, you, as heads and employees of these institutions have to do all
you  can  to  succeed  in  this  changing  environment.  In  some  cases,  this  will  mean  reinventing
yourselves and finding even better and more efficient ways of shaping your businesses.
And second, I think we supervisors need to identify areas where we could improve the regulatory
regime. And  as  I  see  it,  there’s  one  major  step  we  can  take  here:  we  need  to  relieve  small,
regional,  less  risky  banks  and  savings  banks  of  the  operational  burden  associated  with
regulations that were actually established with large international banks in mind. And this brings
me to the focal point of my presentation today.
3. Strong regulation, weak institutions?
What I’d like to talk about now is what’s known as the “proportionality debate” – a topic that’s
received a lot of attention over the past few months.
Let’s cast our minds back ten years: the financial crisis was ruthless in exposing all the holes in
the regulatory regime at the time. These holes were systematically exploited and the result was a
massive  shock  at  the  macroeconomic  level.  It  has  since  become  clear  that  it  is  not  strong
regulation that damages an economy, but weak rules.
With Basel III and the banking union, Europe now has the stricter rules it so desperately needed
and a common European approach to supervision. So, to some degree, we can rest easier now.
But these rules are mainly geared towards large banks with international ties, which is not exactly
surprising considering these banks were the ones at the epicentre of the crisis. Consequently,
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the Basel Committee focuses its attention on precisely these institutions.
It is especially the case in Europe, however, that the international standards since Basel I are
being applied to all banks. And thus, we now have a single rulebook for the EU. But since Basel II,
this unity has come at a high cost to smaller and medium-sized institutions.
The Basel III reforms have made it even harder for these banks, as the rules are getting more
and more complicated and explicit, and the list just keeps getting longer. We have the guiding
principle of the reforms to thank for this: risk-oriented governance and regulation are there to help
banks to allocate capital resources as efficiently as possible. But in order to prevent a state of
undercapitalisation,  this  approach  needs  very  specific  rules.  This  increases  the  compliance
workload – that is, the effort associated with meeting the requirements as well as demonstrating
that they’ve been met.
Particularly for credit institutions that are able to strongly optimise their employment of capital in
order to benefit from higher returns, this is worth all the effort. And it’s worth it for especially large
credit institutions because they can profit from economies of scale where fixed costs per product
fall  as  the  volume  of  business  increases.  This  then  also  makes  it  easier  to  finance  a  larger
compliance department.
Smaller,  regionally  based  institutions,  however,  cannot  normally  rely  on  these  economies  of
scale  or  a  strong  risk  appetite  for  a  source  of  income.  Seen  from  an  individual  business
perspective, the cost of regulation is similar or even higher for these banks, but their ability to
take advantage of these complex strategies is somewhat weaker.
In other words, the complicated risk-oriented approach favours banks with a large organisation,
whose activities are more complex and which take on greater risks. The reason we should be
giving this more thought is that the vast majority of German banks and savings banks are smaller
institutions; about 1,000 credit institutions in Germany recorded total assets of less than €1 billion
in 2016; for a further 500, this figure was somewhere between €1 billion and €5 billion.
We therefore need to ask ourselves two questions. How appropriate are the new regulations for
smaller, regional banks? And is there any way we can simplify or even get rid of requirements
that are out of proportion?
4. Regulation: strict, complex and proportional?
Before I go on to discuss the solutions to these issues, let me first make one thing clear: I do not
subscribe to the view that small banks and savings banks are put at a systematic and deliberate
disadvantage – and that is because regulation and supervision have been proportionate in many
areas for many years already. Furthermore, I don’t believe that smaller and regional institutions
are risk-free per se; instead, every individual credit institution requires robust regulation for the
benefit of all.
What this means is that even small market players cannot expect a regulatory free pass – they,
too,  are  not  exempt  from  regulation.  What  this  also  means  is  that  any  alteration  of  the  rules
needs to meet the essential prerequisite of posing no risk to financial stability. However, within
these bounds, I fully support the goal of lightening the disproportionate burden placed on smaller
institutions.
Doing nothing is therefore not an option for me. As important and justified as the reforms were,
we must also recognise that – as far as smaller institutions are concerned – they have, in large
part, overshot their target.
This does not mean that I would propose easing the minimum capital and liquidity requirements
for smaller banks and savings banks, be it by systematically reducing them or by introducing
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
unclear exemptions. For one thing, this would bring little relief to smaller institutions, the majority
of which are well capitalised, and, for another, the set minimum requirements are already broadly
balanced.
On the contrary, I suggest keeping the strict capital and liquidity requirements currently in place
while  factoring  in  some  reasonable  relief  from  complicated  organisational  and  administrative
rules. Simpler, but robust – to my mind, this is what regulation should look like for banks and
savings banks that are not large, complex or risky.
As I see it, this means that we need to examine the rules more closely. I think that a review of the
CRR and CRD IV, as is currently taking place in the EU, is a good place to start. For instance, in
its  proposal  for  a  CRR  II  and  CRD  V,  the  European  Commission  expressed  its  intention  to
reduce the burden on smaller institutions in all reform areas. The draft consultative document
contains various relief measures and de minimis thresholds, such as in disclosure and reporting
requirements and in trading book regulation. Institutions below these thresholds would be subject
to simplified rules, with some requirements even being abolished altogether. This would mean,
for instance, that small institutions that do little proprietary trading would not be subject to the
new, complicated rules.
I consider de minimis thresholds to be quite a reasonable approach to reinforcing proportionality
in regulation.
But it isn’t enough – this won’t really do much to make the rules less complicated for smaller
institutions. In my opinion, what we need is an entirely new and, if you like, more radical way to
reinforce proportionality: a specific, independent set of rules for smaller institutions.
This new approach now has a name: the “small banking box". I believe that the small banking box
is the approach best suited to systematically easing the operational burdens placed on banks
and savings banks.
And that is why I’m also so pleased to see that this debate is gaining momentum and has even
given  rise  to  specific  projects.  In  Germany,  we  at  the  Bundesbank  have  already  worked  in
collaboration with BaFin and the Federal Ministry of Finance to draw up a concrete draft. This
took  place  with  the  close  involvement  of  the  relevant  associations.  The  Federal  Ministry  of
Finance is pulling out all the stops to promote the project in the EU, while we at the Bundesbank
are making the case for the small banking box wherever we can – setting our sights, first and
foremost, on our fellow central bankers. The next step needs to be to gain broad support for the
project – which, while undoubtedly a challenge, is by no means impossible.
I have a clear goal in mind here: a set of rules that makes demands  on  small  banks  without
placing an unnecessary burden on them. By unnecessary burden, I mean provisions such as far-
reaching reporting requirements or a framework for rules on remuneration. Of course, it will be
impossible to fit all of the rules on the back of an envelope – but at least the list of requirements
would  be  much  shorter  and  considerably  easier  to  understand,  and  complying  with  the  rules
would become a much less time-consuming exercise for small institutions.
5. Simple, but effective: the small banking box
This is what the small banking box sets out to achieve. But what form might this box take? It
sounds as though it would be necessary to establish an entirely new set of rules. But it doesn’t
need to be all that difficult – a separate, short passage in the CRR would suffice.
The  two  cornerstones  of  the  box  are  establishing  a  definition  of  those  institutions  to  which  a
simplified set of rules could apply and, of course, determining the areas in which the rules would
be eased.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let’s start by establishing a definition. I previously spoke of a set of rules for small institutions. An
initial  criterion  for  determining  whether  a  bank  or  savings  bank  would  be  subject  to  simplified
rules would therefore be a comparatively low level of total assets. A reasonable threshold under
which simpler rules could be applied to an institution would be around the low single-digit billion
range, although the level at which this threshold should ultimately be set is up for debate for the
time being. Still, if the threshold were set at total assets of €3 billion, for instance, this would
affect 82% of all institutions in Germany but only 14% of aggregate total assets.
However,  an  absolute  threshold  on  its  own  could  lead  to  a  situation  in  some  EU  countries  in
which many or all institutions would then be subject to the simplified regime. To stop this from
happening,  a  second,  relative  size  criterion  should  probably  be  considered:  namely  that  an
institution is not bigger than a certain share of the gross domestic product or banking market of
the member state in which it is domiciled.
These  criteria  make  it  feasible  to  establish  an  initial  sensible,  workable  definition  of  a  small
institution. But they are still not enough as they could, for example, result in institutions with risky
business models also coming under the simplified rules. This needs to be avoided, which means
that  it  would  make  sense  for  these  criteria  to  be  accompanied  by  a  raft  of  tough  secondary
conditions as follows.
First,  only  institutions  that  would  be  subject  to  insolvency  proceedings  in  the  event  of
resolution may be part of the box.
Second, candidates for the small banking box may not undertake any notable capital market
or cross-border business.
Third, they should have, at most, a small trading book and only a small derivatives book.
Fourth, instead of internal models, they may only use the standardised approach.
By adopting this list of requirements, institutions with riskier business models can be excluded
from  the  very  start.  What’s  more,  we  should  not  forget  the  systemic  risks  arising  from  the
connectedness of many small institutions – that is to say, they are “too many to fail".
In the end, the final decision should always rest with the supervisors. Should they have serious
misgivings, they can opt not to subject an institution to the simplified rules.
Incidentally, this ability to choose should be anything but a one-way street. I believe that credit
institutions that would be considered eligible for the small banking box should also be given the
option of opting to be supervised pursuant to the more complex rules.
What  I  wanted  to  show  to  you  is  that  it  is  perfectly  feasible  to  establish  a  sensible,  workable
definition of institutions that are eligible for relief measures. But the second all-important question
remains unanswered: what in the box actually needs to be simplified?
In some areas, relief could be provided by completely exempting institutions in the small banking
box  from  certain  requirements.  For  instance,  I  can  imagine  small  institutions  being  largely
exempted from disclosure requirements and remuneration rules being abolished.
But I also think that we should consider easing requirements in other areas. For example, the
reporting  process  could  be  reduced  to  a  core  reporting  process  –  a  standardised  reporting
approach, so to speak. In Pillar 2, which covers the supervisory review process for institutions,
reviews could be scaled back in terms of scope and level of detail. I also see scope for relief in
some areas of corporate governance.
Much could be achieved by taking these steps. Political perseverance is now required, as these
changes  need  to  be  incorporated  into  the  revised  version  of  the  CRR.  Such  a  move  needs
majority backing across the EU, and we all know how difficult it is to pull that off.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
But several lines need to be drawn in the sand with respect to the reforms. First, capital and
liquidity  requirements,  which  were  only  recently  tightened,  must  not  be  undermined.  Second,
requirements cannot be eased for systemically important institutions. Third, only institutions with
sound business models and risk profiles should benefit from the simplified rules – in this regard,
medium-sized institutions should be viewed with caution. From the Bundesbank’s perspective,
these are lines that cannot be crossed.
6. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, the regulatory reforms implemented in the wake of the financial crisis are
a major accomplishment – it would be a serious mistake and go against the public interest to
undermine them. However, we need to systematically examine the areas in which regulation is
disproportionate for small institutions.
The small banking box represents a highly promising solution to the issue of establishing greater
proportionality.
But, as I have previously stated, the success of this project is anything but certain. Nevertheless,
it stands a realistic chance: when I started drumming up support for this project over a year ago,
most  people  still  deemed  it  highly  unrealistic.  But  that  is  no  longer  the  case  –  we  have  now
reached a point where it is more than worth the effort to put the project into action.
Let’s  combine  our  efforts  to  win  the  backing  of  Brussels  for  such  a  project  –  let’s  objectively
demonstrate why this would bring with it major benefits, not only for the German economy but
also for the European Union.
Let’s present a united front on this issue and all pull together.
Anyone who wants to preserve the diversity of the banking landscape ought to have the courage
to graduate regulation – at least to a certain extent. We now have an excellent opportunity to
make this happen. Let’s use it.
Thank you for your attention.
1
Here we are seeing a continuation of a long-term trend, as the past few years had already shown a clear
decline.  In  the  past  20  years,  the  number  of  German  credit  institutions  has  dropped  from  over  3,000  to
considerably fewer than 2,000. This decline has primarily been among smaller savings banks and cooperative
banks, with savings banks falling by one-third from more than 600 to around 400.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
