Norman Chan: Hong Kong's development as the premier banking
hub in Asia
Opening remarks by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at  the  HKMA  Conference  for  Independent  Non-Executive  Directors  (INEDs),  Hong  Kong,  16
March 2017.
Fellow INEDs, Ladies and Gentlemen,
 1.  Good morning and a very warm welcome to all of you to the inaugural Annual Conference of
INEDs of banks in Hong Kong!  Today is a very special day for us because it is the first time
in Hong Kong’s banking history that we have gathered in one place over 100 INEDs, which
represents 82% of the total INED population of 123.
2.  Today is also special because it marks an important milestone of the development of Hong
Kong as the premier banking hub in Asia.
3.  In case you do not know already, the size of Hong Kong’s banking sector, as measured in
the amount of banking assets, has exceeded HK$20 trillion by end of 2016.  This equals to 8
times of Hong Kong’s GDP, which is a powerful manifestation of Hong Kong’s position as an
international banking centre.  Having said that, one of the things that we have learnt from the
Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008: Big is not necessarily Beautiful.  The bitter lessons of
some  of  the  aspiring  financial  centres  such  as  Ireland  and  Iceland  are  clear  and  brutal
reminder of the risks of pursuing fast expansion of the financial sector without giving proper
attention to supervision and governance.  The GFC has also taught us that even the largest
banks in the world are not immune to failure in risk control and management and, when they
failed, there would be devastating effects on systemic stability and on the society at large.
4.  Fellow INEDs, while you may have come from a rather diverse background, I believe most of
you know each other quite well already.  This is because all of you have worked for decades
in  your  respective  fields,  crossing  the  paths  of  a  wide  spectrum  of  industries,  and  have
achieved  proud  accomplishments  in  different  shapes  and  forms.    It  is  your  unique
experience and expertise, your reputation and your willingness to serve the banking sector
that have brought you together as INEDs today at this Conference.
5.  As INEDs, you play a crucial and irreplaceable role in the governance of the banks in Hong
Kong, serving not only the shareholders but also the public at large, given the special and
important role of banks in the society.  I think you will agree with me that in the interest of
good  governance,  a  board  of  directors  has  to  provide  the  needed  steer,  guidance  and
checks and balance to the bank.  Clearly this can only be achieved if the INEDs can function
effectively and efficiently.  Without functioning INEDs, the board is just another gathering of
the senior bank management.  We may as well abolish the board of directors as it would
serve no real or useful purposes.                  
6.  This is why the HKMA has in the last few years been embarking on a programme to help
equip and empower the INEDs.  Our intention is to help INEDs to work with the executive
directors and senior management to achieve a more optimal outcome and not work against
them.    So  it  is  important  that  the  bank  management  joins  the  HKMA  in  embracing  the
empowerment of INEDs because we all share the common interests and goals.
7.  Under  this  INED  empowerment  programme,  we  have  rolled  out  a  number  of  initiatives. 
Some of you have attended the High Level Seminar co-organised by the HKMA and China
Banking  Regulatory  Commission  (CBRC),  which  was  designed  to  give  INEDs  a  unique
opportunity to understand the macro perspectives of China’s development strategy and how
Hong Kong should position itself in the years to come.  The first one was held in Beijing in
October 2015 and the second one was held in Xian in June last year.  On both occasions,
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
the former Chairman of CBRC personally attended to speak to the INEDs, which is a clear
indication of the support given by Beijing on this programme.  On a regular basis, we have
also organised thematic seminars in Hong Kong, all of which were well attended by INEDs. 
In  December  last  year,  we  issued  guidance  to  banks  on  the  HKMA’s  requirements  to
enhance  the  roles  of  INEDs,  including  their  remuneration  and  the  way  the  boards  should
conduct their meetings.  Two weeks ago, the HKMA issued a circular to banks providing
guidance on the importance of sound governance and good corporate culture and what they
should do to promote them.  I won’t go into the details now as the main themes of these new
guidance circulars will be covered in the Conference later today. 
8.  Today is going to be a long day for you because the Conference won’t end until 5:45 pm. 
However, I sincerely hope that by the end of the Conference there will be some takeaways
that you will find helpful in your capacity as INEDs of banks. 
9.  Fellow INEDs, I have talked long enough and now is the time for me to introduce to you our
keynote  speaker  for  this  Conference.    We  are  honoured  and  highly  privileged  to  have
Mr Andrew Bailey, Chief Executive Officer of the UK Financial Conduct Authority, to fly all the
way from London to join us today.  Andrew needs no introduction.  Before he joined the FCA
last year, he was the Deputy Governor in the Bank of England and Chief Executive Officer of
the Prudential Regulation Authority from April 2013 until June last year.  So Andrew is truly
exceptional in the sense that he has been in charge of both the prudential and conduct sides
of banking supervision, and is very well-respected internationally.  He is therefore uniquely
well placed to share with us his experience and insights.  Mr Bailey, please.  
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
