Andreas Dombret: The euro area navigates rough seas - where is
Europe heading?
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at  the  parliamentary  evening  at  the  Bundesbank's  Regional  Office  in  Hamburg,  Schleswig-
Holstein and Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Hamburg, 7 June 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
I am delighted to be here this evening to talk to you about the future of the euro area. Here in
Hamburg, Germany’s largest sea port, it seems quite fitting to ask where Europe is heading.
These  days,  Europe’s  reputation  is  suffering  somewhat  –  uncertainty  and  political  risks  are
casting  a  shadow  on  Europeans’  self-image. Against  the  backdrop  of  Brexit  and  an  apparent
resurgence of nationalism and populism, politicians and the general public alike are starting to
ask: “Where is Europe heading?"
The European Union is facing criticism on all fronts at present. Why is this? What are the roots
of  the  seemingly  ever-increasing  levels  of  euro-scepticism  and  reform  fatigue?  What  lessons
can and must we learn from the dissatisfaction of large numbers of people? How can we counter
calls for more nationalism and less Europeanism?
I believe we must deal constructively with euro-scepticism. This involves finding areas in which
we can start making improvements.
I am emphatically not talking about making intellectual U-turns. What really matters is bringing
about a change of course and sticking to it. And that is why it is equally important to take an
unbiased view of the chances of successful reform in Europe.
2. Navigating rough seas – European and global challenges
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  result  of  the  US  presidential  election  and  the  unexpected  Brexit
decision in the United Kingdom are just two examples that show that many of the general public’s
reservations and concerns have been underestimated for too long. And yet, in Europe, too, a
tendency to revert to nationalism is not a completely new phenomenon. Even when the EU was
being  established,  many  member  states  had  misgivings  about  transferring  sovereignty  to
international institutions. And these concerns come to the fore again every time powers at the
European level are expanded.
But  we  should  not  be  under  any  illusion  –  over  the  last  few  years,  protectionist  policies  have
gained more political traction than in the past. Protectionists believe that trade barriers will bring
jobs  back  as  well  as  boost  growth  and  employment.  They  see  stricter  trade  and  immigration
controls as the answer to people’s concerns.
However,  they  fail  to  recognise  that  it  is  precisely  the  opening-up  of  trade  that  improves  a
country’s competitiveness by facilitating the division of labour, which enables countries to exploit
their own individual competitive advantages. This allows goods to be produced at low cost, which
increases  consumers’  purchasing  power. 
this  stimulates  demand;  prosperity,
investment, and, ultimately, employment increase as a result. 
Ideally, 
One  thing  is  clear:  isolationism  brings  no  benefits,  offers  no  stability  and  does  not  lead  to
prosperity. The belief that protectionism is the better alternative is merely an illusion.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Nonetheless,  scepticism  regarding  the  European  project  has  grown.  Of  course,  some  of  the
criticism  aimed  at  the  euro  area  is  justified.  Unfortunately,  closer  European  cooperation  also
produces undesirable side-effects.
Without a doubt, there are major benefits to the single European market. But, at the same time, it
obviously  creates  redistribution  effects  which  can  cause  the  regional  loss  of  jobs  or  wage
stagnation. And these effects tend to undermine many people’s trust in the European Union. 
The European project must therefore be judged on the extent to which it benefits all its citizens.
On the one hand, economic and socio-political action needs to be taken in this regard – but I
won’t go into further detail about that today. On the other, however, there is also a fundamental
need  to  overhaul  the  regulatory  framework  in  Europe.  Parts  of  this  framework  need  to  be
adjusted and parts need to be completed in order to provide a stable footing for the European
project in the long term.
Only stable institutions and a reliable regulatory framework can create confidence. We saw the
opposite of this during the European sovereign debt crisis, when a lack of confidence in the euro
area led to a crisis which was by no means confined to individual countries. 
Even though many necessary reforms have been initiated and the euro area has been made
significantly less vulnerable to crises, we have not yet reached our goal. We still need to press
ahead with the right reforms in order to strengthen people’s trust in the institutions of the EU,
which would also take some of the wind out of the sails of populism. So let’s now consider where
we could start making specific institutional changes. 
3. The euro area – room for improvement in the status quo
The sovereign debt crisis made one of the euro area’s problems glaringly obvious – previously,
the financial markets appeared to assume that, should individual euro-area countries experience
financial  difficulties,  the  European  community  would  bail  them  out,  even  though  the  EU  treaty
prohibits mutual liability. As a result, doubts as to the soundness of individual governments led to
doubts regarding the euro area as a whole. It is therefore extremely important that, in the future, it
is  possible  for  over-indebted  states  to  default.  For  one  thing,  this  would  significantly  limit  the
extent of future crises; for another, it would reduce the likelihood of the European community of
states having to intervene.
Until then, however, we still need to overcome a few obstacles. One major obstacle is the strong
nexus between banks and sovereigns. It means that insolvent banks can pose a threat to the
solvency of entire governments, and vice versa. 
Banks  are  not  required  to  back  bonds  issued  by  European  governments  or  other  OECD
countries  with  capital,  and  can  hold  unlimited  quantities  of  them  on  their  books.  In  theory,  a
bank’s  business  could  therefore  consist  entirely  of  bonds  issued  by  a  single  state.  This  rule
creates a troubling risk concentration.
To sever this unhealthy link, we need to make just one simple change. In future, banks must
back the government bonds they purchase with sufficient capital. In short, the existing rules need
to be improved to ensure that both creditors and borrowers consider the risks more carefully
when lending or borrowing.
However, this reform won’t be enough on its own to resolve the euro area’s underlying problems.
Another starting point for reform would therefore be to intensify the coordination and integration of
economic policy within the euro area. Without an integrated economic policy, it is difficult for the
economies in a currency union to converge.
Implementing deficit ceilings for government debt is another area in which progress needs to be
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
made. All  member  states  should  adhere  to  these  ceilings  –  in  no  way  should  they  be  seen
merely as recommendations. The onus here is clearly on politicians. Central banks can apply
pressure, at most.
4. Where is Europe heading?
Now, there will be some who say that these reform proposals sound too ambitious given the
current state of Europe. But there are signs that the EU is indeed both willing and able to reform
and  that,  overall,  it  is  making  progress.  I  would  therefore  like  to  bring  three  points  to  your
attention.
First, it goes without saying that you can think long and hard about the need for reform – even the
finest minds will achieve nothing if the political will is lacking. It is on this very issue that we seem
to be seeing a turnaround. For instance, it appears possible to win elections with a clearly pro-
European stance. We recently witnessed this in France.
The  finance  ministers  of  France  and  Germany  have  also  announced  an  initiative  designed  to
strengthen the euro area. Furthermore, we are hearing claims from France that it is on course to
comply with the deficit ceilings for general government debt in future. To me, this is wonderful
news.
Second, the European economy is also providing a boost. Following a prolonged period of weak
economic developments in the euro area, we now find ourselves on a solid upward trajectory.
The euro-area economy grew by 0.5% in the fourth quarter of 2016 and the first quarter of this
year, respectively. The euro area’s economic recovery has thus firmed, with even the mounting
uncertainty in the wake of the Brexit vote and the outcome of the US presidential election doing
nothing to alter that fact.
The  tides  are  also  turning  in  our  favour  with  respect  to  the  unemployment  rate,  with
unemployment in the euro area falling consistently. Although, at 9.5%, the unemployment rate is
currently higher than the pre-crisis average, it has been declining steadily since 2013 – while the
finishing line is undoubtedly still a way off, we are on the right track.
But how are economic developments now affecting politics in Europe? First, populist movements
that oppose multilateralism, free trade and the euro play on factors such as the fear of weak
economic  growth  and  rising  unemployment.  In  other  words,  positive  economic  developments
take  the  wind  right  out  of  sceptics’  sails.  Second,  a  turning  manoeuvre  can  be  performed  far
more successfully after picking up a little speed.
And I cannot neglect to mention a third ray of hope for Europe: we have recently implemented
major reforms. By that, I am referring to the EU’s banking union.
The  banking  union  was  approved  in  May  2014  and  has  standardised  banking  and  financial
supervision in the euro area. Though still in its infancy, it is one of the most sweeping reforms to
be implemented following the euro-area crisis.
In  the  euro  area,  we  were  able  to  see  that  the  costs  of  the  crisis  were  felt  not  only  by  the
countries that caused them. However, given the existence of risk-sharing in the euro area, it is
vital  that  these  risks  also  be  jointly  managed.  The  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial
markets could therefore no longer remain a matter of national responsibility.
It was for that reason that the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the SSM, was established as the
first  pillar  of  the  banking  union.  Within  a  very  short  space  of  time,  85%  of  assets  held  by
European banks were placed under the supervision of the ECB.
All systemically important financial institutions in the euro area are now overseen by the ECB’s
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
joint supervisory teams and the national supervisory authorities. These teams are headed by a
member of staff from the ECB. Important actions and decisions are determined jointly with the
national supervisory authorities and carried out by joint staff. Put differently, the ECB cooperates
closely with national authorities such as BaFin and the Bundesbank in the SSM.
By contrast, smaller institutions that are not deemed systemically important are still overseen by
national  supervisors.  The  SSM  demonstrates  how  European  and  national  authorities  can
complement each other and work together efficiently.
What the banking union also shows is that Europe is capable of reform today. With that in mind, I
do not believe that we need a new Europe; instead, we need to concentrate on improving the one
we already have.
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, where is Europe heading?
I was invited here today to shed light on this issue. But I’m afraid I must disappoint you: I don’t
have  the  answer  to  this  question. At  the  end  of  the  day,  Europe  is  everyone’s  decision  –  a
decision that we all have to make. 
As we have seen, the EU is facing major challenges: from the sovereign-bank nexus and the
possibility of sovereign insolvencies to the integration of European economic policy. Confronted
with  the  threat  of  populism,  we  must  work  with  even  greater  determination  to  improve  the
European system. While this will not always be easy, Europe is worth the effort. Nevertheless,
we ought to be optimistic about the years to come.
We are no longer going to stumble from crisis summit to crisis summit. We can see political
commitment to change. We can see that the euro area is in good economic shape. And we can
see that, thanks to the banking union, reforms are continuing to be implemented in the EU. The
future of Europe is not as grim as some would have us believe.
I  hope  that  the  US  election,  the  Brexit  decision  and  euro  scepticism  will  provide  the  impetus
needed for major reforms and motivate us to work tirelessly for a better Europe.
The European Union is an anchor in rough seas. For more than 70 years, peace and stability
have reigned over our European continent. Let us never succumb to the temptation to take this
for granted.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
