William  C  Dudley:  Prospects  for  the  local  economy  and  the
importance of workforce development
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Onondaga Community College, Syracuse, New York, 25 September
2017.
 Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here with you in Syracuse, and I want to thank Onondaga
Community College for hosting us. This is my fourth visit to Central New York as president of the
New York Fed, and I always look forward to coming back as part of our regular visits to different
parts of our district. These trips and our meetings with stakeholders in the region give me and my
colleagues important insight into what’s happening in the economy.
Today,  I  will  briefly  discuss  my  outlook  for  the  U.S.  economy  and  what  we  are  seeing  at  the
regional  level,  and  offer  some  reflections  on  the  challenges  and  importance  of  workforce
development in the region and across the nation. As always, what I have to say reflects my own
views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal
1
Reserve System.
Two years ago, I spoke in nearby Rochester on the topic of workforce development.  Since then,
the need for effective workforce development has become no less pressing, and both the New
York Fed and the Federal Reserve System have focused greater efforts on this critical issue.
This morning, I will return to some of the themes from that speech and look at lessons we have
learned.
The U.S. Economic Outlook
2
Although  the  damage  wrought  by  Hurricanes  Harvey,  Irma,  and  Maria  has  imposed
immeasurable  hardship  on  many  and  will  undoubtedly  disrupt  commerce  for  a  time,  these
effects are likely to be relatively short-lived in the context of the overall economic outlook. Natural
disasters tend to depress economic activity initially, but once the recovery and reconstruction
efforts get underway in earnest, such disasters actually serve to lift economic activity.
Looking  beyond  the  storm  effects—which  will  make  interpreting  near-term  economic  data
releases more difficult—the U.S. economy remains on a trajectory of slightly above-trend growth,
which is gradually tightening the U.S. labor market. Over time, this should support a rise in wage
growth.  The  fundamentals  supporting  continued  expansion  are  generally  quite  favorable.  Low
unemployment, sturdy job gains, and rising wages—even at a pace below previous expansions
—are lifting personal income.  Household  wealth  has  been  boosted  by  rising  home  and  equity
prices,  and  household  debt  has  been  growing  relatively  slowly,  contributing  to  a  healthy
household  balance  sheet.  Thus,  consumer  spending  should  continue  to  advance  in  coming
quarters.
Business  fixed  investment  outlays  are  also  likely  to  continue  to  rise.  With  the  supply  of  labor
tightening,  there  are  greater  incentives  for  businesses  to  invest  in  labor-saving  technologies.
Investment spending should also benefit from a better international outlook and improvement in
U.S. trade competitiveness caused by the dollar’s recent weakness. The softer dollar and solid
growth abroad also suggest that the trade sector will no longer be a significant drag on economic
growth.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
With  a  firmer  import  price  trend  and  the  fading  of  effects  from  a  number  of  temporary,
idiosyncratic  factors,  I  expect  inflation  will  rise  and  stabilize  around  the  FOMC’s  2  percent
objective over the medium term. In response, the Federal Reserve will likely continue to remove
monetary policy accommodation gradually.
The Regional Economy
While the national economy has been growing steadily since the end of the Great Recession, the
economies of Upstate New York have lagged behind, with job growth running at only about half
the national pace through much of the expansion. And, over the past year, job growth in Upstate
New York has slowed considerably, particularly in Rochester and Buffalo.
Here in Syracuse, job growth has also been disappointing through most of the expansion, with an
even slower pace of growth than many other upstate areas. In fact, today, almost 10 years after
the  Great  Recession,  Syracuse  has  still  not  fully  recovered  all  of  the  jobs  that  were  lost—a
benchmark most of Upstate New York passed some time ago.
However, this slow growth does not imply that the region is standing still. Indeed, there is a lot of
activity going on beneath the surface. The Syracuse economy and labor force are evolving and
becoming better positioned for the future. But, more needs to be done to help workers adapt to
change, a theme I will return to in a moment.
As  is  the  case  in  much  of  the  country,  Syracuse  has  experienced  a  dramatic  decrease  in
manufacturing jobs, reflecting the dual forces of technological change and globalization. These
were  well-paying  jobs  that  supported  a  vibrant  middle  class.  Now,  I  am  a  firm  believer  in  the
overall positive effect that open trade has had on the United States, but I also recognize that its
benefits and costs are distributed unevenly, and the positive and negative consequences can be
geographically concentrated.   On  the  whole,  we  have  not  done  enough  to  recognize  the  vast
consequences  of  these  changes  and  to  help  those  hurt  by  technological  change  and
globalization.
3
The Syracuse economy has changed considerably from 25 years ago, when manufacturing was
the dominant source of jobs and income. The number of manufacturing workers has been cut in
half  since  then,  reducing  the  sector’s  share  of  employment  from  15  percent  to  8  percent—a
share that is now on par with the nation. This transition has been painful, but has resulted in a
more diversified and stable regional economy.
In manufacturing’s place, the healthcare and education sectors have picked up the slack, and
have  been  a  stabilizing  force  for  the  Syracuse  economy.  Offsetting  the  20,000  manufacturing
jobs  that  were  lost  over  the  past  25  years  are  around  25,000  jobs  added  in  education  and
healthcare. Those two sectors now employ almost 20 percent of the workers in the region. Other
sectors,  like  business  services  and  leisure  and  hospitality,  have  also  been  creating  new  job
opportunities that differ from the ones the region previously relied on.
In addition, jobs are being created in innovative hot spots in the region. For example, start-up
companies rising from the Syracuse Tech Garden, as well as a new global center for unmanned
aerial systems, are providing exciting new opportunities. While these particular efforts are still
relatively small in scale, they have the potential to change the trajectory of the regional economy
over time. However, Syracuse will need workers with deep skill sets to fill such jobs.
To that end, it can be difficult for workers to adapt to these changes, and they may need help to
get there. Taking a broader view, the good jobs being created in today’s economy require more
education, training, and, ultimately, skill than ever before. The skill requirements for virtually all
jobs are increasing, and workers will need to rise to the occasion to thrive in today’s economy.
The challenge facing all of us is how to best help workers develop the skills necessary to land a
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
good job, and how to enhance those skills over time as work requirements evolve. Workers with
years of experience in jobs that are no longer in demand have it especially hard, as their skills
may not be sufficient or match current opportunities—an all-too-familiar story for workers in the
Syracuse area.
Workforce Development
Workforce  development  must,  therefore,  be  a  top  priority  for  everyone  involved:  workers,
employers, communities, government, and educational and training institutions. There is no silver
bullet  or  one-size-fits-all  solution.  This  is  a  complex  challenge  that  requires  a  combination  of
strategies. But one thing is clear: it requires a holistic approach encompassing the “three P’s” I
described  two  years  ago—Partnerships,  Programs,  and  Placement—and  then  some.  Before
delving deeper into these, let me first explain why we, as the nation’s central bank, care about
workforce development.
As  many  of  you  know,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  tasked  by  Congress  with  a  dual  mandate:
maximum employment in the context of price stability. Clearly, we cannot declare success if we
have people who want to work but lack the skills to fill available jobs. A skilled workforce that is
matched to the needs of employers is necessary for the economy to grow and prosper, and for
individuals to reach their potential. Monetary policy can help labor markets recover by providing
incentives  for  firms  to  invest  and  grow.  However,  monetary  policy  cannot  by  itself  solve  skill
mismatches and gaps that exist in the economy.
So, what can we do? The Federal Reserve provides research and analysis, and leverages its
convening  ability  to  bring  together  diverse  stakeholders  to  better  understand  the  issues  and
identify practices that work. For example, we run the Leading the Way video campaign with P-
TECH schools and employer partnerships.  This competition challenges teams of high school
students in the Rochester area to create public service announcements detailing skills required
to  work  in  industries  that  are  currently  hiring.  We  also  participate  in  the  New  York  City  Data
Science Task Force to increase the number and diversity of students in the metropolitan area
prepared to enter graduate school or the workforce with data science skills. And, we are finalizing
the  results  of  a  survey  of  community  colleges  across  New  York  State  that  looks  at  their
engagement  with  employers  for  the  purposes  of  workforce  development.  I  will  talk  a  bit  more
about the survey’s preliminary results shortly.
4
In addition, we are working with the Federal Reserve Board of Governors and our fellow regional
Reserve  Banks  on  broader  initiatives  to  promote  investment  in  workforce  development  and
encourage partnerships, including next month’s Investing in America’s Workforce Conference in
Austin,  Texas.  The  conference  is  a  joint  effort  by  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  several
leading  institutions  in  the  field   intended  to  connect  businesses,  government  agencies,  non-
profits,  academics,  and  philanthropic  organizations.  The  goal  is  to  reframe  workforce
development as an investment, attract new resources, and leverage existing ones to improve
economic mobility and job opportunities for potential workers.
The Three P’s of Workforce Development
5
The  core  of  any  workforce  development  effort  is  the  need  to  help  workers  build  the  skills
necessary  to  adapt  to  change,  meet  the  challenges  of  an  evolving  economy,  and  find  good-
paying jobs. We have been hearing from business owners across our district, on our advisory
councils,  and  through  surveys  for  several  years  about  the  skills  gaps  they  face,  in  areas  as
diverse  as  engineering,  long-haul  trucking,  welding,  and  metalworking.  What  they  all  have  in
common is that they require specific skills and training, whether through a certification program,
a  two-  or  four-year  degree,  or  a  formal  apprenticeship—an  approach  that  has  been  very
successful in countries such as Germany and the UK, but has not been as widely used here.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is where the partnership concept comes into play. Partnerships entail cooperative efforts
between  local  employers  and  educational  institutions  to  determine  the  best  strategies  to  help
workers develop the skills employers need. The good news is that New York State seems to be
ahead of the curve in this area.
As I mentioned, we are in the process of completing a survey of community colleges in New York
State. The early results are encouraging: we have found that all community colleges in the state
offer some workforce development programming, and partnerships with employers are the norm.
In fact, the median number of employer-partners among community colleges is over 100, and
there  are  partnerships  in  every  industry,  from  healthcare  to  utilities  to  agriculture.  Such
partnerships are growing in importance and fill a need for both local workers and employers. This
goes to my second P: Programs. Community colleges in New York are becoming very adept at
creating programs tailored to the current skills required by local employers.
Locally,  I’d  like  to  highlight  Onondaga  Community  College’s  partnership  with  Madison  County
manufacturers,  which  trains  workers  through  the  Apprentice  Career  Training  program.  This
program  provides  paid  training  for  students  that  can  lead  to  four-year  apprenticeships  in
participating businesses in advanced manufacturing, where they will develop skills necessary for
jobs  that  are  in  high  demand,  including  maintenance  mechanics,  tool  makers,  and  machine
operators.
I would also like to call attention to Work Train’s job training and industry collaboration,  as well
as the work of the Onondaga Citizens League to quantify the types of jobs that are in Central
New York, what job opportunities will likely exist in the future, and other critical workforce-related
questions.  I  anticipate  that  the  Citizens  League’s  report  on  how  Central  New  York  works  will
7
serve as an important resource for shaping workforce development programs in the area.
6
However, while training and skill-building are foundational, they are not enough. Placement into
good jobs—my third P—is a critical component of effective workforce development, especially
for those currently unemployed. Recent work by Federal Reserve economists highlights some of
the hurdles to job placement that will need to be overcome. This research leveraged the New
York Fed’s Survey of Consumer Expectations to examine how people find work.  The difference
between  those  looking  for  work  while  employed  versus  those  who  are  unemployed  is  stark.
Relative to the unemployed, employed workers spend less time searching for jobs but have three
times higher contact rates and two times as many job offers. Furthermore, workers hired from
another job do better than those who are unemployed, receiving 28 percent higher wages and
twice the level of benefits. While we have always known how difficult it is for recent high school
or college graduates to find their first job, it seems that those currently unemployed face an even
greater hurdle, and this is an issue that we need to address.
8
Another finding from this work is the importance of networking and references for those seeking
employment. Referrals accounted for 40 percent of total job offers, and while 60 percent of all job
applications were the result of job board searches, these accounted for only 24 percent of offers.
This all suggests that workforce development providers need to build relationships and trust with
employers as a way to help their job-seekers find available opportunities and successfully apply
for them.
Having covered the three P’s, I’d like to now focus briefly on the “and then some,” which refers to
addressing a number of social and structural factors that work against even the best workforce
development efforts.
In  my  travels  throughout  the  region  and  my  interactions  with  workers,  business  leaders,
workforce development practitioners, and others, I regularly hear how access to transportation
and childcare are preventing able and willing workers from actually working. People’s inability to
get to jobs relatively far from where they live—either because they can’t afford a car or there is no
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
viable  and  reliable  public  transportation.  This  is  a  challenge  we  are  seeing  both  in  sparsely
populated  areas,  like  the  North  Country,  and  in  cities,  where  jobs  may  be  available  in  the
surrounding suburbs and exurbs with no easy public access. With regard to childcare, cost and
access are what we hear most as hindering people’s ability to fill jobs. And, even for those who
can afford childcare, irregular scheduling by employers makes it very difficult to plan effectively.
Additional  adverse  factors  include  a  decline  in  geographic  mobility—that  is,  people’s  ability  or
willingness  to  relocate  to  where  the  jobs  are—and  the  opioid  epidemic,  which  Chair  Yellen
9
recently spoke about as having a significant negative impact on our workforce.
While I am not an expert on these subjects, I can say that the inefficiencies these impediments
create  are  keeping  us  from  realizing  our  full  potential  individually  and  as  a  country,  and  that
addressing them as part of a comprehensive workforce development solution is essential.
I would like to conclude by saying that Syracuse, as well as Upstate New York more generally,
has been dealing head-on with the consequences of economic change for a long time. Perhaps
because of this, the region has developed a deep understanding of the importance of helping its
people adapt through workforce development programs. The issue of workforce development is
a  complex  one  that  requires  a  holistic  approach  and  close  collaboration  among  all  interested
parties.  The  good  news  is  that  many  great  organizations  in  the  area  are  trying  different
approaches to discover what works best. Our region is in many ways leading the way, and we at
the New York Fed will continue to support these efforts.
Thank you for your kind attention. I would now be happy to take a few questions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Jaison Abel, Jason Bram, Gerard Dages, Tony Davis, Richard Deitz, Jack Gutt, and Anand Marri assisted in
preparing these remarks.
See William C. Dudley, Workforce Development and Reinvention in the Rochester Economy, August 12, 2015.
See William C. Dudley, Benefits and Challenges from Globalization, May 11, 2017.
P-TECH stands for Pathways in Technology Early College High School.
Some of these institutions include the John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University,
the Ray Marshall Center for the Study of Human Resources at the University of Texas at Austin, and the W.E.
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Work Train is a program of the CenterState Corporation for Economic Opportunity.
How CNY Works, Onondaga Citizens League, 2017.
R. Jason Faberman, Andreas I. Mueller, Ayşegül Şahin, Rachel Schuh, and Giorgio Topa,  How Do People Find
Jobs?, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics (blog), April 5, 2017.
Smialek, J. (2017, July 13). Yellen Says Opioid Use Is Tied to Declining Labor Participation. Bloomberg News.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
