Andreas Dombret: Current challenges for the European economy
and international trade
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the German Chamber of Commerce, Beijing, 25 May 2017.
1 Introduction
 Ladies and gentlemen, probably all of you know that the Chinese name for Germany is “déguó",
meaning “land of virtue". Therefore, we can safely say that trade relations between China and
Germany were born under a lucky star. However, there are some clouds on the horizon casting a
shadow on the future of international trade.
Without any doubt, this proposition needs further explanation. Thus, I will begin my statement
today by briefing you on the economic situation in the euro area. Afterwards, I wish to present you
the most important developments affecting the future of international trade – not only between
Germany and China, but more generally the future of the international trading system as a whole.
Namely, I will talk about the rise of protectionism in a number of large economies.
By the way, it is reassuring that China has so far pledged to maintain a stance that promotes free
trade, as it did at the World Economic Forum in Davos, and is even looking for ways to expand it.
But I do not want to speak primarily about the policies of governments, but about what each of us
‒ including central banks and international companies ‒ can do to steer the debate on trade away
from harmful protectionism.
2 Economic situation in the euro area
2.1 Positive economic outlook for the euro area
But first, let me look at the general economic outlook for the euro area and consider the factors
influencing future economic growth in Europe. Since the financial crisis, the pace of recovery in
the euro area has been slower than in the United States, not to mention fast-growing emerging
economies  like  China.  Lately,  however,  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  has  become
increasingly broad and robust.
For the euro area, just in the last few weeks the economic development has been slightly on the
upside. The concrete data as calculated by the ECB staff shows that for the euro area, we are
looking at sound GDP growth of 0.5% for the first quarter of 2017. At the same time, inflation for
April 2017 stood close to the ECB target at 1.9%. Unemployment in March was at 9.5%, down
from  its  peak  of  12%  in  2013.  On  the  whole,  the  euro  area  economy  is  looking  increasingly
healthy and is set on a growth path.
But looking to the future, we can see several factors dampening growth in Europe. Politically,
the UK vote to leave the European Union has been a setback for the European project, but this
decision is supposed to have a limited impact on the European economy as a whole, given the
significant but limited weight of UK GDP. Even the Bank of England hinted in its most recent
statement that the rate increase anticipated for 2019 might take place sooner than expected. Of
course,  the  Bank  of  England  stressed  that  this  will  depend  on  the  outcome  of  the  Brexit
negotiations.
One persistent problem of the euro area economy is unemployment. I mentioned just now that
euro area unemployment stood at 9.5%. However, if we look at the wider statistics published by
the  ECB  on  unemployment  and  underemployment,  including  discouraged  workers  or  workers
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
who are not able to work as much as they want, we are rather looking at 18%. With the exception
of Germany, where the combined figure is under 10%, most big euro area economies such as
France,  Italy,  and  Spain,  still  are  facing  the  same  problem  of  persistent  and  widespread
unemployment  and  underemployment,  especially  among  the  young.  The  wider  unemployment
statistics have been falling slowly since early 2014 as well, but because people tend to lose their
skills and their social capital when they are unemployed for a long time, helping these people
retain or gain skills and getting them into jobs is vital for sustaining the recovery.
Because  it  is  not  yet  clear  when  inflation  will  stabilise  close  to  2%,  and  because  underlying
inflation  excluding  energy  remains  below  target,  the  ECB  governing  council  has  chosen  to
maintain, for the time being, its accommodative monetary policy stance with negative rates and
extensive asset purchase programmes. However, at the April press conference, ECB president
Draghi conceded that “the growth risks were moving towards a more balanced configuration."
In sum, despite Brexit and the persistence of unemployment in many European countries, the
short-term outlook for the European economy is cautiously optimistic. Fundamental weaknesses
such  as  persistent  unemployment  need  to  be  addressed  by  governments  with  structural
reforms. Until these underlying problems are resolved, political risks will remain the biggest threat
to European economies over the medium to long term.
The  danger  exists  that  populist  parties  could  make  European  countries  unable  to  respond
effectively to crises and changes. I will discuss the underlying causes of this political risk later on:
Dissatisfaction with free trade and flirting with protectionism.
3 Future of international trade
Looking at the global landscape, positive economic data are not only coming from Europe. For
the first time since a brief surge in growth in 2010 we are experiencing a synchronised recovery
that is taking place broadly across Europe, the United States, as well as in China and emerging
market economies. This synchronised recovery will support international trade and vice versa. At
the  same  time,  we  have  witnessed  public  attacks  on  international  trade  and  the  system  that
supports it, which is based on the free flow of goods and capital.
Protectionist  sentiment  in  developed  economies  is  rising.  Promises  to  cut  back  on  free  trade
have resounded with voters in some developed countries. While it is still unclear what – if any –
protectionist policies will actually be implemented and how they will affect international trade, it is
clear that leaders in government and business have not been able to persuasively defend the
virtues of free trade, and that the future of international trade will depend precisely on their ability
to do just that.
Let me brief you about this discussion and the action that has to be taken. We have to adopt a
stance that is both correct and compassionate. That is: Restrictions on international trade will do
much more harm than good and would be a historic mistake. And we must be compassionate:
Even though the reasoning of those who call for protectionism is ultimately wrong, we have to
recognise that there are parts of society who believe international trade is responsible for taking
away their jobs.
3.1 Is free trade useful?
For  a  long  time,  the  usefulness  of  international  trade  has  been  undisputed,  and  international
policymakers have concentrated on ever-more detailed arrangements and standards. That is no
longer  the  case  anymore:  The  core  of  the  international  trade  system  is  being  questioned.
Protectionism is back, and even mercantilism, dead for centuries, has reared its ugly head again.
In this context, I am convinced that this trend is leading us down the wrong path. The social and
economic issues that countries across Europe and around the world are facing are not at odds
with the conventional wisdom regarding international trade, and they cannot be solved by falling
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
back into protectionism.
What  globalisation  statistics  show  is  that  economic  integration  does  indeed  raise  aggregate
wealth. Worldwide exports and imports have reached roughly 60% of global GDP , and there has
been a surge in global economic integration in recent decades. At the same time, real income
2
has been growing globally and across the income spectrum since the 1980s.
1
These  developments  are  not  accidental  side  effects.  Indeed,  trade  theory  predicts  a  more
efficient  allocation.  This  happens  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  such  as  comparative  advantage  or
economies  of  scale.  Economic  integration  also  facilitates  the  transfer  of  knowledge,  bringing
innovation to places that would otherwise not have benefited from new technologies.
At the same time, just because trade leads to gains overall does not mean no one will be left
worse  off.  This  has  been  studied  since  the  early  days  of  international  economics.  Recent
surveys  have  identified  groups  that  have  suffered  from  international  trading  arrangements,  at
least  relative  to  their  national  peers. Think  about  communities  in  the  American  Midwest  or
Northern France: both are regions where manufacturing jobs have disappeared with devastating
effects on the social fabric of their communities. Some shifting of manufacturing jobs is not proof
that international trade theories have failed – indeed it is part of the evidence that the theories are
right. Accepting trade theories thus means accepting that there may – and most probably will –
be negative consequences for some communities.
3.2 Mill’s solution
3
The answer to this political-economic problem was given a long time ago by John Stuart Mill and
can be put simply as “free trade plus compensation" . Compensation can take many forms. The
member states of the euro area tend to provide extensive social benefits. At the same time, the
euro area countries trade freely with each other and we conclude from this that free trade and
compensation are not mutually exclusive.
4
Let me be clear that assistance in the form of benefits is not the only and certainly not the most
effective way to help people. First, I am also talking about measures to retrain workers: Such
active  labour  measures  are  found  to  significantly  reduce  unemployment  and  long-term
unemployment in OECD countries . Second, we should value the positive effects of international
standards.  They  help  to  maintain  a  level  playing  field  and  to  prevent  a  regulatory  race  to  the
bottom in policy fields that serve the whole of society. Think about international labour standards
as an example.
5
However,  not  all  countries  are  implementing  these  measures.  Why  is  that?  The  populists’
solution  to  the  problem  is  “cut  down  on  free  trade,  it’s  hurting  jobs!”  The  problem  with  this
solution  is  that  it  is  deeply  misleading.  First,  there  is  more  than  one  reason  for  the  loss  of
manufacturing jobs. Advances in efficiency due to technology and automation have permanently
reduced the number of workers needed to manufacture a given output. The managing director of
the IMF Christine Lagarde highlighted in a recent speech that “technology has been the major
factor behind the relative decline of lower- and middle-skilled workers’ incomes in recent years,
with trade contributing to a much lesser extent." Erecting trade barriers will do nothing to recover
jobs lost as a result of automation. While it is true that some manufacturing jobs have moved to
emerging countries, all theory and evidence shows that international trade has been a net gain
for Europe, the United States, as well as for the rest of the world. We have to confront all those
who  distort  the  facts  about  the  supposed  benefits  of  protectionism,  because  following  their
advice would be a disaster for world trade and would not help those who feel left behind. The
opposite would be the case, since protectionism would reduce the size of the total economic pie,
leaving society worse off on the whole.
6
At  the  same  time,  we  must  not  fall  into  the  trap  of  self-complacency.  The  “Washington
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
st
consensus” has dominated the discourse on international economics from the 1990s until the
early 21  century .  Its  proponents  have  welcomed  the  advance  of  free  trade  in  the  name  of
economic  efficiency.  While  their  argument  is  technically  sound,  they  have  not  provided  any
answers for those who have seen their share of the pie stay the same size or even get smaller.
7
We have to admit that, as part of this consensus, policies were recommended that generally
reject any form of “free trade plus compensation". To be fair, such a balanced approach has not
been rejected because of any lack of compassion, but because it was believed that a minimum
of regulation would be beneficial for trade and economic development. Indeed, almost 20 years
ago  Harvard  economist  Dani  Rodrik,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  scholars  in  the  field  of
international economics and political economy, accurately noted that “governments today actively
compete with each other by pursuing policies that they believe will earn them market confidence
and  attract  trade  and  capital  inflows:  tight  money,  small  government,  low  taxes,  flexible  labor
8
legislation, deregulation, privatization, and openness all around."
I think his observation explains why not enough attention was given to Mill’s advice about “free
trade  plus  compensation".  We  are  at  risk  of  a  backlash  against  international  trade  because
leaders in some countries have not been able to give convincing answers to those who have
seen their standard of living decline, either due to free trade or due to technology. In this sense,
leaders  in  institutions,  government,  and  business  should  not  discount  or  oppose  sensible
measures in the field of regulations or social security, because these measures help defend the
consensus that free trade is beneficial for us all.
3.3 Outlook for future Free Trade Agreements
At this point, and after so much gloom, it is time to not only talk about the threats to international
trade but to share a few ideas about the opportunities opening up for trade.
One development that is sure to gain in importance in the coming years and decades is trade not
only  in  goods,  but  in  services.  Historically,  we  have  focused  on  trade  in  what  are  known  as
tradable,  manufactured  goods.  But  technology  is  continually  expanding  the  range  of  tradable
services. Think about internet e-commerce platforms that can provide their distribution service
from  anywhere  in  the  world,  think  about  a  professional  consultant,  a  programmer  or  even  a
medical  doctor,  professionals  who  use  modern  technological  tools  of  collaboration  and
communication and who can provide their services from anywhere in the world.
In fact, we could very easily be holding our meeting today by video conference, although I myself
very much prefer making and maintaining contacts on a personal basis. There will surely always
be a need for personal dialogue.
The planned Trans-Pacific Partnership contained provisions that addressed the blurring between
tradable  goods  and  supposedly  non-tradable  services.  Even  though  the  future  of  the  treaty  is
currently  uncertain,  finding  an  international  trade  framework  for  digital  goods  and  services  will
continue to be highly relevant.
There are more examples of developments favourable to international trade. One such example
is the Trade Facilitation Agreement, which entered into force on 22 February 2017 after it was
ratified by two-thirds of the World Trade Organization’s members.  Another example is the CETA
treaty  between  the  European  Union  and  Canada  that  is  in  the  process  of  being  ratified  and
 The “one belt, one road” initiative was promoted with much publicity at a summit in
adopted.
Beijing just ten days ago.
 While it remains to be seen whether the proposed project will meet
European  standards  of  fairness  and  transparency,  it  clearly  shows  that  enthusiasm  for
international trade is far from dead.
10
11
9
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, I have argued that even if international trade is far from dead, we can no
longer take it for granted that the conditions and moods favouring international trade will prevail in
the future.
In  Europe  and  in  other  developed  countries,  there  is  an  open  discussion  on  the  merits  and
drawbacks of international trade. We have to join in this discussion if we are to preserve and
expand  international  trade.  We  will  have  to  think  long  and  hard  about  how  to  implement  the
principle of “free trade plus compensation", that is how to help those who are losing out to adapt
to the changes brought about by international trade and technological progress.
In this way, citizens in Europe, in China, and all over the world will recognise that international
trade is a virtue in our societies, not a threat.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Source: Penn World Tables Version 8.1.
Source: Milanovic, B. (2013). Global income inequality in numbers: In history and now. Global policy. 4(2): 198–
208.
On  domestic  distributional  consequences  of  international  trade,  see,  for  example, Acemoglu  et  al.  (2016).
Import competition and the great US employment sag of the 2000s. Journal of Labor Economics 34(S1): 141–
198; McKinsey (2016). Poorer than their parents? A new perspective on income inequality. Available online:
www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-and-growth/poorer-than-their-parents-a-new-perspective-on-
income-inequality.
John Stuart Mill argued in 1825 for the possibility of winners compensating losers in the context of the repeal of
the Corn Laws. See: The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume IV – Essays on Economics and Society
Part 
John  M.  Robson,  University  of  Toronto  Press,  1967.  Available  online:
oll.libertyfund.org/titles/244#Mill_0223–04_311.
I,  ed. 
On the effectiveness of active labour measures: ftp.iza.org/pp84.pdf, p.10.
Speech  of  Christine  Lagarde  at  Bruegel 
tank,  April  12,  2017.  Available  online:
www.imf.org/en/news/articles/2017/04/07/building-a-more-resilient-and-inclusive-global-economy-a-speech-by-
christine-lagarde. On this issue see also the findings of the IMF in the World Economic Outlook April 2017,
Chapter  3,  p.  122f.  Available  online:  www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2017/04/04/world-economic-
outlook-april-2017.
think 
A summary on the debate is given by Joseph Stiglitz in “The Post Washington Consensus Consensus". The
Initiative 
online:
policydialogue.org/files/events/Stiglitz_Post_Washington_Consensus_Paper.pdf.
Dialogue, 
Available 
Policy 
2008. 
for 
Dani Rodrik (2000). How far will economic integration go? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(1).
Source: www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/tradfa_e/tradfa_e.htm.
Source: ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/in-focus/ceta.
Source: www.xinhuanet.com/english/special/201705ydylforum.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
