REMARKS BY MR. JAVIER GUZMÁN CALAFELL, DEPUTY GOVERNOR AT THE 
BANCO DE MÉXICO, ON “EMERGING ECONOMIES IN A NEW GLOBAL CYCLE: 
CENTRAL  BANK  PERSPECTIVES”,  AT  THE  9TH  ANNUAL  CONFERENCE 
ORGANIZED  BY  THE  CENTRAL  RESERVE  BANK  OF  PERU  AND  THE 
REINVENTING  BRETTON  WOODS  COMMITTEE  “NEW  CHALLENGES  FOR 
GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTEGRATION”. Cusco, Peru, July 24, 2017.1 
 
 
I thank the Banco Central de Reserva del Perú and the Reinventing Bretton 
Woods Committee for the invitation to participate in this event. 
 
After having reached a post-crisis low in 2016, global economic activity seems 
to  be  transitioning  to  a  faster,  although  still  moderate,  growth  trajectory 
starting  this  year.  The  recovery  is  supported  by  the  upturn  in  global 
merchandise trade, notably in capital goods, and an improved dynamism in 
the  industrial  sector,  especially  in  manufacturing.  The  improved  economic 
situation in the advanced economies is particularly noteworthy. Naturally, this 
has  enhanced  confidence  in  the  global  economic  outlook  and  reduced  the 
perception  of  risks  deriving  from  tail  scenarios,  although  these  cannot  be 
completely ruled out. 
 
Notwithstanding these positive developments, the world economy seems to 
have lost part of the long-term dynamism displayed in the past, as global GDP 
growth during 2017-2022 is forecast to be, on average, almost one percentage 
                                                           
1 The opinions and views expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a 
whole. 
 1 
point lower than in the pre-crisis years of 2000-2007. Furthermore, the current 
juncture continues to be characterized by a number of important risks.  
 
To start with, the future evolution of the global economy faces a high level of 
uncertainty related to the lack of clarity and details about the direction to be 
taken  by  economic  policy  in  the  United  States,  particularly  on  the  fiscal, 
regulatory and trade fronts. 
 
Second,  the  recent  strengthening  of  a  widespread  sentiment  against 
globalization,  along  with  the  political  support  it  has  been  able  to  garner, 
certainly threatens to stall, and in some instances even reverse, the progress 
towards  the  economic  and  financial  integration  of  the  global  economy 
achieved over the last decades.  
 
Third,  as  the  ongoing  recovery  continues,  it  is  natural  to  expect  that  the 
normalization  of  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies  will  begin  to 
generalize.  While  this  should  in  principle  be  considered  as  a  positive 
development,  it  is  not  free  of  risks,  as  it  implies  a  tightening  of  financial 
conditions for emerging market economies  (EMEs) and a major policy shift 
with potential adverse global implications. 
 
Fourth,  the  generally  benign  behavior  that  international  financial  markets 
have displayed in recent months could swiftly be disrupted by a number of 
factors. The latter include a reassessment of the economic outlook by global 
 2 
investors as a result of policy surprises, economic difficulties in key emerging 
market economies and geopolitical conflicts, among others.  
 
Finally, we should bear in mind that the medium- to long-term outlook for 
potential growth in both advanced and emerging economies may deteriorate 
due to persistently weak trends in productivity, demography and the available 
stock of capital. 
 
What  should  be  done  to  allow  EMEs  to  thrive  in  such  a  complex  external 
environment? 
 
I  wish  to  stress  that  the  main  responsibility  lies  in  EMEs  themselves.  The 
consequent  recommendations  in  terms  of  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability and structural reform are well known. In this respect, I would only like 
to note that notwithstanding the important progress achieved during the last 
years,  major  efforts  are  still  needed,  as  we  continue  to  see  high  fiscal  and 
current account imbalances, as well as excessive debt levels, in many of these 
economies. In addition, structural reform policies in EMEs stagnated or even 
reversed in recent years, with only a few of them announcing comprehensive 
reform plans.  
 
However,  as  important  as  these  efforts  may  be,  it  is  undeniable  that  the 
magnitude  of  the  challenges  faced  calls  for  increased  cooperation  of  the 
international  community.  It  is  in  this  area,  and  especially  in  the  topic  of 
international monetary cooperation, where I would like to focus my remarks. 
 3 
 
International policy cooperation faces many challenges. As history has shown, 
policy  cooperation  at  the  international  level  is  particularly  strong  during 
episodes of crisis and severe economic and financial distress. Indeed, outside 
such episodes, the case for cooperation tends to fade, as its benefits become 
less evident and policymaking therefore has even stronger incentives to favor 
national over multilateral considerations. 
 
Moreover, the usefulness and feasibility of international policy cooperation is 
a subject of debate. At one level, some argue that under floating exchange 
rates countries are effectively isolated from external shocks and policy choices, 
and  thus  free  to  set  a  monetary  policy  stance  appropriate  for  their  own 
economies, rendering international cooperation unnecessary.2 Even for some 
of  those  who  challenge  the  isolating  properties  of  floating  exchange  rates, 
potential  conflicts  with  the  domestic  mandates  of  central  banks  can  make 
international monetary cooperation difficult to attain.3  
 
In  my  view,  the  merits  of  international  cooperation  outweigh  by  far  its 
potential  disadvantages. 
In  fact,  the  global  financial  crisis  provides 
unquestionable evidence in this respect, since its costs would have been much 
higher in the absence of cooperation. But more generally, I would underline 
the following:  
                                                           
2 See, for instance, Friedman, Milton (1953): “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates”, Essays in Positive 
Economics, pp. 157-203. 
3 See, for instance, Rey, Hélène (2015): “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary 
Policy Independence”, NBER Working Paper No. 21162, May; and Rogoff, Kenneth (1985): “Can International 
Monetary Policy Cooperation Be Counterproductive?”, Journal of International Economics 18:199-217, May. 
 
 4 
 •  From a theoretical point of view, the existence of spillovers implies the 
presence  of  externalities.  If  not  taken  into  account  properly,  i.e. 
internalized,  the  latter  will  imply  inefficient  results.  In  other  words, 
policy cooperation is needed. This applies even under flexible exchange 
rates, since they do not fully insulate countries from external shocks.  
•  The  close  linkages  and  interconnections  currently  existing  in  a  highly 
interdependent  global  economy  set  the  stage  for  a  spillover-rich 
environment, as shocks and policy choices in one country or region are 
easily  transmitted  to  the  rest  of  the  world.4  Naturally,  the  potential 
implications for worldwide output, inflation and financial stability from 
policy  choices  in  systemically  important  economies  are  especially 
relevant.  
•  The analysis of the nature, magnitude and direction of spillovers from 
monetary  policy  can  be 
further  complicated  by  the  use  of 
unconventional monetary policy measures. For instance, according to 
recent studies,5 the implementation of such policies by the US Federal 
Reserve has had a greater impact on economic and financial variables of 
EMEs  than  in  the  US  economy  itself.  Additional  challenges  relate  to 
                                                           
4 For instance, the Bank for International Settlements estimates that a 100 basis-point change in the 3-
month interbank rate in the US induces a 34 basis-point change, in the same direction, in the corresponding 
interest rate abroad, while the effect is nearly twice as large in the case of 10-year government bond rates. 
In regards to pure monetary spillovers, policy rates abroad are also found to respond to changes in the 
monetary policy stance in the United States, as a 1 percentage-point change in the federal funds rate is 
associated with changes between a quarter and a half that magnitude elsewhere. See Hofmann, Boris and 
Előd Takáts (2015): “International Monetary Spillovers”, BIS Quarterly Review, September. 
5 See Chen, Q., A. Filardo, D. He and F. Zhu (2016): “Financial Crisis, US Unconventional Monetary Policy and 
International Spillovers”, Journal of International Money and Finance 67:62-81, October. 
 5 
potential spillovers from prolonged use and subsequent exit from these 
measures.  
•  External  shocks  resulting  from  spillover  effects  will  normally  be 
absorbed to a significant extent through exchange rate adjustments in 
those countries with flexible rate regimes. The empirical evidence shows 
that after a certain threshold the depreciation of a currency can have 
non-linear effects on inflation and other macroeconomic variables.6 
•  A situation of uncertainty, like the one we face today, enhances the case 
for policy cooperation, since by increasing volatility it is equivalent to an 
additional spillover effect. 
international  monetary 
 
Which  are  the  possible  areas  for  enhanced 
cooperation? 
 
Paradoxically, there are actions at the national level in advanced economies 
that can be seen as a way of international cooperation in view of their potential 
global repercussions.  
 
The  first  one  relates  to  communication.  As  I  noted  above,  in  the  current 
setting, a latent source of spillovers derives from a still-substantial degree of 
uncertainty  regarding  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy  in  advanced 
economies. In particular, market anxiety revolves around the timing and path 
for exit from the unconventional measures, and the overall normalization of 
                                                           
6 See, for instance, Caselli, F. and A. Roitman (2016): “Non-Linear Exchange Rate Pass-Through in Emerging 
Markets”, IMF Working Paper No. 16/1, January; and Jašová, M. R. Moessner and E. Takáts (2016): 
“Exchange Rate Pass-Through: What Has Changed Since the Crisis?”, BIS Working Paper No. 583, September. 
 6 
the  “taper 
tantrum”  episode  of  mid-2013, 
the monetary policy stance in those economies. In order to contain the risks 
to macroeconomic and financial stability that may ensue, a clear and effective 
communication strategy takes center stage. Although significant progress has 
been  made  in  this  regard  in  recent  years,  in  large  part  as  a  result  of  the 
experience  with 
the 
misunderstandings  that  we  have  continued  to  see  regarding  possible 
monetary policy actions in some advanced economies are a reminder of the 
extreme market sensitivity to their central banks’ remarks. 
 
The second one has to do with the policy mix in advanced economies. It is well 
known that the policy response in these countries to the global financial crisis 
has  relied  excessively  on  monetary  policy,  without  adequate  support  from 
fiscal  and  especially  structural  adjustment  measures.  In  the  absence  of 
alternative sources of support for economic activity from either the demand 
or the supply sides, interest rates have been lower than we would have seen 
under a more balanced policy mix, thereby giving rise to stronger international 
spillovers.  
 
But beyond these actions at the national level, many possible options exist to 
enhance policy cooperation from a strictly international point of view. Some 
of them can be implemented relatively easily. In other cases, however, a strong 
political will and an awareness of the self-interest deriving from international 
cooperation would be required. Let me give you a few examples:  
 
 7 
•  Advanced  economies  need  to  be  fully  aware  of  the  international 
repercussions of their monetary policy actions. Failure to recognize the 
extent and magnitude of the associated spillovers certainly exacerbates 
the  difficulties  that  the  economies  abroad,  particularly  emerging 
markets, may face.7 This also complicates life for advanced economies, 
since spillovers can certainly have a boomerang effect. Although some 
progress has been made in this regard, this is still far from satisfactory. 
Advanced economies should regularly carry out deeper evaluations of 
the cross-border and boomerang repercussions of their policy choices, 
particularly  as  the  tightening  of  global  financial  conditions  resulting 
from  the  eventual  exit  from  ultra-accommodative  monetary  policy 
stances may pose serious threats to emerging market economies and 
affect advanced economies themselves.  
•  Closely linked to the above, we need more research on monetary policy 
spillovers and spillbacks from different sources. It is widely agreed that 
our understanding of this issue is relatively modest. However, efforts to 
overcome this situation are still insufficient.8 I am of the view that this 
is  a  task  that  should  be  undertaken  by  multiple  parties,  including 
international  institutions,  advanced  economies,  EMEs  and  academia. 
The input of many sources of research is particularly important given the 
                                                           
7 For a review of the effects that unconventional monetary policies in the advanced economies had on 
emerging markets in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, see for instance Özatay, Fatih (2016): “The 
Policy Response in Emerging Market Economies in the G-20”, Chapter 8 of “Managing Complexity: Economic 
Policy Cooperation after the Crisis”, Brookings Institution Press. 
8 See, for instance, Chen, Q., A. Filardo, D. He and F. Zhu, Op. Cit.; International Monetary Fund (2014): 
“2014 Triennial Surveillance Review—Overview Paper”, IMF Policy Paper, July; Blanchard, Olivier (2017): 
“Currency Wars, Coordination, and Capital Controls”, International Journal of Central Banking 13(2):283-308, 
June; and Rogoff, Kenneth (2013): “Comment on ‘International Policy Coordination: Present, Past and 
Future’ by John B Taylor”, in BIS Working Paper No. 437, December. 
 8 
potential for contradictory conclusions from the studies carried out by 
official sources from the involved countries. 
•  We  need  a  strong,  efficient  and  adequately  funded  global  financial 
safety  net.  Although  it  can  be  argued  that  the  latter  has  already 
strengthened  due  to  individual  country  efforts,  particularly  in  the 
international  reserves,  relying 
emerging  markets,  to  accumulate 
exclusively on this strategy would be costly, inefficient and potentially 
distortionary.9 A more balanced approach towards the enhancement of 
the global financial safety net should consider a number of additional 
actions.  First,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  must  consolidate  its 
position  as  the  central  element  of  the  global  financial  safety  net, 
through the increased availability of own resources, which it should be 
better able to mobilize via more and improved lending facilities for its 
membership. Secondly, as demonstrated by the experience during the 
early stages of the global financial crisis, world liquidity provision may 
be  efficiently  expedited  by  the  availability  of  bilateral  swap  lines 
between central banks.10 Lastly, more work should be done to enhance 
the  role  of  regional  financial  arrangements  (RFAs),  including  through 
better coordination with the IMF.11 
                                                           
9 In addition to the country-borne financial costs of the needed sterilization operations, possibly amplified by 
the uncertainty regarding their optimal level and the consequent over-stocking, international reserve 
accumulation may have important effects abroad, including the exacerbation of global current account 
imbalances, downward pressures on international interest rates, distortions in the valuation of assets, and 
investor strategies emphasizing a search for yield. 
10 Reserve currency issuers, in particular, remain reluctant even to restore the network of swap lines 
introduced in the context of the crisis, due mainly to concerns regarding the increased moral hazard it may 
generate among emerging market economies, in addition to other risks that are not easily dealt with 
through the use of collateral. 
11 Of course, RFAs face many other challenges, such as unequal access across countries, limited availability of 
resources, rigid criteria for financial support and uncertainty due to the lack of relevant evidence regarding 
their reliability beyond short-term periods. 
 9 
increasingly 
important  role  of  these  economies 
•  The  current  international  governance  framework  continues  to  be 
characterized by a structural underrepresentation of emerging market 
economies, as it has failed to adapt, even after accounting for the steps 
taken in the midst of the global financial crisis, to the changes implied 
by  the 
in  the 
international economic and financial systems.12 Of course, other recent 
developments,  such  as  the  elevation  of  the  G-20,  including  the  main 
advanced  and  emerging  market  economies,  as  a  major  forum  for 
international  cooperation,  are  steps  in  the  right  direction.  However, 
should existing shortcomings persist, the credibility and legitimacy of 
the  major  multilateral  institutions,  and  thereby  their  relevance  for 
international policy cooperation, are at risk of being further eroded.  
•  Although surveillance mechanisms have been well established for long, 
their  failure  to  timely  identify  the  build-up  of  macroeconomic  and 
financial risks and imbalances leading to the global financial crisis, is a 
clear indication of their lagging behind with respect to the increasing 
and  complex  interlinkages  across  both  countries  and  policies.  The 
multilateral and domestic efforts that have since taken place in order to 
expand and strengthen surveillance are certainly welcome.13 However, 
if these monitoring mechanisms are to represent a fundamental piece 
of international policy cooperation, a number of challenges need to be 
                                                           
12 For instance, the IMF’s 14th General Review of Quotas considered, within the context of the doubling of 
Fund quota resources, a shift in emerging market and developing economies’ quota shares of around 3 
percentage points, to 42.4 percent. However, such an allocation still falls short of the nearly 60 percent 
share of these economies in total global output (measured in PPP-adjusted terms). 
13 Among these, it is worth to highlight the G-20’s Mutual Assessment Program; the European Union’s 
Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure; the increased focus on spillover effects by the IMF, and on financial 
surveillance by this institution and bodies such as the BIS and the Financial Stability Board; as well as other 
oversight mechanisms embodied in regional agreements like East Asia’s Chiang Mai Initiative.  
 10 
properly addressed. One of them is related to the importance of a better 
understanding of spillovers and boomerang effects mentioned before. 
Another is the need for increased efforts towards the formulation of 
more  explicit,  unambiguous  recommendations 
for  avenues  of 
international policy cooperation, together with adequate coordination 
between the institutions involved—for instance through the IMF—and 
a periodic follow-up of results achieved. Even though external, unbiased 
and  credible  assessments  from  one  or  multiple  technically  qualified 
bodies constitute a valuable input for domestic policymaking, as well as 
an important guidepost for directing international cooperation efforts, 
its  combination  with  concrete  proposals  on  the  latter  can  enhance 
substantially the usefulness and effectiveness of the surveillance work. 
 
The  challenges  for  surveillance  are  further  compounded  by  the 
difficulties to compel participating countries to adhere to the derived 
policy  and  cooperation  proposals.  To  this  end,  pure  peer  pressure, 
although desirable and indeed helpful, has proved to be insufficient. On 
the  other  hand,  a  compulsory  approach  would  understandably  be 
rejected  in  view  of  its  implications  for  sovereignty.  Ex-ante  agreed 
sanctions have been tried in regions with a strong political commitment 
to integration. However, as is well known, even in these isolated and 
difficult to replicate cases, the results have been so far unsatisfactory. 
The difficulties linked to efforts to furnish the surveillance function with 
“teeth” are illustrated by the reluctance of some multilateral institutions 
to use tools legally available to them but with potentially controversial 
 11 
implications.14  This  is  clearly  a  very  complex  subject,  but  we  should 
continue to search for efficient enforcement mechanisms, and at least 
encourage  international  institutions  to  draw  upon  all  instruments  at 
their disposal whenever needed. 
 
To conclude, I only wish to note that in the face of a world economy which is 
improving but that still faces formidable challenges, the need to supplement 
any required policy efforts in EMEs with international cooperation should in 
my view not be the subject of much debate. There are many possible avenues 
to move in this direction, with a varying degree of complexity. Unfortunately, 
notwithstanding the measures adopted as a result of the global financial crisis, 
as  in  previous  similar  episodes  the  drive  towards  cooperation  has  lost 
considerable force. The consequent risks are obvious. I hope that we are not 
witnessing  again  the  historical  experience  of  swings 
international 
cooperation that will make us wait for another crisis to achieve perceptible 
progress towards the results we need. 
 
in 
                                                           
14 For instance, the IMF has resorted to special bilateral surveillance procedures with member countries 
(currently in the form of ad hoc Article IV consultations) in only very few occasions, in spite of this being a 
measure that has been in place for nearly 40 years. 
 12 
