Peter Praet: Interview in De Tijd
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
De Tijd, conducted by Mr Wouter Vervenne and Mr Bart Haeck on 13 September and published
on 16 September 2017.
 Do you know where you were when you first realised how serious the problems were?
I was at the National Bank [of Belgium] in Brussels in a meeting with European colleagues. One
colleague  from  the  Bank  of  England  suddenly  had  to  leave  in  a  hurry  because  there  were
problems  with  Northern  Rock,  where  customers  were  lining  up  in  the  street  to  take  out  their
savings. For me that was frightening. I had never thought that something like that could happen
again.
I remember saying to my wife at the time: I hope that we won’t have a banking crisis in Belgium,
because something like that goes on for a decade. The risks we were exposed to then were
enormous. Fortis alone already had a balance sheet of €1 trillion then, if you include insurance. If
you  compared  the  banks’  balance  sheets  with  the  GDP  of  Belgium,  you  could  see  how
enormous  the  risks  were. All  in  all  we  got  through  that  period  fairly  well  in  Belgium,  even  if  it
wasn’t pleasant for the shareholders and there is still a legacy from Dexia. It is just sad that the
banking crisis in Europe has lasted so long.
Why exactly is it so sad?
Because  it  wasn’t  necessary.  The  reforms  could  have  gone  faster.  That  is  why  the  costs  to
society are much higher than they could have been: it weighs on our growth.
It took so long because we did not have the right European institutions to bring the crisis under
control among other reasons. A debt crisis broke out that meant many families and businesses
couldn’t pay down their loans. In a situation like that debtors and creditors have to make a deal.
But one group was in one European country and the others were in another European country.
And we did not have European banking supervision yet. And there was no European resolution
fund  to  make  sure  that  a  bank  could  fail  without  pulling  others  down  with  it.  That  made  the
situation very messy.
Did  you  see  it  coming? At  that  time  you  were  the  expert  on  financial  stability  at  the
National Bank of Belgium?
I was actually already giving warnings about the dotcom bubble in the ‘90s. That earned me the
nickname  Mister  Doom,  which  I  wasn’t  very  happy  about.  I  then  became  chef  de  cabinet  to
Federal Deputy Prime Minister Didier Reynders (MR) – I did that to get some political experience,
but politics is not my thing – and left to return to the National Bank. Financial stability was really
my thing. At that time I travelled to Scandinavia a lot, because in the ‘90s they had already had a
serious banking crisis there. But what began in 2007 was much worse.
What exactly did everyone get wrong?
Back then there was very little information about how banks are interconnected and can drag
each other down.
At  that  time  I  was  sitting  in  an  institution  that  supervises  the  financial  infrastructure,  like
Euroclear.  By  virtue  of  that  function,  one  Sunday  in  2008  I  had  a  teleconference  with  the
American  central  bank,  the  Federal  Reserve.  At  a  certain  point  they  let  me  know  that  the
discussions with Lehman Brothers had failed. ‘We couldn’t reach a deal with Lehman. Now we
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
have to be ready.’ And that was the second shock.
Then  the  ECB  responded.  It  allowed  the  banks  to  borrow  large  amounts  from  it,  so  that  they
would not start selling off their assets in a panic because they needed cash. Lehman Brothers
had got into trouble because of cheap subprime home loans that were no longer being repaid.
But because the US subprime market is not that big from an international perspective, it was still
thought at the time that the crisis could be over within six months.
That is not what happened.
Only later did we start to understand that the problem went much deeper. And I think that those
who are critical of the ECB today underestimate that.
The fundamental problem was that for years we were much too optimistic about future growth.
We  thought  that  our  income  would  continue  to  grow  strongly  and  that  we  would  continually
become more productive, but we systematically overestimated that trend. The problem was that
in many European countries they then began building up debts based on that over-optimism. In
that way you are cashing in on the optimism with the intention of paying back later. But there’s a
huge problem if these expectations don’t materialise.
And that was the moment when the banking crisis turned into a sovereign debt crisis.
Yes. And once again it was a big shock. This time it was German Chancellor Angela Merkel and
French President Nicolas Sarkozy walking on the beach at Deauville in Normandy who agreed
that the investors in government bonds – among which many banks – in the future would have to
share in losses. Until then the financial system took it as a given that euro area government debt
was  always  repaid.  That  was  why  government  bonds  were  used  as  safe  collateral  in
transactions. In Deauville that ‘given’ was taken away.
How hard did that hit?
The interbank markets were completely frozen. Banks in countries with vulnerable government
finances suddenly had problems because the sovereign bonds on their balance sheets – which
they  had  considered  safe  for  decades  –  suddenly  weren’t  considered  safe  anymore  by  the
markets. The economy of the euro area then entered a recession and downward pressure on
prices occurred. That led to fears of a break-up of the euro. It was due to that shock that in 2012,
at  the  Olympic  Games  in  London,  ECB  President  Mario  Draghi  signalled  that  the  ECB  would
do 'whatever it takes' to save the euro. In the years that followed the ECB has eased its policies
considerably, especially with negative rates and the purchase programmes.
Five years on it doesn’t seem as if that policy is really working.
I wouldn’t be so hasty. We are still working on it. The economy is growing. While the ongoing
economic expansion provides confidence that inflation will gradually head to levels in line with our
inflation aim, it has yet to translate sufficiently into stronger inflation dynamics. But may I remind
you that at the time there was a risk of deflation? A deflation scenario would have meant that
prices would fall over a long period and people would have started postponing their spending, so
that the whole economy would have ended up in a negative spiral. That risk of deflation is now
totally gone.
But we are not there yet. You are right on that.
Why is it taking so long?
Because  we  are  coming  out  of  an  enormous  crisis.  A  banking  crisis  is  one  of  the  worst
economic  crises  there  is.  Especially  in  a  region  like  Europe,  where  businesses  are  mainly
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
financed by banks rather than through financial markets. And if the creditors and debtors come
from different countries too, you also have a lot of political tensions to deal with as well.
In my view people don’t realise how serious the crisis was. I don’t think they realise that the world
would have looked totally different – and dramatically worse – if central banks hadn’t stepped in
so forcefully.
The recent strengthening of the euro is making it even more difficult.
Our communication about the exchange rate is very careful. The Governing Council of the ECB
has assessed that recent volatility in the exchange rate represents a source of uncertainty which
requires monitoring with regard to its possible implications for the medium-term outlook for price
stability.
In  the  meantime  criticism  of  the  ECB’s  policy  is  growing,  because  your  policy  is  also
doing some damage.
I don’t think that the stimulus policy itself is being attacked. I do constantly hear people asking
whether it is time to start tapering though.
I understand why the question is asked. Growth is back. The risk of deflation has gone. But the
current economic expansion has yet to translate sufficiently into stronger inflation dynamics.
What is your answer to those who think the ECB is interpreting its objective too narrowly
and in the meantime causing unnecessary problems elsewhere?
That our mandate is to ensure price stability. And the ECB defined ‘price stability'  in  2003  as
‘close to two percent inflation in the medium term'.
Many people looking for the cheapest product while out shopping would probably be
happy if inflation was a mere half a percent. Why push so hard to get to two percent?
Because it is very important to be credible. If everyone is confident that our objective is just under
two percent inflation, then this is included in contracts and especially in wage negotiations, for
example. Already now we are seeing some wage negotiations taking place based on the lower
inflation rate and not on our almost two percent. This shows that ‘inflation expectations’ are still
fragile.
But why “almost two percent"?
Imagine if we defined price stability as zero percent inflation in the euro area. That would mean
prices would be rising in some euro area countries, but falling in some other euro area countries.
It would mean that as soon as some products became more expensive, the prices of others
would have to fall. Otherwise you cannot achieve an average of zero.
Imagine if we defined price stability as one percent: that would mean we would have hardly any
scope to reduce the interest rate and intervene if there was a downturn. Our margin of safety
would  then  be  too  small.  If  you  look  at  it  from  a  long-term  perspective,  there  are  very  good
reasons to aim for close to two percent.
It’s legitimate to have this debate. But anyone who thinks we should be happy with zero percent
inflation  because  we  will  otherwise  destabilise  the  financial  system  is  underestimating  the
importance of aiming for close to two percent inflation.
But in the meantime the dangers of cheap money for the financial system are here, aren’t
they?
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  don’t  deny  that  the  longer  central  banks  pursue  this  accommodative  monetary  policy,  the
greater the risk of bubbles. We are monitoring this but in the euro area as a whole there are no
bubbles, although in some cities real estate has become very expensive, for example. But this
possible disadvantage is too slight to justify changing our policy.
Why?
If  real  estate  were  to  become  too  expensive,  you  could  also  address  this  with  other,  more
specific measures. In Belgium, for example, the National Bank is responsible for such policies.
And furthermore families in certain European cities pay a lot for property, but borrow relatively
little in order to do so. So the link with cheap credit is not always equally clear. So yes, there are
side effects, but we think they are manageable.
Is there a bubble forming in the equity markets?
If you look at the United States equities appear to be quite expensive. I don’t see that in Europe.
Share prices may be rising due to low interest rates, but they are also increasing because the
profit prospects of the firms are increasing. Don’t get me wrong: I am not an equity analyst. I am
not  saying  that  European  equities  are  cheap  or  too  expensive.  I  am  just  saying  that  at  the
moment  they  do  not  give  rise  to  any  concerns  about  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area.  That
would be the case if, for example, many people were borrowing short-term in order to invest in
shares. That would be worrying.
Another side effect is that savers are not earning any interest anymore.
What worries me the most about that is the cultural aspect. Parents can no longer explain the
time effect of money to their children. They can no longer show them that spending today and
spending tomorrow don’t happen at the same price. I don’t think it is good for children to get the
impression  that  they  should  spend  today  rather  than  tomorrow  because  the  interest  rate  is
negative. The experiences and references this creates are not OK. This worries me, but again:
we have to make choices.
Will low interest rates lead to a zombie economy? Will unproductive firms, which should
actually go under, survive due to cheap loans?
Are  we  delaying  the  process  of  creative  destruction  by  providing  cheap  money?  That’s  a  fair
question. We are monitoring this. If you take a macroeconomic perspective, you can see that on
average firms have become more resilient and stronger. The problem is that this average can
mask large differences. For that reason we are now looking at firms’ balance sheets ‘bottom up' -
the IMF does this too. That is the only way we can simulate – firm by firm – whether they can
survive a large rise in interest expenses following an ECB rate increase. We see great progress
in countries like Spain, but more needs to be done.
But  the  incentive  to  reduce  debt,  whether  for  firms  or  governments,  is  small.  These
debts aren’t costing them anything, at the moment.
In general remarkable efforts have been made in the last years. Nevertheless some firms but
also governments are delaying restructuring. Sometimes we have the feeling that we are ‘the
only game in town' and that the others are not doing their job sufficiently. But how can we be held
responsible for others’ lack of courage?
But isn’t it still a fact that the ECB is buying time and a breathing space, but the euro
area  governments  are  not  making  enough  use  of  this  breathing  space  to  implement
reforms?
This sort of reasoning is dangerous. The ECB is an institution that was given its mandate – to
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
keep prices stable – and our independence also means that we decide on our policies on the
basis of our mandate, not on the basis of other considerations.
What can you do then?
Warn people. We send a clear message that we take our task seriously. This means that as
soon as inflation threatens to increase above our objective, we will intervene just as forcefully in
order to prevent that happening too. We will not hesitate to do that, even if it means that interest
rates will increase and those with a lot of debt are going to feel it.
Do economic problems keep you awake at night?
I have been worried about things all my life, eventually you get used to it.
But what worries you the most?
I  am  most  worried  about  the  governments  that  are  reforming  too  slowly.  In  some  European
countries structural reforms are really needed.
Yesterday I was in Paris. President Emmanuel Macron’s reform of the labour law is impressive.
What is very good is that there is broad support for it. But we now have to see how it will work in
practice. There is still a lot of work to do, also elsewhere in Europe.
Has the time come for the ECB to taper its stimulus?
Not yet, we are saying. This autumn we will decide on our policy for next year. I will not say much
about that now. Thanks to the very strong economic growth we are more and more confident that
inflation will increase towards our objective. But underlying inflation remains too low. We have to
be  patient  and  persevere  with  our  policy. A  substantial  stimulus  is  still  necessary.  Everyone
agrees that we have to make sure that the reduction of the stimulus takes place in an orderly
manner, without any excessive shocks.
Is that going to be possible?
We will have to handle it very carefully. And we will have to be very careful about the words we
use. Actually  monetary  policy  pretty  much  comes  down  to  trying  to  influence  other  people’s
expectations  of  the  future.  It  is  a  quiet  and  difficult  exercise  in  mass  psychology.  The  best
example is the impact of the three words Mario Draghi said: 'whatever it takes'.
That is why I have to continue to press home that we will stick to our mandate. I’m an extreme
‘hawk’  in  that  regard.  I  know  that  some  people  describe  me  as  a 'dove',  who  prefers  a  more
accommodative  monetary  policy.  That’s  why  I  am  clearly  saying  this:  we  will  stick  to  our
mandate, symmetrically. If inflation becomes too high, we will react just as ruthlessly as we are
now in order to get inflation back on track.
When can savers dream of getting a return on their money again?
You have to realise that there is a reason for the current low interest rates. Apart from that, one
has to measure return in real terms, in other words corrected for inflation. These real interest
rates  were  low  before  the  crisis  as  well  and  sometimes  negative.  Unfortunately  it’s  mostly
economists who understand that; most other people don’t.
Also I hear very few complaints from people who are renewing a mortgage at a low rate and are
now paying off their house more cheaply. Even though you sometimes hear the same people
complaining afterwards that they are not earning anything on their savings.
It is true that some groups are affected by our policy. Pensioners who rent their home and have a
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
lot  of  savings  are  clearly  feeling  the  effects.  But  helping  to  cushion  that  blow  is  a  job  for
governments.
But when will there be a return on savings again?
Once we can return to a normal policy. So, when there is a sustainable return to an inflation
below but close to 2%. Our policy is working and we see a light at the end of the tunnel. And it
isn’t the lights of a train rushing towards us, as some people jokingly say.
But as to when: it will take time. Don’t forget that we have always confirmed that we will first stop
purchasing bonds and only then consider raising interest rates. Patience is needed.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
