Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Perspectives and issues in navigating the
development of the Malaysian financial market
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia),  at  the  ASEAN  Risk  Conference  2017  “Perspectives  and  Issues  in  Navigating  the
Development of the Malaysian Financial Market”, Kuala Lumpur, 24 May 2017.
 Thank  you  ladies  and  gentlemen.  Two  years  ago,  I  spoke  at  this  very  conference  on ASEAN
integration. Two years on, I am pleased to share that we have achieved substantial progress on
this  front.  Among  others,  the  ASEAN  Banking  Integration  Framework  and  the  bilateral
frameworks  to  settle  trade  in  local  currencies  are  two  significant  milestones  for  financial
integration.
Today,  I  intend  to  speak  on  a  few  issues  relating  to ASEAN  integration  and  outline  the  latest
developments and challenges in the domestic financial market.
For  decades,  globalisation  has  been  the  cornerstone  of  global  economic  development.
Globalisation was a way to bring the countries of the world together to gradually flatten the inter-
country disparities in income, wealth and overall standard of living, in hope that the motivation for
war and conflict among countries would gradually reduce as disparities narrowed. Globalisation
expanded trade and the free flow of capital, allowing countries to reap the benefits of comparative
advantage while facilitating the growth of new sources of income and the transfer of knowledge
and technologies.
Truth  be  told,  globalisation  bore  fruits  that  lead  to  greater  economic  growth,  prosperity  and
wealth. However, in the dogmatic pursuit of inter-country convergence, intra-country disparities
have become increasingly apparent. As nations across the globe were brought closer together,
citizens  within  each  nation  were  pulled  further  apart,  separated  by  the  rising  inequality,  the
declining share of labour income versus capital, and the displacement of workers.
The  unfettered  market  openness  by  advanced  economies  had  caused  unintended
consequences that have ignited the rise to populism, inward-looking tendencies and potentially
protectionist policies. If left to run its course, this will be a setback to global prosperity. In ASEAN,
we are no stranger to this perspective. Our own experience is highly relevant.
We  learnt  from  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis,  that  pushing  countries  to  adopt  policies  when
readiness  is  suspect  is  a  design  for  failure.  Without  the  necessary  preconditions  of  sound
institutional  frameworks,  adequate  safeguards  and  capacity  and  robust  domestic  financial
markets,  premature  financial  liberalisation  will  expose  the  economy  to  waves  of  destabilising
short-term speculative flows. When these flows leave, a trail of destruction is left behind. We
also learnt that proper sequencing and readiness of financial liberalisation is key.
The criticism that ASEAN’s ‘steam engine’ may not be ‘full speed ahead’ does not capture the full
picture. This view fails to consider and understand that quality, not the speed and quantum of
integration,  is  what  really  matters.  The  focus  of  integration  should  not  be  on  speed,  but  on
building the collective capacity, readiness and resilience of member countries.
ASEAN is committed to pursue market openness within this region, but also wants to remain
deeply integrated within the global economy. A ‘Global ASEAN’ is not an oxymoron – rather it is a
declaration  of  our  inclinations,  aspirations  and  direction  for  the  future.  Rather  than  a  narrow
pursuit  of  openness  for  its  own  sake,  experience  taught  us  that  balance,  readiness  and
inclusiveness is critical for the success for an open market economy. As a group, ASEAN has
been very mindful of  the  stage  of  financial  and  economic  development  of  individual  countries.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
ASEAN  pursues  ‘smart’  integration  that  is  based  on  the  readiness  and  capacity  of  member
countries.
From the global financial crisis to the present
We are now entering a decade after the Global Financial Crisis (more apt to be called Trans
Atlantic Financial Crisis) and two decades after the Asian Financial Crisis. The implementation of
unconventional  policies  and  a  prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates,  led  to  financial  and
economic  distortions,  some  severe,  around  the  world.  Emerging  markets,  including  Malaysia,
witnessed large waves of capital inflows into capital markets, primarily in search of better yield.
For  our  onshore  domestic  market,  we  saw  the  ringgit  strengthening  following  the  demand  for
ringgit assets. Between 2011 to 2013, the ringgit traded at its strongest levels since the Asian
Financial Crisis, between 2.90 to 3.30 against the US dollar. FX trading volume also increased,
contributing to the overall liquidity of the onshore FX market. At the same time, the increased
levels  of  non-resident  investments  in  Malaysian  financial  assets  had  pushed  non-resident
holdings of Malaysian government bonds to rise to the height of 33.6% in May 2013.
These heights came with costs, heightened risks and vulnerabilities. From the Taper Tantrum in
2013 onwards, our markets went through several bouts of volatility. These were largely driven by
volatile  portfolio  flows.  During  the  Taper  Tantrum  in  2013  itself,  we  saw  outflows  of  USD19.1
billion and a depreciation of 9.7% of the ringgit against the US dollar.
Despite  this,  our  capacity,  capability  and  resilience  in  managing  these  sizable  and  volatile
financial  flows  have  been  fortified  in  a  number  of  ways.  Our  economic  fundamentals  have
remained healthy and our financial market is more diversified and well-developed. This enhanced
the  ability  of  the  financial  system  to  absorb  capital  inflows  and  outflows,  thereby  minimising
disruptions  while  ensuring  that  these  flows  can  be  effectively  intermediated  to  support  real
economic activity.
Malaysia’s exchange rate regime has also accorded the necessary flexibility for the exchange
rate to adjust to the changing conditions. This has provided a good balance between flexibility
and stability. Our ability to manage domestic liquidity has also improved significantly, supported
by a wider range of instruments to conduct monetary operations and strengthened surveillance
systems.
Pervasive impact of the offshore markets
However, one noticeable observation over the years was that, for each episode of volatility we
faced, the subsequent calm would see an even larger build-up of risks. In particular, with the high
non-resident investors’ participation in the onshore financial market, we saw significant growth in
the  ringgit  NDF  market.  More  recently,  in  November  2016,  non-resident  investors’  holdings
reached a record high of 34.7% of Malaysian Government Bonds. While some argue that the
ringgit NDF market is used by non-resident investors to hedge their ringgit assets, the reality is
far more sobering. It is mostly used for speculative purposes.
These  speculative  activities  have  shown  to  have  adverse  negative  spillovers  to  the  onshore
financial  market  due  to  its  volatility.  More  importantly,  the  sheer  volume  of  this  market,  which
surpassed  over  300%  of  GDP  in  2015,  underscores  the  extent  of  disconnect  between  NDF
trading and economic reality. Given the size, onshore markets were vulnerable to the arbitrary
and unpredictable nature of the offshore market.
Besides  this  vulnerability,  there  was  an  even  larger  long  term  challenge  that  we  faced.  The
offshore market was developing and thriving at the expense and detriment of the onshore market
and  domestic  stability.  The  recent  developments  following  the  US  presidential  election  have
attested to this fact. Following the results of the presidential election, the ringgit NDF was traded
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
as high as 2168 pips away from the onshore market close during the New York trading hours.
Such a significant move is obviously driven more by speculative activities and misplaced market
sentiment rather than any significant change in the economic fundamentals of the country.
Given  the  divergence  between  offshore  and  onshore  ringgit  prices,  arbitrage  opportunities  for
non-resident investors persisted. To make things worse, even our own market players, began to
consistently take the cue from the NDF market. This placed unwarranted downward pressure on
the ringgit. Most unfortunate is the lack of concern by regulators where the NDF activities were
thriving despite of the adverse impact on the affected currencies.
With  the  extreme  destabilising  effects  of  the  offshore  ringgit  NDF  market  on  domestic  ringgit
pricing,  we  took  a  broad  spectrum  of  measures  to  reduce  the  speculative  and  damaging
influence of these activities. Part of this was our stricter enforcement of non-facilitation rules for
offshore derivatives. The long-standing prohibition on domestic players to facilitate transactions
of  offshore  markets  was  extended  to  non-resident  financial  institutions  via  a  compulsory
attestation  requirement.  We  also  facilitated  and  managed  the  exit  of  significant  short-term
positions related to the NDF market. Certainly, these aggravated the immediate pressures on the
ringgit but were very necessary to any eventual stabilisation of the currency.
I  am  pleased  to  share  that  a  number  of  global  financial  institutions  have  complied  with  our
requirements.  But,  there  are  still  a  few  holdouts.  We  are  perplexed  as  to  how  these  financial
institutions can continue to operate or facilitate an activity that clearly contravenes our rules and
regulations. We will continue to enforce our measures and look at avenues to deal with those
who facilitate the ringgit NDF activities.
The destabilising implications arising from the offshore activities gave a bad name to the market-
based mechanism. It corrupted the idea of market openness and the liberalisation process. Such
destabilising risks bear upon the integration process among financial markets of this region.
Developing long term solutions through the Financial Markets Committee
Addressing  the  speculative  impact  of  the  NDF  market  is  only  part  of  the  solution.  Of  greater
importance  is  the  need  to  put  in  place  sustainable  long-term  solutions.  With  this  in  mind,  the
Financial Markets Committee (FMC) was established in 2016, and tasked with the responsibility
to look into the overall development and strategy for the Malaysian financial market. The FMC
also  looked  into  the  factors  that  caused  imbalances  in  the  demand  and  supply  of  foreign
currencies  in  the  domestic  market,  including  the  reduced  capacity  of  the  market  to  provide
liquidity to intermediate the portfolio adjustment by non-residents.
The underlying motivation of the FMC is to create a deeper and more liquid onshore market that
will  enhance  its  capacity  to  intermediate  these  flows  and  strengthen  our  resilience  against
excessive  volatility.  Despite  the  havoc  caused  by  episodes  of  volatility  from  the  opaque,
unregulated and value destroying activities of the NDF market, the FMC in identifying the possible
remedial measures have concluded that market based mechanism and solutions is still the best
way forward.
Through close consultation with various stakeholders, including corporate entities and small and
medium  size  enterprises,  the  FMC  developed  a  series  of  targeted  initiatives  to  develop  the
onshore financial market. The first series of initiatives announced on 2 December 2016, seeks to
provide greater room for the onshore ringgit hedging for both resident and non-residents. The
focus was on ensuring better access to the onshore financial market.
In  particular,  residents  can  now  hedge  without  providing  underlying  documents  up  to  certain
limits, while registered non-resident investors have the flexibility to carry out dynamic hedging. At
the same time, the scope of the appointed overseas office framework was widened to provide
greater avenues for non-residents to access the onshore financial market.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  second  series  of  initiatives  announced  on  13 April  2017,  introduced  greater  flexibility  for
investors to manage currency and interest rate risks. Registered investors can now conduct full
dynamic hedging and resident investors can now conduct short-selling for Malaysian government
securities. All these flexibilities are expected to increase the ease of hedging business risks. The
aim is to promote a two-way liquidity in the onshore financial market. At the end of the day, we
envision that the implementation  of  these  initiatives  will  make  the  domestic  financial  market  a
market of choice, where prices are determined by the real economy devoid of speculative and
damaging  activities.  In  this  respect,  we  have  introduced  initiative  that  enables  non-resident
investors to access and hedge ringgit assets in the domestic markets.
We are mindful that for the NDF market to truly reduce in significance and adverse influences,
the onshore market must become highly competitive, not just the foreign exchange market but
also all aspects of the financial market. We are determined to realise the idea of having a market
that possesses the breadth and depth to cater to the increasingly complex and diverse needs of
the economy, and a market that is able to sustain and weather volatilities that contribute to the
overall wellbeing of the economy.
The early positive results of the measures speak for themselves. The onshore foreign exchange
market now regularly records a healthy daily volume. In addition, the ringgit exchange rate has
remained  stable  with  volatility  reducing  by  half  since  the  introduction  of  these  measures.  The
domestic  bond  market  is  now  more  resilient  as  speculative  positions  have  mostly  exited  the
market.  There  is  a  larger  composition  of  stable  and  longer  term  investors.  This  fact  is  much
more  important  than  just  looking  at  the  percentages  or  size  of  non-resident  holdings.  Our
experience  suggests  that  there  is  a  threshold  where  non-resident  investors  will  become  a
destabilising force.
The success of our measures and our continued faith in the market mechanism is now validated
and restored.
Ensuring trust, confidence and integrity of the financial market 
There are many lessons that we ought to learn. Some of the disruptions were caused from the
uncompetitive market behaviors and questionable conduct by players. More evidently in recent
times,  cases  of  market  manipulation  and  illegal  fixing  of  interest  rate  and  foreign  exchange
benchmarks have surfaced globally. These cases were only possible because of collusion and
have collectively undermined the trust, integrity and confidence in the global financial market. The
consequences are dire. As the saying goes, ‘trust takes years to build, seconds to break, and
forever to repair’.
One  significant  example  of  such  far-reaching  incidents  that  undermined  trust,  was  the
manipulation of the LIBOR benchmark, a benchmark rate used to price a market estimated at
USD450 trillion. Ineffective due diligence in the case of a rogue trader of a French bank and the
‘London  Whale’  incident  has  also  tarnished  the  credibility  of  some  international  institutions.
Closer to home, two Australian banks were charged for manipulating the NDF ringgit fixing rate in
Singapore.
For  the  Malaysian  market,  we  have  recently  introduced  the  Principles  for  a  Fair  and  Effective
Financial  Market  (Principles)  on  13 April  2017  as  part  of  our  market  development  strategy  to
uphold and maintain the trust, integrity and confidence. These principles represent the universal
overarching  ideals  for  a  fair  and  effective  financial  market.  It  complements  the  rules-based
guidelines and regulations, including the recently revised Code of Conduct.
I wish to highlight these principles;
1.  Professionalism and integrity, through universal adoption of best market practices;
2.  Full transparency and accountability, in all aspects of market participation;
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
3.  A competitive environment that is free from collusive, fraudulent and manipulative activities;
4.  Good internal governance and due diligence, supported by robust internal surveillance and
reporting mechanisms; and
5.  Compliance  to  prevailing  rules,  regulations  and  market  codes  while  extending  full
cooperation to the authorities.
The Principles should be universally applied, internalised and practiced by all parties that transact
in  the  Malaysian  financial  market.  These  Principles  must  be  demonstrated  consistently  in  the
daily conduct of market participants.
Outcomes of the Adherence to the Principles will result in a well-functioning market
The  Principles  are  intended  to  result  in  a  fair  and  effective  financial  market  that  efficiently
intermediates  the  funding  needs  of  the  economy  and  resilient  in  the  face  of  shocks.  One
particular aspect of the Principles is on the adherence to rules and regulations, a critical pillar of
financial  stability,  and  a  Code  of  Conduct  expanded  to  explicitly  prohibit  transactions  in
unauthorised markets. This includes, in particular, the NDF market.
These Principles ought to result in three key outcomes:
1.  Firstly, balanced perspectives when formulating policy and assessing market development.
Such  balance  is  needed  between  growth  and  stability,  whereby  growth  of  the  financial
market must be consistent with economic fundamentals. We have seen in many instances
how the size of the financial market can be disconnected, and has grown too large for the
real economy.
Most of the activities in these outsized markets do not contribute to sustainable growth and
consist mainly of speculative activities. Speculative activity is a major source of vulnerability
not only for the financial market but also to the real economy, which if left unattended, could
lead  to  devastating  financial  crises.  Arguments  expounding  that  these  activities  provide
liquidity are delusional, and at best deflective.
2.  Secondly, the outcome of the Principles is to level the playing field among market players.
This means a market that cannot be distorted by any institution or individual. All participants,
either large or small will have fair access to the market, without fear of being subjected to
market  collusion  and  manipulation.  It  ought  to  create  an  efficient,  competitive  and
transparent market that will contribute to economic prosperity.
3.  Thirdly,  the  outcome  of  the  Principles  is  a  strengthened  regulatory  framework.  The
Principles  of  transparency,  accountability  and  good  governance  will  promote  market
discipline. The Principles will serve as guidepost for us to effectively supervise and regulate
the  market  and  is  necessary,  given  the  increasing  complexity  of  the  financial  market,
exacerbated  by  the  disruptions  arising  from  technological  innovations  and  greater
interconnectedness.
Achieving  these  three  outcomes  is  central  to  our  development  strategy  and  policies  for  the
financial market. Together with the various FMC measures and initiatives already announced, we
have laid the foundations to redirect the growth and development of the ringgit foreign financial
market from the offshore to the onshore market.
After  all,  a  thriving,  open  and  robust  onshore  financial  market  is  a  prerequisite  for  a  stable
financial system and sustainable economic growth.
Conclusion
This year is the 20th anniversary of the Asian Financial Crisis and close to the 10th anniversary
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
of the Global Financial Crisis. Anniversaries such as these are opportunities to pause, reflect and
ponder  on  the  past,  present  and  future.  There  are  many  lessons  to  be  learnt  from  recent
episodes, and let us not repeat them. For if we do, only misery and hardship await us.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
