Ravi  Menon:  Global  outlook,  Asian  promise,  alternative
opportunities
Speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the DBS
Institutional Investor Symposium 2017, Singapore, 22 June 2017.
Mr Piyush Gupta, CEO, DBS Bank
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
 I am happy to join you today, and I thank DBS Bank for the invitation.
The American author John Maxwell once said, “The pessimist complains about the wind.  The
optimist expects it to change.  The leader adjusts the sails.”
As investors, you too seek to adjust the sails, to avoid being knocked over by market turbulence
and to find new harbours of opportunity.
So, what are the winds facing us like?  Let me offer some thoughts in three areas:
First, the global economy and financial markets – where are we today, what are the risks?
Second, Asia’s medium-term prospects and the promise it offers to investors.
Third, opportunities in alternative assets as investors look to unlock new sources of value.
Global economy and financial markets
The global outlook seems rather straightforward at this point.
Growth is on a positive momentum and is increasingly broad-based, across both advanced
and emerging economies.
Global  trade  has  picked  up,  manufacturing  has  recovered,  and  commodity  prices  have
bottomed.
Most measures of confidence are looking up.
But the factors that  underpin  sustained  growth  –  capital  investment  and  productivity  –  remain
weak in most parts of the world.
Investment has been dragged down, by weaker domestic demand and higher private debt
burden  in  advanced  economies,  and  slower  foreign  direct  investments  in  emerging
economies.
Productivity  growth  has  slowed  significantly  after  the  shock  of  the  crisis  and  has  still  not
recovered to pre-crisis rates.
A striking feature of the post-crisis landscape is that while investment in the real economy has
been sluggish, the appetite for risk-taking in financial assets has been voracious.
Investors  are  extrapolating  into  the  future,  current  low  interest  rates  and  realised  asset  price
volatility, and continuing to reach for yield.
Developed market bond and equity valuations are rich compared to history.
The cyclically-adjusted price-to-earnings ratio for US equities is at the 97th percentile.
There  has  been  some  dampening  of  exuberance  in  recent  months.    Even  so,  the  question
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
remains: have markets over-priced the good news and under-priced the potential bad news? 
What are some of the risks?
First,  markets  appear  to  be  expecting  macro  outcomes  that  may  be  inconsistent  with  what
economies need for medium-term sustainability.
In the US, markets still expect – or hope – for some fiscal stimulus in the short-term, even though
the economy is at full employment.
What ought to matter is not the size of any stimulus but its composition.
The  key  question  is  not  how  much  the  stimulus  boosts  demand  in  the  short-term  but
whether and how it increases the medium-term supply capacity in the economy.
Similarly, in China, markets are keeping close track of quarterly GDP growth rates.
What ought to matter more is whether efforts are being stepped up to achieve sustained
growth over the medium-term – by reducing vulnerabilities in the system and implementing
structural reforms.
Second,  markets  seem  to  be  under-estimating  the  pace  of  monetary  policy  normalisation,
particularly by the US Fed.
The Fed’s guidance suggests one more rate hike in 2017, and three each in 2018 and 2019.
But markets are pricing in less than three hikes in total for the rest of this year through 2019.
Granted – with lower oil prices and muted wage growth, the risk of inflation surprising on the
upside is low.
But what if that risk materialises, especially if the labour market tightens further?
Unemployment is already around its natural rate.
Past  experience  suggests  that  the  pass-through  from  labour  market  tightness  to  inflation
tends to accelerate as unemployment falls below the natural rate.
That  could  well  lead  to  a  faster  pace  of  monetary  policy  normalisation  than  the  market
currently anticipates.
Finally, there is a conundrum between volatility and uncertainty.
Why is volatility so low in financial markets when uncertainty is high on the policy front?
Perhaps it is because uncertainty about economic growth is lower.
- The size and number of revisions to global growth forecasts have clearly come down.
But  surely,  political  uncertainty  is  at  elevated  levels?   And  when  politics  is  uncertain,  can  the
economics remain unaffected?
A  disorderly  Brexit  could  lead  to  increased  market  turmoil  and  trigger  sharp  asset  price
corrections.
While the risk of increased trade protectionism seems to have abated somewhat, it remains
a significant tail risk that could seriously injure global growth.
Against this backdrop, a rising tide of populist backlash against globalisation is a wild card for the
medium-term.
These risks are not pre-destined.  The world is in a better position than before to deal with these
risks.    Where  we  go  from  here  hinges  strongly  on  domestic  policy  responses  in  each  of  the
major economies and the trade-offs they make today between the short-term and the long-term.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Asia’s medium-term prospects are good
Lest we forget, many parts of the emerging market world have not seen a significant backlash
against globalisation.  And Asia stands out in that regard.  Asia remains committed to openness,
is positioned for sustained growth, and offers much promise to investors.
Led by China and India, Asia will remain the fastest-growing region in the world.
The IMF projects that Emerging and Developing Asia will grow by an average of 6.3% p.a.
from now to 2022.
The ASEAN  economies are expected to grow by about 5% p.a., China by about 6% p.a.,
and India by 7-8% p.a.
1
Three factors will drive investment opportunities in the region.
First, a growing middle class and rapid urban migration.
According to the ADB, by 2030, about 1 billion people across China, India and ASEAN will be
in the middle-income bracket.
This  is  more  than  a  threefold  increase  from  today,  and  presents  significant  potential  for
growth in private consumption.
Asia’s 
imports  of  consumer  goods  as  well  as  modern  services,  such  as
telecommunications,  information,  and  financial  services,  have  risen  sharply  over  the  past
decade.
Second, sustained investments to build up physical and human capital.
China’s  fixed  asset  investment  in  education  and  infrastructure  has  expanded  rapidly,
growing by about 20% annually since 2009.
Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines have ramped up development spending to address
infrastructure deficits.
Vietnam  has  been  making  heavy  investments  in  education,  at  almost  20%  of  total  public
expenditure.  This is beginning to show results in its global ranking in PISA – the Programme
for International Student Assessments.
Third, growing economic integration within the region.
Asia already has extensive cross-border production networks, particularly in the electronics
and automobile industries.
China’s Belt and Road Initiative will facilitate not just infrastructure investment in the region
but, more importantly, strengthen connectivity.
As new projects gain traction, there will be increased regional flows of trade, capital, and
people in the next five to ten years.
Finally, I want to touch on a new source of untapped potential – the CLMV countries:  Cambodia,
Laos, Myanmar and Vietnam.
They  are  increasingly  plugged  into  the  global  economy  and  regional  supply  chains,
participating as downstream manufacturers in regional production networks.
In Vietnam, manufacturing now makes up a third of the economy.
- Vietnam has developed into one of the world’s top electronics exporters, with Samsung
producing about 40% of its phones there.
To be sure, Asian economies will continue to be subject to the political, economic and social
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
uncertainties that characterise emerging markets. But the region’s fundamentals are sound.
Growth  inherently  enlarges  the  size  of  the  asset  pool,  and  asset  markets  in Asia  provide  a
compelling case for global investors.
The region is seeing a growing diversity of institutional investors – not just from Asia but also
from Europe and the Americas.
There is also an expanding breadth of investible assets, driven by Asian companies raising
capital to grow and internationalise their business.
Alternative opportunities in Asia
Recent trends in the asset management landscape favour investment opportunities in Asia.
A  key  trend  is  the  shift  in  asset  allocation  from  traditional  public  markets  to  private  market
alternatives  like  private  equity  (PE),  real  estate  and  infrastructure.    This  is  largely  driven  by
investors’ search for yield and portfolio diversification benefits.
Preqin reports that allocations towards alternative assets hit a record US$7.7 trillion assets
under management in 2016.
And perhaps as an indication of more to come, global institutional investors are still below
their long-term target allocations to such alternative asset classes.
In the steer towards alternative assets, there are two themes that stand out for investors looking
towards Asia.
First, companies, including those in Asia, are choosing to stay private for longer, and are
increasingly comfortable with the PE value proposition.
Second,  Asia’s  immense  real  estate  and  infrastructure  needs  are  an  opportunity  for
investors to monetise its demographic and structural transformations.
The trend of companies choosing to stay private for longer is particularly marked for technology
companies.
If the experience in the US is any indication, the average age of US technology companies
that went public in 2014 was 11 years, up from just 4 years in 1999.
We are seeing the same among Asian tech start-ups.
- Alibaba stayed private for 15 years before its IPO in 2014.
- Closer to home, Singapore-based Sea Ltd, Southeast Asia’s most valuable start-up, raised
its first funding round in 2009 and only recently filed for an IPO after 8 years.
- Razer Inc., which was founded in 2005 by a Singaporean and is now based in California, is
still staying the course as a private company.
Asia is experiencing a surge in PE deals in technology and internet based businesses.  Such
deals made up more than 45% of the region’s total PE deal value in 2016.
As  Asian  companies  become  increasingly  receptive  to  the  PE  value  proposition,
opportunities  abound  for  institutional  investors  in  companies  along  the  entire  growth
spectrum.
The PE momentum in Asia is expected to remain robust.
China will continue to be a steady source of activity as it rides the retail e-commerce boom.
In Southeast Asia, internet companies will require US$40–50 billion in investments over the
next 10 years, according to a joint study by Google and Temasek.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second investment theme is Asian real estate and infrastructure.
Asian real estate has seen growing interest as an institutional target.
A recent study by PwC found that investors were most upbeat about emerging cities in the
region – such as Bangalore, Mumbai, Manila and Ho Chi Minh City.
Rapid urban migration has created strong residential demand in these cities.
Logistics  and  business  parks  are  also  thriving  on  the  back  of  a  booming  outsourcing
industry.
The  story  is  similar  for  infrastructure.    Amid  government  efforts  to  ramp  up  infrastructure
development, institutional capital has a growing role to play.  According to a report by Marsh &
McLennan, about 40% of infrastructure projects in emerging Asia are considered bankable.
These projects have the necessary conditions to attract sources of funding beyond bank-
based finance.
While  institutional  investors  have  traditionally  participated  in  the  secondary  market  for
completed  infrastructure,  they  are  increasingly  financing  construction-phase  projects  to
capture higher risk-adjusted returns.
Singapore as a gateway to Asian opportunities
Singapore  is  well-positioned  to  serve  global  institutional  investors  in  their  steer  towards
alternatives in Asia.
Singapore is a developed pan-Asian asset management centre with a strong pool of global and
regional players.
Fund  managers  here  have  a  deep  network,  are  able  to  readily  access  deals,  and  can
support Asian companies throughout their life cycle.
Eight of the top ten global PE firms have an office in Singapore.
So do some of the top global real estate managers.
MAS is taking steps to deepen Singapore’s VC and PE ecosystem and enhance the operating
environment for VC and PE managers.
We  will  start  with  simplifying  the  regulatory  framework  for  VC  managers  in  the  next  few
months.  This will facilitate faster time-to-market for VC managers, and promote financing
for enterprise development.
We are also working with government agencies, universities and industry players to explore
industry-wide talent development programmes for VC and PE managers.
There is a growing suite of opportunities in bankable infrastructure projects.
Investors with strong in-house infrastructure expertise can engage in direct investments in
green-field projects.  This can be done alongside multilaterals and commercial banks.
Others can tap on established fund managers focused on Asian infrastructure.
Yet another opportunity lies in project bonds.  But these remain relatively nascent in Asia.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Regardless  of  the  investment  approach,  project  structuring  is  critical  in  bringing  to  fruition
infrastructure projects.
For investors looking towards Asian infrastructure, Singapore offers a dynamic ecosystem –
with quality solutions in project advisory, project financing, and legal services, and dispute
resolution.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The global economy is in a better shape than it has been in a long while.  Financial markets
reflect this but have probably under-estimated tail risks.
Reduced volatility in the markets should not beguile us into thinking there is less uncertainty
out there.
Some caution will not be entirely misplaced.
Asia remains the biggest growth story in the world.  There is still much work ahead in regional
economic integration and domestic structural reform.
But Asia is moving forward.
And the region’s economic fundamentals remain sound.
Investing in Asia is about participating in this growth story.  It is also about looking forward and
staying the course for the medium- to long-term.
As  institutional  investors  pivot  towards  alternative  assets, Asian  private  equity, Asian  real
estate,  and  Asian  infrastructure  can  provide  credible  stores  of  value  in  the  institutional
portfolio.
And  Singapore’s  financial  centre  –  with  more  than  120  global  and  regional  banks,  a  diverse
ecosystem of over 650 asset managers, and extensive connectivity with the rest of Asia – offers
an excellent platform to tap into these opportunities.
Thank you, and have a good evening.
1
The  IMF  forecasts  refer  to  the  ASEAN-5  economies  of  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Thailand,  Vietnam  and  the
Philippines.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
