Janet L Yellen: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress
Testimony  by  Ms  Janet  L  Yellen,  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives,
Washington DC, 12 July 2017.
 Chairman  Hensarling,  Ranking  Member  Waters,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am
pleased to present the Federal Reserve’s semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress.
In  my  remarks  today  I  will  briefly  discuss  the  current  economic  situation  and  outlook  before
turning to monetary policy.
Current economic situation and outlook
Since  my  appearance  before  this  committee  in  February,  the  labor  market  has  continued  to
strengthen. Job gains have averaged 180,000 per month so far this year, down only slightly from
the average in 2016 and still well above the pace we estimate would be sufficient, on average, to
provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force. Indeed, the unemployment rate has fallen about
1/4 percentage point since the start of the year, and, at 4.4 percent in June, is 5 1/2 percentage
points  below  its  peak  in  2010  and  modestly  below  the  median  of  Federal  Open  Market
Committee  (FOMC)  participants’  assessments  of  its  longer-run  normal  level.  The  labor  force
participation rate has changed little, on net, this year—another indication of improving conditions
in the jobs market, given the demographically driven downward trend in this series. A broader
measure of labor market slack that includes workers marginally attached to the labor force and
those  working  part  time  who  would  prefer  full-time  work  has  also  fallen  this  year  and  is  now
nearly as low as it was just before the recession. It is also encouraging that jobless rates have
continued to decline for most major demographic groups, including for African Americans and
Hispanics.  However,  as  before  the  recession,  unemployment  rates  for  these  minority  groups
remain higher than for the nation overall.
Meanwhile, the economy appears to have grown at a moderate pace, on average, so far this
year. Although inflation-adjusted gross domestic product is currently estimated to have increased
at an annual rate of only 1-1/2 percent in the first quarter, more-recent indicators suggest that
growth rebounded in the second quarter. In particular, growth in household spending, which was
weak earlier in the year, has picked up in recent months and continues to be supported by job
gains, rising household wealth, and favorable consumer sentiment. In addition, business fixed
investment  has  turned  up  this  year  after  having  been  soft  last  year.  And  a  strengthening  in
economic growth abroad has provided important support for U.S. manufacturing production and
exports.  The  housing  market  has  continued  to  recover  gradually,  aided  by  the  ongoing
improvement in the labor market and mortgage rates that, although up somewhat from a year
ago, remain at relatively low levels.
With regard to inflation, overall consumer prices, as measured by the price index for personal
consumption expenditures, increased 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in May, up from
about 1 percent a year ago but a little lower than earlier this year. Core inflation, which excludes
energy and food prices, has also edged down in recent months and was 1.4 percent in May, a
couple  of  tenths  below  the  year-earlier  reading.  It  appears  that  the  recent  lower  readings  on
inflation are partly the result of a few unusual reductions in certain categories of prices; these
reductions will hold 12-month inflation down until they drop out of the calculation. Nevertheless,
with inflation continuing to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, the FOMC
indicated in its June statement that it intends to carefully monitor actual and expected progress
toward our symmetric inflation goal.
Looking ahead, my colleagues on the FOMC and I expect that, with further gradual adjustments
1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
in the stance of monetary policy, the economy will continue to expand at a moderate pace over
the next couple of years, with the job market strengthening somewhat further and inflation rising
to  2  percent.  This  judgment  reflects  our  view  that  monetary  policy  remains  accommodative.
Ongoing job gains should continue to support the growth of incomes and, therefore, consumer
spending; global economic growth should support further gains in U.S. exports; and favorable
financial  conditions,  coupled  with  the  prospect  of  continued  gains  in  domestic  and  foreign
spending  and  the  ongoing  recovery  in  drilling  activity,  should  continue  to  support  business
investment. These developments should increase resource utilization somewhat further, thereby
fostering a stronger pace of wage and price increases.
Of course, considerable uncertainty always attends the economic outlook. There is, for example,
uncertainty about when—and how much—inflation will respond to tightening resource utilization.
Possible changes in fiscal  and  other  government  policies  here  in  the  United  States  represent
another source of uncertainty. In addition, although the prospects for the global economy appear
to  have  improved  somewhat  this  year,  a  number  of  our  trading  partners  continue  to  confront
economic challenges. At present, I see roughly equal odds that the U.S. economy’s performance
will be somewhat stronger or somewhat less strong than we currently project.
Monetary policy
I will now turn to monetary policy. The FOMC seeks to foster maximum employment and price
stability, as required by law. Over the first half of 2017, the Committee continued to gradually
reduce the amount of monetary policy accommodation. Specifically, the FOMC raised the target
range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point at both its March and June meetings,
bringing the target to a range of 1 to 1-1/4 percent. In doing so, the Committee recognized the
considerable progress the economy had made—and is expected to continue to make—toward
our mandated objectives.
The  Committee  continues  to  expect  that  the  evolution  of  the  economy  will  warrant  gradual
increases in the federal funds rate over time to achieve and maintain maximum employment and
stable  prices.  That  expectation  is  based  on  our  view  that  the  federal  funds  rate  remains
somewhat  below  its  neutral  level—that  is,  the  level  of  the  federal  funds  rate  that  is  neither
expansionary nor contractionary and keeps the economy operating on an even keel. Because the
neutral rate is currently quite low by historical standards, the federal funds rate would not have to
rise all that much further to get to a neutral policy stance. But because we also anticipate that the
factors  that  are  currently  holding  down  the  neutral  rate  will  diminish  somewhat  over  time,
additional gradual rate hikes are likely to be appropriate over the next few years to sustain the
economic expansion and return inflation to our 2 percent goal. Even so, the Committee continues
to anticipate that the longer-run neutral level of the federal funds rate is likely to remain below
levels that prevailed in previous decades.
As  I  noted  earlier,  the  economic  outlook  is  always  subject  to  considerable  uncertainty,  and
monetary policy is not on a preset course. FOMC participants will adjust their assessments of
the appropriate path for the federal funds rate in response to changes to their economic outlooks
and to their judgments of the associated risks as informed by incoming data. In this regard, as
we  noted  in  the  FOMC  statement  last  month,  inflation  continues  to  run  below  our  2  percent
objective  and  has  declined  recently;  the  Committee  will  be  monitoring  inflation  developments
closely in the months ahead.
In evaluating the stance of monetary policy, the FOMC routinely consults monetary policy rules
that  connect  prescriptions  for  the  policy  rate  with  variables  associated  with  our  mandated
objectives.  However,  such  prescriptions  cannot  be  applied  in  a  mechanical  way;  their  use
requires careful judgments about the choice and measurement of the inputs into these rules, as
well as the implications of the many considerations these rules do not take into account. I would
like to note the discussion of simple monetary policy rules and their role in the Federal Reserve’s
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy process that appears in our current Monetary Policy Report.
Balance sheet normalization
Let me now turn to our balance sheet. Last month the FOMC augmented its Policy Normalization
Principles  and  Plans  by  providing  additional  details  on  the  process  that  we  will  follow  in
normalizing  the  size  of  our  balance  sheet.  The  Committee  intends  to  gradually  reduce  the
Federal Reserve’s securities holdings by decreasing its reinvestment of the principal payments it
receives  from  the  securities  held  in  the  System  Open  Market  Account.  Specifically,  such
payments  will  be  reinvested  only  to  the  extent  that  they  exceed  gradually  rising  caps.  Initially,
these caps will be set at relatively low levels to limit the volume of securities that private investors
will  have  to  absorb.  The  Committee  currently  expects  that,  provided  the  economy  evolves
broadly as anticipated, it will likely begin to implement the program this year.
Once we start to reduce our reinvestments, our securities holdings will gradually decline, as will
the supply of reserve balances in the banking system. The longer-run normal level of reserve
balances  will  depend  on  a  number  of  as-yet-unknown  factors,  including  the  banking  system’s
future  demand  for  reserves  and  the  Committee’s  future  decisions  about  how  to  implement
monetary policy most efficiently and effectively. The Committee currently anticipates reducing the
quantity  of  reserve  balances  to  a  level  that  is  appreciably  below  recent  levels  but  larger  than
before the financial crisis.
Finally, the Committee affirmed in June that changing the target range for the federal funds rate is
our primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. In other words, we do not intend to
use  the  balance  sheet  as  an  active  tool  for  monetary  policy  in  normal  times.  However,  the
Committee  would  be  prepared  to  resume  reinvestments  if  a  material  deterioration  in  the
economic outlook were to warrant a sizable reduction in the federal funds rate. More generally,
the Committee would be prepared to use its full range of tools, including altering the size and
composition  of  its  balance  sheet,  if  future  economic  conditions  were  to  warrant  a  more
accommodative monetary policy than can be achieved solely by reducing the federal funds rate.
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
