Mario Draghi: Building on the achievements of post-crisis reforms
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank and Chair of the European
Systemic  Risk  Board,  at  the  second  annual  conference  of  the  ESRB,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  21
September 2017.
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to the second annual conference of the European Systemic
Risk Board (ESRB).
The conference coincides with the tenth anniversary of the start of the global financial crisis in
the summer of 2007. The crisis shook the European Union to the core, and required substantial
policy actions to stabilise the economy and the financial system. With a return to stability having
been achieved, it is important that we take time to reflect on what we have learnt, what we have
achieved over the past ten years, and where we need to do further work.
The crisis taught us that individual banks and the banking system as a whole needed to be more
resilient than they were pre-crisis. As a result, many reforms have been put in place in recent
years.  Our  banking  regulation  and  supervision  have  become  stricter.  Moreover,  the  European
regulatory framework now places greater emphasis on identifying and addressing system-wide
risks.  This  includes  the  establishment  of  the  ESRB  and  the  creation  of  macroprudential
instruments assigned to public authorities.
A more resilient post-crisis banking sector
In the banking sector, significant efforts have been made in recent years to increase resilience. In
the  euro  area,  for  example,  the  average  Common  Equity  Tier  1  ratio  of  significant  institutions
rose from 7% in 2008 to 13.5% by end-2016. And banks are required to set up solid governance
structures  and  prudent  risk  management  practices.  Moreover,  resilience  is  now  tested  more
rigorously in a forward-looking manner. The EU-wide stress tests coordinated by the European
Banking Authority (EBA) have become an important tool for quantifying banks’ capital needs, with
a view to ensuring that they would be able to continue lending to creditworthy borrowers even
during a severe recession.
1, 2
 
Post-crisis  prudential  rules  have  also  provided  public  authorities  with  macroprudential  tools  to
address systemic risks in the banking sector.  And the understanding of how to calibrate and
implement  these  tools  has  advanced.  For  example,  all  Member  States  now  have  a
countercyclical  capital  buffer  framework  that  is  fully  operational.    Four  Member  States  have
announced a non-zero buffer rate for domestic exposures.
3
4
Yet  despite  these  steps  forward,  it  is  important  to  remain  vigilant.  One  important  aspect
concerns the interaction between monetary policy and macroprudential policies.  Financial and
business cycles can potentially become de-synchronised, meaning that financial imbalances can
grow in an environment characterised by relatively muted inflation. In such an environment, the
use of monetary policy is not the right instrument to address financial imbalances, and may lead
to  substantial  deviations  of  aggregate  output  and  inflation  from  their  desirable  levels.  This  is
particularly so in a currency union where monetary policy affects the entire region, but financial
imbalances may be local in nature. Macroprudential policies, targeted at particular markets or
countries, can play a key role in addressing such imbalances.
5
Indeed, the ESRB last year identified medium-term vulnerabilities in some countries’ residential
real estate sectors – precisely the type of situation that macroprudential policies are designed to
address.  It  published  country-specific  warnings  to  eight  Member  States  in  November  2016,  in
6
accordance with its mandate to identify and flag significant systemic risks.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
But beyond increasing the resilience of the banking sector, there is also a need to address the
remaining  legacies  of  the  crisis.  Two  important  aspects  are  the resolutionof  already  impaired
assets, and better accounting for impaired assets for the future.
7
Despite recent progress, the level of non-performing loans (NPLs) on European banks’ balance
sheets remains high.  At the end of 2016, the stock of gross NPLs in the EU banking sector was
around  €1  trillion.  This  number,  however,  does  not  take  into  account  the  fact  that  that
collateralised  lending  plays  an  important  role  in  Europe.  For  example,  including  collateral  and
provisioning,  the  coverage  of  NPLs  is,  on  average,  82%  in  the  euro  area.  Banks’  profitability,
however,  is  affected  by  the  lower  returns  provided  by  the  NPLs,  given  the  weight  of  gross
exposures  in  total  assets:  gross  NPLs  represent  4%  of  the  total  assets  of  euro  area  banks,
8
against only 0.8% for US banks.
The  outstanding  stock  of  NPLs  is  a  consequence  of  cyclical  and  structural  factors.  First,  the
severe recession resulting from the global financial crisis led to a deterioration of the quality of
banks’ loan books. The current economic expansion should therefore help to improve the asset
quality of European banks. At the same time, structural weaknesses still persist. These include
inadequate  internal  governance  structures  in  banks,  ineffective  and  costly  debt  recovery
procedures in some Member States and misaligned incentives that prevent a quick resolution of
NPLs. To this end, the ESRB has proposed  a series of measures to complement those already
being taken at EU and euro area level.
10
9
In  the  short  term,  the  ESRB’s  proposals  focus  on  strengthening  banks’  NPL  management,
including their prudent measurement and the valuation of the associated collateral. Policymakers
could aid this process by developing blueprints for asset management companies, accompanied
by harmonised data templates across the EU.
Measures  should  also  concentrate  on  insolvency  regimes,  debt  recovery  and  servicing
capacities with a view to improving recovery rates from NPLs. Over a longer horizon, secondary
markets’  trading  platforms  should  be  further  developed.  And  banks  also  need  to  be  given
adequate incentives, in particular in relation to accounting for impaired assets.
12
11
From  1  January  2018  onwards,  a  new  accounting  standard  for  the  classification  and
measurement of financial instruments, known as IFRS 9 , becomes mandatory in EU. At the
request of the European Parliament, the ESRB has recently published a report on the financial
stability implications of IFRS 9,
 which concludes that it is a major improvement, particularly
regarding  accounting  for  NPLs.  The  most  important  change  introduced  by  IFRS  9  is  the  shift
from an incurred loss approach to an expected credit loss approach for measuring impairment
allowances.  This  means  that  banks  will  have  to  recognise  impairments  earlier,  curtailing
excessive forbearance towards NPLs and helping ensure that banking sector repair takes place
in a timelier and more comprehensive manner in future downturns. A recent impact assessment,
based on a sample of 54 banks across 20 Member States published by the European Banking
Authority,  suggests  that  the  introduction  of  IFRS  9  would  lead  to  an  increase  of  provisions  of
about 13% on average.
13
The expected credit loss approach also means that banks will have to react in their accounting to
new and forward-looking information as it is received. This means that impairment allowances
may  increase  suddenly  and  significantly  when  economic  conditions  deteriorate,  which  could
have certain pro-cyclical effects.
 The ESRB report considers a number of policies that could
address such effects.
14
For  example,  stress  testing  could  be  used  as  a  means  to  gauge  the  variation  in  impairment
allowances associated with adverse scenarios, in order to ensure that sufficient capital buffers
are  in  place  and  to  allow  for  remedial  policy  action  if  required.  If  banks  can  withstand  a
hypothetical  adverse  scenario,  they  would  likely  be  able  to  cope  with  the  early  recognition  of
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
expected credit losses under a real downturn, as required by IFRS 9.
Identifying and addressing risks beyond the banking sector
Given the bank-based nature of the European economy, the state of the banking sector is central
to our assessment of systemic risk. But the financial system is constantly evolving. Since 2008,
the assets of the non-bank financial sector in the euro area have roughly doubled and are now
slightly larger than those of the banking sector.
 The path to growth set out in the European
Commission’s Action Plan on Building a Capital Markets Union (CMU) means that the non-bank
financial sector is likely to play an increasingly important role in financing the economy.
 This
evolution offers many opportunities: it would provide new sources of funding for business, and it
would help increase options for investors and savers.
15
16
Yet, as financial intermediation shifts from banks to non-banks, existing risks may migrate and
new risks may emerge. It is important, then, to identify such risks and to develop tools to mitigate
them.
17
Take,  for  example,  the  issue  of  interconnectedness  between  different  parts  of  the  financial
system.  Interconnectedness  –  be  that  through  direct  exposures  or  indirectly  via  common  or
correlated asset holdings – is a natural feature of an integrated financial system. But during times
of financial stress, interconnectedness transmits and potentially amplifies shocks, and can lead
to contagion. Full visibility is of the essence here.
18
In  this  regard,  the  second  EU  Shadow  Banking  Monitor,  published  by  the  ESRB  earlier  this
year,
 analyses a unique data set collected by the EBA. The data show that exposures of EU
banks  to  shadow  banking  entities  amount  to  over  €1  trillion. Focusing  on  a  more  granular
subset  of  these  exposures,  the  analysis  finds  that  60%  of  EU  banks’  exposures  to  shadow
banking entities are to entities domiciled outside the EU.
 These findings highlight the global and
cross-border interconnectedness of the banking and shadow banking systems and the need for
international  cooperation  in  monitoring  and  addressing  cross-sectoral  risks.  Unilateral  actions
and isolated national attempts are predisposed to fail.
19
20
When moving from identifying to addressing risks in the financial system, a number of elements
need to work in tandem: good regulation and supervision make individual firms safer; recovery
and resolution regimes provide legal certainty when a firm gets into trouble and they ensure that
failure is orderly; and macroprudential policy looks beyond individual institutions and deploys tools
to target systemic risks.
A  recovery  and  resolution  regime  is  particularly  important  for  central  counterparties  (CCPs),
which have become critical hubs in the financial system. Legislation in this area is progressing,
and  the  ESRB  continues  to  identify  areas  of  refinement  to  better  address  macroprudential
considerations.
  This  includes  the  need  for  cooperation  and  coordination  between  resolution
authorities for banks and CCPs, as distress of a CCP would typically be triggered by distress in
one or more banks that are clearing members of the CCP.
21
Creating a harmonised recovery and resolution framework for the insurance sector across the
EU is also important. Ordinary insolvency procedures may not always be consistent with policy
holder  protection  and  financial  stability  objectives.  This  means  that  they  may  not  suffice  to
manage the failure of a large insurer or the simultaneous failure of multiple insurers in an orderly
fashion. For example, Romania developed a comprehensive recovery and resolution framework
of  this  kind  following  difficulties  faced  by  two  large  insurers  in  2014  and  2015.  And  the
Netherlands and France are in the process of developing such frameworks after experiencing the
near-failure of some financial conglomerates during the global financial crisis.
22
Addressing  systemic  risks  requires  macroprudential  tools  that  public  authorities  can  use.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Reflecting  this,  the  ESRB  recently  noted  that  there  is  a  need  to  establish  a  comprehensive
macroprudential toolkit beyond banking, which to date is lacking.
 Of course, specific tools still
need to be developed. The ESRB has done preliminary work assessing what those tools might
be. One example is the macroprudential use of margins and haircuts, on which I updated the
European Parliament earlier this year.
Conclusion
24, 25
23
 Let me conclude.
Much has been achieved since the global financial crisis. In particular, banks in Europe are more
resilient and the banking union has advanced. Moreover, authorities have the mandates and tools
to tackle risks in the banking sector and are using them. These improvements have created a
financial system that poses fewer risks to the real economy.
At the same time, work remains to be done. Authorities need to watch out for blind spots, where
risks  can  build  up  unnoticed,  and  use  the  tools  at  their  disposal. And  legislators  need  to  be
mindful  that  authorities  require  a  broad  range  of  tools  to  be  able  to  tackle  risks  beyond  the
banking sector.
I  hope  that  when  you  return  to  your  institutions,  this  conference  will  have  strengthened  your
resolve to address the challenges in banking and beyond that are discussed here. On that note, I
am pleased to open this second annual conference of the European Systemic Risk Board.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
For example, the most recent stress tests by the European Banking Authority in 2016 included 51 banks from 15
EU and EEA countries, covering around 70% of banking assets in each jurisdiction and across the EU. See
European Banking Authority (2016), “2016 EU-wide stress test results”, July.
The  ESRB  has  contributed  a  macroprudential  perspective  to  these  stress  tests  and  developed  surveys  to
consider feedback loops. See, for example, ESRB (2016a), “Adverse macro-financial scenario for the EBA 2016
EU-wide bank stress testing exercise”, March; and Brinkhoff, J., S. Langfield, and O. Weeken (2017). “From the
horse’s mouth: surveying responses to stress by banks and insurers”, ESRB Occasional Paper, forthcoming.
i.e. the Capital Requirements Directive IV and the Capital Requirements Regulation.
ESRB (2017), “A Review of Macroprudential Policy in the EU in 2016”, April.
“The interaction between monetary policy and financial stability in the euro area”, keynote speech by M. Draghi at
the  First  Conference  on  Financial  Stability  organised  by  the  Banco  de  España  and  Centro  de  Estudios
Monetarios y Financieros, 24 May 2017.
For details, see the special feature on assessing vulnerabilities and policy stances in the residential real estate
sector in ESRB (2017), “A Review of Macroprudential Policy in the EU in 2016”, April.
See, for example, Constâncio, V. (2017), “Resolving Europe’s NPL burden: challenges and benefits”, February.
See, Constâncio, V. (2017), “Challenges faced by the European banking sector”, June.
See ESRB (2017), “Resolving non-performing loans in Europe”, July. The ESRB policy proposals should not be
understood  as  formal  ESRB  warnings  or  recommendations,  as  defined  by Article  16  of  Regulation  (EU)
No 1092/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on European Union macro-
prudential  oversight  of  the  financial  system  and  establishing  a  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (OJ  L  331,
15.12.2010, p. 1.
See, for example, ECB Banking Supervision (2017), “Guidance to banks on non-performing loans”, March.
International Financial Reporting Standard 9.
ESRB (2017), “Financial stability implications of IFRS 9”, July 2017.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
EBA (2017), “Report on results from the second EBA Impact Assessment of IFRS 9”, July.
For a model-based assessment, see Abad, J. and Suarez, J. (2017), “Assessing the cyclical implications of
IFRS 9 – a recursive model”, ESRB Occasional Paper, No 12.
European Central Bank (2016), “Report on financial structures”, October.
European  Commission  (2015),  “Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  European  Parliament,  the
Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions – Action Plan on
Building a Capital Markets Union”, September.
Speech by M. Draghi at the first annual conference of the ESRB, Frankfurt am Main, 22 September 2016.
ESRB (2017), “EU Shadow Banking Monitor”, May.
Abad,  J.,  D’Errico,  M.,  Killeen,  N.,  Luz,  V.,  Peltonen,  T.,  Portes,  R.  and  Urbano,  T.,  “Mapping  the
interconnectedness between EU banks and shadow banking entities”, ESRB Working Paper No 40, 2017.
This analysis focuses on exposures to shadow banking entities that are equal to or above 0.25% of each
institution’s eligible capital.
ESRB (2017), “Opinion on a central counterparty recovery and resolution framework”, July.
ESRB (2017), “Recovery and resolution for the EU insurance sector: a macroprudential perspective”, August.
ESRB (2016), “ESRB response to the European Commission’s Consultation Document on the Review of the
EU Macro-prudential Policy Framework”, October.
Introductory statement by M. Draghi at the Hearing before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of
the European Parliament, May 2017.
ESRB (2017), “The macroprudential use of margins and haircuts”, February.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
