François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Recent  European  economic
challenges
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Paris
Europlace International Financial Forum, Tokyo, 5 December 2016.
Accompanying slides.
 Thank  you  for  your  invitation.  I  am  very  pleased  to  be  here  in  Tokyo  for  the  first  time  as  a
Governor. France and Japan have a lot in common. Both our countries have a long history and
culture,  a  long-term  vision  and  a  strong  private-public  partnership.  And  Bank  of  Japan  and
Banque de France have developed a rich and fruitful relationship. Let me thank Governor Kuroda
for  his  enlightening  comments  on  digital  innovation  and  FinTechs,  which  Banque  de  France
clearly supports. I will focus for my part on European economic challenges.
In  2016,  the  world  in  general,  and  Europe  in  particular,  has  experienced  a  period  of  high
uncertainty:  uncertainties  relating  to  our  security,  with  the  threat  of  terrorist  attacks;  political
uncertainties, with “Brexit” and, more recently, Mr Trump’s victory in the United States; as well as
economic uncertainties, including oil prices or Chinese growth, and high market volatility at the
beginning of the year. The referendum in Italy yesterday may be deemed as another source of
uncertainty. However it cannot be compared to the British referendum: Italian people have been
called to the polls to vote on an internal constitutional matter, and not about Italy’s long-standing
EU membership. We will nevertheless look closely at its consequences.
If we look beyond uncertainties, we have also received positive news; in particular, recovery is
underway in Europe. As you may know, a meeting of the ECB Governing Council will be held in
three days, so I have to respect a silent period and I will not speak on monetary policy matters.
But  I  can  emphasize  that,  in  response  to  weak  inflation  and  heightened  uncertainties,  the
Eurosystem,  of  which  the  Banque  de  France  is  a  member,  has  acted  decisively.  In  addition,
several European countries have implemented structural reforms since the onset of the crisis
and,  at  the  same  time,  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  have  taken  significant  steps  to  enhance
economic  and  financial  integration  and  stability. All  these  efforts  have  strengthened  the  euro
area’s resilience as shown by limited reactions to Brexit or the US elections or by the unaffected,
steady recovery in the euro area.
1/ Changes in economic conditions
[Slide  2]  In  Europe,  economic  recovery  is  underway.  Europe  is  continuing  to  recover,  at
1.7% in 2016, and is expected to carry on recovering in 2017. Euro area growth is robust
since  it  is  supported  by  domestic  demand,  i.e.  household  consumption  and  corporate
investment. New more detailed euro area growth and inflation projections will be published
on 8 December.
It  is  particularly  important  to  note  that  labour  market  conditions  are  improving  and
unemployment is receding. In the euro area, on the past 4 years, the unemployment rate has
dropped from 13% to 9.8% last October and is at its lowest level in four years. It is still too
high but is going in the right direction.
For France, after 1.2% of GDP growth in 2015, we are likely to see a growth rate above that
range for 2016 and 2017. In the short term, we expect growth at 0.4% in the last quarter of
2016. The Banque de France will publish its new growth and inflation projections for France
on 9 December.
Inflation developments
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
[Slide  3]  Inflation,  which  was  nil  in  the  euro  area  in  2015,  rose  steadily  in  2016:  it  should
reach 0.6% in November. Monetary policy has helped and will continue to support a move
toward the Eurosystem objective of an inflation rate below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term.  In  addition,  oil  prices  have  bottomed  out  since  the  beginning  of  this  year  and  this
should directly help inflation to increase beyond 1% in the first months of 2017.
[Slide 4] The comprehensive package of measures adopted on 10 March 2016 made euro
area monetary policy more accommodative. One of its distinctive features is that it targets
the  financing  of  the  real  economy.  The  second  series  of  targeted  refinancing  operations
(dubbed  “TLTRO  2”),  for  an  amount  of  EUR  444.6  bn  allotted  so  far,  should  continue  to
improve medium-term funding conditions for banks and foster bank lending to companies
and households.
2/ Structural policies
Progress  has  also  been  made  regarding  structural  reforms.  Several  European  countries,
including Germany and Spain, are showing the way forward to Europe. They have succeeded in
carrying  out  wide-reaching  reforms  that  are  compatible  with  our  common  European  social
model, which combines high standards of public service and relatively low levels of inequality –
much  lower  than  in  the  American  society.  Progress  has  been  made  in  all  four  key  areas:
Enterprise, Employment, Education and Expenditure reduction. And these reforms are delivering
results today: in recent years, GDP and employment have grown much faster in those countries.
Contrary to preconceptions, France has also demonstrated in the past its capacity to meet the
challenge of economic and social reform. In the 1990s, to prepare for the introduction of the euro,
France pursued a competitive disinflation policy that proved highly effective. Remember that in
the  late  1990s,  France  experienced  the  highest  GDP  growth  and  the  weakest  inflation  rate
among European countries, along with a significant fall in its unemployment rate. Today, French
reforms  are  heading  in  the  right  direction,  [Slide  5]  in  particular  the  Tax  Credit  for
Competitiveness and Investment (CICE) and the Responsibility and Solidarity Pact (RSP) which
are  designed  to  foster  an  improvement  in  the  competitiveness  of  the  French  economy.  We
should obviously persevere with more reforms. But progress has also been made with the recent
labour law (‘Loi El Khomri’) which, among other things, clarifies the conditions under which firms
can carry out dismissals for economic reasons.
Besides, France has strengths in the financial sector that we should not forget: robust banks and
insurance companies – they went through the crisis without public money except in one very
specific  case  (Dexia)  –,  a  dynamic  asset  management  industry,  strong  financial  market
infrastructures, and a highly skilled labour force. And the French authorities, including the Banque
de France, attach the utmost importance to ensuring that Paris is one of Europe’s strongest and
most attractive financial centres, still more after Brexit. You spoke about Brexit this morning. It is
too early to tell what will be the precise choice of the British government, but one principle is
obvious: if they want to keep full access to the European single market, they will have to apply all
its rules. There can be no free riding, and no cherry picking. And if Britain were to choose a “hard
Brexit", this would in particular mean the end of the European passport for the City of London. Be
sure that the Euro area will then be one of the most integrated financial zones worldwide: we
have a solid common currency, we have high savings resources, we already have a Banking
Union,  and  we  have  a  couple  of  significant  financial  centers,  starting  with  Paris.  Brexit  was
clearly  not  our  wish,  but  we  are  now  ready  to  welcome  Japanese  financial  institutions;  my
predecessor Christian Noyer has been assigned to this mission by the French government and
already came twice to Tokyo in the last months to convey this very concrete message.
3/ How can we give further impetus to Europe?
Getting back to the European level, I would like to point out that many improvements have also
been made in the field of crisis prevention and management. Prevention is based on much more
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
efficient financial regulation and on a European governance framework that is better organised
now  with  well-designed  monitoring  mechanisms  on  fiscal  performance  as  well  as  on  macro-
economic  imbalances  and  structural  reforms.  Banking  Union  contributes  to  strengthening
financial stability in the euro area and the EU as a whole and to ensuring that the banking sector
is safe and reliable. The global European picture is of substantially enhanced resilience since the
crisis. The Common Equity Tier 1 ratios of significant banking groups in the euro area have risen
from 7% in 2008 to 14% today. Crisis management – including for Greece – has also evolved
considerably with the creation of the ESM. So you can be fully confident about the resilience of
the euro and of the euro area. It is not only an economic asset, it is also a political one, supported
by each of the 19 governments and – which is still more important – by 68% of euro area citizens
(and even by 70% of French citizens and 73% of German citizens).
Moreover, monetary policy played its full part to maintain euro area cohesion. Europe has clearly
succeeded with monetary union, but monetary policy should not remain the only game in town.
We must continue to make progress towards economic union in order to achieve more and to
further join forces in the new international context. To do so, Europe should seize the opportunity
to move forward on three concrete steps towards Economic Union:
The  first  step,  as  of  today,  is  to  build  a  “Financing  and  Investment  Union”  (FIU)  to  steer
abundant savings into productive investment. Resources are not lacking: in the euro area,
the current account surplus, which is a measure of the excess of savings over investment,
stands at more than 3% of GDP. This trend is often described as a “saving glut” but I believe
it  is  more  fitting  to  talk  of  an  “investment  crunch”  [slide  6],  since  we  lack  productive
investment.  The  FIU  would  merge  together  the  initiatives  already  in  place:  the  Capital
Markets Union of course, but also the Juncker Investment Plan – which aims, through the
use of limited public guarantees, to foster private investments totalling EUR 630 billion in six
years –, and the Banking Union. We need to put the pieces of the puzzle together in order to
magnify  their  impact  through  synergies.  There  are  two  objectives:  [slide  7]  increased
diversification of firms’ financing – with more equity financing –, and higher resilience of the
euro area thanks to private risk-sharing across domestic borders.
[slide 8] The second step, after the FIU, would be a collective economic strategy for the euro
area. Growth and employment will be stronger in Europe if we combine more reforms where
they are needed, such as in France and Italy, and more fiscal support in those countries with
room for manoeuvre, such as Germany. In practice, for such a collective economic strategy
to exist, the euro area needs an institution that fosters confidence: it could consist of a euro
area “Finance Minister”.
The third step, in the longer term, would be a European fiscal capacity. It comes at the end
as it requires more convergence and more confidence. A genuine euro budget would be a
stabilisation tool and could include, for example, a euro area-wide unemployment insurance
scheme. It could also be used to finance certain “European public goods” such as digital
technology, the energy transition or the integration of refugees. And in the long term, it could
directly issue common debt and even raise taxes.
Let me sum up. Since the beginning of the crisis, Europe has been able to strengthen itself and
to  build  a  set  of  instruments  and  mechanisms  that  have  significantly  increased  its  resilience
(Banking Union, the ESM, the enhanced SGP, etc.). It is now a matter of continuing this progress
and not seeing Brexit as a shock to the euro area but rather as an opportunity to pursue, in a
structured way, the setting-up of a better Economic Union. And at the core of Europe, France
has made progress, which needs to be accelerated. But in an uncertain world, France appears
as a rather stable country, seen from the resilience of its economy, the strength of its financial
sector, as well as the solidity of its political institutions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
