Andreas  Dombret:  The  cake's  getting  smaller.  Consolidation  and
reorientation in the German banking sector
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Frankfurt School of Finance &amp; Management's Fifth Annual Conference on Integrated
Performance and Risk Management, Frankfurt am Main, 30 March 2017.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this  conference  on  integrated  performance  and  risk
management.  The  close  ties  between  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  the  Frankfurt  School  of
Finance & Management have already become something of a tradition, and I hold them in high
regard.
The  speech  I  am  holding  today  is  entitled  “The  cake’s  getting  smaller  –  consolidation  and
reorientation in the German banking sector", and you may be wondering what managing a credit
institution has in common with this city’s famous cake, the Frankfurter Kranz …
Well,  both  are  crowning  achievements  in  their  respective  professions:  the  Frankfurter  Kranz,
invented here in Frankfurt am Main in 1735 by an unknown baker, is part and parcel of this city’s
history  in  the  18th  century.  Shaped  like  a  wreath  –  Kranz  in  German  –  it  symbolises  the
emperor’s crown. Unsurprisingly, then, it takes a great deal of skill and craftsmanship to prepare.
Similarly, managing a credit institution has emerged as one of the elite disciplines in the business
world.  Steering  an  institution,  with  all  the  tasks  that  entails,  has  become  far  more  gruelling  in
recent years – not just because market conditions have become harsher, but also because the
cake that can be divided up in the first place has shrunk in size and is continuing to do so. And
when the going gets tough, there’s no option but to tweak the recipes.
2 The cake’s getting smaller
The cake that can be divided up among Germany’s banks and savings banks has been shrinking
for many years now. Just look at how earnings have been contracting for more than 15 years –
the figure for 2015 is nearly 30% down on 1999.
This  malaise  can  be  traced  back  to  a  number  of  factors.  One  is  that  Europe,  and  Germany
especially,  are  often  lambasted  for  being  “overbanked".  Unless  these  overcapacities  are
reduced, they will continue to take their toll on earnings.
The  low-interest-rate  environment  is  having  much  the  same  effect.  We  are  already  seeing
diminishing margins in deposit business, and that’s partly because institutions are loath to pass
on  negative  rates  to  their  retail  customer  base.  It  is  also  apparent  that  the  contribution  from
lending business has remained largely steady.
Another factor we should not overlook here, of course, is the tougher competitive environment –
though  I  might  add  that  rivalry  has  always  been  very  intense  in  Germany’s  banking  sector.
Fintechs have been disrupting the market, and incumbent credit institutions have lost pace with
developments  on  many  fronts.  Some  segments  of  the  value  added  chain  have  migrated  to
fintechs, eroding banks’ revenue streams in those areas. And as for tapping fresh sources of
earnings  such  as  alternative  payment  procedures,  traditional  credit  institutions  are  already
lagging behind the “new kids on the block".
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  debate  surrounding  the  low  levels  of  profitability  in  Germany’s  banking  industry  inevitably
returns to the role played by regulation. In the pre-crisis era, there were undoubtedly a number of
regulatory  blind  spots  which  many  institutions  capitalised  on  to  engage  in  excessively  risky
transactions. This behaviour has taken its toll on the entire economy. That is why it is good that
improved rules are now in place and supervision has been tightened. Needless to say, I am not
expecting a rapturous reception  from  credit  institutions,  but  the  reforms  were  right,  they  were
important, and to a large extent, implementing them represents a one-off expense.
Regulation, digitalisation, low rates, overcapacities – all these factors suggest that profitability is
going to remain under pressure for the foreseeable future. The economy may be on an upbeat
path right now, but if the environment takes a turn for the worse, it will only add to the pressure on
credit institutions.
What  I  am  saying  is  that  from  today’s  perspective,  it  doesn’t  look  like  the  cake  is  going  to
increase in size again over the short and medium term – in fact, it will probably even shrink a little
further.
How  can  the  sector  respond  to  this  state  of  affairs?  Probably  through  a  combination  of
consolidation on the one hand and reorientation on the other.
3 Consolidation and the ever-shrinking cake
Let’s begin with consolidation. The gradual downsizing of branch networks and institutions is a
clear signal that consolidation is already under way. But there is still some way to go yet. It would
appear logical to press ahead with consolidation, particularly with a view to boosting the cost-
income ratio. According to this metric, Germany’s banking sector is still firmly entrenched among
the  worst  in  Europe.  For  that  reason,  measures  aimed  at  cutting  costs  and  increasing
operational efficiency will probably have to remain a firm fixture on credit institutions’ agendas.
Mergers  and  acquisitions  are  one  way  of  unlocking  substantial  cost  savings.  This,  too,  is  a
strategy which has already been practised in recent years – with mixed results.
Don’t get me wrong, I’m not saying that mergers are a panacea as such – after all, simply putting
two  ailing  institutions  together  doesn’t  make  one  robust  one.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  potential
source of contagion. Two minuses might make a plus in the world of mathematics, but that’s
rarely true in a merger.
Mergers and acquisitions, then, will only ever be crowned with success if they are underpinned
by a realistic strategy. Thus, a deal between institutions with complementary regional operations
might be a sound idea, as might a European merger. If a plan is well thought out, supervisors will
be supportive, too. However, that is not a reason for us to lower the bar for ailing institutions;
rather, we will take a very close look.
4 New and improved recipes needed
Ladies and gentlemen, consolidation doesn’t go nearly far enough. That is why German credit
institutions will, in some cases, need to recalibrate their business models. Some of them are
already in the process of doing so. But can it really be said that realignment is already in full
swing? I think more could still be done on this front.
If  the  cakes  of  the  future  are  to  be  profitable  ones,  we  are  going  to  need  new  and  improved
recipes. You will probably be familiar with my long-held view that institutions should scrutinise
their  business  models,  and  that  many  of  them  should  adapt  them,  or  even  overhaul  them
altogether.
Because  the  pressure  is  set  to  mount  still  further.  The  business  environment  has  been
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
transformed beyond recognition since 2008 – the setting today is often referred to as “the new
normal". And business models cannot very well remain stuck in “old normal” mode.
Let me now turn my attention to one of the stiffest challenges facing banks and savings banks in
this regard – the low-interest-rate environment. We are all aware that persistently low rates are
rocking the very foundations upon which many German institutions have erected their business
models – I’m talking specifically about the ones that run highly interest-driven franchises. That is
why any institution that is over-reliant on revenues from interest business needs to rethink its
approach.
And  while  banks  are  busy  reviewing  their  strategies,  there’s  another  scenario  they  must  also
bear in mind – that interest rates are going to pick up again. This will give rise to interest rate risk,
which an institution’s risk management will need to be able to cope with. Institutions should each
have  a  meticulously  crafted  response  to  this  scenario  at  the  ready  –  rather  than  hectically
drawing up a plan when things come to a head and interest rates start climbing. Furthermore, the
new recipes of the future will also need to include some digital ingredients, and that goes for
business  models  and  risk  management  operations  in  equal  measure.  State-of-the-art  risk
management needs to devote far more attention to cyber risks, which are a matter of general
business management.
Efficient  processes  which  harness  economies  of  scale  on  the  cost  side  can  help  stabilise
earnings. Innovative information technology can play a role here, and it can also be supportive in
reshaping business models.  In fact, to a limited extent, it can help tap new sources of income.
Another way in which institutions can unlock new sources of revenues and optimise their existing
profit centres is by cooperating with fintechs.
5 Stricter rules for the baking process: regulation and bank management
1
But  it  is  not  just  the  business  models  which  need  to  be  scrutinised  –  the  management
approaches should be reviewed as well. And this is where regulation comes into play.
Up  until  just  a  few  years  ago,  integrated  performance  and  risk  management  largely  revolved
around  allocating  capital  according  to  an  institution’s  exposures.  The  chief  objective  was  to
allocate capital resources as efficiently as possible whilst adhering to the minimum regulatory
capital requirements.
This  principle  is  still  the  essence  of  bank  management  today.  Yet  the  regulatory  reforms
introduced  since  the  financial  crisis  have  been  forcing  institutions  to  rethink  their  set-ups
somewhat.
The problems facing the banking sector have shown that setting a minimum capital requirement
that is based solely on risk-weighted criteria doesn’t go far enough to create sufficient resilience
within the sector.
Because  risk-weighted  capital  requirements  alone  did  not  provide  the  necessary  level  of
protection,  additional  safety  nets  were  introduced  as  part  of  the  Basel  III  package.  Thus,  the
existing risk-weighted standards have now been joined by the leverage ratio, and there are also
two  new  liquidity  ratios,  capital  buffers,  loss-absorbing  capital  and  individual  capital  add-ons
under the supervisory review and evaluation process (SREP).
These are worthwhile additions from a supervisory vantage point because they give us a tailor-
made toolkit to control the various risks which can cause a bank to fail.
But for credit institutions, the new system means that their management systems now have to
take into account not just one metric, but several of them. So a decision whether or not to grant a
loan no longer depends solely on the return and the efficient allocation of equity, but also, for
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
instance,  on  the  impact  on  the  balance  sheet  structure,  which  is  regulated  by  the  net  stable
funding ratio (NSFR).
The toughest challenge probably lies in coping with the interplay between the various minimum
standards and the need to simultaneously adhere to minimum capital requirements, the leverage
ratio,  requirements  for  an  institution’s  liquidity  and  balance  sheet  structure  as  well  as  varying
point-in-time and institution-specific criteria – on this magnitude, this is uncharted territory.
What  all  this  means  is  that  the  optimisation  problem  suddenly  becomes  much  more
complicated,  raising  the  question  as  to  whether  compliance  can  be  achieved  by  means  of  a
simple equation. Or does a more multifaceted approach need to be adopted?
It is precisely this complexity which makes a smart approach to integrated risk management so
crucial.  There  is  the  question,  of  course,  of  the  levels  which  this  integrated  management
approach  ought  to  address.  Can  different  metrics  be  broken  down  to  individual  business
activities? Or does it make more sense to look at the bank as a whole or at portfolio level in order
to identify risk drivers and render management measures more transparent? All this is forcing
institutions to rethink both their operational and strategic set-ups.
One  aspect,  I  believe,  is  particularly  crucial.  Institutions  should  not  and  cannot  steer  their
business solely on the basis of compliance with the regulatory minimum requirements. Even if I
do  have  to  concede  that  the  rules  which  supervisors  including  myself  have  created  naturally
curtail the scope of management action.
But  there  is  nonetheless  still  a  great  deal  of  entrepreneurial  scope  which  institutions  can
capitalise  on  –  by  running  smart  business  models,  by  adopting  innovative  strategies,  and  by
smoothly  putting  them  into  operation.  Business  models  that  operate  solely  on  the  basis  of
satisfying  the  regulatory  minimum  requirements  cannot  be  successful  over  the  long  run.
Adhering to the minimum requirements is a necessary constraint – the main key to success,
however, is a smart business model that is built to last.
Ladies and gentlemen, the “new normal” is forcing institutions to rethink their business models
and management approaches. It is a setting in which the cake is continuing to shrink. Logically,
cake recipes and their preparation look set to become all the more challenging – but saying that, I
firmly believe that the cakes of tomorrow not only have to be tastier; they should also be more
palatable for customers, the real economy, supervisors and the banks themselves.
All of you here today are working on these new and improved recipes, and while there is still
some way to go, I am in no doubt you are on the right track to come up with successful recipes.
Thank you for your attention.
1
Dombret, Andreas (2016): Digitalisation – repercussions for banks and their supervisors. Speech delivered at
the 
University 
June
2016. www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Reden/2016/2016_06_08_dombret.html
Norddeutscher 
Bankentag 
Leuphana 
Lüneburg, 
16th 
at 
8 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
