Peter  Praet:  Have  unconventional  policies  overstretched  central
bank 
and
independence?  Challenges 
transparency in the wake of the crisis
Keynote address by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the "Symposium on Building the Financial System of the 21st Century: An Agenda for
Europe and the United States", Frankfurt am Main, 29 March 2017.
accountability 
for 
 I would like to thank Claus Brand for his contribution to this speech.
Evolution in consensus on the role of central banks and central bank independence
In  the  course  of  monetary  history,  consensus  on  the  role  of  monetary  policy  and  on  the
appropriate  degree  of  independence  of  the  central  bank  has  fluctuated  considerably.  During
major crises, the pendulum has tended to swing from one extreme to the other. 
In  the  heyday  of  the  gold  standard,  i.e.  the  decades  preceding  World  War  I,  there  was  a
commonly accepted understanding of how to preserve monetary and financial stability. The gold
standard  provided  what  we  call  a  “nominal  anchor”.  It  effectively  ensured  central  bank
independence from other public policies by subjecting monetary policy to an automatic rule.  At
the same time, there was a clear understanding of the role of central banks as a lender of last
resort. Under that regime, central banks enjoyed sufficient discretion to take effective action in
the event of banking panics. Adherence to the oft-quoted Bagehot principle (“lend freely at a high
rate against good collateral” to solvent, but illiquid institutions ) ensured that lender of last resort
activities did not threaten monetary stability.
1
2
The pendulum began to swing away from this pre-war consensus when World War I prompted
many  countries  to  subordinate  monetary  policy  to  financing  war  and  to  suspend  the  gold
standard. Countries returning to the gold standard after World War I, however, turned to overly
rigid  management  of  monetary  affairs.  Lacking  the  necessary  discretion,  following  the  Wall
Street  crash  and  the  global  recession  in  1929,  and  the  subsequent  banking  crisis,  monetary
policy prompted a precipitous collapse in money and prices.  This spawned the greatest loss in
jobs and output on record in what came to be remembered as the Great Depression.
3
In a fateful irony of monetary history, the role of monetary policy in precipitating these calamitous
events did not usher in monetary reform. On the contrary, notions hardened that monetary policy
was  powerless  and  that  macroeconomic  stability  needed  to  be  safeguarded  through  other
policies.   This  shift  in  emphasis  culminated  in  fiscal  dominance,  which  contributed  to  the
monetary mismanagement of the 1960s and 70s, paving the way for the “Great Inflation”. Only a
few  countries  that  preserved  central  bank  independence,  such  as  Germany,  were  able  to
maintain low inflation rates throughout these years.
4
The Great Inflation was eventually overcome as monetary policy once again gained centre stage
and was recognised as a powerful factor in macroeconomic stability. Economists, irrespective of
their  scholarly  persuasion,  and  policymakers  alike  became  convinced  of  Milton  Friedman’s
famous dictum that “inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon”.  This return to
old  wisdom  helped  to  rebuild  a  consensus  that  central  banks  need  to  be  granted  sufficient
independence  to  pursue  monetary  stability  without  political  interference.  The  pendulum  had
swung  back,  and  central  bank  independence  became  the  mainstay  of  inflation  targeting
frameworks. In the European Union, the independence granted to the ECB for the pursuit of price
stability is a central plank of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU and has thereby attained a
unique institutional and legal status.
5
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Challenges for central bank communication and accountability in times of crisis
We  have  been  going  through  the  biggest  financial  crisis  in  two  generations,  which  has  now
lasted nearly a decade. Prior to it, monetary policy operated predominantly through adjustments
to  short-term  interest  rates.  But  the  crisis  has  upended  traditional  patterns  in  finance  and
economics,  and  monetary  policy  is  no  exception.  In  its  response  to  the  crisis,  the  ECB  has
deployed  a  novel  and  complex  range  of  instruments.  The  novelty  and  complexity  of  these
unconventional measures have created challenges for accountability and transparency.
The  financial  crisis  has  evolved  in  three  main  phases,  each  of  which  has  required  different
monetary  policy  responses  and  has  brought  about  particular  challenges  for  central  bank
communication and accountability.
The first phase was the abrupt liquidity crisis triggered by the turning of the global financial cycle
and  the  subsequent  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  It  provoked  a  systemic  failure  of  funding
markets and prompted global central banks to step in with forceful and coordinated interventions
to provide essential liquidity to the banking sector. Without this response, the financial system
would have collapsed and a far deeper recession would have ensued.
Owing  to  the  funding  freeze,  the  classical  interest  rate  instrument  ceased  to  be  the  main
signalling  device  of  the  monetary  policy  stance.  The  deployment  of  the  central  bank  balance
sheet  as  a  stabilising  instrument  was  a  novelty,  and  immediately  met  substantial  scepticism.
First,  there  were  concerns  about  moral  hazard,  given  the  unprecedented  expansion  of  ECB
credit to banks at a time when banks were under scrutiny for their mismanagement of risk in the
pre-crisis period and for having precipitated the crisis in the first place. Second, there were also
concerns about these liquidity injections paving the way for inflation.
Owing  to  the  incompleteness  of  the  institutional  structure  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union
(EMU), the profound effects of the banking crisis were not addressed as swiftly in the euro area
as in other jurisdictions. This paved the way for the second phase of the crisis, the sovereign
debt crisis, which was amplified by the fact that banks predominantly hold debt securities of their
own national governments. As the cost of borrowing increased for certain governments, banks
with  exposures  to  this  debt  came  under  intense  market  pressure,  ultimately  leading  to  entire
national banking systems losing market access. This in turn resulted in financial fragmentation
and a serious disruption of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. As a consequence,
cuts in key ECB interest rates were not being passed on to firms and households to the same
extent in every euro area country.
To  arrest  and  reverse  this  development,  two  policies  were  introduced.  First,  to  ensure  banks
could rely on longer-term funding, central bank liquidity was made available for up to three years,
and the collateral that could be used to access central bank money was expanded. Second, the
announcement of Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) in 2012 removed the euro area break-
up risk that was being priced into government borrowing costs.
Notwithstanding the success of OMTs in alleviating redenomination risk, the sovereign debt crisis
set back the recovery and laid the ground for the third phase of the crisis. Banks in large parts of
the euro area became less willing and less capable of keeping credit flowing to the real economy,
producing a vicious circle of contracting credit growth and weak demand dynamics. Accordingly,
headline inflation began to drift downwards, owing both to global energy and commodity price
developments and to ongoing weakness in the core components.
In  June  2014  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  embarked  on  a  phase  of  renewed  expansion,
aimed  both  at  enhancing  monetary  policy  transmission,  in  a  context  of  continued  bank
deleveraging, and increasing policy accommodation in view of persistently weak inflation. Having
limited  room  for  manoeuvre  on  the  main  refinancing  rate,  the  ECB  initiated  a  series  of  new
unconventional measures. These consisted of our targeted longer-term refinancing operations
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
(TLTROs), our asset purchase programme for public and private sector securities (APP), and
our policy of charging a zero interest rate on main refinancing operations and a negative rate on
excess reserves. As the floor of our monetary policy corridor – which by then had become the
key  instrument  steering  monetary  conditions  in  the  money  market  –  was  reduced  to  negative
levels, other short to medium-term market yields dipped below the zero line as well.
Given the novelty, scope and size of the measures taken, and given their potential interaction
with other public policies, communication of these measures proved to be much more difficult
than before the crisis, when we only had to explain how changes in the main policy interest rates
affect the economy and ultimately the price level.
Likewise, holding the ECB accountable for its monetary policy has also become more difficult.
Let  me  illustrate  this  difficulty  by  considering  how  observers  have  been  using  Taylor  rules  to
compare  our  policy  interest  rates  with  rule-based  benchmarks.  In  a  Taylor  rule,  such
benchmarks are pinned down mainly by the deviation of inflation from target and by a measure of
economic slack. On this basis, observers held central banks accountable for monetary policy
decisions,  as  the  relation  between  policy  objective  and  instrument  is  transparent  and  not
equivocal. In a nutshell, empirical regularities lay the ground for a prescriptive monetary policy
rule – even though oversimplified – against which central bank actions can be evaluated.
In crisis times, it turned out to be nearly impossible to track the monetary policy stance using a
Taylor rule. First, with the interest rate having ceased to be the main instrument, incorporating
balance sheet measures into the rule is not straightforward at all.. Second, as the transmission
of  policy  interest  rates  to  the  economy  has  been  impaired,  their  comparison  with  Taylor  rule
benchmarks  has  become  much  less  informative.  Third,  in  view  of  persistently  weak  and  low
inflation and a high degree of economic slack, Taylor rules might well prescribe the setting of
interest rates below their effective lower bound, wrongly indicating a tight policy stance, as the
easing  effects  of  unconventional  measures  cannot  be  accounted  for.  Developing  other
comparatively simple monitoring tools has not been possible. Overall, the ability of observers to
use policy rules to hold the ECB accountable has been severely hindered.
How can we then be sure that the measures taken fall within the ECB’s narrowly defined price
stability mandate?
6
The precise scope of our price stability mandate has been the subject of some debate in recent
times.  Some have argued that central banks, by engaging in a systematic expansion of their
balance sheets, are in effect venturing into the realm of fiscal policy. Such views could be paving
the way for another turnaround in the public perception and institutional status of central banks,
which could result in less financial and, ultimately, less statutory independence. This threat may
be even more pronounced in a world in which, virtually everywhere, public debt has surged to
high levels, making political pressure on central banks to alleviate debt servicing costs through
higher inflation more likely.  Another swing of the pendulum?
7
Central  banks  are  ultimately  judged  on  their  success  or  failure  in  ensuring  low  and  stable
inflation.  Central  bank  independence  gives  them  the  freedom  to  pursue  their  mandate.
Independence  does  not  mean  that  they  can  act  in  a  completely  unfettered  way.  In  modern
democratic societies, independent institutions are accountable. They need to explain the reasons
for their actions and why these are appropriate for fulfilling the mandate that has been assigned
to them as the result of a democratic process. For central banks, one of the challenges is to
communicate their internal deliberations in a transparent manner to their external stakeholders.
Safeguarding accountability
The  Treaty  sets  out  an  accountability  framework  for  the  ECB,  which  requires  regular
appearances by ECB officials before the European Parliament and the publishing of the Annual
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Report.  Let  me  remind  you  that  the  ECB  was  the  first  major  central  bank  to  hold  press
conferences on its monetary policy decisions. The Economic Bulletin provides a comprehensive
account  of  the  economic  and  monetary  analyses  supporting  the  Governing  Council’s
assessments. In 2015, we took another important step: we started publishing accounts of the
monetary  policy  meetings  of  the  Governing  Council,  as  an  additional  means  to  explain  the
deliberation process that leads to our actions.
Overall,  the  steps  that  the  ECB  took  to  enhance  transparency  have  been  acknowledged  in  a
report  released  this  week  by  Transparency  International  EU.   Concerning  monetary  policy
communication, it notably commends our decision to publish regular accounts of the Governing
Council’s monetary policy discussions. By explaining the rationale behind our policy decisions,
the accounts also show how the measures we take are aligned with our mandate of maintaining
price stability. This is important, because some unconventional monetary policy measures have
been challenged on the grounds that they could be serving other policy objectives.
8
To elaborate further on this, I will take a few examples of monetary policy measures that some
have perceived to be fiscal or quasi-fiscal measures. It is imperative to be fully transparent on
such measures and dispel any doubts about their motivation and their effect on price stability.
Safeguards against encroachment on the area of fiscal responsibilities are extremely important.
Conflicts with the price stability objective could emerge from monetary operations that support
unsustainable government finances or insolvent financial institutions.
There  is  no  doubt  that  monetary  policy  has  had  beneficial  effects  on  government  finances;
monetary  policy  has  unavoidable  implications  for  public  budgets.  The  same  kind  of  indirect
support occurred during the easing cycle in the early 2000s, when our main refinancing rate was
reduced to 2% – a very low level at the time – and was maintained at that level for more than two
years. The fiscal ramifications of monetary policy that we see today (and in the early 2000s),
however,  differ  fundamentally  from  the  deliberately  coordinated  strategy  of  monetary  financing
that we observed in some countries in the 1970s. Today the use of any central bank instrument
has to be justified solely on the basis of the central bank’s narrow price stability objective, and not
on any fiscal consequences thereof.
Borrowing from the theory of monetary regimes, it is the dominance of the central bank mandate
over the objective governing fiscal conduct that differentiates the setting of monetary policy today
from  anything  we  saw  prior  to  monetary  union.  The  ECB  continues  to  have  the  necessary
institutional independence, the financial resources and operational capacity to take all appropriate
measures, if and when needed, to counter upside or downside risks to price stability in a truly
symmetric fashion.
It could be argued that there are multiple channels through which the central bank could take on
tasks and obligations that pertain to the fiscal authority, and some of these channels are both
more  subtle  and  less  apparent  than  outright  financing  of  public  deficits.  Extending  liquidity
support to insolvent banks is a case in point.
But,  even  in  this  admittedly  fuzzier  terrain  that  separates  liquidity  provision  from  solvency
support, the ECB operates in a sound framework that has passed multiple resilience tests in
recent years. In the case of Greece, for instance, the choices of the Governing Council were
another example of strict adherence to this framework. In keeping with Article 123 of the Treaty,
which prohibits the ECB from monetary financing, the Governing Council imposed strict limits on
the use of government securities as collateral for loans that the Greek banks received from the
ECB.
We nevertheless continued to supply the necessary liquidity so as to ensure the functioning of
the Greek banking system and the continuation of lending to businesses and households. This
was in line with the principle by which the Eurosystem may lend to banks which are solvent and
have sufficient collateral. To sum up, the balance we achieved with our interventions during the
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Greek  crisis  was  fully  within  our  mandate;  it  respected  the  political  commitment  to  the  single
currency contained in the Treaty, but at the same time we implemented that commitment within
the limits of our Statute.
The Treaty prohibition of monetary financing has been a key element in preserving the monetary
policy  nature  of  OMTs  and  the  public  sector  purchase  programme  (PSPP).  The  technical
features of OMTs imply that they would only be considered if warranted from a monetary policy
perspective.  Moreover,  the  extra  exposure  to  any  single  country  that  the  Eurosystem  might
acquire as a consequence of OMT activation would be secured by the country’s strict obligations
arising from the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) macroeconomic adjustment programme
to which the country would have to submit as a precondition. It is worth noting that in June 2015
the European Court of Justice ruled that, given the strict modalities for activation, OMTs fall within
the scope of the ECB’s mandate and include sufficient safeguards to avoid monetary financing.
A  number  of  safeguards  apply  to  public  sector  bond  purchases  under  the  PSPP  too.  Such
purchases have a monetary policy purpose which is different from the one that applies to OMTs
and are specifically aimed at bringing inflation back to our medium-term objective in a situation in
which our key interest rates are at levels that can hardly be reduced much further. The modalities
are  exclusively  governed  by  the  primary  objective  of  price  stability  and  are  decided  in  full
independence, irrespective of developments in other policy areas.
The  size  and  duration  of  the  PSPP  are  calculated  to  achieve  progress  towards  the  ECB’s
inflation objective. The effectiveness of the tool is rooted in two important features of the financial
system.  First,  government  bond  yields  are  the  benchmark  indicator  for  pricing  a  large  set  of
private debt instruments. Second, government bond markets are deep and liquid. Interventions in
these markets can initiate a process of portfolio rebalancing with significant secondary effects on
broad  financing  conditions.  Several  safeguards  are  in  place  to  minimise  potential  distortive
effects on market functioning and price formation (such as the issuer limit and the issue share
limit of 33%).
There has been a prominent financial stability dimension in all unconventional measures taken,
but the existing institutional framework ensures that monetary policy is the last line of defence
with respect to preserving financial stability. The establishment of the European banking union, in
particular  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism
(SRM), has taken monetary policy one step further away from financial stability issues. Progress
has  been  made  to  ensure  that  regulatory  capture  and  forbearance  are  minimised  and  that
shareholders bear responsibility and face the consequences of failure. But we are not there yet.
These  mechanisms  need  to  be  complemented  by  a  common  system  of  deposit  protection,
which would further bolster financial stability by reducing the risk of bank runs in crisis times.
Conclusion
To conclude, unconventional policies have been complicated to implement and to communicate.
But they have been effective in enhancing our ability to deliver on our mandate in a medium-term
perspective.  Our  measures  have  been  designed  to  complement  each  other  and  have  proved
adaptable  to  and  effective  against  the  series  of  shocks  which  have  buffeted  the  euro  area
economy.  The  complex  nature  of  unconventional  measures  has  repercussions  for  the
transparency and accountability dimension of central bank independence. But they were a sine
qua  non  for  our  mandate  to  be  respected.  The  challenge  from  the  monetary  policy
consequences of the financial crisis has placed a particularly heavy responsibility on the ECB to
explain how the measures taken fall within the ambit of its price stability mandate.
Non-standard measures have been designed in such a way that they cannot compensate for
failures in other policy areas. The evolving institutional structure of EMU is further contributing to
ensuring that, if at any critical juncture in future the macroeconomy faces risks, monetary policy
will be able to concentrate solely on preserving price stability.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
As described in Barry Eichengreen (1992), Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919–
1939,  Oxford  University  Press,  pp.  29–66,  the  credibility  of  the  pre-World  War  I  gold  standard  rested  on
international cooperation, with Britain at the centre, enjoying considerable leeway in observing the rules of the
game, and France, Germany, and others willing to support sterling’s stability. The United States, at the time an
agricultural exporter and a foreign borrower, with the Federal Reserve System not yet operating, faced more
binding constraints. Seasonal swings in the demand for money, for example, triggered gold flows which could
not be absorbed, thereby causing periods of deflation.
For a critical appraisal, see Charles Goodhart (1999), “Myths about the Lender of Last Resort”, International
Finance, Vol. 2(3).
Barry Eichengreen, op. cit.; Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867–1960, Princeton University Press; and Ben Bernanke (2004), Essays on the Great Depression,
Princeton University Press.
Robert L. Hetzel (2008), The Monetary Policy of the Federal Reserve: A History, Cambridge University Press.
Milton Friedman (1963), Inflation: Causes and Consequences, Asian Publishing House.
Willem Buiter (2016), “Dysfunctional Central Banking; The End of Independent Central Banks or a Return to
‘Narrow  Central  Banking’  –  or  Both?”, Global  Economics  View,  Citi  Research,  21  December;  Otmar  Issing
(2016), “Central Banks – From Overburdening to Decline?”, SAFE White Paper Series, No 42.
Jakob de Haan and Sylvester C.W. Eijffinger (2017), “Central bank independence under threat?”, CEPR Policy
Insight, No 87.
Transparency International EU (2017), Two sides of the same coin – Independence and accountability of the
European Central Bank, transparency.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/TI-EU_ECB_Report_DIGITAL.pdf.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
