Benoît Cœuré: Interview in L'Obs
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
in L'Obs, conducted by Ms Sophie Fay and Mr Pascal Riché on 15 May, and published on 23 May
2017.
 In the United States, the administration wants to reconsider the banking regulations put
in place after the 2008 financial crisis. The United Kingdom is tempted to do the same in
the context of Brexit. In France, Emmanuel Macron also thinks that the steps taken were
excessive. Is this a threat to the stability of the financial system?
Yes, the threat of deregulation exists. In many places there appears to be a temptation to revisit
the financial regulation adopted by the G20 countries, which has been a huge project: we have
strengthened  the  capital  requirements  and  liquidity  of  banks,  limited  their  size,  regulated
potentially dangerous products, such as derivatives, and started to put in order what’s known as
shadow banking, which takes place outside the banking sector.
It comes as no surprise that the financial industry dislikes these new rules. The large banks say
that they hinder lending and increase the cost of capital. But this is not the case in the euro area,
and even less so in France. Banks have significantly strengthened their capital base since 2010
and yet they have never made so many loans at such low rates.
The temptation of a regulatory race to the bottom exists in any industry, but it is even stronger in
finance.  It  took  enormous  political  energy  on  the  part  of  the  Heads  of  State  or  Government,
following  the  financial  crisis,  not  to  give  in  to  it.  But  whenever  this  political  will  weakens,  the
temptation  of  a  race  to  the  bottom  returns.  Such  a  temptation  exists  in  the  United  States,
although for the time being the new administration has not expressed any desire to backtrack on
financial cooperation, either in the G7 or the G20, which is comforting.
Emmanuel  Macron  has  also  said  that  he  wants  to  reconsider  certain  banking  rules,
notably on the required level of own funds.
His comment was born of good intentions: to facilitate the financing of SMEs. But there are other
instruments available for that purpose. It would be useful if, once a year, the ministers of finance
and  economic  affairs  of  the  EU  were  to  examine  the  impact  of  regulation  on  the  financing  of
businesses.  But  that  must  not  be  a  pretext  for  dismantling  what  has  been  achieved  at
international level.
Don’t technocrats have too much power now in relation to these issues?
The  agreements  reached  in  the  Basel  Committee,  which  brings  together  central  banks  and
supervisory authorities, have to be transposed into national law. As such, they are not binding.
Politicians can always take back control. They are the ones who draw up and adopt the banking
regulations.  Should  international  technocratic  fora  be  more  transparent?  Yes,  probably.  Mario
Draghi has agreed to keep the European Parliament better informed about ongoing discussions.
What needs to be done in order to limit the porous boundaries between the banking
sector and the world of politics?
In Europe, the answer is simple: the banking union should be taken seriously. The essence of the
project is to “denationalise” supervision of large banks by entrusting it to the ECB, in order to
harmonise supervisory methods and create distance between the supervisor and the supervised
entity. Before the banking union, regulation and supervision of banks in each country was a kind
of ecosystem, a co-production between the banks, the government and the banking supervisor.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
And we saw the results: some banks took excessive risks in the markets, while others, which
were  no  longer  viable,  continued  without  sufficient  supervision  to  finance  projects  which  no
longer made economic sense. Taxpayers had to clean up the mess. The banking union reduces
the sociological proximity between banks and the administrative and political powers.
As regards “sociological proximity”, the new French President is a former banker. Will
the ECB will be more vigilant with regard to him?
One  should  avoid  accusations.  Georges  Pompidou  and  Henri  Emmanuelli  also  worked  for
Rothschild! The French political authorities were in the vanguard of the banking union: it is an
achievement  and  it  was  not  self-evident  in  France.  What  matters  today  is  continuing  in  that
direction.
Is financial deregulation a factor in the rise of inequality, as some are saying?
Financial  regulation  has  its  rightful  place  within  a  framework  for  combating  inequality. As  the
economists  Philippe  Aghion  and  Angus  Deaton  have  said,  combating  inequality  involves
combating rent-seeking. And yet the big forces of change today, globalisation and technological
progress, create rents. Tackling these is not easy, because there are “good” and “bad” rents. If
we want innovation to flourish, rent-seeking has to be accepted, at least temporarily.
Rent-seeking that obtains patents, for instance…
Yes. In order to encourage people to innovate they need to be able to enjoy the fruits of their
innovation. But if rents are excessive, a minority appropriates the benefits of globalisation and
technological  progress.  Finance  is  necessary  to  fund  innovation,  but  it  may  itself  become  an
excessive source of rent-seeking.
How?
Large financial institutions naturally tend to grow in size in order to exploit economies of scale,
diversify,  and  reduce  their  financing  costs.  If  they  are  too  large,  that  creates  a  problem  of
competition and this creates rents. It also encourages a phenomenon specific to finance: being
“too big to fail”. A large financial institution may take unreasonable risks because it knows that the
public authorities will have no choice but to rescue it if something goes wrong… That race for
size must be avoided by way of regulation.
Another  phenomenon  specific  to  finance  is  rents  being  built  up  by  individuals. A  proportion  of
financial industry employees are remunerated at unreasonable levels when measured against
their  value  to  society,  as  Thomas  Philippon  and  Ariell  Reshef  have  clearly  shown.  This
misappropriation  is  socially  unjust  and  must  be  regulated.  Hence  the  EU  legislation  aimed  at
regulating the distribution of bonuses. Some countries, such as the United Kingdom, have gone
further in making senior bank managers criminally liable in the event of excessive risk-taking or
lack of control. It is a political choice. France also could do it.
All these rules reduce the risk of financial crises, which tend to deepen inequality. Too often in the
past, taxpayers have borne the cost of bank recapitalisation post-crisis. And banking crises, by
causing economic activity and employment to fall, hit the most vulnerable in our societies the
hardest. Europe is endeavouring, with a set of new rules, to avoid the costs of these crises being
borne by taxpayers, by calling on bank shareholders and creditors.
What is Europe doing otherwise to combat inequality?
To  reduce  inequality,  redistribution  instruments  are  needed,  i.e.  taxes  and  transfers.  Only  a
legitimate, elected parliament can decide to tax some people to give to others. At global level,
such a legislature obviously does not exist. At European level, it does. This is an extraordinary
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
opportunity! It should be used effectively.
The paradox of globalisation is that the greater the need for redistribution instruments, the more
they  are  called  into  question.  For  example,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult  to  tax  large
companies, which are now operating on a global scale. The European Commission’s action in
relation  to Apple  in  Ireland  is  a  good  example  of  what  needs  to  be  done  to  regain  control  of
globalisation. And its plan to harmonise the corporate tax base is a move in the same direction.
The planets finally seem to be aligned in a way that permits the functioning of the euro
area to be reformed. What do you think?
A window of opportunity is opening. It must be seized. In electing Emmanuel Macron, the people
of France have confirmed their attachment to the single currency. This gives the new president a
strong mandate but also a responsibility to bring forward proposals to reform the euro area. For
the ECB, this is good news.
In  the  first  round,  half  of  the  votes  went  to  candidates  who  were  very  critical  of  the
euro...
This shows just how much the reform of the euro area is needed! The ECB is mindful of this
every day, having to ensure the stability of a single currency with 19 different governments which
are often pulling in different directions and labouring to manage and resolve crises. That lack of
efficiency takes a toll on economic activity and employment.
The euro brought stability during the financial crisis. The ECB’s monetary policy is supporting the
economic recovery. The euro area has created around five million jobs since mid-2013. But there
is still a major, existential problem of lack of trust in Europe and lack of trust between Europeans,
as shown for example by cultural prejudices between the north and the south.
Is this only a problem of trust? Isn’t there also a mechanical problem, a design defect,
which  makes  the  euro  a  cause  of  divergence,  rather  than  convergence,  between
Germany and the other countries?
It is not because of the euro that the unemployment rate is currently 4% in Germany and 10% in
France. It’s because the economic policy responses before and after the outbreak of the crisis
were very different in the two countries. Admittedly, at European level, there has sometimes been
a lack of coordination; solidarity instruments need to be improved. But there has also been a lack
of commitment to reform in some countries.
Is  Germany  ready  to  accept  more  instruments  of  “solidarity”:  a  European  budget,
Eurobonds, etc.?
There is a German prejudice – that Germany pays for the rest of Europe. This is largely untrue.
Germany contributes to the European rescue plans in accordance with its economic weight, as
do  France  and  Italy.  There  are  symmetrical  prejudices  in  France;  for  example,  the  idea  that
unemployment in France can be explained by the euro being undervalued for German industry
and overvalued for French factories. In fact, if unemployment is higher in France it is because the
labour market is performing less well. We must overcome these prejudices, which fuel populism.
Everyone needs to do their bit.
This is something that Emmanuel Macron has understood very well. France is expected to make
proposals about reforming the euro area. But to be credible, it must itself undertake the reforms
necessary to bring the French unemployment rate closer to the best performers within the EU.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
