Sabine  Lautenschläger:  The  test  of  progress  –  Europe,  the  euro
and the future
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  at  the
Übersee-Club Hamburg, Hamburg, 24 January 2017.
 “The eurosceptic genie is out of bottle and won’t be put back”, said Nigel Farage on 23 June
2016, while the British were still voting on whether they wanted to remain part of a united Europe.
The majority didn’t want to, as we now know.
But the eurosceptic genie is not only haunting the people of Britain. After the Second World War,
Europe represented the future for many people; today, a large number are having doubts about
Europe’s future.
In many countries, parties critical of a united Europe are in the ascendant. Think of the Front
National in France, the Freedom Party in the Netherlands, the Five Star Movement in Italy and the
Alternative for Germany party.
Let  me  say  straightaway:  for  me,  Europe  is  the  future:  politically,  because  Europa  stands  for
peace and freedom; economically, because Europe offers, with its common market, freedom of
movement of persons, goods, capital and payments, and the freedom to provide services. These
freedoms have enabled Europe to grow together, boosted the economy and brought prosperity to
us all.
The same applies to the euro. The euro is an important part of Europe’s integration and it offers
significant  economic  advantages.  As  the  currency  of  the  common  market,  it  stimulates
competition and makes trading and investing easier right across Europe. At the same time, it is
an international currency and thus gives Europeans greater political influence on the international
stage.
Despite all these things, the euro is now mainly associated with the crisis. And yes, the euro area
has been through a severe crisis. Growth has slumped, prosperity has been wiped out and many
people are worried about their future livelihoods, especially, but not only, in the crisis countries.
But the euro area has coped with the crisis and is recovering. Now there are some people saying
that this recovery won’t last as it is only being driven by a loose monetary policy.
It’s true that the ECB played a key role in fighting the crisis. It’s also true that the ECB’s monetary
policy is helping the economy to recover. And it’s true that monetary policy by itself is not enough
to strengthen the euro area economy in a sustainable way and create prosperity for all.
Let’s take a closer look at these things.
The ECB’s monetary policy
The ECB did a great deal to help combat the crisis, starting with the banking turmoil in 2008, the
sovereign debt crisis from 2010 onwards and later the prolonged low inflation.
In doing so, it took a number of measures. Some of them form part of conventional monetary
policy, others are new or, at least for the euro area, unusual.
Thus, when inflation remains too low for a long time it’s a conventional measure for a central
bank to lower interest rates. The idea behind this is as follows: the lower the interest rates are,
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the more attractive it is for companies to invest and for people to consume. Demand goes up, as
do prices.
Yet this conventional monetary policy virtually became a new instrument in June 2014. For the
ECB cut the deposit rate for banks to below zero – the zero lower bound was breached. Since
then, banks have had to pay interest on their deposits at the ECB.
Do you find it strange to pay someone in order to lend money to them? It is at the very least
unusual, but there is a reason for it in this case. The idea is to encourage a bank to lend its
money elsewhere – for example, to businesses. That is one effect of negative rates.
And there is a second effect – aimed at investors in the financial markets. It was made clear to
them that short-term interest rates could fall below zero. Mindful of this, investors adjusted their
interest  rate  expectations  downwards; 
fallen.  This  has
strengthened the desired effect on investment and consumption.
interest  rates  have 
long-term 
The low interest rates are now being severely criticised, particularly in Germany. It’s claimed that
the ECB is penalising savers, destroying the banks’ business models and ultimately doing more
harm than good.
My point of view in this debate has always been that low interest rates are justified.
Interest  rate  cuts  are  the  “normal”,  the  called-for,  monetary  policy  measure  of  a  central  bank
when inflation is well below the objective.
This is all the more the case when inflation remains low, when inflation expectations show no
signs  of  improvement,  when  growth  is  very  weak  and  unemployment  rising.  In  such
circumstances every other central bank would have cut interest rates.
That  I  am  more  critical  of  some  non-standard  monetary  policy  instruments,  such  as  the
purchase of government bonds, is well known.
However,  the  world  keeps  on  turning  and  the  debate  moves  on.  The  situation  seems  to  be
improving in the euro area. Consumer confidence in December was at its highest for 18 months.
Unemployment is at a seven-year low. A broad-based recovery is under way – across countries
and sectors.
At the same time, inflation in the euro area rose significantly – from 0.6% in November to 1.1% in
December. In Germany inflation even stood at 1.7% in December.
And unsurprisingly, some are calling for the ECB to put a quick end to its loose monetary policy.
In terms of the desired level of inflation, it’s been a long, cold winter. We are now seeing the first
ray of sunshine – that’s good. Is this ray already having a warming effect and does it herald the
spring? Is inflation really back? Perhaps one or two more rays of sunshine are needed; they’ll
bring a bit more warmth.
Higher inflation is currently being driven mainly by energy prices and they could well have only a
temporary effect. What’s more important here is underlying inflation, from which the very volatile
energy and food prices are excluded.
And  underlying  inflation  in  December  was  just  0.9%,  after  0.8%  in  November.  This  rise  was
largely due to the fact that package holidays became more expensive in Germany. However, this
does not tell us much as the prices of package holidays are always fluctuating.
Does this mean we still have to wait a long time before exiting accommodative monetary policy?
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  my  view  it  doesn’t  mean  waiting  until  the  last  doubt  about  the  return  of  inflation  has  been
dispelled. It is rather a matter of not risking a reaction to a temporary inflation spike – which then
might lead to longer, exceptional monetary policy measures.
All preconditions for a stable rise in inflation exist. I am thus optimistic that we can soon turn to
the question of an exit. That’s why we need to be ready to act when the time comes.
For loose monetary policy is like a strong medicine for someone who’s very sick. It works, no
doubt, but it also has side effects – and some of the unconventional measures have stronger
side effects than others. And while the intended benefits of these measures wear off over time,
the side effects and risks increase.
That’s why it’s important to stop taking the medicine as soon as possible, but not too early either.
Otherwise, we risk having a relapse.
And let me reassure you that, to stick with the metaphor, I am an optimistic doctor who believes
in self-healing powers and gladly stops prescribing the medicine sooner rather than later.
And, above all, as with many medicines, you shouldn’t abruptly stop loose monetary policy, but
slowly cut the dose – such a policy has to be reduced gradually.
In any case, loose monetary policy can help put a patient back on her feet, but by itself it can’t
ensure  that  she’ll  go  on  long  walks  again.  Monetary  policy  cannot  create  sustainable  growth.
Other things are necessary. Sound economic structures form the basis for long-lasting growth;
reforms are the right therapy.
Structural reforms for more growth
We  need  more  reforms  in  the  euro  area. And  now  is  the  best  time  –  in  a  nascent  recovery
reforms are easier to carry out than in the midst of a crisis.
And they pay off, as many examples have shown. Consider Ireland and Spain: these countries
have reformed their economy and become more competitive; their economies have grown and
unemployment has fallen.
But  in  other  euro  area  countries,  unemployment  remains  very  high,  especially  among  young
people. Labour markets are often too rigid to respond flexibly to change – regardless of whether
the change was triggered by a crisis or shifts in technology. The same applies to goods markets
and  the  general  business  environment  –  here  too,  strict  rules  or  excessive  red  tape  reduce
flexibility.
All of this is important for the countries in crisis. But the problem goes beyond those countries.
Take productivity growth. Put simply, productivity measures how much a worker can produce in
a given period of time. When productivity rises it means that each worker produces more than
before.
A good 20 years ago productivity in the euro area was growing steadily – in 1995 productivity
growth was around 2% per year, as in the rest of the world.
Today,  however,  we  are  a  long  way  behind.  Productivity  in  the  euro  area  is  0.5%.  The  global
average  is  still  just  under  2%,  the  emerging  countries  over  3%,  the  United  States  and  other
industrialised countries just under 1%.
This in itself is a problem. But there’s another factor: an ageing society. In future, a shrinking
number of young people will be working for an increasing number of old people. So it’s all the
more important that productivity grows. And that makes reforms necessary.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Often productivity improves because of innovations. But for that, it’s vital that innovations spread.
This occurs, for instance, through competition: new businesses, which can produce better and
at  lower  cost  thanks  to  innovative  methods,  squeeze  out  older  companies.  The  economist
Joseph Schumpeter called this “creative destruction”.
For  that  to  happen,  the  environment  has  to  be  right.  In  many  countries,  for  instance,
entrepreneurs still have to overcome major bureaucratic obstacles simply to set up a business.
Once they have done that, they need capital and labour in order to grow. That brings us back
again to flexible markets, which can react to new and changing demand.
And finally, businesses need markets on which they can sell their products. In that context, it is
important  to  complete  the  common  European  market.  That  applies  particularly  to  the  digital
market, which is set to become even more important in the future.
Growth and prosperity
Ladies and gentlemen, we need reforms for the economy in the euro area to grow sustainably.
Hardly anyone questions that.
But is that the end of the debate? Will people regain confidence in Europe and in the euro when
the economy is growing again? I think growth plays an important role, but we also have to look
beyond that.
Theodore  Roosevelt  said:  “The  test  of  our  progress  is  not  whether  we  add  more  to  the
abundance of those who have much, it is whether we provide enough for those who have little”.
Translated into the language of economics, it means: we must not only pay attention to growth
but also to the distribution of the wealth it generates.
Compared with other regions, income and assets in western Europe have traditionally tended to
be quite evenly distributed. But as in many other countries, inequality is rising – and has been for
decades.
There are many reasons for this, ranging from rising unemployment, a larger number of single
parents, reduced spending on education through to steady de-industrialisation.
Rising  inequality  is  a  complex  phenomenon.  Some  people  therefore  seek  to  explain  it  in
simplistic terms by referring, for instance, to globalisation or European integration.
That’s how we then have a link between the distribution of wealth and criticism of Europe, as I
mentioned at the start my speech. And indeed, studies are showing that there is a relationship:
increasing inequality provides fertile ground for euroscepticism.
And  inequality  is  not  a  problem  that  only  affects  Europe.  The  World  Economic  Forum  in  its
current “Global Risks Report” says that inequality is one of the key risks to the global economy.
These are all reasons for not focusing solely on growth in our deliberations. Distribution of its
benefits must always be borne in mind as well. That concerns on the one hand national welfare
systems.
On the other hand, it also concerns equal opportunities: how can people be put in a position to
benefit from technological progress, globalisation or European integration?
And there are many who say that the winners and losers of such trends differ in one respect
particularly: in terms of their education.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  well-educated  benefit  from  international  trade,  open  borders  and  new  technological
opportunities. Education is key if we want to create equal opportunities. We have to take action
here if we are to pass Theodore Roosevelt’s “test of progress”.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, Europe is a target of criticism – no question about that. In my talk I have
concentrated on economic issues and concluded that:
First, monetary policy must get ready for better times.
Second, reforms are necessary to ensure our well-being – and now is the best time for this.
Third, prosperity must be of benefit to all – equal opportunities are crucial.
And  finally:  we  need  a  united  Europe;  we  need  free  trade  and  a  common  currency. As
Barack Obama said: “A nation ringed by walls would only imprison itself”.
But the unity of Europe is of course much more than just a common market and a common
currency. And prosperity is much more than just material wealth.
Europe also means common values.
After the Second World War, it was all about ensuring peace. It was about creating a free and
open society which steadily builds on the bedrock of democracy.
But  here  too,  the  advantages  of  a  united  Europe  must  benefit  everyone.  Europe  has  to  be  a
home  where  its  citizens  can  feel  just  as  European  as  they  feel  German  or  French. A  home
where everyone can move freely and benefit from the opportunities that arise.
This  is  a  major  challenge  for  politicians,  but  I  am  convinced  that  they  can  master  it.  I  would
therefore like to end by paraphrasing another former US President.
Bill Clinton said something about the United States which I will adapt to our continent: “There’s
nothing wrong with Europe that cannot be cured by what is right with Europe”.
1
Thank you very much for your attention.
1
Some minor editorial changes were made to align the English version to the German version.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
