Guy Debelle: The FX Global Code of Conduct – final phase
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the FX Week
(Australia) 2017 Conference, Sydney, 28 March 2017.
 Today I am going to talk about the FX Global Code. The Code is on track to be released in two
months’ time on 25 May. This is a culmination of two years’ effort, involving considerable input
from a sizeable number of foreign exchange market participants, both public and private. Today I
will reiterate the motivation for the work we have been doing on the Code, why you all should be
interested in it, and then update you on where we are at with the process and outline the way
forward.
1
As  I  hope  most  of  you  know,  Phase  1  of  the  Code  was  launched  in  May  last  year  in  New
York.  The Code is pretty easy to find. It is available via the Bank for International Settlements
(BIS) website or on the website of a number of foreign exchange committees (FXCs), including
the Australian Foreign Exchange Committee (AFXC) website.  The text of the complete Code will
be available in the same places from 25 May, following its public release.
2
Why is the work going on? As I have stated before, the foreign exchange (FX) industry has been
suffering  from  a  lack  of  trust  in  its  functioning.  This  lack  of  trust  is  evident  both  between
participants in the market and, at least as importantly, between the public and the market. The
market needs to move toward a more favourable and desirable location, and allow participants to
have much greater confidence that the market is functioning appropriately.
A well-functioning FX market is very much in the interest of all market participants. This clearly
includes central banks, both in their own role as market participants but also as the exchange
rate is an important channel of monetary policy transmission. In a globalised world, the foreign
exchange market is one of the most vital parts of the financial plumbing.
The Code sets out global principles of good practice in the FX market to provide a common set
of guidance to the market, including in areas where there is a degree of uncertainty about what
sort of practices are acceptable, and what are not. This should help to restore confidence and
promote the effective functioning of the wholesale FX market.
To that end, one of the guiding principles underpinning our work is that the Code should promote
a robust, fair, liquid, open and transparent market. A diverse set of buyers and sellers, supported
by  resilient  infrastructure,  should  be  able  to  confidently  and  effectively  transact  at  competitive
prices  that  reflect  available  market  information  and  in  a  manner  that  conforms  to  acceptable
standards of behaviour.
The work to develop the Code commenced two years ago, in May 2015, when the BIS Governors
commissioned a working group of the Markets Committee of the BIS (which I chaired until early
January  this  year)  to  facilitate  the  establishment  of  a  single  global  code  of  conduct  for  the
wholesale FX market and to come up with mechanisms to promote greater adherence to the
Code.  Our group comprises representatives of the central banks of all the major FX centres. My
colleague Matt Boge at the RBA has contributed enormous time and effort to the project.
3
This work is also very much a public sector–private sector partnership. We have been ably and
vigorously supported in this work by a group of market participants, chaired by David Puth, CEO
of  CLS.  David’s  group  contains  people  from  all  around  the  world  on  the  buy  side,  including
corporates and asset managers, and the sell side, along with trading platforms, ECNs and non-
bank participants, drawing from the various FXCs and beyond. Hugh Killen from Westpac has
been  the  representative  from  Australia  on  David’s  group.  All  parts  of  the  market  have  been
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
involved in the drafting of the Code to make sure all perspectives are heard and appropriately
reflected.
There are two important points worth highlighting: first, it’s a single code for the whole industry
and second, it’s a global code.
On the first point, the Code is supplanting the existing codes that have been present in the FX
market, including the ACI model code that is used in Australia. The ACI has recently confirmed its
intention to utilise the FX Global Code and will make it a prerequisite for members to commit to
4
adherence to the FX Global Code.
Importantly, the Code covers all of the wholesale FX industry. This is not a code for just the sell
side. It is there for the sell side, the buy side, non-bank participants and the platforms; its breadth
is both across the globe and across the whole structure of the industry.
Hence  the  Code  is  relevant  for  all  of  you  here  at  this  conference.  The  way  it  is  relevant  will
depend  on  your  engagement  with  the  market.  On  the  buy  side  it  will  also  help  to  give  you
guidance as to what you can reasonably expect from your counterparty as you transact your FX
business. What this means in practice is that the steps different market participants take to align
their activities with the principles of the Code will necessarily reflect the size, complexity, type
and extent of their engagement with the FX market.
As I mentioned earlier, the first phase of the Code was released in May 2016. It covered areas
such as ethics, information sharing, aspects of execution and confirmation and settlement. The
second  phase  covers  further  aspects  of  execution  including  e-trading  and  platforms,  prime
brokerage, as well as governance, and risk management and compliance.
We have provided market participants with a number of opportunities to comment on the Code,
in addition to receiving the direct input of the Market Participants Group led by David Puth. Over
the  past  few  months,  drafts  of  the  full  text  of  the  Code  have  been  distributed  to  market
participants for their review, principally through the various FXCs, but also through other industry
associations  to  ensure  all  perspectives  are  appropriately  reflected  in  the  Code.  Through  this
process, quite a few thousand comments were received.
In my view, the text of the Code provides the best and most appropriate guidance we could give,
given  the  sometimes  wide  range  of  feedback  received,  particularly  on  those  small  number  of
issues that are most controversial in the market. The most obvious example of this is ‘last look’.
This issue has generated considerable passionate discussion. I would expect that discussion to
continue after the release of the Code in May and that the Code might evolve as a function of that
discussion. I would like to make the point that if market participants think it would be preferable
for the Code to have gone further, they are welcome to go down that path in their operations. On
the  other  hand,  it  would  not  be  desirable  for  the  converse  to  occur,  namely  for  market
participants practices to fall short of the principles described in the Code.
That said, I think it is a good outcome of the process that we were able to distil the points of
contention down to a small number of (not insignificant) issues. Outside of a small number of
contentious areas, the feedback was reflective of a widely held consensus. Market participants
have recognised the Code’s aim of helping move the FX market to a better place.
I will illustrate that with a couple of the areas that were addressed in the first phase of the Code,
which is already in the public domain. One example of this is around information sharing, where
many market participants highlighted that they are unsure what information can be conveyed to
counterparties  and  other  market  participants.  While  it  is  clear  (or  at  least  should  be)  that
disclosing  the  details  of  a  client’s  order  book  to  a  counterparty  is  not  acceptable,  market
participants have noted that there is much less clarity around what level of aggregation, say, is
necessary in order to convey market colour appropriately.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  a  result,  it  appears  some  market  participants  are  being  very  conservative  in  sharing
information,  which  can  have  implications  for  the  effective  functioning  of  the  market.  This  is
notwithstanding the guidance provided in this area in the Global Preamble put out by the global
FXCs, in March 2015.  The Global Code takes the material in the Global Preamble and fleshes it
out a bit more, including with some examples of what is, and isn’t, appropriate communication,
and why.
5
Similarly,  there  have  been  diverse  opinions  around  what  is  appropriate  behaviour  in  terms  of
order handling. There have been some very public instances of inappropriate behaviour around
order handling that have come to light in recent years. The market is seeking greater guidance as
to what principles should be followed, including the different standards that may apply depending
on whether an intermediary is functioning as principal or agent.
This is one area that was not adequately covered in the pre-existing codes that the various FXCs
had endorsed for the FX market. It is an area where we have provided the sought-after guidance.
But  we  are  not  writing  a  procedures  manual  for  order  handling.  Rather  we  are  articulating
principles that need to be taken into account. Individual firms may then take these principles and
reflect them in their own procedures manual. Our aim in articulating these principles is to provide
market participants with the framework in which to think about how they handle stop-loss orders.
The  emphasis  here  is  very  much  on  the  word  ‘think’.  The  Global  Code  will  not  provide  the
answers to all your questions, but it should help you ask the right questions.
Adherence to the Code
Alongside drafting the Code, we have also been devoting considerable time and effort to thinking
about how to ensure widespread adoption of the Code by market participants. Clearly, that has
been an issue with the various existing codes that have been in place in a number of markets
over many years. It is evident that they were ignored on occasion, wilfully or otherwise.
One of our central aims in drafting the Code is for it to be principles-based rather than rules-
based. There are a number of reasons why this is so but, for me, an important reason is that the
more prescriptive the Code is, the easier it is to get around. Rules are easier to arbitrage than
principles. Moreover, the more prescriptive and the more precise the code, the less people will
think about what they are doing. If it’s principles-based and less prescriptive then, as I just said,
market  participants  will  have  to think  about  whether  their  actions  are  consistent  with  the
principles of the Code.
So, we have worked with the industry to produce a principles-based code rather than a set of
prescriptive  regulatory  standards.  It  will  not  impose  legal  or  regulatory  obligations  on  market
participants, nor will it supplant existing regulatory standards or expectations. But we do expect
the principles in the Code to be understood and adopted across the entire FX market.
Our approach to adherence has a number of dimensions. We laid out our overall approach to
6
 We will provide a more comprehensive
adherence to the Code in New York in May last year.
description of the suite of mechanisms to support adherence alongside the release of the Code
in May.
One  critical  dimension  is  market-based  adherence  mechanisms.  An  important  element  of
discipline should come from the market itself and we are working closely with market participants
on this. The adherence to a voluntary code will only come about if firms judge it to be in their
interest and take the practical steps to ensure the code is embedded in their practices. Such
practical  steps  would  include  training  their  staff  and  putting  in  appropriate  policies  and
procedures.
We  have  provided  a  draft  Statement  of  Commitment  for  firms  to  publicly  demonstrate  their
adherence to the Code. One reason for a public demonstration is that firms are more likely to
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
adhere to the Code if they believe that their peers are doing so too. That is, an important source
of pressure to adhere  should  come  from  other  market  participants.  Without  blaming  them  for
what occurred, more scrutiny from counterparties about how their FX transactions were being
executed  may  have  helped  to  reduce  the  incidence  and  severity  of  the  market  abuses  that
occurred  in  the  past.  One  reason  for  this  lack  of  scrutiny  was  that  FX  transactions  were
sometimes regarded as ancillary to the core business, notwithstanding their potential impact on
returns. This attitude seems to be in decline, though it still persists.
Ultimately  the  success  of  the  Code  in  promoting  integrity  and  restoring  confidence  in  the
wholesale FX market lies in the hands of its participants.
Another aspect of market-based adherence comes through the FXCs. The Global FXCs issued a
joint statement of support at the launch of the Code in New York as well as stating their intention
to  make  adherence  to  the  Code  a  likely  requirement  of  FXC  membership.   In  Australia,  a
commitment  to  adhere  to  the  Code  will  be  a  requirement  for  membership  of  the AFXC.  That
would ensure the Code is embedded at the core of the FX market, but it is also important that it
extends beyond that, and that there is, at the very least, an awareness of it across all market
participants.
7
A second dimension of adherence is that the BIS central banks have signalled their commitment
by  announcing  that  they  themselves  will  follow  the  Code,  and  that  they  expect  that  their
counterparties will do so too.  To that end, the RBA will no longer transact in the FX market with
those that don’t commit to adhere to the Code.
8
A third dimension of adherence is that we are talking to regulators in our various jurisdictions as
to  how  they  might  use  the  Code  in  monitoring  market  conduct.  In  Australia,  the  securities
regulator, ASIC,  is  very  supportive  of  the  development  of  the  Code  and  is  considering  how  it
might utilise the Code in its market surveillance. In its recent enforceable undertakings against
some  local  market  participants,  ASIC  has  referred  explicitly  to  the  Code.  ASIC  ‘encourages
market participants to adhere to high standards of market practice, including those set out in the
Global Code’.  In the UK, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) is considering how they might
incorporate the Code in the Senior Managers Regime there.
9
Given that we are only providing the full text of the Code to the market in May, there will be a
period of time for market participants to adjust their practices where necessary to be in line with
the principles in the Code. Hopefully not much time should be required to do this. This period of
time might potentially be as short as six months, but no more than twelve months for the vast
majority  of  market  participants.  How  much  effort  this  might  require  will  in  part  depend  on  the
nature and extent of your engagement with the FX market. In drafting the Code, we have always
kept the principle of proportionality at front of mind.
Conclusion
We are on track to complete the Code so that it will be released in London in May. At the end of
that process, for the Code to be effective and for it to achieve what we want it to achieve, it will
need to be accepted and endorsed across the full spectrum of market participants. I ask you all
as participants in the foreign exchange market to familiarise yourself with the principles of the
Code and verify that your operations in the market align with them.
That said, the process does not really end, because as the foreign exchange market continues to
evolve, the Code will need to evolve with it.
The work to date has reflected a very constructive and cooperative effort between the central
banks and market participants. I would particularly like to acknowledge the enormous time and
energy contributed by David Puth and the Market Participants Group as well as the team of my
fellow  central  bankers. All  of  us  recognise  the  need  to  restore  the  public’s  faith  in  the  foreign
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
exchange market and the value of the Global Code in assisting that process and also in helping
improve market functioning and confidence in the market.
Let me finish with three things to take away with you:
Read the FX Global Code when it is released on 25 May.
Adapt your business where appropriate to conform to the principles of the Global Code.
Ask your FX counterparties whether they are committed to the principles of the Global Code.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
See <www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/gc_may16.pdf>.
See <afxc.rba.gov.au/>.
See <www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm>.
See <acifma.com/news-detail?page=1%2C0>.
See <www.rba.gov.au/afxc/about-us/pdf/global-preamble.pdf>.
See <www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/am_may16.pdf>. See also Salmon C (2016), ‘Rebuilding Trust through the “FX
Global Code’”: Reasons for optimism’, Speech given at the ACI UK Square Mile Debate, London, 21 September,
available at <www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech924.pdf>; and Potter S
(2016),  ‘The  Role  of  Best  Practices  in  Supporting  Market  Integrity  and  Effectiveness’,  available  at
<www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2016/pot160907>, Remarks at the 2016 Primary Dealers Meeting,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 7 September.
See <afxc.rba.gov.au/news/afxc-26052016.html>.
See <www.bis.org/press/p160526a.htm>.
See  <www.asic.gov.au/about-asic/media-centre/find-a-media-release/2017-releases/17–065mr-asic-accepts-
enforceable-undertakings-from-westpac-and-anz-to-address-inadequacies-within-their-wholesale-fx-
businesses/>.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
