Southern Methodist University 
Mission Foods Texas-México Center 1st Annual Event 
Thursday April 6th, 2017  
 “US-México trade relationship in the age of NAFTA” 
Remarks by Agustín Carstens 
Governor, Banco de México 
 1.  Introduction 
I would like to start by thanking Mission Foods Texas-México Center at SMU 
for having invited me as a keynote speaker at this First Annual Texas-México 
Conference. It is a real honor and privilege for me. This event provides a timely 
opportunity to discuss the significance and benefits that efforts for regional 
integration have had for México and the United States. 
In my remarks tonight I will pay special attention to providing an overview 
of the benefits that NAFTA and trade in general have brought to the region. In 
particular,  I  will  argue  that  NAFTA  has  allowed  member  countries  to  boost 
growth and to attain important productivity and efficiency gains that have led 
to welfare improvements for both producers and consumers across the whole 
region. Furthermore, to the extent that we live in a  very competitive global 
economy, NAFTA has meant that the North American region is better prepared 
to compete with the rest of the world. 
This is important, because recently NAFTA has fallen out of favor among 
notable sectors of the US population. NAFTA is twenty three years old, and as 
such, it safely can be said that it needs some fine-tuning. In particular, it is key 
 1 
to  bring  it  up  to  date  to  incorporate  progress  and  developments  that  have 
taken place in all the member countries since its signing. But such needed, and 
even desired, adjustments should not threaten the essence, nor the existence, 
of the agreement. I consider NAFTA – and I say this with full conviction –as one 
of  the  main  milestones  in  the  effort  of  bringing  México  and  the  US  closer 
together, for our mutual benefit. 
It is worth recalling that México had sequential financial and fiscal crises in 
the 70s, 80s and the first years of the 90s, with severe consequences for the 
wellbeing of the population. Therefore México realized that if it wanted to be 
considered as a trustworthy and reliable partner in the agreement, it needed 
to  bring  its  house  in  order,  and  persevere  in  transforming  the  Mexican 
economy into a resilient, dynamic one. To achieve this, México has enacted 
several  reforms  that  seek  to  strengthen  its  macroeconomic  framework  and 
improve its microeconomic structure. These efforts should leave no doubt that 
México is fully committed to take all the necessary steps to make the economic 
integration within the region a lasting success. So before delving deeper into 
the benefits that NAFTA has produced, let me highlight some of these reforms 
that México has implemented through the years. 
 2.  México as a trusted partner 
México has developed a  solid macroeconomic framework over the years 
through a prolonged effort of reform that has been key to cope with the many 
challenges  that  the  international  environment  has  posed.  These  measures 
have  contributed  to  the  macroeconomic  stability  that  México  has  enjoyed 
during the last years.  
 2 
In terms of the monetary policy framework, since 1994 Banco de México 
has been autonomous and, by law, it is mandated to keep a low and stable 
inflation.  In  2001  we  adopted  an  inflation  targeting  scheme  to  conduct  our 
monetary policy. Indeed, a credible commitment by the Central Bank to attain 
its  inflation  target,  along  with  an  absence  of  fiscal  dominance,  has  brought 
about a significant reduction of the level, volatility and persistence of inflation; 
the  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations,  and  a  lower  exchange-rate  pass 
through  onto  prices.  This  has  helped  to  keep  inflation  and  its  expectations 
well-behaved, despite the large and persistent depreciation that the peso has 
registered in the past couple of years. Even though there has recently been a 
noticeable  increase  in  inflation  as  a  result  of  the  cumulative  effect  of  the 
depreciation  of  the  peso  and  the  liberalization  of  gasoline  prices,  Banco  de 
México has taken the appropriate steps to keep inflation expectations well-
anchored  and  to  induce  a  gradual  convergence  back  to  our  permanent 
inflation target.  
The fully flexible exchange rate regime that México has followed since the 
90s has been a key element of our macroeconomic policy framework, given 
that  the  exchange  rate  has  worked  as  an  efficient  shock  absorber  for  the 
Mexican  economy.  As  a  result,  the  room  to  maneuver  and  the  flexibility  of 
monetary policy to counteract macroeconomic shocks has also increased. 
Moreover, México has also strengthened the regulation and supervision of 
the  domestic  financial  system.  In  particular,  all  our  financial  institutions 
already comply with Basel III guidelines. 
 3 
There have also been relevant changes in fiscal policy. In particular, during 
the last decade México has improved its public finances along two fronts: first, 
by strengthening the Fiscal Responsibility Law, and second, fiscal reforms that 
have  allowed  the  Federal  Government  to  increase  its  revenue  from  tax 
sources, reducing the dependency on oil revenues. The important progress in 
the  country´s  fiscal  framework  has  allowed  for  a  better  implementation  of 
macroeconomic policy and has reduced the risks associated with volatile and 
uncertain sources of revenue.  
While macroeconomic stability is a necessary condition for accelerated and 
sustainable  growth, 
it 
is  not  sufficient. 
In  particular,  the  underlying 
microeconomic structure of the economy also matters, since, to a large extent, 
it  determines  how  productive  and  efficient  a  country  is.  Hence,  besides 
working towards achieving a better macroeconomic management, for a long 
time México has also pursued policies aimed at reforming the structure of the 
economy. As part of this agenda, during the past few years México has enacted 
a series of structural reforms whose aim is to improve human capital, enhance 
infrastructure, boost competition in domestic input and products markets, and 
strengthen institutions. Preeminent among these are reforms addressing the 
labor market, appropriate anti-trust legislation, education, and the financial, 
telecommunications,  oil  and  electricity  sectors.  Many  of  these  reforms  are 
now  being 
implemented  and  are  expected 
to 
improve  México´s 
competitiveness and productivity, since many of them deal with sectors that 
provide inputs of generalized use. They are also expected to provide additional 
efficiency gains via the adequate regulation of sectors that behave like natural 
monopolies due to their network structure. This reform effort has been and 
 4 
will continue to be of paramount importance to the modernization process of 
the  Mexican  economy  as  it  allows  México  to  achieve  greater  flexibility  and 
efficiency in the allocation of its productive resources, which, in turn, is key to 
attaining greater economic growth. 
México´s  solid  macroeconomic  framework  and  its  ambitious  structural 
reform agenda have worked in tandem to make the Mexican economy resilient 
to the many external shocks that have afflicted it over the last few years. In 
particular,  the  Mexican  economy  has  had  to  cope  with  a  weak  external 
demand as a result of the slow recovery in global economic activity and the 
stagnation of global trade that followed the global financial crises of 2008-09; 
it has also had to deal with the pronounced fall in the price of oil; and it has 
had to face high volatility in exchange rate markets, that may be attributed to, 
among other factors, the uncertainty regarding the pace of monetary policy 
normalization in the US, as well as the US electoral process. It is worth noting 
that México is one of the few countries among the G-20 and OECD members 
that  has  been  able  to  register  positive  growth  rates  for  30  consecutive 
quarters, since mid-2009. So it has been able to contribute continuously to the 
growth and prosperity of the region. 
3.  Trade and its benefits 
Let me now turn to the benefits that NAFTA has brought for its members, 
concentrating in México and the United States.  
The  enactment  of  NAFTA  in  1994  transformed  the  bilateral  relationship 
between México and the United States. NAFTA has represented much more 
than  a  tariff-reduction  scheme.  It  also 
involved  deep  regulatory  and 
 5 
institutional  changes  that  had  the  goal  of  promoting  a  deeper  economic 
integration among member countries. As such, NAFTA can be more accurately 
viewed as a set of institutional rules that govern foreign trade and investment 
between  Canada,  México, and the United States  with the  aim of promoting 
both  types  of  flows  across  the  region  in  order  to  attain  productivity  gains 
through  production  sharing.  Indeed,  NAFTA  has  given  way  to  a  sustained 
growth  of  intra-industry  trade  across  countries.  In  that  sense,  rather  than 
trade partners, México and the US have become production partners. 
Evidence of the development of regional supply chains and of the close-knit 
economic  relationships  that  have  been  formed  within  the  North  American 
region can be seen in the considerable growth of Mexican non-oil exports to 
the  US  and  of  México’s  imports  of  intermediate  goods  from  the  US  since 
NAFTA went into effect. México is currently the second most important source 
for  US  imports  and  the  second  most  important  destination  for  US  exports.1 
Furthermore,  México  is  among  the  top  two  export  destinations  for  at  least 
thirty  US  states,  including  Texas.2  In  some  cases,  México  buys  over  ninety 
percent of some states’ overall export sales of particular goods.3 
The  integration  brought  about  by  NAFTA  through  the  deepening  of 
commercial and production ties has benefited all its members. The channels 
through  which  these  gains  have  accrued  are  diverse,  but  range  from 
productivity and employment gains on the production side to increased access 
                                                            
1 Figures for 2016 from US Department of Commerce. 
2 Wilson (2016). 
3 For example, according to Wilson (2016) overall, twenty seven percent of US corn exports are destined for 
the Mexican market, but in the case of Arizona, Utah, Kansans and Missouri, over ninety percent of their corn 
exports are bought by México.  
6 
 to a greater variety of goods at more competitive prices on the consumption 
side. 
If we look at growth rates for different periods of time since the 1980’s, 
the highest annual average corresponds to the years immediately after NAFTA 
was  enacted.  This  is  true  for  both  México  and  the  US  (Graphs  1  and  2). 
Moreover,  for  both  countries,  NAFTA  can  be  associated  with  a  period  of 
relatively  high  growth  in  total  factor  productivity  (TFP).  Indeed,  México  has 
shown  a  lackluster  behavior  for  TFP  in  general,  except  for  the  years 
immediately  after  NAFTA  was  enacted.  In  the  case  of  the  US,  although 
productivity  has  shown  a  better  performance,  the  period  after  1996  was 
particularly  favorable  (Graphs  3  and  4).4  After  2001  growth  rates  have 
diminished  in  both  our  countries.  That  can  be  attributed  to  more  stringent 
competition in  international  markets  with  China accession  to the  WTO,  and 
more recently to the aftermath of the global financial crisis of 2008-2009. But 
without  the  shared-strength  provided  by  NAFTA,  the  effect  of  these  two 
events on the region could have been much worse. 
At Banco de México we have carried out some exercises to estimate the 
effect that a higher degree of trade openness has had on aggregate welfare in 
both  México  and  the  US,  and  have  found  that  for  both  countries  trade 
openness has had a positive effect on living standards. This is intuitive since a 
reduction in the barriers to trade can be associated with better terms of trade, 
which  in  turn  are  usually  linked  to  higher  welfare.5  Under  a  few  standard 
                                                            
4 TFP figures computed based on the 2014 Penn World Tables. 
5 Measuring the terms of trade accurately can be a difficult task. However, the methodology developed by 
Arkolakis et al. (2012) provides a simple way to bypass this measurement issue. The key intuition underlying 
their result is that an increase in the terms of trade implies an increase in imports (relative to exports), both 
7 
 assumptions from the international trade literature, we estimate that between 
1993 and 2015 trade openness resulted in gains for México that could amount 
to an 8.2% increase in welfare, while the increase for the US could reach 1.6%. 
To more easily interpret these percentage increases in welfare associated with 
trade openness, let us assume that we can use GDP per capita as a proxy for 
welfare.6 Using World Bank data, our estimates of the welfare gains from trade 
would imply that income for the average citizen in 2015 was $682 higher in the 
case of México and $856 higher in the case of the US than what it would have 
been  without  the  higher  degree  of  trade  openness  that  these  countries 
achieved between 1993 and 2015. 
An  additional  very  important  benefit  of  NAFTA  has  been  that  it  has 
allowed  its  member  countries  to  take  advantage  of  recent  trends  in  the 
globalization process. The fragmentation of production through global value 
chains is the most recent manifestation of the process of economic integration 
that  the  world  has  been  undergoing  over  the  last  couple  of  centuries. 
Previously,  this  process  mostly  took  place  through  trade  in  final  goods  and 
services.  Today,  global  value  chains  imply  that  this  process  occurs  primarily 
through  trade  in  intermediate  goods  and  joint  production  arrangements. 
Global  value  chains  foster  specialization,  improve  efficiency  and  increase 
welfare through the  same mechanisms that induce gains from international 
                                                            
because of a substitution effect (imports become relatively cheaper) and an income effect (same amount of 
exports buy more imports). The increase in imports will imply a reduction in the share of domestic spending 
in total spending. Therefore, decreases in the share of domestic spending in total spending can be used to 
infer gains in aggregate welfare associated with trade openness. From the fact that the share of domestic 
spending  in  total  expenditure  has  decreased  for  all  NAFTA  members,  we  can  infer  that  all  countries  have 
experienced aggregate gains from trade openness. The estimates reported here are found by using a version 
of the formula of Arkolakis et al, together with an estimate for the trade elasticity and an estimate for the 
intensity of intermediate goods in production. 
6 Burstein and Cravino (2015) show that to a first approximation, real GDP can be associated with welfare. 
8 
 trade in final goods. Additionally, the fact that they also improve the allocation 
of production stages around the globe implies that they may in fact generate 
larger welfare gains that go beyond those implied by traditional mechanisms. 
In  fact,  the  World  Bank  and  World  Economic  Forum  estimate  that  the 
elimination  of  non-tariff  barriers,  such  as  inefficient  logistic  systems  or 
transportation  and  administrative  costs  that 
inhibit  the 
international 
fragmentation  of  production,  could  result  in  an  increase  in  global  GDP  that 
would be six times greater than the direct elimination of the remaining tariff 
barriers in international trade.7 
It  should  be  noted  that  in  a  context  in  which  production  takes  place 
along global value chains and trade is dominated by intermediate goods, the 
fact that a country has a trade deficit against another country, overall or in a 
given sector, does not necessarily mean that it is losing employment or that it 
has  a  lower  welfare  level.  In  fact,  this  deficit  may  reflect  imports  of 
intermediate goods that are necessary for domestic production to take place 
and  which  usually  contributes  to 
increased  domestic  employment, 
consumption and exports. In this regard, the more efficient organization of the 
production process that has been achieved through trade integration has also 
resulted in increased employment in the NAFTA region. Studies have shown 
that  in  the  case  of  México  NAFTA  induced  an  increase  in  employment, 
particularly in regions with an outward orientation.8 For the case of the United 
States, data from the US Department of Commerce indicates that after NAFTA 
took effect the number of jobs supported by the export of goods and services 
                                                            
7 US Chamber of Commerce (2016). 
8 Chiquiar et al. (2017). 
 9 
increased significantly, from 7.4 million in 1993 to 9.3 million in 1997 (Graph 
5).  Moreover,  while  the  share  of  manufacturing  employment  in  total  US 
employment has been declining since the 1970s, the speed of the reduction 
softened in the years following the enactment of NAFTA (Graph 6).9 In fact, in 
the  three  years  after  NAFTA  was  implemented,  employment  in  the  US 
automotive industry grew by 14.1 percent, worker hourly earnings grew by 5.6 
percent,  and  Ford,  Chrysler  and  GM 
invested  $39.1  billion 
in  new 
manufacturing plants and equipment in the US, while only investing $3 billion 
in México.10 Furthermore, it is estimated that trade with México, together with 
Mexican foreign direct investment in the United States, supports a combined 
five  million  American  jobs.11  In  the  case  of  Texas,  it  is  estimated  that  382 
thousand jobs are supported by trade with México.12 
Contrary to the evidence just discussed, much has been said about the 
negative effects of trade on employment in the US. However, several studies 
point toward automation and the adoption of less labor-intensive production 
processes  as  the  primary  causes  of  the  decline  in  US  manufacturing 
employment  and  to  the  declining  importance  of  factory  jobs  around  the 
world.13  This  assessment  is  consistent  with  the  upward  trend  shown  by 
spending on industrial robots in North America over the years, which has been 
                                                            
9 Estimates obtained from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (FRED). 
10 De Long (2017). 
11 Wilson (2016). 
12 Wilson (2016). 
13  De  Long  (2017)  argues  that  technological  change  rather  than  trade  with  México  and  China  had  a  more 
significant impact on US manufacturing employment. Pierce and Schott (2016) find that at the plant level, the 
shift towards less labor intensive processes contributed to declining employment in manufacturing. Acemoglu 
and  Restrepo  (2017)  estimate  large  and  robust  negative  effects  on  employment  and  wages  in  local  labor 
markets from the exposure of workers to competition from robots. Kenny (2014) argues that automation has 
decreased  the  importance  of  labor  as  an  input  in  manufacturing  production.  See  also  Cocco  (2016)  and 
Schrager (2017). 
10 
 particularly concentrated in the automotive sector.14 In this respect, economic 
integration and the possibilities it affords for the organization of production 
may provide NAFTA members with the required flexibility to capitalize on the 
new growth and employment opportunities that may arise as a consequence 
of  trends 
in  automation  and  technological  advancement.  Thus,  trade 
integration could well be the mechanism that allows industrial economies to 
boost overall employment in the face of this new challenge.15 
Last but not least, another important advantage that results from trade 
openness  is  that  consumers  gain  access  to  increased  varieties  of  goods  for 
consumption and that they face lower prices for these goods.16 Prices decline 
with  trade  openness  because  of  increased  market  competition  (or  market 
discipline) and also due to the incentives that trade openness generates for 
the  adoption  of  new  technologies  that  increase  productivity  and  reduce 
marginal costs of production. For example, following the enactment of NAFTA 
the price of vehicles, relative to average prices, showed an important decline, 
particularly in the US (Graph 7).17  
In summary, NAFTA has entailed positive gains for both the US and the 
Mexican economies. In particular, it has boosted growth and productivity by 
exploiting each country’s comparative advantages through a complex web of 
production sharing arrangements that has led to a more efficient allocation of 
resources across the region. This has not only allowed the region to remain 
                                                            
14 Source: Robotics Industries Association. 
15 Schrager (2017). 
16 Feenstra and Weinstein (2017) estimate that between 1992 and 2005, welfare in the United States rose by 
0.86% due to increased product variety and the pro-competitive effects of trade on markups. 
17 US is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
11 
 competitive in the face of fierce global competition, but has also led to a large 
number  of  export-related  jobs  in  both  countries.  It  has  also  meant  that 
consumers have had greater access, and at a lower cost, to a wider array of 
goods. 
 4.  Concluding remarks 
It should be recognized that trade integration does not happen without 
undesired  side-effects.  While  there  seems  to  be  compelling  evidence  that 
production  sharing  arrangements  play  an  important  part  in  enhancing 
productivity  and 
living  standards,  this  process  necessarily  entails  the 
reallocation of  resources  away from  less productive tasks and toward  more 
productive  ones,  which  is  not  frictionless  and  may  lead  to  an  unequal 
distribution  of  benefits  among  different  industries  and  sectors  of  the 
population. Just as the new opportunities and gains from global value chains 
need to be emphasized, the new policy challenges that these negative side-
effects entail need to be recognized and addressed to ensure that everyone 
shares in these gains from trade. 
Policy-makers  are  confronted  with  the  need  of  designing  and 
implementing  policies  that  mitigate  adverse  effects  on  sectors  of  the 
population  that  do  not  directly  benefit  from  either  the  process  of  trade 
openness or the process of automation and technological change. This could 
be  accomplished  through  compensatory  taxes  or,  as  long  as  there  is  fiscal 
space, an increase in the spending on activities with high social returns, such 
as education and health. At the same time, some of the implemented policies 
 12 
should  aim  at  minimizing  the  welfare  loss  associated  with  the  required 
reallocation  process,  for  instance,  by  providing  workers  with  additional 
training.  But  one  should  be  weary  of  policies  that  would  sacrifice  the 
substantial  welfare  gains  from  trade,  and  for  that  matter  from  automation. 
Confronting the redistributive policy challenges is better than simply pushing 
back trade or technological advancement.  
Hence,  in  my  view,  instead  of  trying  to  revert  decades  of  economic 
integration,  the  way  to  move  forward  is  to  tap  further  into  the  as  yet 
unexploited gains that can be attained through a deeper economic integration 
of the region. For example, the recent structural reform efforts in México have 
opened up certain sectors that were previously closed off to foreign investors, 
such as the oil and electricity sectors. Strengthening the bilateral relationship 
between the US and México would mean more investment and employment 
in  projects  like  the  two  refineries  that  are  being  built  in  Texas  to  serve  the 
Mexican  market  or  the  wind  farms  that  are  being  built  in  Baja  California  to 
supply  California  with  electricity.  Additional  opportunities  for  gains  from 
deeper integration could be attained if NAFTA rules can be simplified so that 
more exporters can take advantage of the benefits of belonging to a free-trade 
area.  
México is willing to work with the US and Canada to build on and extend 
NAFTA to the benefit of all parties involved. In fact, México has been working 
hard  to  keep  a  sound  macroeconomic  framework  and  to  improve  its 
microeconomic  structure  in  order  to  become  an  even  more  attractive 
destination for investment and to further promote the economic integration 
 13 
of the region. In this sense, México is committed to proving that it can be a 
trusted partner in the quest for growth and prosperity for the whole region. 
 14 
Appendix 
Graph 1. Total GDP: México  
Annual % change, s.a 
s. a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.  
Note: The red line denotes the simple average over the sample period. 
Source: Elaborated by Banco de México with data from INEGI.  
Graph 2. Total GDP: USA 
Annual % change, s.a 
  s. a./ Seasonally adjusted figures. 
Note: The red line denotes the simple average over the sample period. 
Source: Elaborated by Banco de México with data from Federal Reserve Economic Data, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
15 
   Graph 3. Total Factor Productivity: USA 
Average annual % change 
Note: The regions were estimated as a weighted average according to regional population. Regions are conformed by: 1. Europe (OECD): 
Austria,  Belgium,  Czech  Republic,  Denmark,  Estonia,  Finland,  France,  Germany,  Greece,  Hungary,  Iceland,  Ireland,  Italy,  Latvia, 
Luxembourg.  Netherlands,  Norway,  Poland,  Portugal,  Slovakia,  Spain,  Sweden,  Switzerland,  U.K.;  and  2.  Europe  (Selected  countries): 
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, U.K. 
Source: Elaborated by Banco de México with data from the Penn World Tables. 
 
 Graph 4. Total Factor Productivity: México 
Average annual % change 
         
Note: The regions were estimated as a weighted average according to regional population. Regions are conformed by: 1. Southeast 
Asia: South Korea, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand; 2. Four Europeans: Spain, Greece, Ireland and Portugal and 3. Latin 
America excl. México: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Uruguay and Venezuela. 
Source: Elaborated by Banco de México with data from the Penn World Tables. 
  16 
Graph 5. Jobs Supported By Exports of Goods and Services, 1993-2009 
Millions of jobs 
Source:  Department  of  Commerce  International  Trade  Administration  (2010).  International  Trade 
Research  Report  no.  1:  Exports  Support  American  Jobs  (http://trade.gov/publications/pdfs/exports-
support-american-jobs.pdf) 
    Graph 6. Percent of Employment in Manufacturing in the United States 
            Source: Estimates from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (FRED).  
 17 
  Graph 7. US: Price of Cars and Trucks relative to General Price Level1/ 
US city average, Index 1994=100 
1/ Price index for new trucks and new cars relative to CPI. Not seasonally adjusted. 
Source:  US Bureau of Labor Statistics.  
 
 18 
References 
Acemoglu,  Daron  and  Pascual  Restrepo.  (2017).  “Robots  and  Jobs:  Evidence  from  US  Labor 
Markets.” NBER Working paper No. 23285. 
Arkolakis, Costas. Arnaud Costinot and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. (2012). “New Trade Theory, Same 
Old Gains?” American Economic Review. 
Burstein, Ariel and Javier Cravino. (2015). “Measured Aggregate Gains from International Trade.” 
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. 
Chiquiar, Daniel. Enrique Covarrubias and Alejandrina Salcedo. (2017). “Labor market consequences 
of trade openness and competition in foreign markets.” Banco de México Working Papers No. 2017-
01. 
Cocco,  Federico.  (2016).  “Most  US  manufacturing  jobs  lost  to  technology,  not  trade.”  Financial 
Times. https://www.ft.com/content/dec677c0-b7e6-11e6-ba85-95d1533d9a62 
De  Long,  J.  Bradford.  (2017).  “NAFTA  and  other  trade  deals  have  not  gutted  American 
manufacturing-  period.”  Vox.  http://www.vox.com/the-big-idea/2017/1/24/14363148/trade-
deals-nafta-wto-china-job-loss-trump 
Feenstra,  Robert  C.  and  David  E.  Weinstein.  (2017).  “Globalization,  Markups,  and  US  Welfare.” 
Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming). 
Ferdman, Roberto A. (2015). “The rise of the avocado, America’s new favorite fruit.” Wonkblog, The 
Washington Post. URL: the-sudden-rise-of-the-avocado-americas-new-favorite-fruit 
Kenny,  Charles. 
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-04-28/why-factory-jobs-are-shrinking-
everywhere 
(2014).  “Why  Factory 
Jobs  are  Shrinking  Everywhere.”  Bloomberg. 
Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. (2016). “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing 
Employment.” American Economic Review. 
Schrager,  Allison.  (2017).  “Technology  killed  manufacturing  jobs;  trade  is  what  will  bring  their 
replacement.”  Quartz.  https://qz.com/844284/technology-killed-manufacturing-jobs-trade-is-
what-will-bring-their-replacement/ 
US  Chamber  of  Commerce.  (2016).  https://www.uschamber.com/issue-brief/global-supply-chain-
customs-and-trade-facilitation. 
US  Department  of  Commerce. 
american-jobs.pdf 
(2010).  http://trade.gov/publications/pdfs/exports-support-
Wilson, Charles. (2016). “Growing Together: Economic ties between the United States and México.” 
Wilson Center, México Institute. 
 19 
