The Governor’s
Concluding Remarks
Annual Report
Rome, 31 May 2017
The Governor’s 
Concluding Remarks
Annual Report
2016 - 123rd Financial Year
Rome, 31 May 2017
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Carlo  Azeglio  Ciampi,  President  Emeritus  of  the  Italian  Republic  and 
Governor Emeritus of the Bank of Italy, passed away on 16 September.
He joined the Bank in 1946, serving as Governor from 1979 to 1993. 
Immediately following his appointment he had to address the gravest banking 
crisis of the post-war period, with the Bank of Italy still shaken by the dramatic 
events that had seen its top management unjustly accused. 
During  his  governorship,  he  achieved  full  autonomy  of  the  central 
bank and created the conditions for bringing high inflation under control; 
he  initiated  the  construction  of  a  modern  payments  system,  based  on  the 
technological infrastructure essential for a large market economy; he began 
the reform of the Bank’s supervisory activities with a radical revision of the 
rules and the banking market. 
Ciampi left a lasting imprint on the Bank’s management, introducing into 
its institutional culture a working method based on teamwork and an ability 
to combine different skills. This method was a hallmark of his work in all the 
positions of high office that he held after leaving the Bank.
With his death, Italy has lost a great statesman, a firm believer in the 
founding values of democracy and in a united Europe, which he considered 
fundamental to guarantee peace, freedom, equality and prosperity. We are left 
with the principles that inspired his way of working: a sense of duty, respect 
for others and awareness of one’s own responsibility. These values help us to 
understand what is meant by the phrase ‘serving the general interest’, Carlo 
Azeglio Ciampi’s lodestar throughout his life. 
In the last six years the monetary policy response to the financial crisis, 
the sovereign debt crisis and the risks of deflation have had a profound impact 
on the size and structure of the Bank of Italy’s balance sheet. Assets increased 
by more than €440 billion to €774 billion. The portfolio of securities held for 
monetary policy purposes rose from €18 billion to €245 billion. Lending to 
banks grew by €157 billion.
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
3
As  I  recalled  on  31  March  in  my  report  to  the  Ordinary  Meeting  of 
Shareholders, in which I also dealt with the capital reallocation process, the 
expansion  of  the  balance  sheet  has  not  only  increased  profitability  but  also 
heightened  risks;  these  have  been  addressed  by  the  introduction  of  capital 
safeguards. The 2016 financial year closed with a net profit of €2.7 billion; after 
allocations to the ordinary reserve and dividends paid to the shareholders, €2.2 
billion were allocated to the State, in addition to the €1.3 billion paid in taxes.
The institutional innovations in supervision and the resolution of banking 
crises have altered the responsibilities of the Bank of Italy, increasing its tasks. 
Our remit in the area of safeguarding financial stability has been expanded, 
while the Bank has strengthened its longstanding role in Europe as provider 
of high-tech payment, market and statistical services. Before the end of this 
year  private  operators  will  have  completed  their  adhesion  to  the  European 
securities settlement platform TARGET2-Securities, a complex infrastructure 
whose entry into full operation makes a crucial contribution to the process of 
integrating Europe’s financial markets. 
We give an account of last year’s numerous organizational changes in the 
Bank of Italy’s Report on Operations and Activities, which is published today 
together with the Annual Report. 
At  a  time  of  profound  technological  innovation,  these  changes  have 
contributed  to  a  reduction  in  operating  expenses,  which  have  come  down 
by 15 per cent in real terms since 2009. During this period the Bank’s staff 
diminished by 870 to around 6,900. Today secondments to other European 
and international organizations number more than 150 and have increased 
sharply since the launch of the Single Supervisory Mechanism.
The Bank of Italy holds fast to its principles, mindful of the responsibilities 
entrusted to it by society and careful to use the resources at its disposal efficiently. 
My own personal appreciation, that of the Governing Board and the Board 
of Directors, goes to the women and men who work here: their personal and 
professional qualities, and dedication to the common good enable the Bank 
to look with confidence to the changes that the future will inevitably bring.
The economic situation and monetary policy
The world economy is growing at a rate of more than 3 per cent, supported 
by expansionary policies in the main economic areas; the rise in investment 
is providing renewed vigour to world trade (Figure 1). Optimism prevails in 
the financial markets despite the uncertainty connected with the future stance 
of  economic  policies  in  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom’s  exit  from 
4
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
the European Union, the high level of debt in various parts of the world, and 
persistent geopolitical tensions.
In  the  euro  area  growth  is  strengthening,  led  by  consumption  and 
investment in capital goods. In 2017, GDP is expected to grow by almost 2 per 
cent in the euro area, around twice the rate for Italy. Consumer price inflation, 
which had been practically nil since the end of 2014, has picked up in the last 
six months, sustained mainly by the rising prices of energy and food products. 
According to the European Central Bank’s March projections, consumer price 
inflation in the area will be 1.7 per cent for the year as a whole, but scarcely 1.1 
per cent net of the most volatile components (Figure 2). The corresponding 
figures for Italy are just under 1.5 and 1 per cent. 
Economic activity and inflation are benefiting from the strongly expansionary 
stance of monetary policy; fiscal policies are on the whole neutral. The measures 
we have adopted in the Governing Council of the European Central Bank since 
mid-2014 have succeeded in averting the risk of a deflationary spiral which, 
given the high level of debt, both public and private, would have had severe 
depressive effects on the economy of the entire area. Since March 2016, when 
the asset purchase programme was expanded, the probability of deflation implied 
by option prices − which had exceeded 30 per cent at the beginning of 2015 −  
has  gradually  diminished  and  is  now  almost  nil.  The  downward  trend  in 
medium- and long-term inflation expectations has come to a halt. 
The objective of price stability in the euro area – a rate of inflation below, 
but  close,  to  2  per  cent  sustainable  over  the  medium  term  –  has  yet  to  be 
achieved.  Core  inflation  remains  constrained  by  unemployment  in  many 
euro-area economies and by sluggish wage growth, even in the countries with 
better labour market conditions. The normalization of inflation expectations 
still has to be consolidated. Credit demand remains weak.
A highly accommodative monetary policy is needed to achieve the full 
convergence of inflation to the ECB’s objective. A change in the monetary 
policy stance, to be implemented with the requisite graduality, will serve as 
confirmation that demand growth and price stability can be self-sustaining in 
the medium term. 
Long-term interest rates are very low; besides monetary conditions, this 
reflects the depth and exceptional length of the recession. Owing to the still 
high level of debt, it will take more time than in past cyclical recoveries to 
regain  suitable  levels  of  investment  demand  and,  therefore,  profitability. 
Structural factors, such as the slowdown in productivity growth and the effects 
of demographic trends, are playing a role in keeping yields down.
Monetary policy alone cannot guarantee a return to strong and steady 
growth.  The  structural  problems  affecting  the  national  economies  must  be 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
5
tackled by expediting the necessary reforms. Where public debt is especially 
high, deficit and debt reduction must be pursued decisively, with a budget 
composition that is more conducive to growth; where debt is lower, it is possible 
to support internal demand, especially through investment in infrastructure 
in order to avoid an overly large net external position which could provide an 
argument for protectionist policies. 
Italy’s economy, though still weak, has been expanding for two years. The 
cyclical improvement is spreading to most industrial sectors; positive signals 
have also recently emerged in services and construction, mainly in residential 
housing, which is benefiting from tax incentives for the renovation of existing 
homes  and  from  low  interest  rates.  Activity  in  non-residential  building  is 
struggling to gain traction, owing to sluggish public investment.
The improved performance of Italian exports, which has kept pace with 
the increase in world trade, continues to be coupled with a moderate increase 
in household expenditure, driven by the favourable outlook for income, and 
more recently, a recovery in private investment. The greatest increase has been 
in purchases of capital goods, which have a direct impact on the economy’s 
potential output; this type of investment grew almost 5 per cent last year but 
is still 14 per cent below the 2007 peak. 
Italy’s  southern  regions  have  also  posted  growth.  Positive  indications, 
though  less  widespread  with  respect  to  the  Centre-North,  are  nonetheless 
discernible  from  the  data  collected  by  our  branches  from  local  economic 
operators. The gap with the rest of the country remains wide, with a difference 
of more than 40 per cent in GDP per capita. The balanced development of 
Italy’s economy necessarily depends on removing the obstacles, not only of an 
economic nature, that impede the recovery of Italy’s South.
Overall,  there  are  still  ample  margins  of  slack  and  firms’  demand  for 
labour is insufficient. This is reflected in the performance of prices while wage 
growth remains very subdued. Consumer price inflation was slightly negative 
on average in 2016. Core inflation decreased to 0.5 per cent, but we expect it 
to increase gradually.
At the current rate of growth, GDP would return to its 2007 level in the 
first half of the 2020s. Apart from cyclical factors, Italy’s economic development 
is  hampered  by  rigidities  in  the  business  environment,  the  slow  growth  of 
productivity, and an insufficient employment rate. Decisions to invest can be 
encouraged by continuing the reform effort to favour business activity. The 
positive signals that have emerged must be consolidated. A growing number of 
firms consider the tax incentives introduced for the purchase of capital goods 
6
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
to be significant; this year they have been expanded to include investment in 
advanced digital technology.
The years of crisis 
Ten years marked by a double-dip recession – first, the global financial 
crisis, then, the sovereign debt crisis – and the risk of a deflationary spiral have 
weighed heavily on the euro-area economy. Euro-area GDP fell by 4.5 per cent 
during the first crisis and, after recouping 3.5 percentage points, by over 1 per 
cent during the second, with sharply varying trends from country to country. 
It was not until 2015 that the economy regained 2008 levels (Figure 3). 
Some countries were especially hard hit. The Italian economy suffered the 
worst years it had ever experienced in peacetime (Figure 4). The effects of the 
double-dip recession proved to be worse than those of the Great Depression. 
From 2007 to 2013 GDP fell by 9 per cent; industrial production declined 
by almost a quarter, investment by 30 per cent, consumption by 8 per cent. 
Today Italy’s GDP is still more than 7 per cent below what it was in early 
2008; in the rest of the euro area it is 5 per cent above that level. 
The problems were exacerbated by the vulnerabilities of EU institutions 
and  macroeconomic  and  financial  imbalances  whose  importance  had  long 
been  underestimated  in  a  number  of  countries.  Following  Economic  and 
Monetary Union, integration had progressed slowly on the assumption that 
common rules and market forces would make up for the lack of a unified 
government policy approach. 
Nevertheless, the reaction to the global financial crisis was coordinated and 
incisive. As early as the end of 2008 the major central banks were providing 
ample liquidity and cutting official interest rates in concert, an unprecedented 
development; they eventually reduced them even further, to historic lows. At 
the  same  time,  the  European  Council  approved  a  macroeconomic  support 
plan. Almost all the countries adopted expansionary fiscal policies; many took 
measures  to  stabilize  the  banking  and  financial  system.  In  April  2009  the 
members of the G20 agreed on further actions. 
Unlike  other  countries,  Italy  suffered  from  the  slowness  with  which  it 
had undertaken the modernization necessary to cope with the challenges of 
globalization, technological change and monetary union. Structural weaknesses 
amplified the repercussions of the crisis and further delayed recovery. Between 
2007 and 2009 GDP fell by 6.5 per cent, recouping more than 2 percentage 
points  over  the  next  two  years.  In  2011  industrial  production  was  still  15 
percentage points below its pre-crisis level, while Germany’s industrial output 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
7
had in large part recovered; the volume of German goods exports had already 
regained 2007 levels, while Italian exports were still 5 per cent below them. 
During that phase, in many countries the financial support provided by 
governments to banks was considerable; at the end of 2011 the impact of State 
aid on public debt amounted to 48 per cent of GDP in Ireland, 11 per cent 
in Germany, and 7 per cent in the Netherlands and Belgium. In Italy, it came 
to 0.2 per cent of GDP, reflecting the limited exposure of our banks to the 
structured finance products that had triggered the financial crisis. 
The response to the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area that began in 
2010, after the true state of Greece’s public accounts came to light, was not so 
rapid or adequate. The incompleteness of the European construction, with its 
lack of institutions for managing member state financial crises, contributed 
to this delay. 
Concerns  about  the  resilience  of  the  economies  that  were  affected  by 
imbalances  in  banking  systems,  balances  of  payments  and  public  accounts, 
triggered market turmoil. Borrowing conditions became prohibitive for Ireland 
and Portugal which, as Greece had already done, requested financial assistance 
programmes  in  autumn  of  2010  and  spring  of  2011. Tensions  then  spread 
to Italy and Spain, with the dramatic widening of the differentials between 
their  government  bond  yields  and  those  of  Germany.  The  problems  in  the 
government securities market extended to the banks, whose credit ratings were 
equated to those of their sovereign; the consequent tightening of the credit 
supply contributed to the start of a new recessionary phase; fears mounted for 
the break-up of the single currency. 
To defend the sustainability of the public debt, fiscal policies took on a 
restrictive stance in the countries that had agreed to assistance and in those 
that feared loss of access to financial markets; an analogous policy was adopted 
in other countries as well, including Germany. The lack of a common budget 
precluded supranational action to counteract the strong procyclical impulse of 
national policies. 
At  that  time  macroeconomic  conditions  in  Italy  were  deteriorating 
much  more  rapidly  than  indicated  by  our  projections  and  those  of  the 
leading international organizations. In January 2012 we forecast a 1.5 per 
cent drop in GDP (0.4 per cent under a less unfavourable scenario) for 
2012 and 2013; in the summer this forecast was revised to 2.2 per cent; in 
the end, the decline amounted to 4.5 per cent. This result was due in part 
to the deceleration in international trade and the collapse in confidence in 
euro-area prospects, which amplified the effects of credit tightening and the 
budgetary adjustment.
8
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
In the final months of 2011, monetary policy took on a clear expansionary 
tone, reinforcing the measures to counter the serious liquidity shortfalls in 
the banking system and the consequent fragmentation of financial markets. 
But the need for intervention to safeguard the single currency struggled for 
recognition in an environment in which tensions were blamed largely on the 
deterioration in national outlooks for growth and public finances and not 
also on a systemic risk, such as the potential break-up of the monetary union. 
After overcoming the differences of opinion on this issue, in the summer of 
2012 the ECB Governing Council authorized the purchase of the government 
securities of countries in difficulty. The announcement sparked an immediate 
improvement  in  financial  market  conditions  and  fostered  a  resurgence  of 
capital inflows to the countries affected by the crisis. 
Monetary  measures,  European  institutional  reforms,  the  credibility 
gained thanks to the corrective measures of national governments, and the 
agreements on financial assistance to the Spanish banking system and on the 
renewal of aid to Greece, all helped to ease financial tensions, bringing interest 
rate spreads back to regular levels and setting in motion the normalization of 
economic conditions within the euro area.
A contributing factor in this result was the decision to implement the project 
for Banking Union: the complexity of the reform and the commitment to carrying 
it out within a very short time frame, at least as regards the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism, were signals of the strong determination to continue on the path 
to  integration.  I  have  often  remarked  on  the  difficulties  stemming  from  the 
incompleteness of the new framework and the lack of consideration of the risks 
associated with implementing the new legislation on banking crisis resolution. 
Two sources of weakness
The consequences of the double-dip recession for Italy are most clearly 
observed in the behaviour of two variables, radically different in nature and 
dimension, which owing to their rate of growth and current level are frequently 
cited as Italy’s main problems: namely, the public debt and the loans defined as 
‘non-performing’ held by banks. These are sources of weakness that limit the 
room for manoeuvre of the State and of financial intermediaries; both make 
the Italian economy vulnerable to market turmoil and can amplify the effects 
of cyclical fluctuations. 
In order to assess these sources properly and identify the best strategies to 
manage their impact, we must first recognize their close connection with the 
problems of the economy as a whole. On both fronts we must continue to act, 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
9
with resolve and clarity of purpose, to preserve and reinforce the trust of those 
who deposit their savings and invest in Italy and its banks. 
The public debt
The ratio of debt to GDP has been at high levels for over thirty years 
now.  Notwithstanding  the  reduction  that  began  in  the  mid-1990s,  at  the 
outbreak of the crisis it was still close to 100 per cent. Since 2008 it has risen 
rapidly, to the point of exceeding 130 per cent (Figure 5). Not counting the 
Treasury’s liquid assets, last year the ratio basically stabilized. Following the 
most turbulent phase of the sovereign debt crisis, fiscal policy has accompanied 
the expansionary monetary policy stance, mediating between the necessity of 
holding debt in check and that of supporting the recovery.
Since 2008 the increase in the ratio of debt to GDP has essentially been 
attributable to the poor performance of the latter. Had real output grown at 
even the low average rate recorded in the years between the launch of Economic 
and Monetary Union and the onset of the financial crisis, and had the rise in the 
deflator been consistent with the ECB’s inflation aim, the larger denominator 
alone would have determined a debt-to-GDP ratio today comparable to what it 
was in 2007. Without the crisis, higher growth would also have enabled deficits 
to be brought down and avoided the need to provide financial support to other 
countries; the ratio would have been even lower as a result. 
Long-term projections such as those made periodically by the European 
Commission indicate no significant risks to the sustainability of Italy’s public 
debt. This is thanks to the reforms that have assured the financial equilibrium 
of the pension system, wiping out almost one third of the implicit pension 
liabilities accrued up to the early 1990s and enabling it to withstand adverse 
demographic or macroeconomic shocks. 
Italy’s high public debt is nevertheless a source of vulnerability and acts as 
a brake on the economy. It makes it more costly to fund productive investment 
by  the  private  sector;  it  induces  greater  recourse  to  distortionary  tax  systems, 
with adverse effects on the capacity to produce income, save and invest; it stokes 
uncertainty, another way in which it discourages investment; and it leaves less room 
for macroeconomic stabilization policies. The high debt also exposes the country 
to a loss of market confidence and phenomena of contagion. The exceptional and 
abrupt widening of the spread between Italian and German government bonds 
at the height of the crisis was proof of this; the increase recorded in the last eight 
months is another such reminder. Every year market placements of debt securities 
issued by the Italian State amount to around €400 billion.
10
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
An  appreciable  and  lasting  decline  in  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  must 
commence without delay. There must be no repeat of past errors: the failure to 
reduce the ratio of debt to GDP sufficiently in good economic times forced us 
to make procyclical adjustments during the crisis. 
In this current phase of – moderate – recovery, durable consolidation can 
be pursued through prudent budgetary policies, designed not only to lower the 
deficit but also to review the composition of expenditure and revenue. Economic 
growth can be strengthened and the reduction of the debt ratio facilitated by 
giving greater scope to public investment, rethinking the structure of government 
transfers,  tax  subsidies  and  exemptions,  rebalancing  the  tax  burdens  on  the 
various sources of income and redoubling efforts to combat tax evasion. 
With annual growth of around 1 per cent, inflation at 2 per cent, and 
with the average interest rate on the debt gradually regaining pre-crisis levels, 
a primary surplus (net of interest payments) of 4 per cent of GDP, which is 
basically consistent with the Government’s policy scenario, would bring the 
debt-to-GDP ratio below 100 per cent in around ten years. With higher growth, 
achievable as part of a package of incisive reforms, a recovery in investment, and 
a different composition of the public budget, this could happen even faster.  
Italy  has  already  shown  it  can  deliver  and  maintain  a  large  primary 
surplus: between 1995 and 2000 this averaged almost 5 per cent of GDP. 
Other countries have done even better and for longer periods of time; between 
1995 and 2007 the primary surplus averaged more than 6.5 per cent of GDP 
in Canada and about 5 per cent in Belgium, Denmark and Finland. That 
is no small achievement, but it is not beyond our reach. According to the 
Government’s  plans,  to  meet  the  objectives  outlined  in  the  Economic  and 
Financial Document and avoid next year’s scheduled VAT hike will require 
the definition of corrective measures in the order of 1.5 percentage points of 
output in the three years 2018-20. 
A constant, protracted effort to keep the public accounts under control 
is indispensable to a lasting reduction in the ratio of debt to GDP against a 
backdrop of a return to stable growth. This would have positive effects on 
confidence,  economic  activity,  and  interest  expenses.  While  not  the  only 
answer, given the constraints on public real estate assets and their heterogeneity, 
and the characteristics of the State’s portfolio of shareholdings, privatizations 
could help to speed up the reduction of the debt. 
Non-performing loans
The repercussions of the crisis could not but affect banks’ balance sheets. 
Between 2007 and 2015 the ratio of bad loans to total loans i.e. exposures to 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
11
insolvent debtors, more than tripled, reaching a level that was still below the 
peak recorded in the mid-1990s (Figure 6). In several cases, banks’ difficulties 
were exacerbated by fraudulent conduct and imprudent lending policies. 
At  the  end  of  2016  Italian  banks’  non-performing  loans,  recorded  in 
balance sheets net of write-downs, came to €173 billion or 9.4 per cent of total 
loans. The €350 billion figure often cited in the press refers to the nominal 
value of the exposures and does not take account of the losses already entered 
in balance sheets and is therefore not indicative of banks’ actual credit risk. 
Of the €173 billion in net non-performing loans, €81 billion or 4.4 per 
cent of total loans were classified as bad loans, against which the banks hold real 
collateral and personal guarantees of over €90 billion and almost €40 billion 
respectively. The remaining €92 billion are other non-performing exposures, 
whose nominal value has already been written down by roughly a third. For 
some of these, a return to regular payments is certainly possible, though to 
what degree will depend on the timing and strength of the recovery; active 
management of the positions on the part of the banks is indispensable if the 
share that become bad loans is to be reduced significantly. 
Three  quarters  of  net  bad  loans  are  held  by  banks  whose  financial 
conditions  do  not  require  their  immediate  disposal  on  the  market.  Those 
held by intermediaries experiencing difficulties, which could find themselves 
obliged to offload them rapidly, amount to around €20 billion. As we have 
documented, bad loans are recorded in banks’ balance sheets at values consistent 
with the recovery rates actually observed in the last ten years. If they were sold 
at the very low prices offered by the few large specialist debt collection agencies 
active in the market today, which pursue very high returns, the amount of 
additional write-downs would be in the order of €10 billion. 
At the end of 2011 net bad loans held by Italy’s banks made up 2.9 per 
cent of total loans. A ‘system-wide’ intervention on non-performing loans, 
involving substantial public funds along the lines of what occurred in other 
countries, appeared neither justified nor feasible. The increase in bad loans was 
not concentrated in any specific sector of the economy; the macroeconomic 
predictions made in the course of 2012 were much more favourable than the 
results actually achieved. As the sovereign debt market strains grew more acute, 
government  intervention  on  non-performing  loans  appeared  incompatible 
with the state of the public finances.
In  the  years  immediately  following  the  picture  changed  rapidly.  The 
recession proved much longer and deeper than originally forecast; the attendant 
rise in business failure rates and unemployment fuelled the growth of net bad 
loans, which in 2015 reached 4.8 per cent of total loans. The abatement of 
the tensions on sovereign debt markets, which began in mid-2012, gathered 
12
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
momentum in 2013, and at that point made desirable the establishment of 
a  publicly  supported  company  to  manage  banks’  non-performing  assets,  a 
possibility which we actively supported. Its fruition was, however, impeded by 
the position on State aid adopted by the European Commission in mid-2013.  
In part following the proposals drawn up by European institutions, in recent 
months the idea has been mooted again. We remain convinced of its potential 
usefulness, provided that the asset sale prices are not excessively detached from 
their real economic value, banks’ participation in the scheme is voluntary, and 
the restructuring plans of the participating banks are properly defined ex ante. 
Whether or not there is a real determination to proceed down this path must 
be clarified without delay: uncertainty slows the conclusion of the transactions 
under way and discourages those that could be completed in the coming months. 
In 2016 the flow of non-performing loans declined, as did the ratio of 
non-performing loans and that of bad loans to total lending. The ongoing 
recovery supports this trend. The sales currently scheduled by the major groups 
could raise the reduction in the net bad loan ratio significantly. 
The  large  stock  and  low  market  prices  of  non-performing  exposures 
reflect Italy’s excessive time to recovery, which is far longer than in the other 
main European countries. At the end of 2015 recovery times averaged almost 
eight  years  for  bankruptcies  and  over  four  years  for  property  foreclosures. 
Legislative measures taken in recent years go in the right direction but must 
be strengthened to ensure a sufficient shortening of recovery times. It would 
be especially useful to increase the degree of specialization in the handling 
of  insolvency  cases,  providing  for  the  centralization  of  the  more  complex 
proceedings, including by reviewing the territorial jurisdiction of Italy’s courts.
For  their  part,  the  banks  must  make  the  best  possible  use  of  the 
instruments  already  available  in  the  form  of  out-of-court  agreements  with 
firms on debt restructuring and the transfer of real estate pledged as collateral. 
As recent analyses by the Bank of Italy have shown, incentives for the disposal 
of  non-performing  loans  would  derive  from  the  removal  of  the  regulatory 
disincentives that impede the sale of large amounts of these assets by banks 
that use advanced internal models for calculating capital requirements. 
timely 
Sufficient  and 
information  makes 
the  management  of 
non-performing  assets  less  costly,  increasing  their  value;  harmonization  at 
European level would facilitate cross-data analysis, with positive effects on the 
prices and speed of the transactions. The new reporting on bad loans that we 
introduced last year is a step in this direction, inducing banks to manage these 
exposures more actively and effectively.
Supervisors  are  mindful  of  the  need  to  refrain  from  imposing  blanket 
sales of non-performing loans, which de facto lead to a transfer of resources 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
13
from Italy’s banks to a handful of specialized investors. However, as indicated 
by  the  recent  guidelines  issued  at  European  level  and  drawn  up  with  the 
active contribution of the Bank of Italy, the largest intermediaries (classified as 
‘significant’ within the Single Supervisory Mechanism) must adopt strategies to 
improve the management of these assets together with ambitious operational 
plans to ensure their substantial and progressive reduction. Possible options 
include: the creation of separate and specialized management units, recourse 
to external managers, the sale of the portfolios on the market. We are working 
to extend the guidelines to the banks under our direct supervision.    
Labour and growth
It is in the labour market in particular that we see the most painful legacy 
of  the  crisis:  in  2014  the  unemployment  rate  came  to  nearly  13  per  cent, 
more  than  double  that  of  2007  (Figure  7);  unemployment  among  young 
persons aged 15 to 24 increased from 20 to over 40 per cent; the figures are 
higher  in  the  South.  The  gap  between  the  quality  of  the  positions  offered 
and workers’ expectations widened: nearly all fixed-term employees would 
prefer a permanent position, while two thirds of part-time workers would 
like a full-time job, compared with two fifths ten years ago. Households’ living 
standards have fallen, especially for the most disadvantaged.
There has been some improvement in the last two years thanks to the 
cyclical recovery, social security contribution relief and measures to improve 
the efficiency of the labour market. However, at the end of 2016, less than 
60 per cent of people aged 20 to 67 were employed and only one out of two 
women. About a quarter of people younger than 30, and a third in the South, 
were not in education, employment or training. These figures are far from 
those of most other European countries. 
The  question  of  labour  is  central.  It  relates  to  social  integration  and 
personal identity. On the economic level, it should not be seen solely as a 
cyclical  problem:  the  economy’s  growth  potential  depends  on  the  quantity 
and quality of the labour force and the capacity of the productive economy 
to provide adequate employment. Demographic and technological tendencies 
play an important role, destined to increase in the years to come.
According to Istat, whose forecasts even assume a net annual influx of 
about 150,000 migrants, the number of people aged 20 to 69 will fall by nearly 
7 million in the next 30 years. The population older than 70 will increase to 
about 30 per cent of the total, with important repercussions on the composition 
of employment and further growth in the demand for jobs in personal care, 
assistance and health, which in the past 20 years have accounted for over a 
14
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
third of the increase in employment. Increased labour market participation 
and the efficient and rational inclusion of migrants will be essential to Italy’s 
future development. But productivity must return to growth. 
Italy’s  economy,  much  of  which  lags  far  behind  in  the  adoption  of  new 
technologies, suffered from excessively slow total factor productivity growth well 
before the onset of the crisis (Figure 8). It averaged annual growth of just 0.2 
per cent between 1995 and 2007, roughly a quarter of the rate estimated for 
France and Germany; and in recent years it has recouped only a small part of the 
substantial decline experienced during the crisis. The gap with the other countries 
is particularly wide for small firms (with fewer than 20 employees), which account 
for 55 per cent of all workers in industry and in non-financial private services.
To avoid negative effects on the living standards of Italians, we must bridge 
this gap and take part in the ongoing digital revolution. Some have predicted 
that technological progress will sharply reduce jobs and increase inequality. 
But others maintain that the creation of new occupations will compensate for 
those supplanted by machines, as has been the case historically. Estimating 
these consequences is difficult, but the Italian economy appears vulnerable to 
the processes of automation: according to recent estimates by the OECD, the 
risk is very high for a tenth of all occupations and high for up to half.
Economic  policy  must  take  into  account  the  risks  and  opportunities 
that stem from these long-term trends, in pursuit of the objective, which is 
no longer deferrable, of aligning the Italian economy with global dynamics. 
There  is  no  alternative  to  increasing  productive  efficiency,  and  managerial 
and administrative capacity: only innovation in the production of goods and 
services can simultaneously ensure higher incomes and raise the quantity and 
quality of employment.
Improvements are emerging in the sectors where competitive pressures 
are  strongest.  In  manufacturing,  productivity  has  benefited  from  a  shift  of 
resources towards the more efficient firms, a trend that was under way before 
the  crisis  and  has  picked  up  further  in  recent  years.  The  transformation  is 
evident among firms active in international markets: the share of exports from 
medium- to large-sized firms, which are capable of keeping pace with global 
demand, has increased progressively. This change must extend to the entire 
productive  system,  particularly  the  service  sector  where  the  qualitative  and 
technological lags by comparison with Italy’s main competitors are most severe. 
In the past the attempt was made to cope with these changes by means of 
cost reduction alone, especially labour costs. The benefits obtained in terms 
of  employment,  while  significant,  proved  ephemeral,  because  they  were 
not  accompanied  by  the  structural  change  required  in  many  parts  of  our 
productive  economy.  In  order  for  a  larger  and  more  highly  skilled  labour 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
15
supply to be fully utilized in jobs that satisfy the legitimate expectations of the 
younger generations, there must be a qualitative leap to help foster innovation 
and improve the mechanisms that drive resource allocation. To this end, the 
convinced participation of all concerned is needed: businesses, workers, and 
public administrators.
Over the last five years we have entered an intense period of reform. The 
aim is to increase the efficiency of the productive economy by modifying the 
legal framework for economic activity and by intervening on the functioning of 
the product, capital, and labour markets. We have begun a process designed to 
enhance efficiency of the public administration and the civil justice system. The 
battle against corruption has been stepped up. Measures have been introduced to 
reduce the costs and time needed for firms to enter and exit the market. Provisions 
have been made to facilitate a change in the composition of payroll employment 
towards open-ended contracts; active policies in favour of employment have 
been launched; unemployment benefit programmes have been reviewed. 
These are the first steps on a long path, which must be followed resolutely, 
monitoring  the  implementation  of  the  measures  taken.  The  reform  efforts 
must  also  be  directed  at  encouraging  new  business  ventures,  increasing 
competitiveness in key service sectors, further simplifying crisis management 
procedures,  reducing  handling  times  in  the  courts  to  levels  comparable  to 
those of other advanced countries, and eliminating the regulatory and fiscal 
disincentives to the expansion of firms. 
Regulatory reform is a complex process whose benefits are not immediate. 
It must be accompanied with measures to foster the continuous creation of 
new jobs, also in the short term. Encouraging results have stemmed from the 
introduction of allowances commensurate with increases in corporate equity, 
tax breaks for investment in the capital of innovative startups, and the creation 
of national venture capital funds based on the cooperation of the public and 
private sectors. The national plan ‘Industry 4.0’ introduced a series of measures 
to encourage the adoption of the new digital and automation technologies.
Ample  room  for  rationalization  remains  in  the  allocation  of  public 
resources, which must be directed to serve medium- to long-term objectives. 
Spending on public investments must return to growth: falling since 2010, its 
ratio to GDP was slightly higher than 2 per cent in 2016, about 1 point less 
than pre-crisis levels and among the lowest in the euro area. An increase in the 
resources dedicated to the renovation of existing public and private buildings, 
the  prevention  of  hydrogeological  risks,  and  the  reduction  of  earthquake 
damage would have appreciable effects on employment and economic activity, 
and to a greater extent in the Centre and South. This is not a task that the State 
can undertake on its own; the private sector must be involved. 
16
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
To deal with change and seize the opportunities offered by the predictably 
profound  transformation  of  the  technological  paradigm,  economic  policy 
must engage above all with human capital. In Italy, both formal education 
levels  and  reading  comprehension  and  logical  and  analytical  skills,  are  far 
below those of the other advanced countries, even among the young. There are 
widespread shortcomings in the school system and in higher education; private 
and public funding of research and instruction at university level remains very 
low by international standards. Also on account of the technological lag, many 
sectors of the productive system have little inclination to invest in on-the-job 
training,  or,  more  generally,  to  offer  opportunities  to  qualified  workers;  in 
the end, the returns on education are low, reducing the incentive for young 
people to improve their skills. Investing in education and knowledge creates 
citizens who are more aware and workers who are better able to discharge 
rapidly  changing  tasks  and  functions.  This  is  an  essential  condition  to  the 
more equitable distribution of labour and its remuneration. 
The effects of the reform will require time to materialize, relying as they 
do on the behaviour of citizens. The reforms will not suffice if the presence 
of  firms  whose  profit  margins  depend  on  illegal  activity,  tax  evasion  and 
corruption continues to be widespread. These practices distort competition 
and reduce the resources available to invest in infrastructure and services for 
the community and in higher value-added projects. Illegality in all its forms is 
a source of injustice and the cause of diminished economic well-being. 
Banking supervision and the challenges for banks
During the years of crisis, banking supervision was engaged on several 
fronts.  Liquidity  checks  were  intensified,  and  at  the  moments  of  greatest 
tension  conducted  intraday.  The  volume  of  assets  eligible  as  collateral  for 
Eurosystem or market funding grew substantially.
A series of targeted inspections that commenced in the second half of 
2012 resulted in significant value adjustments in respect of non-performing 
loans. Between 2009 and 2014 coverage ratios rose by 5 percentage points for 
the major banks and by almost 11 points for the others; today these ratios are 
higher than the European average.
We have urged – and where necessary required – banks to attain higher 
levels of capitalization; this action continued with the launch of Banking Union, 
even at times of tension in the credit and capital markets. Between the onset of 
the crisis and the end of 2016, the CET1 ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets 
was raised by 4 percentage points for the leading banks, to 10.4 per cent on 
average, and by 5 points, to 15.5 per cent for the rest of the system.
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
17
In an economy in which four fifths of firms’ financing comes from banks, as I 
observed earlier the contraction in economic activity inevitably had repercussions 
on the banks. Their profitability and capacity to generate capital deteriorated, as 
revenues diminished while loan losses increased. On average in the three years 
2013-2015 loan losses wiped out 90 per cent of their operating profit. 
The  benefits  of  the  economic  recovery  are  now  slowly  showing  up  in 
banks’  balance  sheets.  Last  year’s  negative  results  partly  reflect  the  low  level 
of interest rates and one-off costs sustained to incentivize early retirements; 
another contributing factor was the substantial write-downs on loans made in 
the closing months of 2016. In the first quarter of this year the operating profits 
of the leading groups held broadly stable, while write-downs were reduced by 
about a fifth. Lending to the non-financial private sector continued to grow at 
an annual rate of around 1 per cent. The success of the UniCredit Group’s very 
substantial capital increase on the market is an important marker of confidence.
The crisis struck especially those banks which were already weak, owing in 
part to shortcomings in corporate governance and imprudent – in some cases 
illicit – granting of credit. This was the case of the four banks placed in resolution 
at the end of 2015 and of the groups currently engaged in capital strengthening.
In cases of serious irregularities, we imposed the most severe sanctions 
applicable  under  the  law.  In  cases  of  malfeasance,  suspected  offences  were 
promptly reported to the judicial authorities, initiating our cooperation during 
our on-site inspections.
The  major  reforms  enacted  in  recent  years  were  designed  to  correct 
the shortcomings of banks thrown into relief by the crisis. Since the end of 
2015  eight  of  the  ten  largest  cooperative  banks,  whose  operations  extend 
far beyond the sphere of the local community, have been transformed into 
public  limited  companies.  The  reform  has  strengthened  the  incentives  for 
monitoring the activities of these banks’ directors, improved transparency in 
corporate management and enhanced their capacity to tap the capital markets. 
It provides for increased members’ attendance at meetings, defusing the risk 
of concentration of power in the hands of organized minorities. The merger 
of  Banco  Popolare  and  Banca  Popolare  di  Milano  at  the  start  of  this  year 
created the third largest banking group in Italy. Mutual banks, with the reform 
currently being implemented, can have recourse to the market and increase 
their support for local economic activity with greater efficiency and security 
while preserving the mutualistic spirit that distinguishes them.
Our supervisory activity was conducted during a period of intensive change 
in international and European banking regulations. Above all, the design of a 
new  system  for  managing  bank  crises  and,  before  that,  the  more  restrictive 
interpretation of the rules on State aid, marked a radical new departure, as  
18
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
I have observed on several occasions. In the downturn the risks of the transition 
were underestimated. In applying the new rules, financial stability must not be 
jeopardized. In adherence to the principles underpinning the new European 
rules,  authorities’  interventions  must  be  designed  to  preserve  the  value  of 
banking activity, to the benefit of savers and borrower firms. We cannot run the 
risk of undermining confidence in the banks and in the savings in their custody.
Effective  crisis  management  requires  extremely  prompt  and  decisive 
action, close cooperation among all those involved, and the clear definition of 
responsibilities and priorities. This is how in the past even severe strains were 
overcome in Italy without damage to savers or the credit system as a whole. 
Today, under the new European arrangements, crisis interventions are assigned 
to multiple, mutually independent authorities and institutions, both national 
and  supranational,  with  decision-making  processes  relatively  incompatible 
with rapid intervention. Effective coordination is lacking.
In  market  conditions  in  which  the  transfer  of  banking  assets  is  very 
difficult, the competent European authorities now treat preventive intervention 
by deposit protection funds as equivalent to State aid, even though these funds 
are completely private and their utilization is determined by entrepreneurial 
considerations, not by interventions by authorities. The use of public funds, 
even though it may be economically and financially advantageous, is subject to 
stringent limits even after shareholders and subordinated creditors have been 
bailed-in.
In recent weeks, at the end of a laborious and complex process, the procedure 
for the sale of three of the four banks placed in resolution was completed; for the 
fourth, the process is nearing conclusion. Negotiations are continuing between 
Italian  and  European  authorities  for  precautionary  public  recapitalization  
– an instrument envisaged by the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive –  
of Banca Monte Paschi di Siena, Banca Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca. 
Negotiations are at an advanced stage for the sale of three small banks to a large 
French banking group, with the financial and operational intervention of a 
voluntary fund constituted by most Italian intermediaries.
The  banks  under  our  direct  supervision  are  continuously  monitored, 
which involves intense on-site inspection activity as well as off-site analysis. 
In years past these checks have enabled us to resolve problems in the areas 
of  corporate  governance,  organization,  and  risk  management.  In  2016  we 
conducted 95 inspections of banks under our direct supervision, in line with 
the average of recent years. In most cases the inspections embraced the whole 
spectrum of the bank’s business. The checks on credit risk, which centre on loan 
classification and the adequacy of the banks’ write-downs, are very thorough; 
a selection of individual loans are screened and a very large proportion of the 
entire portfolio is checked.
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
19
For the 101 banks (not counting mutual banks) under our direct supervision, 
last year the prudential review process produced positive assessments in 60 per 
cent of the cases. The 35 per cent that were put on a ‘watch list’ will be subject 
to  more  intensive  and  stringent  controls  and  interventions.  The  remaining 
‘critical’ assessments referred to small banks at which corporate reorganizations 
and recapitalizations are now under way, among other purposes to deal with 
the potential capital shortfalls that emerged following the assessments of the 
effects of adverse scenarios. 
In the mutual bank sector, in the three years 2014-16 on-site inspections 
were carried out at two thirds of the sector’s 330 banks; 60 in 2016 alone. Also 
in this case the problems that emerged consequent to the prudential review 
involved  only  a  limited  number  of  intermediaries,  at  which  interventions 
are under way or nearing completion to resolve the difficulties with a view 
to their inclusion in the larger groups that will be created as a result of the 
reform. For two large groups, together with the ECB in 2018 we will conduct 
a comprehensive assessment like that held in 2014 for the banks subject to 
joint European supervision.
At the Italian banks classed in 2016 as significant, 34 inspections were 
made last year on behalf of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, conducted 
mostly by Bank of Italy inspectors, and in the most important cases with the 
participation  of  staff  from  other  member  country  authorities.  Another  11 
inspections dealt with questions of transparency and money laundering at those 
banks. Our inspectors also took part in checks at large foreign intermediaries.
In exercising the powers and duties that the law assigns to the Bank of 
Italy in the area of banking products, in 2016 we reminded 90 intermediaries 
of the need for full and prompt compliance with the rules on transparency 
and correctness in customer relations. Appropriate corrective measures were 
required  and  sanction  proceedings  initiated  where  necessary.  As  a  result  of 
these controls, banks refunded some €35 million of improperly debited fees to 
customers. The activity of the Banking and Financial Ombudsman, to which 
the  Bank  of  Italy  provides  organizational  support,  is  expanding  rapidly.  In 
2016 alone the Ombudsman received some 22,000 complaints and handed 
down  14,000  decisions,  three  quarters  of  them  in  favour  of  the  customer. 
Although these decisions are not binding, in virtually all cases the bank abided 
by  them;  this  resulted  in  the  refunding  of  another  €13  million.  The  Bank 
of Italy’s controls in this area are complemented by our financial education 
initiatives; we are taking an active part in the launch of a national financial 
education strategy.
The 
revision  of 
for 
implementation of the fourth European directive has now been completed. 
The  new  framework  confirms  the  role  and  organization  of  the  supervisory 
Italy’s  anti-money 
regulations 
laundering 
20
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
authorities and Italy’s financial intelligence unit (UIF). The Unit’s position 
within  the  Bank  assures  its  independence  and  effective  preventive  action. 
In  its  ten  years  of  existence  our  system  has  worked  well,  as  is  shown  by 
the declining number and decreasing gravity of the criticisms raised in the 
course  of  inspections,  the  growing  cooperation  of  financial  institutions  in 
reporting suspicious transactions, and the important contribution of the UIF 
to  investigative  and  judicial  activities.  Given  the  high  threat  of  terrorism, 
procedures for investigation and cooperation, including at international level, 
have been finalized to intercept and counter terrorist financing.
Today, Italian banks are called on to change in order to bring profitability 
back up to adequate levels. This is the spirit in which they must address the 
challenges  of  technological  progress  and  the  evolving  structure  of  markets. 
They must proceed resolutely in the rationalization of branch networks, the 
even radical overhaul of governance structures, and the reduction of the cost 
of labour, at all levels. The spread of new forms of financing of the economy 
alternative  to  bank  credit,  involving  the  direct  access  of  firms  to  investors 
and  the  capital  market,  may  enable  the  banks  themselves  to  broaden  and 
diversify their sources of income. A significant contribution can come from 
corporate finance and asset management services; these lines of business, while 
permitting  less  stringent  capital  requirements,  demand  special  attention  to 
ensuring correct relations with customers.
The growth of forms of intermediation hinging on the use of technology 
heightens  competition  and  itself  makes  possible  a  wider  range  of  services. 
Digitalization  also  comes  with  operational  risks,  however,  and  makes 
infrastructures vulnerable to external attacks. Customers’ confidence depends 
crucially on transparent information, correct conduct, and data security. The 
computer emergency response team formed together with the Italian Banking 
Association and the participation of banks and other financial sector entities is 
acting effectively. International coordination for IT security is indispensable. 
Within the framework of the G7 a programme of cooperation has been initiated 
with the objective of developing common lines of action to strengthen the 
protection of financial entities, private and public alike.
 The  global  economic  scenario  has  been  transformed  by  sweeping 
commercial,  financial,  technological  and  demographic  change.  Italy  has 
struggled to respond, and this explains the difficulties it has encountered in 
lending vigour to the strengthening recovery. 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
21
The need to exit the crisis has called for, still calls for, an exceptional effort. 
Just as exceptional is the commitment necessary to return to a path of stable, 
high growth and to resolve the question of jobs, which are so difficult to create, 
maintain, and transform, a question that is of vital importance today not only 
in the economic sphere.  
The main lesson of the crisis is that imbalances must be corrected quickly, 
otherwise sooner or later the price will have to be paid. On the subject of 
reforms, on the state of the public finances, on banks, we must keep moving 
forward, not backward. The structural adjustment of the economy requires 
the  continued  removal  of  restrictions  on  business  activity  and  further 
encouragement of competition and innovation. 
We  must  remain  open  to  technological  progress  because  there  is  no 
alternative if we want to create jobs and well-being. The choice of economic 
policies and the decisions made by each of us require a comprehensive vision: to 
respond to these challenges we need to invest heavily in knowledge and in new 
and interconnected skills, essential to combatting the threats to employment 
and attenuating the inequalities that the digital revolution risks accentuating. 
Italy must take advantage of the consolidating recovery to accelerate the 
necessary structural adjustment to the public accounts; the high public debt 
is a serious source of vulnerability which weighs on the country’s economy.  
A  credible  debt  reduction  plan  may  gather  its  own  momentum.  It  could 
trigger a virtuous cycle similar to the one which allowed us to adopt the euro. 
We could pay no better tribute to the memory of Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, who 
defined just such a plan and implemented it. 
The banking and financial sectors must profoundly modernize to meet 
the challenge posed by technological competition. Some, albeit hesitant and 
small, steps have been taken.
The legacy of the double-dip recession, endured but not caused by Italian 
banks, must be left behind. The banking system as a whole is not experiencing a 
crisis, but its strength is inextricably linked to the health of the economy. Various 
problematic situations pertaining to individual banks have been resolved or are 
in the process of being resolved; in Italy and Europe we are working on open 
cases intensively and with determination.
The flow of new non-performing loans is slowing; those inherited from the 
past must be actively managed in order to accelerate their reduction. We can debate 
the methods used to avoid excessive losses but this is an obligatory step to regain 
the trust of the markets and recover profitability. To this end, additional progress 
in reforming the civil justice system is important but not in itself sufficient.
We  must  continue  with  conviction  along  the  path  of  cost  reduction, 
corporate reorganization, and the adoption of efficient corporate governance 
22
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
structures. This is not something that only affects a few banks facing difficulties 
but also healthy banks if they want to remain so. 
It is an illusion to think that Italy’s economic problems could be solved 
more readily outside of Economic and Monetary Union. A departure from the 
euro, which is often discussed with scant knowledge of the facts, would not 
serve to heal the structural defects of our economy; it certainly would not lower 
interest expenses much less would it magically lower our debt level. On the 
contrary, it would generate serious risks of instability. Italy’s competitiveness is 
not suffering from an overvalued currency; the current account in the balance of 
payments is in surplus; our spending power has been defended. The European 
rules on the public finances contain some elements of flexibility, to be invoked 
by always paying careful attention to the scale and rollover of the debt.
Monetary policy has done what had to be done for the area as a whole, 
aiming at guaranteeing price stability by sustaining demand; it will continue 
to do so in the appropriate time and manner. There is often talk about when 
we will commence monetary policy normalization, though not always with 
the necessary analytical rigour. Some speak of desiring a forced acceleration, 
others by contrast, conjure up the spectrum of potentially drastic consequences. 
When the decision is made it will mean that aggregate demand conditions and 
prices in the euro area have been restored to the desired levels. At national level 
the exit will be manageable if all the actors involved behave responsibly. 
Looking  forward,  the  gradual  return  to  higher  interest  rates  if  growth 
levels increase should not concern us unduly. What should worry us instead 
is the risk that rates increase as a result of a fall in market confidence, the 
consequences of which, given the weight of public debt, could prove serious.
We are facing difficult issues in Europe: the exit of the United Kingdom 
from the European Union, growing migration flows, the threat of terrorism. 
The biggest obstacle is the dearth of confidence that has developed in recent 
years, the return of mutual mistrust and prejudice among member states and 
between the peoples of Europe and its institutions. We must take arms against 
these tendencies.
The process of European integration has guaranteed seventy years of peace 
and prosperity. It has made it possible for many generations of young adults to 
study abroad and to develop a sense of belonging, surmounting linguistic and 
cultural barriers; it has provided working adults with new job and professional 
growth opportunities; it has intensified trade and strengthened financial ties.
Europe must remain an anchor of stability in a world that appears ever 
more  unstable  and  politically  unpredictable.  The  willingness  to  cooperate 
more  closely  on  issues  such  as  immigration,  defence,  security,  justice  and 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
23
representation at international fora is undoubtedly a positive signal. We must 
continue on this path, tackling the issues that still stand in the way of effective 
economic governance of the euro area.
At times we also criticize European rules that do not satisfy us completely 
or the decisions by European authorities of which we do not approve, but we 
do not do so to question the path of European integration. We believe – and we 
have reiterated this on many occasions – that one of the problems that the crisis 
has laid bare is precisely the incompleteness of European integration, especially 
in the areas of the economy and finance. European governance in these sectors 
has to date relied almost exclusively on rules that, in an exaggerated pursuit of 
mutual guarantees, constrain the choices of each country. The result has been 
a Union that is better at prohibiting things than at getting them done.
This is evident in the public finances; in the absence of a common budget, 
it has been hard to lend support to the economic recovery. It is also evident in 
the management of bank crises and in the preservation of financial stability, 
where the splitting of powers among a large number of authorities makes it 
difficult, at times, to identify the measures to be adopted and slows actions 
that, to be effective, must instead be taken extremely quickly.
Proceeding by means of compromises is becoming increasingly difficult. 
Completing Banking Union and establishing a capital markets union are clear 
and immediate objectives. The true completion of the European construction, 
however,  will  only  be  achieved  with  the  development  of  democratically 
designated institutions mandated to exercise common sovereignty.
The difficulties we have faced in these critical years have been arduous 
as  are  the  challenges  that  remain.  For  the  Bank  of  Italy  this  means  being 
increasingly  effective  in  fulfilling  its  role,  enlarging  its  scope  and  sharing 
responsibilities at European level.
The process of bringing Italy back to a path of growth has begun, but must 
be lent greater support. The changes will require time, commitment and sacrifice. 
Measures to sustain demand can moderate the economic and social costs of the 
transition, but economic policies must be far-sighted and highlight the benefits 
to society. Consensus must be built by setting out and communicating clear and 
ambitious plans that are firmly grounded in reality.
I  am  confident  that,  notwithstanding  the  political  uncertainty,  Italy 
will achieve results that serve the public interest, never forgetting those who 
have been left behind, freeing the economy of futile constraints, privileged 
positions, and accumulated and emerging delays. All the opportunities now 
afforded by innovation must be seized to develop a robust economy, a stable 
financial system, and a more equitable society for all. 
24
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
FIGURES
GDP growth
Figure 1
4
% 
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
World 
Euro area 
Italy 
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Sources: Istat, Eurostat and IMF. Forecasts: Bank of Italy, ECB and IMF.
Inflation
World 
Italy 
Euro area 
5
% 
4
3
2
1
0
-1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Sources: Eurostat and IMF. Forecasts: Bank of Italy, ECB and IMF.
4
% 
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
5
% 
4
3
2
1
0
-1
Figure 2
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
27
GDP
(2007=100) 
Figure 3
108
106
104
102
100
98
96
94
92
90
Euro area (excluding Italy) 
Italy 
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Sources: Based on Istat and Eurostat data. Note: GDP at chain-linked values.
Per capita GDP in Italy 
(1929=100; 2007=100)  
1929-1938 
(Great Depression) 
2007-2016 
(Great Recession) 
105
100
95
90
85
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Source: Bank of Italy historical reconstruction. Note: GDP at chain-linked values.
108
106
104
102
100
98
96
94
92
90
105
100
95
90
85
Figure 4
28
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
Public debt/GDP and GDP in Italy 
(GDP: 2007=100) 
GDP (right-hand scale) 
Public debt/GDP 
135
% 
125
115
105
95
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
2016
Source: Based on Bank of Italy and Istat data. Note: GDP at chain-linked values.
Bad loan ratio and GDP in Italy 
(GDP: 2007=100)
Bad loans/total loans  
GDP (right-hand scale)  
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
2016
6
% 
5
4
3
2
1
Figure 5
Figure 6
102
96
90
84
78
102
97
92
87
82
77
Sources: Based on Istat data and supervisory reports. Note: Ratio of bad loans to total loans, net of 
write-downs; GDP at chain-linked values.
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
29
Unemployment rate
Figure 7
13
% 
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
Euro area (excluding Italy) 
Italy 
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Source: Based on Eurostat data.
Per capita GDP and productivity in Italy 
(average annual growth rates)
Per capita GDP
Productivity 
Post-Unification 
Giolitti era
(1861-1896)
 (1896-1913)
Early inter-war 
period       
(1919-1929)
Great Depression 
Post-war period 
(1929-1938)
(1950-1973)
Pre-Maastricht 
Post-Maastricht
Treaty 
(1973-1995)
Treaty
(1995-2007)
Great Recession 
Recovery
(2007-2013)
(2013-2016)
6
% 
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
13
% 
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
% 
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
Figure 8
Source: Bank of Italy historical reconstruction. Note: Total factor productivity; GDP at chain-linked 
values.
30
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2016
Printed by the 
Printing and Publishing Division  
of the Bank of Italy 
Rome, 31 May 2017
