Peter Praet: The macroeconomic situation and monetary policy in
the euro area
Introductory remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the MNI Connect Roundtable and OMFIF lunch discussion, London, 23 February 2017.
 Today  I  will  discuss  the  current  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area,  the  outlook  and  the
implications for monetary policy.
As  a  central  bank  with  a  clear  price  stability  mandate,  we  need  to  ultimately  judge  economic
developments with regard to their implications for price stability. Inflation has fallen short of the
ECB’s medium-term inflation goal of below, but close to, 2% since the beginning of 2013. But
recently, with the fading of the declines in energy prices that restrained inflation, headline inflation
has moved up quite sharply. In the near future, we will have to assess how the forces that are
driving  prices  today  can  influence  the  outlook  for  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  and  help
durably stabilise inflation around our goal.
The  economic  recovery  will  help  support  domestic  price  pressures.  Indeed,  the  upswing  is
continuing  at  a  moderate,  but  firming  pace,  and  is  broadening  gradually  across  sectors  and
countries. Real GDP growth has expanded for 15 consecutive quarters, growing by 0.4% during
the final quarter of 2016 in the euro area according to the Eurostat flash estimate. Economic
sentiment  is  at  its  highest  level  in  nearly  six  years  and  unemployment  is  back  to  single-digit
figures. Looking beyond the euro area, the global economy, too, is showing increasing signs of a
cyclical upturn.
The euro area economy has been resilient in the face of a number of risks and uncertainties at
global level. One example of its improving resilience is the fact that domestic demand is now the
mainstay of real GDP growth. Previously, growth in the euro area was closely correlated with the
strength  of  international  trade,  but  that  relationship  has  weakened  recently;  last  year’s  growth
would not have been possible in view of the lacklustre international conditions.
Our monetary policy measures have been a key contributor to these positive developments in the
euro  area  economy.  The  comprehensive  set  of  measures  introduced  since  June  2014  has
worked  its  way  through  the  financial  system,  leading  to  a  significant  easing  of  financing
conditions for consumers and firms. Together with improving financial and non-financial sector
balance sheets, this has strengthened credit dynamics and supported domestic demand.
Since  June  of  that  year,  bank  lending  rates  for  both  euro  area  households  and  non-financial
corporations  have  fallen  by  over  110  basis  points.  Lending  rates  for  small  and  medium-sized
enterprises, which provide two-thirds of total private sector employment in the euro area, have
declined by over 180 basis points.
1
The sharp reduction in bank lending rates has been accompanied by easier access to funding,
as  recent  surveys  have  shown.   These  positive  developments  have  been  supported  by  the
second  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  as  a  result  of  which  banks  are
passing on the favourable funding conditions to their customers. Moreover, these improvements
are not limited to interest rates: bank lending volumes have also been gradually recovering since
early 2014. Market-based funding conditions, too, have improved significantly in response to the
corporate sector purchase programme launched in June 2016.
We  expect  the  euro  area  economy  to  recover  further.  Private  consumption  growth  and  the
continued cyclical recovery of business investment are expected to support domestic demand.
Underpinning  consumption  are 
labour  market  conditions,  with
improvements 
the 
in 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
unemployment  steadily  falling  despite  a  rise  in  participation.  These  developments  increase
households’ real disposable income, which boosts the spending of established employees, who
are confident about their earnings prospects, as well as new employees. Business investment is
also expected to continue recovering amid support from better corporate profitability.
As for price developments, after hovering at levels well below 1% for three years, with occasional
dips into negative territory, euro area headline inflation edged higher towards the end of last year
and reached 1.8% in January. This upward movement of inflation mainly reflects increases in
energy and food prices. By contrast, underlying inflation – which relates more to domestic price
pressures  –  continues  to  remain  very  subdued  and  has  yet  to  show  clear  signs  of  a  more
dynamic upward movement. For example, the annual rate of HICP inflation excluding food and
energy has mostly remained below 1% since late 2013.
So  why  is  underlying  inflation  still  slow  to  pick  up? And  will  further  monetary  accommodation
really facilitate a durable return of inflation back to a level that is below, but close to, 2% over the
medium  term?  To  answer  these  questions  we  need  to  acknowledge  that  monetary  policy
controls medium-term inflation through two main channels: by influencing cyclical conditions and
by pinning down expectations.
As  you  see,  I  have  omitted  from  my  list  the  sort  of  “structural  factors”  that  have  figured
prominently in the recent debate on secular stagnation and have been invoked – in that context –
as an explanation for low inflation. This is not to say, however, that forces that are structural in
nature and unrelated to monetary policy cannot influence the inflation trajectory for what might be
a protracted period of time. For example, a supply shock that reduces firms’ pricing power by
either weakening barriers to entry or by increasing price transparency can result in a mark-up
squeeze for firms, triggering a drawn-out process of disinflation that can last for years. But once
firms have adjusted to the new competitive landscape and their selling prices stabilise around a
lower equilibrium level, the mark-up squeeze will cease to drive aggregate inflation down. Inflation
– once more – will start fluctuating around the level that the central bank chooses for the medium
term. The traditional Phillips curve connection between current inflation, expectations of future
inflation and the cycle will re-assert itself.
Eurosystem  staff  analysis  confirms  that  the  Phillips  curve  remains  alive  and  well  in  the  euro
area. Today, that empirical regularity says that, while being on a gradual reabsorption path, some
remaining  slack  continues  to  restrain  underlying  inflation  in  the  euro  area.   By  ensuring
accommodative  financing  conditions,  monetary  policy  supports  domestic  demand,  which
creates the environment necessary for the mobilisation of idle resources to bring output back to
its potential level. This will lead to a build-up of price pressures and ultimately pull inflation up.
2
Monetary  policy  also  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations,  which  are  an
important  explanatory  factor  of  actual  inflation.  After  all,  inflation  expectations  determine  the
intercept of the Phillips curve.
Under  normal  conditions,  longer-term  inflation  expectations  should  remain  unaffected  by
transitory  shocks  that  typically  dissipate  over  the  medium  term,  such  as  those  related  to  oil
prices.  However,  recurrent  shocks  that  lead  to  either  a  prolonged  period  of  above-  or  below-
target  inflation  can  be  misinterpreted  as  a  lasting  change  in  underlying  inflation.  In  my  earlier
example,  if  the  central  bank  tolerates  a  prolonged  period  of  declining  mark-ups,  and  headline
inflation is weaker than the central bank’s target, then the Phillips curve in all likelihood will re-
anchor around a lower medium-term inflation level. In the worst scenario, self-reinforcing spirals
may  result,  as  firms  and  households  start  to  extrapolate  from  past  inflation  outcomes.  Their
expectations become self-fulfilling through adaptive wage- and price-setting behaviour.
Today,  an  important  element  keeping  underlying  price  pressures  subdued  is  muted  wage
dynamics, which are shaped by many factors. At this stage, there is still a significant degree of
labour  market  slack  and  weak  productivity  developments  that  keep  a  lid  on  wage  growth.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Furthermore, the process of setting wages is to some extent backward-looking in a number of
euro  area  countries,  reflecting  formal  and  informal  indexation  mechanisms.   Additionally,  the
timing  of  wage  negotiations  plays  a  role.  Wage  negotiations  often  have  a  multi-year  horizon;
given that headline inflation remained below 1% for 38 consecutive months until December of
last  year,  it  is  going  to  take  some  time  for  an  increase  in  headline  inflation  to  translate  into
second-round  effects  on  broader  inflation.  Moreover,  weak  wage  growth  could  also  reflect
previous downward wage rigidities: difficulties in reducing wages during the crisis may result in a
4
slower upward adjustment of wages as labour market conditions improve.
3
Just as our monetary policy measures have effectively underpinned the economic recovery, they
have  also  prevented  the  prolonged  period  of  disinflationary  pressures  from  turning  into  a
sustained period of deflation. In fact, the accommodative monetary policy stance appears to be
increasingly visible in developments in inflation expectations, which are showing signs of reversal
from previous flat or negative trends, while also reflecting changes in the global environment. For
example,  market-based  measures  of  euro  area  inflation  expectations  have  been  trending
upwards since early September, while survey-based measures of inflation expectations continue
to signal an increase of inflation.
So while we are certainly seeing a firming, broadening and more resilient economic recovery that
will in time translate into a durable increase in inflation, we cannot ignore the fact that one of the
main forces behind the upward inflation trajectory that we expect to see over the medium term is
monetary  policy  itself.  The  economic  recovery  and  the  outlook  for  price  stability  are  still
predicated on the very favourable financing conditions that to a large extent depend on continued
monetary policy support.
Therefore,  we  need  to  look  through  the  volatility  in  short-term  data  resulting  from  transitory
factors in order to assess whether progress towards a durable and self-sustaining convergence
in the path of inflation has been sufficient.
With  this  aim  in  mind,  the  Governing  Council  reaffirmed  at  its  last  meeting  that  the  asset
purchase programme will continue until the end of December 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and
in any case until we are sufficiently confident that inflation converges towards levels below, but
close to, 2% over the medium term and that this process will not reverse under less supportive
monetary policy conditions. 
Of course, monetary policy cannot be the only game in town: other policymakers must display
the same commitment to ensuring a sustainable economic recovery. Structural reforms can play
a key role in turning the cyclical recovery into a structural recovery and the current low interest
rate environment makes it politically and economically easier to implement them. Such reforms,
if carried out now, will help to promote favourable economic conditions down the road.
1
2
3
4
See ECB Bank Lending Survey, January 2017, and ECB Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the
euro area, April 2016 to September 2016.
For more detailed discussion of the Phillips curve and low inflation in the euro area economy, see Praet, P.
“Maintaining price stability in the euro area”, remarks at the 15th Handelsblatt Jahrestagung “Zukunftstrategien
für Sparkassen und Landesbanken”, Berlin, 2 February 2017.
For further discussion, see “Recent wage trends in the euro area”, Box 2, ECB Economic Bulletin 2016/03.
See,  for  example,  “Wage  dynamics  amid  high  euro-area  unemployment”,  Deutsche  Bundesbank  Monthly
Report, December 2016.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
