Klaas Knot: Are we all macroprudentialists now? 
Keynote speech by Mr Klaas Knot, President of the Netherlands Bank, at a seminar entitled 
“Tomorrow’s banking and how central banks have developed in last 15 Years”, organized by 
the Bank of Finland, Helsinki, 16 January 2017. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to speak at this conference at the Bank of Finland, in which we 
pay  tribute  to  Pentti  Hakkarainen.  As  Deputy  Governor  and  Chairman of  the  Finnish  FSA, 
Pentti  has  played  an  important  role  in  the  areas  of  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential 
policy.  
In my remarks, I would like to focus on the increased importance of macroprudential policy 
for central banks, and elaborate on some of Pentti’s main insights. 
I want to raise three main points. 
My first point is that financial crises have always happened and will always happen. And they 
do not result from some exogenous, extreme event. Rather, to use Pentti’s words, financial 
crises can “be interpreted as an extreme manifestation of the financial cycle phenomenon”.1 
By financial cycle we understand systematic patterns over time in the financial system that 
can have important macroeconomic consequences.  
Typically,  financial  crises  are  preceded  by  booms  characterized  by  a  combination  of 
intensified  financial  innovation,  robust  and  widespread  appetite  for  risk,  and  a  favorable 
economic  environment.  This  favorable  environment  could  for  example  reflect  new  growth 
impulses  from  technological  innovation,  international  trade,  and  mobile  and  volatile 
international capital flows. 
These patterns are indeed not specific to the Global Financial crisis, nor  – if we look back in 
time – to the Great Depression. In fact, the first truly global financial crisis in modern history – 
the South Sea Bubble of 1720 – originated in England, France and the Netherlands.2  
All key ingredients of an extreme financial cycle gone wrong can be found here. (The famous 
tulipmania that hit the Dutch Republic in 1636-37 shared some but not all of these elements, 
and its dynamics can be compared to the dotcom bubble rather than a global financial crisis.)  
The  burst  of  the  South  Sea  Bubble  followed  a  period  of  strong  economic  growth.  The 
discovery  of  the  economic  potential  of  the  New  World  had  led  to  a  shift  in  global  trade 
towards  the  triangle  that  brought  manufactured  goods  to  Africa,  Africans  as  slaves  to  the 
New World, and commodities to Europe. 
There  had  been  rapid  innovation  in  financial  engineering,  spurred  by  some  form  of 
deregulation.  This  allowed  greater  risk  sharing  and  supported  exuberance  in  the  financial 
sector.  “Shadow  banking”  (the  English  insurance  companies  and  international  investors) 
played a pivotal role.  
As  liquidity  stress  morphed  into  solvency  problems,  the  bubble  burst  with  a  dramatic 
international stock market crash.  
You can see how the mechanics of this crisis do not differ much from those of the recent 
Great Financial Crisis, and all other crises traced through history by Charles Kindleberger.3 
1  P. Hakkarainen (2015) Finance cycles and macroprudential tools - the case of Finland within the euro area. 
Speech  at  the  Seventh  High-Level  Policy  Dialogue  of  the  Eurosystem  and  Latin  American  Central  Banks, 
Madrid, 11 November. 
2  R. Frehen, W. Goetzmann and G. Rouwenhorst (2013) New evidence on the first financial bubble. Journal of 
Financial Economics. Vol. 108 (3), pp. 585–607. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  My  second  point  is  that  there  is  a  consensus  that  macroprudential  policy  is  an  essential 
toolkit but its effects and transmission channels are still not fully understood. 
Since  the  1930s,  policymakers  have  used  prudential  means  to  enhance  system-wide 
financial stability, with a view to limiting macroeconomic costs from financial distress. Some 
measures taken in the 1930s, 1950s and 1960s to support the domestic financial system and 
to  influence  the  supply  of  credit  have  been  viewed  as  macroprudential  tools.4  Still,  when 
Andrew Crockett pleaded for a macro perspective on prudential policy in 2000, the idea was 
controversial.5 
It took the Great Financial Crisis to forge a consensus on the importance of macroprudential 
policy.  As  Pentti  put  it,  “Macroprudential  policy  is  needed  in  addition  to  other  economic 
policies.  
It  is  very  important  that  authorities  have  also  macroprudential  instruments  available.  Now, 
after the Great Financial Crisis, we have instruments and framework in place.”6  
But in his usual sharpness Pentti also highlighted the challenges to using macroprudential 
tools:  “the  effects  of  the  said  instruments  are  uncertain  and  second,  processes  for  their 
usage are unnecessarily complicated. These points are intertwined.”7 
My  third  point  –  and  here  I  would  like  to  elaborate  a  bit  –  is  that  we  should  not  look  at 
macroprudential  policy  and  its  effectiveness  in  isolation.  As  Pentti  argued  in  a  speech  last 
year, it is important to coordinate macroprudential policy and monetary policy.8 
Let  me  elaborate.  The  effectiveness  of  macroprudential  policy  depends  importantly  on  its 
interaction with monetary policy. In particular, it hinges on the “side effects” that one policy 
has on the objectives of the other.  
On the one hand, monetary policy can thwart the intentions of macroprudential policy. We all 
agree that the monetary policy stance affects risk taking of the financial system as a whole. 
While  macroprudential  instruments  typically  target  specific  vulnerabilities,  monetary  policy 
affects the cost of finance for all financial institutions – including the shadow banking sector. 
As such, in the words of Jeremy Stein, it “gets in all of the cracks and may reach into corners 
of the market that supervision and regulation cannot”.9 
This is most evident in a crisis situation, such as the one we are still witnessing in the euro 
area. Standard and non-standard monetary policies that provide ample liquidity may avoid a 
collapse of the banking sector. But they can come at the expense of reduced incentives for 
                                                                                                                                                   
3  C.  Kindleberger  and  R.  Aliber  (2015)  Manias,  Panics  and Crashes:  A  History  of  Financial  Crises.  Palgrave 
Macmillan. 7th edition.  
4  A. Haldane (2011) Risk off. Speech delivered on 18 August.  
5  A. Crockett (2000) Marrying the micro- and macroprudential dimensions of financial stability. BIS Speeches, 
21 September. 
6  P. Hakkarainen (2016a) Capital-based macro-prudential instruments - what type of policy tools are needed to 
address  macro-prudential  risks  in  the  banking  sector?  Notes  for  the  panel  discussion  on  "Capital-based 
macro-prudential instruments - what type of policy tools are needed to address macro-prudential risks in the 
banking  sector?”  EU  Commission's  Public  Hearing  on  the  Review  of  the  EU  macro-prudential  framework. 
Brussels, 7 November. 
Ibidem. 
7 
8  P. Hakkarainen (2016b) Monetary policy - which road ahead. Notes for the session “Monetary Policy: Which 
Road Ahead?”. Frankfurt European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November.  
9  J. Stein (2013) Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses. Speech at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis research symposium on “Restoring Household Financial Stability after the 
Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter”, 7 February. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  banks to recapitalize and restructure. They may actually promote the evergreening of non-
performing loans and regulatory forbearance.  
It is argued that targeted macroprudential policies can offset these side effects. But I do not 
side with this Panglossian view and am afraid that there are limits to what macroprudential 
tools can achieve in practice. 
On  the  other  hand,  macroprudential  policy  can  thwart  the  intentions  of  monetary  policy. 
Changes in (micro and macro) prudential policy will affect banks’ risk-taking, their financing 
conditions  and  balance  sheet  composition.  They  will  therefore  have  an  impact  on  the  real 
economy and on price stability.  
The  fact  that  the  ongoing  unprecedented  monetary  policy  stimulus  does  not  translate  into 
rapid credit growth in the euro area might then not imply that monetary authorities are not 
doing  enough.  Rather,  banks  are  reacting  to  stricter  regulatory  rules  that  have  been 
introduced in the wake of the global financial crisis in an attempt to make the financial system 
more  resilient.  These  regulatory  changes  therefore  weaken  the  pass-through  of  monetary 
policy  measures  to  the  supply  of  bank  credit  and,  ultimately,  to  aggregate  demand  and 
inflation.  
Let me conclude. The claim that “we are all macroprudentialists now” seems to suggest that 
macroprudential  policy  has  become  fashionable.10  Are  we  then  all  macroprudentialists?  In 
the spirit of Pentti’s thinking my answer is:  Yes – as long as we stay eclectic, pragmatic and 
flexible. And we take the interactions of monetary and macroprudential policies into account, 
and coordinate the two policies. 
Thank you. 
                                                
10  C. Borio (2009) The macroprudential approach to regulation and supervision. VoxEU, 14 April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
