Elvira Nabiullina: Review of recent inflation developments in Russia
Statement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, in the follow-up to the Board
of Directors meeting, Moscow, 24 March 2017.
 Today the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to reduce the key rate to 9.75 p.a.
The economic situation is more favourable than we expected in December 2016. The upturn in
the economy has started earlier and is progressively gaining sustainability. The balanced growth
in  supply  and  demand  exerts  no  considerable  inflationary  pressure.  Inflation  is  slowing  down
faster than we predicted. Inflation expectations continue to go down. These developments favour
a change in the key rate. We reduced it today by a quarter percentage point and we are looking
into further cuts in the second and third quarters of this year.
At the same time, we need to be convinced that the positive trends will gain momentum. We
need to see inflation not just slowing down, but anchoring near the 4% target. Therefore, inflation
expectations should be anchored at this level. Inflation risks have abated somewhat for now, but
they  may  materialise  over  the  forecast  horizon.  Therefore,  we  will  reduce  the  key  rate
progressively in the medium term and are likely to take short pauses while sticking to moderate
tightness in our monetary policy. We will mostly rely on our pivotal meetings when we update and
release our macroeconomic forecast whereon our decision is based. Having said that, we do not
rule out that a decision may be made at one of our intermediate meetings.
Let us have a closer look at the factors behind today’s decision.
First, inflation has slowed down considerably. It stood at 5.4% in late 2016 and fell to 4.3%
as of 20 March. It is very close to the 4% target.
Inflation reduction is driven by a number of factors. Price growth is primarily checked by slack
consumer  demand.  Some  indicators  suggest  that  it  started  to  slowly  recover  in  early  2017.
However,  overall  households  retain  the  propensity  to  save,  of  which  deposits  are  indicative.
Incentives to save are supported by positive real interest rates.
Lowering inflation expectations also slow down consumer price growth, though they are still high.
Expectation  indicators  sometimes  wobble  up  and  down  and  we  speak  about  their  volatility.
Having said that, the most important development is that a downward trend has entrenched.
The ruble appreciation triggered inflation to reduce faster than forecast. It has affected all goods
and individual services in recent months, especially food prices. Prices for some products, such
as fruit and vegetables, even dropped, because they quickly respond to a changing environment.
That said, it also means that the situation may abruptly reverse for such goods. Exchange rate
movements also decelerated growth in non-food goods and service prices.
Another factor is heavy crops last year and in 2015. They have left stocks of farm produce which
drag down prices for some food products. This effect was expectable but proved to be stronger.
The contribution of exchange rate fluctuations and heavy crop to inflation slowdown may decline
in future. We took this into account when choosing the scale of key rate reduction.
The Bank of Russia maintains a focus on the analysis of inflation trends in the regions. Although
most regions are enjoying slower inflation, it still varies considerably. February data suggest that
annual inflation in the regions ranged between 1.9 and 6.4%. Differing readings for price growth
across regions are explained by a number of factors including households’ capacity to pay, the
level of competition, industrial specialisation and the policy of local authorities. Monetary policy
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
checks overall inflationary pressure; yet, regional differences will persist, albeit, as we foresee,
will diminish progressively.
Inflation  may  also  vary  across  households  with  different  incomes.  Early  last  year,  these
differences became stronger.  This year we are witnessing lower inflation almost in all income
groups, except for highest income households. Inflation in medium and low income households
is approaching the 4% target, which is certainly a positive trend. This lays the groundwork for
soundness of households’ savings and incomes.
Second, a more sustainable economic recovery does not trigger inflationary pressure.
The updated Rosstat data suggest that the downturn in the Russian economy was not so deep
in  2015–2016  and  the  economy  saw  a  recovery  earlier  than  expected.  If  we  compare  this
situation with the overall economic crunch of 2008–2009, we can see that GDP dropped over
10% at the time, while in 2015–2016 it contracted by slightly more than 3%, given that the oil
price drops were similar. We will be able to revise our estimates in April, when Rosstat publishes
its updated statistics for 2016. Preliminary estimates suggest that GDP started showing quarterly
growth as soon as 2016 Q2 (Q3 according to previous estimates).  Annual industrial production
growth entered positive territory in the first quarter of last year. Estimates of industrial production
statistics for the beginning of this year need calendar adjustment. This February is two working
days shorter than last year, which results in different volumes. If adjusted for this factor, industrial
production continued to expand, adding more than 1% YoY in February. This calendar effect will
also manifest itself in overall Q1 readings.
After a long period of instability, we can see clearer signs of investment recovery.  Production
and imports of investment goods are growing. Surveys confirm that investment demand is on the
rise.  Businesses  are  building  up  stockpiles  as  they  expect  demand  to  recover.  These
expectations may soon prove right. We predict consumption to increase in annual terms as soon
as the second quarter. It will come after expansion in production and will not create inflation risks.
Third,  the  short-term  risks  stemming  from  Finance  Ministry  operations  have  not
materialised.
As  we  were  making  the  key  rate  decision  in  February,  the  Finance  Ministry  was  then  yet  to
launch  its  forex  operations  as  part  of  the  budget  rule.  It  was  difficult  to  gauge  the  envisaged
impact of such operations. The Finance Ministry-conducted purchases of foreign currency could
have  fomented  a  short-term  deterioration  in  exchange  rate  and  inflation  expectations.  Given  a
number of risks including these, we toughened our rhetoric at the time. To date we see that the
foreign  currency  market  has  remained  steady.  The  impact  of  these  operations  on  the  ruble
exchange rate was immaterial if its strengthening factors prevailed.
Fourth,  the  updates  to  the  outlook  are  mainly  related  to  2017,  with  the  mid-term
prospects for economic development unchanged.
A conservative approach to the baseline scenario assumes oil prices to drop to $40 a barrel by
the end of 2017. In this case, the average annual oil price will hold near $50 in 2017, that is, well
above the previous scenario’s assumptions. It would be difficult at this point to make a definitive
forecast as regards the potential extension, in the middle of the year, of oil producers’ output cut
deal.  This  is  indeed  an  uncertainty  factor.  Oil  prices  may  also  be  under  downward  pressure
coming from rising outputs of shale oil, as well as a potentially stronger dollar on the back of the
US Fed rate rise.
In a scenario when we see oil prices slump from the current relatively high levels, both business
and household expectations are set to be negatively affected for a time. However, we expect no
reversal in the current positive economic trend. We cannot rule out a certain slowdown in the
paces  of  growth  between  late  this  year  and  early  next  year;  yet  subsequently,  the  economic
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
trends of today will prevail. Businesses will be gradually building up investment as they capitalise
on their profits accumulated in prior years. The real sector’s ability to borrow will also improve
over  time. Alongside  with  softer  monetary  conditions,  this  will  give  extra  impetus  to  growth  in
investment.  Consumer  demand  will  recover  gradually  on  the  back  of  growing  revenues  and
improving expectations. This process is expected to be smooth and create no inflation risks. The
recent strengthening in the ruble is set to bring about increased demand for imports in the first
half of 2017. Moving forward, however, this growth is on course to become slower; in this way,
exports are set to grow at moderate paces.
In 2017–2018, economic growth will total about 1-1.5%, with acceleration to 1.5-2% envisaged as
early as 2019. Still, potential economic growth will be invariably constrained by structural factors.
Following this recovery period, paces of GDP growth are expected to be equal or less than 1.5-
2%.
The current account balance is expected to rise in 2017, prompted by higher oil prices. It will
decline  in  the  course  of  2018,  triggered  by  a  slump  in  oil  prices  that  the  forecast  assumes.
Capital outflow will remain low and under $13 billion helped by, among other things, a drop in net
external corporate debt payments.
Banks  are  expected  to  fully  pay  out  their  forex  repo  debt  in  the  course  of  2017,  which  is
estimated, alongside the Finance Ministry-conducted foreign currency purchases, to help foreign
currency reserves grow by as much as $23 billion.
The baseline scenario assumes that a reduction in oil prices will trigger no growth in inflation,
which  will  continue  to  slow  down  on  track  to  reach  4%  before  the  end  of  2017  and  will  be
subsequently  maintained  near  this  level  on  condition  our  monetary  policy  remains  moderately
tight.
Fifth, the risks that we may fail to deliver on the target for inflation by late 2017 have
gone down. The outrunning slowdown in inflation to date is seen as a margin of safety
going forward. At the same time, risks remain that inflation may fail to become anchored
around the target level in the medium term.
We see output prices accelerating growth across several core industries including oil production
and metallurgy. This may have negative implications for costs and, as a result, for the economy
overall.  Should  the  baseline  scenario  that  assumes  a  correction  in  oil  prices  materialise,  this
factor is expected to have only a minor and short-lived impact on inflation.
The current inflation risks are also related to the deterioration in some global food markets. In
particular, we currently see growth accelerating in prices for dairy products, meat and sugar.
The  tax  policy  measures  under  discussion  may  have  pro-inflationary  implications,  to  be
estimated once more clarity is available on the scale of proposed changes.
Also, the risks that inflation expectations will decrease too slowly are still there. It is important to
take into account that inflation expectations are sensitive to other risks materialising, for instance,
to the risks of fluctuating prices in commodity and merchandise markets. These may be affected
by even an upsurge in prices for only individual goods or services – for example, those frequently
purchased. Growing inflation expectations, in their turn, may reinforce the impact of various one-
off factors on prices. As we look into these trends, we put household expectations in the first
place. On the side of analysts’ expectations, these continue to decline and on track to approach
the target level of inflation. This is a truly positive trend considering that companies may well be
guided  by  analysts’  estimates  in  their  decision-making  –  and  it  is  companies  that  determine
prices and wages.
As  I  have  mentioned  on  several  occasions  before,  we  are  seeking  more  than  a  one-time
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
reduction in price growth to 4%. It is important to anchor inflation near this level in future. For this
reason we call this situation price stability, i.e. sustainably low inflation.
To maintain inflation close to its target level, moderately tight monetary policy may be needed
over a two-three year horizon. This is necessitated by the still high sensitivity of inflation to one-
off factors, as well as its inertia and elevated inflation expectations. As they stabilise close to the
target level of inflation, prices are expected to be less responsive to various short-term factors.
These new conditions would see no need for additional tightening in the monetary policy stance
to ensure that inflation holds near 4%.
This conservative strategy in monetary policy may appear unattractive short-term; however it will
enable us to deliver on a more sustainable result in the mid-term, that is, deliver on the objective
to  establish  in  Russia  a  low  price  and  cost  growth  environment  –  such  that  favours  both
households and businesses, as well as the overall economy.
Q&A for the Media
QUESTION from Vedomosti:
Given the Bank of Russia’s move to reduce the rate and its guidance that further rate reduction is
not impossible in the second and third quarter, does that suggest that the Bank of Russia has
launched a monetary loosening cycle?
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
An easing cycle is understood as a process of sequential rate reduction, decided at each policy
Board  meeting.  Having  said  that,  we  acknowledge  that  the  sequence  of  rate  cuts  may  be
interrupted, though this would not run counter to an overall mid-term downward movement of the
rate. We will move forward with care and precision. For the most part we will be largely guided by
economic data as well as, certainly, by our forecasts. Under such uncertain circumstances and
present risks of inflation we are unable to state with certainty that this move constitutes the start
of a recurrent easing cycle, to be continued upon decision at each forthcoming Board meeting.
However,  we  are  not  ruling  this  out  as  a  likely  possibility,  conditional  on  a  sufficiently  positive
outlook.
RIA Novosti’s QUESTION:
According  to  a  recent  statement  issued  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  inflation  is  expected  to
decrease to 4% as early as in the first half of the year. In any case the Bank of Russia predicts
that the target for inflation will be hit by the end of the year. Could you please comment on any
risks  the  Central  Bank  sees  in  this  potential  over-performance?  Can  the  Central  Bank  have
estimated a divergence, of critical importance, from the target in this case? If so, what is the
extent of this deviation? Is there any risk that inflation will get stuck above 4%? And are there any
risks associated with a rate of inflation of around 3%? Have you made any critical calculations of
a twofold estimate? And if not, when do you intend to do so? Thank you.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Our goal is to ensure that inflation remains around 4%, a target we have always spoken of. In
other words, it is impossible to expect that the rate of inflation will work out to be precisely 4%
every  single  day. An  economy  being  a  living  organism,  it  is  only  natural  for  inflation  to  hover
around 4%, that is, slightly higher or slightly lower on any given day. This figure may appear as
early as this year. This is a completely normal situation, without any indication of risk whatsoever.
This is the way it should be. Risks may emerge only if we see either a substantial or lengthy
deviation in the rate of inflation in either direction from the 4% target.
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
You will recall that in the early days of inflation targeting this range was defined as 4% plus or
minus  1.5  percentage  points.  We  rejected  this  range,  for  the  following  reason:  we  did  this
because both analysts and market players were of the opinion that we were aiming for a point
outside the middle of this band, with expectations tending towards its upper limit. We decided to
put the plug on this scheme and make known our intentions to ensure a sustainable downward
movement in the rate of inflation towards the target.
However, we leave open the possibility for this variation range to be reinstated once we have hit
our 4% inflation target. Such a range exists in many economies, and it is open to variation. I think
this issue will be on our agenda this autumn as we develop our Monetary Policy Guidelines; at
this time we will look into the need for this range and its potential impact on our communication
policy. Thank you.
QUESTION from Reuters:
Your press release allows for a gradual downgrade in the key rate. Is this to say that a 25 basis
point reduction in future is the new normalcy?
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Thank  you  very  much.  It  is  true  that  we  have  decided  on  this  magnitude  of  reduction  –  25
percentage points after long time. A short while ago, I floated the idea of a smaller step as we
transition progressively to a single-digit rate. This is understood to be standard practice when the
key rate is below 10%. Yet, this is not to say that each policy meeting will decide in favour of a 25
bp  reduction.  I  leave  open  the  possibility  of  a  further  0.5  bp  reduction  provided  that  the  right
conditions are in place; however, I envisage that a 0.25 reduction is likely to be more acceptable
in the near future.
QUESTION from Interfax:
Two questions, please. First. Last autumn, the Central Bank issued a public statement that it
was crafting guidance for civil servants, in an effort to mitigate the volatility of the exchange rate.
Can  you  please  update  us  on  the  status  of  this  guidance?  For  which  civil  servants  is  this
intended? Does this initiative remain current in light of recent statements that suggest a general
over-strengthening in the ruble and that they weigh in on the exchange rate?
And another question, if I may. Recently, we have heard heavy criticism against Rosstat. What is
the  Bank  of  Russia’s  view  of  Rosstat  statistics?  Do  you  think  this  authority  should  remain
independent, or should it once again be subordinated to the Ministry for Economic Development?
Thank you.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Many thanks for your questions. As for the guidance you mentioned – this is still in the works. It is
not so simple, as we are all accustomed to comment on a variety of processes. This is common
practice when experts, business representatives and governmental officials voice their opinions
on the current economic and forex situation. In other countries these opinions are not usually
referred  to  as  verbal  interventions  –  verbal  interventions  are  normally  understood  as  the
statement  of  a  central  bank,  and  are  taken  as  verbal  interventions,  as  well,  possibly,  forward
guidance, too.
I  think  that  markets  will  gradually  adopt  the  right  view  of  such  communications,  and  become
accustomed to them. At the same time, we are looking to develop some general rules in this
area. The idea is to ensure a more careful approach.
 5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the subject of Rosstat, there are objective complexities. These are understood to arise when
Rosstat makes estimates in the context of significant external changes, which causes structural
shifts to take place. These changes have to be reflected in data series as they unfold – so as a
result we are not immune to recalculations. While we do use the full set of Rosstat data, we have
always  drawn  on  additional  data  obtained  through  surveys.  Our  special  focus  is  currently  on
information coming in from regions using our network. Leaders of the Bank of Russia’s regional
branches are invited to each of our rate-setting meetings. They update us on the situation in their
regions;  ultimately,  our  estimates  and  outlooks  are  not  solely  based  on  the  data  provided  by
Rosstat.
Rosstat  data  should  indeed  be  treated  as  a  reliable  source  of  information,  considering  that
alongside  authorities  virtually  all  market  participants  also  use  them.  So,  the  more  trust  in
Rosstat’s professionalism and independence the better. There are a variety of options on how
we may address this. At the end of the day I believe this is up to the Government. I would rather
reserve my judgement here. Thank you.
QUESTION from Bloomberg:
Two questions, again, please. One, following up on the question from my colleague, we heard
both  the  economic  development  minister  and  the  finance  minister  mention  that  the  ruble  is
stronger than its fundamental values. In this connection, what does the Bank of Russia make of
this; is the ruble close to its fundamental values, or is it actually stronger?
And  my  second  question,  which  is  in  some  way  related  to  the  first.  You  mentioned  that
purchases  of  foreign  currency  are  a  possible  means  to  replenish  reserves,  provided  these
purchases do not do damage to inflation targets. All indications are, we are on track to meet the
4%  inflation  target  by  mid-year.  Can  the  Central  Bank  launch  foreign  currency  purchases  to
replenish its reserves? Thank you.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Thank  you.  On  the  subject  of  the  fundamental  value  of  the  exchange  rate.  It’s  true  that  this
concept is employed by many experts, and so too by us; we have expressed this on several
occasions. However, this concept must be treated with great care. My view is that this is a very
conditional concept. We at the Bank of Russia have a number of models to measure this basic
reading of the exchange rate. It would be fair to say that we estimate this deviation to be much
smaller than does the Ministry of Finance. According to other models these deviations appear
smaller.
But in any case, what exactly is the fundamental rate of exchange? This is the rate of exchange
necessitated by the current balance of payments, current account and capital outflow combined.
Yet  it  is  anyone’s  guess  to  gauge  the  exact  influence  of  basic  and  short-term  drivers  on  this
value. This is, as I have previously stated, a very conditional concept. As we see it, in a floating
exchange rate environment, as we see it, no matter what deviations are in place, the impact from
objective factors will ultimately result in an equilibrium which brings the interests of exporters,
importers and borrowers into balance. In our view the issue should be addressed in this way.
Second.  Our  reserve  replenishment  policy.  Our  strategy  remains:  when  favourable  conditions
arise  we  will  be  able  to  replenish  our  foreign  currency  reserves  to  boost  our  safety  cushion,
improving  both  economic  resistance  to  external  shock  and  financial  sustainability,  with  the
understanding that forex reserves are a key instrument. Let me say again though that our current
forex reserves, by international standards, are adequate; they are high.
In  this  context,  we  are  invariably  committed  to  a  policy  of  supplementing  forex  reserves  only
when we see no risk to our 4% target, nor to this target in the mid-term. This [resumption of forex
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
purchases] would take place after evaluation of all factors. We have not yet made this decision.
QUESTION from Bloomberg:
Does the regulator support the Finance Ministry-proposed tax manoeuvre whereby VAT would be
raised to 22% and the rate of insurance payments lowered to 22%? Did you take into account
potential changes to the tax system in your forecasts, including monetary policy for this year?
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Just  as  I  said,  any  tax  manoeuvre  or  a  change  to  the  tax  system  may  have  implications  for
inflation,  and  this  should  certainly  be  taken  into  consideration.  It  is  difficult  to  provide  any
estimates until such a time as we know the magnitude of these moves. A few options and ideas
are  on  the  table,  which  relate  to  areas  beyond  VAT  and  social  payments.  There  is  too  much
debate.
Certainly, we have made preliminary assessments of the options. These preliminary estimates
suggest a one-off inflation impact of 1 to 2 percentage points. Moving forward, the impact would
ride on the range of products affected, as well as, among other things, on the timeline: whether it
would  be  a  one-step  or  a  two-step  move.  The  many  unknowns  in  this  area  prevent  us  from
making any final estimates.
When  making  this  decision  we  certainly  took  into  account  that  potential  changes  to  the  tax
system are not impossible. These have been discussed and will be discussed moving forward.
While we are on this subject, we would like to ask the Government to make the parameters of
these initiatives known before they are implemented so these could be reflected in our monetary
policy, enabling a consistent and smooth monetary policy stance. This is what we would like of
the Government in relation to tax reforms.
QUESTION from TASS Agency:
When  you  reviewed  lending  to  the  economy,  were  you  guided  by  certain  adjustments  to  the
macroeconomic forecast?
Also, could you please comment on capital outflow. Were there any revisions in the three-year
estimate? Thank you.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Yes, we have indeed made some corrections. Overall, as I have noted, our assessment of 2017
is more positive, while 2018–2019 assumptions are unchanged. This does indeed translate into
movement in various indicators.
On the subject of lending, we are expecting growth, and we expect this growth to be gradual and
sufficiently smooth. The banking system’s capital stock is adequate to boost lending; we do not
foresee any growth in outstanding liabilities and, at the same time, profits are sufficient to enable
capital buildup. The question is, what procedure will banks use to assess borrowers’ risks and
how will demand for capital rise. The current volume of lending is indeed growing, albeit at a very
moderate pace: around 5-7% for this year.
Turning now to capital outflow. As we see it, capital outflow is expected to remain steady – in the
range of $12–13 billion a year over a three-year horizon.
Rossiiskaya Gazeta’s QUESTION:
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Mrs Nabiullina, the Bank of Russia has recently closed submission of debt load calculation and
use  proposals.  What  feedback  did  you  receive  from  the  market?  What  is  the  timeline  for  the
rollout of this instrument?
And my second question, if I may. You met the People Bank of China’s governor, discussing
yuan-denominated OFZ. Did you reach an agreement on investment quotas for our securities?
Thank you.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
As regards the rollout of the debt load indicator, we believe this is absolutely the right approach,
and we intend to move forward in this direction. We are still receiving feedback. We will need
time to process and consolidate this feedback. No final conclusions are possible at this point, our
approach  being  though  that  this  indicator  should  be  enacted;  the  timeline  and  details  to  be
discussed.
As for my meeting with the governor of China’s central bank. Yes, we met on the sidelines of the
G20 meeting for finance ministers and central bankers. In our talks we discussed, among other
things,  prospects  for  yuan-denominated  OFZ  to  be  issued  on  the  Russian  market.  We  not
support for this idea in principle, with details to be discussed subsequently.
Lenta.ru’s QUESTION:
There are concerns in business circles and in the expert community that the ruble is too volatile.
What is the Bank of Russia’s view on this matter? What could lead to the Central Bank giving up
the floating exchange rate?
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
In  the  foreseeable  future,  I  do  not  anticipate  any  factors  which  would  force  us  to  abandon  a
floating  exchange  rate  regime.  I  am  convinced  that  the  negative  repercussions  cited  by
enterprises in the real sector of the economy, namely, volatility, are outweighed by the benefits of
this policy. Thus we are saved from any drastic corrections in the exchange rate, which would
then hurt the economy overall, including social expenditures, etc.
Allow me to stress this point again. We are confident that the arrival of the floating rate regime
has  in  many  ways  helped  the  economy  adjust  to  external  shocks  more  quickly  than  it  did  in
2008–2009.  This  is  also  suggested  by  the  depth  of  recession.  It  was  the  floating  regime
arrangement that enabled the real sector of the economy, together with the financial sector, to
adjust to a drastically different environment. This really is an inbuilt stabiliser, and we see that it
does work.
The disadvantage of this approach at the time of its rollout was that this policy decision coincided
with a drop in the price of oil, triggering a surge in inflation, which in turn necessitated a rise in the
rates. But you will recall that we saw a comparable drop in the price of oil in early 2016 which had
almost no impact on inflation. These are signs of an economy which is becoming accustomed to
a  floating  rate  and  how  it  works.  In  my  opinion  this  is  where  the  floating  exchange  rate
demonstrated its positive role as an economic adjustment enabler.
We are indeed scared of floating schemes in the economy, explained by the many decades of a
fixed exchange rate which changes only during a crisis, such as a devaluation crisis, and aside
from which remains permanent for a period of time. Admittedly, this volatility of the exchange rate
is  a  concern.  But  I  will  remind  you  that  when  the  exchange  rate  was  permanent,  our  interest
rates were very volatile, as were other prerequisites to business. Therefore, it will take some time
for the economy to adjust to some volatility. This is number two.
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third. Volatility receded drastically following the introduction of the floating exchange rate. It was
very  high  according  to  various  measures:  both  realised  volatility  and  implied  volatility,  monthly
and three-monthly. It is now down to levels seen in other emerging markets, possibly even lower.
Moreover, it is substantially lower than oil volatility. It was assumed previously that as long as oil
is overly volatile, the ruble remains equally as volatile. Yet the volatility of the ruble is lower than
that of oil.
It will take a further diversification of the economy to enable basic conditions for bringing down
volatility. The current developments call for further promotion of forex hedging instruments. We
see  demand  emerging  for  these  instruments,  which  is  why  we  welcome  the  initiative  of  the
Government’s Ministry for the Economy for the establishment of a dedicated facility to support
businesses in hedging forex risks.
QUESTION from TASS Agency:
Another question about the ruble and oil, if I may. The Brent crude price has dropped by almost
13% since the start of the year. The ruble has appreciated against the US dollar by roughly 7% in
the same period of time. Does the Central Bank monitor the ruble’s dependence on oil? Can you
estimate how long this weakening of the ruble’s dependence on oil will last? Thank you.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Your question clearly demonstrates that the ruble is not only affected by oil. The oil elasticity of
the exchange rate depends on seasonal factors, among others. On some occasions we have
registered the elasticity ratio at 0.9, it has even reached 1 during short periods. According to our
estimates,  it  now  stands  at  0.2-0.3.  You  will  see  that  the  movement  may  even  be  reversely
directed if other, more serious, factors affecting the exchange rate are in place. The exchange
rate is governed not only by oil – oil is an important factor, but not the only one to influence the
exchange rate.
The  depreciation  of  the  ruble  was  also  largely  triggered  by  typical  seasonal  variation  in  the
current account – the current account usually shows stronger performance in the first quarter,
irrespective of oil prices. The second factor is the growth in oil prices and oil sales by exporters.
The third factor is important but the Central Bank believes that it should not be overestimated or
exaggerated. I am referring to certain inflows of capital, which are comparable to the inflows of
foreign capital to emerging markets.
Further  developments  will  depend  on  many  factors:  oil  price  movements,  the  Fed’s  policy,
strengthening or weakening of the exchange rate, and the strength of our economy. There are
many forces at play here.
QUESTION from TV channel Russia-24:
Mrs  Nabiullina,  you  have  already  mentioned  that  the  Central  Bank  will  support  Russian  state-
owned  banks  affected  by  sanctions  in  relation  to  the  situation  in  Ukraine.  What  specific
measures are you going to take? Thank you.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
I would like to repeat and emphasise that we do not see any risk to financial stability of our credit
institutions  even  if  their  investments  in  Ukrainian  assets  depreciate  completely,  because  they
account for only a very small share of their assets. Therefore we do not see any systemic risks
here. Our banks have already created or are creating provisions for such assets. Nevertheless,
given the contingencies, we decided that for their convenience they will be allowed a three-year
deferral in the creation of provisions on Ukrainian assets.
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
RIA Novosti’s QUESTION:
I wanted to ask, you said that the Central Bank was developing an action plan to reduce inflation
volatility  through  non-monetary  measures,  among  others.  What  kind  of  instruments  have  you
already developed? This is the first question.
And question two. Have you revised your risk and optimistic scenarios for the next three-years?
Thank you.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Inflation volatility may in fact be determined by non-monetary factors which we are also taking
into account. We think it is important to tackle these factors in cooperation with the Government
and regional authorities to reduce inflation volatility. In fact, the regional analysis mentioned today
also demonstrates that inflation dynamics depend primarily on a competitive environment. For
example, inflationary pressure is lower in those regions where local authorities are pushing for
agricultural  fairs  to  bring  produce  to  the  market.  There  are  also  factors  related  to  natural
monopolies, and so on.
We have already held an expert discussion. Our Monetary Policy Department is onto it. We invite
experts to map out such non-monetary risks and specify measures to tackle them. However,
these efforts are still underway – we are at present actively engaged in this process.
Your second question was about the risk and optimistic scenarios.
We have left the baseline parameters largely unchanged, i.e. oil prices in the risk scenario stand
at $25 a barrel in 2018–2019, and fall to this level by the end of 2017. We have updated some
internal parameters. They will be published today in the Monetary Policy Report. We have kept
those predictions in the scenario with growing oil prices, at $55–60; there have also been some
minor  revisions  but  general  trends  remain  unchanged.  In  essence  our  estimates  have  not
changed since last December.
RBC Media Holding’s QUESTION:
Two  questions,  please.  First.  You  have  cited  many  factors  which  favour  the  rate  cut,  but  the
significance of constraining factors remains relatively unclear. Do they include uncertain fiscal
policy and reshuffles in the Ministry of Economic Development? Could you please repeat what
prevents you from reducing the rate more rapidly and why the rate of reduction is 0.25 pp – is this
a new norm?
And  question  two.  Economists  say  that  the  key  rate  is  losing  significance  in  terms  of  the
economy, i.e. businesses are watching it less closely. Do you see any considerable difference
between 9.75% and 9.5%? How important is the key rate at this time?
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Indeed,  we  took  into  account  many  positive  factors  as  we  made  the  decision  to  cut  the  rate,
however inflation risks still persist. We consider them more likely to be medium-term than short-
term risks. Monetary policy takes effect with a lag of six to nine months, therefore when in making
a  decision  we  have  to  bear  in  mind  its  effects  not  only  this  year,  but  also  in  2018.  It  is  very
important for the economy to have inflation anchored at 4%.
What  stands  in  the  way?  The  uncertainty  of  external  factors,  including  oil  prices.  We  are
conservative about it and therefore will pursue our monetary policy, and easing thereof, with great
care and precision, taking these external factors into account. Households still have high inflation
expectations. There is a risk that they will be too slow in verging towards our inflation target. This
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
is also a risk which may sustain conditions of high inflation.
Taxes are still adding to the uncertainty. However, we realise that at some point forthcoming tax
decisions  will  have  inflation  repercussions.  Certainly,  we  have  taken  all  of  these  factors  into
account.
Again, we assume that we will always analyse the situation, analyse newly received data on the
current situation, revise our forecasts and make decisions accordingly.
I have already said that we believe 0.25 pp to be an appropriate pace for reducing the key rate to
a specified level, which we have actually already reached. However, we may deviate from this
pace of 0.25 pp during this period. Is there any difference between 9.75% and 10%, and does our
rate work? The rate works, as we can clearly see. It effectively determines short-term rates on
the money market and ultimately translates these into rates on bank loans and deposits. This
takes effect with a certain lag. We are continuously estimating this lag, which is quite small and
adheres to the standard accepted in other countries. Therefore, even the reduction of 0.25 pp
may drag down rates for the ultimate borrower. Having said that, risk assessment factors for
specific borrowers are essential for banks, and we can see that this factor prevails.
Question from Bloomberg:
Before  asking  my  question,  let  me  congratulate  you  on  behalf  of  all  my  colleagues  on  the
Russian President’s decision to launch the procedure for expanding your mandate. It proves that
your policy is correct and, as far as I can see, everybody is satisfied with it.
My  question  is  as  follows.  When  you  participated  in  the  online  reading  of  ‘The  Master  and
Margarita’, you read a passage from Chapter 29 of the novel, in which Matthew asks Woland to
let  the  Master  have  some  peace.  Have  you  asked  for  some  peace  from  the  President? And
anticipating your answer, what will be your objectives for the new term? Thank you very much.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Thank you for your question. Peace is something we can only dream of, I would say. Though I
would prefer external factors to display more certainty and structural reforms to progress faster.
This would make it easier for us to pursue our monetary policy.
As for objectives, our monetary policy goal is, as a I have told you today, to ensure low and stable
inflation  everybody  could  rely  on  and  feel  the  benefits  of.  It  is  now  clear  to  everyone  that  low
inflation must be good for people because price growth does not accelerate, food prices do not
grow. However, perhaps not everybody has realised the benefits of sustainably low inflation for
businesses, because we are yet to assure them that inflation will indeed remain low and stable,
and companies may rely on this assurance in making plans and raising investment. I hope we
will be able to achieve this in the forthcoming years.
As for the development of the financial and banking sector, I would like to complete the so-called
resolution  policy  and  invest  more  in  favourable  conditions  for  banking  and  finance  at  large,  in
order to improve financial inclusion and expand the availability of financial services to customers
so that they have more trust in the financial system.
The confidence in the banking system is already relatively high, but I would like to support and
strengthen it. A separate task is the development of the non-bank financial sector. We have quite
a  small  share  of  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies,  though  they  are  a  source  of  long
money necessary to economic development. These are the key objectives in this field.
QUESTION from Reuters:
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The seasonal nature of the balance of payments makes analysts expect purchases of foreign
currency conducted by the Ministry of Finance to have larger impact on the ruble exchange rate
in April. Do you support this view?
And  a  question  about  methodology.  Do  you  recognise  these  purchases  of  foreign  currency,
conducted by the Ministry of Finance, in international reserves?
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Indeed, purchases of foreign currency conducted by the Ministry of Finance affect the FX market
because the Ministry of Finance is itself a buyer of foreign currency. However, reverse factors
have  so  far  offset  this  impact.  Future  developments,  the  impact  of  other  factors  and  overall
movement in the exchange rate depend on many things, including oil price dynamics.
Nevertheless,  as  we  have  said  from  the  beginning,  our  joint  estimates  with  the  Ministry  of
Finance suggest that these purchases will not be able to considerably affect the exchange rate,
nor determine its dynamics. Other factors have greater influence on the exchange rate.
As for the second question, the answer is yes, of course they are recognised in the reserves.
RIA Novosti’s QUESTION:
The  Ministry  of  Finance  said  that  the  Treasury  was  preparing  to  take  over  foreign  currency
purchases from the Central Bank. Does the Bank of Russia see any associated risks for the
exchange rate, or conversely might there be some positive outcomes? Thank you.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
We see neither risks nor evident benefits here. This is the Ministry of Finance’s decision. So far
we have been acting as an agent, but this decision has been made. Its impact on the FX market
is neutral.
QUESTION from Interfax:
My question is as follows. You have mentioned that the Central Bank expects banks to redeem
their  debts  on  FX  refinancing  in  2017.  It  was  introduced  during  a  period  of  crisis  to  back  up
external debt repayments. Am I right in thinking that the Central Bank will abrogate this instrument
in 2018 or will you keep it in some other form with different conditions?
And another question, if I may. Does the Central Bank intend to introduce special instruments to
provide  liquidity  to  banks  which  experience  difficulties  after  information  attacks?  There  have
already been cases when regional banks faced challenges, due not to financial difficulties but to
information attacks.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
As for the FX refinancing instrument, I think it would be appropriate to evaluate it when it expires.
We believe that it has proven to be an effective instrument which has allowed our enterprises
and banks to adjust more easily to the surge in external debt repayments. We set the limit at $50
billion, with a maximum allocation of $37 billion. For now debt only slightly exceeds $5 billion. As
we initially planned and stated, we will curtail its use by the end of 2017. We will progressively
reduce the limits and we do not foresee any problems arising for the banking sector in repaying
these funds by the end of the year.
We are not going to completely abrogate it and remove it from our toolkit. It will be a suspended
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
instrument. We do not see any need to apply it again in the near future, but we will keep it in our
toolkit.
As  for  the  special  instruments  to  provide  liquidity,  we  are  currently  developing  such  a
mechanism. We believe there could be liquidity provision lines for banks experiencing temporary
liquidity shortages, not necessarily because of information attacks, but due also to various other
factors.  Having  said  that,  we  assume  that  these  banks  should  be  either  solvent  or  explicitly
capable  of  restoring  their  solvency  independently  in  the  near  future. As  we  understand  it,  the
intention is not to fund insolvent banks by means of these liquidity lines.
We  are  currently  working  to  determine  possible  parameters  of  such  liquidity  lines  and  to
introduce them to our toolkit, because, as you may see, structural liquidity surplus has saved us
the necessity of providing refinancing. The demand for both 312P (BoR loans secured by non-
marketable  assets)  and  refinancing  through  the  use  of  the  Lombard  list  is  falling.  We  will
gradually revise these procedures. We are raising the requirements for securities to be included
in the Lombard list and will continue to do so. However, you were certainly right to say that under
these  conditions  such  liquidity  lines  are  increasing  in  significance  in  the  face  of  unforeseen
liquidity shortages in banks. We will certainly be working on it.
QUESTION from Reuters:
You have mentioned banking licences. Some large state-owned banks, such as Sberbank, as
well  as  some  bank  products  have  increased  their  market  share  during  the  crisis.  Being  a
regulator, does the Bank of Russia monitor competition in the banking market? Do you believe
Russia still has a competitive banking environment? Thank you.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
A  competitive  environment  is  important.  We  do  indeed  monitor  this.  However,  the  present
structure  of  the  banking  system  has  been  in  use  for  a  long  time,  and  cannot  be  changed
overnight.  Our  objective  is  to  do  our  best  to  create  conditions  and  regulations  to  ensure  fair
competitive  conditions.  Not  least  because  of  that  we  suggest,  for  instance,  that  the
Government’s  approaches  to  how  and  where  to  place  budget  funds  and  the  funds  of  public
companies be updated in order to involve not only large banks, but also small banks, using the
mechanisms which will allow the Government to assess reliability of these banks.
We always make such proposals in order to ensure fair competitive conditions. We believe that a
three-level system will allow improvement of the competitive environment, because small banks
which have to comply with all the complex standards and Basel requirements have to compete
on unequal terms due to their size. When we suggest that they focus on small and medium-
sized  businesses  and  individuals,  and  limit  risks  for  large  customers,  but  ease  regulation  in
return,  we  contribute  to  fairer  competition  allowing  them  to  develop  and  carve  out  a  niche.  I
believe it will improve the competitive environment overall.
However, in general banks do compete with each other. This is evident from the movement of
interest rates in the market. We cannot speak about monopolies here.
Allow me to make another comment, because competition is a very important subject. Why do
we need to encourage competition in the banking sector? To make loans more accessible for
small  and  medium-sized  businesses.  Underdeveloped  competition  and  banking  systems  hit
small and medium-sized businesses.
QUESTION from Bloomberg:
Two  questions,  if  I  may.  Question  one.  The  Bank  of  Russia  had  several  options  before  this
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
meeting: to maintain the key rate, to cut it by 25 bp or to cut it by 50 bp. How unanimous was the
decision to reduce the rate by 25 bp? Did anybody want to keep the rate unchanged?
And, question two. As long as non-monetary policy-related questions have already been asked,
may  I  also  have  one? According  to  Novaya  Gazeta,  roughly  $22  billion  was  withdrawn  from
Russia  in  2011–2014  under  the  so-called  Moldova  scheme,  whereby  money  was  withdrawn
under court rulings. The Moldavian party claims that Russia did not assist but in fact impeded the
investigation.
Was the Bank of Russia aware of this, and were you monitoring it somehow or countering cash
withdrawals in any way? Thank you.
ELVIRA NABIULLINA:
Thank you very much. Indeed, we discussed different options about whether to keep the key rate
or reduce it, we analysed the pace of reduction, all the economic data and our forecast. The final
decision to cut the rate by 0.25 pp was unanimous.
As  far  as  the  Moldova  scheme  is  concerned,  it  was  one  of  the  first  dubious  transactions  we
countered.  We  almost  eliminated  it  and  revoked  licences  from  banks  actively  involved  in  the
Moldova scheme. I am unaware of the details currently being discussed in the media, but I can
say  that  the  Bank  of  Russia  extensively  cooperates  with  the  regulators  in  as  far  as  it  is
competent,  and  while  adhering  to  the  law.  We  are  able  to  provide  documents,  if  necessary.
However, I just cannot recall this case: these enquiries must have been received outside of my
tenure. I cannot recall having received such enquiries over the past four years, but I will check.
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
