Theodore Mitrakos: Overview of the Greek economy and financial
sector
Speech  by  Mr  Theodore  Mitrakos,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  37th 
meeting of the Central Banks Governors' Club, Session  III "Country Presentations  - Recent 
Economic and Financial Developments", Belek - Antalya, Turkey, 3 April 2017.
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you today and have the opportunity to update you on
economic and financial developments, and more importantly to share my thoughts on the growth
prospects of the Greek economy.
Allow me first to give you a brief overview of the performance of the Greek economy and financial
sector  over  the  last  few  years.  Following  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2007–2008,  the  Greek
economy  has  entered  a  deep  and  prolonged  recession.  The  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Greece
turned  soon  into  a  banking  crisis:  banks  were  gradually  excluded  from  the  interbank  market,
suffered significant deposit outflows and losses to the value of their assets as the sovereign debt
was downgraded by rating agencies. What started as a liquidity crisis for banks, turned into a
solvency crisis following the Greek debt restructuring (the so-called Private Sector Involvement –
PSI) and debt buyback in 2012. Greek banks suffered losses in the order of €38 billion, which
wiped out their entire capital base.
Furthermore, the cumulative decline in real GDP by more than a quarter from its pre-crisis level
and the surge in unemployment impacted negatively the financial condition of households and
businesses and therefore the ability of borrowers to service their debt obligations. As a result,
non-performing loans increased by around eight times from 5.5% in 2008 to 45.1% in June 2016.
Against this backdrop, Greece has implemented a brave programme of economic adjustment
that has eliminated fiscal and external deficits and improved competitiveness that, between 2009
and  2016,  resulted  in  the  shrinkage  of  the  general  government  deficit  by  approximately  14
percentage points of GDP and to the improvement of the primary balance, adjusted for the effect
of  the  business  cycle,  by  about  17  percentage  points  of  potential  GDP.  This  achievement
represents  one  of  the  largest  fiscal  adjustments  ever  undertaken  worldwide.  Significant
improvement was also recorded on external adjustment, where the current account improved by
about 15 percentage points of GDP compared to 2008, being in balance in the last two years. In
addition,  bold  reforms  in  the  labour  and  product  markets  helped  towards  the  restoration  of
competitiveness, helping the share of exports in GDP to increase from 19% in 2009 to 30% in
2016, while the exports of goods in real terms have increased by 43% since 2009, compared to
42% for the euro area.
The aforementioned developments helped the economy to show signs of stabilization, with real
GDP  remaining  almost  flat  despite  bouts  of  uncertainty  surrounding  the  negotiations  with  our
European partners, the imposition of capital controls (including limits in deposits withdrawals and
cross-border transfers) and the implementation of further austerity measures.
As far as the banking sector is concerned, the management of non-performing loans represents
the  most  significant  challenge  as  their  stock  has  reached  unprecedented  levels,  with  the
deterioration  in  asset  quality  being  widespread.  The  Bank  of  Greece  and  the  State  have
implemented  a  number  of  measures  to  address  impediments  in  efficient  NPL  management.
Following a troubled asset review, the Bank of Greece enhanced the supervisory and regulatory
framework  helping  banks  to  enrich  their  policies  and  practices  to  deal  with  the  large-scale
resolution  of  troubled  assets.  The  banks  have  to  follow  specific  guidelines  regarding  NPL
management,  starting  with  the  establishment  of  a  well-defined  and  fully  operational  internal
independent NPL workout unit and implement the Code of Conduct regarding the interaction of
1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
credit and other financial institutions with borrowers in arrears.
Recently,  the  Bank  of  Greece,  in  close  cooperation  with  the  Banking  Supervision  arm  of  the
European Central Bank ECB has designed an NPL operational targets framework, supported by
several  Key  Performance  Indicators  (KPIs).  The  selected  targets  and  KPIs  are  both  action-
oriented and results-oriented and provide a granular view on the key asset quality metrics of the
bank, on the management actions to reduce NPLs and on the effectiveness of these actions. In
addition,  following  an  extensive  consultation  with  authorities  and  the  industry,  the  reporting
framework of the Bank of Greece has been upgraded accordingly. Banks agreed on ambitious
but achievable targets, which were submitted at the end of September 2016, with a 3-year time
horizon. According to these targets, banks will aim at reducing their NPLs by 49% by the end of
2019. The reduction is mainly driven by curing of loans and write-offs and to a lesser extent by
liquidations, collections and sales of loans. The largest part of the reduction will be effective in
2018 and 2019, since inflows of new NPEs will remain significant in the second half of 2016 and
2017. Banks managed to achieve the NPE targets for Q3 and Q4 2016, despite the headwinds in
real GDP growth in the last quarter.
The State, for its part, updated the law on over indebted households, amended the Code of Civil
Procedure,  enhanced  the  efficiency  of  the  judicial  system  and  developed  a  framework  for  a
secondary market for bad loans and non-bank credit servicing firms.
Turning  to  the  most  recent  developments,  following  the  Eurogroup  of  20th  March,  the  Greek
authorities and the institutions have intensified talks on outstanding issues to reach a staff level
agreement as quickly as possible. In the fiscal front, the state budget recorded a surplus of 0.2%
of GDP in the first two months of 2017, while available data for 2016 indicate that the surplus will
reach 2.0% of GDP, outperforming the Programme’s target by a large margin. It should also be
noted that the European Stability Mechanism adopted a set of short-term debt relief measures for
Greece on 23.1.2017. These measures, which were endorsed by the Eurogroup in December,
are designed to reduce interest rate risk for Greece and to ease the country’s repayment profile.
Looking forward, the Bank of Greece expects GDP to grow by around 2.5% in 2017, although a
downward revision of the December 2016 forecasts is likely due to the negative carry-over effect
of the sharp decline in output in Q4 2016 (attributed mainly to the decline in gross fixed capital
formation and government consumption). Downside risks to the economic outlook exist related
to  delays  in  the  conclusion  of  the  second  review  of  the  Programme,  the  impact  of  increased
taxation  on  economic  activity  and  reform  implementation.  Downside  risks  connected  with  the
international environment include increased uncertainty associated with forthcoming elections in
several EU countries, the rise in protectionism worldwide and a slowdown in global trade and a
possible  resurgence  of  the  refugee  crisis.  Upside  risks  are  related  to  the  inclusion  of  Greek
sovereign  debt  in  the  ECB’s  quantitative  easing  programme  (QE)  and  an  increase  in  tourist
arrivals and travel receipts, as indicated in the bookings trend.
Regarding the banking sector outlook, the out-of-court mechanism will focus on standardizing
procedures  for  small  business  professionals  and  small  and  medium  enterprises  to  ensure  a
rapid, effective and transparent resolution of arrears. On the remaining steps, it is important that
bank managers and employees acting in good faith in managing non-performing loans should be
protected from criminal prosecution, while the platforms for electronic auctions and the out-of-
court mechanism are expected to become operational soon.
Addressing the problem of non-performing loans in an efficient manner is important from both a
micro  and  a  macro-prudential  perspective,  since  it  would  not  only  improve  the  financial
soundness of banks, but also free-up funds to be directed to other more productive sectors of
the economy, resulting in an increase of productivity and growth. The resolution of private debt is
of utmost significance for the rebalancing of the Greek economy towards export-oriented sectors
and  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  The  identification  of  viable  businesses,  for  which
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
sustainable  long-term  restructuring  solutions  should  be  implemented,  will  preserve  the
productive  fabric  of  the  economy  and  lay  the  foundations  for  resumption  in  investment  and
growth. In a similar vein, restoring affordability of household debt can render many households
once again bankable and reinforce social cohesion.
In conclusion, Greece is about to return to economic and financial normality and to shift to a new,
outward-looking and sustainable growth model, based on tradable goods and services. To this
end,  allow  me  to  highlight  the  following  pre-conditions:  the  prompt  completion  of  the  second
review and a more realistic approach by all parties to the fiscal mix and government debt burden.
Thank you for your attention. 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
