  20.04.17 
 Challenges and opportunities for the Spanish banking industry 
Opening address, Day Two of the “XXIV Encuentro del Sector Financiero” (24th 
Financial Industry Meeting), ABC, Deloitte and Sociedad de Tasación 
Javier Alonso 
Deputy Governor 
 
  I would like to thank you for inviting me to participate in day two of the twenty-fourth (24th) 
Financial  Industry  Meeting  organised  by  the  newspaper  ABC,  Deloitte  and  Sociedad  de 
Tasación. It is a pleasure to be here with you today. 
I wish to take this opportunity, my first public address as Deputy Governor of the Banco de 
España,  to  share  with  you  some  reflections  regarding  the  challenges  facing  the  Spanish 
banking industry in the short and medium-term.  
In particular, I am going to focus on three aspects that I consider especially important: i) the 
need to maintain the profitability of the industry in order to guarantee its correct functioning, 
ii)  the  challenge  for  traditional  banking  posed  by  the  development  of  new  technologies 
(FinTech) iii) and, finally, the importance of increasing customer confidence, the linchpin of 
banking activity.  
1 Profitability 
Bank  profitability  has  been  a  recurrent  challenge  lately  and  is,  once  again,  one  of  the 
priorities  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  for  2017.  A  number  of  factors  are 
putting pressure on the profitability of Spanish deposit institutions  and of their European 
peers.  
First,  the  very  low  interest  rate  environment  puts  pressure  on  financial  intermediation 
margins. Although the interbank market interest rate, Euribor, is negative, banks find it very 
difficult to reduce their deposit rates below zero. At the same time, the existence of fierce 
competition for good customers makes it difficult to raise lending rates.  
A second factor putting pressure on profitability is the still low level of banking activity. In 
fact, despite the improvement in recent years, year-on-year growth in lending to the private 
resident sector remains negative, standing at -4% at the end of 2016.  
Another factor is the still significant volume of non-productive assets (non-performing and 
foreclosed) on bank balance sheets. The good news is that this volume is falling – last year 
it fell by 9% –, which translates into lower provisions.  
Finally, as a result of the financial crisis there has been an increase in the regulatory pressure 
to which banks are subject. The tightening of the minimum capital requirements for banks, 
in terms of quantity and quality, has not been accompanied by an equivalent reduction in 
the perception of the riskiness of banking business, so that its cost of capital remains high 
and exceeds its profitability.  
Moreover, the stricter prudential requirements are compounded by the obligation to comply 
with  the  new  resolution  regulations,  which  requires  banks  to  have  a  minimum  level  of 
liabilities enabling losses to be absorbed should this be necessary (MREL). Again, complying 
with  this  minimum  volume  of  liabilities  will  not  be  cheap  and  may  in  fact  be  particularly 
difficult for those banks which, as a consequence of their business model, do not have the 
necessary experience of issuing this type of instrument.  
Against this background of low profitability, banks have already made significant efforts to 
reduce  their  operating  expenses,  by  adjusting  their  productive  capacity.  The  number  of 
banking groups has been reduced by 44% since 2007. And, from their peak levels in 2008, 
 3/7 
 the number of offices and employees in the banking industry have been reduced by 37% 
and by 31%, respectively. 
Orderly correction of the excess capacity in the Spanish banking industry has raised its level 
of efficiency relative to the banking systems of other European countries. However there is 
still room for further improvement.  
2 New technologies - FinTech 
The second challenge facing traditional banking activity arises from the development of new 
technologies and entry into the banking market of so-called FinTech companies. 
Banks  are  sometimes  presented  as  rigid,  inefficient  institutions,  in  contrast  to  new  agile 
unregulated businesses, which seek to offer a better service to customers through a broad 
range of innovations. An extreme view is that these businesses could actually displace credit 
institutions  from  the  provision  of  traditional  financial  services.  In  my  opinion  this  is  a 
simplistic, distorted view of a much more complex reality. 
Certainly we are facing a major technological transformation of banking activity. Permanent 
connectivity  and  the  sheer  number  of  mobile  devices  affect  the  way  in  which  financial 
services  are  provided  and  used.  Users  increasingly  demand  the  ability  to  access  their 
current accounts and to initiate transactions at all times and in all places. However not all 
the initiatives that have arisen in response to this demand have the same impact on banking 
business. Allow me to introduce some nuances.  
1. First, it is important to understand that, rather than projects that directly compete with 
banks,  some  of  these  technological  innovations  are  in  fact  operational  tools  or 
improvements that credit institutions can incorporate into their own operations.  
Without giving an exhaustive list, this would, for example, be true of the use of technology 
to analyse so-called big data i.e. the analysis at great speed of a massive volume of data 
also generated at great speed and obtained from many sources. There are businesses that, 
with  this  tool,  are  capable  of  analysing  or  predicting  customer  behaviour  using  a  large 
amount of unstructured information. This technology has many applications in the field of 
banking. In fact, one of the main assets of credit institutions is the information they have on 
their  customers.  Properly  harnessed,  this  information  would  enable  them  to  better  know 
their risk profile and their preferences and needs, and thus to adapt the offering of financial 
products for the benefit of both parties. Moreover, banks have an invaluable asset, namely 
the confidence of bank customers in the confidentiality of their transactions which, as I will 
mention later should be nurtured and properly valued.  
The same could be said about cloud computing technologies, which enable the information 
systems of all kinds of businesses to be adapted flexibly to their changing needs, converting 
a large part of their fixed costs into variable costs. This technology may notably reduce the 
costs  for  banks  of  their  information  systems,  which,  precisely  due  to  the  use  of  new 
technologies, are growing rapidly, although there are security risks that must be controlled. 
Another example are mobile payment services. These may  seem new, but  ultimately the 
transaction usually ends with an interbank transfer or a simple credit or debit card payment. 
Spanish banks have been pioneers in the euro area in the incorporation of this technology 
4/7 
  through  the  Bizum  platform,  an  interbank  initiative  for  immediate  payments,  allowing 
payment to be made from one account to another in a matter of seconds.  
The list of technological developments available to credit institutions is longer. To mention 
some more, I would also point out the new methods to validate identity by means of voice 
or image, which make it possible to identify and register new customers remotely, bypassing 
the traditional branch network; or the provision of automated advisory services, known as 
“robo  advice”,  which  enable  advice  to  be  provided  in  areas  where  just  recently  it  was 
impossible to imagine that automated solutions could be developed.  
2. Second, the development of new services will require regulation in accordance with the 
risks they introduce into the system, both in terms of customer protection and the stability 
of the financial system.  
In  fact,  new  competitors  are  specialising  in  specific  parts  of  the  value  chain  of  banking 
business,  beyond  deposit-taking  and  payment  service  provision,  which  are  activities 
reserved  for  authorised  institutions.  The  development  of  these  new  services  will  require 
adjustment  of  the  regulatory  perimeter.  Thus,  for  example,  the  new  payment  services 
Directive already covers new services not previously regulated, such as payment initiation 
and account aggregation. 
Another case is that of crowdfunding platforms, which seek to put lenders and borrowers 
directly in touch with each other, without the need for banks – the traditional intermediaries. 
The development of these services and their resilience in situations of stress might require 
further adjustments to current regulations.  
3. Third, it is important that the price of services charged to the customer reflects their cost. 
Currently, a large part of the technological improvements offered do not seem to have an 
additional cost for the user. For example, immediate access to data through mobile devices, 
automatic repetition of consultations every few seconds, or the dispatch of instructions or 
data requests en masse, are offered without any apparent cost to the customer. However, 
the new services do have costs and these must be clearly and transparently passed on to 
customers.  
4.  Finally, it should  not  be  forgotten  that the  benefits  promised  by new technologies  are 
neither cost-free nor risk-free. There may be costs arising from investments in innovation 
that fail to bear fruit or from investments with payback cycles that end up being much longer 
than expected, as apparently may be the case, in principle, of some of the initiatives being 
developed  in  relation  to  Distributed  Ledger  Technology.  And  risks  relating,  inter  alia,  to 
personal  information  privacy,  fraud  or  cyber-attacks.  In  addition,  the  proliferation of  new 
technologies may also lead to the financial exclusion of those users at a distance from them, 
who  could  be  adversely  affected  if  the  continuity  of  service  provision  through  traditional 
systems is not guaranteed.  
In short, we are facing great technological change in the banking industry, the effects of 
which are still not clear. The development of new services is a great opportunity for renewal 
for the more dynamic banks, as it may provide them with efficiency improvements and mean 
that they can offer greater services to their customers. And, improving customer service is 
precisely one of the main challenges facing the banking industry, which brings me to the 
final point of my address: the importance of maintaining the confidence of bank customers. 
 5/7 
 3 Confidence 
Confidence is the most important and the most fragile of a bank’s assets and determines 
the  nature  of  its  relationship  with  its  customers,  beyond  the  ambit  of  mere  commercial 
transactions.  
Bank customers deposit their savings with credit institutions, trusting that they will return 
those savings to them, when they need them, on the terms agreed. In turn, credit institutions 
provide  financing  to  customers,  trusting  that  they  will  repay  those  funds  on  the  terms 
agreed. Likewise, customers conduct all their business with their banks because they trust 
them not to sell or reveal any information they have on them as customers.  
Unfortunately,  the  bank  crisis  weakened  the  general  public’s  trust  in  credit  institutions. 
Some strategies followed by certain banks may have made them less customer-centric. I 
am thinking, for example, of the incentive schemes based, perhaps to excess, on growing 
business rather than incrementing customer loyalty. In addition, the lack of good practices 
in the selling of bank products and services has clearly played some part in this loss of trust.  
One  of  the  most  important  future  challenges  we  face  is  to  restore  and  strengthen  the 
industry’s reputation both with investors and customers. The first step to achieve this must 
be to make simplicity and accuracy a priority in all communications with customers. This 
includes aspects such as improving the language that is used in relations with customers, 
refining selling policies and promoting transparency. Allow me, in conclusion, to expand on 
these points a little further. 
First,  the  use  of  language.  The  names  and  descriptions  of  bank  products  must  not  be 
misleading as to their return and risk characteristics, nor must they be used as misleading 
advertising tools. Accordingly, terms that offer a false sense of security as to the return or 
interest that may be obtained must be avoided. 
The need to improve the use of language is even more pressing, bearing in mind that the 
dialogue  between  banks  and  their  customers  is  not,  shall  we  say,  a  dialogue  between 
equals. In this respect, since 2008 both the Banco de España and the National Securities 
Market Commission (the CNMV) have made great efforts with a view to improving financial 
knowledge among the general public through the Financial Education Plan. The initiatives 
taken in this period, to cite just a couple, include the launch of the Finance for All portal 
(www.finanzasparatodos.com) and the project to include financial education in the school 
syllabus.  
A second key aspect of this process is to improve selling practices. Financial institutions 
have  made  advances  in  the  service  they  offer  and  the  resources  they  dedicate  to  the 
monitoring  of  regulatory compliance.  But  greater  efforts  are  needed  to  ensure  that  bank 
customers  –  banks’  main  assets  –  are  able  to  understand  the  terms  of  the  transactions 
concerned (clauses of agreements, the cost of services provided, etc.).  
In this respect, greater zeal is required to ensure that customers receive appropriate pre-
contractual information, and the sale of products to customers whose profile does not fit 
the product in question must be eradicated.  
6/7 
  Lastly, with regard to transparency, and as I have indicated, banks must be clear about the 
cost of the services they offer and pass on those costs to bank customers in appropriate 
fashion.  
To  that  end,  the  Banco  de  España  is  stepping  up  its  activities  relating  to  supervision  of 
banking conduct. The Market Conduct and Claims Department was set up for that purpose 
in 2013 and has been allocated an increasing amount of resources. In 2016 a total of 109 
measures were taken, mostly relating to compliance with transparency regulations in the 
sale  of  mortgage  and  consumer  loans,  the  operation  of  banks’  customer  service 
departments and observance of the rules on bank advertising. These activities are expected 
to  intensify  this  year  and  other  measures  will  be  launched  relating  to  the  use  of  new 
technologies in the sale and purchase of bank products. 
4 Closing comments 
To conclude, we are indeed in the midst of a profound transformation of traditional banking 
activity.  The  setting  is  one  of  pressure  on  financial  intermediation  margins  that  means 
institutions need to seek further ways to enhance their operating efficiency. We are waiting 
to see the as yet uncertain impact that new technologies linked to the provision of financial 
services will have on traditional banking business. And above all, we are at a point in time 
when banks must ensure that their customers are their main priority, as this is the only way 
to maintain confidence in the correct functioning of the banking industry.  
Thank you very much. 
   7/7 
