Amando  Tetangco:  Corporate,  environmental  and  social
governance - continuing capacity building
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  BSP-IFC  Mini  Forum  (and  Ceremonial  MOU  Signing),
Manila, 26 May 2017.
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP).
1
  Let  me  begin  this  keynote  with  the  ending  of  a  paper  written  by  a  Professor  Emeritus  from
Harvard “Good governance is an important condition that we hope all the world can enjoy. There
is much to be understood about the concept and how it can be achieved. But like all good ideas,
it is not a magic bullet.” This quote poetically captures the three points I wish to share with you
today:
1) First… Over the years, the BSP and the banking industry have done much to ensure that good
corporate governance (CG) sits at the core of decision making and institutional operations;
2)  Second…  There  is  more  to  learn,  for  example,  concepts  like  environmental  and  social
governance  (ESG)  and  risk  management  (ESRM).  These  principles    need  deeper  exploration
and understanding in the context of banking and finance; and
3) Third… Indeed, good governance is not a magic bullet by itself. Practitioners must faithfully
practice the principles. Whether it is about CG or ESG, institutions and its employees need to
remain well-equipped to demonstrate, embed and practice good governance in daily operations.
Good Corporate Governance in the BSP and the Banking Sector
To expound on my first point, let me share that the BSP champions good governance within the
organization, and as supervisor of the banking system. Internally, we have adopted a corporate
governance  framework  and  defined  strategic  priorities  focused  on  a  strong  governance
mechanism,  operational  excellence,  organizational  readiness  and  engaged  stakeholders.  We
continue  to  improve  our  bank-wide  risk  management  system  and  institute  business  process
improvements.  We  strive  to  promote  a  culture  of  fair  and  responsive  treatment  of  all  our
stakeholders. We have clearly defined and communicated expectations from each employee in
carrying-out the BSP mission.  We have a performance scorecard that checks our progress and
achievements.
These  efforts  have  borne  fruit.  The  BSP  was  recently  recognized  as  an  Island  of  Good
Governance by the Institute of Corporate Directors and Institute for Solidarity in Asia.
As  regulator,  we  adopted  a  three-phase  governance  reform  program  for  BSP-supervised
financial institutions. We started with the fit and proper requirements for the board of directors
and senior officers, followed by the issuance of standards for checks and balances systems. 
We are now in the third phase, with the issuance of guidelines on the management of specific
risk  areas  such  as  credit,  information  technology  and  operational  risks ,  paving  way  for
enhanced guidelines on risk governance.
2
The BSP views good CG as the foundation of a safe, sound and efficient financial system. As
keepers of 80 percent of the financial system’s assets, Philippine banks must hold up to high CG
standards. Adherence  to  these  standards  always  start  at,  and  is  the  full  responsibility  of,  the
board and management. This is fundamental in good CG. The “fitness and propriety” of the board
and senior officers should pertain to their qualifications and competence, but more so to their
integrity, ethics and independence.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Like  parenting,  good  CG  behavior  that  emanates  from  the  board  and  management  gets
cascaded down, and modeled by, employees of the organization. Often, organizational values
are “caught” by, not “taught” to, the rank and file. On the other hand, checks and balances like
internal  controls  and  compliance  functions  provide  the  handlebars  that  steer  people  and
organizations toward greater transparency and accountability.
Another fundamental CG element is risk consciousness. The banking environment is always in
flux, constantly affected by disruptive technology, competition from non-traditional players, unique
consumer profiles and new market niches, or upgraded regulations and international standards.
Old risks evolve, new ones emerge and sources of risks multiply. For banking to remain a public
trust, it is imperative for banks to effectively protect their depositors, investors and institutions
from undue risks.
Good  risk  governance  begins  with  genuine  understanding  of  these  risks,  and  setting  the
institution’s  risk  appetite  based  on  objective  assessment  of  its  capability  to  manage  them
effectively. To do this, the board and management should fully understand the data and evidence
that affect the institution’s risk exposures. They should ensure adequacy of capital to absorb both
the foreseeable and unexpected losses. Down the line, bank personnel also need to know the
risks attendant to their operations, be equipped to mitigate, and be wary of the consequences of
weak risk management.
The CG fundamentals that I have cited are universal and applicable to all financial institutions.
Many of our banks are diligently exercising these principles, yet many are also struggling to do
so.  Nevertheless,  the  BSP  remains  confident  that  our  CG-related  regulations  will  continue  to
guide the banks toward full compliance, further strengthening and enabling them to serve a wider
market.
Environmental, Social Governance and Risk Management
Let  me  now  move  on  to  my  second  point.  Risk  governance  may  be  influenced  by  other
dimensions,  for  example  shared  value ,  which  refers  to  ways  of  doing  business  that  gain
competitive advantage, while also improving social, environmental and economic conditions, to
achieve the double bottomline of profitability and social responsibility. This is when ESG, the set
of  standards  that  promote  sustainability;  and  ESRM,  a  risk  management  tool  that  promotes
sustainable finance, usually get factored in. And these are areas that we need to explore deeper.
3
Sustainable  finance  is  any  form  of  financial  service  that  integrates  ESG  criteria  into  business
decisions to benefit the environment and society at large . Regulators and banks in emerging
markets  like  Indonesia,  Bangladesh  and  Mongolia   are  openly  promoting  sustainable  finance
through ESG standards. Around the world, there is increasing evidence that integrating ESG and
ESRM  in  business  practices  result  to  positive  returns,  those  that  get  reflected  on  financial
statements,  client  retention  and  organizational  reputation.  Equally  significant,  banks  also  feel
good as they contribute to socio-economic and environmental well-being of the communities in
which they operate.
4
5
The BSP believes that ecological sustainability is a key pillar of inclusive growth, and sustainable
finance promises to support this objective. It is consistent with the BSP’s drive to establish a
responsive, responsible and inclusive financial system that delivers a high quality of life for all
Filipinos.  While  BSP  policies  and  regulations  already  promote  shared  value  through  financial
inclusion,  we  feel  the  need  to  deepen  our  understanding  of  sustainable  finance.  We  have  to
bridge the gap between what we know about financing and corporate governance, and how or
when ESG should be integrated.
Hence  in  2013,  we  began  taking  baby  steps  to  understand  ESG  and  ESRM.  We  became  a
member of the Sustainable Banking Network (SBN) with support from the International Finance
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Corporation  (IFC).  SBN  is  a  knowledge  sharing  network  of  banking  regulators,  industry
associations and ESG specialists. We continue to learn and share experiences with like-minded
peers and industry players already practicing sustainable finance in other jurisdictions.
In  2015,  again  with  IFC  support,  we  completed  a  scoping  study  on  the  extent  of  industry
experience  and  interest  in  adopting  ESRM.  Study  results  showed  moderate  awareness,  very
limited experience, and mixed perceptions about the business case of ESRM adoption among
local banks. Still, many believed that practicing sustainable finance can enhance their institutional
reputation as good corporate citizens, and may eventually affect their business bottomline.
Understandably,  profit  maximization  thru  viable  opportunities  remains  the  driver  for  banks  to
scale-up  green  investments,  and  influence  their  client  firms  to  be  more  environment-friendly.
Banks need to see financial viability and attractive risk-return profiles of green projects and un-
bundle  the  mainstream  perception  of  high  transaction  and  compliance  costs.  In  other  words,
banks, and even regulators like the BSP, need to fast-track learning curves in the area of ESG
6
and ESRM.
This now brings me to my third point, and the reason why we are all here today.
CG and ESG: The Need for Continued Capacity Building
The principles of CG and ESG may be constant and universal, but situations and contexts in
which they are applied are varied and mutable, and new lessons arise from each application. As
markets,  regulations  and  institutions  evolve,  it  is  necessary  for  CG  and  ESG  practitioners  to
deepen  knowledge  and  continue  building  capacities.  The  board  and  management,  employees
and  the  entire  organization  should  not  only  adopt  good  governance  policies  –  they  need  to
continuously adapt, upgrade and improve to remain relevant and effective.
This is the primary intent of the BSP-IFC agreement which we will sign today, with everyone here
as  witnesses,  and  maybe  even  future  partners.  IFC  will  support  the  BSP  in  improving  its
assessment  tools  to  ensure  good  governance  and  proper  risk  management  in  the  banking
system.  IFC  will  train  and  advise  the  BSP  and  BSP-supervised  financial  institutions  on  a
proportionate legal and regulatory framework that enhances corporate governance.
In addition, IFC and BSP shall continue to conduct awareness campaigns, capacity-building and
peer learning events to deepen the industry’s understanding of ESG and ESRM. In this area, we
are  mindful  that  in  the  Philippines,  there  is  a  spectrum  of  big  and  small  banks  with  varied
capacities, business models and risk appetites. Some will see value in ESG and ESRM; while
some will simply not have the right capacity and resources to deal with these standards…for
now. For those who can, and are willing, we look forward to further working with you.
Today, we have lined-up international and local speakers to jumpstart the knowledge sharing on
global developments and domestic experiences on CG and ESG. I hope you all take advantage
of this opportunity.
Conclusion
We thank the IFC and the World Bank for your sustained support to the BSP and the banking
industry.  Thank  you  to  this  community  of  regulators,  government  agencies,  the  banking
associations, the sustainability advocates, colleagues and guests, for joining us in this endeavor.
We will surely keep you involved in the next steps of the BSP-IFC partnership. 
Thank you and good morning.
-------------------
 1
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
 Grindle, Merilee S., June 2010, “Good Governance: The Inflation of an Idea”, Harvard Faculty Research Working
Paper RWP10–023, Kennedy School of Government.
 E.g. Circular 855 on Credit Risk Management Framework; Circular 808 on Technology Risk Management; and
Circular 900 on Operational Risk Management.
 Corporate policies and practices that enhance the competitive advantage and profitability of the company while
simultaneously advancing social and economic conditions in the communities in which it operates. Shared
value  is  not  corporate  social  responsibility,  philanthropy,  or  even  sustainability,  but  a  new  way  to  achieve
economic success. (Harvard Business School, Institute for Strategy and Business).
 Adapted from the Swiss Sustainable Finance Center.
  Members  of  the  Sustainable  Banking  Network  that  have  issued  regulations/roadmaps/standards  that
specifically promote ESG standards.
 Frankfurt School-UNEP Centre for Climate & Sustainable Finance. “Delivering the green economy through
financial policy”. Technical paper, March 2014.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
