Peter Praet: Ensuring price stability
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Belgian Financial Forum colloquium on "The low interest rate environment", Brussels, 4 May
2017.
Accompanying slides.
 I would like to thank Leopold von Thadden for his contribution to this speech.
The cyclical recovery of the euro area economy is becoming increasingly solid and downside
risks to the growth outlook have further diminished. Today the configuration of risks around the
most likely growth outlook is closer to balance than it has been in some time. Yet, downside risks
still prevail, being mainly related to remaining fragilities in the global outlook. Also, despite the
cyclical recovery, underlying price pressures remain subdued as unutilised resources continue
to  weigh  on  domestic  wage  and  price  formation.  As  yet  the  evidence  continues  to  indicate
insufficient progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation towards levels below,
but close to, 2% over the medium term, which is a condition we have indicated for the ECB to
start a gradual process of normalisation in its monetary policy stance. In view of this evidence,
the Governing Council in its April meeting has judged that the complex set of instruments that we
have put in place over the past three years to counter downside risks to price stability, including
our  forward  guidance,  is  still  needed  to  support  a  durable  and  self-sustaining  inflation
convergence.  After  a  prolonged  period  of  exceptional  monetary  policy  accommodation,  any
change in our policy stance should be gradual. It should be motivated by sufficient evidence that
the present indications of an acceleration in activity find confirmation in hard data and that a more
robust growth feeds through into a sustainable adjustment in the path of inflation.
What  are  the  conditions  that  led  to  the  adoption  of  this  complex  package  of  monetary  policy
measures? And how can we measure their success in fostering progress in our economy, as a
pre-condition for a lasting return of inflation to levels more consistent with our objective of price
stability over a medium term horizon? Let me first lay out the strategy that we followed over the
past  challenging  years  since  the  collapse  of  Lehman  in  2008  to  counter  a  deeper  and  more
damaging  economic  contraction  and  ward  off  risks  of  deflation  and  of  a  prolonged  period  of
below-norm  inflation.  What  I  will  refer  to  as  the  three  phases  of  the  crisis  have  called  for  the
deployment of different policy instruments, so I will start establishing a correspondence between
the chronology of the crisis and the taxonomy of our instruments.  I will then turn to the current
state  of  the  economy  to  extract  inferences  about  the  effectiveness  of  our  strategy.  I  will  then
conclude looking forward.
Monetary policy responses to the crisis
1
In the euro area, the crisis has evolved through three phases. The first phase was triggered by
the  abrupt  liquidity  strains  that  almost  paralysed  the  global  financial  system  in  the  immediate
aftermaths of the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Banks – both in the euro area and elsewhere –
suddenly became very uncertain about the underlying health of other banks and stopped lending
to each other. The ECB was very swift in its response, faithful to its responsibility to guarantee
appropriate  liquidity  conditions  to  solvent  banks.  Together  with  other  major  central  banks,  the
ECB stepped in with forceful and coordinated interventions to provide essential liquidity to the
banking  sector.  In  the  euro  area,  liquidity  was  made  available  in  virtually  unlimited  amounts  –
against eligible collateral – and at increasingly longer tenors, which helped those banks that were
being  negated  access  to  market  refinancing  to  remain  in  business  and  continue  their  key
intermediation function. Without this response, the financial system would have imploded and a
far deeper contraction would have occurred.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  second  phase  of  the  crisis  came  as  a  consequence  of  the  loss  of  confidence  in  some
sovereigns.  It  brought  on  the  development  of  redenomination  risk  and  thereby  threatened  the
integrity of our currency. The sovereign debt crisis found impulse in some cases from a weak
fiscal  position,  whereas  in  others  from  a  weak  banking  system.  But  irrespective  of  its  initial
impulse  it  quickly  became  a  two-way  interaction  through  the  “bank-sovereign”  nexus.  Banks
remained dependent on fiscal authorities for solvency assistance, and the financial obligations
vis-à-vis banks that this responsibility created on the side of some national fiscal authorities with
weak fundamentals further undermined their credit standing. As the cost of borrowing for certain
governments increased, banks with exposures to this debt came under intense market pressure,
ultimately leading to entire national banking systems losing market access. This in turn resulted
in  financial  fragmentation  and  a  serious  disruption  to  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.
The ECB had not remained inactive in the face of such vicious feed-back loop, as it saw the
implications that such dynamics could have for price stability. But, as the ECB lowered interest
rates, these reductions were not being passed on to firms and households in a large part of the
euro  area,  signalling  an  unusual  disconnect  between  expanding  central  bank  liquidity,
exceptionally  stimulative  monetary  policy  interest  rates  and  contractionary  loan  dynamics  to
NFCs and households.
The ECB then responded to these unprecedented conditions with a twofold reaction.
First,  the  ECB  revived  the  longer-term  refinancing  instrument  that  had  proven  particularly
effective in the aftermaths of the Lehman demise. Central bank liquidity was made available to
banks  for  up  to  three  years.  This  eased  the  pressure  particularly  on  banks  located  in  the
jurisdictions that had been hit by the sovereign debt crisis.
Second,  the  announcement  of  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  in  the  summer  of  2012
removed the euro area break-up risk which markets – by that time – had started to price into the
yields of securities issued by the governments most impaired by the sovereign debt crisis. The
impact of the announcement on market sentiment was instantaneous and material to an extent
few had anticipated. The steep fall in interest rates and improved monetary policy transmission in
those  countries  most  affected  by  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  averted  a  deeper  recession  in  the
euro area as a whole. Nonetheless, the sovereign debt crisis left a damaging legacy on the euro
area economy and laid the groundwork for the third phase of the crisis.
In the subsequent years, the trauma that the debt crisis had caused for the banks located in the
vulnerable countries triggered among those banks a drawn-out process of deleveraging aimed at
shedding the most risky components of their balance sheets: loans to the economy. This, once
more, impeded transmission of the stimulus introduced by OMT and by the liquidity operations to
the real economy and threatened to derail the very tenuous recovery that had started in 2013.
The third phase of the crisis started in 2014, as it became clear that the incipient recovery was
too fragile and dependent on progress in transmission to warrant inaction on the side of the ECB.
Additional  monetary  policy  measures  were  required  to  repair  the  bank  lending  channel  and  to
arrest  the  accelerated  decline  in  both  headline  and  underlying  measures  of  inflation  that  had
become  visible  since  early  2013.  While  inflation  had  started  to  drift  downwards,  there  was  a
palpable risk that the disinflationary pressure would de-stabilise long-term inflation expectations
and usher in a self-sustained period of deflation.
As the main policy interest rate, the interest rate on the deposit facility, had already been brought
to  zero  in  summer  2012,  the  Governing  Council  introduced  innovative  measures  to  provide
additional stimulus. Starting in June 2014, the Governing Council brought the interest rate paid on
banks’  deposits  of  excess  liquidity  with  the  Eurosystem  to  –0.1%. At  the  same  time,  a  credit
easing  package  was  announced  which  included  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations
(TLTROs  I),  a  programme  to  purchase  covered  bonds  issued  by  the  banks  (CBPP3,  a  new
version of two earlier  programmes  with  a  similar  scope)  and  a  novel  asset-backed  securities
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
purchase programme (ABSPP).
Generally speaking, credit easing measures influence the economy via three main transmission
channels: direct pass-through, portfolio rebalancing and signalling. All three channels supported
the key motivation underpinning the design of this package, namely to improve the pass-through
for liquidity injected into the financial system to private sector borrowing costs and to reinforce
the accommodative monetary policy stance.
The  credit  easing  measures  were  immediately  effective  in  turning  around  the  credit  crunch
situation prevailing in a number of countries and favouring a pronounced easing in bank lending
conditions  for  companies  and  households.  But,  also  due  to  the  headwinds  coming  from  the
international  economy,  the  inflation  outlook  continued  to  deteriorate  in  the  summer  and  in  the
autumn  of  2014  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  started  to  give  concrete  signs  of
destabilisation. As  a  result,  in  January  2015  the  Governing  Council  announced  the  expanded
asset purchase programme (APP), which included a large-scale purchase programme targeting
public securities (PSPP).
The purpose of the new programme was to reinforce the direct path-through effects generated
by CBPP3 and ABSPP by promoting a general compression of yields across all asset classes.
This in particular brought about extra incentives for banks to rebalance their portfolios towards
assets with higher risk-adjusted returns, such as loans to firms and households.
Overall,  these  measures  have  been  designed  to  complement  each  other  and  have  proved
effective and adaptable to the series of shocks which have hit the euro area economy since their
introduction. Indeed, the deposit rate has been reduced further (now standing at –0.4%). This
decrease into more negative territory incentivises banks to invest the liquidity they receive as a
consequence of the asset purchases into longer-maturity and higher yielding assets. The APP
has been recalibrated since its introduction and in early 2016 the Governing Council announced
four additional targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs II) to further support credit
availability to euro area firms and households.
All these elements adopted in the third phase are still in place. Moreover, the ECB has adopted
an integrated system of forward guidance that governs the future path of asset purchases and
short-term interest rates, as well as the sequencing of these different policy tools. I will come
back to this at the end of my talk.
The cyclical recovery in the euro area is becoming increasingly solid
Our  monetary  policy  works  and  the  effects  of  our  measures  on  the  euro  area  economy  are
becoming increasingly visible. Euro area real GDP has expanded for 15 consecutive quarters,
with the quarterly growth rate for the final quarter of 2016 standing at solid 0.5%. For the first
quarter in 2017, according to Eurostat’s preliminary flash estimate, the same quarterly growth
rate of 0.5% can be expected. This suggests that the economic expansion is likely to have firmed
and  broadened  in  the  first  few  months  of  this  year.  The  euro  area  composite  PMI  output,  in
particular, hit in April a six-year high, signalling a strong start to the second quarter.
While  the  optimistic  picture  inspired  by  recent  soft  data  still  awaits  validation  in  hard  data
releases, we take comfort in the fact that euro area growth seems increasingly robust to adverse
overseas influences, as domestic factors have become key drivers of the on-going economic
expansion. This is a crucial difference to earlier, abortive recoveries. Robust employment growth
continues to strengthen households’ labour income and to support consumption. The euro area
unemployment rate stands at its lowest level since April 2009. Private consumption has been a
main driver of growth throughout last year, expanding in 2016 at an annual real rate of 2%.
Reflecting  a  more  synchronised  upswing  across  economic  regions  on  a  global  scale,
international trade has picked-up recently at a rather strong pace which should further support
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the euro area recovery.
It  is  also  comforting  to  see  the  euro  area  recovery  broadening  across  countries,  sectors  and
labour markets. If one looks at the percentage of all sectors in all euro area countries that have
positive  growth,  the  figure  stood  above  80%  at  the  end  of  last  year,  well  above  its  historical
average of 73% and the level observed during the 2009–11 recovery. Similarly, the dispersion in
growth rates across both sectors and countries has also narrowed significantly and both are now
at their lowest level since 1997. The same evidence is visible for employment. Just as for GDP
growth rates, the dispersion of employment growth across euro area countries is now at record
low levels.
The fact that the cyclical recovery is becoming increasingly solid reflects the effectiveness of the
various  monetary  policy  measures  –  both  standard  and  non-standard  –  that  have  been
undertaken by the ECB, in particular since mid-2014. Our policy has not only eased financing
conditions  on  average,  but  triggered  a  remarkable  convergence  in  borrowing  costs  across
different euro area countries. Non-standard measures are estimated to be particularly effective in
counteracting  bank  funding  and  financial  fragmentation  in  some  jurisdictions.  This  is  reflected
also in the lending conditions faced by the real economy. In June 2014 the median lending rate
for firms in vulnerable economies was 120 basis points higher than for those in stronger ones –
despite overnight rates being close to zero. Today the difference is only 20 basis points.
These  improvements  have  led  to  rising  credit  volumes  and  improved  access  to  finance,
especially for small and medium-sized enterprises. Loan growth has proceeded along a path of
gradual recovery since 2014. And across financial intermediaries, the banks which participated in
the  TLTROs  have  experienced  higher  loan  dynamics  than  the  non-participating  ones.  Model-
based  analysis  indicates  that  the  contribution  of  non-standard  measures  to  the  annual  loan
growth to NFCs is in the order of 2 p.p. at the current juncture, and should remain supportive
going forward.
This assessment is corroborated by the ad hoc questions of the Bank Lending Survey on the
impact  of  APP,  negative  DFR  and  TLTRO  which  point  to  significant  easing  effects  of  the
measures on broad credit conditions, despite some restraints on bank profitability.
2
The  Bank  Lending  Survey  also  shows  that  euro  area  banks  have  reacted  to  the  package  of
measures  by  easing  significantly  the  terms  and  conditions  that  they  offer  on  loans.  It  is
interesting  to  delve  into  the  factors  that  banks  cite  to  explain  the  change  in  their  lending
behaviour .    While  heightened  “risk-perceptions”  and  low  capacity  by  banks  to  “tolerate  risk”
were consistently mentioned by banks as two key factors contributing to tighter credit standards
throughout what I referred to as the third stage of the crisis, the last three years have seen an
evolution in the composition of factors explaining the changes in credit standards.  Whereas the
unwinding of “risk perceptions” has offered a material contribution to the easier credit standards
that we have observed since 2014 (with only a slight reversal in the most recent period), “risk
tolerance” has remained moderate and, in fact, since 2015 has even tended to offset the easing
impulse  coming  from  other  factors.  This  can  be  interpreted  as  evidence  that,  despite  a
turnaround in the market for bank credit and in the general economic prospects more broadly,
banks continue to apply  prudent  standards  when  deciding  whether  to  extend  new  credit.  This
being said, taking a longer term perspective, the ad hoc question on the level of credit standards
indicates that credit standards are tighter today than in the pre-crisis period, and since 2010 have
eased only to some extent and in some jurisdictions.
The  monetary  impulse  from  non-standard  measures  is  also  reflected  in  broad  monetary
dynamics. Evidence on the sectoral allocation of the ECB’s asset purchases, and on portfolio
rebalancing decisions towards monetary instruments, would indicate that current M3 growth is
significantly  supported  by  the APP.  The  support  of  central  bank  liquidity  to  broader  monetary
aggregates is further vindicated by the growing contribution of households and firms deposits to
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
M1  and  M3  growth.  Judging  from  their  leading  indicator  properties  on  economic  activity,  this
might also bring some confidence on the strength of the underlying economic recovery.
Underlying inflation dynamics remain subdued
Is macroeconomic repair complete? I would not conclude in this direction.
First, while the drag on domestic activity from abroad – which was considerable in certain stages
of  the  crisis  –  has  largely  faded,  and  while  global  data  and  indicators  point  to  sustained
momentum  in  activity  and  trade  early  in  2017,  the  ongoing  synchronised  recovery  is  still
depending on a high degree of policy support. And even if on the upside there is a possibility that
stronger sentiment in financial markets and confidence indicators translate into a faster pick-up
in activity than currently foreseen, risks to the global economy over the medium term are stacked
to  the  downside  and  weigh  on  euro  area  prospects.  These  relate  to  re-escalating  geopolitical
tensions, the possibility of a less favourable resolution of some remaining fragilities in key EMEs,
particularly China, as well as questions related to Brexit and the future policy choices of the US
administration.
Second, most importantly, the strengthening of economic activity has yet to find correspondence
in inflation developments: underlying inflation and domestic price pressures remain subdued.
Headline  inflation  has  been  exceptionally  volatile  over  recent  months.  After  a  sharp  rebound
between November and February, in March HICP inflation has dropped sharply to 1.5%, reflecting
lower inflation rates for all main components – energy, food and HICP excluding food and energy
– only to return to 1.9% in April, according to the Eurostat flash estimate of last week. Inflation
excluding  food  and  energy  for April  is  currently  estimated  to  have  reached  1.2%,  up  from  an
almost all-time low of 0.7% in March. However, inflation is predicted to oscillate around one and a
half percent for the remainder of the year before resuming a gentle path toward levels closer to
2%  in  the  following  two  years.  Inflation  stripped  of  the  most  volatile  price  components  is  also
expected  to  follow  an  upward  path  which  should  bring  it  to  levels  comparable  with  those  of
headline  inflation  by  2019,  but  the  trajectory  is  expected  to  remain  slow.  More  sophisticated
measures of underlying inflation pressures have yet to show a convincing upward trend.
There is not yet sufficient evidence that the observed strengthening of producer price inflation at
the earlier stages of the pricing chain will be durably transmitted to later stages which matter for
HICP inflation. Annual global producer price inflation excluding oil remained elevated at 3.1% in
February, standing above its long-term average. Yet, further up the pricing chain, producer price
inflation for domestic sales of non-food consumer goods increased only slightly to 0.3% in March.
A  clear  sign  of  a  turning  point  is  not  yet  visible.  One  way  to  reconcile  the  increasing  price
pressures  at  the  earlier  stages  with  weak  producer  price  inflation  of  consumer  goods  is  a
squeeze in margin. In any case, a lagged transmission of pipeline pressure up the pricing chain
would be in line with past observations.
Similarly, the GDP deflator, the broadest measure of domestic price pressures and one closely
linked with developments in underlying inflation, does not yet provide evidence of strengthening.
In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2016  the  annual  growth  rate  of  the  GDP  deflator  decreased  further,
although  mainly  on  account  of  a  weaker  contribution  from  unit  taxes. A  strengthening  of  unit
labour cost growth and profit margin growth can be a reliable signal that domestic demand is
exerting a material traction on inflation. From this perspective, profit margin growth has increased
in the last two quarters of 2016 after it had been depressed by the waning terms of trade effects.
By contrast, unit labour cost growth has been broadly flat.
This suggests that in order to achieve a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation wage growth
has to be stronger. This will require that higher employment levels not only reduce the slack in
labour  markets,  but  also  feed  through  into  wage  dynamics. At  this  juncture  it  is  not  easy  to
predict how quickly this will happen. In particular, while the amount of slack plays a decisive role
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
for underlying inflation, there is high uncertainty around its measurement. A strengthening labour
market may attract “marginally attached” workers back into the labour force, or encourage those
“underemployed” to seek more hours, causing the effective supply of labour to rise in tandem
with demand. Due to such effects, measures of labour underutilisation which are broader than
the recorded unemployment rate would have predicted lower inflation in the last two years and
thereby  offered  a  better  account  of  observed  inflation  outcomes  than  more  traditional  Phillips
curve  specifications.  In  view  of  this  evidence  domestic  wage  pressures  may  therefore  only
materialise at a relatively late stage in the economic expansion.
Mirroring still weak domestic price pressures, market-based inflation expectations have failed to
correct in a sustainable manner and continue to suggest only a very slow adjustment towards
2%.
Appropriateness of the current very accommodative monetary policy stance
In view of currently available evidence, the Governing Council in its April meeting has judged that
there  is  not  yet  sufficient  evidence  of  progress  towards  a  durable  and  self-sustaining
convergence  in  the  path  of  euro  area  inflation  that  would  warrant  a  scaling  back  of  the
exceptional degree of monetary policy accommodation. For us to conclude that a self-sustaining
convergence in the path of inflation is accomplished, we will not only need to build confidence
that inflation is on an upward path reaching levels close to 2% within a meaningful medium-term
horizon. We will also need to verify that inflation is sufficiently robust to a firming of policy. In other
words,  inflation  would  need  to  maintain  its  trajectory  even  with  diminishing  support  from
monetary policy. In this context it should be recalled that the latest ECB staff projections from
March this year include a material contribution from monetary policy to the path of inflation.
In sum, continued monetary policy support for demand remains key to inflation convergence. The
recovery  of  inflation  still  depends  on  the  very  favourable  financing  conditions  that  firms  and
households are facing, which in turn is largely due to the current very accommodative monetary
policy stance.
The forward guidance on the future course of our policy is an integral component of our stance,
as  re-asserted  by  the  Governing  Council  at  its  last  meeting  in April.  The  Governing  Council’s
forward guidance is structured around two fundamental elements: conditionality which links the
horizon of the APP to the sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with our inflation
aim, and the sequencing which gives indications about the expected path of our key policy rates
during  the  life  of  our  net  asset  purchases  and  beyond.  These  fundamental  features  of  our
forward guidance have a clear logic. They are meant to communicate that our set of measures
will  evolve  over  time  in  a  way  that  can  most  efficiently  internalise  and  exploit  the  intimate
complementarities among the various instruments, notably the asset purchases and the negative
rate  policy. All  other  features  of  our  forward  guidance  are  of  a  parametric  nature  and  can  be
recalibrated depending on incoming data.
Looking forward to our next monetary policy meeting in June, we will be able to draw on a more
expanded information set than is available today, organised around new projections and including
an updated assessment of the distribution of risks surrounding the economic outlook.
1
2
For a more detailed account of these phases, see: The ECB and its role as lender of last resort during the
crisis Speech at the Committee on Capital Markets Regulation conference on The lender of last resort – an
international perspective, Washington DC, 10 February 2016.
The BLS has traditionally combined risk factors in one single factor. However, since 2015Q1 the survey has
asked banks about the contribution to easing standards coming from two distinct risk factors, “risk perceptions”
and “risk tolerance”.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
