Juyeol Lee: 67th anniversary of the Bank of Korea
Speech by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the commemorating ceremony of
the Bank of Korea’s 67th anniversary, Seoul, 12 June 2017.
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea family,
 Today  marks  the  67th  anniversary  of  the  Bank  of  Korea’s  foundation.  I  would  like  to  take  this
opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  all  those  who  served  before  us  in  the  Bank
of Korea over the years, devoting themselves to the development of our Bank and the national
economy, and to those who have supported and encouraged us as well. Let me also express
my compliments to each and every member of our current staff, for so faithfully carrying out the
duties entrusted to you. 
Although consumption still appears to be recovering only modestly, it is judged that the pace of
growth in our economy is accelerating, as exports are increasing rapidly and investment is also
showing  favorable  movements.  As  these  trends  continue,  it  is  expected  that  the  economic
growth rate for this year will exceed the forecast in April. Notably, if measures to expand fiscal
expenditures to create jobs and for other purposes are implemented by the new government,
then the pace of growth will accelerate even further.
However, looking at the economic environments at home and abroad, there are still numerous
potential risks preventing us from complacency about this positive growth outlook. If our trade
relations  with  major  countries  become  strained,  owing  to  stronger  trade  protectionism  for
example, the negative impacts on our economy with its heavy dependence on exports can be
high. Additional rate hikes and the reduction of its balance sheet by the US Federal Reserve, as
well as political uncertainties in major countries and geopolitical risks related to North Korea, can
also at times lead to increased financial market volatility and even work to limit our growth.
On the domestic front, there are a variety of difficult structural problems causing the recovery in
our  economic  vitality  to  slow.  Factors  such  as  our  low  birth  rate  and  population  aging,  inter-
sectoral imbalances, and the dual structure in the labor market have been weakening our growth
potential  and  the  virtuous  cycle  in  our  economy.  Further,  owing  to  delays  in  industrial
advancement and in finding new drivers of growth, improvements in productivity and the creation
of high-quality jobs are not being properly achieved. As household debt has continued to grow
faster  than  household  income  for  a  long  time,  concerns  are  rising  that  household  debt  can
constrain consumption and undermine financial stability.
We will need to overcome these structural problems wisely in order to sustain our recent growth
momentum over the medium- to long-term. First, we will need to loosen the many competition-
restricting  regulations  and  eliminate  unfair  trade  practices,  so  as  to  create  an  environment
favorable to dynamic technological innovation and the brisk advent of new industries. Together
with this, we must devote efforts to easing the sectoral imbalances in our economy and restoring
its  virtuous  cycle.  As  the  government  is  working  from  multi-faceted  perspectives  to  devise
measures for resolving our structural problems, the policy authorities and economic agents will
need to work together so that the measures undertaken by the government can achieve their
desired results.
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea family,
Now I would like to talk about several of the tasks that the Bank of Korea needs to focus on going
forward.
Despite the recent accelerating  pace  of  growth,  we  will  need  to  maintain  our  accommodative
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary  policy  stance  for  some  time,  in  view  of  the  continuing  high  uncertainties  as  to  the
growth  path  and  the  not  so  great  inflationary  pressures  on  the  demand  side.  However,  if
economic  conditions  show  more  clear  improvements,  with  the  economic  recovery  being
sustained  for  example,  then  we  may  need  to  adjust  the  degree  of  our  monetary  policy
accommodation,  and  will  therefore  need  to  carry  out  a  thorough  review  of  this  possibility.  In
conducting monetary policy, it is also necessary to stress the importance of financial stability-
related  issues  such  as  the  pace  of  increase  in  household  debt  and  the  monetary  policy
normalization by the US Fed.
There have been various economic policies drawn up since the new government took office. We
will need to take a closer look at the impacts which these policies will have on our monetary
policy environment, including macroeconomic and financial stability conditions. We will also need
to work to keep our monetary policy in sync with the government’s policies. We must in addition
actively  propose  effective  and  feasible  policy  options,  through  practical  application  of  our
research  capacities,  so  as  to  ensure  that  the  government’s  policies  can  better  lead  the
development of our nation’s economy.
We will have to devote even greater attention to financial stability. Above all, we must concentrate
our best efforts on easing the trend of sharply rising household debt, which is a potential risk to
the  financial  system.  While  redoubling  our  endeavors  for  the  monitoring  of  household  debt
trends, analysis of the factors causing it to increase, and assessment of the related risks, we
should also contribute to the formulation of effective measures for responding as necessary, in
close consultation with the government and the supervisory authorities.
We  must  maintain  our  robust  external  soundness  as  well.  We  will  need  to  closely  monitor
developments  in  terms  of  factors  causing  global  financial  market  unease  that  could  lead  to
expanded exchange rate or capital flow volatility. If the financial and foreign exchange markets
become unstable, then market stabilization measures appropriate to the circumstances should
be carried out in a timely manner. We will in addition need to work to strengthen the multi-level
financial safety nets, through financial cooperation with international organizations and regional
cooperative bodies.
As  the  convergence  of  IT  and  finance  accelerates,  the  environment  for  our  payment  and
settlement-related work is changing rapidly, and in view of this we should continue to expand and
improve the related infrastructures and services. We will also need to carry out in-depth research
on the implications that the establishment of Internet-only banks, and the extensive use of digital
currencies,  have  had  on  conditions  for  monetary  policy  operation  and  the  payment  and
settlement system.
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea,
In times of high uncertainties like those now facing us, it will inevitably be difficult for the central
bank to accurately analyze economic conditions and carry out an optimal monetary policy based
upon this analysis. No matter what the circumstances, however, we need to faithfully fulfill the
mandate  bestowed  upon  us.  Only  by  doing  so  can  we  contribute  to  sound  economic
development  and  gain  even  greater  public  trust.  To  this  end,  all  members  of  our  Bank’s  staff
should work to strengthen their expertise, by striving to develop themselves and to fully exercise
their potentials. We must also open our minds and listen to diverse voices directed at the central
bank, such as outside requests and opinions of economic experts at home and abroad, without
being  shackled  by  our  existing  knowledge  and  experience.  We  should  continue  working  to
increase the transparency and predictability of our policies, so that economic agents are able to
enhance their understandings of our monetary policy and form rational expectations as to our
policy directions.
The more a society advances, the higher the level of morality and social responsibility demanded
of those in the public sector. And central bankers are of course no exception. We must therefore
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
work to bring our ways of thinking and our code of conduct into step with the new values and
norms arising with the changes of the times. Not only as members of this organization, but in our
own everyday lives as well, we as central bankers should spare no effort in self-management to
uphold  our  dignity.  We  should  also  take  the  lead  in  showing  consideration  for  the  socially
disadvantaged, while strengthening our community service activities as well.
Fellow members of the Bank of Korea,
I  am  filled  all  the  more  with  emotion  now  because  today’s  ceremony  celebrating  the  Bank  of
Korea’s foundation will be the last event held in this building, which has been with us here for 50
years. We must make sure that the construction and renovation project preparing our new home
is successful. While being mindful to ensure that no safety accidents nor security issues occur
during the process of staff relocation and construction, we should also see to it that we do not
cause any inconveniences to the general public.
Thanking the staff involved in the preparation of this commemorative event, I want to wish all of
you and your families the very best of good health and the greatest happiness.
Thank you. 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
