Amando  M Tetangco,  Jr:  Two  sides  of the same  coin  – transforming
challenges into opportunities
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central bank of the Philippines), at the FINEX, MAP, MBC, PCCI, AMCHAM Phil, ECCP and CIBI
Foundation, Makati, 24 May 2017.
 Thank you for taking the time to organize and host this event and thank you for the testimonials! 
I share the recognition you are giving me today with my colleagues at the Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas  and  the  Monetary  Board  whose  members  include  Finance  Secretary  Sonny
Dominguez,  former  DBP  Chairman  and  CEO  Freddie  Antonio,  former  Economic  Planning
Secretary and Economics Professor Phillip Medalla, former BSP Deputy Governor and General
Counsel Andy Suratos, former BSP Deputy Governor and General Counsel Jun de Zuniga, and
former PDIC  President Val Araneta. This formidable group works together as members of Team
BSP. A team that is driven to excel by the singular vision of creating a better life for Filipinos
through sound monetary and banking policies.
I  also  wish  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  deep  appreciation  for  the  support  and
cooperation the leaders and members of your organizations have been extending to the BSP and
me.  You actively engage us in dialogues, meetings, and conferences to share your insights in
the formulation and the implementation of our policies and programs. This is a crucial element in
our operation as a central bank. Thank you.   
Indeed,  the  most  significant  achievement  for  any  head  of  institution  is  to  see  the  effective
implementation of its mandate. In the case of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, it means providing
a stable environment for our economy through inflation management, as well as a sound and
stable banking system through effective regulation and policy formulation.     
Given our mandate, how does BSP measure up?  Well, you have been most kind and generous
in expressing your opinions about me and the BSP. Now, it is my turn to share certain highlights
in the BSP’s performance, the challenges we faced and their ramifications, where we are today,
and what we see going forward.
Two Sides of the Same Coin
Ladies and gentlemen, we often hear economists use the phrase “two sides of the same coin.”
The phrase is used to establish a linkage between two seemingly unrelated variables. Today, I
use the phrase to illustrate that, in the context of policy making, challenges and achievements
are more closely interrelated than we think.
As  a  central  banker  of  over  four  decades,  I  have  witnessed  how  significant  economic  and
financial challenges/changes served to catalyze crucial and progressive reforms. 
Stepping up to the Challenges – Banking Sector:
A case in point is the 1997–98 Asian Financial Crisis (AFC) that revealed vulnerabilities in the
Philippine  financial  system.  The  recognition  of  these  weaknesses  firmed  up  our  resolve  to
formulate measures and implement reforms to address these concerns.
The AFC also highlighted the importance of reducing currency and maturity mismatches through
the creation of a fully developed capital market. This triggered a whole slew of market reforms
that included the development of “organized markets”, where transparency, price discovery, and
more reliable benchmarks are essential elements.
1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Then in 2007, we witnessed the outbreak of what eventually evolved into the worst financial crisis
the modern world has witnessed. International financial institutions weighed down by bad debts
collapsed or had to be supported by their governments to keep credit flowing to credit-starved
economies.  Notwithstanding, the global recession that ensued was the worst since the Great
Depression.    
In contrast, the Philippine economy continued to grow through the Global Financial Crisis (GFC)
with  our  banking  sector  remaining  sound,  stable  and  liquid.  Indeed,  this  performance  can  be
attributed to the crucial reforms that had been put in place earlier.  In the aftermath of the GFC,
the  BSP  is  unrelenting  in  its  pursuit  of  an  even  broader  reform  agenda  aimed  at  further
strengthening  the  Philippine  banking  industry  in  terms  of  capitalization,  risk  management,  and
corporate governance.
Clearly,  the  BSP  has  provided  the  regulatory  framework.    In  response,  the  banking  industry
stepped up the plate and aligned their standards with international best practices.  In other words,
the synergy worked !  
Thus,  even  in  the  face  of  lingering  uncertainties  overseas,  the  domestic  banking  system  has
maintained  a  remarkable  growth  momentum.      As  of  December  2016,  total  resources  and
deposits  of  the  banking  system  have  reached  historic  high  levels  (P13.8  trillion  in  resources
which  increased  further  in  Q1  this  year    and  deposits  of  over  P10  trillion).  This  allowed  bank
lending to continue to expand by double-digit rates, most of which financed productive sectors. In
addition, asset quality continues to improve with NPL ratio of universal and commercial banks
dropping  to  less  than  2%  in  December  2016,  even  better  than  the  pre-Asian  Financial  Crisis
levels.
Seizing Opportunities – Monetary & External Policies
On  monetary  policy,  we  adopted  inflation  targeting  in  2002,  in  response  to  findings  that  the
traditional macroeconomic relationship between monetary aggregates and prices had weakened.
While  inflation  targeting  is  a  more  challenging  framework,  it  represents  a  better  way  of  doing
things – it is more effective, it promotes greater accountability and it engages the public in the
process. This is a guiding philosophy at the BSP – continuously developing better ways in terms
of process and operations to achieve institutional objectives.   
Under this framework, BSP has had good success. Since 2009, inflation has been kept below
the  upper  bound  of  the  National  Government’s  inflation  target  range.  Moving  forward,  we  see
inflation remaining on a generally low and stable path and within the target range of 2-4 percent,
under our inflation targeting framework. 
In 2016, we further refined our policy framework by launching the Interest Rate Corridor (IRC)
system  to  align  our  open  market  operations  with  the  liquidity  needs  of  the  market.  This  will
strengthen the transmission channels of monetary policy, boost  domestic money market, foster
real price discovery and further improve the intermediation of funds.
Low inflation has allowed the BSP to maintain policy rates at similar low and stable levels. This
lowered the cost of doing business and the cost of consumer loans, factors that support and
encourage economic activities. In the Philippines, household consumption remains a key growth
driver of the economy.
The Philippine economy is strong.  GDP grew 6.4 percent in the first quarter this year, one of the
fastest in Asia. This brought our record of achieving uninterrupted GDP growth to 73 consecutive
quarters.
Meanwhile,  we  have  been  able  to  build  our  war  chest  of  FX  reserves  because  of  strong  OF
remittanes, export proceeds and BPO receipts. In turn, the presence of such strong buffers has
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
allowed us to continue with a policy of a market determined exchange rate policy.  Building FX
reserves to a healthy level and allowing the exchange rate to absorb some of the external shocks
are yet another set of responses to past crises.
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  Our  experiences  in  the  past  two  decades  prove  that  challenges  or
difficulties provide compelling reasons to change the status quo. Viewed in this context therefore,
challenges and achievements are indeed two sides of the same coin.
Indeed, the country’s low and stable inflation, strong banking system and robust external position
have not gone unnoticed by credit rating agencies and other third party analysts. The Philippines’
24 positive credit rating actions since 2010 as well as the distinctions received by our banking
system provide strong validation for our economy’s solid performance.
As you very well know, the highlight of the Philippines’ credit rating history came in 2013 when we
finally achieved investment grade rating from the 3 major credit rating agencies (Fitch, Moody’s
and S&P). These were followed by subsequent upgrades from S&P and Moody’s in 2014.
The Road Ahead
In other words, “so far, so good”. But, what’s in store for us? What new challenges are we likely
to face and learn from? Let me name a few.
In the near-term, we will continue to face market volatilities from asynchronous monetary policy
responses to the uneven global recovery and the resulting reflationary pressures.
From a more strategic standpoint, our business models will continue to be challenged by speedy
shifts in financial technology, heightened cybersecurity risks, and increased global competition.
Overall,  however,  there  is  the  primordial  challenge  of  remaining  a  relevant  and  viable  going
concern amidst these changes.
In the BSP, the development of an inclusive financial system that supports inclusive growth is an
institutional  imperative.  Our  objective  is  to  reduce  poverty  by  enhancing  access  to  financial
services, promoting financial education and strengthening financial consumer protection.
In this connection, the BSP is working with 14 government agencies and other organizations to
facilitate  the  implementation  of  the  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion  in  a  cost-efficient
manner.
Also  clear  and  present  in  the  pipeline  for  the  BSP  is  the  implementation  of  a  National  Retail
Payment System that will speed up the mainstreaming of unbanked Filipinos into the financial
system. The ultimate goal is to serve financial transactions across the country through a safer
and more efficient system that will benefit consumers in particular and our economy in general.
These initiatives/thrusts represent the social dimension of our monetary and financial policies.
To remain relevant, the BSP has always pursued its primary mandate while being in tune with
the  social  dimension  of  policy.  Moreover,  we  believe  that  history  must  inform  our  country’s
journey; we must learn from the past so that we will be better and stronger for the future. For this
reason,  the  BSP  has  a  continuing  program  to  share  information,  document  its  learnings  and
promote appreciation of our country’s rich culture and history.
Tomorrow, the BSP will launch two books: the first is  “Philippine Central Banking: A Strategic
Journey to Stability” and the second the coffee table book “LIKHA: Enduring Legacies of Filipino
Artistry” featuring the Decorative Arts Collection of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. The book on
Philippine central banking should be a good reference for policy makers, those in business and
those in school. On the other hand, LIKHA will make you proud of our ancestors who created
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
these works of art, the oldest of which was crafted 2,000 years ago.              
Conclusion
President Duterte has designated Deputy Governor Nestor Espenilla, Jr., a career central banker
with  36  years  of  experience  as  the  next  Governor.  We  thank  the  President  for  this  vote  for
continuity  at  the  BSP.  There  is  no  question,  Nesting  will  hit  the  ground  running,  having  been
exposed  to  many  facets  of  BSP  operations.  He  is  highly  qualified  and  a  man  of  integrity  and
courage. He and the BSP deserve your continuing full support.
I also thank FINEX and its Board for launching the FINEX-Governor Tetangco Professorial Chair
for Monetary Policies and Financial Sector Development. I see this is an expression of support
not only to me but also to the BSP in the important area of financial education. FINEX, you walk
your talk. Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen.  I stayed on as a career central banker for over 40 years because I have
always felt that it is an honor and a privilege to serve our country as a civil servant. Will I miss the
BSP? Of course! But I take with me important professional and personal life lessons, foremost of
which is to value independence and integrity because these are the foundations for credibility,
that in turn, engender effectiveness in purpose.
I also take with me the lesson of keeping your eye on the ball (or in our case, the BSP mandate),
while making sure you are sensitive to the lay of the land (in other words, surveillance is key).
Maintaining the proper “stance”, but retaining flexibility so you can be sure to “follow through” your
actions (or be  policy nimble). Counting your “balls” and being familiar with your “irons” (in other
words, knowing what’s in our tool kit!), play the hand you are dealt (or always be ready!)
But wait. Those lessons sound like rules for a golf game. Friends, as it turns out, most of what
really matters whether you are in the Board Room or on the golf course is basically the same. 
With this realization, I suppose I am ready for life after central banking. There are many activities I
want to pursue (including possibly more golf with friends) and new adventures to look forward to,
after July 2.          
But today, my heart is full. For this, I thank all of you. Thank you for this testimonial, your kind
words, your wishes for my good health and your friendship. 
Maraming salamat! Mabuhay ang BSP! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
