Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim:  The  dawn  of  a  new  era  in  Malaysia's
payment systems
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Malaysian  E-Payments  Excellence  Awards,  Kuala  Lumpur,  22  May
2017.
 I  am  glad  to  be  with  you  at  this  2   Malaysian  E-Payments  Excellence Awards  organised  by
MyClear.
nd
This  evening,  we  are  recognising  the  contributions  of  the  financial  industry,  businesses  and
government agencies to the country’s e-payment agenda. The achievements showcased by the
award winners today reflect the broader innovations and involvement that we continue to witness
in the payment space to make e-payments more convenient, cost-efficient and safe for users.
I am encouraged that contactless payments, for example, are gaining greater appeal for smaller
value payments.  Equally important have been the collective efforts made to educate and inform
users.  This  helps  to  drive  changes  in  payment  habits  away  from  cash  and  cheques  to  e-
payments.
Malaysians are increasingly embracing e-payments
Malaysia has long recognised the importance of e-payments as a key enabler to drive national
efficiency  and  competitiveness,  and  as  a  catalyst  to  facilitate  the  creation  of  new  sources  of
growth. Promising progress has been made in achieving the country’s e-payment targets.
In a period of 6 years between 2011 and 2016, the number of e-payments per capita has almost
doubled from 49 to 97 transactions per capita. This largely reflects the accelerated adoption of
electronic fund transfers to displace cheques. Cheque usage declined by 35% from over 200
million cheques in 2011 to 133 million in 2016. Over the same period, Interbank GIRO (IBG) and
Instant Transfers (IBFT) grew almost four fold from 66 million transactions in 2011 to 257 million
transactions in 2016.
Encouraging  progress  has  also  been  achieved  in  efforts  to  displace  cash.  Reform  measures
implemented  since  2015  have  made  the  acceptance  of  payment  cards  more  affordable  to
merchants.  We  estimate  the  annual  cost  savings  to  merchants  to  be  about  RM168  million  in
2016.
This in turn has encouraged an increase in the number of payment card acceptance devices (or
POS  terminals)  which  expanded  by  40%  to  323k  terminals  in  2016.  We  expect  these
developments  to  further  expand  the  usage  of  debit  cards  to  displace  cash  together  with  the
enhancements to the payment card infrastructure to support PIN and contactless technology.
A new era in payments
For many years, Bank Negara Malaysia has taken the leading role in shaping the development of
the country’s payment systems, in line with its statutory mandate to promote safe, efficient and
reliable payment systems.
We  have  taken  important  steps  to  correct  price  signals  associated  with  the  use  of  different
payment instruments, and created market mechanisms to better align incentives at the institution
level. Along the way there was resistance, but we had experienced that left to its own devices,
the market is not capable of making strategic changes necessary to drive payment efficiency,
financial inclusion and competitiveness. But, cooperation is key.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Indeed, the various measures that were implemented have been instrumental in accelerating the
e-payment agenda forward, only because of the cooperation of the industry, sometimes with a bit
of nudging. But truth be told, we have been able to achieve so much.
Today, the payments industry is no longer the exclusive domain of banks. The advent of FinTech
driven  by  the  increasingly  inexpensive  and  pervasive  internet  and  mobile  technology  has
encouraged the entry of more agile non-bank players as potential disruptors or collaborators of
the incumbent players.
This  has  set  the  stage  for  an  exciting  new  era  in  payments,  an  era  in  which  the  industry  is
expected to take on a larger role in delivering a more robust and efficient payments system for
Malaysia.   
The Bank will facilitate this in three key ways:
i.  First, through policy initiatives to encourage collaborative competition or ‘co-opetition’;
ii.  Second, by further strengthening industry alignment; and
iii.  Third, by supporting more inclusive governance arrangements for the development of the
payment system.
Policies to promote co-opetition as a key enabler for greater efficiency, competition and
innovation 
Network effects are critical to an efficient payment system. The larger the network of a payment
system, the more valuable it is to users of the payment system.
Instead  of  duplicating  resources  to  build  costly  and  overlapping  payment  infrastructures,  the
industry  should  collaborate  at  the  infrastructure  level  to  improve  the  network  architecture  and
achieve  this  more  quickly,  thus  benefitting  from  economies  of  scale  and  new  opportunities  to
serve customers better.
Competition  should  continue  to  exist  at  the  product  level,  where  industry  players  compete  to
deliver  a  positive  user  experience  through  value-added  product  offerings.  This  would  not  only
avoid market fragmentation, but also allow a more optimal use of scarce industry resources.
Such ‘co-opetition’ is not new in Malaysia.  We used to have three ATM networks in the country.
In 1997, the three ATM networks were consolidated into MEPS, immediately allowing the public to
withdraw  funds  from  a  larger  network  of  ATMs  nationwide.  In  2005,  the  financial  industry
collaborated to adopt the  EMV  Chip  technology  to  enhance  the  security  and  interoperability  of
domestic payment cards.
This  eradicated  counterfeit  card  fraud  and  boosted  public  confidence  in  the  use  of  payment
cards. As a result, payment card spending increased by almost threefold from RM47.5 billion in
2006  to  RM141.6  billion  in  2016.  More  recently,  such  collaboration  can  be  observed  in  the
industry-wide  migration  to  adopt  PIN  and  EMV  contactless  technology  to  further  enhance  the
security and convenience of domestic payment cards.
Throughout  these  developments,  appropriate  policy  interventions  played  an  important  role  to
encourage ‘co-opetition’ in the payment market – in particular, to overcome the natural resistance
of banks to collaborate due to a perceived loss of competitive advantage if they do so. 
Fostering ‘co-opetition’ will therefore continue to be a key policy thrust of the Bank. 
In the near term, the Bank will be issuing a framework on interoperable mobile payments to foster
‘co-opetition’ in the mobile payment landscape. The framework will promote open and fair access
to shared payment infrastructures for both banks and eligible non-bank entities.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This will be supported by interoperability standards and proportionate risk management controls
that aim to encourage competition while facilitating collaboration at the infrastructure level. Banks
and operators of shared payment infrastructures such as MyClear and MEPS are encouraged to
publish  open  Application  Programming  Interfaces  (or  APIs)  to  drive  continuous  innovation  in
value-added payment services by both banks and non-bank fintech players.
Merger  of  MyClear  and  MEPS  to  strengthen  industry  alignment  and  spearhead  the
transformation of the payment landscape
Today, I am also pleased to announce an agreement has been reached between Bank Negara
Malaysia  and  the  industry  to  merge  MyClear  and  MEPS  which  operate  Malaysia’s  shared
payment infrastructures for wholesale and retail payment transactions. The merged entity will be
called ‘Payments Network Malaysia’, or ‘PayNet’ in short.
PayNet will be jointly owned by Bank Negara Malaysia and the financial services industry. It will
embark  on  modernising  our  payment  infrastructure.  It  will  assume  a  key  role  in  ensuring  that
Malaysia’s  payment  systems  are  future-proofed  and  always  at  the  cutting  edge  of  payment
efficiency,  innovation  and  competition.  Importantly,  the  merger  will  further  strengthen  the
alignment of strategies and priorities for the development of Malaysia’s payment systems. It is
also expected to significantly reduce the time to market for delivering improvements. 
As a shared utility, PayNet will operate with a public interest objective to support and develop
safe,  reliable  and  efficient  payment  systems  in  Malaysia.  PayNet  will  provide  the  necessary
common infrastructure, and the banks will compete on providing financial products and services.
In the long run, we should expect that the merged entity should venture abroad and strike foreign
alliances to further expand network and reach.
Over the next 12 months, PayNet will move forward with plans to develop and implement a Real-
time Retail Payments Platform (RPP) that will facilitate interoperable mobile payments.
A central feature of the RPP is the national addressing database that will allow payments to be
made conveniently through the use of mobile phone numbers and National Registration Identity
Card (NRIC) numbers, instead of referencing bank account numbers.
In line with principles of fair and open access, the RPP will be open to both banks and eligible
non-bank  payment  service  providers.  Besides  making  the  technology  roadmap  for  the  RPP
publicly available, PayNet will actively engage with the banking industry, FinTech community and
other relevant stakeholders in the development of the RPP.
PayNet will also direct its focus to promoting MyDebit, which is the domestic debit card network,
as a low-cost alternative to displace the use of cash. Significant efforts will be devoted towards
increasing the acceptance of MyDebit, particularly among lower-tier merchants to lessen the use
of cash to lower the operational costs for businesses.
Some of the initiatives that will be undertaken by PayNet include enabling MyDebit to be used on
mobile phones and operating a ‘shared token service’ for the local payment industry. In addition,
PayNet will also expand the use of MyDebit to pay for transit services, including buses and trains,
within the coming year.
Supporting  more  inclusive  governance  arrangements  through  the  transformation  of
NPAC 
While we can look forward to developments that will further transform our payment systems, the
process also matters.
Since the establishment of the National Payments Advisory Council (NPAC) in 2001 to advise on
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  steer  payment  system  development  in  Malaysia,  we  have  worked  to  put  in  place  a  more
inclusive process for setting the payment agenda. This aims to reflect the changing make-up of
the payment industry and better anticipate the changing demands of users.
We cannot hope to future proof the system without a good pulse on the expectations, constraints
and incentives that drive payment behaviours and decisions to invest in innovation. It also often
determines how quickly or slowly we can roll out planned initiatives, or even stay the course on
these plans. 
This led to changes that were introduced last year to broaden the representation of the NPAC to
include stakeholders on both the demand and supply sides of the payment market. This includes
wider  representation  from  non-bank  payment  service  providers  and  user  groups  such  as
consumers, merchants and government agencies.
The  NPAC  now  comprises  a  Steering  Committee,  a  User  Consultative  Group  and  a  Service
Provider  Consultative  Group.  The  consultative  groups  serve  to  promote  dialogue,  encourage
alignment and canvass new ideas to improve payment solutions. This provides important inputs
to focus on the strategic and tactical priorities for the development of the payment systems in
Malaysia.
Continued support from all stakeholders necessary to ensure the successful migration to
PIN verification
Before I end my speech, allow me to take this opportunity to commend the industry on its efforts
to achieve a smooth transition from signature to PIN verification of payment card transactions. 
Collectively, we shall achieve our targets to migrate users to PIN verification by 1 July 2017.  We
have seen tremendous commitment and intensified efforts by banks to meet these targets and I
am pleased to note that we are near completing the replacement of all active payment cards and
POS terminals with PIN functionalities. 
We have been clear that there will be no extension to the deadline of 1 July 2017 for turning off
signature verification. 
By that date, only PIN will be accepted for domestic payment card transactions, so it is important
that in the next 40 days, we should not be complacent and no effort is spared to encourage the
migration to PIN. From the latest data we have, the PIN bypass rate has now been reduced to
10% in April. At the current rate of migration, we expect to see that rate to come down much
further before the end of June.
Closing remarks
Driving  and  sustaining  an  inclusive  transformation  of  Malaysia’s  payment  ecosystem  is  a
collective effort. 
Bank Negara Malaysia will continue to foster a conducive payment ecosystem, with the National
Payments Advisory Council (NPAC) playing a more active role in shaping priorities to enhance
and future-proof the country’s payment systems.
PayNet will serve as the key vehicle for collaboration at the infrastructure level, encouraging more
open competition and greater innovation in payment solutions by both banks and non-banks in
serving the public and economy. 
The remaining piece is the continuous education of businesses and consumers to encourage
the  desired  change  in  payment  behaviour  that  will  deliver  important  efficiency  and  productivity
gains for our economy.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me conclude by congratulating MyClear and the winners of today’s awards ceremony. I hope
that  today’s  event  will  inspire  greater  achievements  in  accelerating  Malaysia’s  migration  to  e-
payments.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
