Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim:  Financial  markets  and  the  ringgit  -  our
journey forward
Opening remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara Malaysia), at the Financial Market Association (PPKM) Annual Dinner "Financial Markets
and the Ringgit: Our Journey Forward", Kuala Lumpur, 18 November 2016.
 It is my great pleasure to address the members of the financial market industry at the Financial
Market Association of Malaysia’s annual dinner. This dinner regularly held towards the end of the
year, has developed its own unique tradition and camaraderie.
Another year is passing by and we find ourselves in a very familiar situation; heightened volatility
and  uncertainty,  low  growth  and  low  interest  rates.  The  specificities  or  circumstances  behind
these  may  be  different  and  indeed  some  of  these  developments  were  considered  highly
unexpected  or  even  irrational.  Hindsight,  which  gives  us  20/20  vision,  does  not  necessarily
provide us with a better understanding. The global markets continue to be imbued with financial
market and policy uncertainties.  To  add  to  this,  are  the  evolving  geopolitical  uncertainties  and
challenges arising from Brexit and the impending changes following the recently concluded US
presidential elections.  2016 is turning out to be a year of many surprises, something that policy
makers tend to be uneasy with. I hope 2017 will bring less of these, but then for financial market
players,  surprises,  volatilities  and  uncertainties  are  not  totally  undesirable  as  they  also  bring
along lucrative trading opportunities.
For the ringgit exchange rate market, the past two years have been uniquely challenging. At the
end of 2014, the situation appeared rather benign. The ringgit was stable, market liquidity was
good, trading activity was healthy with market volumes averaging USD11.8 billion daily while the
volume  for  USD/MYR  pair  averaged  USD8.3  billion  in  2014.  The  subsequent  period  however,
precipitated by the weakening external conditions, falling oil prices and domestic uncertainties
have  laid bare these notions. Volume and liquidity declined, bid-offer spreads widened and at
times,  there  were  one-way  markets  which  exacerbated  any  movements.  Given  these
developments, 2015 was a year where our actions were primarily geared towards stabilizing the
markets. While this was clearly achieved, it was not without cost; a reduction in foreign exchange
reserves, a markedly less liquid and volatile foreign exchange market, and a weaker currency. In
the  midst  of  this,  an  important  observation  that  became  increasingly  evident  is  the  continued
vulnerability of our markets to the arbitrary and unpredictable devices of the offshore markets.
 
Adverse conditions brought on by the NDF market 
Activities in the offshore market, in particular the ringgit non-deliverable forward (NDF) market,
had  brought  on  observable  adverse  impacts  to  the  onshore  market.  To  our  disappointment,
onshore players had become followers rather than leaders in determining domestic market rates.
Consequently, taking the lead from the NDF market, the ringgit exchange rate has been quite
volatile since last year, peaking at 23.1% for its 1-month historical volatility and is the highest
among  regional  currencies  for  this  year.  Of  late,  it  has  been  trending  down,  but  the  average
volatility remains high at 10.1% compared to its 5-year average of 8.2%.
On a day-to-day basis, the ringgit was also volatile, particularly prior to the USD/MYR fixing time
even though it can be quiet throughout the rest of the day. As trade related FX transactions are
done throughout the day, it is highly perplexing as to why trading activities and observed volatility
have  to  be  concentrated  just  prior  to  the  fixing  time.  The  only  plausible  reason  for  the  above
phenomena  is  that  it  emanates  from  the  fixing  orders  from  non-resident  financial  institutions
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
(NRFI), the transactions of which are driven by NDF market activities. As NDF is settled using
fixing  rate,  NRFI  have  been  using  fixing  orders  to  square  their  offshore  NDF  positions. As  a
consequence of such speculative activities, the ringgit fixing rate has significantly diverged from
the onshore traded ringgit prices. The ringgit fixing rate was clearly out of sync with real trades
and investment activities done throughout the day.
The impact of NDF market volatility has been clearly pervasive in the onshore market.  Several
FX  traders  in  the  domestic  market  were  observed  to  be  looking  towards  the  NDF  market  to
provide cues in determining  the opening market price for ringgit.  And this behaviour continues
throughout  the  day  in  the  pricing  of  the  ringgit.  Unfortunately,  our  media  and  public  were  also
drawn into taking the lead from these offshore rates as well. The sum effect of these behaviours
is  that  we  inadvertently    imported  the  NDF  volatility  into  the  onshore  market.  Given  the
importance of this, let me dwell a little further on the dynamics of the situation. 
The offshore market, which is driven by speculative interest, lacks the onshore market’s diverse
spectrum  of  market  participants  and  information.  This  was  notably  mentioned  by  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York paper in May 2005, that an estimated 60 to 80 percent of NDF volume
is generated by speculative interest. Because of this, NDF tends to promote herd behavior which
compounds  the  lack  of  two-way  market  liquidity.  Prices  may  move  rapidly  in  one  direction  or
another  driven  purely  by  fickle  sentiment,  as  well  as  leveraged  positions  taken  on  by  the
speculators,  making  them  inherently  unsuitable  to  represent  an  efficient  and  objective  price
discovery process for the ringgit. Compounding this further, the offshore NDF markets are highly
opaque and information on these markets can only be gleaned  through the BIS’ triennial survey
and  other  sources  such  as  through  mandatory  reporting  of  derivatives  and    swap  data
repositories on US financial institutions.
Actions by BNM/the market
With increasing concern over the offshore market negative spill-over impacts, BNM has taken a
broad spectrum of actions to reduce the speculative and damaging influence of NDF activities.
Because of the estimated volume and its opaqueness, the NDF market clearly has the potential
to undermine the integrity and financial stability of the onshore market. BNM has the responsibility
to ensure orderly functioning of the foreign exchange market and to maintain public confidence in
the  financial  system.  We  have,  over  the  years,  taken  proactive  actions  to  slowly  root  out  the
speculative elements in the onshore market.
From end 2014, we have significantly reduced the availability of short-term central bank papers
that were used for short-term investments that support the NDF market and speculation on the
ringgit. Such actions were taken despite our cognisance that such papers provide an efficient
liquidity management instrument to our own market players. But increasingly, over the years, it
had become an instrument of choice in facilitating the speculative flows. Holding of these papers
had been dominated by the NRFI.  At one time, as much as 96 percent of our BNM short term
papers  were  held  by  NRFI.  The  yields  on  these  papers  have  consistently  trended  below  the
policy rate showing the extent of speculative elements, which would not happen under normal
circumstances.  Consequently, we no longer issue these papers on a regular basis.
In 2015, to ensure a more reflective pricing mechanism of the domestic market, a more direct
attempt to cut off the pricing linkage between onshore and the offshore market was made. Banks
were  prohibited  to  quote  fixing  orders  to  NRFI    that  do  not  have  firm  underlying  trade
commitments.  As NDF is settled offshore based on ringgit fixing rate, the prohibition ultimately
raised  the  basis  risk,  and  financial  cost,  of  hedging  NDF  transactions  in  the  onshore  market.
While this measure may appear harsh, it has worked to some extent to reduce the NDF related
flows into the onshore financial market.
In mid-2016, following extensive discussions with financial market players through the FMA, we
reviewed the ringgit fixing mechanism to enhance its integrity. The new fixing, now known as KL
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
USD/MYR reference rate, uses transaction data in the determination of the reference rate.
While it enhances the credibility of the fixing mechanism, the new methodology has also greatly
reduced the ability of the offshore NDF related transactions to capitalize on the reference rate
process.  The  initiative,  which  was  implemented  smoothly  with  positive  market  response,  also
had the desired outcome in further reducing the volume of ringgit speculative flows.
Throughout the year, we  have  also  strengthened  our  monitoring  of  compliance  to  the  existing
Foreign Exchange Administration (FEA) rules. FIs have been strongly reminded to be cautious in
facilitating FX transactions, particularly with NRFI, to ensure that they do not become unwitting
facilitators of ringgit speculative activities. Accordingly, we expect banks to conduct robust due
diligence and Know-Your-Customer (KYC) process to fully understand clients’ transactions. We
believe that the enhancement of such processes will enable banks to detect transactions that
could be related to NDF activities in ringgit. Prompt supervisory intervention will be taken against
any individuals and banking institutions that are found to facilitate NDF market activities.
Another  area  which  we  looked  at  was  the  exchange  traded  ringgit  products  in  the  offshore
markets. As part of our policy of non-internationalization of ringgit, we prohibited the trading of
ringgit  assets  and  products  outside  of  our  jurisdiction.  It  undoubtedly  the  opaque  pricing
mechanism has adverse impact on the domestic financial market, price discovery process and
the stability of the financial market.
Accordingly, when there were reports of ringgit futures contracts being  introduced on offshore
exchanges,  we  issued    reminders  to  onshore  financial  institutions  and  corporations  against
participating in them. The prohibition also encompassed engaging in any onshore FX transaction
with non-residents that could be deemed as facilitating offshore ringgit transactions. These rules
are not new but have been there all this while.
We also instituted several measures this week as volatility also picked up sharply after the US
Presidential  election  result.  Because  of  adverse  consequences  on  genuine  investors  and
businesses, we should no longer tolerate the NDF market and its damaging influence over the
onshore pricing of ringgit.
Let me make it doubly clear on this. Onshore banks are reminded against quoting onshore ringgit
opening price referencing to the offshore prices. Markets should not price ringgit excessively or
out of sync with the underlying fundamentals. We have also reminded onshore banks to avoid
dealing in FX with non-resident banks suspected of engaging in NDF speculative activities except
for those that provide confirmation of their non-involvement in the offshore ringgit NDF market.
This  week  has  seen  many  noises  surrounding  these  measures.  There  is  no  new  policy  on
capital flows.
There is no proxy capital control either.  In fact, Malaysia’s capital account remains free with free
mobility of inflows and outflows of capital for investments. The market remains open to all market
participants and we shall ensure the necessary liquidity to the market.
In essence, the measures that were instituted over the past week are consistent with our long
standing  policy  of  non-internationalisation  of  the  ringgit  and  one  that  we  expect  banks  to  fully
adhere to without exception. We do not recognize or condone the non-deliverable ringgit offshore
market. Those who engage in NDF or NDF-related transactions are doing so at their own peril.
I understand that to some, these are challenging measures but as I mentioned earlier, they are
not  new.    We  need  to  remove  the  negative  influence  of  the  NDF  activities  that  impacts  the
smooth functioning and stability of the onshore financial market. We need to protect the interest
of genuine investors and businesses, irrespective of whether they are foreign or domestic. Only
through  a  concerted  effort  by  all  the  stakeholders  of  the  ringgit  market,  can  this  objective  be
achieved. We need to remember, that integrity and proper functioning of our financial market is in
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the interest of every market participant, and all of us have a role to play towards achieving this
objective.
Way forward
To overcome these challenges and to take on new direction and impetus, we had formed the
Financial Market Committee (FMC) earlier this year. Besides tackling the various issues, risks
and challenges of navigating these uncertain and volatile times, the FMC has been mandated to
formulate and propose strategies to take the financial market development forward. I would like to
thank the members of the Financial Market Committee and industry association representatives
for collaborating with us for the common and greater good of market development.
The FMC and its subcommittees have met several times. Some of the initiatives have already
been rolled out; such as the extending of trading hours for the FX market and the KL USD/MYR
reference rate. Some are going through the woodworks of development. I would like to discuss a
few here.
1.  We are embarking on a progressive journey of a more liberalized and conducive financial
market operating environment. As a concrete step, I would like to announce the introduction
of a pilot program for the USD/MYR and CNH/MYR markets. Under this program, residents
will be allowed to undertake hedging transaction for USD and CNH against ringgit without the
need for sighting of the underlying documents. Subject to a position limit, only a declaration
by the customers will be sufficient. Accordingly, cancellation of the hedging will also be freely
allowed.
2.  To  further  complement  this,  the  Bank  is  also  currently  working  with  the  Securities
Commission  and  Bursa  Malaysia  to  facilitate  the  introduction  of  USD  and  CNH  against
Ringgit  futures  for  the  onshore  exchange.  Similar  to  the    interbank  market,  these  will,  for
now,  be  subjected  to  position  limits,  and  for  now  only  applicable  to  residents.    We  shall
review this policy from time to time, with a view to further liberalise the rules.
3.  The  Financial  Market  Committee  (FMC),  through  an  industry-driven  effort,  is  in  the  final
stages of rolling out an operational framework for Foreign Exchange Administration (FEA)
compliance. This will be an industry standard that sets the minimum due diligence and list of
documents required for FEA. Further to this, a standard summary of the relevant FEA rules
to facilitate common understanding and consistent interpretation among market participants
is  being  formulated.  It  is  expected,  through  this  important  initiative,  there  would  be  better
clarity and greater efficiency for the financial institutions and their customers, in undertaking
FX and hedging transactions.
Taken together, these three measures are targeted at residents such as the Small and Medium
Enterprises with a view to expand their access to hedge freely and directly with onshore banks. 
This flexibility will provide the avenue for simplified processes and flexible hedging activities within
prudential limits and incentivise residents to use onshore banks for their hedging needs.
These are but first steps. We will be looking at further measures, similar to these.  The idea
behind these measures is  to  make  our  onshore  financial  market  more  flexible,  facilitative  and
competitive. In other words, we are deepening the onshore markets towards becoming the main
actor to conduct the foreign exchange needs of our economy. This journey will be exciting and
require  some  behavioural  changes.    But  we  have  no  doubt  that  with  the  full  support  of  the
industry, we can achieve these outcomes.
I envisage the FMC and the industry to further collaborate and come up with the new strategies
and ideas to deepen and support the development of our onshore market. Beyond trade or real
sector activities, we should look at financial investments, in particular the non-resident investors
in our bond market. We have 33.7% of our Government bond market held by such investors.
There are opportunities in this domain.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Where are they hedging their foreign exchange exposures? What product can the industry offer
for them to hedge onshore? Given these obvious opportunities, we need to develop solutions that
will benefit the industry as a whole.
The significant overseas investments by residents and foreign currency exposures arising from
trade activities create a need for the domestic hedging market to be further deepened. In 2015,
FX market transactions volume reached a staggering USD2.52 trillion, yet currency derivatives
such as FX forwards and options only made up 5 and 1 percent of the total volume, respectively.
Similar concerns also exist for the bond market.  Both government and corporate bonds are still
primarily held by residents, and we have one of the largest corporate bond markets in the region.
Yet,  this  does  not  translate  into  the  development  of  active  hedging  market  activities.  Credit
derivatives  made  up  less  than  1  percent  of  ringgit  derivatives  volume  in  2015.  This  prompts
several questions. Are our investors able to hedge effectively or efficiently manage the exposures
of their portfolios? What instruments are on offer or traded in our markets that can serve as such
tools?  What are the policy changes that require rethinking to enable us to develop a deep and
liquid hedging market? These are all issues that the FMC will deliberate and offer solutions.
We  all  share  the  aspiration  for  our  onshore  financial  market  to  become  a  highly  competitive
market.  Not  just  the  foreign  exchange  market  but  across  all  its  market  segments;  money,
interbank, bond and the derivatives markets. A market where pricing of ringgit assets are fully
determined  by  a  robust  price  discovery  process  onshore,  driven  by  real  trades  and  non-
speculative investment activities.
We envision a financial market, where it has the breadth to cater to increasingly sophisticated
needs of diverse market participants, going beyond trade and financing towards facilitating more
effective and efficient risk management activities. A financial market, where it also has the depth
to sustain and face any volatility in the market. A financial market, that has ample liquidity across
different instruments in all market segments, and extends beyond the ringgit, to the point where it
can anchor regional trades and investment activities. Ultimately, we want our onshore financial
market to be the market of choice for all market participants, including non-residents, to meet all
their financial needs.
Before I end my speech, I would like to announce an award that will be presented to a leading
derivative bank at the next annual PPKM dinner. The rationale is to give public recognition to an
institution  that  contributes  towards  raising  the  volume  and  value  of  transactions  in  the  FX
derivatives market.
Last but not least, let me take this opportunity to congratulate the FMA on its accomplishments
this year. FMA recently signed a collaboration agreement with the Asian Institute of Chartered
Bankers  and  Asian  Business  School  that  would  contribute  towards  enhancing  the  integrity,
ethical  standards  and  professionalism  of  market  participants.  FMA  certainly  has  been  an
important  driver  and  partner  to  bring  the  financial  market  development  to  a  higher  level. And
organizing this annual event is also one of its perennial successes. On this note, I wish tonight’s
dinner will be an occasion for us to enjoy and cherish.
  5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
