Carolyn  Wilkins:  Bank  of  Canada's  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report
press conference
Opening statement by Ms Carolyn Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at
the press conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 12
April 2017.
 Good  morning.  Governor  Poloz  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  to  answer  your  questions  about
today’s  interest  rate  announcement  and  our Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR).  There  were  a
number  of  issues  that  were  central  to  Governing  Council’s  deliberations  that  I  would  like  to
elaborate on before turning to your questions.
Many  of  the  economic  data  that  we  have  seen  since  our  last  MPR  have  been  stronger  than
expected.  That  is  certainly  a  welcome  change.  Given  these  positive  surprises,  and  because
monetary  policy  must  be  forward-looking  to  achieve  our  inflation  target,  Governing  Council’s
discussions focused on three main issues: first, the extent to which recent strength is signalling
stronger  economic  momentum  in  Canada  and  globally;  second,  how  heightened  levels  of
uncertainty, particularly about US tax and trade policies, should be incorporated in our outlook;
and third, how much excess capacity the economy currently has, and the growth rate of potential
output going forward.
Let me start with the first issue. In our view, some of the upward surprises come from factors
that are unlikely to keep adding to economic growth at the same pace. Energy-related activity has
stopped declining and is transitioning to a new level that companies tell us is commensurate with
the current oil price environment. This is good news. Consumption has also been more robust
than expected as households have benefited from the Canada Child Benefit. This will continue to
support the level of spending, but not the growth rate.
Housing  activity  has  also  been  stronger  than  expected.  We  have  incorporated  some  of  this
strength in a higher profile for residential investment, although we still anticipate slowing over the
projection horizon. The current pace of activity in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA) and parts of the
Golden  Horseshoe  region  is  unlikely  to  be  sustainable,  given  fundamentals.  That  said,  the
contribution of the housing sector to growth this year has been revised up substantially. Price
growth in the GTA has accelerated sharply in recent months, suggesting that speculative forces
are at work. Governing Council sees stronger household spending as an upside risk to inflation in
the short term, but a downside risk over the longer term.
Meanwhile, exports and investment are still weaker than one would expect at this stage of the
business cycle, even though growth in the global economy has also surprised on the upside. So,
we do not yet see the well-balanced base that would give us assurance that growth is on a solid
footing.
This  brings  me  to  the  second  issue.  Given  the  performance  of  exports  and  investment,  the
uncertainty  regarding  the  tax  and  trade  policies  of  the  US  administration  again  factored
prominently in our discussions. The Bank of Canada is quite used to dealing with uncertainty,
and  we  were  very  deliberate  in  choosing  how  to  incorporate  it  into  our  projections  and  policy
decision.
In terms of potential US tax measures, we judged in January that there was enough information
available to make some initial assumptions. There are now signs that suggest implementation
will be delayed, and so we have updated these assumptions.
We took a different approach to uncertainty about potential US trade policies. We now have a
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
better sense than in January of the extremely wide range of possibilities: they include a border-
adjustment  tax,  targeted  tariffs  on  some  products  and  countries,  non-tariff  barriers  and  even
broader multilateral trade measures. We do not know which of these will be enacted; their timing
is uncertain; and each would affect the global economy and Canada through a different, complex
set of channels. Take a look at Box 1 of the Report for a discussion of this.
Although it is fair to say that the possible outcomes are almost certainly negative for Canada, we
cannot  reliably  model  them  at  this  stage.  Instead,  we  have  incorporated  an  extra  degree  of
caution  in  our  forecast  for  exports  relative  to  our  January  forecast,  including  the  potential
implications of the softwood lumber dispute.
We have also been cautious with our forecast of business investment. While businesses are
becoming more confident, they remain wary. When we talk with companies, many tell us that
planned  increases  in  investment  are  modest,  or  related  to  maintenance,  rather  than  to
expansion.
Overall, we project economic growth in Canada to slow from an annual pace of 3.8 per cent in
the first quarter to just over 2 per cent for the remainder of the year. We project growth of just
under 2 per cent in 2018 and 2019.
Given the stronger profile of economic activity relative to January, Governing Council was very
focused  on  the  third  issue:  how  much  excess  capacity  remains  in  the  economy.  We  use  a
couple of different methods to gauge the amount of excess capacity, which gives us a range of
estimates of excess supply. Evidence from inflation data is also consistent with material excess
capacity remaining. Although a number of temporary factors are keeping headline inflation near
its 2 per cent target, our measures of core inflation are in the lower half of the target band and
have  been  trending  downward  in  recent  quarters.  Evidence  from  the  labour  market  has  been
mixed. Employment growth has been firm, yet both wages and unit labour costs have risen only
slowly,  supporting  the  view  that  the  amount  of  excess  capacity  could  be  greater  than  the
midpoint of the range of estimates.
Finally, there is the related issue of how quickly the economy’s potential will grow. We still expect
potential output growth to increase, but by less than we did a year ago, when we last updated our
estimates. You can see from the Staff Analytical Note that we published today that this is mainly
due  to  weak  investment.  That  said,  as  the  economy  gains  momentum  and  approaches  full
capacity, greater investment—including through new firm creation—could lead to potential output
growing  faster  than  we  assume  in  the  base  case.  Some  of  the  tools  used  by  the  Bank  have
tended to underestimate growth in potential output during periods of expansion, leading to upward
revisions later on. If potential growth turns out to be greater than we expect, the economy could
expand further before generating inflationary pressures.
Under our baseline outlook for growth and potential, the economy will absorb its excess capacity
sometime in the first half of 2018, a bit sooner than we projected in January. I would also point
out that we now judge that the neutral interest rate in Canada is lower than we thought previously.
While financial conditions are still very supportive of growth, this implies that they are somewhat
less stimulative now than we judged in January.
This  brings  me  to  our  policy  decision  in  pursuit  of  our  inflation  target.  Governing  Council
welcomes the recent strength in economic data and wants to see more of it in order to be more
confident that growth is on a solid footing. We judge that the economy still has material room to
grow. And we remain mindful that significant uncertainty continues to weigh on the outlook. 
Given  all  of  this,  we  judged  that  the  current  stance  of  monetary  policy  is  still  appropriate  and
maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1/2 per cent.  Governor Poloz and I would now be
happy to answer your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
