Peter Praet: The European Central Bank's monetary policy - past
and present
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
Febelfin Connect event, Brussels/Londerzeel, 16 March 2017.
 In recent years it has been often said that the ECB has become the “only  game  in  town”  for
stabilising the euro area economy. As governments have had to consolidate their fiscal positions,
there has been an unprecedented onus on monetary policy to support aggregate demand. The
ECB has responded to this challenge and acted decisively to secure price stability in face of an
economic and financial crisis unparalleled in post-war history.
But this role, and the unconventional measures we have adopted to execute it, has inevitably put
monetary policy more in the spotlight. We are facing intense scrutiny as to how our policy works,
its necessity and the side effects it causes.
So what I would like to do in my remarks is, first, to explain the current monetary policy of the
ECB and its evolution during the crisis. The unconventional measures we have deployed, such
as negative rates and asset purchases, are the outcome of a protracted crisis that has unfolded
in  multiple  waves  –  one  that  has both  worsened  the  economic  situation  facing  monetary
policy and constrained the instruments we have available to respond to it.
I will then go on to describe how these unconventional measures are working to ease financing
conditions for firms and households, especially through the bank lending channel, and ensure a
sustained  recovery  for  the  euro  area  economy.  Finally,  I  will  touch  on  the  side  effects  of  our
measures on the banking sector, and how they can be addressed to ensure a continued, robust
transmission of our monetary policy.
While  my  focus  will  be  on  what  monetary  policy  has  achieved  during  the  crisis,  it  is  also
important to underline what we cannot do: central banks cannot remain the “only game in town”
indefinitely. Monetary policy can bring output back to its potential level, and it may even be able to
affect that potential by unwinding hysteresis effects, but it cannot durably raise long-term growth
–  which  was  on  a  declining  trend  even  before  the  crisis.  That  requires  further,  determined
progress with structural and institutional reforms.
The phases of the crisis
In 2008 the global economy faced a crisis caused by the coincidence of two trends.
The  first  was  the  bout  of  over-optimistic  expectations  which  took  hold  in  several  advanced
economies in the pre-crisis years, reinforced in the euro area by a renewed sense of security
and  economic  prosperity  following  the  launch  of  monetary  union.  Despite  slowing  potential
growth,  agents  in  a  number  of  economies  overestimated  their  future  income  and  borrowed
against it, accumulating excessive debt. In some countries this over-leveraging was centred on
firms,  in  other  countries  on  households  and  in  others  still  on  the  state.  Banks  acted  as  the
intermediaries in both creditor and debtor economies.
This new environment would probably not have produced such aggressive risk-taking, however,
had  it  not  been  for  the  second  trend:  the  parallel  process  of  financial  liberalisation  and
deregulation across advanced economies which encouraged financial overextension and rapid
credit growth. In the euro area, financial integration also triggered an expansion in cross-border
financial flows, adding to the forces created by the waxing global financial cycle. The consequent
misallocation  of  resources  into  unproductive  sectors  only  worsened  the  underlying  growth
picture.
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
So when this reality finally bit in 2008, monetary policy was left facing a uniquely challenging set
of conditions: an “expectations gap” which had left firms and households overleveraged and in
urgent need of balance sheet repair, coupled with a “credit gap” as overextended banks began
their  necessary  restructuring  and  deleveraging  –  in  other  words,  a  so-called  balance  sheet
recession. These conditions laid the ground for the subsequent evolution of the crisis in the euro
area, which has unfolded in three main phases, each of which has required a different monetary
policy response.
The first phase was the immediate liquidity crisis triggered by the turning of the global financial
cycle and the subsequent collapse of Lehman Brothers. As in other advanced economies, euro
area banks faced uncertainty about the scale of their exposure to subprime products, prompting
a sudden stop in the availability of money market funding for many financial institutions and a
systemic  rush  to  cash.  Central  banks  faced  an  imminent  risk  of  asset  fire  sales  by  credit
institutions  to  meet  maturing  obligations,  in  the  process  depleting  their  balance  sheets  and
initiating a steep contraction in credit.
The ECB’s response was to lower its main refinancing rate to the then record low of 1% in May
2009 and to provide liquidity elastically to the banking sector, at both increasingly long durations
and  against  a  wider  range  of  collateral.  Our  balance  sheet  expanded  as  central  bank  liquidity
substituted for the malfunctioning interbank market.
But though monetary policy was able to avert the collapse of the financial system and prevented
a  much  deeper  recession,  the  Lehman  episode  nonetheless  left  deep  scars  on  the  banking
sector, which the euro area was unable to heal as swiftly as other jurisdictions. Crucially missing
was a truly integrated banking system that could share risk across countries, with a harmonised
resolution  framework  and  a  European  public  backstop.  Thus  the  onus  fell  onto  sovereigns  to
support their national banking sectors, strengthening the two-way risk between European banks
and their national governments.
This created the conditions for the second phase of the crisis: the sovereign debt crisis of 2011–
12  and  its  amplification  through  the  “bank-sovereign”  nexus.  As  sovereign  borrowing  costs
spiked,  banks’  exposures  to  selected  governments  came  under  intense  market  scrutiny.  The
banking  systems  in  vulnerable  countries,  representing  almost  35%  of  euro  area  GDP,  lost
access  to  affordable  wholesale  funding.  Intermediation  retreated  behind  national  borders,  and
with  perceptions  of  redenomination  risk  on  the  rise,  financial  markets  underwent  severe
geographical fragmentation.
The result was a serious disruption in monetary transmission across different parts of the euro
area, which prevented our intended accommodative policy stance from reaching the economy.
Hence we responded to this fragmentation in two ways.
First,  as  per  the  Lehman  shock,  by  compensating  for  sources  of  market  funding  that  had
suddenly  become  unavailable,  which  now  also  included  bank  bonds.  We  achieved  this  by
lengthening the maturity of our operations to three years in November 2011, as well as by further
expanding  the  range  of  eligible  collateral  that  could  be  pledged  against  central  bank  money.
Without such action there would, once more, have been a risk of banks being forced into fire
sales and rapidly contracting credit to the economy. Generalised capital controls in vulnerable
countries would have been inevitable.
Second,  by  removing  the  redenomination  risk  expressed  in  sovereign  spreads,  which  was
distorting the local pricing benchmarks used to price assets and credit. Our main tool here was
the announcement of our conditional Outright Monetary Transactions in September 2012, which
acted as a powerful circuit breaker against self-reinforcing fears in sovereign bond markets. This
successfully truncated the worst tail of the distribution of possible macroeconomic outcomes.
But the sovereign debt crisis nonetheless left a damaging legacy for the economy – and this laid
the ground for the third phase.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The ECB’s measures since summer 2014
As  the  euro  area  entered  a  prolonged  slump,  banks  in  large  parts  of  the  euro  area  began  to
engage  in  a  drawn-out  process  of  deleveraging.  This  represented  a  necessary  –  and  indeed
overdue – process of adjustment for banks that had overleveraged in the run-up to the crisis. But
rather  than  reducing  risk-weighted  assets  by  raising  capital  or  disposing  of  non-core  assets,
banks instead began to reduce lending. In those countries most severely hit by the sovereign
debt crisis, the risk-adjusted returns on loans had declined to the point where banks had a strong
incentive to redeem loans and downsize.
The euro area faced a chronic malfunctioning of bank-based transmission and growing signs of
a credit crunch: by end-2013 the annual growth rate of loans to the private sector had contracted
by more than 2%. Against that background, inflation began a prolonged downward drift. The ECB
cut  rates  twice  in  2013  in  response,  reaching  0.25%  in  November,  and  introduced  forward
guidance to better insulate euro area financial conditions from the diverging US monetary policy
cycle. This policy helped decouple the risk-free curve from outside influences and made it more
appropriate for the underlying conditions we were facing. In early 2014 the recovery appeared to
be back on a firming path.
By mid-2014, however, it was clear that the economic recovery had lost momentum, removing a
key driver of the reflation scenario we had anticipated. The sharp fall-off in oil prices that began in
late summer added further disinflationary pressures. Given the weak underlying trend in inflation,
we  saw  a  growing  risk  that  low  inflation  could  de-anchor  inflation  expectations  and  produce
second-round  effects,  creating  a  self-reinforcing  negative  spiral.  Without  decisive  monetary
policy action, the euro area could have faced deflation.
The ECB therefore faced a pressing need to reinforce the degree of policy accommodation in
view of persistently weak inflation. Yet here we confronted an instrument limitation.
With interest rates already not far from zero, our ability to use conventional monetary policy to
provide additional accommodation was now constrained. And moreover, the pre-crisis slowdown
in  potential  growth,  coupled  with  the  negative  effects  of  the  crisis  on  investment  and  private
sector balance sheets, appeared to have imbalanced saving and investment, and depressed the
real equilibrium interest rate to very low levels. Hence even cutting rates to low (positive) levels
would provide insufficient stimulus.
Under these conditions, the ECB had to resort to a new approach to expand its monetary stance,
one based less on adjusting its main refinancing rate, and more on directly influencing the whole
constellation  of  interest  rates  in  the  economy  that  are  relevant  for  private  sector  financing
conditions. This strategy has been articulated in three instruments.
The  first  is  the  negative  interest  rate  on  our  deposit  facility,  which  –  in  a  context  of  excess
reserves – has brought overnight rates down to negative levels and hence provided additional
effective  stimulus.  The  fact  that  policy  rates  can  indeed  turn  negative  has  also  contributed  to
flattening the short to medium end of the yield curve, thereby easing broader financing conditions
by removing the upward bias to yields that comes from the perception that rates can only go up,
not down.
The  second  instrument  is  the  asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  of  private  and  public  sector
securities, which has helped further depress the term structure of interest rates by compressing
risk premia out along the yield curve. This effect takes place directly in the market segments
where  we  intervene,  namely  covered  bonds,  asset-backed  securities  (ABS),  sovereign  and
corporate  bonds.  And  higher  asset  prices  spill  over,  through  portfolio  rebalancing,  into  non-
targeted markets as investors move up the risk and maturity ladder.
Importantly,  the  stimulus  from  these  two  instruments  reaches  the  economy  independently  of
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
whether  financing  is  dominated  by  banks  or  capital  markets.  A  broad  easing  of  financial
conditions leads to lower  funding  costs  for  banks,  while  asset  purchases  depress  the  pricing
kernels used in each country to price local credit, in particular the risk-free yield curve. Both lead
to  lower  interest  rates  for  borrowers. At  the  same  time,  as  asset  prices  rise  banks  have  a
stronger incentive to provide loans to the real economy in the first place.
Indeed,  banks  operate  on  the  basis  of  the  same  relative-value  logic  as  non-bank  market
participants: a decline in fixed-income securities earnings encourages banks into the same type
of  portfolio  reallocations  that  affect  investors  in  the  capital  market,  rebalancing  their  portfolios
towards  assets  with  higher  risk-adjusted  returns,  including  loans. And  this  also  applies  to  the
excess cash reserves that are created as result of our asset purchases, where the incentive to
invest in higher-yielding assets is intensified by our negative rate policy.
The  third  instrument  is  our  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs),  which  are
specifically aimed at galvanising bank lending to the private sector in a context of ongoing bank
deleveraging. Banks have been able to borrow at the interest rate on our deposit facility, but only
on condition that they demonstrate strong performance in loan origination. The intention was to
introduce more competition in the market for bank loans, which in turn squeezes unit lending
margins and borrowing costs for the real economy.
This set of measures – which works as a mutually reinforcing package – has proved adaptable
to the shocks the euro area has faced since its launch. Indeed, the third stage of the crisis has
not  only  included  the  disinflationary  consequences  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  but  also  an
unprecedented collapse in energy and commodity prices, with its potentially destabilising effect
on inflation expectations; and a slowdown in emerging market economies in 2015 which weighed
on global trade. In each case we have been able to recalibrate our measures in terms of size and
across  instruments  so  as  to  continue  providing  sufficient  accommodation  to  the  euro  area
economy.
The impact of our measures
The evidence for the effectiveness of this strategy is clear. Our monetary policy has contributed
to a major easing of euro area financing conditions and, through this channel, to a more robust
and sustained economic recovery.
Since  mid-2014  bank  lending  rates  have  dropped  to  historical  lows  for  both  firms  and
households, and pass-through regularities appear to have returned. Bank lending volumes have
also been on a continuous upward trend, though they remain relatively weak: in January this year
lending to households grew at the fastest rate since May 2011 – 2.2% on an annualised basis –
while  corporate  lending,  as  in  December,  grew  by  2.3%,  its  highest  reading  since  2009. And
behind this picture of overall credit easing is one of substantial convergence – both inter-country
and intra-country.
Granular  data  confirms  that  both  the  level  and  dispersion  of  lending  rates  has  declined
considerably in vulnerable countries and more strongly than elsewhere, thereby further reducing
asymmetries in the overall policy transmission across country groups. Rate dispersion between
large and small loans also largely vanished between vulnerable and other countries towards the
end of last year, implying a convergence in financing conditions among different types of firms,
especially for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
Indeed,  our  latest  survey  on  access  to  finance  by  SMEs  shows  further  improvements  in  the
availability of external sources of finance and the willingness of banks to provide credit at lower
interest  rates.  “Access  to  finance”  is  now  considered  the  least  important  concern  for  SMEs,
admittedly with some divergence across countries. SMEs in Greece continued to perceive it as a
very important problem but, encouragingly, a score close to the euro area average was reported
by SMEs in Italy, Ireland, Portugal and Spain.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Our measures have helped induce this broad easing of borrowing conditions very much through
the channels we expected.
On the liability side, bank funding conditions have eased considerably, with the average cost of
funding in the euro area reaching historical lows of around 40 basis points. Very low short-term
rates have encouraged banks to rebalance their liability structures away from more expensive
debt securities and towards deposits, providing funding cost relief. But there are of course limits
to such substitution – namely the incoming requirement to hold a minimum amount of eligible
liabilities and own funds (TLAC/MREL) – so it is important that wholesale funding costs have also
come  down  substantially.  Our  outright  purchases  under  the APP  have  tightened  spreads  on
covered  bonds  and ABS,  while  rates  on  senior  unsecured  bank  bonds  have  fallen  due  to  the
portfolio rebalancing effects of the APP.
This positive effect of monetary policy on wholesale funding conditions is confirmed by the Bank
Lending Survey (BLS). Close to two-fifths of banks surveyed in the October 2016 BLS reported a
net improvement in their market financing conditions owing to the APP – up from one-fifth in the
April survey – in particular for financing via covered bonds and unsecured bank bonds, but also
via ABS issuance.
The TLTROs, too, have directly lowered term funding costs, especially for banks in vulnerable
countries,  since  those  that  draw  on  these  operations  have  been  able  to  substitute  more
expensive wholesale debt for longer-term central bank liquidity. 40% of the banks surveyed in the
latest BLS round reported that they have used TLTRO funds for substituting maturing debt. And
the  incentives  embedded  in  the  TLTROs  have  ensured  a  pass-through  to  customers:  ECB
analysis confirms that TLTRO bidders in vulnerable countries have lowered lending rates more
than their non-participating peers.
On the asset side, the flattening of the term structure of interest rates seems to have exerted
strong downward pressure on bank lending rates, especially in countries that were more affected
by the sovereign debt crisis. ECB pass-through models show that, since the launch of our credit
easing  package,  the  decline  in  lending  rates  in  Spain  and  Italy  in  particular  has  been  much
stronger than can be explained by falling market rates alone. Tightening sovereign spreads help
explain much of the observed fall.
This  effect,  paired  with  the  credit  impulse  provided  by  the  TLTROs,  has  also  helped  boost
competition among banks and put further downward pressure on lending rates. Evidence from
the  BLS  confirms  that  rising  competitive  pressures  have  been  a  key  contributor  to  margin
compressions over the last two years. Purchases of corporate bonds are also a factor: banks
facing substitution of bank loans by corporate bonds have reported higher competitive pressures
and stronger margin compressions on loans to large firms.
There is some evidence, too, that as prices have risen banks have rebalanced their portfolios
away from sovereign bonds and towards loans. The increase in bank credit to the private sector
has been counterbalanced by a decrease in credit to general government. Banks responding to
the  BLS  last  year  indicated  that  they  used  the  additional  liquidity  from APP-related  sales  for
granting  loans,  potentially  responding  to  the  incentives  created  by  our  asset  purchases  and
negative interest rate policy.
ECB staff research finds that banks’ reactions to holdings of excess liquidity have changed due
to  the  charge  on  the  deposit  facility:  cumulated  bank  lending  in  less  vulnerable  countries  has
been one percentage point higher than it would have been otherwise.
As  borrowing  conditions  for  the  real  economy  have  loosened,  economic  activity  has  followed.
Whereas the 2010–11 recovery was based almost exclusively on net exports, the euro area is
now experiencing a recovery based predominantly on domestic demand. In fact, growth in the
euro  area  was  previously  closely  correlated  with  the  strength  of  international  trade,  but  that
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
relationship has weakened recently. Monetary policy is contributing to higher domestic absorption
through all three classical channels.
The  strong  recovery  in  consumption  has  been  bolstered  through  the income  channel,  since
falling interest rates have supported net borrowers, who tend to be liquidity-restrained and have a
higher  marginal  propensity  to  consume.  Expansionary  effects  are  also  visible  through
t h e intertemporal  substitution  channel: 
in  particular,  easier  borrowing  conditions  have
encouraged households to bring forward durable consumption, and firms’ investment, through
credit.
Consumption of durables has rebounded in recent years and its growth, especially in countries
where  credit  was  previously  very  tight,  is  closely  correlated  with  the  improvement  in  credit
conditions as recorded in the BLS. Investment has responded more slowly to low interest rates,
yet monetary policy is helping create the conditions for a stronger investment revival through its
overall effect on the economy, sometimes called the “accelerator effect”. Production and selling
price expectations are rising as aggregate demand picks up; corporate profitability is increasing;
and financing conditions remain extremely favourable.
Finally,  housing  markets  are  now  moving  into  an  expansionary  phase  in  most  euro  area
countries, which should also support consumption going forward via the wealth channel.
As a result, we now see the economic recovery continuing at a moderate, but steadily firming
pace, and broadening gradually across sectors and countries. Sentiment indicators suggest that
the cyclical recovery may be gaining momentum. Consequently, our latest staff macroeconomic
projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.8% in 2017, 1.7% in 2018 and 1.6% in 2019
–  a  slight  upward  revision  this  year  and  next  compared  with  the  previous  exercise.  The  risks
surrounding the euro area growth outlook have also become less pronounced, although remain
tilted to the downside due to global factors.
Implications for the financial sector
So  there  is  no  doubt  that  our  measures  are  having  their  desired  effect.  Yet  unconventional
monetary policy can have side effects as well, and especially for the financial sector.
One key concern is their impact on banks’ profitability – which remains generally weak in the
euro area – and especially on net interest income. Asset purchases flatten the yield curve and
reduce  the  returns  on  maturity  transformation;  and  the  negative  interest  rate  policy de
facto flattens the curve further, since the zero lower bound that banks typically apply on deposits
means that a large share of bank liabilities no longer reprice when market rates fall. Bank lending
rates however typically do, compressing loan-deposit margins.
Consistent with this, margins between loan and deposit rates on new business narrowed in 2016
and may tighten further as loan rates continue to decline but deposit rates increasingly stack up
against zero. More than half of the new deposits held by corporations and close to 40% of those
held by households are de facto no longer remunerated. Slightly more than 40% of the stock of
corporate deposits and 35% of household deposits have virtually zero return.
This is clearly a challenging situation for banks, but so far its impact on profitability has been
contained,  since  monetary  policy  has  countervailing  effects  on  bank  balance  sheets.  ECB
analysis  suggests  that  lower  net  interest  margins  are  being  partly  offset  by  higher  asset
valuations  and  a  more  robust  economy  –  which  in  turn  boosts  lending  volumes  and  leads  to
lower provisions and impairments for banks. And more generally, our policy measures create a
faster  recovery  with  higher  inflation,  which  implies  a  faster  return  to  monetary  policy
normalisation. Such expectations are now one factor buoying bank share prices.
Still, given the dominant role of net interest income in banks’ earnings and the staggered pass-
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
through of low rates into lending margins, profitability is likely to remain vulnerable for some years
to come, which raises the question of how the banking sector should best adapt. In my view, it
would be misguided for banks to wait for changes in monetary policy to come to the rescue.
Even in a normalisation scenario, the pre-crisis banking world is unlikely to return. Banks face
new structural and technological challenges that they have to confront, in particular in terms of
raising operational efficiency.
Though the efficiency of the euro area banking sector has improved since the crisis, operating
costs remain generally high. This is especially apparent when one compares the cost-to-asset
ratios of some national banking sectors with those of banks in the Nordic countries. Sweden and
Denmark, for example, have cost-to-asset ratios of around 1, whereas in France and Germany
the ratio is closer to 1.5 and in Italy nearly 2. Such cost structures represent vulnerability in an
environment  where  traditional  bank  business  models  are  under  threat,  and  where  banks  are
facing increasing competitive pressures from new fintech entrants, especially in areas such as
retail payments, where they previously enjoyed healthy margins.
The reasons for these differences are complex, but they are partly the result of overcapacity in
some  national  markets,  leaving  banks  with  high  fixed  costs.  Hence  rationalisation  and
consolidation within the sector appears a key ingredient in relieving cost pressures. While there
has been some movement in this area since the crisis – the number of credit institutions in the
euro area fell by 19% between 2008 and 2015 and the number of branches declined by 16%
– concentration indices in some markets remain low, and consolidation has largely taken place
within countries, reducing the benefits of cross-country diversification.
This is concerning, since it suggests that euro area banks are not yet in a position to exploit the
economies  of  scope  and  scale  that  should  be  possible  in  a  truly  integrated  banking  sector,
leaving  a  banking  landscape  that  remains  fragmented  along  national  lines.  And  despite  the
launch of banking union, this trend is actually worsening: cross-border mergers and acquisitions
accounted for just 9% of total transactions in 2016, against 15% for the period 2000 to 2015.
The still-unfinished state of banking union is one reason why. Two factors make it difficult for
banks to execute a European balance sheet strategy. First, the end scenario for banks in terms
of public risk-sharing is not yet clear, not least for deposit guarantee schemes. Second, the euro
area  is  not  yet  fully  treated  as  a  single  jurisdiction  for  the  purposes  of  bank  regulation  and
supervision, which creates barriers to cross-border activity.
The  latter  means,  for  example,  that  cross-border  euro  area  exposures  are  still  considered
as international  exposures  from  a  regulatory  perspective,  which  may  lead  to  additional  capital
charges for systemically important banks. Banking groups seeking to optimise their liquidity and
capital within the euro area also face frictions to fungibility, be it liquidity waivers or requirements
to relocate staff if different parts of the balance sheet are reshuffled among subsidiaries. All this
reduces the gains to operating as European banks.
What I would ideally like to see – as a monetary policymaker – is a banking union that allows
banks  to  operate  as  truly  European  entities,  and  banks  taking  advantage  of  the  cost-cutting
opportunities  this  provides.  This  would  guarantee  a  healthier,  more  profitable  sector  that  can
transmit  our  monetary  policy  smoothly  to  the  real  economy  across  the  cycle.  And  it  would
increase macroeconomic risk-sharing, leading to a more resilient monetary union.
The extent to which we are able to achieve such a new banking landscape is, in my view, the
litmus test of whether we have completed a genuine banking union.
Looking forward
Faced with a prolonged crisis, the ECB’s unconventional policy measures have been essential to
provide additional accommodation to the economy and prevent a self-sustaining fall in inflation –
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
and they have been a clear success. Easier credit conditions have fed into a domestic demand-
led recovery that has spread across countries and sectors. The economic outlook today is now
better than it has been for many years.
This assessment was confirmed by the Governing Council at its last monetary policy meeting.
Compared  with  our  previous  forecast  round  in  December,  we  are  now  more  confident  in  the
outlook, which is reflected in both the upward revision to the growth path and the upward shift in
the  balance  of  risks  surrounding  that  path.  Accordingly,  we  are  no  longer  concerned  about
deflation risks, which is why the reference to “act[ing] by using all the instruments available within
its mandate” was removed from the introductory statement. We no longer perceive a sense of
urgency to take further measures to combat adverse tail risks.
Nevertheless,  in  important  ways  our  assessment  remains  unchanged.  The  economic  risks,
though becoming less pronounced, remain tilted to the downside. And crucially, we have not yet
seen the firming recovery translate into a durable strengthening of inflation dynamics. Headline
inflation has increased, but largely on account of rising energy and food price inflation. Underlying
inflation pressures continue to remain subdued.
Our latest projections foresee inflation moving towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the
forecast horizon. Given the softness of underlying inflation, however, we cannot yet be sufficiently
confident  that  inflation  will  converge  to  levels  consistent  with  our  aim  in  a  durable  manner.
Inflation  dynamics  also  remain  reliant  on  the  present,  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary
accommodation, so they have not yet become self-sustained.
Against this background, the Governing Council reaffirmed its monetary policy stance, including
its forward guidance, in order to secure a sustained convergence in inflation towards our aim and
insure the recovery against the downside risks that still persist.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
