William  C  Dudley:  The  importance  of  financial  conditions  in  the
conduct of monetary policy
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the University of South Florida Sarasota-Manatee, Sarasota, Florida, 30
March 2017.
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today.    I  would  like  to  thank  the  University  of  South  Florida  for
sponsoring this conference.  As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not
necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  the  Federal  Reserve
1
System.  
One aspect of today’s event is the dedication of a financial laboratory to help students learn about
financial markets, which I think has great value.  Knowledge of how financial markets operate is
an important aspect of financial and economic literacy, and it leads to greater financial security
over  time.    For  example,  one  important  lesson  is  that  when  the  promised  returns  on  an
investment offering are extraordinarily high, it is because the investment is either very risky or
fraudulent.  When investing, it is important to remember that if it seems to be too good to be true,
it likely is!
Today,  I  want  to  take  the  opportunity  to  talk  about  the  importance  of  financial  markets  in
influencing the economic outlook and, in turn, U.S. monetary policy.  This is a subject near and
dear  to  my  heart.    Nearly  20  years  ago—when  I  was  working  in  the  private  sector—my
colleagues  and  I  introduced  an  index  of  financial  conditions.     I  believe  that  my  long-standing
focus on financial conditions has, over time, helped me become a better economic forecaster. 
And, I am pleased that economists and analysts increasingly incorporate financial conditions into
their assessments of the economic outlook.
2
As  I  will  argue,  financial  conditions  in  the  United  States  play  an  important  role  in  influencing
economic conditions.  Because movements in financial markets are a major factor influencing
broader financial conditions, it is necessary to understand how financial market developments
can affect the economic outlook and, therefore, the appropriate setting of monetary policy.  But,
this  story  gets  more  complicated,  as  the  setting  of  monetary  policy,  in  turn,  affects  market
developments  and  financial  conditions.    This  two-way  feedback  is  an  important  feature  of  the
interaction between financial conditions and monetary policy.
To begin, let me be clear about what we mean by “financial conditions.”  Focusing on the United
States, financial conditions can be broadly summarized by five key measures: short- and long-
term Treasury rates, credit spreads, the foreign exchange value of the dollar, and equity prices. 
Although many other measures and prices can also be included in one’s assessment, I think
3
these five are the most essential.
In  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the  FOMC  does  not  have  targets  for  either  specific
components  of  financial  conditions  or  for  financial  conditions  more  broadly.    We  care  about
financial conditions not for themselves, but instead for how they can affect economic activity and
ultimately  our  ability  to  achieve  the  statutory  objectives  of  the  Federal  Reserve—maximum
employment and price stability.  Let me provide a few examples.  A decline in mortgage rates
can lift the demand for owner-occupied housing and support construction activity.  A rise in equity
prices can boost household wealth, which is one factor that underpins consumer spending.  The
foreign  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  can  affect  the  relative  competitiveness  of  importers  and
exporters, which, in turn, influences the country’s trade performance.  Narrower credit spreads
can reduce the cost of capital for business and help support greater business investment.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  sum,  financial  conditions  affect  households’  and  firms’  saving  and  investment  plans,  and,
therefore, play a key role in influencing economic activity and the economic outlook.  This is why
the evaluation of financial conditions is so crucial in the conduct of monetary policy.
The  FOMC  traditionally  implements  monetary  policy  by  adjusting  the  federal  funds  rate—the
short-term  interest  rate  paid  by  banks  that  borrow  reserves  from  other  financial  institutions. 
However, few economic decisions directly depend on the federal funds rate.  Rather, changes in
the  federal  funds  rate  affect  the  economy  through  their  impact  on  other  interest  rates,  which,
consequently,  influence  broader  financial  conditions.    If  financial  conditions  moved  predictably
with the policy rate, then there would be no need for the FOMC to focus on financial conditions. 
In such a world, by adjusting the level of the federal funds rate, the FOMC could be fully confident
that it could generate the appropriate financial conditions necessary to support achievement of
full employment and price stability.
In fact, the response of financial conditions to changes in short-term interest rates is not rigid and
predictable.    Instead,  as  we  shall  see  shortly,  the  linkage  between  the  federal  funds  rate  and
financial  conditions  changes  over  time,  as  it  is  influenced  by  a  whole  host  of  other  factors. 
Recent evidence suggests that even the relation between short-term and long-term rates has
shifted substantially over the past 15 years.   Moreover, at times, we have observed cases in
which financial conditions did not move in the same direction as the monetary policy stance.  Let
me highlight two recent divergences which indicate that we need to keep a separate eye on the
evolution of financial conditions. 
4
The first occurred in the mid-2000s.  In June 2004, the FOMC decided to begin raising the federal
funds rate target in order to remove policy accommodation.  It raised the target in 25-basis-point
increments at 17 consecutive meetings, pushing the rate up from a starting point of 1.0 percent
to a peak of 5.25 percent.  Despite this tightening of monetary policy over two years, financial
conditions failed to tighten in a similar manner.  This can be seen by looking at the behavior of
well-known measures of financial conditions during this period (Exhibit 1).  The rise in short-term
rates  was  offset  by  a  decline  in  long-term  yields,  a  rise  in  equity  prices  and  narrower  credit
spreads. 
In  contrast,  there  have  been  times  when  financial  conditions  tightened  even  as  the  FOMC
reduced short-term interest rates.  For example, consider what happened during the heart of the
financial crisis.  Even as the FOMC lowered the federal funds rate in the fall of 2008—eventually
hitting its effective lower bound that December—credit spreads widened sharply, household and
business loan underwriting standards tightened sharply, liquidity in many financial markets dried
up, and the U.S. stock market plummeted.  Financial conditions tightened despite the aggressive
easing of monetary policy during this period.
There are many explanations for why the relationship between the federal funds rate and financial
conditions is so variable.  Without being exhaustive, let me highlight three.  First, animal spirits in
financial markets wax and wane, pushing asset values up or down in a manner that can more
than  offset  the  effects  of  movements  in  short-term  interest  rates.    The  movements  in  many
financial  markets  following  last  year’s  presidential  election  are  a  notable  example  of  this
phenomenon.  Second, domestic financial conditions are influenced by what happens abroad.  If
the monetary policy of major U.S. trading partners becomes easier relative to policy in the United
States, then it could lead to a dollar appreciation that would weigh on U.S. trade performance, all
else  equal.    Third,  financial  instability  and  stress  can  cause  risk-averse  investors  to  increase
their demand for safe assets.  This can push up risk premia and credit spreads, and push down
stock prices—which can more than offset the impact of an easier monetary policy. 
Divergences between short-term interest rates and financial conditions often appear to be larger
and more persistent in the United States than in most other advanced economies.  There are
several reasons for this.  First, the U.S. financial system depends less on its banking system to
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
intermediate financial flows than in other countries.  The share of credit supplied by the banking
sector fluctuates around 50 percent in the United States, which is much lower than in the euro
area, Japan and the United Kingdom (Exhibit 2).  Second, in contrast to most other countries,
U.S. residential housing is financed mainly by 30-year fixed-rate mortgages, rather than—as is
the case in most other countries—adjustable-rate mortgages with rates that much more closely
track their central banks’ short-term interest rate targets.  Third, the equity market plays a much
more important role in the United States than elsewhere.  The total market capitalization of the
U.S. equity market is considerably higher than in the euro area and Japan (Exhibit 3).
Because the evolution of financial conditions can diverge from the path of the federal funds rate,
financial conditions need to be carefully considered in the conduct of monetary policy.  However, I
want to reiterate that what we care about is not financial conditions themselves, but rather their
influence  on  economic  activity.    Accordingly,  we  should  care  much  more  about  longer-term
movements in financial conditions than about higher-frequency, transitory movements.  That is
because  behavior  in  firms  and  households  will  be  influenced  much  more  by  how  financial
conditions evolve over time, rather than by where they happen to be at a particular moment.
To emphasize this point, let me give two contrasting examples—one where financial conditions
moved sharply but not persistently, and another where financial conditions moved systematically
over a longer time period.  We will see that it is the long-lived movements that have the largest
influence on the economic outlook. 
For the first example, consider the U.S. equity market in 1987.  The S&P 500 index began the
year  at  242,  shot  up  to  a  peak  of  337  in  August  (an  increase  of  almost  40  percent)  and
plummeted to a trough of 225 in October (a fall of 33 percent).  When the stock market fell more
than 20 percent on October 19th—which came to be known as “Black Monday”—many feared
that the decline would lead to a recession.  After all, that crash was the largest-ever one-day
percentage  decline  of  the  U.S.  stock  market.    But,  no  recession  occurred.    Importantly,
households  sustained  their  spending  despite  the  sharp  decline  in  household  wealth.    This
happened, in part, because household spending had not yet responded much to the sharp run-up
in stock prices earlier in the year, so consumer spending turned out to be relatively insensitive to
the market’s sharp reversal.  In addition, the damage from the sharp stock market decline was
mitigated by the Federal Reserve’s commitment “to serve as a source of liquidity to support the
5
economic and financial system.”
A contrasting example is the sharp appreciation of the dollar that began in 1978 and reached a
peak in March 1985.  The persistent strength of the dollar had a significant negative consequence
for  U.S.  trade  performance.    Our  trade  deficit  widened  sharply  in  1985  and  1986,  which
contributed  to  the  sharp  slowdown  in  U.S.  manufacturing  production  growth—and  a  milder
slowdown in GDP growth—over this period. 
This  leads  to  an  important  question:    When  should  the  FOMC  take  changes  in  financial
conditions into consideration in its conduct of monetary policy?  I don’t think there is a simple
answer.  Financial conditions matter in influencing the economic outlook, but so do many other
factors.  It is true that monitoring financial conditions can help improve the effectiveness of the
policy decision-making process.  However, as I hope is clear from my previous examples, there
is no mechanical link between policy rates and financial conditions that monetary policymakers
can systematically rely upon to set policy.
Another  key  question  is  what  one  should  focus  on  in  assessing  financial  conditions.   Again,  I
don’t think there is a simple answer, as the significance of any particular aspect of changes in
financial conditions depends on the economic circumstances and environment.  In the early- to
mid-2000s,  the  combination  of  looser  mortgage  underwriting  practices  and  home  equity
withdrawal  were  major  financial  factors  contributing  to  that  economic  expansion.    The
subsequent  housing  crash  was  exacerbated  by  the  sharp  reversals  of  mortgage  lending
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
standards and home equity withdrawal, which together contributed to the severity of the Great
Recession.  Today, these factors seem less important because lending practices in the housing
market have been much more stable in recent years.
The importance and complexity of financial conditions also underscore the need for caution in
following  any  mechanical  monetary  policy  rule.    For  example,  the  most  well-known  rule—the
Taylor Rule—does not explicitly take financial conditions into account in terms of its monetary
policy prescription.  In that rule, the federal funds rate depends only on the deviations of output
from its potential and inflation from the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent objective, and on the level of
the real short-term interest rate consistent with a neutral stance of monetary policy.  Because the
interactions  can  shift  between  financial  conditions  and  the  economic  outlook—as  well  as
between financial conditions and the federal funds rate—the absence of financial conditions in
this rule can cause it to perform poorly as a guide for monetary policy.
As a case in point, consider what the 1999 variant of the Taylor Rule indicated as the appropriate
monetary policy setting in September 2008, just prior to the failure of Lehman Brothers.  In the
Bluebook  document  that  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  staff  prepared  for  the  September  2008
FOMC meeting, the 1999 Taylor Rule called for a federal funds rate setting of 3.5 percent for the
fourth quarter of 2008, well above the 2 percent setting at the time of the meeting.  The standard
1993 Taylor Rule—which puts  a  greater  weight  on  inflation—called  for  an  even  higher  federal
funds rate target of 4.1 percent.  Given the rapid deterioration in financial conditions, instead of
following the prescription from these rules, the FOMC cut the federal funds rate rapidly over the
next three months, pushing the federal funds rate down to a range of 0 to a quarter of 1 percent
by year-end.
Consistent  with  this  episode,  such  rules  often  perform  poorly  at  times  when  the  economic
environment and outlook are rapidly changing.  This is one important reason why I do not support
proposals that would require the Federal Reserve to explain to Congress whenever its federal
funds  rate  target  deviates  from  a  particular  prescriptive  monetary  policy  rule.    As  Federal
Reserve  Chair  Yellen  explained  in  a  recent  speech,  not  only  are  there  a  plethora  of  rules  to
choose from, but following any monetary policy rule in a perfunctory manner would likely lead to
inappropriate  monetary  policy  at  times—especially  during  economic  turning  points  when  the
6
outlook is changing rapidly.  
Also, requiring the Federal Reserve Chair to explain frequently why the FOMC had deviated from
a particular rule would unduly impinge on the ability of the FOMC to conduct monetary policy in a
manner insulated from short-term political considerations.  Of course, Congress has the right to
hear from the Federal Reserve about its conduct of U.S. monetary policy.  There are already
several  opportunities,  including  regular  testimony  and  semiannual  monetary  policy  reports.    If
Congress desires, such communications could become more frequent or enhanced.  But, my
point is that these exchanges should not be triggered by deviations from a mechanical rule.  And,
of  course,  I  feel  that  this  is  especially  true  for  a  rule  that  does  not  account  for  financial
conditions. 
Now that I have expounded upon the importance of financial conditions, I would like to discuss
their implications for the current stance of U.S. monetary policy.  As I see it, there were a number
of  factors  behind  the  FOMC’s  decision  in  March  to  take  another  step  in  gradually  removing
accommodation by raising the federal funds rate target by 25 basis points to a range of three
quarters of a percent to 1 percent. 
Most importantly, the economy has continued to grow modestly above its sustainable long-term
pace.  This has led to continued, sturdy monthly job gains and a gradual diminution of the amount
of slack in the U.S. labor market.  Forward-looking indicators foreshadow a continuation of this
trend.  For example, household and business confidence has increased markedly over the past
few months. 
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The economic outlook abroad also appears to have brightened.  Growth has picked up in Europe.
Commodity prices have risen, reducing the pressure on emerging market economies that are
major commodity exporters.  There are still significant uncertainties and risks abroad, but overall,
these risks seem significantly lower than they were a year ago. 
Inflation has moved closer to our 2 percent longer-run objective.  Headline inflation on a year-
over-year basis has moved up in the past few months as the sharp declines in energy prices in
late 2015 and early 2016 have fallen out of the calculation.  Core inflation—which ignores the
more volatile movements in energy and food prices—also has moved slightly higher.  Over the
12 months through January 2017, the core personal consumption expenditure deflator has risen
at about 1.75 percent, up from 1.6 percent a year earlier.  Thus, I have become more confident
that inflation will stabilize around the FOMC’s objective over the medium term. 
While  there  is  still  considerable  uncertainty  about  fiscal  policy  and  its  potential  contribution  to
economic  activity,  it  seems  likely  that  it  will  shift  over  time  to  a  more  stimulative  setting. 
Consequently, it appears that the risks for both economic growth and inflation over the medium
to longer term may be shifting gradually to the upside. 
Even after the latest increase, the federal funds rate target range at three quarters of a percent to
1 percent is still unusually low in both nominal and inflation-adjusted terms.  While most FOMC
participants judge the equilibrium  short-term  real  interest  rate  that  is  consistent  with  a  neutral
monetary policy to be low—perhaps in a range of 0 to 1 percent—this is still above the current
inflation-adjusted federal funds rate.  In such circumstances, it seems appropriate to scale back
monetary  policy  accommodation  gradually  in  order  to  reduce  the  risk  of  the  economy
overheating, and to avoid a significant inflation overshoot in the medium term. 
Finally, prior to the March FOMC meeting, financial conditions were generally easing rather than
becoming tighter, even as the FOMC raised its policy rate in December and market participants
increasingly expected further policy tightening in the coming year.  Between the December and
March FOMC meetings, U.S. equity prices rose by about 4 percent, and credit spreads, such as
those for high-yield bonds, narrowed.  Long-term yields and the trade-weighted dollar were little
changed over this period.
William McChesney Martin, the ninth chair of the FOMC, once famously opined that the Federal
Reserve is “in the position of the chaperone who has ordered the punch bowl removed just when
the party was really warming up.”  I don’t think we are removing the punch bowl, yet.  We’re just
adding a bit more fruit juice. 
Before I conclude, let me make a few comments about the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  As
you are undoubtedly aware, the Federal Reserve dramatically expanded the size of its balance
sheet during and following the financial crisis to provide accommodation to support the economy
when short-term interest rates were constrained by their effective lower bound.  Currently, we
are  reinvesting  maturing  Treasury  securities  and  agency  mortgage-backed  securities
repayments to keep the size of the balance sheet generally stable.  We have said that we plan to
continue this policy of reinvestment until we are well along in the process of normalizing the level
of  the  federal  funds  rate.   As  the  FOMC  has  raised  the  federal  funds  rate  three  times,  this
process seems to have proceeded smoothly so far, prompting renewed interest in our balance
sheet and reinvestment policy.
The anticipation of and actual announcement by the FOMC of changes in reinvestment policy is
likely to push up longer-term interest rates and tighten financial conditions somewhat, just as the
earlier  purchases  pushed  down  long-term  interest  rates.    To  what  extent  is  difficult  to  judge. 
Presumably, financial conditions would tighten by more if we were to end reinvestments earlier
and more abruptly.  This suggests a better course may be to taper reinvestments gradually and
predictably. 
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition, because changes in reinvestment policy will likely tighten financial conditions, we will
have to take this into account in our interest rate decisions.  My view is that reducing the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet and raising short-term interest rates are two different, yet related, ways
of removing monetary policy accommodation.  Therefore, I would expect that, when we begin to
end reinvestment, we will have to consider the implications for the appropriate short-term interest
rate trajectory.
In  conclusion,  financial  conditions  are  important.    They  matter  enormously  to  monetary  policy
because their movements can often diverge from the trajectory of short-term rates, and because
they  affect  economic  activity  and  the  economic  outlook.    While  it  is  essential  to  account  for
financial  conditions  appropriately  in  conducting  monetary  policy,  it  is  also  important  not  to
overreact to every short-term wiggle in financial markets.  In addition, it is important to remember
that  the  policy  goal  is  not  the  level  of  financial  conditions  per  se,  but  the  achievement  of  the
Federal  Reserve’s  dual  mandate  objectives.    Sometimes,  that  will  be  consistent  with  easing
financial conditions, and at other times, it will be consistent with tighter financial conditions.  At all
times, our focus will be on achieving our objectives of maximum sustainable employment and
price stability, thereby supporting the livelihoods of households and businesses throughout the
United States.
Thank you for your kind attention.  I would be happy to take a few questions. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
Ozge Akinci, Nicola Cetorelli, Richard Crump, David Lucca, Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy
assisted in preparing these remarks.
See William Dudley and Jan Hatzius, “The Goldman Sachs Financial Conditions Index: The Right Tool for a New
Monetary Policy Regime,” Goldman Sachs Global Economic Paper Number 44, 2000.
For a discussion of various financial conditions indexes see Jan Hatzius, Peter Hooper, Frederic S. Mishkin,
Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Mark W. Watson, “Financial Conditions Indexes: A Fresh Look after the Financial
Crisis,” U.S. Monetary Policy Forum (Chicago: Chicago Booth Initiative on Global Markets, 2010) pp. 3-59.
Samuel G. Hanson, David O. Lucca and Jonathan H. Wright (2017), “Interest Rate Conundrums of the 21st
Century,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 810, March.
Carlson,  Mark,  “A  Brief  History  of  the  1987  Stock  Market  Crash  with  a  Discussion  of  the  Federal  Reserve
Response,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 2007-13, Divisions of Research & Statistics and
Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC, November 2006.
Janet L. Yellen, “The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” speech at the Stanford Institute for
Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, California, January 19, 2017.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
