  Remarks by Daniel Mminele, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the annual Financial Markets Department cocktail function 
 Pretoria 
4 April 2017 
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. 
 It is once again that time of the year when we welcome you all to the annual cocktail 
function  of  the  Financial  Markets  Department  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank 
(SARB). Thank you for accepting our invitation and joining us tonight. 
 Introduction 
 As  you  are  aware,  the  main  idea  behind  this  function  is  to  create  a  networking 
opportunity between  SARB  staff members and  other market participants  in order to 
facilitate an exchange of views on financial market developments in a more relaxed 
environment.  This  annual  event  also  provides  an  opportunity  for  us  as  the  central 
bank  to  convey  our  appreciation  for  the  cooperation  we  have  been  receiving  from 
market  participants  over  the  past  year,  both  in  the  execution  of  open  market 
operations  and  when  we  conduct  financial  markets  research  to  enhance  our 
understanding of market dynamics. These interactions are crucial for our role in the 
financial  markets  as  we  seek  to  give  effect  to  the  monetary  policy  stance  which 
underpins the execution of our price stability mandate. 
  Page 1 of 9 
My colleagues in the Financial Markets Department remind me every year that this is 
not  the  occasion  to  deliver  my  ‘speech  of  the  year’  but  that  I  am  merely  a  curtain-
raiser  to  the  main  event,  namely  conducting  ‘special’  liquidity  management 
operations.  
 In welcoming you to the SARB, allow me to make a few remarks to take stock of the 
recent  developments  in  international  and  domestic  financial  markets  and  their 
implications, last year’s cocktail function being the reference point. Before I conclude 
I  would  also  like  to  touch  briefly  on  market  conduct  issues.  I  will  try  and  heed  the 
advice that Franklin D. Roosevelt once gave: “Be sincere, be brief, be seated.” 
 Developments in global financial markets 
 Since  the  previous  cocktail  function,  policy  uncertainty  has  come  to  dominate  price 
action  in  global  financial  markets.  Among  other  things,  this  is  due  to  what  Marvin 
Barth  has  called  the  ‘politics  of  rage’1,  referring  to  the  rise  in  anti-globalisation 
sentiment,  populist  rhetoric,  and  countries  increasingly  turning  inward.  While  an 
element  of  this  uncertainty  may  have  diminished,  at  least  as  far  as  the  election 
outcomes  in  certain  parts  of  the  world  are  concerned,  the  outcomes  themselves 
have  ushered  in  a  period  of  unusually  high  levels  of  uncertainty  as  regards  policy 
direction, the timing with regard to the adoption of policies as well as the likelihood of 
successful implementation. The risks stemming from the possible election outcomes 
across Europe  this year  appear to be  receding, but one thing last year taught us is 
that impossible things are possible.  
 As a result of this, global financial markets may well be in for further bumpy rides, not 
least because market risk indicators such as high-yield corporate bond spreads, the 
spread  on  foreign  currency  emerging  market  debt,  and  general  equity  market 
volatility  –  which  often  reflect  investor  nervousness  –  remain  low,  pointing  to  a 
possible  dislocation  that  could  understate  the  downside  risk  profile  to  economic 
growth.  Nevertheless,  as  is  the  norm,  markets  have  moved  ahead  of  ‘the  fact’,  for 
                                                           
1 Marvin Barth, The Politics of Rage, 2016, Barclays, United Kingdom.   
 Page 2 of 9 
instance pricing in a higher trajectory for US2 economic growth. Analysts expect real 
GDP3  in  the  US  to  average  2.2%  in  2017,4  more  or  less  in  line  with  the  median 
projection of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The positive momentum 
in terms of growth prospects is not confined to the US and is relatively broad-based, 
particularly when it comes to advanced economies. 
 Against  a  backdrop  of  an  improving  growth  trajectory,  economic  policy  uncertainty 
presents  a  new  challenge  for  the  already  complex  environment  in  which  central 
banks  operate  –  more  so  because  the  actual  and  expected  inflation  figures  are 
seemingly  on  an  uptrend.  For  central  banks,  who  have  said  for  so  long  that  rising 
inflation  is  a  necessary  precursor  to  ‘normalising’  their  policies,  the  macro-financial 
implications  of  this  increasingly  uncertain  political  environment  could  complicate 
monetary  policy  normalisation.  As  the  forward  guidance  thresholds  are  being 
reached,  the  question remains  whether  central  banks  (specifically  those  in  Europe) 
will  once  again  re-emphasise  the  broader  notion  of economic  slack  that  may  result 
from  the  current  political  landscape  as  an  additional  qualitative  feature  of  their 
policies.  The  UK5  facing  headline  inflation  that  is  now  above  the  central  bank’s 
official  target  and,  on  the  other  hand,  threats  to  its  economic  growth  is  a  classic 
example.  The  US  is  in  a  slightly  different  position.  Having  gradually  lowered  the 
projected  path  of  its policy  rate  since the  time  of  our  previous  cocktail function,  the 
FOMC changed its course  in September 2016 and revised upwards the future path 
of  interest  rates  that  it  deems  most  likely  to  foster  outcomes  for  economic  activity 
and inflation that best satisfy its dual mandate. The FOMC’s projections now point to 
two additional 25 basis point increases in the federal funds rate following the March 
hike.  These  expectations  are  in  line  with  those  implied  from  Fed  funds  futures  and 
are  also  evident  in  the  pricing  of  US  currency  and  fixed-income  markets.  The  US 
dollar index has appreciated by  6.2% since April 2016,  reflecting the change in the 
outlook for US monetary policy. At the same time,  the US Treasury curve has bear 
flattened, with yields at the shorter end rising by as much as 60 basis points.  
                                                           
2 United States 
3 gross domestic product 
4 This was the Bloomberg median forecast as at 23 March 2017.  
5 United Kingdom 
 Page 3 of 9 
 In the emerging market economies, things look slightly better than over the previous 
year. Soon after last year’s cocktail function, we noted an increase in the universe of 
negative-yielding  bonds  that,  in  an  environment  dominated  by  the  search  for  yield, 
benefited  certain  emerging  markets.  During  this  period,  yields  on  emerging  market 
local- and hard-currency debt declined and equities rallied, but currencies presented 
a  mixed  picture,  although  in  most  cases  still  with  an  appreciation  bias.  The  rally  in 
emerging  market  assets  was  largely  driven  by  signs  of  stabilisation  in  China’s 
economy  and  financial  markets,  a  rebound  in  energy  and  other  commodity  prices, 
and  more  supportive  central  bank  policies  in  developed  markets.  Furthermore,  on 
the back of the  last-mentioned, net capital flows to  emerging economies  (excluding 
China)  peaked  at  US$26.1  billion  in  June  2016,  according  to  estimates  by  the 
Institute  of  International  Finance.  However,  after  this  June  peak  and  for  the 
remainder  of  2016,  the  build-up  to  and  outcome  of  the  US  presidential  election 
sparked a wave of outflows from emerging markets, with portfolio flows estimated to 
have  plummeted  to  a  41-month  low  as  the  so-called  ‘Trump  Trade’  favoured  a 
stronger US  dollar  and higher  US yields. Emerging market capital flows have since 
rebounded  across  the  major  developing  regions  but  potential  headwinds  persist, 
especially  given  that  it  cannot  be  argued  that  such  were  in  any  way  related  to  a 
change in economic fundamentals.       
 Developments in domestic financial markets 
 Price action in the South African markets was more or less in line with that of other 
developing  economies.  The  most  notable  development  has  been  the  strengthening 
of the rand which, by last week, had appreciated to a low of R12.31 against the US 
dollar since our previous cocktail function. This was the strongest that the rand had 
traded  since  mid-2015.  On  a  trade-weighted  basis,  the  South  African  currency  had 
appreciated by about 19%.  
   Page 4 of 9 
This rally can be attributed to a number of factors, including the pickup in commodity 
prices,  investor  positioning,  and  a  reprieve  from  international  credit  rating  agencies 
regarding a possible downgrade of South Africa  to sub-investment grade. The rand 
was  also  supported  by  more  favourable  terms  of  trade  and  an  improvement  in  the 
current account balance that has reduced the perceived vulnerability of the currency 
to  possible  capital  flow  reversals.  This  made  the  rand  more  resilient  even  during 
externally  induced  risk-off  episodes,  appreciating  alongside  a  stronger  US  dollar 
and/or depreciating by less compared to its emerging market peers.    
 Other  financial  assets  followed  a  similar  path  of  appreciation  over  the  year.  Bond 
yields  rallied  and  breakeven  inflation  declined.  The  yield  on  the  benchmark 
R186 bond had declined from just over 9% a year ago to a low last week of 8.32% 
while  breakeven  inflation  on  the  R197  (5-year)  inflation-linked  bond  declined  from 
7.2%  in  April  last  year  to  around  5.8%  last  week.  With  the  lower  inflation 
expectations, the (FRA) market had, by last week, priced in more than one rate cut 
by the first quarter of 2018, with the 12x15 FRA trading below 7.0%. 
 The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  noted  the  improvement  in  the  inflation 
outlook,  which  over  the  past  year  had  allowed  multiple  downward  revisions  to  the 
forecast, and expressed last week, at the conclusion of its most recent meeting, the 
view that we may have reached the end of the moderate tightening cycle. According 
to  our  most  recent  forecast,  we  expect  headline  inflation  to  fall  below  6%  in  the 
second quarter of 2017 and to remain within the target range for the remainder of the 
forecast  horizon.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  there  was  one  member  of  the  MPC 
who preferred a 25 basis point reduction in the repo rate at the March meeting,  the 
general feeling  was  that  evidence  of  a  more  sustained  improvement  in  the  inflation 
outlook  is  required  before  interest  rates  can  be  reduced.  The  MPC  remains 
concerned about the elevated levels of inflation expectations that are still around the 
upper end of the inflation target band.  
   Page 5 of 9 
As  you  are  aware,  some  of  the  positive  trends  we  had  been  observing  were 
interrupted  by  political  events  during  the  last  week,  which  triggered  a  significant 
movement in the financial markets. Since last Monday, the rand traded in a range of 
163  cents,  between  its  strongest  level  of  R12.31  to  the  dollar  on  Monday  and  its 
weakest  level  of  R13.94  around  midday  today.  The  currency  did,  however, 
appreciate  somewhat  and  was  at  levels  of  around  R13.55  to  the  dollar  earlier  this 
afternoon.  The  R186  yield  also  lost  most  of  the  gains  it  had  made  last  year  and  is 
now  trading  at  just  above  9.0%.  The  12x15  FRA  is  back  to  7.49%,  implying  an 
unchanged repo rate for next year. 
 Financial  markets  will  likely  need  more  time  to  fully  process  the  recent  political 
events and their economic consequences. It remains to be seen whether the recent 
market developments represent a reassessment or  a repricing of the  South African 
credit.  It  is  similarly  too  early  to  draw  any  firm  conclusions  on  how  these 
developments  will  affect  SARB’s  own  inflation  forecasts.  The  MPC  has  previously 
cautioned  that,  should  some  of  the  factors  which  had  contributed  to  a  more 
favourable  outlook  reverse  and  undermine  the  inflation  outlook,  it  may  reassess  its 
views;  the  MPC  stands  ready  to  respond  appropriately  in  line  with  its  mandate 
should the need arise.  
 Yesterday’s decision by S&P Global Ratings to lower South Africa long-term foreign 
currency sovereign credit rating to sub-investment grade, with a continuing negative 
outlook,  is  a  serious  setback  for  the  country.  We  will  now  need  to  redouble  our 
efforts  in  providing  assurance  and  communicating  continued  commitment  to  sound 
macro-economic policies and their consistent and predictable implementation, so as 
to  reverse  the  current  ratings  trajectory.  This  will  require  a  continued  collaborative 
effort between Government, business and labour to boost domestic and international 
investor confidence.  
     Page 6 of 9 
Market conduct developments 
 Before I conclude, let me touch on an issue that has been receiving some attention 
recently. While  it  is  true  that  traders  and  investors  need  to  continually  evaluate  the 
fundamental  drivers  of  asset  prices,  the  behaviour  of  market  participants  should 
always  meet  the  highest  conduct  standards.  Ensuring  and  continuously  promoting 
adherence to  high standards of ethical conduct is an integral part of  contributing to 
the efficiency, integrity and reputation of our financial markets. 
 The  Competition  Commission  of  South  Africa  has  referred  for  prosecution  to  the 
Competition Tribunal allegations of collusive and therefore unlawful practices among 
certain financial institutions in their foreign exchange trading operations involving the 
rand. As stated previously, the SARB views these allegations in a very serious light 
and  is  of  the  view  that  those  found  to  have  violated  the  law  should  accept  full 
responsibility  and  bear  the  consequences.  However,  it  is  also  important that  we  do 
not jump to conclusions and allow the steps now initiated to be completed, following 
due process.  
 Building  on  the  review  of  foreign  exchange  operations  of  local  authorised  dealers 
conducted  in 2015,  National Treasury,  the Financial  Services  Board  and  the  SARB 
will  soon  embark  on  a  more  comprehensive  review  of  conduct  in  the  wholesale 
money,  debt  capital,  foreign  exchange,  commodities  and  derivatives  markets  in 
South Africa in order to strengthen market conduct. The exercise  is expected to  be 
similar  to  the  Fair  and  Effective  Markets  Review  conducted  in  the  UK.  The  review, 
which is scheduled to commence next month (with further details to be announced in 
due  course),  will  look  at  the  standards  and  practices  in  South  Africa’s  wholesale 
financial  markets,  both  regulated  and  unregulated,  in  terms  of  governance, 
accountability  and  incentives;  it  will  ultimately  develop  recommendations  for  overall 
conduct standards to enhance the integrity of our financial markets. 
   Page 7 of 9 
The Bank for International Settlements is in the process of developing a Global Code 
of  Conduct  for  Foreign  Exchange  Markets  which  will  set  out  the  principles  of  good 
practice in the foreign exchange market. The code will be released on 25 May 2017. 
The  SARB  participated  in  its  development  and  is  now  in  the  process  of  consulting 
with a wide range of market participants via the Foreign Exchange Subcommittee of 
the  Financial  Markets  Liaison  Group  with  the  view  that  South  Africa  should  be  an 
early adopter of the code within any proposed time frames.  
 Conclusion 
 Let  me  conclude  by  once  again  expressing,  on  behalf  of  the  Financial  Markets 
Department and the entire SARB, our appreciation to all the market participants for 
their  cooperation  and  support  over  the  years.  We  look  forward  to  continuing  our 
interactions in the future.  
 I  would  like  to  thank  our  financial  markets  team  for  the  sterling  work  over  the  past 
year, for their dedication and commitment to the task.  
 Allow me to also draw to your attention some changes that have taken place in the 
senior  management  of  the  Financial  Markets  Department.  In  preparation  for  the 
upcoming retirement of Mr Callie Hugo in 2018, with effect from 01 April 2017 Callie 
assumed  the  role  of  Special  Projects  Manager  in  the  office  of  the  Head  of 
Department. Mr Zafar Parker, who previously headed up our Reserves Management 
team,  has  taken  over  from  him  as  Head:  Market  Intelligence  and  Operations  this 
week. While Callie still has his work cut out for 15 months or so, it is only proper that 
we  already  thank  him  today  for  his  tremendous  contribution  in  guiding  our  money 
market operations over many, many years. 
 Thank you also to our staff at the Conference Centre for organising this event. 
   Page 8 of 9 
As  in  previous  years,  a  newsletter  called  FMD  Update  has  been  prepared  for  the 
occasion, which provides information on some of the key strategic initiatives that the 
Financial Markets Department is involved in. It is available for you to take home, but 
you can also find it on our website. 
 Thank you for your attention. Enjoy the rest of the evening. 
  Page 9 of 9 
