Stephen S Poloz: The meaning of "data dependence" - an economic
progress report
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the St. John's Board of
Trade, St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador, 27 September 2017.
 I would like to thank Russell Barnett and David Amirault for their help in preparing this speech.
Introduction
I  am  always  happy  to  be  here  in  St.  John’s,  a  unique  corner  of  our  country.  Given  the  city’s
geography, its history and rich culture, those of you who get to call St. John’s home are fortunate,
indeed.
The idea of “home” is a preoccupation for us at the Bank of Canada. We have been working
since the global recession almost a decade ago to bring the Canadian economy home. What I
want to do today is give you a sense of how far the economy has come and how much further it
has to go, and talk about some signs to watch for along the way.
The goal of our monetary policy is to keep inflation low, stable and predictable. Under the terms
of the agreement between the Bank and the federal government, we aim for an annual rate of
consumer price inflation of 2 per cent. Of course, unforeseen events can always push inflation
up or down. So, our agreement sets out a target band of 1 to 3 per cent.
What do I mean by “home”? For us, home is at the intersection of full capacity and 2 per cent
inflation. We expect that when the economy reaches full capacity, inflation will converge on the 2
per cent midpoint of the target band. That is why we are so preoccupied with the idea of home.
Our adjustments to interest rates affect economic activity, which affects the gap between the
level of output and full capacity, which in turn affects inflation. However, there is an important
consideration that sometimes gets lost: this process takes time. Any change in interest rates will
not have its full impact on inflation for about a year and a half to two years. So, when we make
our monetary policy decisions, we are less concerned about the latest inflation numbers—which
are already a month old—than we are about where inflation will be in the future.
Forecasting inflation: data, sentiment and intelligence
That  brings  us  to  the  question  of  how  to  forecast  future  inflation.  The  place  to  start  is  with
economic models. Models are indispensable for developing forecasts of inflation and the rest of
the economy. However, no central banker would ever base a monetary policy decision solely on
a projection from an economic model. Models provide us with a coherent starting point, but we
need to apply real-world judgment before reaching a policy decision.
A lot of this judgment comes from conversations with people. Earlier this year, Deputy Governor
Lynn  Patterson spokeabout  how  the  Bank  gleans  intelligence  from  financial  markets.  Equally
important are efforts to gauge business sentiment—sometimes called “soft data”—and to gather
intelligence  about  the  real  economy  from  business  leaders.  We  need  to  understand  the  view
from both Main Street and Bay Street to help inform our outlook for growth and inflation. This is
where our regional offices, staffed by people who routinely visit companies across the country,
play a vital role.
One  of  the  most  important  vehicles  for  these  efforts  is  our Business Outlook Survey  (BOS),
which is celebrating its 20thanniversary this year. The informal process for these visits began
when I was at the Bank in the early 1990s. In fact, the first time I visited St. John’s was to do
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
some of those consultations. Through our surveys and conversations with business leaders, we
regularly get clues about economic trends before they show up in the official economic statistics.
Let  me  illustrate.  The  roughly  50  per  cent  drop  in  oil  prices  during  2014  represented  a  cut  of
roughly $60 billion per year in export revenue for oil producers. Some of the impacts of this cut
were immediately obvious and predictable. We knew oil-intensive regions would be hurt by the
drop in income and that oil companies would reduce their spending. Certainly, the people of this
city and province are aware of the pain caused by the oil price shock.
However, the BOS taken late in 2014, together with additional discussions we had with energy
companies, revealed warning signs that went well beyond the decline in business investment.
For  example,  companies  in  this  region  told  us  that  they  were  being  flooded  by  résumés  of
workers  returning  from Alberta.  Service  firms,  such  as  hotel  and  trucking  companies,  told  us
about  bookings  being  suddenly  cancelled.  Energy-service  companies  told  us  that  previously
signed  contracts  for  construction  and  exploration  work  were  being  renegotiated,  or  even
terminated.
So, well before the shock started to show up in the statistics, we could see that it would have a
significant  negative  effect  on  the  Canadian  economy  and  the  outlook  for  inflation.  This  was
crucial  to  our  decision  to  lower  interest  rates  in  January  2015. And,  as  companies  cut  their
investment intentions further, we lowered interest rates again the following July.
To be clear, our economic models correctly predicted that the collapse in oil prices would be a
serious blow. Specifically, our main policy model gave us invaluable insights into how the shock
would affect the economy and how the subsequent adjustments would unfold. But the fact that
everything we were hearing was supporting these insights increased our confidence that cutting
rates was the right course of action.
Adjusting to lower oil prices
Obviously, the drop in oil prices was a significant detour for the Canadian economy. We knew
that the shock would trigger a complex series of adjustments and create significant hardship for
many people.
Basically, our models projected that the economy would go through the reverse of its experience
in  2010–14,  when  high  oil  prices  led  to  strong  increases  in  business  investment  and  national
income. Provinces where the energy sector is relatively more important, such as Newfoundland
and Labrador, would feel these effects most acutely. This underscores one of the fundamental
challenges  for  policy-makers,  that  economic  shocks  can  have  very  different  effects  across
Canada’s regions.
In terms of adjustments, we anticipated that lower oil prices would mean not only a decline in the
energy sector, but also a pickup in growth in the non-energy sector. We expected exports to be
boosted by a lower Canadian dollar. And, as exporting companies reached their capacity limits,
we  expected  to  see  business  investment  increase.  Stronger  exports  and  investment  would
complement  household  spending,  and  growth  would  become  more  broadly-based  and  self-
sustaining.
Certainly, adjustment in the energy sector has been painful. Beyond cuts to investment spending,
oil companies restructured operations and laid off workers. Employment in the resource sector
fell by roughly 50,000 jobs from the beginning of 2015 to the middle of last year. Despite this,
companies boosted production and exports of crude oil as earlier investments were completed
and as they found greater efficiencies. And, since oil is priced in US dollars, the decline of the
Canadian dollar also helped cushion the impact of the shock. The increased output and weaker
currency  helped  to  offset  almost  half  of  the  $60  billion  decline  in  revenue  from  oil  shipments,
boosting exports by about $25 billion.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
That  said,  Canada’s  other  exports  took  longer  to  recover  than  we  anticipated.  Exporting
companies  had  taken  a  significant  hit  both  during  and  after  the  global  financial  crisis.  Many
disappeared, to be replaced over time by new firms exporting new goods and services. As a
consequence, the composition of Canada’s exports has also changed since the crisis. Exports
of  services  in  categories  such  as  technical,  travel,  financial  and  management  services,  have
taken the lead, while some traditional goods, such as motor vehicles and parts, have seen their
shares  decline.  By  mid-2016,  non-energy  exports  had  fully  recouped  their  previous  drop,  and
today, total exports are almost 10 per cent above their pre-crisis peak.
Monetary policy has played a key role in this adjustment. We estimate that if we had not lowered
our policy rate in 2015, the economy would be roughly 2 per cent smaller today—a difference of
almost $50 billion—and there would be about 120,000 fewer jobs. Government fiscal stimulus
measures also contributed importantly to growth, and this has meant a better mix of monetary
and fiscal policy. Without this fiscal stimulus, interest rates would have had to have been even
lower than they were. All things being equal, this would have meant even more household debt
and an increased longer-term vulnerability for the economy.
As we look ahead, we project that business investment will be a key driver of economic growth.
Business  investment  has  also  been  slower  to  materialize  than  we  expected,  but  it  has  been
strong  across  the  board  over  the  first  half  of  this  year.  Further,  in  our  most  recent  BOS,  our
regional staff found that companies were more focused on expanding capacity than they were
previously.  Indeed,  businesses  across  an  increasing  range  of  sectors  say  they  expect  sales
growth to improve further, and hiring intentions have reached a record high.
Given  all  this  evidence,  we  could  see  by  the  beginning  of  summer  that  the  economy’s
adjustments to lower oil prices were essentially complete. To be clear, the impact of the shock
was still visible in energy-intensive areas of the country. But this was being offset at the macro
level by greater strength in other areas.
So, in July, and again earlier this month, we raised our key policy interest rate. Between those
two rate hikes we saw a long string of stronger-than-expected economic data, culminating in the
GDP report at the end of August that showed an annual growth rate in the second quarter of 4.5
per cent. As we noted in our most recent interest rate announcement, this pace is unlikely to be
sustained, and recent data point clearly to a moderation in the second half of the year. Still, the
expansion is becoming more broadly-based and self-sustaining, and it is important to remember
that it is the level of output relative to potential that drives inflation, not the growth rate. We are in
the process of developing an updated forecast for growth and inflation, and it will be published in
next month’s Monetary Policy Report (MPR).
Risk management
Despite the recent news about economic growth, the story of inflation in Canada over the past
few  years  has  been  dominated  by  downside  risks.  Indeed,  for  most  of  the  past  five  years,
inflation has been in the bottom half of the target band. Bearing in mind the long lags between
economic activity and inflation, much of this low inflation has been due to slow economic growth
in the past. More recently, it has also reflected temporary factors such as weakness in food and
electricity prices. In fact, inflation has been surprisingly soft recently in much of the developed
world, not just Canada. I will have more to say about this in a few minutes.
Since inflation has been so consistently in the lower half of the target band, our risk-management
approach to monetary policy led us to pay greater attention to forces pushing inflation down. This
is because when inflation is already low, a negative shock to the outlook for inflation has more
significant  policy  consequences  than  a  surprise  on  the  upside.  Throughout,  we  wanted  to  be
sure our policy would be sufficiently stimulative to get the economy home.
As the expansion continues, we will continue to manage the evolving risks to the inflation outlook.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  temporary  factors  that  have  been  holding  inflation  down  should  dissipate  in  the  months
ahead,  although  recent  exchange  rate  developments  could  affect  this  timing.  In  our  July
projection, we forecast that inflation would reach close to 2 per cent by the middle of next year.
Since that projection, the Bank’s measures of core inflation have edged higher, as expected. We
expect  the  downward  pressure  on  inflation  to  shift  to  upward  pressure  as  economic  slack  is
used up. Indeed, our models forecast a very slight overshoot of our 2 per cent target in 2019—a
product of our model’s dynamics.
The appropriate path for interest rates in this situation is very difficult to know, because there are
a number of important unknowns around the inflation outlook. These unknowns are unusual, as
they  are  mostly  the  product  of  the  unusual  nature  of  the  situation  we  find  ourselves  in—the
legacy of the global financial crisis, the protracted period of slow economic growth and extremely
low interest rates, and so on. Accordingly, we need to keep updating our understanding of the
economy in real time. That is why we say that the outlook for inflation, and therefore monetary
policy, is particularly data dependent right now.
The meaning of data dependence
What does it mean, in practical terms, to say that monetary policy is “data dependent”? After all,
central  banks  always  depend  on  data  to  measure  their  economy’s  progress  relative  to
expectations.
What I mean in this context is that in a period of heightened uncertainty about how the economy
is  evolving  and  the  implications  for  inflation,  we  need  to  pay  very  close  attention  to all  the
information  we  receive,  including  data,  sentiment  indicators  and  intelligence,  and  make
continuous inferences about not just how the economy is evolving, but how its behaviour may be
changing.
Let me give you four examples of the issues we will be monitoring.
The first, and most important, is the evolution of economic capacity. I said that our version of
“home” is at the intersection of full capacity and 2 per cent inflation. But full capacity can be a
moving  target.  This  is  because  when  companies  increase  investment,  they  augment  their
capacity to produce through some combination of raising their productivity and increasing their
workforce. This is a welcome development because, as the economy approaches full capacity,
investment spending can have the effect of pushing out those capacity limits, giving the economy
more room to grow in a non-inflationary way. In short, this is something worth encouraging. To
some  extent,  this  happens  at  this  point  in  every  economic  cycle,  but  the  protracted  cycle  we
have been through makes this issue particularly relevant this time around.
A  second  issue  is  the  question  of inflation  and  technology.  Some  economists  have  cited
technology  as  contributing  to  the  weakness  in  global  inflation.  The  digital  economy  may  be
allowing goods and services to be produced and delivered more efficiently, helping to keep prices
down.  We  may  also  be  seeing  stronger  competition  through  e-commerce,  which  affects  how
retailers set prices.
It is worth emphasizing that this type of disinflation increases everybody’s purchasing power and
therefore  is  also  a  positive  development.  The  Bank  would  want  to  estimate  the  impact  of
technological  developments  on  trend  inflation  and,  assuming  the  impact  was  temporary,  see
through it, provided that inflation expectations remained well anchored. There is a lot more work
to be done to understand both the size and persistence of these effects.
A third issue is wage growth, which has been slower than would be expected in an economy
that is approaching full output. Hourly wages increased at an annual pace of 1.7 per cent in the
second  quarter,  and  growth  has  been  subdued  for  months,  although  there  were  signs  of  an
increase  in  the  latest  monthly  employment  report.  The  slow  growth  is  likely  due  in  part  to
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
employment  shifting  from  higher-paying  jobs  in  the  oil  sector  to  lower-paying  jobs  elsewhere.
How long this effect will continue is not clear, and other phenomena may be at work. Again, we
must  work  hard  to  understand  the  data,  and  the  underlying  shifts  in  behaviour  they  may  be
pointing to.
The  fourth  issue  is elevated  household  debt.  There  is  reason  to  think  that  interest  rate
increases may have more of an impact on the economy and inflation than they did in the past.
Further, we do not yet know the full extent of the economy’s reaction to various macroprudential
measures aimed at imbalances in the housing market. So, the Bank will be looking closely to see
how  the  economy’s  adjustment  to  changes  in  interest  rates  may  differ  from  that  in  previous
economic cycles.
This is not an exhaustive list. There are also many external risks and uncertainties around our
outlook, including geopolitical developments and the rise of protectionist sentiment in some parts
of the world. The evolution of the neutral rate of interest is also a topic of significant debate in the
profession. We have been talking about these uncertainties for some time.
In such an environment, we simply cannot rely mechanically on economic models. This does not
mean  we  are  abandoning  our  models.  It  does  mean  we  need  to  use  them  with  plenty  of
judgment, informed by data, sentiment indicators and intelligence, as we go through the delicate
process of bringing inflation sustainably to target. We will continue to watch all the data closely,
as well as developments in financial markets, in terms of their impact on the outlook for inflation.
We  recognize  that  the  economy  may  act  differently  than  in  previous  cycles.  We  will  not  be
mechanical in our approach to monetary policy. 
Let me quickly make one final point. Among the financial market developments that we watch
closely are movements in longer-term interest rates and the exchange rate. Changes in interest
rates  naturally  lead  to  movements  in  the  Canadian  dollar.  However,  currencies  can  move  for
many  other  reasons,  including  external  factors,  and  these  movements  can  affect  our  inflation
outlook, depending on their cause, size and persistence.
Conclusion
It is time to conclude. I hope I have given you an appreciation of just how far the economy has
come on its way home. And although we are confident that the economy has made significant
progress, we cannot be certain of exactly how far there is left to go.
The economic progress we have seen tells us that the moves we took to ease policy in 2015
were the right thing to do. At a minimum, that additional stimulus is no longer needed. But there is
no  predetermined  path  for  interest  rates  from  here.  Monetary  policy  will  be  particularly  data
dependent in these circumstances and, as always, we could still be surprised in either direction.
We will continue to feel our way cautiously as we get closer to home, fostering economic growth
and keeping our inflation target front and centre.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
