 Launching of the Financial Literacy Baseline Survey results 
Opening remarks by the Governor of the Central Bank of Seychelles 
Time: 8:35 a.m. 
Venue: STC Conference Room, Victoria  
 Minister Jean-Paul Adam, 
Minister Wallace Cosgrow, 
Invited Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
 Good  morning  and  welcome  to  the  presentation  of  the  financial  literacy  baseline 
survey results.  A special welcome to Mr Abel Motsomi who will be our main presenter 
for the day.  May I begin these opening remarks with a few words on the background 
of this work: 
 As  part  of  the  deliverables  of  the  Seychelles’  Financial  Sector  Development 
Implementation Plan which  was approved by the Government in November 2014, it 
was  recommended  that  a  baseline  study  on  financial  literacy  be  developed  and 
conducted, following which a national strategy on financial education will be developed 
and implemented.  
 The Central Bank of Seychelles in collaboration with the Financial Services Authority 
has  been  tasked  with  the  mandate  for  financial  literacy  in  Seychelles.    Against  this 
backdrop, the financial literacy baseline survey was commissioned to FinMark Trust, 
an independent trust based in South Africa.  FinMark Trust has focused its efforts on 
making financial markets work for the poor by facilitating and catalysing development 
around access to financial services.  Much of the work of FinMark Trust is focused on 
supporting financial inclusion and financial education.  
  1 
 The  financial  literacy  baseline  survey  is  the  first  of  its  kind  to  be  conducted  in 
Seychelles and its importance needs to be emphasised. The aim of the study was to 
gauge the level of financial  literacy of the population and provide an assessment of 
the  needs  of  the  population  including  the  identification  of  possible  target  groups. 
Assessing  the  levels  of  financial  literacy  in  the  population  is  a  key  component  of  a 
successful  national  strategy  for  financial  education  which  enables  policy  makers  to 
identify gaps and design appropriate responses. 
 The results of the survey which are about to be discussed this morning, provides us 
with a set of data which reflects how the public are making financial decisions vis-à-
vis  saving,  borrowing,  budgeting,  spending  and  planning  for  their  financial  future  in 
general,  amongst  other  factors.  Accordingly,  the  statistics  collected  will  guide  and 
inform the development of the national strategy on financial education. The collected 
data which also provides a description of levels of financial literacy in terms of socio-
demographic groups will enable policy makers to identify the needs of the population 
and  areas  where  interventions  and  attention  are  most  required.  In  addition,  the 
information  collected  provides  the  possibility  to  conduct  repeat  surveys  to  identify 
change over time. 
 The Central Bank of Seychelles and the Financial Services Authority will be working 
in collaboration with the public and private stakeholders to achieve the development 
and implementation of the national strategy. In fact, the procurement for consultancy 
services to assist with the development of the strategy is currently being initiated.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, these initiatives and engagements towards financial consumer 
empowerment echo the recent global tempos in respect of financial education. There 
has been an increased focus on financial literacy internationally, particularly since the 
2008  financial  crisis  which  has  exposed  the  effects  of  lack  of  financial  education 
amongst consumers, leading many countries to develop or start developing national 
financial education strategies.  Whilst other countries are yet to roll out strategies at 
the  national  level,  ample  efforts  are  being  put  into  designing  financial  education 
programmes  or  interventions  for  specific  groups  of  the  population.  The  message  is 
clear:  
  2 
 Financial  education  matters  and  it  matters  at  many  levels.  Primarily,  from  a  social 
welfare perspective, it matters in terms of the ability of people to manage their financial 
affairs prudently and live within their means.  Financial education is meant to empower 
individuals  in  the  financial  marketplace,  in  terms  of  increasing  their  ability  to  make 
informed decisions and meaningful participation in the markets, allowing them to better 
manage  personal  and  household  finances  and  resources.  Financially  savvy 
consumers who interact effectively with providers of financial services are more likely 
to  achieve  their  financial  goals  and  therefore  improve  their  households’  welfare. 
Moreover, financial education is instrumental in supporting financial inclusion policies 
through creation of awareness of the availability of financial products and services and 
through developing confidence in the use of such products and services.  Accordingly, 
financial education contributes to the development of financial systems and markets 
as well as to the promotion of more transparent competition amongst financial service 
providers.  In  fact,  financial  education  is  very  much  considered  as  the  first  line  of 
defence  and  protection  for  consumers  of  financial  products  and  services,  since  it 
complements the regulatory and supervisory measures in place. 
 It is widely recognised that individuals across the globe, living in different economic, 
financial  and  social  circumstances  have  to  take  more  responsibility  for  their  future 
financial well-being and protection. It is important to consider that while Authorities will 
devote  resources  and  work  towards  establishing  mechanisms  that  will  support 
financial  consumer  empowerment,  it  is  important  to  acknowledge  that  the  ultimate 
responsibility  rests  with  the  individual  to  ensure  that  financial  knowledge  and  skills 
acquired are transformed into positive financial behaviour.   
 Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to stress that CBS and its partners remain committed 
to the development of the financial sector in line with our respective mandates. The 
successful  development  of  the  financial  sector  must  be  sustained,  amongst  other 
factors, by appropriate legislative and supervisory frameworks, including an effective 
regulatory  framework  for  financial  consumer  protection,  as  recommended  in  the 
Financial  Sector  Development  Plan.  Accordingly,  to  further  consolidate  financial 
consumer  empowerment,  CBS  and  the  FSA  are  working  on  the  development  of  a 
legislative framework for financial consumer protection.  
  3 
 The proposed framework, which is at a preliminary drafting stage, is specifically aimed 
at  protecting  the  interests  of  financial  consumers  and  to  fairly,  reasonably,  and 
effectively handle financial consumer disputes, thereby reinforcing the confidence of 
financial  consumers  in  financial  markets  and  promoting  their  sound  development. 
Such will complement the development of the national strategy on financial education. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, please allow me to conclude my remarks with a few words of 
acknowledgement.  The  conduct  of  the  financial  literacy  baseline  survey  has  been 
made possible due to the commitment of our faithful partners. May I acknowledge the 
role  of  government  through  the  Cabinet  of  Ministers  for  approving  that  such  an 
initiative be conducted.  I wish to particularly thank the Financial Services Authority for 
its  involvement  throughout  the  entire  process  and  the  National  Bureau  of  Statistics 
which  assisted  with  the  development  of  the  sample  for  the  survey.  May  I  also 
acknowledge our international partners which are contributing to the funding of these 
projects,  specifically  the  Investment  Climate  Facility  for  Africa  and  the  African 
Development Bank. The Central Bank also extends its appreciation to FinMark Trust 
for  the  work  conducted.    I  express  my  gratitude  also  to  the  Central  Bank  team  for 
making sure the work program moved along smoothly and attained its objectives.  Last 
but  not  least,  I  wish  to  thank  the  general  public  for  making  the  time  available  to 
participate in the survey. 
 With these remarks, it is my pleasure to invite Mr. Abel Motsomi of FinMark Trust to 
deliver his presentation on the results of the financial literacy baseline survey. 
 Thank you.  
   4 
