Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before the
Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament,
Brussels, 6 February 2017.
 I am pleased to be speaking before your committee on the eve of the 25th anniversary of the
signature of the Treaty on European Union in Maastricht. That bold decision marked “a new stage
in  the  process  of  European  integration” .  It  laid  the  foundations  for  Economic  and  Monetary
Union,  and  the  European  Central  Bank.  Ten  years  later,  citizens  started  to  have  euro  in  their
hands. This amounted to a considerable strengthening of the political commitment that has been
keeping us together for 60 years.
1
It is easy to underestimate the strength of this commitment. But that would overlook the progress
we  have  made.  With  the  single  currency,  we  have  forged  bonds  that  survived  the  worst
economic crisis since the Second World War. This was in fact the original raison d’être of the
European project: keeping us united in difficult times, when it is all too tempting to turn against
our neighbours or seek national solutions.
But the objective of Economic and Monetary Union should be to strive to achieve “economic and
social progress” as was the intention of the signatories to the Maastricht Treaty. And for this, we
need sustained growth and job creation.
The resilient recovery we have witnessed in recent times has been a welcome step towards this
objective. Over the last two years GDP per capita has increased by 3% in the euro area, which
compares well with other major advanced economies. Economic sentiment is at its highest level
in five years. Unemployment has fallen to 9.6%, its lowest level since May 2009. And the ratio of
public debt to GDP is declining for the second consecutive year.
These are steps in the right direction. But these are just first steps. We need to continue on this
path  so  that  unemployment  decreases  further  and  more  Europeans  can  benefit  from  the
recovery.
I will start by discussing our contribution to supporting the recovery and will then lay out why the
monetary  policy  decisions  taken  in  December  were  the  right  ones  in  the  current  economic
context. As  you  have  requested,  I  will  also  discuss  risks  to  financial  stability,  which  we  are
constantly monitoring.
Supporting the recovery: the Governing Council’s decisions in December
Our monetary policy has been a key contributor to the positive economic developments I have
described. Our measures have worked through the financial system and are benefiting the real
economy at large by ensuring very favourable financing conditions.
At the December meeting, the Governing Council saw the need for the recovery to further mature
and strengthen to ensure a sustained convergence of inflation rates towards levels below, but
close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  For  this  to  happen,  financing  conditions  have  to  remain
supportive,  taking  remaining  uncertainties  inside  and  outside  the  euro  area  into  account.  We
therefore decided to safeguard the amount of monetary easing for the period ahead.
Against this background, we decided to extend the asset purchase programme beyond March
2017, with the intention of conducting our purchases until the end of December 2017 or beyond,
if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim. We will continue to purchase assets at a monthly
pace of €80 billion until March. Starting from April, our net asset purchases will run at a monthly
pace of €60 billion, and we will reinvest the securities purchased earlier under our programme,
as they mature. This will add to our monthly net purchases.
Our December decisions strike a balance between our growing confidence that the euro area’s
economic  prospects  are  firming  up,  and  –  at  the  same  time  –  the  lack  of  a  clear  sign  of
sustained convergence of inflation rates towards the desired level.
On the one hand, the evidence suggests that the acute deflation risks have disappeared and that
inflation is set to pick up over the coming years. And contrary to a widespread perception, euro
area economic conditions have also been steadily improving. Euro area GDP growth has been
solid in every quarter since the beginning of 2015, averaging 1.9 percent in annualised terms.
Compared to 2013, there are 3.5 million fewer unemployed in the euro area, a decrease by more
than 18%. And in the last quarter, the recovery has been broadening across sectors and across
countries. Indeed, the dispersion of value added growth across euro area countries and sectors
has declined sharply and stands close to its lowest level since the introduction of the euro.
But support from our monetary policy measures is still needed if inflation rates are to converge
towards  our  objective  with  sufficient  confidence  and  in  a  sustained  manner.  The  pickup  in
headline inflation in December and in January largely reflects sizeable upward base effects and
recent increases in energy prices. So far underlying inflation pressures remain very subdued and
are expected to pick up only gradually as we go on. This lack of momentum in underlying inflation
reflects largely weak domestic cost pressures. The still significant degree of labour market slack
and weak productivity developments are weighing down on wage growth.
As  I  have  argued  before,  our  monetary  policy  strategy  prescribes  that  we  should  not  react  to
individual  data  points  and  short-lived  increases  in  inflation.  Our  relevant  policy  horizon  is  the
medium term. We therefore continue to look through changes in HICP inflation if we believe they
do not durably affect the medium-term outlook for price stability.
Looking  ahead,  risks  to  the  euro  area  outlook  remain  tilted  to  the  downside  and  relate
predominantly to global factors. Our current monetary policy stance foresees that, if the inflation
outlook  becomes  less  favourable,  or  if  financial  conditions  become  inconsistent  with  further
progress  towards  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation,  the  Governing  Council  is
prepared to increase the asset purchase programme in terms of size and/or duration.
Addressing financial risks in the euro area
You  asked  me  to  discuss  the  financial  stability  implications  of  our  accommodative  monetary
policy. In short: the benefits of our policy clearly outweigh potential side effects. And the latter are
best addressed – if necessary – through other policies.
As  I  have  just  argued,  our  monetary  policy  has  been  key  in  supporting  the  ongoing  recovery.
Going one step further: our measures have played a key role in preserving stability in the euro
area – and that includes financial stability.
Let me now elaborate on the potential side effects of a very accommodative monetary policy on
financial stability.
One of those side effects concerns the impact on banks’ profitability. Let us first look at the data.
Following a slowdown in profit generation in the first quarter of 2016, the profitability of euro area
banks stabilised in the second quarter. According to preliminary data, developments for the third
quarter seem to be in line with those observed for the second quarter.
Monetary  policy  can  have  an  impact  on  bank  profitability  through  various  channels.  Our
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
assessment  is  that  so  far  these  effects  tend  to  largely  offset  each  other.  Low  (and  negative)
rates might dent bank profits through the narrowing of net interest margins. At the same time, in
supporting  the  recovery,  accommodative  monetary  policy  reduces  delinquency  and  default.  It
thus  improves  the  credit  quality  of  firms  and  households.  This  improved  credit  quality  in  loan
portfolios – together with increasing intermediation volumes – is certainly positive for banks. It
has been a key factor sustaining banks’ earnings over the last year. Moreover, low longer-term
interest rates increase the market value of financial assets held by banks. This, in turn, results in
capital  gains  that  further  support  bank  profitability.  This  aggregate  picture  masks  some
heterogeneity  within  the  banking  sector.  In  particular,  depending  on  their  business  models,
individual banks might be affected in different ways by the low interest rate environment.
A  second  issue  is  the  potential  risk  of  credit  or  asset  bubbles.  Currently,  we  do  not  see
compelling evidence at the euro area level of stretched asset valuations. Both corporate bond
spreads and equity prices appear to be broadly in line with fundamentals.
Similarly, real estate price growth remains moderate in the area as a whole, although significant
cross-country  heterogeneity  is  observable.  This  assessment  is  corroborated  by  the  fact  that
credit  growth  is  still  modest,  which  suggests  that  asset  price  developments  are  not
accompanied by increasing leverage.
Nevertheless, the longer the accommodative measures need to be kept in place, the greater the
risks of unwarranted side effects on the financial system become. For instance, asset prices
may increase to levels that are not in line with fundamentals because investors might be tempted
to take on more risk during times of low yields.
Such  developments  are  best  addressed  by  enacting  appropriate  macro  and  micro  prudential
policies.
While our single monetary policy is geared towards delivering price stability for the euro area as a
whole, macroprudential policy measures can be designed to address financial stability risks that
may be building up in specific market segments, jurisdictions or individual countries. Addressing
potential risks at their origin also reduces the probability of contagion throughout the euro area.
Microprudential  policies  also  help  to  reduce  vulnerabilities  in  banks.  I  therefore  welcome  the
European  Commission’s  risk  reduction  proposals  presented  last  November,  which  further
develop  the  EU’s  legal  framework  for  credit  institutions  and  should  increase  the  resilience  of
banks.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
As  I  argued  last  week  in  Ljubljana,  and  as  the  crisis  has  shown,  the  benefits  of  the  single
currency can only be fully reaped if we have policies and institutions at national and European
level that ensure it works for everyone.
In the run-up to the launch of the euro, there was a strong commitment to advancing along the
path of institutional and economic convergence. The crisis showed that this commitment cannot
be relaxed. In fact, it remains fully relevant today as we seek to strengthen EMU and the EU in the
face of current uncertainties and in preparation for future challenges.
The euro area’s resilience in 2016 despite a range of negative shocks shows that we are on the
right track. It also suggests that reforms at national and European level are paying off in terms of
economic growth.
As the economic situation  improves,  and  even  though  challenges  in  other  policy  realms  have
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
understandably been the recent focus of our attention, we should not stop our efforts to make
EMU more resilient and prosperous. We can and should address the remaining, well-identified
fragilities  at  national  and  European  level.  On  the  latter  point,  I  look  forward  to  the  continued
support of the European Parliament in the second half of this legislative term.
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
1
See the full text of the Treaty on European Union
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
