    
 
Productivity puzzles 
 
Speech given by 
Andrew G Haldane, Chief Economist, Bank of England 
   London School of Economics 
20 March 2017  
  The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee.  I 
would like to thank Sandra Batten, Shiv Chowla, Fergus Cumming, Adriana Fernandes,  
Jeremy Franklin, Dena Jacobs, Gabor Pinter, Alex (Sasha) Naumov and Jessica Verlander for their 
help in preparing the text.  I would like to thank Omar Ahmed, Saleem Bahaj, Giuseppe Berlingieri, 
Phillip Bond, Sara Calligaris, Greg Clark, Chiara Criscuolo, Angus Foulis, Peter Gal, Richard Harrison, 
David Hendry, Bill Janeway, Casey Murphy, Lukasz Rachel, John Van Reenen, Michael Saunders, 
Patrick Schneider and colleagues at the ONS Research Database for their comments and 
contributions.  
 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
    
 
By common assent, economists do not agree on much.  I have lost count of the number of jokes about 
economists whose punchline ends “and they still couldn’t reach a conclusion”.  That is why Harry S Truman, 
when President of the United States, famously yearned for a one-handed economist.  Whether or not this 
critique is fair, the issue I will discuss tonight is one on which economists do agree:  productivity matters.    
 At this point, it is customary to wheel out the following, now rather over-used, Paul Krugman quote:  
“productivity isn’t everything, but in the long run it is almost everything.”  Despite its over-use, this quote does 
have one important virtue, something not to be taken lightly in this post-fact, post-truth world:  it is empirically 
verifiable and appears to be factually accurate.  Let me illustrate that with a simple example. 
 Since 1850 UK living standards, as measured by GDP per head, have risen roughly 20-fold, a huge gain. 
How much of that gain can be attributed to higher productivity?  Well, if productivity had flat-lined over the 
period, UK living standards would only have only doubled.  Or, put differently, in the absence of productivity 
growth, UK living standards would be an order of magnitude lower today, stuck at late-Victorian levels.    
 A more refined way of reaching the same conclusion is to decompose growth into the contribution from 
inputs into the production process – labour and capital – and the contribution from improvements in the 
efficiency with which these inputs are used – so-called Total Factor Productivity (TFP).  Chart 1 does that for 
the UK since the Industrial Revolution.  This suggests movements in TFP have accounted for the lion’s share 
of both the growth and variation in living standards since at least the mid-18th century.    
 Saying that productivity matters is not the same as saying we understand its determinants.  The past few 
years have served to underscore just how partial economists’ understanding of productivity remains.  As one 
illustration, Chart 2 plots successive forecasts by the Bank of England of UK productivity growth since 2008, 
while Chart 3 shows IMF forecasts of productivity across advanced economies over the same period.   
 These charts point to a string of material and serially-correlated forecast errors over recent years.  
Productivity growth has consistently underperformed relative to expectations, since at least the global 
financial crisis.  This tale of productivity disappointment, in forecasting and in performance, has been 
extensively debated and analysed over recent years.  Some have called it the “productivity puzzle”.1   
 With each year that passes, and as each new turning point in productivity has failed to materialise, this 
mystery has deepened.  This has led some to conjecture that the world may have entered a new epoch of 
sub-par productivity growth, an era of secular stagnation.2  Various possible causes of this stagnation have 
been posited, including adverse demographic trends and diminished rates of innovation.3  The secular 
stagnation hypothesis is striking in its gloomy implications for future growth in living standards. 
                                                      
1  For example, Barnett et al (2014), Bryson et al (2014) and Weale (2014) 
2  For example, Gordon (2014) and Summers (2013). 
3  Gordon (2014). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 2 
 
2 
  
 
It is striking, too, because of the starkness with which it contrasts with a second topical hypothesis.  This 
posits that we may be on the cusp of a Second Machine Age or Fourth Industrial Revolution, an era of 
secular innovation.4  This might arise from the rise of the robots, artificial intelligence, Big Data, the Internet 
of Things and the like.  Because of its impact on future living standards, the winner of this secular struggle – 
stagnation versus innovation – carries enormous societal implications. 
 A second issue, every bit as topical and important, concerns the distribution of gains in living standards.  
Specifically, there has been mounting concern over a number of years about rising levels of within-country 
inequality across a number of countries.5  Candidate explanations for this widening dispersion in fortunes 
include failings in the educational system, the impact of technology and globalisation, anti-competitive 
practices and weaknesses in corporate governance.6 
 Both of these great debates – innovation versus stagnation, the widening dispersion of income and 
opportunity across society – have a causative link to productivity.  A household’s income depends largely on 
wages and these wages depend, in turn, on the productivity of the company at which households work.  So 
falling productivity growth among firms, and widening dispersion of productivity across firms, could in theory 
have contributed to stagnant household incomes and widening dispersion in these incomes.    
 To be clear up front, I do not have a simple explanation, much less an oven-ready solution, for these 
productivity puzzles.  My aims here are more modest – to draw together some of the available data on 
productivity to shed light on the puzzles.  Specifically, I will look at historical data for the UK, at international 
data from a cross-section of countries and at sectoral and firm-specific data for UK companies.   
 This empirical evidence suggests a long tail of countries and companies with low, slow productivity growth.  
These productivity laggards have been unable to keep-up, much less catch-up, with frontier countries and 
companies.7  At the same time, an upper tail of companies and countries has maintained high and rising 
levels of productivity.  These productivity leaders are pulling ever-further away from the lower tail.  Or, put 
differently, rates of technological diffusion from leaders to laggards have slowed, and perhaps even stalled, 
recently. 
 This empirical pattern sheds light on the two great macro-economic debates.  It helps explain why we might 
see the co-existence of secular innovation (among leaders) and stagnation (among laggards).  It helps 
account for the fall in productivity growth rates – namely, slower rates of diffusion of new innovation to the 
long lower tail of companies.  And it helps explain the widening dispersion in households’ incomes, as the 
mirror-image of widening productivity differences across firms.   
                                                       
4   For example, Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2011, 2014). 
5  For example, Piketty (2014), Milanovic (2016).  
6  Stiglitz (2016). 
7  This has been a key theme of recent work by the OECD, for example Andrews et al (2015). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 3 
 
3 
  
 
This empirical prognosis also helps when devising policy measures to tackle these productivity problems.  
Even marginal improvements to productivity among the long tail of low-productivity companies – or, 
equivalently, a speeding up of rates of technological diffusion to these companies – could make significant 
inroads into the productivity puzzle.  I will discuss possible policies to do so at the end. 
 Explaining the Productivity Puzzle 
 Before diving into the data, it is helpful to set out some of the candidate explanations that have been used to 
explain the productivity puzzle, in the UK and internationally. These hypotheses include: 
 (a)  Mismeasurement 
 There is a fairly widespread perception that the productivity puzzle may, at least in part, be no more than a 
statistical mirage.  It certainly seems likely that official statistics underestimate economic activity to some, 
perhaps significant, degree and with it potential productivity gains.8  For example, a recent review concluded 
that productivity growth in the UK might be under-estimated by around 0.5 percentage points per year, as a 
result of the failure fully to capture elements of the digital economy.9 
 That said, most studies have also found that mismeasurement alone is unlikely to account for the majority of 
the productivity puzzle, whether in the UK or internationally.10  Many of the mismeasurement problems 
already existed long before productivity started slowing.  These problems would need to have increased 
dramatically – and probably unrealistically – to explain fully the productivity slowdown.  Consistent with that, 
the slowdown in productivity appears to be largely unrelated to the penetration of information technologies 
across sectors and countries.11    
 (b)  Crisis-related scarring 
 There is plenty of evidence to suggest that financial crises can have a permanent, or certainly persistent, 
scarring effect on output and productivity in economies.12  This time’s crisis, the largest in at least a 
generation, is unlikely to buck that historical trend.  There are several channels through which financial crises 
might permanently damage corporate sector productivity. 
 
First, a collapse in credit availability is likely to constrict the financing of both new and existing companies 
and hence constrain their investment plans.  It may hit particularly hard young companies, without access to 
alternative sources of finance, for whom productivity growth is often fastest.  Empirical evidence from the 
                                                      
8  For example, Feldstein (2016), Baily and Montalbano (2016). 
9  Bean (2016) discusses the potential mechanisms for the underestimation of GDP.  
10 Syverson (2016), Byrne et al (2016). 
11 Syverson (2016). 
12 For example, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Oulton and Sebastiá-Barriel (2013). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 4 
 
4 
  
 
crisis suggests these channels were potent, in the UK and internationally.13  As credit conditions have eased 
recently, however, this has become a less compelling explanation for persisting productivity problems. 
 A second financial channel through which the crisis may have affected firms’ investment is asset prices.  
Specifically, many small firms are reliant on property collateral to back their loans.  A fall in property prices 
tightens their collateral constraint and credit conditions.  Recent Bank of England research has suggested 
this may have been a potent crisis propagation channel for smaller businesses during the crisis.14  As asset 
prices have recovered, however, this channel cannot explain the persisting productivity puzzle. 
 A third channel through which the crisis might have slowed productivity is by hindering resource reallocation 
between firms and across sectors.15  Flows of capital and labour between companies are one of the key 
channels through which technology and ideas are diffused.16  Since the crisis, rates of labour market churn 
between companies have been low and the dispersion in rates of return across sectors has been high. 17  
Both are consistent with lower rates of factor reallocation having contributed to low productivity.   
 
(c)  Forbearance and monetary policy 
 Some have contended that productivity may have been held back by the actions of the authorities, in 
particular regulatory forbearance and accommodative monetary policies.  By supporting low-productivity 
companies who would otherwise have failed, policy actions may have prevented the “creative destruction” of 
firms.18  Certainly, the level of company liquidations and firm exits has remained low in many countries since 
the financial crisis, probably lower than would have been expected given the path of GDP.   
 A number of studies have considered the evidence on the impact of regulatory and monetary policies on firm 
death and productivity.19  For instance, Arrowsmith et al (2013) examine the prevalence of bank forbearance 
across the small to medium-sized enterprises (SME) sector, finding the effect to be small.  The same study 
finds a potentially larger impact of monetary policy on company failure and productivity.20  That said, it is 
important to note that employment was also higher as a result of looser monetary policy, with potentially 
smaller crisis-related scarring effects on labour markets. 
                                                        
13  Chodorow-Reich (2014), Greenstone and Mas (2012) and Edgerton (2012) for the US, Amiti and Weinstein (2013) for Japan, 
Paravisini et al (2015) for Peru, Bentotila et al (2013) for Spain and Franklin et al (2015) for the UK. 
14  Bahaj et al (2016). 
15  Riley et al (2015), Barnett et al (2014). 
16  For example, Newman et al (2015), Hoekman et al (2004). 
17  Barnett et al (2014), Broadbent (2012), Hseih and Klenow (2008), Calligaris et al (2016).  
18  For example, McGowan et al (2017) and Pessoa and Van Reenen (2014). 
19 Cette et al (2016), Reis (2013), Gopinath et al (2015) and Gorton-Ordones (2015). 
20  See also, Broadbent (2012). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
   (d)  Slowing Innovation 
 Some economists believe that the type of technological progress behind productivity growth over the past 
two centuries may not continue at the same pace in the future.21  One argument is that the current wave of 
innovation, grounded in ICT, does not have the same potential as past innovations.22  A second is that the 
ICT revolution is already quite mature and that future progress is likely to be slower.23  A third is that, with 
world population expected to peak this century, so too might the pace of innovation.24 
 
These arguments are contentious and have been the subject of lively debate.25  Some have argued that the 
ICT revolution has already had a greater impact on productivity than the steam engine.26  Others have 
argued that the ICT revolution is still in its infancy and has vast potential for further disruptive innovation.27  
And a third contends that there are many emerging technologies with the potential to revolutionise the 
economy, such as robotics, artificial intelligence, Big Data and the human genome.28  
 (e)  Diffusion Dynamics 
 An alternative way of accounting for slower productivity growth is that it arises, not from slower rates of 
innovation, but from slower rates of diffusion of innovation to other companies and countries.29  For example, 
recent empirical work by the OECD has highlighted the possibility of the technological diffusion engine 
having slowed, or even stalled, over the most recent period, with a widening in dispersion between the 
fortunes of those companies operating at the technological frontier and those operating inside this frontier.30   
 There are a number of possible explanations for such a phenomenon.  Stifled competition in certain sectors 
and for certain products may have prevented the trickle-down of innovation.31  For example, restrictions on 
patents and intellectual property (IP) might restrict new entrants and retard replication.  A related hypothesis 
is that, in today’s globalised markets, network economies of scale and scope are more potent, generating 
natural monopolies in which single or small sets of players dominate market share.32 
 A third hypothesis is that the emergence of a long tail of non-frontier companies, failing to keep pace with 
innovation, is the result of management failings.  For example, Nicholas Bloom and John Van Reenen have 
shown that weaknesses in management processes and practices go a long way towards explaining the long 
                                                      
21 Gordon (2012) and Cowen (2011). 
22 Gordon (2012). 
23 Decker et al (2016) argue there has been a fall in entrepreneurship in high tech sectors over recent decades. 
24 Gordon (2014). Jones and Romer (2010). 
25 See Tuuli and Batten (2015) for a summary of this debate. 
26 Craft (2004). 
27 Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2011). 
28 Mokyr (2014a and 2014b) and Baily et al (2013). 
29 Comin and Hobijn (2010). 
30  Andrews et al (2015). 
31  Andrews et al (2015). 
32  For example, Haskel and Westlake (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 6 
 
6 
  
 
tail of low productivity manufacturing companies.33  These poor practices are most pronounced in sectors 
where competition is weak and in family-owned firms where management control rests with the eldest son. 
The data presented below do not, in the main, allow a direct empirical test of these competing hypotheses.  
Many of these hypotheses are, in any case, complementary explanations.  The data do, however, lend 
greater weight to some, and less to other, of these explanations when accounting for the productivity puzzle.   
 Historical Productivity Trends 
 Let me start by placing the UK’s recent productivity performance in a broader historical context.  That is 
useful for determining just how unusual the recent period of sub-par productivity performance really is. 
 Since the Industrial Revolution, GDP per capita in the UK has risen almost without interruption, at an annual 
average rate of 1.2% per year.  In lockstep, there has been a near-monotonic rise in UK productivity.  UK 
TFP growth since 1750 has averaged 0.8% per year.  Since the Industrial Revolution, GDP per capita has 
doubled roughly every 65 years and productivity roughly every 85 years.   
 The implications for living standards have been profound.  Each generation has, since the Industrial 
Revolution, been around 25% better off than their parents.  This is a story of secular improvements in living 
standards.  It is also a story of secular innovation, with the two typically going hand in hand.  At least over 
recent centuries, secular stagnation in living standards and innovation has simply not fit the historical facts.  
 This is not, however, the whole story.  For a longer-term perspective, Chart 4 shows an estimate of UK TFP 
back to 1 AD, alongside GDP per head.  The measurement problems in GDP and productivity were probably 
more acute then than now.  Nonetheless, the “hockey-stick” profiles of both GDP and TFP are striking, both 
in their own right and in their similarity.  Over the long haul, GDP and TFP have moved in lockstep. 
 For many centuries prior to the Industrial Revolution, productivity and GDP growth in the UK averaged only 
around 0.01% per year.  Each generation was only around 0.3% better off than their parents – a scarcely 
noticeable improvement.  Secular stagnation in living standards and innovation persisted for many centuries.  
History suggests both secular innovation and secular stagnation have, at different times, been the norm. 
 Although productivity growth has picked up since the Industrial Revolution, it has still been subject to 
significant twists and turns.  Chart 5 plots UK labour market productivity since 1760, decomposed into the 
contribution from additional capital per worker (“capital deepening”) and TFP.  Both have fluctuated 
significantly and have made substantial contributions to UK productivity growth over time. 
                                                       
33  Bloom and Van Reenen (2007). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
   
 
Chart 6 looks more closely at the historical evolution of UK TFP growth. Trends in TFP have been far from 
constant, with decadal spans when productivity has averaged little more than zero and others where it has 
averaged close to 2%.  The latter episodes have typically been associated with periods of rapid technological 
change, as after the three industrial revolutions of the mid-18th, mid-19th and mid-20th centuries. 
 In each case, there was a significant lag between the arrival of new technologies and their impact on 
productivity.  Rates of technological diffusion were relatively slow and sedate.  This is typically felt to have 
reflected the time it takes for new technologies to find widespread use and become General Purpose 
Technologies (GPTs).34  After the first Industrial Revolution, it took around 70-100 years for technological 
diffusion to occur, GPTs to emerge and TFP and living standards to rise.35 
 Subsequent industrial revolutions have also seen a lag between the emergence of new technologies and 
their impact on productivity.  But there is evidence this diffusion lag may have shortened.  Comin and 
Mestieri (2014) estimate the diffusion lag during the industrial revolutions of the late 19th and 20th centuries to 
have been 20-30 years, roughly a third of that during the first industrial revolution.  This may have reflected 
increased flows of labour, capital, ideas and information between firms, regions, sectors and countries. 
 Table 1 looks at average rates of UK TFP growth over the past 2000 years.  It tells a tale of long waves of 
productivity stagnation and innovation.  The historical data do not reject either hypothesis.  Table 1 also puts 
into historical perspective the UK’s recent productivity slowdown.  For the past decade, average productivity 
growth has been negative.  This is unusual, if not unique, historically.  You would have to go right back to the 
18th century to see a similarly lengthy period of stagnant productivity.    
 Global Productivity Trends 
 If UK productivity patterns are unusual relative to the past, how unusual are they relative to other countries?  
To assess that, I draw on a panel of around 116 countries, advanced and emerging, going back to 1950, 
using data from the Penn World Tables.36  Chart 7 plots average TFP growth across the whole sample of 
countries, while Chart 8 does so separately for advanced and emerging economies.  Several interesting 
features emerge. 
 First, the slowdown of productivity growth has clearly been a global phenomenon, not a UK-specific one.   
From 1950 to 1970, median global productivity growth averaged 1.9% per year.  Since 1980, it has averaged 
0.3% per year.  Whatever is driving the productivity puzzle, it has global rather than local roots.    
                                                       
34  Helpman et al (1998). 
35  Comin and Mestieri (2014).   
36  Feenstra et al (2015). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
   
 
Second, this global productivity slowdown is clearly not a recent phenomenon.  It appears to have started in 
many advanced countries in the 1970s.37  Certainly, the productivity puzzle is not something which has 
emerged since the global financial crisis, though it seems the crisis has amplified pre-existing trends.  
Explanations for the productivity puzzle based on crisis-related scarring are likely to be, at best, partial.  
 Third, the productivity slowdown has been experienced by both advanced and emerging economies.  The 
slowdown in median productivity growth after the 1970s among both advanced and emerging market 
economies is around 1¾ percentage points (Chart 8).  Indeed, looking at country-specific trends, it is striking 
just how generalised the productivity slowdown has been (Chart 9).  
 Fourth, one way of understanding this global productivity slowdown comes from decomposing it into changes 
in rates of innovation among countries operating at the productivity frontier and changes in rates of diffusion 
from frontier to non-frontier countries.  Growth theory would predict that, over time, technological diffusion 
should lead to catch-up between frontier and non-frontier countries.38  And the greater the distance to the 
frontier, the faster these rates of catch-up are likely to be. 
 So what explains the 1¾ percentage point slowdown in global productivity growth since the 1970s – slower 
innovation at the frontier or slower diffusion to the periphery?  If the frontier country is taken to be the United 
States, then slowing innovation can only account for a small fraction of the global slowing, not least because 
the US only has about a 20% weight in world GDP.  In other words, the lion’s share of the slowing in global 
productivity is the result of slower diffusion of innovation from frontier to non-frontier countries. 
 To illustrate that, Chart 10 plots the distribution of levels of productivity across countries over a set of sample 
periods, where productivity is measured relative to a frontier country (the United States) indexed to one.  
Comparing the distributions in the 1950s and 1970s, there is a clear rightward shift.  Cross-country 
productivity convergence or catch-up was underway, as the Classical growth model would suggest. 
 In recent decades, however, that pattern has changed.  Comparing the 1970s with the 1990s, there is a 
small leftward shift in the probability mass.  And in the period since the global financial crisis, there has been 
a further leftward shift in the distribution and a widening of its range.  Today, non-frontier countries are about 
as far from the technological frontier as they were in the 1950s.   
 Another way of illustrating the same point is by looking at differences in productivity between frontier and 
periphery countries over time (Chart 11).  In the decades immediately following the Second World War, the 
Classical growth model was operating effectively, with catch-up in productivity underway and at faster rates 
among emerging market countries with furthest to travel to the frontier. 
                                                       
37  Gordon (2014). 
38  Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992) and Rodrik (2011). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
9 
 
9 
   
 
Since the 1980s, however, that convergence process appears to have stalled, perhaps even to have gone 
into reverse, in both advanced and emerging economies.  The gap to the frontier has failed to close and, in 
particular for emerging market countries, has widened.  Classical growth dynamics appear for some reason 
to have stopped operating, with the gap to the frontier widening the more so the greater the distance to it. 
 It is possible to quantify this slowing in convergence using a similar approach to that used to measure output 
convergence in the cross-country growth literature.39  Specifically, a country’s productivity growth can be 
linked by a convergence parameter to its productivity gap to the frontier country.  This parameter can be 
estimated econometrically and tracked over time.40   
 Chart 12 shows a time-series of this convergence coefficient estimated using a rolling regression.  In the 
1980s, this coefficient averaged 0.8.  That is to say, every 10 per cent productivity gap relative to the frontier 
country resulted, on average, in productivity growth being 0.8 percentage points higher than in the frontier 
country.  By 2000, that convergence coefficient had roughly halved.  By the end of the sample, the coefficient 
is statistically insignificant from zero.  Convergence had not just slowed but stalled.   
 One of the key determinants of international technology transfer has been found to be cross-border flows of 
goods and services, people and money and capital.41  While they have waxed and waned historically, all of 
these have tended to rise rapidly since the middle of the 20th century.  Other things equal, that would have 
been expected to increase the speed of diffusion of innovation across countries over that period.  In practice, 
the opposite appears to have occurred. 
 Taken at face value, these patterns are both striking and puzzling.  Not only do they sit oddly with Classical 
growth theory.  They are also at odds with the evidence of history, which has been that rates of technological 
diffusion have been rising rather than falling over time, and with secular trends in international flows of 
factors of production.  At the very time we would have expected it to be firing on all cylinders, the 
technological diffusion engine globally has been misfiring.  This adds to the productivity puzzle. 
 Sectoral Productivity Trends 
 
Some further insight into these puzzles comes from looking at the productivity data in more granular detail.42  
We start by considering sectoral patterns of productivity among UK companies.   
 Sectoral shifts in the economy could plausibly account for some of the fall in productivity growth.  There has 
been a secular shift over time away from manufacturing and towards services, with the employment share in 
                                                      
39 Rodrik (2011). 
40 Based on the following equation:  𝑃𝑖𝑡 − 𝑃𝑓𝑡 =   𝑎𝑖 +   𝑏𝑖 ∗  𝐺𝐴𝑃𝑖  where 𝑃𝑖𝑡 is growth in TFP for country i in year t, Pft is the growth in TFP 
for the frontier country (US) in year t, GAPi  is the gap between the level of TFP in country i and the US as a percentage, ai is a constant 
capturing the average pace of convergence and bi captures how much of the speed of convergence depends on the TFP gap. 
41 For example, Hoekman et al (2004), Stoyanov and Zubanov (2012) and Newman et al (2015). 
42 See McCafferty (2014) for a discussion of productivity from a sectoral perspective.  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
10 
 
10 
   
 
manufacturing having fallen from 17% to 7% since 1990.  Because productivity growth in manufacturing is 
higher than in services, this shift could plausibly account for some of the fall in aggregate productivity growth.  
Even if we correct for this compositional effect, however, the slowdown in UK productivity growth remains.   
 Chart 13 looks at the evolution of different UK sectors’ productivity, while Table 2 looks at the contributions of 
various sectors to UK productivity growth in the decades either side of the global financial crisis.  Pre-crisis, 
the strongest rises in measured productivity were in manufacturing, information and communication and 
financial services, all of which experienced annual growth of over 4%.  But growth was not confined to these 
sectors, with virtually all sectors making a positive contribution to productivity growth. 
 In the period since the crisis, those pre-crisis trends have changed dramatically.  Virtually every sector has 
seen productivity flat-line.  The contributions of all sectors to productivity growth have fallen and most are 
tightly bunched around zero (Table 2).43  Whatever has caused UK productivity growth to fall, it has done so 
on a generalised, cross-sector basis.   
 It is sometimes asserted that, without the collapse in financial services output associated with the financial 
crisis, the UK’s productivity performance would have held up.  It is certainly true that financial sector 
productivity was probably over-stated in the run-up to the crisis.44  Nonetheless, the subsequent sharp fall in 
financial services productivity is plainly not the whole story.  Of the 1.7 percentage point fall in the UK’s 
productivity growth since 2008, less than a third can be accounted for by financial services (Table 2).   
 One sectoral story that could account for this generalised slowing is a reduced rate of factor reallocation 
between sectors.45  Consistent with that hypothesis, the dispersion of productivity across industries has 
increased significantly over the last 40 years.  And the variance in sectoral productivity gaps, relative to  
pre-crisis trends, also increased sharply after the crisis (Chart 14).  
 Nonetheless, this pickup in the dispersion of productivity across sectors is dwarfed by the increase in 
productivity dispersion within sectors (Chart 15).  This suggests that any obstacles to the movement of 
resources within the economy have been more important within sectors than across them.  With that in mind, 
it is firm-by-firm data to which we now turn. 
 Firm-level productivity trends 
 A more granular lens still comes from looking at firm-by-firm productivity data.  The OECD has recently 
undertaken extensive analysis using company-level data to assess global productivity patterns.46  We draw 
on two datasets for the UK that can prospectively shed light on firm-level trends.   
                                                      
43 See Billet and Schneider (2016) for an interactive tool for examining sectoral productivity trends. 
44 Haldane et al (2010). 
45 Bank of England (2016), Barnett et al (2014). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 11 
 
11 
  The first is based on the UK Office for National Statistics (ONS) Annual Business Survey and employment 
surveys.47  The ONS combines these surveys in the form of the Annual Respondent Database (ARDx).  The 
sample covers around 40,000 companies per year, accounting for around 80% of UK GDP.  The data covers 
the period 2002 to 2014.  This survey is stratified to match the UK population of companies and so should be 
broadly representative of aggregate UK trends.  
 The second is the Bureau van Dijk (BvD) FAME database, compiled from UK company accounts.  Whereas 
larger firms are required to submit full annual accounts, there are exemptions for smaller firms.  So the 
sample is smaller, at around 20,000 firms per year, and is biased towards larger firms.  However, it contains 
detailed data on firm-level characteristics which are useful when exploring the determinants of productivity. 
 These data enable us to examine the distribution of productivity across firms.  Chart 16a plots this 
distribution in 2014, based on the ONS data.48  It is wide and elongated, with a long, thin upper tail of  
high-productivity firms and a short, fat lower tail of low-productivity firms.  This shape means that modal 
productivity among UK companies is around 50% lower than mean productivity.49 
 One interesting question is how this distribution has evolved over time.  Chart 17 looks at different 
percentiles of the firm-level productivity distribution over time, both in levels terms and indexed to 2002=100.  
There has been a widening dispersion in the distribution of productivity across companies over time.  In 
particular, there is a striking and widening divergence between frontier firms (say, the 99th percentile of firms) 
and the long tail of non-frontier companies. 
 If we define frontier firms as the top 5% of firms by productivity performance, in line with the OECD, there is 
clear and widening blue water between frontier and laggard companies (Chart 18).  In arithmetic terms, it is 
non-frontier companies that largely explain flat-lining productivity over recent years (Chart 19).  
 These dynamics cast the secular innovation versus stagnation debate in an interesting light.  The distribution 
of UK companies’ productivity suggests both forces have been operating, albeit at different points in the 
distribution – innovation in the upper tail, stagnation in the lower one.  Widening productivity dispersion 
means that secular innovation and stagnation are complementary, not competing, hypotheses.   
 For a relatively small cohort of frontier companies, secular innovation is clearly evident, with both high and 
rapidly-rising levels of productivity.  For example, around 1% of UK firms have seen average productivity 
growth of around 6% per year.  This poses a serious challenge to the notion that stalling innovation has been 
                                                                                                                                                                                
46  For example, Andrews et al (2015). 
47  This work contains statistical data from ONS which is Crown Copyright.  The use of the ONS statistical data in this work does not 
imply the endorsement of the ONS in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data.  This work uses research datasets 
which may not exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. 
48  The BvD data delivers a similarly-shaped distribution. 
49  Other authors finding a long tail of low-productivity companies in the UK include Bloom and Van Reenen (2007). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
12 
 
12 
   
 
the key driver of the productivity slowdown.  At the same time, for a large cohort of non-frontier companies 
secular stagnation is evident, with low and flat-lining levels of productivity.  For example, around one-third of 
UK companies have seen no rise in productivity throughout this century.  This is a long tail.   
A second implication of these results, consistent with the cross-country evidence, is that rates of 
technological diffusion from frontier to non-frontier companies appear to have slowed.  It is stalling diffusion, 
rather than stifled innovation, that accounts for the UK’s productivity puzzle.  These patterns are not unique 
to the UK.  They are shared by a number of other countries internationally.  That has led the OECD to 
conclude that the technological diffusion engine among companies appears to have broken.50   
 A comparison of the UK with other advanced countries suggests that both the degree of dispersion in 
productivity performance is larger in the UK, and that this dispersion has widened more in the UK, than in 
other countries.  The dispersion of services sector productivity is more than 50% higher in the UK than in 
other advanced economies (Chart 20a).  It has also widened by materially more in the UK.  Even in a world 
of long and lengthening tails of low-productivity companies, the UK is a striking outlier. 
 One potential explanation for this longer tail of UK companies than elsewhere is poor management practices.  
Using the database developed by Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), we can plot a normalised distribution of 
management skills for a subset of UK firms.51  This suggests (a lack of) management quality is a plausible 
candidate explanation for the UK’s long tail of companies, as Bloom and Van Reenen find (Chart 21). 
 Looked at quantitatively, there is a statistically significant link between the quality of firms’ management 
processes and practices and their productivity.  And the effect is large.  A one standard deviation 
improvement in the quality of management raises productivity by, on average, around 10%.  This suggests 
potentially high returns to policies which improve the quality of management within companies.      
 Decomposing the Distribution  
 We can go further in uncovering some of the characteristics of the companies in the upper and lower tails.  
Might they simply reflect sharp regional differences in productivity, with frontier companies clustered in some 
regions and laggards in others?  Might it simply reflect some sectors, such as manufacturing, generating 
higher levels of productivity and sitting in the frontier while others, such as services, occupy the lower tail?   
 Charts 22a to 22f look at different cuts of the data according to:  (a) the UK region in which the company is 
based; (b) the sector in which the company operates;  (c) whether the company exports overseas;   
(d) whether the company is foreign-owned;  (e) whether the company has introduced new products and 
processes in the preceding three years;  (f) the size of the firm;  and (g) the company’s leverage. 
                                                       
50  Andrews et al (2015). 
51  With thanks to John Van Reenen for making these data available to us. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 13 
 
13 
  
 
Beginning with the regional picture, it is well-known that there are sharp differences in average productivity 
across UK regions.52  For example, the UK’s highest productivity region (London) is around 75% more 
productive than its lowest (the North East).  Nonetheless, if we look at the regional distribution of productivity, 
the similarities are more striking than the differences (Chart 22a).  Every region has the same long, thin 
upper tail of frontier companies and a short, fat lower tail of laggard firms.   
 It is true, as a matter of arithmetic, that the upper tail of frontier companies is somewhat larger, and the lower 
tail of laggards shorter, in London than in, say, the North East.  But the key point is that every region has 
plenty of both types of firm.  Regional differences are not the main factor explaining the UK’s long tail of firms 
nor why this tail is longer in the UK than elsewhere. 
 Second, the same is true, by and large, if we move from regions to sectors.  There are some reasonably 
marked differences in average levels of productivity across sector.  For example, manufacturing is on 
average around 35% more productive than construction.  Nonetheless, these differences are dwarfed by 
variations within each sector (Chart 22b).  Each has a long, thin upper tail and a short, fat lower tail.  
Whatever is driving slower rates of technological diffusion, sector-specific technologies are not it. 
 Third, if we look at the external-facing profile of firms, we begin to uncover some important differences  
(Chart 22c and d).  Firms which export have systematically higher levels of productivity than  
domestically-oriented firms, on average by around a third.  The same is true, even more dramatically, for 
foreign-owned firms.  Their average productivity is twice that of domestically-oriented firms. 
 This is not altogether surprising.  Firms that export are likely to be exposed to global competition and many 
are integrated into global supply chains.  This increases incentives to boost efficiencies and to match 
international best practices.53  The self-same forces are likely to be at play among foreign-owned firms.  The 
productivity benefits these external-facing firms bring underscore the importance of openness to trade and 
foreign direct investment in generating rising productivity and living standards over time. 
 We can quantify these benefits by looking in more detail at the relationship between firms’ productivity and 
their export share (Chart 23).  There is a positive and statistically-significant relationship.  Every 10 
percentage point increase in a company’s export share of turnover is, on average, associated with a 3% 
increase in productivity.  While causation could operate in either direction, this illustrates the productivity 
benefits of a corporate sector which is open to trade and exposed to external competition and innovation.  
 Chart 22e classifies firms according to their spending on new products and processes.  The differences here 
are not especially surprising, with average productivity around 20% higher among firms investing in new 
                                                      
52  For example, Haldane (2016). 
53  Newman et al (2015). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
14 
 
14 
   
 
products and processes.  Nonetheless it is striking, and perhaps surprising, these differences are not larger.  
Clearly, they do not explain most of the productivity differences across companies. 
 Firm size appears to matter somewhat more to productivity (Chart 22f).  For example, for small firms (with 
fewer than 50 employees) the picture is a nuanced one.  In general, their average levels of productivity are 
materially lower than for larger firms, on average around 7% lower.  There is, in particular, a larger lower tail 
of small companies with low, or even negative, levels of productivity. 
 Nonetheless, some smaller companies do inhabit the high-productivity, upper tail.  Moreover, small 
companies tend to exhibit faster rates of productivity growth than larger firms, even when it is from a lower 
base.  Table 3 looks at average productivity growth rates among firms of different size.  Smaller firms have 
higher average growth rates, and greater dispersion in these growth rates, than larger ones.  
 
Finally, when it comes to companies’ leverage, the picture is also a nuanced one.54  High leverage is a 
characteristic of firms with two very distinct productivity profiles (Chart 22g).  Very low-productivity firms tend 
to have high leverage because their profits, repayment capacity and investment are low.  But high leverage 
also characterises high-productivity firms, whose profits, borrowing and investment are high. 
 These patterns provide an explanation for the damaging impact of the crisis on productivity growth.  The 
absence of credit may have affected disproportionately high leverage, high productivity companies operating 
in the upper tail.  The distribution of debt is also important when gauging what impact monetary policy and 
regulatory forbearance may have had on the lower tail of companies, to which I now turn. 
 The Role of Monetary Policy 
 These distributional data enable us to look closely at the lower tail of companies who have potentially been 
protected from failure since the global financial crisis by regulatory forbearance and accommodative 
monetary policies.  Chart 16b plots this lower tail on three dates, pre-crisis (2002), mid-crisis (2008) and 
post-crisis (2014).  Unsurprisingly, the crisis fattened the lower tail.   
 Since the crisis, however, this tail has shrunk again.  The tail of low-productivity companies today is, if 
anything, smaller than it was pre-crisis.  On the face of it, that is not easy to square with (regulatory and 
monetary) policies having had a significantly damaging impact on aggregate productivity by keeping alive a 
large tail of low-productivity companies.  
 However, these distributions cannot by themselves identify the role monetary policy has played in influencing 
companies’ fortunes.  To gauge that, we need to undertake a counter-factual exercise.  Specifically, we 
                                                      
54  Bahaj, Foulis, Gal and Pinter (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
15 
 
15 
   
 
consider a simple scenario in which Bank rate is held at 4.25% rather 0.25%.  What impact would that have 
had on companies’ solvency and hence on aggregate productivity? 
 With data on their debts, interest payments and profits, we can simulate interest cover ratios for each 
company in our sample – that is to say, their profits before interest divided by interest paid (Chart 24).  And 
by making an assumption about the level of the interest cover ratio at which a company is forced to default, 
we can simulate how a different interest rate path might have affected the solvency of each firm and hence 
aggregate productivity. 
 For the purposes of the experiment, we assume a default threshold for the interest cover ratio of one.  That is 
to say, we assume a company that cannot cover its interest payments with profits fails.  Different 
assumptions are clearly possible.  The effect of higher interest rates is to shift the distribution of companies’ 
interest cover ratios to the left, so that a number of them now lie below the solvency threshold.  In the 
simulation, an extra 10% of companies go bankrupt.  This would translate into an immediate loss of around 
1½ million jobs – a very significant macro-economic cost.   
 Nonetheless, there are also prospectively productivity benefits.  The scale of these benefits depends on the 
productivity characteristics of those firms going bust and specifically on their levels of debt.  As Chart 25 
shows, there is a U-shaped relationship between firms’ productivity and debt, with both high-productivity 
(“gazelles”) and low-productivity (“zombie”) companies having high debt ratios.  Higher interest rates hit both 
types of company and so the net effect on productivity is an empirical question. 
 If we assume all firms have the same solvency threshold, more of the firms going bust are zombies than 
gazelles – there is more creative destruction than destructive destruction (Chart 24c).  Nonetheless, the 
positive impact of higher interest rates on aggregate productivity is significantly tempered by the bankruptcy 
of some high-leverage, high-productivity companies.  The overall effect of higher interest rates in the 
simulation is to boost the level of productivity by around 1 or 2% relative to the baseline.   
 This is a significant productivity gain.  At the same time, it does not account for the majority of the 
productivity shortfall since the crisis.  Moreover, it comes at a hefty employment cost.  Should monetary 
policymakers have sacrificed 1 ½ million jobs for the sake of an extra 1 or 2% of productivity?  Hand on 
heart, I can tell you this one would not knowingly have done so.     
 Of course, this experiment is only illustrative and is based on a number of simplifying assumptions.  For 
example, it assumes there is no adverse effect on the output of firms who do not go bust but who 
nonetheless find their cashflows squeezed.  This would tend to raise the output and employment cost of 
higher interest rates and make the terms of trade for productivity improvements less favourable still.  
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
16 
 
16 
   
 
Acting in the opposite direction, gazelle firms may be able to borrow to avoid bankruptcy in the event of 
higher interest rates – their solvency threshold might be higher than for zombie companies.  If we assumed 
instead that only the lowest-productivity firms went bust, the boost to productivity is around 3% (Chart 24d).  
This is more material, but would still need to be weighed against the significant output and employment cost. 
The Dispersion of Productivity and Wages 
 A final use to which the distributional data can be put is to analyse whether rising dispersion in productivity 
among firms is mirrored in rising dispersion of wages among households.  Have productivity differences 
been a contributor to rising income inequalities?  This has been the subject of a number of recent empirical 
studies, which have tended to find productivity to have been a significant factor.55   
 A useful starting point is the distribution of wages across our panel of firms (Chart 26).  There is some 
evidence of a widening dispersion in wages across companies over time.  The pattern broadly mirrors 
productivity, with wages among the top 1% of companies rising, except immediately after the financial crisis.  
At the same time, pay has largely stagnated among as many as three-quarters of the firms in the distribution.  
 By itself, this does not tell us how closely firm-level pay and productivity have been correlated and what 
contribution productivity may have played in widening the dispersion of wages.56  While there is an 
established literature on the aggregate relationship between productivity and wages, the relationship 
between firms’ productivity and average pay levels is less certain. Nevertheless, looking at the distributions 
of pay and productivity, three points stand out (Chart 27).   
 First, labour productivity can explain around 60% of the variation in average pay across firms, controlling for 
other firm characteristics.  On average, firms with 1% higher productivity have 0.2% higher pay.  And firms 
with 1 percentage point faster productivity growth have 0.5 percentage points faster wage growth (Table 4).  
Productivity dispersion across companies is an important, if by no means the only, driver of wage dispersion 
across households. 
 Second, the distribution of pay is materially narrower than for productivity.  The reason for this is that a 
significant part of firm-specific variation in productivity is absorbed by firms in their profits or reflected in their 
prices.  The reason is that firms’ profits and prices absorb a significant part of firm-specific variation in 
productivity.  Many of the workers in the more productive tail of firms are being underpaid relative to their 
average productivity, which results in frontier firms making a larger profit share.  The opposite is the case at 
the other end of the productivity distribution. 
                                                       
55 For example, Furman and Orszag (2016) 
56 There is time series evidence to suggest a strong historical relationship between aggregate productivity and real wages.  For example, 
Castle and Hendry, Blundell et al (2013) and Disney et al (2013). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
17 
 
17 
   
 
This analysis focusses on differences in pay across firms.  But what about pay within firms?57  We can 
examine this by tracking differences between the average pay in each company and the pay of their highest 
paid director.  Chart 28 plots the median across firms of these series over time, while Chart 29 compares the 
variance of each series as well as the gap between average pay and the highest paid director.   
Since 1998, the variance in average pay and director pay has increased across firms, although it has fallen 
notably since the financial crisis.  The median gap between average pay and director pay has followed a 
similar pattern.  Although these data are far from perfect they suggest that, while within-firm pay differentials 
have accounted for some of the increased dispersion in pay across households, across-firm variations have 
made a larger contribution. 
 Tackling the Productivity Puzzle 
 There has been no shortage of public policy ideas over recent years for boosting productivity growth.  
Reports by the IMF and OECD have suggested measures ranging from increased infrastructure spending to 
improved education and training programmes.58   Earlier this year, the UK Government issued a Green 
Paper setting out various pillars to support productivity.59  And, most recently, here at the LSE the Growth 
Commission produced their second report on measures to boost UK productivity.60 
 In generic terms, these policy measures fall into three categories.  First, there are measures which support 
all companies, irrespective of sector, region or characteristic.  For example, last year’s Autumn Statement 
provided additional financial support for UK infrastructure spending, while in the Budget a couple of weeks 
ago the UK government announced plans for increased support for technical skills. 
 Second, there are measures which support technological innovation – the creation and growth of frontier 
firms.  One potentially important micro-economic measure supporting innovation is greater recognition of the 
importance of companies’ intangible assets, such as intellectual property (IP).  These constitute an 
increasing fraction of companies’ total assets, but are not measured or valued in as consistent and coherent 
a way as tangible assets such as plants and machinery. 
 This can have real costs for the companies concerned.  It means these assets are often not valued fully by 
investors and lenders.  This raises the cost of capital for these firms to sub-optimally high levels – a market 
failure.  Remedying that market failure, by ensuring intangible assets are consistently and coherently valued, 
is important if these companies are to grow to reach their full potential.61 
                                                       
57 For example, Song et al (2015) find that virtually all the rise in earnings dispersion between workers is accounted for by increasing 
dispersion across the average wages paid by different firms. 
58 Andrews et al (2015) and Dabla-Norris et al (2015). 
59 HM Government (2013). 
60 Aghion et al (2017). 
61  Big Innovation Centre (2017b). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
18 
 
18 
   
 
More broadly, it is possible that current UK corporate governance practices may act as a brake on innovative 
companies.  A recent report by the Big Innovation Centre makes important proposals for re-purposing UK 
companies to support long-term investment and productivity.62  The government recently initiated a Patient 
Capital Review to explore how best to support the financing of innovative companies as they scale-up.63 
 A third category of policy measure focusses on the fortunes, not of innovative frontier companies, but the 
long tail of low-productivity non-frontier firms.  These companies have tended to be focussed on somewhat 
less historically.  Indeed, their large numbers and disparate characteristics may be one reason why this is the 
case.  Yet given their scale, the returns to modest improvements in these firms could be dramatic. 
 As a thought experiment, imagine productivity growth in the second, third and fourth quartiles of the 
distribution of UK firms’ productivity could be boosted to match the productivity of the quartile above.  That 
sounds ambitious but achievable.  Arithmetically, that would deliver a boost to aggregate UK productivity of 
around 13%, taking the UK to within 90-95% of German and French levels of productivity respectively. 
 The policy question is how to effect those improvements. One idea which offers real potential comes from 
the Productivity Commission chaired by Sir Charlie Mayfield.64  This starts from the assumption that not only 
is there a long tail of companies, but that many are unaware of that fact.  For the same reason most  
car-owners believe they are above-average drivers, most companies might well believe they have  
above-average levels of productivity.  
 In fact, we know most companies have below-average levels of productivity and a large fraction of them have 
seen no productivity improvement for several decades.  The Mayfield Commission aims to create an app 
which enables companies to measure their productivity and benchmark themselves against other companies 
operating in similar sectors and regions. 
 By shining a light on companies’ relative performance, the aim is that this would serve as a catalyst for 
remedial action by company management.  Indeed, the aim is to provide firms not only with a means of 
benchmarking themselves, but with tools to improve performance along identified areas.  These online tools 
would be a mechanism for speeding-up the process of technological diffusion to the long tail.   
 One practical way of doing so is by pairing up companies, frontier and non-frontier, to enable the sharing of 
best practices.  This is effectively a mentoring scheme for firms, the like of which is already common among 
individuals.  What would be in it for frontier companies?  A more productive supply chain is clearly in their 
interests.  The public sector could also play a useful nudging role in its procurement practices.   
                                                       
62  Big Innovation Centre (2017a). 
63  HM Treasury and Department for Business (2017). 
64  Mayfield (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
19 
 
19 
   
 
A more ambitious idea still, which I have been considering with Philip Bond, is to develop a virtual 
environment which would enable companies to simulate changes to their business processes and practices.  
These platforms are already used by many frontier firms to assess the impact of new technologies and 
processes on their business.  These tools can be created, and tailored to companies’ circumstances, at 
relatively low cost.  This makes them a potentially cost-effective way of facilitating diffusion to the long tail.   
 Policy measures such as these are valuable in boosting living standards and narrowing the dispersion of 
incomes across households.  As a by-product, they also potentially offer benefits to monetary policymakers.  
Structural measures to boost investment will tend to raise the interest rate in the economy which equilibrates 
investment opportunities and savings plans.  This is sometimes known colloquially as r*. 
Policies which boost r* mean that a given interest rate is likely to impart greater stimulus.  Or, put differently, 
they mean the same level of demand in the economy can be achieved with a higher interest rate.  And a 
“pivot” in the mix of policies, with somewhat less of a contribution from monetary policy and more from 
structural policies, would probably be desirable.  Not least, it could help mitigate any adverse impact of 
accommodative monetary policies on productivity or the distribution of income and wealth. 
 Conclusion 
 Productivity is a gift for rising living standards, perhaps the greatest gift.  It is not, however, one that always 
keeps on giving, as recent events attest.  Whether in supporting living standards, or in shrinking their 
distribution, tackling the global productivity puzzle is among the most pressing public policy issues today.   
If history is any guide, there is unlikely to be any single measure which puts productivity growth back on 
track.  But measures which support the long tail of companies, currently operating at low levels of 
productivity, have the potential to do considerable good.   
 As Olympic athletes have shown, marginal improvements accumulated over time can deliver world-beating 
performance.  Applying those marginal gains to the population of UK companies could significantly improve 
UK living standards, even if those are harder to measure than gold medals.     
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
20 
 
20 
   
 
Annex 
Chart 1: Decomposition of long run UK GDP growth 
Source: Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2016) “Three Centuries of Data - Version 2.3”, available here. 
 Chart 2: UK labour productivity growth forecast revisions 
 Sources: ONS and Bank of England Inflation Report projections.  
Notes: Forecasts for hourly labour productivity. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
21 
 
21 
   
 
 
Chart 3: IMF advanced economy labour productivity growth forecast revisions 
Sources: IMF and Bank calculations. 
Notes: Forecasts for productivity per worker. 
 Chart 4: Long run UK total factor productivity  
  Sources: Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2016) “Three Centuries of Data - Version 2.3”, available here.  
Illustrative estimates prior to 1850 are based on data on the growth rate of technology between 1AD and 1750AD in “A farewell to Alms” 
by Gregory Clark.   
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
22 
 
22 
   
 
Chart 5: Decomposition of long run UK labour productivity growth 
Sources: Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2016) “Three Centuries of Data - Version 2.3”, available here. 
 Chart 6: Long run UK total factor productivity growth 
Sources: Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2016) “Three Centuries of Data - Version 2.3”, available here. 
 Table 1: Average TFP growth in the UK 
 Pre-industrial 
1 to 1760 AD 
Industrial Revolution 
1760 to 1850 
Mass Industrialisation  
1850 to 1918 
IT Revolution 
1950 to 2008 
Post-financial crisis 
2008 onwards 
Average growth rates 
Annual % change 
0.014 
0.238 
0.867 
1.704 
-0.367 
Sources:  Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2016) “Three Centuries of Data - Version 2.3”, available here.  
Illustrative estimates prior to 1850 are based on data on the growth rate of technology between 1AD and 1750AD in “A farewell to Alms” 
by Gregory Clark.   
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
23 
 
23 
   
 
Chart 7: Long run global total factor productivity growth for 116 countries 
Source: Penn World Tables database. 
 Notes: Sample of countries changes over time, with fewer countries available at the start of the period shown.  
 Chart 8: Long run global total factor productivity growth for advanced and emerging economies 
Source: Penn World Tables database.  
Notes: Percentage change in median TFP growth; five year moving average. 
      
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
24 
 
24 
   
 
Chart 9: Productivity trends across individual countries 
a)  Advanced economies: 
Emerging markets: 
   
Source: Penn World Tables 9.0 and Bank calculations. 
Notes: Percentage change in TFP growth; trend lines show HP filter. 
 
 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
25 
 
25 
   
 
Chart 10: Distribution of productivity levels across 44 countries relative to the US 
Source: Penn World Tables 9.0 and Bank calculations.  
Notes: Median TFP level at current PPPs; US TFL level = 1; sample of 44 countries. 
  Chart 11: Productivity level relative to the US, by region 
Source: Penn World Tables 9.0 and Bank calculations. 
Notes: Median TFP level at current PPPs; USA = 1. 
      
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
26 
 
26 
   
 
Chart 12 – Convergence coefficient 
Source: Penn World Tables 9.0 and Bank calculations.  
 Notes: The coefficient can be interpreted as follows: for every 10ppt TFP gap compared to the US, TFP growth is x percentage points 
faster than in the US. 
Chart 13: Productivity across sectors  
  Source: ONS and Bank calculations. 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
27 
 
27 
   
 
Table 2: Contributions to annual labour productivity growth 
Source: ONS and Bank calculations.  
 Chart 14: The standard deviation of productivity across industries 
 Source: EUKlems productivity database, ONS and Bank calculations.  
Notes: The chart excludes the mining & extraction, energy and real estate industries.  
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
28 
 
28 
   
 
Chart 15: The variance of productivity within and across industries 
Source: ONS Research Database and Bank calculations.  
 Notes: This work contains statistical data from the ONS which is Crown Copyright. The use of the ONS statistical data in this work does 
not imply the endorsement of the ONS in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data. This work uses research 
datasets which may not exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. This note applies to all charts and analysis using data from 
the ONS Research Database. 
 Chart 16: The distribution of productivity across firms 
(a)  Distribution in 2014 
(b)  Lower tail of distribution in selected years 
 Source: ONS Research Database and Bank calculations.  
Notes: Gross value added per worker. 
      
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
29 
 
29 
   
 
Chart 17: Firm level productivity distribution over time 
(a)  Levels 
(b)  Index 
  Source: ONS Research Database and Bank calculations. 
Notes: Productivity per worker.  
 Chart 18: Productivity among Frontier and Non-Frontier companies 
Source: ONS Research Database and Bank calculations. 
 Notes: Frontier defined as top 5% of firms by GVA per worker in a given year and sector as defined by 2-digit SIC 2007 industrial 
classification. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
30 
 
30 
   
 
Chart 19: Contribution of frontier and other firms to productivity growth  
Source: ONS Research Database and Bank calculations.  
Notes: Frontier as defined in Chart 18. 
Chart 20: Productivity dispersion*  
 (a)  Services (Levels) 
(b)  Manufacturing (Levels) 
(a)  Services (Index) 
(b)  Manufacturing (Index) 
  Source: OECD and Berlingieri, Blanchenay and Criscuolo (2017, forthcoming); ONS Research Database and Bank calculations.  
Notes: Charts a and b show percentage difference between the 90th and 10th deciles approximated by log differences; Charts c and d 
show ratio of productivity at 90th to 10th percentile using the difference in the log levels. UK data only available from 2002, UK index 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
31 
 
31 
   
 
base year = 2002. Data have been aggregated from a detailed industry level. To the extent that industry classifications in the UK and 
the other countries shown are slightly different this may affect the comparability of the series. 
 Chart 21: Management practices and labour productivity 
Source: BvD, World Management Survey and Bank calculations. 
 Notes: The productivity kernel is based on around 280,000 firm-year observations on labour productivity (in logs) spanning the 2002-
2013 period (source: BVD). The management kernel is based on around 1500 interviews with firm managers from the WMS database 
(as described in Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007, 2010). Covering the 2002-2014 period. The raw data are converted to Z-scores by 
removing the sample mean from each observation and dividing the demeaned values by the sample standard deviation.  
 Chart 22: Firm level productivity distributions 
a)  Region 
b)  Industry 
       
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
32 
 
32 
   c)  Export status 
  e)  Innovation 
  g)  Leverage 
d)  Foreign ownership 
f)  Size 
     Source: ONS, ONS Research Database, BvD and Bank calculations. 
 Notes: These charts plot the kernel density distribution of labour productivity (real GVA per employee) across Great Britain. Chart (e) 
uses unweighted firm data. Chart (g) shows data BvD rather than VML firm-level data and is not directly comparable to the other charts.  
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
33 
 
33 
   
 
Chart 23 – Firm exports and productivity 
Source: BvD and Bahaj, Foulis, Gal and Pinter (2016). 
Notes: Results from a Pooled Regression (slope=0.34; t-value=12.2), data for 2013. 
 Table 3 – Median productivity growth by firm size* 
  Number of employees 
6-10 
11-20 
21-50 
>50 
 
Source: BvD  
2.8 
2.5 
1.8 
1.2 
 Notes: Data for 1998 -2013; Three-year cumulative growth.  
 Chart 24: Monetary policy counterfactual experiment based on company accounts data 
a) 
Interest Cover Ratio 
b)  Leverage 
      
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
34 
 
34 
   c)  Productivity – scenario 1 
d)  Productivity – scenario 2 
Source: BvD and Bank calculations. 
Notes: Scenario 1 assumes that half of firms with interest cover ratios of less than 1 exit the market. In scenario 2, only the low-
productivity half of firms with interest cover ratios of less than 1 exit the market. 
  Chart 25: The estimated relationship between leverage and labour productivity 
Source: Bahaj, Foulis, Gal and Pinter (2016). 
 Notes: The figure plots the results from local regressions. The red line shows the results from local weighted scatter smoothing 
(LOWESS), the blue line shows the results from a third degree kernel weighted local polynomial smoothing where the gray area depicts 
the associated 95% bootstrapped confidence bands. Labour productivity is defined as the log of gross value-added per number of 
employees. During the local regression estimations, we trim the data by deleting the top and bottom 1% of estimated productivity and 
leverage values in order to mitigate problems of outliers. 
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
35 
 
35 
   
 
Chart 26: Distribution of average pay across companies 
Source: ONS Research Database and Bank calculations.  
Notes: Series show wage deciles/percentiles. 
 Chart 27: Distribution of firm level labour productivity, wages and profits in 2014 
Sources: ONS Research Database and Bank calculations. 
Table 4: Regressions of average pay on productivity 
   Productivity 
Productivity2 
Employment 
Employment2 
Age 
Exporter 
Foreign owned 
 Constant 
 Observations 
R-squared 
 Average pay 
Levels 
0.20*** 
0.04*** 
0.35*** 
-0.03*** 
0.002*** 
-0.005 
0.20*** 
   Growth 
0.49*** 
0.004 
0.14*** 
-0.005* 
-0.002*** 
-0.03* 
0.09*** 
   241,165 
0.60 
215,614 
0.51 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
36 
 
36 
   
 
Sources:  ONS Research Database and Bank calculations.  
Notes: Regressions are in logs. 
 
Chart 28: Average and director pay from company accounts data 
Sources:  BVD.  
  Chart 29: Variance of average and director pay from company accounts data 
Sources:  BvD.  
             
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
37 
 
37 
   
 
References 
Aghion, P, T, Besley, J, Browne, D, Caselli, R, Lambert, R, Lomax, C, Pissarides, N, Stern, J, Van Reenen 
(2017) ‘Investing for Propsperity: skills, infrastructure and innovation’, LSE Growth Commission Report. 
Amiti, M and D Weinstein (2013), How much do bank shocks affect investment? Evidence from matched 
bank-firm loan data’, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 604. 
Andrews, D, Criscuolo, C and Gal, P (2015), ‘Frontier firms, technology diffusion and public policy: micro 
evidence from OECD’, OECD Productivity Working Paper No 2. 
Arrowsmith, M, Franklin, J, Gregory, D, Griffths, M, Wohlmann, E and Young, G (2013), ‘SME  forbearance 
and its implications for monetary and  financial stability’, Quarterly Bulletin, Bank of England. 
Bahaj, S, Foulis A, and Pinter, G (2016), ‘The Residential Collateral Channel’, Discussion Paper 1607, 
Centre for Macroeconomics. 
Bahaj, S, Foulis A, Gal, P and Pinter, G (2016), ‘Productive and Unproductive Leverage’, mimeo, Bank of 
England. 
Baily, M and Montalbano, N (2016), ‘Why is productivity growth so slow? Possible explanations and policy 
responses’, Hutchins Center Working Paper No 22. 
Barnett, A, Batten, S, Chiu, A, Franklin, J and Sebastiá-Barriel, M (2014), ‘The UK productivity puzzle’, 
Quarterly Bulletin, Vol 54 (2), Bank of England. 
Bank of England (2016), ‘Understanding and measuring finance for productive investment’, Bank of England 
Discussion Paper. 
Barnett, A, Broadbent, B, Franklin, J and Miller, H (2014), ‘Impaired capital reallocation and productivity’, 
National Institute Economic Review. 
Barro, R and Sala i Martin, X (1992), ‘Convergence’, The Journal of Political Economy, Vol 100 (2), p.223-
251. 
Bean, C (2016), ‘Independent Review of UK Economic Statistics’, available at 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/independent-review-of-uk-economic-statistics-final-report.  
Bentolila, S, Jansen, M, Jimnez, G and Ruano, S (2013), ‘When credit dries up: job losses in the great 
recession’, Discussion Paper 9776, CEPR. 
Berlingieri, G, Blanchenay, P and Criscuolo, C (2017), ‘The Great Divergence(s)’, OECD STI Policy paper, 
forthcoming. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
38 
 
38 
   Big Innovation Centre (2017a), ‘The Purposeful Company’, BIC Policy Report, February 
Big Innovation Centre (2017b), “Intangible Gold” final report, forthcoming 
Bloom N and Van Reenen, J (2007), ‘Measuring and explaining management practices across firms and 
countries’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol CXXII (4). 
Bloom, N, Sadun, R and Van Reenen, J (2012), ‘Americans Do IT Better: US Multinationals and the 
Productivity Miracle’, American Economic Review No 102 (1), p167–201, doi:10.1257/aer.102.1.167. 
Blundell, R, Crawford, C, Jin, W (2013), ‘What can wages and employment tell us about the UK’s productivity 
puzzle?’, IFS Working Paper W13/11. 
Broadbent, B (2012), ‘Productivity and the allocation of resources’, Bank of England, speech at Durham 
Business School, available at  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2012/speech599.pdf 
Bryson, A, Forth, J and Askenazy, P (2014), ‘Productivity Puzzles in Europe: a Comparison of the UK, 
France, Germany and Spain’, presented at the NIESR ‘Productivity and Firm Growth’ conference. 
Brynjolfsson, E and McAfee, A (2011), ‘Race against the machine: how the digital revolution is accelerating 
innovation, driving productivity and irreversibly transforming employment and the economy’, Digital Frontier 
Press Lexington, Massachusetts.  
Brynjolfsson, E and McAfee, A (2014), ‘The Second Machine Age: work, progress and prosperity in a time of 
brilliant technologies’, Norton and Company, New York.  
Byrne, D, Fernald, J, Reinsdorf, M (2016), ‘Does the United States have a productivity slowdown or a 
measurement problem?’, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, Spring. 
Calligaris, S, Del Gatto, M, Hassan, F, Ottaviano, G and Schivardi, F (2016) ‘Italy’s productivity conundrum: 
A study on resource misallocation in Italy’, European Economy Discussion Paper No 30, European 
Commission. 
Chodorow-Reich, G (2014), ‘The employment effects of credit market disruptions: Firm-level evidence from 
the 2008-09 financial crisis’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 129 (1). 
Comin, D and Mestieri, M (2013), ‘Technology diffusion: measurement, causes and consequences’, NBER 
Working Paper No. 19052 
Cowen, T (2011), ‘The great stagnation: How America ate all the low-hanging fruit of modern history, got sick 
and will (eventually) feel better’, Penguin eSpecial:Dutton, New York.  
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
39 
 
39 
   Dabla-Norris, E, S, Guo, V, Haksar, M, Kim, K, Kochhar, K, Wiseman and A, Zdzienicka (2015), ‘The new 
normal: a sectoral-level perspective on productivity trends in advanced economies’, IMF Staff Discussion 
Note,SDN/15/03.  
Disney, R, Jin, W and Miller, H (2013), ‘The productivity puzzles’, IFS Green Budget. 
Edgerton, J (2012), ‘Credit supply and business investment during the great recession: Evidence from public 
records of equipment financing’, mimeo, Federal Reserve Board. 
Feenstra, R, Inklaar, R and Timmer, M (2015), ‘The Next Generation of the Penn World Table’, American 
Economic Review, Vol 105(10), p.3150-3182, available for download at www.ggdc.net/pwt. 
Feldstein, M (2016), ‘Remarks at the Brookings Institution conference on productivity’, 8 September, 
available at https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/feldstein-remarks.pdf. 
Foda, K (2016), ‘The productivity slump; a summary of the evidence’, Global Economy and Development at 
Brookings Brief.  
Franklin, J, Rostom, R and Thwaites, G (2015), ‘The banks that said no: banking relationships, credit supply 
and productivity in the United Kingdom’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No 557. 
Furman, J and Orszag, P (2015), ‘A Firm-Level Perspective on the Role of Rents in the Rise in Inequality’, 
Presentation at “A Just Society” Centennial Event in Honor of Joseph Stiglitz. 
Gopinath, G, Kalemli-Ozcan, S, Karabarbounis, L Villegas-Sanchez, C (2015), ‘Capital Allocation and 
Productivity in South Europe’, NBER Working Paper No. 21453. 
Gordon, R (2012), ‘Is the US economic growth over? Faltering innovation confronts the six headwinds’, 
NBER Working Paper No. 18315, available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18315. 
Gordon, R (2014), ‘The demise of US economic growth: restatement, rebuttal and reflections’, NBER 
Working Paper No. 19895. 
Gorton, G and Ordonez, G (2015), ‘Good Booms, Bad Booms’, Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania. 
Greenstone, M and Mas, A (2012), ‘Do credit market shocks affect the real economy? Quasi-experimental 
evidence from the great recession and 'normal' economic times’, Technical Report 12-27, MIT Department of 
Economics Working Paper. 
Haldane, A, Brennan, S, and Madouros, V (2010), ‘What is the contribution of the financial sector: miracle or 
mirage?’, in Turner A and others, The Future of Finance: The LSE Report, London School of Economics and 
Political Science.  
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
40 
 
40 
   Haldane, A (2016), ‘One car, two car, red car, blue car’ Speech given at Materials Processing Institute, 2 
December. 
Haskell, J and Westlake, S (2016), ‘Are intangibles worsening the productivity gap between leading firms and 
laggards?’, 2 June, blog post available at http://www.theintangibleeconomy.com/. 
Helpman, E and Trajtenberg, M (1998), ‘A Time to Sow and A Time to Reap: Growth Based on General 
Purpose Technologies’ in Elhanan Helpman, (ed.) General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth, 
MIT Press. 
Hsieh, C and Klenow, P (2009), ‘Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India’, Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, Vol 124(4), p.1403-1448. 
Hoekman, B, K, Maskus, K, Saggi (2004), ‘Transfer of technology to developing countries: unilateral and 
multilateral policy options’, Institute of Behavioural Science Working Paper PEC2004-0003. 
HM Government (2017), ‘Building our Industrial Strategy’, HM Government Green Paper 
HM Treasury and Department for Business (2017), ‘Patient capital review’, UK Government Policy Paper, 
February 
Mayfield, C (2016), ‘How good is your business really? Raising our ambitions for business performance’, 
available at: https://howgoodisyourbusinessreally.co.uk/ 
 McGowan M, Andrews D and Valentine M (2017), ‘The walking dead? Zombie firms and productivity 
performance in OECD countries’, OECD Economics Department Working Papers No 1372. 
McCafferty, I (2014), ‘The UK productivity puzzle – a sectoral perspective’, speech given at Market News, 
London, 19 June. 
McMillan, M and Rodrik, D (2011), ‘Globalisation, structural change and productivity growth’, National Bureau 
of Economic Research Working Paper No 17143. 
Melitz, M (2003), ‘The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry productivity’, 
Econometrica, Vol 71(6), p.1695-1725. 
Mokyr, J (2014a), ‘What today’s economic gloomsayers are missing’, Wall Street Journal, 8 August.  
Mokyr, J (2014b), ‘The Next Age of Invention: Technology’s future is brighter than pessimists allow’, in  
Brian C. 
Newman, C, J, Rand, T Talbot and D Tarp (2015), ‘Technology transfers, foreign investment and productivity 
spillovers’, European Economic Review, March. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 41 
 
41 
  Reis, R (2013), ‘The Portuguese Slump and Crash and the Euro Crisis’, Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity, Vol 46(1), p.143-193. 
Paravisini, D, Rappoport, V, Schnabl, P and Wolfenzon, D (2015), ‘Dissecting the effect of credit supply on 
trade: Evidence from matched credit-export data’, The Review of Economic Studies, Vol 82(1), p.333-359. 
Piketty, T (2014), ‘Capital in the twenty-first century’, Harvard University Press. 
Riley, R, Rosazza Bondibene, C and Young, G (2015), ‘The UK Productivity Puzzle 2008-2013: Evidence 
From British Businesses’, NIESR Discussion Paper. 
Rodrik, D (2011), ‘The future of economic convergence’, Harvard Kennedy School Faculty Research 
Working Paper, RWP 11-033. 
Billett, I and Schneider, P (2016), ‘Bitesize: Exploring UK sectoral productivity’, Bank Underground blog post, 
available at https://bankunderground.co.uk/2017/01/19/bitesize-exploring-uk-sectoral-productivity/. 
Song, J, Price, D, Guvenen, F, Bloom, N and Von Wachter, T (2015), ‘Firming Up Inequality’, NBER Working 
Paper No. 21199. 
Stoyanov, A, and Zubanov, N (2012), ‘Productivity spillovers across firms through worker mobility’, American 
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, p.168-198. 
Summers, L (2013), IMF Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in Honor of Stanley Fischer, 8 November. 
Syverson, C (2016), ‘Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for The U.S. Productivity Slowdown’, 
NBER Working Paper No. 21974. 
Tuuli, S and Batten, B (2015), ‘Back to the future: why we’re optimistis in the secular stagnation debate’, 
Bank Underground Blog post, July, available at https://bankunderground.co.uk/2015/07/02/supply-side-
secular-stagnation-and-the-future-of-innovation/. 
Weale, M (2014), ‘The UK productivity puzzle: an international perspective’, Speech to Mile End Group, 
Queen Mary, University of London, 8 December. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
42 
 
42 
 