Andreas  Dombret:  Uncertain  times  -  Brexit  and  its  impact  on  the
financial sector
Remarks by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
to Boston Consulting Group, Frankfurt am Main, 7 February 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you very much for the kind introduction.
Since June of last year, Brexit has held our attention. It is one of the few topics that have endured
in  the  news  despite  the  Trump  administration  taking  office.  The  reason  lies  in  the  intense
uncertainty surrounding Brexit and its exact implications. I expect this is also what brought most
of us here today. We are all looking for answers.
The  political  debate  surrounding  Brexit  became  increasingly  tense  recently.  It  seems  that  the
closer we get to the start of the divorce proceedings, the louder the sabre-rattling becomes. And
there is clearly a lot at stake for both the European Union and the United Kingdom. Many complex
problems will need to be resolved, and tough decisions will need to be made over the months
and years ahead.
But  a  confrontational  approach  is  not  in  the  interest  of  either  the  UK  or  the  EU.
Interconnectedness between the UK and the EU is significant in terms of both the real economy
and  financial  markets.  A  cooperative  stance  that  perpetuates  the  close  links  between  our
economies is now called for. And I hope that this will be the guiding principle of negotiations.
 
2. Major questions regarding Brexit
This period of uncertainty is not the time for speculation, but for scenario-based thinking. And at
the  Bundesbank,  we  are  looking  into  different  scenarios  and  outcomes,  especially  for  the
financial sector. Let me now give you a broad idea of my thoughts on some of these issues: first,
on everything related to market access and the location decisions of banks. Second, I will touch
upon the question of what Brexit means for the future of clearing in London. I will then close with
some thoughts on the preparations banks on both sides of the Channel are making for Brexit and
the prospects for future regulatory regimes in the EU and the UK.
 
2.1 Future market access
The debate on market access for UK-based financial institutions was transformed mid-January.
After  Prime  Minister  May’s  most  recent  speech,  a  “hard”  Brexit  is  to  be  expected.  For  the
financial industry this means that the current model of using London as a gateway to Europe is
likely  to  end.  Banks  from  third  countries  would  need  a  licensed  entity  inside  the  European
Economic Area to gain access to the whole area – this is known as “passporting". TheCityUK, a
banking lobby group, have already dropped their demands for continued passporting rights.
Many are now hoping for an equivalence decision to fill the gap left by passporting rights. If the
European Commission deems the regulatory and supervisory regime in the UK to be equivalent
to that in the EU, market access would be partly retained. And the chances for equivalence seem
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to be good at first sight. Directly before Brexit, the UK regime will be equivalent to that of the EU.
However,  I  am  very  sceptical  about  whether  equivalence  decisions  offer  a  sound  footing  for
banks’ long-term location decisions. Equivalence is miles away from single market access.
There  are  three  major  drawbacks  to  equivalence  decisions.  First,  they  only  cover  banks’
wholesale  business.  Second,  given  the  fact  that  banks  need  time  to  build  up  a  new  entity
elsewhere, an equivalence decision would have to be taken quite soon to actually have a bearing
on  banks’  location  decisions.  Third,  equivalence  decisions  are  reversible,  so  banks  would  be
forced to adjust to a new environment in the event that supervisory frameworks are no longer
deemed equivalent. These lead to the overall conclusion that equivalence decisions are no ideal
substitute for passporting.
But let’s not forget about European banks’ access to the UK. For German banks, for example,
the UK is the second-most important foreign market, right after the US. It will be up to the UK
Prudential Regulation Authority to decide under what circumstances European banks can retain
access  to  the  UK.  One  possibility  here  is  asymmetric  equivalence.  That  is,  the  UK  could
unilaterally grant access for EU financial institutions in order to retain London’s attractiveness as
financial centre.
A  transition  period  could  ease  the  pressure  on  financial  institutions.  It  would  reduce  earnings
risks for banks, which would be economically beneficial. Furthermore, it could support a smooth
relocation process by taking pressure off both supervisors and banks, for example by preventing
“first-mover advantages". However, transition periods would be a politically sensitive topic in the
negotiations, and it is unclear how likely such an agreement might be.
Let  me  summarise  the  prospects  for  market  access.  Continued  passporting  rights  are  highly
unlikely, and an equivalence decision would be an imperfect substitute. A transition period could
ease  some  of  the  pressure,  but  it  is  a  sensitive  issue. According  to  their  Brexit  white  paper
published last week, the UK government will strive for an ambitious free trade agreement with the
EU as a long-term solution. But financial services are an especially tricky area. So far, the EU
has never fully integrated finance in its free trade agreements with third countries.
 
2.2 Location decisions
Consequently, many banks are now considering moving some of their business to the EU. You
can  read  reports  about  major  firms  taking  new  decisions  daily  –  some  are  true,  some  are
rumours.  First,  let  me  say  that  I  expect  London  to  remain  an  important  financial  centre.
Nevertheless, I also expect many UK-based market participants to move at least some business
units to the EU in order to hedge against all possible outcomes of the negotiations.
The question that is causing some excitement is: Where will banks go? As a supervisor, my
main  concern  is  that  banks  are  supervised  according  to  standards  that  are  both  high  and
consistent.  This  is  best  ensured  within  the  SSM  area,  which  means  I  will  not  promote  any
particular  financial  centre.  That  said,  I  am  open  for  dialogue  with  financial  institutions  in
assessing the conditions for moving business units to Germany.
Financial institutions are right to contact their potential future supervisors early on. And numerous
market participants have already contacted the ECB, BaFin and the Bundesbank. We respond to
such  requests  pragmatically.  That  is,  we  provide  financial  institutions  with  quick  and  reliable
guidance and clarity on the requirements for establishing a licensed entity here in Germany and
aid a smooth transition. One important issue in this regard are the rules related to outsourcing.
Here, we explain that German law requires any subsidiary domiciled in this country to retain chief
responsibility for its business. This means that we will not accept any empty shells or “letterbox
companies".
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
2.3 Future of clearing
Market access and location decisions are the primary point of interest. A close second is the
future of clearing in the UK. Will UK-based clearing houses be stripped of their ability to clear
euro-denominated  transactions?  At  present,  the  Eurosystem  does  not  have  regulatory
competence to restrict clearing in the UK. However, continuation of clearing strongly depends on
the acceptance of the European Court of Justice, as Mario Draghi emphasised yesterday. And
so far, the UK government has indicated that it would leave the European Court of Justice after
Brexit.
Furthermore, the EU has introduced clearing obligations for some interest rate derivatives and
credit default swaps, and more are in the pipeline. If the UK were to establish a regulatory and
supervisory regime for its clearing houses that is not deemed equivalent to EU standards, the
UK-based  clearing  of  derivatives  subject  to  the  EU’s  clearing  obligations  would  become
impossible for EU market participants. What is more, resilient clearing houses need a reliable
source of euro liquidity. Ensuring a continuous and dependable supply of euro liquidity is certainly
easier  within  the  euro  area  than  outside  it. Against  this  backdrop,  I  see  strong  arguments  for
having the bulk of the clearing business inside the euro area.
 
3. Looking beyond the obvious
The areas I have touched upon so far are the major issues for the financial sector. I trust that the
vast majority of financial institutions are aware of them and are assessing their implications. But
they  should  not  focus  only  on  the  obvious.  Financial  institutions  need  to  systematically  think
through what effects Brexit could have on each of their areas of operations. For example, banks
should check what Brexit might mean for covenants, or how it could affect the handling of margin
calls.
This is important advice for all companies – not just banks – that want to avoid a rude awakening
after Brexit. And I believe Wolfgang Dörner will talk later about preparations that companies and
financial institutions should make.
But  overall,  I  believe  that  both  financial  institutions  and  supervisors  have  already  made  good
progress  in  preparing  for  Brexit.  I  therefore  do  not  expect  financial  stability  repercussions  in
Germany or Europe or a significant shortage of credit supply.
 
4. Retaining a cooperative stance
Ladies and gentleman, Brexit fits into a certain trend we are seeing towards renationalisation. I
strongly believe that this negatively affects the well-being of us all. We should therefore invest all
our efforts in containing these trends. This holds for the private sector as well as for supervisors
and policymakers in the EU and the UK.
To  give  you  an  example  from  the  private  sector,  the  merger  between  Deutsche  Börse  and
London Stock Exchange could serve as a counterbalance to renationalisation. In fact, Brexit has
made  the  business  case  for  the  undertaking  more  compelling.  If  sensibly  implemented,  the
project can serve as a bridge between EU and UK financial systems and strengthen financial
markets. But there are also certain risks associated with the project, for example related to the
concentration of market power or to counterparty risks. These and other questions surrounding
the envisaged merger are currently being examined by the European Commission.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Looking at the EU, the Capital Markets Union project must be continued. Once implemented, the
project will facilitate the funding of the real economy and foster risk sharing. While the CMU’s
positive welfare effects would have been greater had the UK opted to remain in the EU, I am
convinced that it remains a sensible project. What I do believe to be important is that, when the
CMU is established, we make sure the door is left open for intensified cooperation between the
EU and UK financial systems.
With  regard  to  the  UK,  it  will  be  important  that  the  UK  retains  a  regulatory  and  supervisory
framework that is stability-oriented. But some voices are calling for deregulation after Brexit. One
such example is the “financial centre strategy” that is being discussed as a fall-back option for
the City of London. Parts of this recipe are low corporate taxes and loose financial regulation. We
should  not  forget  that  strictly  supervised  and  well-capitalised  financial  systems  are  the  most
successful ones in the long run. The EU will not engage in a regulatory race to the bottom.
 
5. Closing remarks
Ladies and gentlemen, we can expect uncertainty to persist in the months ahead. The fog will
only slowly clear during negotiations. Policymakers on both sides of the Channel should take a
pragmatic approach and not let themselves be swayed by populist or nationalist voices.
The EU has made it clear that its future unity has the highest priority, and that this includes the
inseparability of the four freedoms, these being the free movement of goods, capital, services,
and people. The challenge for those involved in negotiations will be to reconcile these conditions
with the UK’s wish to “take back control", for example on matters like immigration.
Until  the  negotiations  are  concluded,  the  challenge  for  companies  is  to  deal  with  continued
uncertainty as efficiently as possible.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
