Ravi Menon: Financial regulation - the way forward
Speech  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the
Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) City Lecture, Washington DC, 20 April
2017.
 Lord Meghnad Desai, Chairman of the OMFIF Advisory Board,
Mr David Marsh, Managing Director, OMFIF,
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  I am grateful to OMFIF for organising this City Lecture and
giving me the opportunity to share my thoughts with you.
The world experienced nine years ago a most devastating financial crisis.  In response, we saw
the  implementation  of  perhaps  the  most  wide-ranging  reforms  in  financial  regulation  ever  in
history.
We are now at an inflection point.  The phase of active rule-making is drawing to a close.  Where
do we go from here? 
The 19th century Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard once said: 
“Life must be understood backwards, but it must be lived forward.”
In the spirit of Kierkegaard, I see two key priorities in the next phase of financial regulation:
First, to take stock of the reforms to-date – evaluate their effects, consolidate what we need
to preserve, and fine-tune what we need to improve.
Second, to position regulation for the technological changes sweeping the financial industry
– harness the opportunities they present while managing their risks.
Taking stock of post-crisis regulatory reforms
Reaffirming the rationale
In taking stock of the reforms, let us begin with why we embarked on them.  It is easy to forget
how close the world came to a full-blown depression as a result of the financial crisis in 2008. 
The global financial crisis was remorseless in the wake of destruction that it unleashed upon the
economy and society. 
The cumulative loss of output since the crisis is estimated to be 25% of one year’s world
1
gross domestic product  . 
For  the  US  alone,  estimates  of  the  output  loss  from  the  crisis  vary  from  US$6  trillion  to
2
US$22 trillion .
The crisis revealed deep fault lines in the financial system:
financial institutions that leveraged themselves to the hilt (as much as 40 dollars of debt to 1
dollar of equity) and had severe mismatches in liquidity;
lax  underwriting  standards,  made  worse  by  conflicts  of  interest  in  banks  originating
mortgages;
an opaque OTC derivatives market, leading to rapid contagion when liquidity suddenly dried
up.
The Financial Stability Board (FSB), working closely with standard-setting bodies, put in place
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
over the last eight years a comprehensive set of regulatory reforms to address these fault-lines. 
The aim is to make the financial system less prone to crisis and more resilient in the event of
crisis. 
There are three key thrusts.
First, strengthening the banks. This is being done through the Basel III reforms, increasing
capital buffers, setting liquidity requirements, and constraining leverage.
Second,  making  derivatives  markets  safer.  This  is  being  done  through  requirements  for
trade reporting, central clearing, and margining.
Third, tackling the too-big-to-fail problem. Global systemically important financial institutions
have  been  identified  and  are  being  subject  to  higher  capital  requirements,  more  intensive
supervision, and resolution planning.
Evaluating the impact
With the rule-making largely done and implementation generally making good progress, it is time
to evaluate the impact of the regulatory reforms.  The FSB is developing a framework to do this,
focusing on two key questions:
effectiveness – are the reforms achieving their intended outcomes?
effects – what are their broader social benefits and costs of the reforms?
This work is especially important in the current context.
First,  the  regulatory  changes  of  the  last  eight  years  are  substantial,  especially  when  taken
cumulatively.    It  is  incumbent  on  us  as  regulators  to  be  accountable  for  these  changes,  to
evaluate objectively their intended outcomes as well as any unintended consequences.
Second,  with  memories  of  the  crisis  fading  and  the  compliance  burden  of  new  regulation
continuing  to  grow,  pressures  have  begun  to  mount  to  unwind  some  of  the  reforms.    Any
adjustments to be made should be grounded in an objective assessment of the impact of the
reforms.
How effective have the reforms been?  The preliminary assessment is encouraging.
Large banks are now stronger, more liquid, less leveraged, less complex.
Derivatives  markets  are  safer,  with  central  clearing  covering  more  than  90%  of  OTC
derivatives trades in 14 major jurisdictions.
The financial system as a whole seems more robust and more resilient.
The system has remained resilient through several episodes of market stress, ranging
from the 2014 US Treasury “flash crash”, and the 2015 Swiss Franc de-pegging to the
2016 Brexit vote.
What have been the overall effects of the reforms?  Work in this area is nascent, there are no
clear answers yet.  But let me sketch some of the key issues.  In each of these areas, we are
confronted with the problem of attribution.  It appears that regulation has had some role but we do
not know how much of a role alongside other factors.
Let  me  begin  with market  liquidity.    There  are  concerns  that  liquidity  has  declined  in  some
markets.   Preliminary evidence indicates there is less depth and potentially less resilience under
3
stressed market conditions . 
Some of the blame has been ascribed to the emergence of more automated trading, which
has little to do with regulation.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
But other factors – such as less market making by dealer banks and increased post-trade
transparency in corporate bond markets – appear to have stemmed from regulation.
Second, bank  profitability.  The  profitability  of  several  large  banks  today  is  below  the  cost  of
capital. This is worrying.
Banks need to be profitable in order to be strong.  Retained earnings are one of the major
sources of equity – which is the highest quality capital that banks hold.  Unprofitable banks
are a potential source of instability.
Banks also need to be profitable to be able to support the real economy.  They have to earn
a decent return for intermediating credit, otherwise they will do less of it.
Bank profitability has come under pressure from a combination of the three realities of the post-
crisis financial landscape: slow growth, easy money, tight regulation.  More work is needed to
discern the impact each of these factors is having on bank profitability. 
Be that as it may, as we put the finishing touches to the Basel III reforms, it is important that the
overall capital requirements on banks not be increased significantly.
It is also quite clear that the cost of risk management and compliance has exploded and this is
something regulators need to be alert to. 
According to a Thomson Reuters report, more than one-third of financial firms spend at least
4
an entire day each week tracking regulatory change .
The  headcount  for  legal,  compliance,  and  regulatory  matters  has  grown  significantly  in
financial firms, in some case, even doubling.
Third,  have  regulatory  reforms  contributed  to strong,  sustainable,  and  balanced  economic
growth?  This is much tougher to answer, but this is the central question. 
Across  most  countries,  overall  credit  provision  to  the  economy  has  been  stable  despite
higher capital and liquidity requirements.
The  cost  of  financing  has  remained  low,  although  this  has  had  do  with  highly
accommodative monetary policies, which are not permanent.
But there are distributional effects that we need to monitor closely.
Studies  suggest  that  small  business  loans  have  been  shrinking  as  a  share  of  non-bank
loans  in  the  US.  Small  banks  are  trimming  product  lines  and  pulling  back  from  certain
customer segments.
Emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs) have expressed concerns that global
banks  have  been  reducing  their  activities  in  these  markets  as  they  review  their  business
models in light of the new regulatory environment. The FSB is keeping a close watch on this.
We have rightly focused our regulatory efforts to minimise the risk of another financial crisis.  But
we must continually ensure that we do so without minimising economic growth and opportunity.
Fine-tuning regulation
We must be careful to avoid “pendulum swings” in regulation that could undermine the gains in
financial  stability  that  we  have  achieved,  not  to  mention  prolong  and  add  to  the  uncertainties
facing the financial industry. 
That  regulations  have  imposed  costs  on  the  economy  is  in  itself  not  sufficient  reason  to
unwind them.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
These costs have to be weighed against the benefits of a more stable financial system to
support sustainable economic growth.  De-regulation has its own costs.
Having said that, some fine-tuning may be necessary to reduce the unintended effects of reforms
while preserving their benefits.
Regulatory policy must continually seek the fine line between discouraging excessive risk-
taking and encouraging innovation. 
We should not be afraid to adjust and fine-tune where necessary. 
As  Dan  Tarullo,  former  governor  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  says  with  respect  to  the
Dodd-Frank Act and other regulations in the US, “some recalibrations and reconsiderations
5
will be warranted on the basis of experience." 
There  are 
proportionality and global consistency.
two  key  principles 
to  keep 
in  mind  as  we 
fine-tune 
regulations: risk
Risk proportionality
We  need  to  be  mindful  of  proportionality  when  applying  international  regulatory  standards.
Subjecting  banks  of  different  sizes,  different  scope  of  activity,  and  different  degrees  of
internationalisation, to the same rules is not appropriate.
Most of the new regulations were designed with large, cross-border financial institutions in mind.
They are a poor fit for smaller institutions – like local community banks and finance companies –
that tend to pose fewer systemic risks. 
Here in the US, there are concerns that post-crisis regulations have been unduly punitive on
smaller banks and have affected their ability to support small businesses.
Regulators need to review their frameworks to ensure they remain risk proportionate.
They are not starting from a blank slate.  In the US, for example, the Dodd-Frank Act already
exempts firms with less than $50 billion in assets from the tougher prudential requirements.
And Bill Dudley, President of the New York Fed, has suggested: “… this threshold could be
6
raised significantly without unduly increasing the risk to the broader financial system.” 
Global consistency
Adjustments  to  domestic  regulation  must  not  lead  to  inconsistency  with  agreed  international
standards.  Global harmonisation of regulation enables fair competition and minimises regulatory
arbitrage. 
Harmonisation does not mean identical rules.  Country differences matter.  We therefore need to
establish  effective  mechanisms  to  recognise  and  defer  to  one  another’s  national  regulatory
regimes.
Conflicting rules on cross-border OTC derivatives trading is a case in point.  If not resolved, it
may fragment global markets into distinct liquidity pools that are less resilient to market shocks.
Christopher Giancarlo, Acting Chairman of the CFTC, has put it well: “It is critical that we
make  sure  our  rules  do  not  conflict  and  fragment  the  global  marketplace  …  the  CFTC
7
should operate on the basis of comity, not uniformity, with overseas regulators.”     
Adjustments to domestic regulation  must  not  impede  the  globalisation  of  finance  and  the  free
flow of capital.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Breaking up large banks or trapping capital and liquidity through ring-fencing measures may
make  them  easier  to  resolve  but  could  weaken  their  ability  to  respond  to  different  stress
scenarios.
Ring-fencing could also hinder the ability of global banks to provide connectivity and facilitate
intermediation across different pools of capital, especially in EMDEs. 
If global finance is fragmented, both financial stability and financial inclusion could suffer.
I  come  from  a  small  country.    And  we  small  countries  have  an  instinctive  pull  towards
international standards and a global system.  This may seem to matter less to large countries. 
But may I suggest that all countries today are smaller than they used to be, or smaller than they
think they are.  Smaller in the sense that what happens outside our borders has an increasingly
larger impact on what happens inside. 
The US has much to gain from continuing to work alongside other regulators, exercise leadership
where needed, and help to shape and promote international regulatory standards. International
cooperation  necessarily  involves  some  compromises.  The  benefit  of  such  give-and-take  is  a
safer global financial system that benefits all countries.
Positioning regulation for technological innovation and cyber risks
Let me move now to the second key priority of financial regulation going forward – positioning for
the technological innovation sweeping the industry and the challenge of cyber security.
FinTech or the application of technology to financial services is transforming as well as disrupting
the industry.
Digital  payments  are  becoming  more  widespread,  propelled  by  advances  in  near-field
communications, identity authentication, and biometrics.
Internet-enabled  distribution  platforms  are  emerging  that  make  financial  products  directly
available, e.g. peer-to-peer lending, crowd-funding, and pay-as-you-use insurance models.
The smartphone is becoming your bank, your insurance broker, and your investment
adviser.
Blockchains  or  distributed  ledger  systems  are  being  tested  for  a  variety  of  financial
operations  –  to  settle  interbank  payments,  to  reconcile  trade  finance  documentation,  to
execute performance contracts.
Cloud technology is being used to store large volumes of data at low cost and retrieve them
on-demand.
Big data – aggregating and analysing large data sets, including through the use of sensor
networks and natural language processing – is being used in many areas of finance: to gain
richer  insights  into  customer  needs,  to  detect  fraud  in  financial  transactions,  to  sharpen
surveillance of market trends.
Regulating FinTech
How should regulation deal with FinTech?
First, we need to develop a deep understanding of these emerging technologies and the risks
and opportunities they present.  Financial regulators should not be afraid to work collaboratively
with financial institutions or even FinTech companies.
At MAS, we did not understand the risks and benefits of cloud technologies until we started
to  work  directly  with  cloud  service  providers.  Such  collaboration  helped  us  develop
guidelines on cloud computing that facilitated its adoption by industry.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Take  another  example  –  blockchains.  MAS  participated  directly  in  proof-of-concept  trials
together  with  industry  players  to  test  the  application  of  this  technology  to  inter-bank
payments. We learnt much from the exercise.
Second,  regulation  must  not  front-run  innovation.  Introducing  regulation  prematurely  may  stifle
innovation and potentially derail the adoption of useful technology.
MAS’ approach is to apply a materiality or proportionality test.
This means regulation kicks in only when the risk posed by the new technology becomes
material or crosses a set threshold. 
And the weight of regulation must be proportionate to the risk posed.
Third, we need to allow experimentation to facilitate FinTech innovation while limiting its risks to
consumers and the financial system should these innovations fail. The regulatory sandbox is a
useful device to test new ideas in a confined environment.
Several jurisdictions have introduced regulatory sandboxes over the last 12 months. Singapore
was among the earliest, shortly after the UK. Let me outline briefly how the MAS sandbox works.
The  sandbox  is  available  to  both  regulated  financial  institutions  and  unregulated  FinTech
players to test innovative products and new technologies.
Firms entering the sandbox do not need to meet all the relevant regulatory requirements at
the onset.
To  ensure  that  the  consequences  of  any  failure  are  contained,  the  experiments  are
conducted within agreed boundaries, such as the number of clients, scope of the activity,
etc.
The experiment is time-bound.
If  successful,  the  entity  must  exit  the  sandbox  and  fully  comply  with  all  relevant
regulations if it wants to roll out the innovative product to the broader market.
If the experiment fails, well, we all learn something.
Regulatory  sandboxes  not  only  encourage  FinTech  innovation  by  providing  a  safe  space  for
experimentation. They also give regulators an opportunity to learn the risks associated with new
technologies and right-size regulation accordingly. In fact, the sandbox is an experiment not only
for firms but for regulators as well.
Harnessing technology to manage risk
We must also look to harnessing FinTech to better regulate and supervise financial institutions
and help them manage their risks. 
From a regulatory perspective, among the more promising applications of technology is in what
is called “RegTech”, aimed at enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of financial firms’ risk
management and compliance.  We can see RegTech advancing in several areas.
Predictive analytics  is  being  used  in  stress  testing  –  to  assess  the  ability  of  large,  complex
financial institutions to withstand a variety of stresses affecting different parts of the business in
different geographies.
Cognitive  computing  and behavioural  algorithms  are  being  used  to  monitor  and  detect
suspicious trading and possible misconduct in financial institutions. Machine learning capabilities
can help to identify subtle patterns in behaviour, which are hard to detect using traditional data
analysis.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  the  future,  financial  regulators  will  increasingly  harness  big  data  to  detect  and  prosecute
misconduct, and to identify weaknesses to focus on.
In a recent case, the US SEC obtained a settlement against a broker-dealer for its failure to
adequately  train  its  representatives  when  they  were  selling  certain  complex  debt
instruments.
Custom  analytics  tools,  instead  of  traditional  investigative  techniques,  were  used  to  sift
through  millions  of  trading  records.  They  helped  identify  over  8,000  retail  customers  for
whom the investment in the debt instruments was inappropriate.
This is how 21st century regulation and supervision should look like.
Strengthening cyber risk management
As financial services increasingly move online and FinTech becomes more pervasive, the key
risk that financial institutions and regulators have to deal with is likely to be in cyber space.
The core IT systems which are buried deep in financial institutions’ inner sanctums can now
be reached by a hacker sitting on the other side of the world.   
Cyber risk is already a clear and present threat. The frequency, scale, and complexity of cyber
attacks is worrisome.
In February 2016, cyber-attackers gained access to the Bangladesh Central Bank’s payment
transfer credentials and used it to steal US$81m from the Bank. Subsequently it was found
that several other central banks had been targeted in the same way since 2013.
In  February  2017,  malware  was  uploaded  to  the  Polish  and  Mexican  financial  regulators’
website. These websites were then used to infect financial institutions’ IT systems whenever
the regulators’ websites were accessed. Dozens of banks were affected in this manner.
Even more alarming is how long it takes to detect successful cyber penetrations.
8
According to a study , the median time it takes to discover a cyber attack is 146 days.
This means that of all the cyber attacks in the world happening this week (in April), more
than half of them will not be detected until after Labour Day in September.
It is not inconceivable that a future financial crisis could be precipitated by a cyber attack.
The regulatory and supervisory framework for cyber risk management is still evolving. Two areas
are likely to figure prominently.
First, we need some common risk management standards in cyber defence. 
Given  how  inter-connected  systems  across  the  global  financial  industry  are,  common
standards  for  the  swift  recovery  of  critical  functions  disrupted  by  a  cyber  attack  will  help
reduce systemic vulnerabilities.
Given how often cyber incidents stem from compromised user IDs and passwords, a global
minimum  standard  for  robust  authentication  for  online  financial  services  is  worth
considering.
Second, we need to encourage sharing of cyber intelligence within the financial industry. 
This will heighten the industry’s collective situational awareness, so that it can respond more
quickly and more effectively to impending cyber threats.
Regulators  can  help  to  establish  common  infrastructure,  processes  and  protocols  to
facilitate this.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
A good example is the US Financial Services – Information Sharing & Analysis Centre
(FS-ISAC).
And with support from MAS, FS-ISAC is in the process of setting up in Singapore its
Asia-Pacific cyber intelligence centre.
Third, we need to encourage sharing of cyber intelligence among financial regulators. 
Cyber threats do not respect sovereign boundaries.  Cyber attacks in one country can have
serious spill-over effects on other countries. 
Regulators need mechanisms to share cyber intelligence efficiently in real-time.
There are already informal, bilateral arrangements for such information-sharing.
But  more  can  be  done.  We  need  to  identify  and  reduce  the  barriers  inhibiting  cyber
threat information sharing, such as legal, confidentiality, and operational constraints.
I believe that cyber risk management is likely to emerge as the new frontier for global regulatory
harmonisation and supervisory co-operation.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
We have accomplished much – regulators and industry together – to make the global financial
system safer.  But we are not done yet.
We  must  ensure  that  implementation  of  regulatory  reforms  is  consistent  across
jurisdictions.
We must evaluate the effectiveness as well as effects of the reforms.
We must be prepared to adjust and fine-tune regulations where necessary – but we must do
so  in  a  way  that  does  not  undermine  the  gains  in  financial  stability  that  have  been
painstakingly achieved.
We need to look ahead to a world of technological change.  FinTech – if smartly harnessed and
safely  managed  –  offers  hope  and  dynamism  for  an  industry  facing  the  triple  headwinds  of
slower growth, tighter regulation, and growing competition.
We must allow innovation and the adoption of new technologies – to harness their benefits
while managing their risks.
We must step up our efforts and cooperation to combat the growing threat of cyber risk.
A common theme emerges when we look back as well as look forward.
The choice is not between light regulation and hard regulation, or between less regulation
and more regulation. 
What we must collectively seek is smart regulation – regulation that achieves resilience with
efficiency, stability with growth, safety with innovation.
We will then have a financial industry that is systemically sound and also serves the needs
of the economy and society.
It is a vision worth working for, together.
Thank you.
1
2
Ollivaud  &  Turner,  “The  effect  of  the  global  financial  crisis  on  OECD  potential  output”,  OECD  Journal  of
Economic Studies, 2014.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
See  for  instance,  David  Luttrell,  Tyler  Atkinson,  and  Harvey  Rosenblum,  “Assessing  the  costs  and
consequences of the 2007–09 financial crisis and its aftermath”, Dallas Federal Reserve, September 2013; and
US Government Accountability Office “Financial regulatory reform: financial crisis losses and potential impact of
the Dodd-Frank Act”, January 2013.
FSB, “Report on implementation and effects of G20 reforms”, August 2016. 
Thomson Reuters, “Cost of Compliance 2016”
Daniel Tarullo, “Departing Thoughts”, 4 April 2017.
William Dudley, “Principles for Financial Regulatory Reform”, 7 April 2017.
Christopher Giancarlo, “CFTC: A New Direction Forward”, 15 March 2017.
B.  Boland,  “M-Trends  Asia  Pacific”, www.fireeye.com,  24  August  2016,  www.fireeye.com/blog/threat-
research/2016/08/m-trends_asia_pacifi.html
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
