Guy Debelle: The Global Code of Conduct for the Foreign Exchange
Market
Opening remarks by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the
CLS FX Industry Reception, Sydney, 30 January 2017.
 Today I am going to talk about the Global Code of Conduct for the Foreign Exchange Market,
which has been consuming a large part of my and David Puth's sleeping hours for more than 18
months. As I hope most of you know, Phase 1 of the Code was launched in May last year in New
York.  The complete Code will be released in London in a few months' time at the end of May. It
is pretty easy to find. It is available via the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) website or on
the Australian Foreign Exchange Committee (AFXC) website.
1
Today I will reiterate the motivation for the work we are doing on the Code, why you all should be
interested in it, and then update you on where we are at with the process and outline the way
forward.
Why is the work going on? As I have stated before, the foreign exchange (FX) industry has been
suffering  from  a  lack  of  trust  in  its  functioning.  This  lack  of  trust  is  evident  both  between
participants in the market and, at least as importantly, between the public and the market. The
market needs to move toward a more favourable and desirable location, and allow participants to
have much greater confidence that the market is functioning appropriately.
A well-functioning foreign exchange market is very much in the interest of all market participants.
This clearly includes central banks, both in their own role as market participants but also as the
exchange rate is an important channel of monetary policy transmission. In a globalised world, the
foreign exchange market is one of the most vital parts of the financial plumbing.
The Code sets out global principles of good practice in the foreign exchange market to provide a
common set of guidance to the market, including in areas where there is a degree of uncertainty
about  what  sort  of  practices  are  acceptable,  and  what  are  not.  This  should  help  to  restore
confidence and promote the effective functioning of the wholesale FX market.
The work to develop the Code commenced in May 2015, when the BIS Governors commissioned
a working group of the Markets Committee of the BIS (which I Chaired until earlier this month) to
facilitate the establishment of a single global code of conduct for the wholesale FX market and to
2
come up with mechanisms to promote greater adherence to the code.
Our Working Group comprises representatives of the central banks of all the major FX centres.
This work is also very much a public sector–private sector partnership. We are being ably and
vigorously supported in this work by a group of market participants, chaired by David. David's
group contains people from all around the world on the buy side, including corporates and asset
managers,  and  the  sell  side,  along  with  trading  platforms,  ECNs  and  non-bank  participants,
drawing from the various Foreign Exchange Committees (FXCs) and beyond. Hugh Killen from
Westpac is the Australian member of this group, representing the AFXC. All parts of the market
are  being  involved  in  the  drafting  of  the  code  to  make  sure  all  perspectives  are  heard  and
appropriately reflected.
There are two important points worth highlighting: first, it's a single code for the whole industry
and second, it's a global code.
On the first point, the Code is replacing the existing codes of conduct that have been present in
the FX market, including the ACI model code used here in Australia. Importantly, the Code covers
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
all of the wholesale FX industry. This is not a code of conduct for just the sell side. It is there for
the sell side, the buy side, non-bank participants and the platforms; its breadth is both across the
globe and across the whole structure of the industry.
Hence the Code is relevant for all of you here in this room. The way it is relevant will depend on
your engagement with the market. The guidelines for appropriate conduct are relevant for the buy
side as well as the sell side. On the buy side it will also help to give you guidance as to what you
can  reasonably  expect  from  your  counterparty  as  you  transact  your  FX  business.  What  this
means in practice is that the steps different market participants take to align their activities with
the principles of the Code will necessarily reflect the size, complexity, type and extent of their
engagement with the FX market.
As I mentioned earlier, the first phase of the Code was released in May 2016. It covers areas
such as ethics, information sharing, aspects of execution and confirmation and settlement. The
second  phase  covers  further  aspects  of  execution  including  e-trading  and  platforms,  prime
brokerage, as well as governance, and risk management and compliance.
We have provided market participants with a number of opportunities to comment on the second
phase draft. We will be sending out a fatal flaw version of the complete Code for comment next
week. The distribution to market participants will be principally through the FXCs but also through
other industry associations as well. Again, we are endeavouring to ensure all perspectives are
appropriately reflected in the Code.
The aim is for the full Code to be published in May and we are on track to achieve that.
Adherence to the Code
Alongside drafting the Code, we have also been devoting considerable time and effort to thinking
about how to ensure widespread adoption of the Code by market participants. Clearly, that has
been an issue with the various existing codes that have been in place in a number of markets
over many years. It is evident that they were ignored on occasion, wilfully or otherwise.
One of our central aims in drafting the Code is for it to be principles-based rather than rules-
based. There are a number of reasons why this is so, but for me, an important reason is that the
more prescriptive the Code is, the easier it is to get around. Rules are easier to arbitrage than
principles. If it's not expressly prohibited or explicitly discouraged, then it must be okay seems to
be the historical experience. Moreover, the more prescriptive and the more precise the code is,
the less people will think about what they are doing. If it's principles-based and less prescriptive
then,  as  I  just  said,  market  participants  will  have  to think  about  whether  their  actions  are
consistent with the principles of the Code.
So, we are working with the industry to produce a principles-based code of conduct rather than a
set  of  prescriptive  regulatory  standards.  It  will  not  impose  legal  or  regulatory  obligations  on
market participants, nor will it supplant existing regulatory standards or expectations. But we do
expect the principles in the Code to be understood and adopted across the entire FX market.
Our approach to adherence has a number of dimensions. We laid out our overall approach to
3
adherence to the Code in New York in May last year.
One  dimension  is  market-based  adherence  mechanisms. An  important  element  of  discipline
should come from the market itself and we are working closely with market participants on this.
The adherence to a voluntary code will only come about if firms judge it to be in their interest and
take the practical steps to ensure the code is embedded in their practices.
Firms  will  need  to  take  practical  steps  such  as  training  their  staff  and  putting  in  appropriate
policies  and  procedures.  We  have  provided  a  draft  Statement  of  Commitment  for  firms  to
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
publicly demonstrate their adherence to the Code. One reason for a public demonstration is that
firms are more likely to adhere to the Code if they believe that their peers are doing so too.
Without blaming them for what occurred, more scrutiny from counterparties about how their FX
transactions were being executed may have helped to reduce the incidence and severity of the
market abuses that occurred in the past. FX transactions were sometimes regarded as ancillary
to the core business, notwithstanding their potential impact on returns.
Ultimately  the  success  of  the  Code  in  promoting  integrity  and  restoring  confidence  in  the
wholesale FX market lies in the hands of its participants. That is why the Global FXCs issued a
joint statement of support at the launch of the Code in New York as well as stating their intention
to make adherence to the Code a likely requirement of FXC membership.  That would ensure
the Code is embedded at the core of the FX market, but it is also important that it extends beyond
that, and that there is, at the very least, an awareness of it across all market participants.
4
A second dimension of adherence is that the BIS central banks have signalled their commitment
by  announcing  that  they  themselves  will  follow  the  Code,  and  that  they  expect  that  their
counterparties will do so too.  To that end, the RBA will no longer transact in the FX market with
those that don't commit to adhere to the Code after its release in May.
5
A third dimension of adherence is that we are talking to regulators in our various jurisdictions as
to  how  they  might  use  the  Code  in  monitoring  market  conduct.  In  Australia,  ASIC  is  very
supportive of the development of the Code and is considering how it might utilise the Code in its
market surveillance. The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in the UK is considering how they
might incorporate the Code in the Senior Managers Regime there.
Conclusion
We are on track to complete the Code so that it will be released in London in May. At the end of
that process, for the Code to be effective and for it to achieve what we want it to achieve, it will
need to be accepted and endorsed across the full spectrum of market participants.
That said, the process does not really end, because as the foreign exchange market continues to
evolve, the Code will need to evolve with it.
The work to date has reflected a very constructive and cooperative effort between the central
banks and market participants. I would particularly like to acknowledge the enormous time and
energy that David has contributed. All of us recognise the need to restore the public's faith in the
foreign exchange market and the value of the Global Code in assisting that process and also in
helping improve market functioning and confidence in the market.
1
2
3
4
5
See www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/gc_may16.pdf.
See www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm.
Code”: 
See www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/am_may16.pdf.  See  also  C  Salmon  (2016),  ‘Rebuilding  Trust  through  the  “FX
Global 
at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech924.pdf, Speech given at the ACI UK
Square Mile Debate, London, 7 September; and S Potter (2016), ‘The Role of Best Practices in Supporting
Market  Integrity  and  Effectiveness’,  available  at www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2016/pot160907,
Remarks at the 2016 Primary Dealers Meeting, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 7 September.
optimism’, 
Reasons 
available 
for 
See afxc.rba.gov.au/news/afxc-26052016.html.
See www.bis.org/press/p160526a.htm.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
