Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Invisible to joined hands
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Annual Joint General Membership Meeting of MART, ACI, IHAP,
TOAP, NASBI, and FMAP, Makati City, 21 September 2017.
 The spirit of unity, collaboration and optimism in this Annual Joint General Membership Meeting is
palpable.  That there are six (6) prestigious financial market associations here in full force in spite
of a holiday of sorts is exciting.  It sets the tone for our willingness to work hard together, hand-in-
hand to make our financial markets stronger and better.
Historically and ideologically, there has been a divide between the private and the public sectors. 
There  are  staunch  views  that  capitalism  will  take  care  of  itself  and  government  should  leave
markets alone.  As early as the 18th century, Adam Smith’s theory of the “invisible hand” that
guides supply and demand toward equilibrium and efficiency was gospel. 
In the 1930s, the idea of self-correcting markets was debunked by the Great Depression… even
recently, by the Global Financial Crisis. That Government can improve market outcomes – to
promote efficiency and equity, and address market failures is now accepted principle.
That you have consistently been valuable partners of the BSP emphasizes – quite happily – that
we  are  on  a  higher  plane  of  acceptance.  We  view  each  other  as  indispensable  partners  in
achieving  our  shared  vision  of  greater  economic  development  …  There  is  resounding
acknowledgement that we are on the same side… and it is only when we work together that we
can achieve our goals.
For this, I sincerely thank you.  To the Money Market Association of the Philippines (MART), ACI
Financial Markets Association Philippines (ACI Philippines), the Trust Officers Association of the
Philippines (TOAP), the Fund Managers Association of the Philippines (FMAP), the Investment
House Association of the Philippines (IHAP) and the National Association of Securities Broker
Salesmen, Inc. (NASBI), maraming salamat… 
Thank you for being partners with us in our shared vision of ensuring a more robust financial
system… To everyone in this ballroom, esteemed guests, ladies and gentlemen, good evening.
Setting context
Many of us have witnessed how our country has transformed from being an economic laggard to
one of the region’s fastest performing economies. 
For the past 74 quarters (or 18.5 years), the Philippines has posted uninterrupted GDP growth,
backed by strong macroeconomic fundamentals.
Inflation today is low and stable with average headline inflation from January-August 2017 at 3.1
percent.    The  balance  of  payments  is  under  control  despite  global  shifts.  External  liquidity  is
secure.  We benefit from prudent fiscal management with the National Government deficit at a
manageable level of 2.1 percent of GDP and a relatively low debt-to-GDP ratio of 42.1 percent as
of end 2016.  And we protect our fiscal space to support economic gains by moving forward with
an ambitious tax reform agenda.
In the first half of 2017, GDP growth was 6.4 percent.  A strong domestic demand and expansive
government  budget  for  infrastructure  development  underpins  this  growth.    Overseas  Filipino
remittances and BPO sector revenues continue to drive our economy.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Recently,  the  World  Bank  affirmed  a  positive  growth  path  for  the  Philippines,  forecasting  the
economy to grow even more at 6.8 percent this year, and at 6.9 percent in 2018.
Overall  business  sentiment  remains  positive  as  shown  by  the  results  of  the  BSP  Business
Expectation Survey for the third quarter of 2017.  
Indeed, it is possible to have both strong economic growth and manageable inflation.  For 2017–
2019,  we  expect  average  inflation  to  track  the  target  range  midpoint  of  2-4  percent… Ample
domestic liquidity and broad-based growth in bank lending for production activities continue to
support economic growth.
While there could be some transitory upside risks to inflation owing to the possible impact of the
proposed  tax  reform  program  along  with  pending  petitions  to  raise  power  rates,  inflation
expectations continue to be within target over the policy horizon. Over the medium term, as the
infrastructure  program  gets  underway,  the  resulting  improvement  in  productivity  and  various
safety nets are also expected to temper the impact on inflation.  Based on these considerations,
the Monetary Board decided during its meeting earlier today to maintain the BSP’s key policy rate
at 3.0 percent.
With  respect  to  the  external  sector,  the  Philippines’  current  account  (CA)  balance  narrowed
during the 1st half of 2017 relative to a year earlier. This was due mainly to higher net receipts in
the trade-in-services, and primary and secondary income accounts which mitigated the widening
trade-in-goods deficit during the first half.  In turn, the strong demand for imports such as capital
goods, consumer goods, raw materials and intermediate goods is a result of the sustained and
broad-based  expansion 
formation,  production  and
consumption.
the  domestic  economy’s  capital 
in 
The increased demand for dollars also reflects residents’ investments abroad and prepayments
of  foreign  debt.  However,  continued  strong  inflows  from  overseas  Filipinos’  remittances,
business  process  outsourcing  receipts,  and  revenues  from  the  tourism  sector,  are  seen  to
support the current account. Meanwhile, we continue to watch against financial market volatility
as risks emanating from normalization in advanced economies and ongoing geopolitical tensions
may dampen investor sentiment.
Our financial sector has also demonstrated strength and sustained growth amidst uncertainty.
Banks  have  stronger  balance  sheets  and  much  improved  asset  quality.  There  is  double-digit
growth in assets, loans, deposits and capital. The banking system’s resources expanded by 14.2
percent  as  of  end-July  supported  by  a  stable  deposit  funding  base.  In  line  with  the  country’s
domestic growth, banks’ total loan portfolio grew by 17.9 percent and is diverse across industry
sectors.
Notwithstanding sustained expansion in credit, banks demonstrate prudence in lending.  Banks’
NPL ratios declined to 1.98 percent.  Banks also maintained an adequate buffer for loan losses,
registering a higher NPL coverage ratio of 113.13 percent.
Meanwhile, banks continue to build up their capital position. As of end-March 2017, the capital
adequacy ratio (CAR) of universal and commercial banks (U/KBs) registered at 15.8 percent. 
Continuing need for balance
We have much going for our economy that outshines seemingly inherent negativity.  What is the
role of the BSP and what more can it do to protect and advance our solid gains?  Let me share
with  you  some  programs  of  the  BSP  key  reform  agenda…these  embody  what  I  describe  as
“Continuity Plus Plus”.
The BSP remains committed to its core mandates of maintaining price and financial stability, as
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
well  as  an  efficient  payments  and  settlement  system.    These  form  part  of  the  “Continuity”
agenda. 
Monetary policy
To ensure inflation is kept at a manageable level, the BSP follows an established process in its
periodic review of monetary policy.  The BSP has been successful in keeping inflation low and
stable, in this regard, we will continue with our monetary policy approach and inflation targeting
mechanism. 
With  the  introduction  of  the  Interest  Rate  Corridor  (IRC)  last  year,  we  continue  to  strengthen
monetary  policy  transmission.    We  have  seen  some  encouraging  results  in  the  form  of  1)
sustained Term Deposit Facility (TDF) demand, and 2) a gradual adjustment in market interest
rates.    As  originally  envisioned,  we  shall  continue  to  improve  the  IRC  system  as  we  move
towards a more market-based implementation of monetary policy. 
Prudential reforms
Further,  leveraging  on  the  financial  system’s  current  position  of  strength,  we  will  continue  to
pursue  progressive  and  proactive  prudential  reforms  to  maintain  resilience  against  external
shocks.
With the evolving trends and changing preferences in financial services delivery, we continue to
align with international standards while engaging relevant stakeholders for our policies to remain
responsive to local conditions.
Last  week,  our  enhanced  corporate  governance  framework  took  effect.    It  emphasizes  the
responsibilities  and  qualifications  of  banks’  board  of  directors  and  senior  management  and
strengthened requirements for board composition.  This essentially serves as the overarching
framework that ties in risk management in functional areas of a financial institution.
Earlier, the BSP issued regulations to strengthen governance over treasury activities.  The BSP
expects market participants to behave ethically and with utmost integrity in all its dealings. 
 We recognize that the industry has developed a Code of Ethics.  We understand it governs
financial market activities as well as market conventions covering a range of financial products. 
We enjoin the industry to review these standards to ensure alignment with global best practice. 
We encourage the industry to operationalize arrangements to promote adherence to the Code,
not only at an industry level, but down to the institution- and individual-level. 
In our expanding market, integrity and accountability are vital in sustaining confidence. 
Strategic financial sector reforms towards inclusive growth
Now, let me move on to what is close to my heart.  While continuity is about focusing on our core
mandates, the “plus plus” agenda pushes the envelope further and focuses on reforms that will
foster broad-based inclusive growth.  These financial sector and market infrastructure reforms
are strategic, complementary, and reinforcing.  They aim to 1) deepen our local currency debt
and  foreign  exchange  markets,  2)  digitalize  our  payment  system,  and  3)  ultimately  enhance
access to financial services and products.
The  world  has  recently  recognized  our  potential  as  a  promising  investment  destination.  Our
capital markets are poised to serve as an important source of funding in support of the National
Government’s resolve to shore up infrastructure.
A  well-functioning  local  currency  debt  market,  therefore,  is  critical  to  the  implementation  of  a
sustainable market-oriented debt management strategy.  This will likewise support open market
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
operations  of  the  BSP.    This  will  promote  financial  stability  by  diversifying  funding  sources  to
support economic growth, and increase the availability of financial products.
Many of you were at the BSP last month when the BSP, in collaboration with the Department of
Finance (DOF), Bureau of the Treasury (BTr), and the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC), unveiled the local currency debt market development roadmap.
As you know, the capital market reform agenda will initially focus on benchmark markets.  The
reforms will be undertaken over an 18-month time frame from launch in November with specific
targets for regulatory and institutional milestones.  Deliberately, we sequenced and calibrated the
roadmap to ensure that urgent and foundational issues are prioritized.
These include initiatives to 1) increase the volume of treasury bills, 2) provide stable, predictable
and transparent issuance of government securities, 3) develop a systematic set of obligations,
rights and incentives for market-makers, 4) establish a reliable yield curve, 5) introduce a repo
program, and 6) strengthen regulatory oversight over the repo and fixed income market.
Even  as  we  pursue  efforts  to  deepen  the  local  debt  market,  the  BSP  actively  worked  on
improving  access  to  investment  products.    For  instance,  the  Personal  Equity  Retirement
Account  (PERA)  was  launched  late  last  year.    This  was  done  with  the  strong  support  of  the
industry. The program provides an opportunity for capital market gains to be enjoyed by a wider
retail base.  Further, we continue to pursue a related legislative agenda such as the Collective
Investment Schemes Law (CISL) to provide a harmonized legal framework for pooled vehicles of
investments.
Given  the  Philippines’  young  demographic  profile,  these  efforts  can  also  translate  to  the
mobilization  of  a  sizeable  and  sustainable  amount  of  savings  towards  financing  the  country’s
long-term infrastructure requirements and developmental programs.
As  part  of  our  holistic  financial  sector  reform  agenda,  we  are  pursuing  ambitious  foreign
exchange (FX) reforms. The objectives are to deepen the FX market, increase its efficiency and
reduce the cost of doing business.   Reforms include removing prior BSP approval for certain FX
transactions, simplifying registration processes, further reducing documentary requirements, and
enhancing data capture for effective policy decision-making.
While  the  idea  is  to  establish  a  framework  that  relaxes  FX  rules  and  regulations,  we  wish  to
stress that authorized agent banks (AABs) are responsible and are held accountable for faithfully
complying with these rules.
With these efforts, we hope to encourage FX flows from the parallel market to the formal market.
Even as we strengthen regulations over Money Service Businesses (MSBs) to maintain financial
integrity and enhance consumer protection, we will streamline FX requirements for the banking
system to reduce market fragmentation and increase FX liquidity.
The amendments to FX regulations is part of a broader thrust for an organized FX market. The
intention  is  to  increase  transparency,  improve  price  discovery,  and  increase  availability  of  FX
instruments, including hedging products, to improve risk management capabilities of banks and
clients.
Finally,  we  are  setting  our  sight  on  digital  innovations  as  a  catalyst  to  reach  greater  scale. 
Creating  an  efficient  digital  infrastructure  reinforces  our  capital  and  FX  markets  and  financial
inclusion agenda. It provides an enabling platform that can transform the way financial services
are efficiently delivered and consumed.
In  this  regard,  the  BSP  is  committed  to  drive  modernization  of  the  country’s  retail  payment
system, promote electronic retail payments, and facilitate inter-operability for faster settlement of
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
transactions.  The launch of the National Retail Payment System, in partnership with industry
stakeholders, will help us achieve this vision of a “cash-lite” economy.
From invisible to helping hands
At  the  onset,  I  expressed  how  the  role  of  Government  in  economic  markets  has  shifted  from
exclusion, to regulation, to cooperation.  Adam Smith’s invisible hand, while potent with respect to
forces  of  supply  and  demand,  is  now  complemented  by  the  helping,  collaborating  and  joined
hands  of  the  Government  and  the  private  sector.    Joining  hands  is  essential  for  long-term
success. 
This is so as goals must be shared and not merely cascaded. For sustainability, interests of the
regulator and regulated must converge.
Our objectives are the same but our expertise and experiences are varied… these differences
may be harnessed so that we can come up with viable and mutually beneficial outcomes.  I have
faith  that ACI,  MART,  IHAP,  TOAP,  NASBI,  and  FMAP  will  remain  our  trusted  partners  in  this
regard. I trust that all of you will remain committed to playing a big role in growing our respective
markets,  in  developing  professional  standards,  in  delivering  value  to  your  organizations  and
clients, and in forging strong partnerships with regulators such as the BSP.  Today is a day of
protest.  Join me in protest against inefficient and undeveloped financial markets.  Tama na! 
Panahon na! Sama sama tayo sa pagunlad.  Mabuhay tayong lahat.
Thank you and I wish everyone a pleasant evening.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
