John  Iannis  Mourmouras:  The  political  economy  of  Europe's
monetary union - an update
Speech by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the
European Public Law Organization, Sounio, 30 August 2017.
 Introduction
 It is my great pleasure to be here with you today at the EPLO Academy, near Cape Sounion,
where the famous ancient Temple of Poseidon, the god of the sea, rests (built in the 5th century
BC). I am grateful to the President of EPLO Professor Spyridon Flogaitis for his kind invitation to
deliver this inaugural lecture. 
It seems that Poseidon is in no good mood today, it’s quite windy in Sounio! 
My speech today will be structured in three sections: I will firstly talk about the political economy
of  the  European  Union,  giving  a  more  detailed  picture  of  the  EU’s  political,  institutional  and
economic landscape, as it has been shaped so far. In the second section, I intend to take a brief
look into the EU’s major policies including monetary policy, with particular reference to the role of
the ECB and the debate on an exit strategy from the ECB’s ongoing accommodative policies.
Finally, I will offer some brief remarks about Greece’s place in the eurozone in the post-MoU era.
As  most  of  the  participants  in  the  EPLO’s Academy  are  of  purely  legal  background,  it  is  my
intention to keep to the legal and institutional aspects of the topics of my speech and spare you
the  economic  and  financial  ins  and  outs  of  the  EU’s  economic  policies,  which,  as  you  may
imagine, abound in technical complexity.
1. The political economy of the European Union
1.1 Incomplete architecture – institutional
  The  euro  area  is  emerging  from  a  deep  crisis  that  has  challenged  the  ability  of  its
macroeconomic policy framework to deliver stability and prosperity. The setup of the Economic
and  Monetary  Union,  as  initially  conceived  and  laid  down  in  the  1997  Maastricht  Treaty,  has
proven unsustainable and unstable. The global financial crisis which began 10 years ago and led
to the European Union’s worst recession in its six-decade history, did not start in Europe, but EU
institutions  and  Member  States  had  to  take  unprecedented  action  to  counter  its  impact  and
address the shortcomings of the original design of the Economic and Monetary Union. Important
lessons have been drawn as a result of the crisis, with new legislation, policy instruments and
institutions put in place to strengthen the governance of the euro area, as we will examine in
more detail in the following sections of my speech.
As robust as it may be today, the EMU remains incomplete. The “monetary” component of the
EMU is successfully developed, as illustrated by the role of the European Central Bank (ECB).
However,  the  “economic”  component  is  still  lagging  behind,  with  less  integration  at  EU  level
hampering  its  ability  to  support  fully  the  euro  area’s  single  monetary  policy,  but  also  national
economic  policies.  There  is  a  need  to  strengthen  the  political  will  across  the  board,  among
Member States, between Member States and EU institutions, and restore the confidence of the
general public. There should be no complacency about the need to strengthen EMU architecture.
 1 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
to 
1.2 Union in diversity
First and foremost, we need to remind ourselves that the political economy of the EU concerns a
Union of 28 Member Stateswith different economic histories, diverse financial systems, credit
and  regulatory  philosophies.  Yet,  the  integration  of  financial  markets  and  their  corresponding
regulation have been considered central to achieving a European single market since at least the
1980s. In this context, the governance of EU financial services has gradually moved from the
national 
the
effective internationalisation of capital. As banking and finance progressively internationalised,
EU member state governments have had to open up to pan-European initiatives; otherwise, it
was feared that European economies would become increasingly marginalised in global capital
markets. Another force that pushed towards European financial integration is a recurrent theme
in the history of the EU: crisis-driven regulatory responses, i.e. when Member State governments
and economic actors look to Europe for solutions to comparative problems affecting them all.
Under  extraordinary  circumstances  such  as  the  recent  crisis  that  the  EU  experienced,  the
supranational  regulation  of  financial  services  represents  the  best  solution  to  deal  with  the
challenges posed by the internationalisation of capital.
complementary  dynamic  of 
the  European 
level  under 
the 
Allow me here to make a small digression to remind you how important European law, and the
contribution of legal experts such as yourselves, is for further integration in the creation of new
law based on the two cornerstones of EU action. Indeed, any integratory step towards a fiscal
and economic union must take heed of the subsidiarity  and proportionality principles, which
regulate the exercise of powers by EU. More specifically, in areas in which the European Union
does  not  have  exclusive  competence,  the  principle  of  subsidiarity,  as  laid  down  in Article  5.3
TEU,  defines  the  circumstances  in  which  it  is  preferable  for  action  to  be  taken  by  the  Union,
rather  than  the  Member  States.  The  criteria  for  applying  those  two  principles  are  set  out  in
Protocol No 2 on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality annexed to the
Treaties.
Article 5.3 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU)
 “The Union shall act only if and in so far as the objectives of the proposed action cannot be
sufficiently achieved by the Member States, either at central level or at regional and local level,
but can rather, by reason of the scale or effects of the proposed action, be better achieved at
Union level.”
Like the principle of subsidiarity, the principle of proportionality seeks to set actions taken by EU
institutions within specified bounds. Under this rule, the action of the EU must be limited to what
 2 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
is necessary to achieve the objectives of the Treaties.
Article 5(4) of the Treaty on European Union (TEU)
“Under the principle of proportionality, the content and form of Union action shall not exceed what
is necessary to achieve the objectives of the Treaties.” 
1.3 Unemployment – growth 
In  what  follows  I  will  give  you  very  briefly  some  figures  and  charts  about  the  current
macroeconomic  conditions  in  the  euro  area,  more  specifically  about  growth,  investment  and
unemployment in the euro area.
Today, the EU economy is expanding for the fifth consecutive year. Employment is getting close
to its pre-crisis peak, as more than 5 million jobs have been created since early 2013 in the euro
area.  Banks  are  now  stronger  and  better  capitalised,  investment  is  picking  up,  and  public
finances are in better shape. Eurozone growth reached an annualized pace of 2.1% in the last
quarter, its best level in 5 years, which is considered high by recent standards.
 3 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
The unemployment rate has been slowly reduced and now stands at its lowest level since 2009
(at around 9% in the eurozone), compared with 12% after the region’s debt crisis (see Figures 4
and 5).
 4 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
 5 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is true that the protracted economic downturn and divergences between euro area countries
have been the result of pre-crisis imbalances and shortcomings in the way the EMU responded
to major shocks. The diverging experiences of the Member States after the crisis have renewed
the focus on achieving convergence across the EU. Convergence may indeed be important for
the  cohesion  of  the  monetary  union,  as  it  helps  to  ensure  that  the  gains  from  economic
integration  are  shared.  Countries  such  as  Germany  are  now  well  above  their  pre-crisis  GDP
levels, but for other countries such as Italy, GDP is only expected to return to its pre-crisis level in
the mid-2020s (last quarter GDP 1.5% on a yearly basis). 
While  recent  economic  developments  are  indeed  encouraging,  a  lot  remains  to  be  done  to
overcome the legacy of the crisis years. The euro area is finally witnessing a decent economic
recovery, but it would be wrong to be complacent. The single currency remains vulnerable in its
institutional  architecture,  and  faces  many  unresolved  problems  at  the  national  level. A  lack  of
productivity catch-up – lower productivity growth in countries with lower initial per capita income
and  productivity  –  explains  much  of  the  lack  of  income  convergence  within  the  euro  area.
Countries with lower initial productivity levels can have larger productivity gains from labour and
product  market  reforms  than  countries  with  higher  initial  productivity.  In  light  of  the  above,
structural reforms are critical to reducing productivity gaps to foster real income convergence.
 6 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
 All in all, the current situation is much improved, but economic reforms in the goods, capital and
labour markets which remove barriers to competition and increase market flexibility are essential
for the smooth functioning of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Such reforms are key to
raising productivity and employment in the euro area, thereby supporting the growth potential of
the euro area in the long run. What is also needed is investment in talent and human resources,
on which the European Union is currently lagging behind its major competitors. 
1.4 The political landscape: where is Europe headed?
Unlike earlier in the year, when the prospect of a populist far-right turn of the French electorate in
the presidential elections in May was a serious cause for concern, political instability is no longer
at the top of the agenda for the Member States of the EU. Global markets have been nervous
lately,  but  the  source  of  their  worries  this  time  isn’t  in  the  eurozone.  Instead, political
uncertainty has risen around the US, as the White House under President Trump is in turmoil.
The  UK,  meanwhile,  is  struggling  after  the  2016  upset  vote  of  the  British  people  to  leave  the
European Union to address the political and economic challenges of Brexit. From an economic
point of view, such uncertainty tends to support the euro against the dollar and the sterling pound.
From a political point of view, the centre electorate seems to have been unsettled by what is
happening in the UK and US and has been frightened off the extremist-populist parties. 
There are of course seminal elections ahead in the European continent, in Germany, Europe’s
biggest  economy  and  the  eurozone’s  dominant  power,  in  September.  The  likelihood  that  no
major  political  upsets  will  come  from  Germany  in  September  is  indeed  among  a  number  of
forces combining to generate fresh optimism for the European project, which has seen quite a
few lows in the past few years. 
Of course, the German electoral result will influence everything from European relations with
the US, China, Russia and Turkey and, certainly, the future course of the European Union and, in
particular, the success of French President Emmanuel Macron’s initiative to reboot the eurozone
through his proposals for a common budget and finance minister for the region. Macron is openly
pro-European and keen to bolster support for the EU – reinforcing the idea that the bloc can help
its  citizens  secure  a  better  life  –  as  a  key  part  of  his  strategy  to  counter  populism  and
Euroscepticism. Support for the EU, battered by long crises over debt and migration, has begun
 7 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
to recover. The EU’s own latest Eurobarometer report on public opinion, published this month,
found that trust in the EU has risen to 42%, from 36% a year ago and 32% in late 2015 (see
Figure 7).
 8 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Outside the UK, dissatisfaction with the EU doesn’t translate into support for leaving. This is not
to say that European citizens suddenly disregard the EU’s dysfunctional nature and efficiency
problems. A survey of 10 EU countries published in June by the Pew Research Center found that
Europeans remain critical of the bloc. A median of 46% disapproved of the EU’s handling of its
long economic crisis, while 66% disapproved of its management of the refugee crisis.
Any talk of Frexit, Dexit (and so on) is now definitely off the cards. Although support for the euro
area is now higher, it is highest in countries with high income levels. Indeed, countries that have
experienced  high  growth  since  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  are  more  likely  to  have
seen an increase in citizen support for the euro. Brexit will certainly bring a major upheaval in the
EU’s economy, which cannot as yet be predicted.
Improving economic growth in much of Europe, especially in the 19-country euro currency zone,
has helped blunt some of the discontent of European citizens with the European Union, creating
a unique opportunity to take action to make the institutional changes that are required if the EU
wants to prosper. Improved opinion of the EU coincides with renewed economic confidence in
most of the European countries surveyed. In recent years, many Europeans have been dispirited
about economic conditions in their country. Now, as the economy in a number of nations has
begun to recover, the public mood is brightening.
There is now positive momentum for the EU and its Member States. The Franco-German axis
is once again set to enter into operation and push ahead with reforms that will help the EU stand
on its own two feet or “take [its] destiny into [its] own hands”, as Angela Merkel recently put it.
After the Brexit decision, France and Germany seem to agree that a medium-term roadmap for
deepening the EU, and eurozone governance in particular, is needed. French President Macron
has proposed a “new deal” to help address Europe’s economic dilemmas to entice Germany and
other northern eurozone countries to allow the currency bloc to pool financial resources to shield
members from future crises. (Of course, President Macron first has to go through necessary
labour reforms in his own country). Northern EU countries —which have long called for structural
overhauls  in  France—may  be  unwilling  to  sign  on  to  his  proposals  for  the  currency  area,
including  increased  spending  by  Germany  and  other  wealthy  economies  and  a  shared  crisis
budget. 
Democratic accountability 
The  EMU  setup  and  the  operation  of  the  euro  area  has  thus  far  been  characterised  by low
democratic  accountability,  as  it  is  based  on  “output  legitimacy”,  that  is,  legitimacy  that
depends  on  a  system’s  capacity  to  achieve  the  citizen’s  goals  and  solve  their  problems
effectively and efficiently. The higher its capacity, the more legitimate the system. Its operation
prioritises  results  and  output  effectiveness  over  an input-oriented  democratic  decision-
making (legitimacy derived from the way in which decisions are made and not by the results of
these decisions produce) architecture that might be less effective.
One  of  the  lessons  drawn  from  the  crisis  is  that  there  is  a  need  for more  transparency to
bolster support for the European integration project on behalf of the citizens. Europeans reacted
to  all  the  opaque  decision-making  made  at  the  height  of  the  crisis  by  unelected  officials  and
technocrats away from the democratic center by massively and repeatedly turning to populist,
anti-European parties.
Accountability in EMU governance can indeed be improved through more transparency, but in
order to fully address the existing shortcomings of EMU governance and thus set the conditions
for the European economy to work, a political union and European federal-type institutions are
needed. At the moment, there is little appetite on the part of member states for relinquishing their
national sovereignty in fiscal matters and transfer it to the EU level, which would require a major
institutional change in the European Union. So far, the European Commission’s proposed short-
 9 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
term measures to improve the democratic accountability of EMU are: setting up a strengthened
and more formalised dialogue with the European Parliament, a proposal to integrate the fiscal
compact into the EU legal framework and progress towards a stronger external representation of
the euro area. Over the long term, steps towards ensuring the democratic accountability of EMU
governance and decision-making could include: a full-time permanent chair of the Eurogroup, the
Eurogroup established as an official council configuration, a fully unified external representation
of the Euro area, the setting up of a euro area Treasury and a common finance minister (i.e. a
common  fiscal  capacity),  the  setting  up  of  a  European  Monetary  Fund  and  the  integration  of
remaining intergovernmental arrangements in the EU. 
Apart  from  the  proposed  agenda  by  French  President  Macron,  who  has  argued  that  without
institutional  change,  the  euro  could  fail  within  10  years,  reform  proposals  have  also  been  put
forward  by  the  European  Commission  in  its White  Paper  on  the  Future  of  Europe under
President Juncker. As there is still no political support for a fully federalised European Union, the
European Commission’s five alternative scenarios reflect the current realistic choices that stand
before the European Union.
The table below shows the five alternative scenarios proposed by the European Commission in
this White Paper, which focus on differentiated degrees of “deepening” cooperation. It should be
pointed out that the “Those Who Want More Do More” scenario formally recognises for the first
time the model of differentiated/multi-speed integration (already endorsed by the leaders of the
four  biggest  Member  States,  i.e.  Germany,  France,  Spain  and  Italy),  an  idea  dating  back  to
German  Chancellor  Willy  Brandt  in  1974.  This  White  Paper  reflects  a  significant  shift  in  the
European integration debate, since a “Europe at many speeds” had been mainly advanced by
intergovernmentalist  forces,  but  stumbled  on  the  adamant  opposition  of  pro-Europeans
(federalists), in favour of centralised/supranational EU governance.
 10 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Further progress on European integration issues will of course be slow ahead of the German
elections  on  24  September  that  will  be  decisive  in  many  ways  for  the  future  path  that  the
European Union, but the question is now all about whether EU affairs will take a turn for the better
thereafter. In any event, the European Commission is set to present its first set of conclusions on
the roadmap for the future of the EU at the December 2017 European Council.
As should be expected from the European Union, there will not be any radical changes overnight,
but rather a process ofincremental change to improve the political economy and governance of
 11 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
the EU and the eurozone. In my view, this is the best chance to restore faith in the European
integration project and show that it is capable of protecting its citizens. 
2. Towards a complete economic and monetary union/ an update of economic policies
Future steps towards the completion of the EMU have been laid down in the well-known “Five
Presidents’ report”, divided into two stages (short-term and long-term steps), as shown in the
table below.
2.1 Monetary policy: towards an exit strategy
According  to Article  127  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  (TFEU),  the
primary objective of the European System of Central Banks (Eurosystem) is “to maintain price
stability.  Without  prejudice  to  the  objective  of  price  stability,  the  ESCB  supports  the  general
economic policies of the Union with a view to contributing to the achievement of the objectives of
the Union as laid down in Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union”. This wording suggests that
the Treaty assigns overriding importance to price stability, as the most significant contribution
that monetary policy can make to achieve the objectives of the European Union, i.e. favourable
economic environment and high level of employment.
Under the extraordinary circumstances  of  the  crisis,  the  ECB  went  beyond  its  “price  stability”
mandate  and  already  since  2008  used  unconventional  monetary  policy  tools  such  as  large
liquidity  injections  and  the  securities  markets  program  to  ensure  that  debt  markets  remain
functional. Faced with the EU’s worst recession in its six-decade history, the ECB needed to act
resolutely to counter its impact and address the shortcomings of the initial setup of the economic
 12 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
and monetary union. In 2012, ECB President Draghi pledged to do “whatever it takes to preserve
the euro” and announced the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) programme to allow the
ECB  to  buy  sovereign  bonds  of  euro  area  countries. Apart  from  OMTs,  the  ECB  launched  a
quantitative easing (QE) programme in 2015 (asset purchases of public sector bonds), which
was expanded to asset purchases of corporate sector bonds in 2016 (now worth €2 trillion). We
are now entering a debate on how to orchestrate the exit from the ECB’s QE, in terms of its
timing  and  its  sequencing.  Against  this  background,  last  month’s  ruling  by  the  German
constitutional court to refer to the European Court of Justice (ECJ) the case with regard to the
ECB’s  €2  trillion  quantitative  easing  programme  is  of  seminal  importance.  The  action
perpetuates legal ambiguity for at least another year – even though the ECJ is expected to decide
in the ECB’s favour.
Clearly  at  some  point  in  time,  sooner  or  later,  there  will  be  an  end  to  these  unconventional
monetary policies. The crucial question will revolve then around timing and sequencing, namely
‘when these policies will end’ and ‘if tapering should come first and then be followed by a rate
hike’ or the reverse. On the other hand, a premature normalisation of monetary policy (just like in
2008 and 2011), either in terms of interest rate hikes or in terms of proper tapering or according
to the ECB’s preferred wording “orderly adjustment”, entails the following two risks: the first is the
risk of a relapse, namely the ECB shouldn’t abruptly stop loose monetary policy as a result, for
instance, of a temporary inflation spike and not supported by the economic fundamentals. The
second risk is the risk of financial instability, once interest rates start to rise. 
2.2 Fiscal Policy
 The idea of a Fiscal Union has gained new impetus and is again on the table and there seems to
be a future towards integrated fiscal policies in the eurozone. It is true that integration within the
eurozone  has  somewhat  stalled  since  the  creation  of  a  Banking  Union  in  2014  (which  I  will
analyse in the following section). However, the relevant debate has been given new impetus by
the election in France of Emmanuel Macron, who has publicly advocated a common eurozone
budget and a Finance Minister. Encouraging signs have been coming from the German side as
well, as there is likely to be indeed readiness of the newly elected German government to push
forward the European integration process. However, Germany has been accused of seeing fiscal
union  as  a  vehicle  to  achieve  more  austerity  in  the  eurozone!  It  has  in  fact  been  argued  that
Germany has ‘no alternative’ to a revival of the Franco-German axis to reboot EMU governance
and that is why it has put forward proposals for advancing European integration of its own, such
as the proposal for transforming the European Stability Mechanism into a European Monetary
Fund, as it builds expertise and takes on a continuous fiscal surveillance of Member States. This
would  understandably  suit  the  German  agenda  which  has  long  criticised  the  more  lenient
supervision  of  eurozone  countries’  compliance  with  fiscal  discipline  rules  (under  the  revised
Stability and Growth Pact).
The latest on the field of common fiscal policy in the eurozone is a proposal from the European
Commission  called  European  safe  bond.  The  point  is  the  following:  investors  can  buy
government debt into the euro area as a whole, rather than into one particular member state.
This  is  different  from  a  pooling  of  national  government  debt  issuance,  known  as  common
Eurobond,  which  remains  a  political  taboo  in  Germany.  Sovereign  debt  across  the  eurozone
could be bundled into a new financial instrument (ESB) and sold, if you like as a European brand,
to investors. Such an idea could have potential benefits to many stakeholders, including the ECB.
As you know, the ECB is a major buyer in the secondary market of the europeriphery. Issuing
bonds backed by all 19 eurozone countries would be the best way to keep borrowing costs down
if the ECB were to taper or indeed to end its QE programme at some point in time. Moreover, the
ECB  itself  may  want  to  replace  national  government  bonds  in  its  own  balance  sheet  with
European safe bonds. 
 13 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
2.3 Banking Union
The  crisis  paved  the  way  for  a  major  paradigm  change  in  the  regulation  of  banks,  i.e.  the
introduction  of  common  prudential  rules  to  create  a  level  playing  field  for  all  the  financial
institutions of the EU (some 8,300 banks across the EU), also known as the Single Rulebook,
comprising  secondary  law  (Directives,  Regulations,  Decisions),  regulatory  and  implementing
technical standards drafted by the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) and soft-law rules
such as guidelines and recommendations.
The Single Rulebook applies to all 28 EU member states and marks a shift from the previously
predominant regulatory philosophy of minimum harmonization of national rules and the provision
of a European passport based on mutual recognition across the EU to maximum harmonization.
Three of the most important single-rulebook pieces are directly related to banking. These are the
Capital Requirements Directive IV (CRD IV) and the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR), the
Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) and the Deposit Guarantee Scheme Directive
(DGSD), which lay down capital requirements for banks and create regulation to the prevention
and management bank failures, including a minimum level of protection for depositors.
  To  this  end,  along  with  the  major  regulatory  change  in  the  banking  sector,  there  was  swift
progress towards institutional change with the creation of the Banking Union (BU): pan-European
centralised bodies for the supervision and resolution of banks, indispensable to ensure financial
stability in the euro area.
The creation of the Banking Union comprises three pillars based on the single rulebook as the
foundation (see Figure 10 below): a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), a Single Resolution
Mechanism  (comprising  a  Single  Resolution  Board  and  a  Single  Resolution  Fund)  and  a
common deposit insurance scheme (yet to be approved).
 14 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Under the first pillar, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) was established without treaty
change. By unanimous vote the Council decided to confer “specific tasks concerning policies
relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions”  on  the  European  Central  Bank,  in
accordance with Article 127(6) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
But a treaty change in the future should not be ruled out. The European Central Bank now directly
supervises 123 systemically significant banks and, at the same time, national supervisors work
closely  together  within  an  pan-European  supervisory  system  to  supervise  the  so-called  “less
significant institutions” (around 5,500) in the 19 Member States of the euro area.
A  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  is  the  necessary  complement  of  the  first  pillar.  The
rationale  behind  it  is  to  avoid  the  risk  of  bank  bail-outs  by  national  governments,  and  for  the
private sector to bear the cost rather than the taxpayer. In the case of failing banks, the Single
Resolution  Board  may  decide  on  resolution,  to  be  covered  by  funds  drawn  from  a  Single
Resolution Fund (€55 billion by 2023) that banks themselves pay into. Any residual fiscal burden
on sovereigns should be contained through a federal fiscal backstop.
The  missing  link  from  the  Banking  Union  structure  is  its  third  pillar.  The  Commission’s  2015
proposal  for  a  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS)  builds  on  the  existing  framework
under the Deposit Guarantee Scheme Directive (2014/49/EU) which provides for a more uniform
degree of deposit guarantee for all retail depositors.
2.4 Capital markets union
Since 2015, the European Commission’s new flagship project is the creation of a Capital Markets
Union to build a single integrated capital market for all 28 Member States. The Capital Markets
Union (CMU) is a plan of the European Commission consisting of a mix of regulatory and non-
regulatory reforms (33 measures in total), aiming to better connect savings to investments based
on a single rulebook that will create a level-playing field for the provision of investment services
and  offer  private  firms  the  possibility  to  raise  capital  through  issuance  of  equity  and  debt
anywhere in the EU.
I should remind you that the European economy has been traditionally bank-based. It is indicative
 15 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
that 70% of capital raised in the EU comes from the banking system, compared with just 20% in
the  US.  So,  the  idea  is  to  provide  alternative  sources  of  financing  and  more  opportunities  for
consumers and institutional investors. For companies, especially SMEs and start-ups, the CMU
means accessing more funding opportunities, such as venture capital and crowdfunding. The
CMU also puts a strong focus on sustainable and green financing: as the financial sector begins
to  help  sustainability-conscious  investors  to  choose  suitable  projects  and  companies,  the
Commission is determined to lead global work on supporting these developments.
A  well-functioning,  diversified  and  deeply  integrated  capital  market  is  of  key  relevance  for  the
European Central Bank for three reasons: first of all, the integration of capital markets facilitates
the  transmission  of  single  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area,  secondly  it  contributes  to
macroeconomic and financial stability and thirdly, it supports risk-sharing in the private sector
across the EU.
3. Greece in the eurozone in the post-MoU era
 Finally, turning to my country Greece, this is a fortunate moment in the following sense. Greece
today is again at a crossroads, but this time may be different. Under some preconditions, a case
could be made for a strong turnaround of the economy. If the Greek authorities remain vigilant
with no complacency (no delays, no back-tracking) and we ALL roll up our sleeves and stick to
structural reforms and the privatisation agenda, and, on the other hand, our lenders, deliver on
their promises about debt relief sooner rather than later, i.e pacta sunt servanda principal should
apply  to  both  lenders  and  borrowers,  then,  I’m  quite  optimistic  that  the  return  to  European
normality after the completion of the current programme in August next year is within reach.
The  Greek  economy’s  progress  during  the  last  eight  years  of  adjustment  has  been
unprecedented,  both  in  terms  of  fiscal  and  external  adjustment  of  more  than  15  percentage
points of GDP. The huge twin deficits turned into surpluses. Last year, the primary surplus was
4.2% of GDP, outperforming the target of 0.5%. The current account during the last two years
had effectively been in balance from a 15% deficit eight years ago.
At the same time, sweeping structural reforms have been implemented, covering the pensions
system, the health system, labour markets, product markets, the business environment, public
administration, etc. Recapitalisation and restructuring have taken place in the banking system
and significant institutional reforms have been initiated aiming at reducing the volume of NPLs.
Moreover,  there  is  evidence  that  the  economy  has  been  undergoing  a  rebalancing  towards
tradable, export-oriented sector: the share of exports of goods and services in GDP increased
from 19% in 2009 to 28.2% in 2016, with most of the increase coming from exports of goods.
 16 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
In closing, I would like to stress that Greece belongs to the core of Europe. Its future is within the
eurozone,  within  the  group  of  solidary  countries,  to  the  people  of  whom  we,  the  Greeks  are
grateful for their financial support. Despite all these years of uncertainty and austerity, this is the
overwhelming wish of the majority of the Greek people still today, within the core of Europe. This
is  our  legacy  as  a  nation  that  goes  back  to  our  history  and  our  tradition  and,  more  recently,
expressed by a visionary Greek politician, a great European statesman, who stood above political
parties, late President Konstantinos Karamanlis, who showed the Greek people the way forward,
the European way.
Concluding remarks
The sovereign debt crisis in the Eurozone revealed how vulnerable the euro area’s economic and
monetary framework was to external shocks, especially taking into account the constraints of no
bail-out and no debt restructuring. The euro area was not equipped to tackle large crises and did
not have the safety nets and institutions to respond promptly to the severe challenges that such
crises entail. So it had to buy time and resort to quick fixes that would bring it back on a more
table footing. The response to the crisis focused on the need to strengthen the fiscal rules, to
prevent macro-imbalances and reinforce economic policy coordination and surveillance between
Member States.
Furthermore,  there  is  an  imperative  need  to  deepen  euro  area  economic  governance  (i.e.
complete  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union)  in  order  to  strengthen  the  convergence  of
economic  performances  of  Member  States  and  reduce  the  degree  to  which  financial
fragmentation spreads in times of crisis.
It  is  worrying  somehow  Europe’s  declining  international  standing  over  the  last  twenty  years.
Today, Europe is no longer the world’s largest economy, it has been overtaken by China and, by
2025, the IMF predicts that China’s share will reach 16.5%, while the EU’s share will be almost
halved. In the area of security and defence, the EU’s international role is also diminishing and it
seems that Europe’s greatest and most sustainable source of political power is of the soft kind.
But of course, Europe’s geostrategic outlook is essential in shaping the global order. Specifically
with regard to global security, Europe must rise to the occasion and help address the modern-
day challenges of instability and turbulence in Islamic countries. In terms of world trade, as an
open market economy, the EU has been a major player in efforts to bolster multilateralism and
trade cooperation in the global system. It is worth mentioning the effort to promote global trade
(for instance, by means of the TTIP).
In 
it. 
facing 
Over  its  long  history,  the  EC/EU  has  traditionally  managed  to  find  consensus  on  the  burning
issues 
the  spectre  of  a  ―previously
inconceivable―exit of a Member State, the EU needs to smooth over disputes between Member
States and establish mechanisms to address heightened uncertainty and unpredictable political
developments, and also find solutions to ensure an evenly distributed economic recovery across
its territory.
juncture,  and  under 
the  current 
There is an old saying in Brussels that the European project only advances in times of crisis, and
Europe’s leaders are known to have a tried and- tested method for coming up with policy fixes
when forced to cope with emergency situations. I only hope that this time is not different. As they
say: “Times will tell”.
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 17 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
