Andreas  Dombret:  Between  global  competition  and  the  regional
principle - which bank needs which rules?
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the "G20 and Locally Focused Banks" conference, Berlin, 9 March 2017.
 1. Introduction
Finance Minister Dr Schäuble
Mr Haasis
Ladies and gentlemen
Germany  is  the  G20’s  host  this  year,  so  you  could  say  the  world  is  our  guest.  Many  smaller
banks and savings banks sense that, following the financial crisis, the world – in the guise of
global regulation – edged a little closer towards them. For quite a few of them, it was too close for
comfort.
I  keep  hearing  claims  that  the  “little  bank  just  around  the  corner”  bore  the  brunt  of  the  major
reforms enacted by the international community in recent years.
Just to remind you: the financial crisis spurred the G20 to formulate its intention to address, to
the greatest extent possible, all the risks inherent in the exceedingly complex worldwide banking
system.  Experience  shows  that  a  country  going  it  alone  isn’t  the  right  way  to  guarantee  the
stability of the financial system. These days, the financial system knows no national boundaries,
and  crises  can  very  easily  spill  over  from  one  country  to  the  next.  This  prompted  the  Basel
Committee  to  set  about  overhauling,  substantially  in  some  cases,  the  uniform  standards  that
underpin the key ground rules in the banking business.
And because it has always been standard practice to do so in the EU, these rules were then
applied  across  all  institutions  in  Germany. A  good  case  can  be  made  for  that.  But  still,  I  do
wonder  whether  things  really  have  to  be  that  way?  Do  we  really  have  to  make  a  choice  –
between a functioning global competitive environment on the one hand, and the regional principle
on the other?
Over the next few minutes, I will outline a number of proposals which I think can better align the
supervisory  rules  with  the  low-risk  operations  of  small  credit  institutions  in  the  future  while
nonetheless adhering to international standards.
 
2. Proportionality in regulating small institutions
There  are  already  many  exceptions  in  force  today  to  help  small  institutions  manage  their
compliance  workload.  However,  such  exceptions  are  not  special  treatment  motivated  by
industrial policy concerns. Rather, they result from what banking supervisors are there to do in
the first place – that is, to shield the economy effectively and efficiently from excessive risks and
financial crises. This is the rationale behind the principle that high risks necessitate a high level of
provisioning.  The  same  holds  true  in  reverse:  low  risks  necessitate  less  provisioning.  It  can
therefore be concluded from this that relief is always warranted as long as it does not result in
risks being inadequately provided for.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
That is a principle which supervisors and regulators – including those in Basel, incidentally – took
on board some time ago. The Basel Committee, remember, has taken into account differences
in the size and complexity of institutions – just take the rules the committee devised to enable
banks  and  savings  banks  to  use  different  methods  to  measure  their  capital.  Institutions  are
generally  permitted  to  use  complex  models,  but  only  those  authorised  by  the  supervisory
authorities. Yet there is no obligation to use a model; instead, institutions can also opt for a more
straightforward  standardised  approach.  What  is  more,  large  and  systemically  important
institutions are asked to meet additional requirements. Global systemically important institutions,
for instance, need to set aside more capital in the shape of a separate capital buffer. The aim,
then, is not to treat institutions equally, but risks.
We apply this principle in our day-to-day supervisory activities as well. The higher an institution’s
risks, the more intensively we will supervise it. The more significant, complex and risky the bank,
the more frequently, extensively and intensively we will inspect it. That is why we deploy far more
supervisors to inspect larger institutions in our routine SREP examinations at credit institutions.
You will recognise the same supervisory strategy in the institutional reporting system. The euro
area’s “significant institutions", as they are known, have a standard requirement to report more
than 8,000 data points to their supervisors – and to do that quarterly. The reporting templates
may  be  harmonised  across  Europe,  but  some  business  areas  are  omitted  for  the  smaller
institutions. A typical savings bank, then, has to report far fewer data, often just half of the data
1
points.
This  practice  accommodates  smaller  institutions  running  low-risk  business  models  –  but
perhaps not as much as it could, because there are still some rules whose point and purpose is
barely relevant to a savings or people’s bank “just around the corner", but which nonetheless
impose too much of an administrative burden on them.
On top of that, regulation hasn’t exactly got any simpler since the financial crisis. It has been
significantly  revised  and  augmented  to  include  new  requirements,  expanded  and  stated  more
precisely. So in its effort to cover every single risk in the complex world of banking, the regulation,
too,  had  to  become  more  complex  –  and  that  is  still  taking  a  very  heavy  toll  on  smaller
institutions; too much so, if you ask me.
For small institutions, especially, the work this entails is disproportionately time-consuming and
costly. At the same time, many a provision grasps at thin air at small institutions. Just take the
existing disclosure requirements, which are there to ensure that large publicly traded institutions
are  subject  to  public  accountability.  Yet  market  discipline  hardly  has  any  bearing  for  small
institutions which are not publicly traded – so why force them to satisfy the same provisions?
Another point worth mentioning in this regard is that the many smaller institutions represent an
important component of a diverse banking landscape. During the financial crisis, it was notably
the  savings  bank  and  cooperative  bank  sector  which  proved  to  be  an  anchor  of  stability  in
Germany. Savings banks and cooperative banks, operating as they do within their own regions,
were far less exposed to international disruptions. Plus, close relationships built up over time with
customers exuded stability in an environment fraught with uncertainty – clearly, the diversity of
Germany’s banking landscape paid off on this score.
If  you  ask  me,  that  alone  is  reason  enough  to  systemically  scour  the  existing  rulebook  for
provisions that ask too much of smaller institutions and to then set about eliminating them.
In Europe, the rulebook is presently being subjected to a thorough and comprehensive review,
and the European Commission has already tabled quite a few proposals for amending the rules.
Some  of  these  proposals  would  bring  relief  for  smaller  institutions.  These  are  proposals  I
advocate in principle.
Adjustments  could  be  made  to  the  magnitude  and  frequency  of  disclosure  and  reporting
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
requirements.  The  standards  for  remuneration  systems  are  another  area  that  could  be
addressed,  while  sensible  exceptions  might  be  made  to  the  new  standardised  approach  for
market risk.
While I have a great deal of time for the legitimate interests of smaller institutions rooted in their
home regions, there’s one issue I would like to stress: proportionality isn’t a gateway to relieving
smaller institutions of regulation altogether.
It should most certainly not be about lowering quantitative requirements – for capital or liquidity,
for instance – but rather a case of tracking down operational requirements that can be dispensed
with.
The diversity of a banking system cannot be protected by classifying small banks and savings
banks  as  completely  risk-free.  Trouble  can  befall  any  institution.  If  the  banking  industry  is  to
function  as  part  of  our  market  economy,  banks  and  savings  banks  need  to  behave  like  other
economic  agents  and  take  responsibility  for  their  decisions  and  the  consequences  of  those
decisions.  Viewed 
this  perspective,  supervisory  authorities’  quantitative  minimum
requirements – above all, capital requirements – ensure that the banking industry is subject to a
minimum degree of entrepreneurial accountability.
from 
 
3. Global competition, global proportionality in regulation
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  how  can  a  globally  coordinated  regulatory  regime  be  reconciled  with
proportionality? Do rules agreed  at  the  global  level  mean  that  small,  regionally  focused  banks
have  to  be  treated  in  the  same  manner  as  large  multinational  institutions?  Does  a  global
regulatory  regime  leave  no  room  for  proportionality?  My  answer  to  this  is  no,  there  is  no
fundamental conflict. Relief measures for smaller banks, and even separate sets of rules, are not
at  odds  with  the  aim  of  a  global  regulatory  regime.  The  Basel Agreements  never  set  out  to
establish  a  single  regulatory  framework  that  applies  to  all  banks,  without  exception,  in  every
corner of the world. In fact, their objective is to make large and internationally active banks more
stable by implementing a uniform set of rules and to make sure that there is a level playing field
worldwide.
It was only after Basel II had been implemented in Europe for banks and savings banks across
the  board,  irrespective  of  their  size  and  business  activity,  that  subsequent  international
negotiations and reforms began to turn their attention to the smaller institutions. It is therefore up
to  us  in  Europe  to  reconcile  global  competition  with  fitting  rules  for  institutions  operating
regionally.
In a globalised world, we need a uniform set of rules to ensure fair competition among those
banks  operating  globally  –  only  in  this  way  can  a  reckless  regulatory  race  to  the  bottom  be
prevented. For banks conducting the same business activities and bearing the same risks, this
means that they should be subject to the same rules.
But  what  about  institutions  of  vastly  differing  sizes?  Germany,  for  me,  is  the  quintessential
example  of  a  diverse  banking  landscape  characterised  by  local  and  regional  institutions:  it  is
currently  home  to  around  1,700  banks  and  savings  banks,  the  vast  majority  of  which  are  not
global players.2
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
How  can  neutral  competitive  conditions  be  established  in  such  a  system?  When  it  comes  to
institutions of varying sizes, do uniform rules for regulating and supervising banks not actually
contribute to competitive distortion? In my view, the answer is far more straightforward than you
might  think,  and  it’s  not  surprising:  regulators  and  supervisors  can  behave  in  a  competitively
neutral manner by strictly focusing their interventions on risks that stem from an institution and
pose a threat to the financial system.
This is because the same degree of competition does not exist between all banks. For instance,
a  regional  bank  operating 
is  hardly  competing  with
its US equivalent. In my view, the argument regarding competition, as relevant as it may be in the
case of big banks competing at the international level, should therefore not be overstated.
the  area  surrounding  Berlin 
in 
Time  and  again,  we  are  finding  that  the  approach  taken  to  implementing  the  principle  of
proportionality varies from country to country. And that is as it should be. My advice would be to
use  these  differing  approaches  as  inspiration  and  as  a  catalyst  for  exchanging  views  across
national borders.
For instance, the United States introduced the Basel II requirements almost exclusively for large
institutions. Turning to the Basel III regulations, the US authorities have given smaller “community
banks”  more  time  to  implement  the  rules  and  have  also  factored  in  some  relief  for  these
institutions regarding individual rules. In other words, there has not been a separate regulatory
regime there to date. A proposal that could change this is currently on the negotiating table as
part of what has been dubbed the Choice Act. What this entails, in a nutshell, is that an institution
need not meet a large proportion of the detailed requirements with which it must normally comply
if  it  has  a  sufficiently  sound  leverage  ratio.  This  is  generally  in  keeping  with  the  kind  of
proportionality I support. Let me repeat: operational relief can only be provided if it does not come
at the expense of resilience.
That said, the internationally agreed regulatory regime remains crucial for our financial system.
Criticise  Basel  III  if  you  like  for  its  complexity,  but  you  won’t  find  a  simple  alternative  that
maintains healthy international competition while simultaneously combatting the shifting of risks
into  inadequately  regulated  areas.  In  a  global  financial  framework,  national  regulators  cannot
simply dodge these responsibilities.
But it may well be possible to reconcile a separate set of rules that provides relief for regional,
low-risk institutions with such a global financial framework. With that in mind, the debate on such
a “small banking box” should be continued in an open-minded and constructive manner.
 
4. Conclusion
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  spent  the  last  quarter  of  an  hour  attempting  to  illustrate  the
conditions  under  which  I  believe  greater  proportionality  in  banking  regulation  would  be  both
possible and sensible. Let me now conclude by summarising the key points.
1.  Cleverly  selected  relief  measures  for  smaller  institutions  can  contribute  to  a  more  stable
financial system.
2.  These measures should focus on operational requirements and should not result in capital
or liquidity being lowered.
3.  We also need internationally harmonised rules for large, international banks. However, the
approach taken to implementing the principle of proportionality in regulation can vary from
country to country.
In  the  debate  on  proportionality,  we  should  therefore  concern  ourselves  less  with  what  would
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
appear to be policy issues and instead give greater consideration to concrete, targeted relief and
appropriate criteria.
On that note, I wish you a fruitful and rewarding exchange of views at this key conference. I, for
my  part,  support  you  in  your  call  for  the  construction  of  a  more  appropriate  regulatory
architecture.
1
2
There are also institution-specific reports, eg under the large exposures reporting regime.
The percentage of institutions with total assets of up to €3 billion is around 83% in Germany.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
