WELCOME ADDRESS 
Twelfth Asia-Pacific High Level Meeting on Banking Supervision 
 Jointly organised by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), the 
Financial Stability Institute (FSI), and the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-
Pacific Central Banks Working Group on Banking Supervision (EMEAP WGBS), 
hosted by Bank Indonesia 
  “Taking stock of post-crisis regulatory reforms in Indonesia – 
progress made and challenges ahead” 
Bali, Indonesia, 22-23 March 2017 
Remarks by Mr. Erwin Rijanto, Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia 
 Honorable  
  Mr. Fernando Restoy, Chairman FSI, BIS  
  Mr.  Nestor  A.  Espenilla,  Chairman  EMEAP  WGBS  and  Deputy 
Governor Bank of Sentral Ng Pilipinas,  
  Mr William Coen, Secretary General BCBS, BIS 
  and  fellow  delegates  from  financial  stability  authorities  and 
representatives of the financial industry 
 Good morning to all of you, 
1. 
It is my pleasure to welcome you to the 12th Asia-Pacific High Level 
Meeting  on  Banking  Supervision.  Together  with  the  Bank  for 
International Settlement and EMEAP, Bank Indonesia is honoured to 
host this event in the beautiful island of Gods.  
2. 
In my welcome address today, I will slightly touch upon the global 
financial sector reform initiatives to give a flavour of the speech and 
emphasize  more  on  the  progress  and  challenges  in  Indonesia.  I 
would  like  to  highlight  that  the  progress  so  far  is  due  to  the  joint 
efforts of relevant authorities and the support from the industry. 
 1 of 6 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
3.  The  costs  of  the  financial  crisis  are  significant.  According  to  the 
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  the  cumulative  loss  of output  since 
the crisis, compared to its pre-crisis trend, is estimated around 25% 
of one year’s world GDP. 
4.  To  address  the  fault  lines  that  caused  the  financial  crisis,  the  G20 
Leaders  in  2008  agreed  to  initiate  a  comprehensive  programme  of 
regulatory reforms which covers 4 (four) core elements: 1.) Building 
resilient  financial  institutions;  2.)  Ending  too-big-to-fail;  3.)  Making 
derivatives  markets  safer;  and  4.)  Transforming  shadow  banking 
into resilient market-based finance.   
5.  As  a  member  of  the  FSB  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision (BCBS), Indonesia endevours to implement the reforms 
in  a  full,  timely  and  consistent  manner  albeit  challenges  due  to 
differences in the characteristic of our financial market with that of 
advance economies, in which the regulation is build upon. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
6.  Building  resilient  financial  institutions.  The  first  element  of 
reforms centered on the Basel III package. The quality and level of 
capital  has  been  increased    and  new  standards  for  liquidity  has 
been  introduced.  In  addition,  leverage  has  been  constrained  and 
explicit macroprudential dimension has been introduced. 
7.  Although  we  started  a  year  late,  Basel  III  implementation  in 
Indonesia  has  been 
in  accordance  with  BCBS  phase-in 
arrangements  since  2014.  I  am  pleased  to  inform  you  that 
Indonesian  banks  are  not  facing  significant  challenges,  especially 
with regards to the capital reform, due to the high levels of capital 
ratio  dominated  by  Common  Equity  Tier  1.  Indonesia  has  also 
2 of 6 
implemented 
the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  and  capital 
conservation buffer in addition to the minimum capital requirement.  
8. 
In  terms  of  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio,  banks  that  are  required  to 
adopt 
the  standard  have  no  major  difficulties  complying. 
Nonetheless,  we  continued  to  monitor  the  long  run  impact  of  the 
requirement.   
9.  Ending too-big-to-fail. The next core element is ending too-big-
to-fail.  A  set  of  measures,  known  as  the  Systemically  Important 
Financial Institutions (SIFI) Framework, has been introduced. 
10.  Although  Indonesia 
is  not  home 
jurisdiction  of  the  Global 
Systemically  Important  Banks,  a  number  of  domestic  banks  are 
required to meet capital surcharge that varies between 1% to 2.5% 
to  reflect  their  systemic  importance  in  the  domestic  financial 
system.  
11.  Indonesia has also passed the Law on Prevention and Resolution of 
Financial  System  Crisis  in  April  2016.  The  law  enables  related 
financial stability authorities to implement a more rigorous banking 
regulation  and  supervision,  particulary  for  Domestic  Systemically 
Important  Banks,  including  the  provision  of  recovery  plans.  It  also 
provides legal foundation of bail-in mechanism. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
12.  Making  derivatives  markets  safer.  The  third  fundamental  area 
of  reform  is  in  the  OTC  derivatives  market.  The  crisis  highlighted 
how  the  opaque  inter-connections  across  financial  institutions 
engaged  in  trading  complex  derivative  contracts  over-the-counter 
and  poor  risk  management  led  to  rapid  contagion  and  systemic 
crisis.  
3 of 6 
13.  The  reform  has  focused  on  5  (five)  areas:  standardization  of 
derivative  contracts;  platform  trading;  central  clearing;  higher 
margin  and  capital  requirements  for  non-centrally  cleared  trades; 
and  mandatory  reporting of  all  trades.  Indonesia  has  implemented 
reporting  requirement  for  banks  engaging  in  OTC  derivatives 
transactions.  In  addition,  platform  trading  are  required  for  both 
equities  and  commodities  derivatives.  National  authorities  are  also 
in the proceses of establishing a CCP for OTC derivatives. This step 
would complement the higher capital requirement for Non-Centrally 
Cleared OTC derivatives regulation issued in September 2016. 
14.  Transforming  shadow  banking  into  resilient  market-based 
finance.  Compared 
to  other  elements  of 
the 
reform, 
internationally-wide  implementation  of  the  agreed  reforms  related 
to  shadow  banking  remains  at  relative  early  stage.  The  FSB  and 
jurisdictions  are  planning  to  conduct  more  work  to  assess  and 
respond to potential financial stability risk in this area.  
15.  With  regards  to  monitoring  and  regulation  of  non-bank  financial 
entities  (NBFEs),  the  Indonesian  FSA  is  responsible  to  supervise 
these  institutions.  It  also  has  the  authority  to  pass  regulations  on 
new  and  existing  NBFEs  activities.  Bank  Indonesia  also  performs 
periodic  assessments  of  emerging  non-bank  financial  intermediary 
activities from a macroprudential perspective. Efforts to reduce gaps 
between the risk assessment framework for NBFEs and the banking 
system are on-going.    
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
16.  Implementation  of  the  reforms  is  challenging.  Of  importance,  is 
ensuring  that  the  implementation  of  the  regulatory  reforms  does 
not  impair  the  ongoing  economic  recovery  process  and  that 
resilience of the banking system is preserved. 
4 of 6 
17.  We noted several challenges need to be address. First, with regards 
to  BCBS  review  of  the  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign 
risk. We underline the need to undertake due consideration on the 
important  role  of  sovereign  debt  in  monetary  operation,  the 
financial market and economic development financing, especially in 
emerging  economies.  A  one-size-fits-all  approach  may  not  be 
suitable due to different sovereign instrument and financial market 
characteristics among regions.  
18.  Second, revision on the standardized approach for credit risk 
and  market  risk.  BCBS  is  working  on  revising  the  standardized 
approaches for credit risk and has revised the framework for market 
risk  to  enhance  robustness  and  risk  sensitivity  of  both  framework. 
Consequently, the standardized approach will be more granular and 
complex.  On  the  other  hand,  Indonesian  banks  mostly  engage  in 
traditional banking activities. Hence, regulators and the industry will 
need to adjust their skills and information system accordingly. 
19.  Last  but  not  least,  as  a  number  of  regulatory  reforms  are 
finalized, member jurisdictions including Indonesia are expected to 
implement  these  reforms  expeditiously  according  to  the  commited 
time  line.  Given  limited  resources,  authorities  will  need  to 
strengthen coordination to ensure full and timely implementation.  
  Ladies and Gentlemen,  
20.  I  have  no  doubt  the  12th  Asia-Pacific  High  Level  Meeting  on 
Banking Supervision  will be fruitful  as  we have  an excellent line of 
speakers,  who  will  be  deliberating  current  and  critical  issues  in 
Supervision and Banking in this post crisis era.  
21.  I believe there is no right or wrong when discussing frameworks for 
effective  supervision  and  banking  regulation.  The  effectiveness  of 
the agreed standards depends on many aspects and that there is no 
5 of 6 
one-size-fits-all  approach.  As  many  have  said:  “Economics  is  the 
only field in which two people can get a Nobel Prize for saying the 
opposite thing” is true. 
22.  Before I close my welcome address, allow me to offer my warmest 
welcome to you all and express my deepest gratitude to your visit. I 
hope  you  will  make  the  most  of  your  stay  in  Bali    and  take  home 
with you warm memories of your visit.  
23.  I would also like to remind you that Indonesia will be hosting IMF – 
World Bank Annual Meeting on October 2018 in this beautiful island 
of Bali. I would like to invite you to visit Bali, not only to attend the 
workshops,  but  also  to  participate  in  a  series  of  activities  in 
connection to the Annual meeting. Please save the date, and mark 
your agenda.  
Thank You. 
6 of 6 
