Peter  Praet:  Europe’s  economic  recovery  and  implications  for
monetary policy
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the International Conference of Commercial Bank Economists (ICCBE) in France, Paris, 6 July
2017.
 Since June 2014, the ECB has introduced a range of unconventional measures, alongside our
conventional  ones,  in  pursuit  of  its  price  stability  objective.  Together,  these  measures  have
proved to be extremely effective in preventing a period of disinflation from spiralling into one of
deflation. Nearly three years on, the risks of deflation have vanished and the transmission of our
policy measures to the real economy is clearly evidenced by the recovery, which has gathered
some further momentum recently.
Before turning to price developments and monetary policy, let me say a bit more about the latest
economic developments in the euro area.
The solid upswing continues to broaden across sectors and countries. Real GDP in the euro
area has expanded for 16 consecutive quarters, growing by 1.9% year-on-year during the first
quarter of 2017, according to Eurostat. This compares with the latest potential growth estimates
1
for the euro area of just over 1%.
Moreover,  recent  survey  data  point  to  a  strong  start  to  the  second  quarter.  For  example,  the
composite output Purchasing Managers’ Index – which is strongly correlated with growth in the
euro  area  –  remains  close  to  six-year  highs  in  June.  The  forward-looking  components  of  the
survey continue to point to growth in the quarters ahead. Moreover, economic sentiment is at its
highest 
to  June
2
2017.  Unemployment is at its lowest level in eight years. Looking ahead, the latest Eurosystem
staff macroeconomic projections point to a continued economic expansion at a somewhat faster
pace than previously expected.
in  nearly  a  decade  and  has 
increased  notably 
from  May 
level 
The breadth of the economic recovery is also notable. The dispersion of growth rates across
both  countries  and  sectors  is  at  its  lowest  level  in  two  decades,  reflecting  a  convergence  of
growth rates around higher levels. This is reassuring for the growth outlook because recoveries
tend  to  be  firmer  and  more  robust  when  they  are  broad-based.  It’s  a  similar  picture  for
employment,  with  dispersion  of  employment  growth  rates  across  euro  area  countries  at  its
lowest level on record.
The increasingly solid cyclical recovery reflects the success of our monetary policy measures,
which  have  worked  their  way  through  the  financial  system  and  led  to  a  significant  easing  of
financing conditions for consumers and firms. Together with improving financial and non-financial
sector balance sheets, this has strengthened credit dynamics and supported domestic demand.
Since  June  2014,  bank  lending  rates  for  euro  area  non-financial  corporations  have  fallen  by
almost  120  basis  points  and  for  households  (for  house  purchase)  by  over  100  basis  points.
Lending  rates  for  very  small  loans,  which  can  be  taken  as  a  proxy  for  loans  to  small  and
medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs),  have  declined  by  almost  190  basis  points.  The  significant
improvement in funding conditions for SMEs is especially encouraging as they provide two-thirds
of  total  private  sector  employment  in  the  euro  area.  Heterogeneity  of  lending  rates  across
countries  has  also  fallen  sharply,  indicating  that  our  non-standard  measures  have  been
particularly  effective  in  counteracting  bank  funding  and  financial  fragmentation  in  some
jurisdictions. For example, the difference between the average lending rate for firms in countries
that were severely affected by the crisis versus other countries has narrowed by about 100 basis
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
points over this three-year period.
3
The sharp reduction in bank lending rates has been accompanied by easier access to funding,
as  recent  surveys  have  shown.   These  positive  developments  have  been  supported  by  the
second  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  as  a  result  of  which  banks  are
passing on the favourable funding conditions to their customers.  Moreover, these improvements
are not limited to interest rates: bank lending volumes have also been gradually recovering since
early 2014. According to the latest Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises, covering the
period  from  October  2016  to  March  2017,  euro  area  small  and  medium-enterprises  have
continued  to  signal  improvements  in  the  availability  of  bank  loans.  Market-based  funding
conditions,  too,  have  improved  significantly  in  response  to  the  corporate  sector  purchase
programme launched in June 2016.
4
The easing of financing conditions has underpinned the recovery in domestic demand, which is
now the mainstay of growth in the euro area. As the unemployment rate continues to decline
despite  a  rise  in  labour  force  participation,  households’  real  disposable  income  is  improving.
Given the broadly stable savings rate, increased labour income is translating into higher private
consumption expenditure. Business investment is also picking up as a result of the favourable
financing conditions, the need to modernise the capital stock after years of subdued investment
and strengthening corporate profitability.
From  today’s  point  of  view,  there  are  signs  of  a  stronger  global  recovery  and  a  pick-up  in
international  trade.  The  continued  global  economic  upswing  across  regions  should  further
support the euro area recovery.
As for price developments, after hovering at levels well below 1% for three years, with occasional
dips into negative territory, euro area headline inflation has again edged higher towards the end of
last  year.  Headline  inflation  –  slightly  down  from  May  –  stands  at  1.3%  in  June,  according  to
Eurostat’s  flash  estimate.  The  decrease  mainly  reflects  a  decline  in  energy  inflation  and  to  a
smaller extent, food inflation, which more than offset an increase in HICP inflation excluding food
and energy. Underlying inflation – which relates more to domestic price pressures – continues to
remain subdued, as unutilised resources still weigh on wage and price growth. In fact, the annual
rate of HICP inflation excluding food and energy has mostly remained below, or around, 1% since
late 2013.
Today,  an  important  element  keeping  underlying  price  pressures  subdued  is  muted  wage
dynamics,  which  are  shaped  by  many  factors.  Besides  weak  productivity  developments,  the
significant  degree  of  remaining  labour  market  slack  acts  to  contain  wage  growth.  When
assessing slack, it can prove useful to also look at broader measures than the unemployment
rate. The so-called “U6 measure” captures unemployment, underemployment (meaning workers
who would like to work more hours) and marginal attachment, namely those workers that are not
competing very actively in the labour market, e.g. because they are not available to start a new
job on short notice. This measure currently covers 18% of the labour force in the euro area, and
is thus considerably higher than the unemployment rate.  Furthermore, the process of setting
wages is to some extent backward-looking in a number of euro area countries, reflecting formal
6
and informal indexation mechanisms.
5
Overall, we are certainly seeing a firming, broadening and more resilient economic recovery. The
economic upturn seems to have gathered some further momentum. Real activity is expanding
more  strongly  than  previously  expected  and  risks  to  the  growth  outlook  are  now  broadly
balanced. This clearly puts our confidence in the recovery on a stronger footing and has made
very adverse scenarios for the inflation outlook less likely, in particular as deflation risks have
largely  vanished.  As  a  consequence  of  this  change  in  the  risk  assessment,  the  Governing
Council  decided  to  remove  its  reference  to  lower  interest  rates  from  its  forward  guidance  on
policy rates at the meeting in June.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
As the economic prospects brighten, higher expected returns on business investment will make
borrowing conditions increasingly attractive. This, as in our plans, will reinforce accommodation
and make sure that inflation convergence develops strong foundations.
But our mission is not yet accomplished. We need patience and persistence. We need to be
patient,  because  inflation  convergence  needs  more  time  to  show  through  convincingly  in  the
data. The euro area’s economic environment is improving, and the negative tail risks to inflation
expectations, which were so visible at the start of our asset purchase program, have virtually
disappeared. This strengthens our confidence that headline inflation will gradually move towards
the  Governing  Council’s  objective  of  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  But
measured  inflation  remains  exceedingly  volatile  and  metrics  of  underlying  price  pressures
continue to be subdued. The entire distribution of inflation expectations still needs to shift a fair
distance to the right.
We  need  to  be  persistent,  because  the  baseline  scenario  for  inflation  going  forward  remains
crucially contingent on very easy financing conditions which, to a large extent, depend on the
current accommodative monetary policy stance.
Therefore, maintaining a steady hand continues to be critical to fostering a durable convergence
of inflation toward our monetary policy aim.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See, for example, European Commission, European Economic Forecast, Spring 2017.
 See, European Commission, business and consumer survey results, June 2017.
 See the ECB’s euro area bank lending survey, April 2017, and the ECB’s Survey on the Access to Finance of
Enterprises in the euro area, October 2016 to March 2017.
  For  more  details  on  the  impact  of  the  TLTROs,  see  “The  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations:  an
overview of the take-up and their impact on bank intermediation”, Economic Bulleting, Issue 3, Box 5, ECB,
2017.
 See ECB (2017), “Assessing labour market slack”, Box 3, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3.
 For further discussion, see “Recent wage trends in the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, Box 2, ECB
2016.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
