Mario Draghi: Sustaining openness in a dynamic global economy
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium "Fostering a Dynamic Global Recovery", Jackson
Hole, Wyoming, 25 August 2017.
 The global recovery is firming up. In some countries like the United States, this process has been
visible for some years, in others like Europe and Japan, the consolidation of the recovery is at an
earlier stage. So it is fitting that our discussions are now focusing not only on how to stabilise the
economy, but also on how to make it more dynamic – while at the same time improving people’s
welfare. At the centre of this debate is the question of how to raise potential output growth, which
1
has slowed from around 2% in OECD countries in 2000 to around 1% today.
Without stronger potential growth, the cyclical recovery we are now seeing globally will ultimately
converge downwards to those slower growth rates. Slower growth will in turn make it harder to
work through the debt and demographic challenges facing many advanced economies.
With  the  population  growth  rate  in  those  economies  projected  to  slow,  the  burden  of  raising
potential growth must fall on productivity. There are a number of areas in which domestic policies
can  encourage  an  upward  shift  in  productivity  growth,  such  as  competition,  research  and
development, and insolvency regimes.
But when thinking about the global economy, one of the key ingredients for raising productivity is
openness.  Open  trade,  investment  and  financial  flows  play  a  key  role  in  the  diffusion  of  new
technologies across borders that drive forward efficiency improvements.
The social consensus on open markets has, however, been weakening in recent years. This is
driven not so much by a belief that open markets no longer create wealth, but by the perception
that the collateral effects of openness outweigh its benefits. People are concerned about whether
openness is fair, whether it is safe and whether it is equitable.
As Karl Polanyi observed many years ago, if the dislocation created by an open market goes
2
beyond a certain point, protectionism is society’s natural response.
So a central element of efforts to raise productivity growth – and build a dynamic global economy
– must involve responding to these concerns about openness. And this is a feat countries cannot
accomplish by themselves. Although domestic welfare policies are, of course, essential to the
task, a commitment to working together through multilateral institutions is just as important.
This is because fears about fairness, safety and equity ultimately reflect a lack of trust in other
countries’ regulation and enforcement. One of the main reasons why multilateral institutions exist
3
is to create regulatory convergence, and therefore to increase trust between countries.
And  perhaps  the  most  important  area  where  this  applies  today  is  global  financial  sector
regulation.
Openness as the key to a dynamic global economy
One of the key questions facing the global economy is whether the trend towards ever greater
economic openness, which has defined the last three decades, is coming to an end. Temporary
trade barriers have indeed risen from covering around 1% of products in 2000 to more than 2.5%
4
today, with the crisis accelerating this pattern. The same is true of anti-dumping actions.
That  said,  at  the  global  level  openness  is  still  viewed  favourably;  three-quarters  of  people
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
consider growing trade and business ties with other countries to be a positive trend. But those
5
polled in rich countries are more negative than in the pre-crisis period.
Given the established gains of trade, this is plainly a concerning trend for the global economy.
International trade results in a more efficient use of production factors and in specialisation where
6
comparative advantage exists, thereby raising productivity growth.
And  welfare  gains  from  trade  for  firms  and  consumers  follow  from  the  wider  availability  of
7
cheaper and better quality products.
Moreover,  for  advanced  economies  the  importance  of  trade  may  actually  be  growing.  As
economies  converge  towards  the  global  technological  frontier,  innovation  becomes  more
important for sustained productivity growth. And as OECD research has shown, openness to
8
trade is a crucial factor in enabling an economy to benefit from frontier innovation. 
According to OECD estimates, in the case of a 2% acceleration in multi-factor productivity (MFP)
growth in a frontier economy, the productivity spillover will be 0.3 percentage points higher for a
country  that  trades  intensively  with  the  frontier  economy  than  for  one  which  trades  less
intensively.  To  put  this  in  context,  MFP  growth  has  averaged  only  around  0.5%  in  OECD
9
countries since 2000.
Thus a turn towards protectionism would pose a serious risk for continued productivity growth
and potential growth in the global economy. And this risk is particularly acute in the light of the
structural challenges facing advanced economies.
Old-age dependency ratios are rising, putting more pressure on public finances. By 2025 there
will be 35 people aged 65 and over for every 100 persons of working age in OECD countries,
compared with 14 in 1950.
10
At the same time, public debt levels have surged in those countries from 56% of GDP in 2007 to
around 87% today.
 Only higher potential growth can provide a lasting solution.
11
So, clearly, to foster a dynamic global economy we need to resist protectionist urges. But to do
so, we also need to identify how best to respond to protectionism.
The role of multilateral cooperation in making openness sustainable
Much has been written over the past few years about the negative effects of free trade and the
need to pay more attention to those who benefit less from it. The debate has typically focused on
the extent to which welfare policies can be used to share the gains of trade more evenly.
Though this is a complex issue,
 I have no doubt that making better use of public policies to
support the more vulnerable members of society, not just financially but also through education
and retraining, is a vital part of the equation. More work needs to be done in this area and it is
important to learn from best policy practices.
12
But the other key question is: how can we work together to make openness sustainable? What
role can multilateral cooperation play towards this goal? This is the angle I would like to address
today. Its importance becomes clear when one thinks about the three main areas of concern that
people have about open markets that I mentioned earlier.
First, there is the concern about whether openness is fair – i.e. whether all are playing by the
same  rules  and  applying  the  same  standards.  This  manifests  itself  in  fears  about  currency
manipulation by trading partners, dumping practices and lack of reciprocal market access.
Second, there is the concern about whether openness is safe – i.e. whether it exposes people to
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
harmful spillovers from abroad. This is perhaps most visible, at least for economists, in the case
of  cross-border  capital  flows ,  but  it  also  applies  in  areas  such  as  agriculture  and
biotechnology.
13
Third,  there  is  the  concern  about  whether  openness  is equitable  –  that  is,  whether  it
disproportionately benefits some groups in society over others. Though it is not straightforward to
14
disentangle the effects of trade and technology on inequality – and they may in fact be linked –
the perception that openness contributes to inequality has become more widespread.
In each case, multilateral cooperation, leading to regulatory convergence, is a precondition for
addressing the underlying causes of these concerns. To demonstrate this, let me draw on our
experience of managing openness within the European Union.
15
As  regards fairness,  the  point  is  obvious:  regulatory  convergence  provides  the  strongest
assurance  that  the  playing  field  is  level  right  across  the  European  market.  This  is  why,  as
borders  have  opened  within  Europe,  common  supranational  powers  of  legislation  and
enforcement have strengthened in parallel.
For  example,  the  Single  European  Act  in  1986  not  only  launched  the  single  market,  it  also
substantially extended the powers of the EU to make laws, the role of the European courts to rule
on them, and the powers of the Commission to execute them. The logic was that a single market
could only be sustainable over time if all participants could be certain that they faced the same
rules, and had recourse to the same courts in the case of infractions.
Despite  the  political  events  of  last  year,  this  symmetry  between  regulatory  convergence  and
market  deepening  has,  by  and  large,  been  a  success.  In  fact,  the  free  movement  of  people,
goods and services within Europe is regularly mentioned in polls as one of the two most positive
aspects of the EU, the other being peace among its Member States.
16
Similarly,  what  has  permitted  the  Single  Market  to  survive  various  financial  and  consumer
protection  crises  is  its  ability  to  restore safety  by  adapting  market-wide  regulation  and
enforcement.
To give an illustration, the internal market for frozen foods overcame the mis-selling scandal of
2013, when horsemeat was sold as beef, in large part because it was met with an improved food
labelling  and  EU-wide  inspection  regime  that  restored  trust.  By  contrast,  a  perceived  lack  of
regulatory convergence between the EU and other countries, especially regarding food safety, is
one reason for opposition to preferential trade agreements, such as the TTIP.
More fundamentally, following the sovereign debt crisis, the euro area experienced first-hand the
risks of a diverging supervisory and regulatory framework for cross-border finance – and faced a
serious threat of financial market fragmentation when those flows reversed. Safety was restored
by elevating supervision and resolution to the European level with the banking union. This was
key to re-establishing trust in the banking system and reviving cross-border capital flows within
Europe. These are only the first steps, but the direction of travel has been drawn.
When it comes to the effects of openness on equity, it is admittedly less obvious how multilateral
cooperation represents a solution to the fears being expressed. As I said, such fears typically
have  to  be  addressed  by  national  distributional  policies.  But  there  is  also  an  important
international dimension, in particular related to tax avoidance.
Indeed, the problem many have with openness is not just that it redistributes income between
different  social  groups.  Almost  everything  that  happens  in  a  market  economy  –  skill-biased
innovation,  churning  of  firms  –  redistributes  income  in  some  way,  and  we  have  in  place
mechanisms to deal with those outcomes, such as tax systems.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Where trade may differ from these other market forces, however, is in the perception that, in
Dani Rodrik’s words, it “undercuts the social bargains struck within a nation and embedded in its
laws and regulations”.
17
For example, increasing openness to trade and finance is perceived by some to shift the burden
of taxation from footloose capital to labour, or to create pressures to reduce labour protections to
boost the competitiveness of domestic producers – the “race to the bottom”.
Such  perceptions,  and  the  sense  of  injustice  they  fuel,  are  deeply  damaging  to  public  faith  in
open markets – and this is where multilateral solutions can play a role.
Addressing  tax  arbitrage  between  jurisdictions,  for  instance,  can  clearly  best  be  achieved  by
countries cooperating via international institutions. Likewise, taking a stand against race-to-the-
bottom  dynamics  that  threaten  labour  protections,  calls  for  a  common  regulatory  approach.
Again,  our  experience  in  Europe  offers  some  insights  into  how  this  can  work,  as  well  as  into
some of the difficulties involved.
Thanks to its common legal framework, the EU has successfully upheld labour standards even
as  its  market  has  expanded  to  lower-income  countries.  The  Single  Market  has  no  doubt
prompted  some  relocation  of  jobs  across  countries,  and  this  has  at  times  triggered  fears  of
“social dumping”.
 But in fact openness has not fundamentally challenged labour protections.
18
One main reason for this is that safeguards central to the European social model have been
progressively  embedded  in  European  law,  ensuring  gradual  convergence  in  labour  standards
among EU countries. Thus, while there is still heterogeneity, the gap between them is narrowing.
Preferences about the degree and type of social and labour protection differ across the world,
and I am not claiming that those in the EU should be a model for everybody. The point here is
that through multilateral decision-making, the EU has successfully built and defended the single
market, addressing the perception that openness is always a source of inequality.
At the same time, in areas where unanimous decision-making is more prevalent, Europe has not
always used the potential of its multilateral structure to the same extent. This is the case, for
instance,  in  combatting  profit-shifting  and  tax  avoidance,  although  progress  is  now  being
made,
 which clearly chimes with the mood of EU citizens.
19
20
In short, there are certain concerns about equity that can most effectively – and perhaps only –
be addressed through multilateral actions. As such, in tandem with well-targeted welfare policies,
they are a key part of the policy toolbox for making openness sustainable.
Implications for the global economy
Clearly,  the  European  model  involves  several  unique  features.  In  particular,  it  depends  on  a
relatively  advanced  political  structure  that  helps  reconcile  multilateral  cooperation  with
democratic control, which is difficult to replicate elsewhere. Still, EU countries are generally more
open  than  other  advanced  economies  and  perhaps  have  fewer  problems  of  skewed  income
distribution.
21
So what lessons can we draw for the global economy from our experience?
The  most  salient  is  that,  at  a  time  when  disaffection  with  openness  is  growing,  multilateral
institutions  become more,  not  less  important.  They  provide  the  best  platform  to  address
concerns about openness without sacrificing open markets.
So organisations like the WTO, which make sure that trade is governed by rules and is subject to
fair arbitration, remain vital to ensuring that global trade is perceived as fair and safe – while at
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the same time avoiding protectionism in disguise. And bodies that foster global cooperation, such
as  the  G20,  remain  just  as  necessary  to  reconcile  openness  with  equity.  The  OECD/G20
initiative to combat tax base erosion and profit-shifting is just one example of such cooperation.
That said – and going by our experience in Europe – the area where we need a special focus
today  is  cross-border  finance.  Organisations  that  facilitate  convergence  in  financial  regulation
and supervision, such as the Financial Stability Board and the Basel committees, are key in this
context.
Within  these  committees,  a  substantial  amount  of  work  has  been  done  since  the  crisis  to
strengthen microprudential regulation, as well as to design and calibrate macroprudential tools.
This work has been essential for at least three reasons.
The first reason is that finance is the most mobile production factor, and therefore the most likely
to cause dangerous spillovers. This makes convergence in financial regulation one of the most
important components of a sustainable open economy.
And  we  should  remember  that  diverging  financial  regulation  would  endanger  not  only  financial
openness, but also global trade, since they are often two sides of the same coin: finance and
trade  are  complementary  in  spreading  knowledge  and  underpinning  global  value  chains.  A
striking feature of the global financial crisis was indeed the collapse in world trade: between the
third  quarter  of  2008  and  the  second  quarter  of  2009  global  trade  volumes  declined  by
approximately 15%.
The second reason is that we have only recently witnessed the dangers of financial openness
combined  with  insufficient  regulation.  International  financial  flows  both  contributed  to  and
propagated the global financial crisis and the ensuing collapse of trade, output and employment.
Financial integration only survived relatively unscathed because the global regulatory response
was swift and decisive, creating a financial system that posed fewer risks to the world economy.
Any reversal would call into question whether the lessons of the crisis have indeed been learnt –
and thus whether financial integration can still be considered safe.
Third,  financial  regulation  interacts  critically  with  monetary  policy.  Lax  regulation  implies  an
underestimation by regulators of incentives which lead to behaviour that is individually profitable,
but socially costly. Given the large collective costs that we have observed, there is never a good
time for lax regulation. But there are times when it is especially inopportune.
Specifically,  when  monetary  policy  is  accommodative,  lax  regulation  runs  the  risk  of  stoking
financial imbalances. By contrast, the stronger regulatory regime that we have now has enabled
economies to endure a long period of low interest rates without any significant side-effects on
financial stability , which has been crucial for stabilising demand and inflation worldwide.
22
With  monetary  policy  globally  very  expansionary,  regulators  should  be  wary  of  rekindling  the
incentives that led to the crisis.
To  design  and  agree,  in  reciprocal  trust,  a  regulation  that  preserves  financial  stability  without
unnecessarily  restricting  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy,  while  revisiting  the  post-crisis
regulatory framework where necessary, the FSB and the Basel committees remain essential.
This  is  also  because,  for  large  economies,  changes  in  domestic  regulation  have  international
consequences.  Global  financial  conditions  account  for  20–40%  of  the  variation  in  countries’
domestic financial conditions, as shown by recent research from the IMF.
Conclusion
23
Let me conclude.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
To inject more dynamism into the global economy we need to raise potential output growth, and
to do so with ageing societies we need to lift productivity growth. For advanced economies that
are close to the technological frontier, this depends crucially on openness to trade.
Yet  openness  to  trade  is  under  threat,  and  this  means  that  policies  aimed  at  answering  this
backlash are a vital part of the policy mix for dynamic growth. Some of those policies can be
implemented  domestically,  but  some  can  only  be  effectively  enacted  through  multilateral
cooperation.
Multilateral  cooperation  is  crucial  in  responding  to  concerns  about  fairness,  safety  and  also
equity.  By  encouraging  regulatory  convergence,  it  helps  protect  people  from  the  unwelcome
consequences of openness. And protection ensures that we do not lapse into protectionism over
time.
The European experience provides some insights into the opportunities and challenges involved.
It also shows the importance of ensuring that, at all times, openness remains under democratic
control.  Multilateral  institutions  are  necessarily  staffed  by  experts.  But  it  is  essential  that  they
always remain accountable to elected representatives who set the parameters and have the final
say.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Per capita potential output growth, OECD data.
Polanyi, K. (1944), The Great Transformation.
See, for example, Williamson, O. (1996), The Mechanisms of Governance.
Bown,  C.P.  (2016), Global  Antidumping  Database,  The  World  Bank;  World  Bank  Temporary  Trade  Barriers
Database.
Pew Research Center (2014), “Faith and Skepticism about Trade, Foreign Investment”, September. However, a
Pew Research Center poll released in August 2017 found that, in the context of immigration, 68% of Americans
believe that “America’s openness to people from all over the world is essential to who we are as a nation”.
he most recent review in the literature has been published by the IMF and confirms that international trade
improves  welfare  and  strengthens  economic  growth.  See  IMF  (2016),  “Global  Trade:  What’s  behind  the
slowdown?”, World Economic Outlook, Chapter 2, October.
For  more  information  on  this  topic,  see  Helpman  and  Krugman  (1985),  Grossman  and  Helpman  (1991),
Melitz(2003), Broda and Weinstein (2006), Melitz and Ottaviano, (2007), Antoniades (2015).
Saia, A., Andrews, D. and Albrizio, S. (2015), “Productivity Spillovers from the Global Frontier and Public Policy:
Industry-Level Evidence”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No 128.
OECD data, unweighted average.
OECD (2015), Pensions at a Glance 2015: OECD and G20 indicators, OECD Publishing, Paris.
OECD data, unweighted average.
See, for example, Antràs, P., de Gortari, A. and Itskhoki, O. (forthcoming), “ Globalization, Inequality and Welfare”,
Journal of International Economics.
Broner,  F.  and  Ventura,  J.  (2016),  “Rethinking  the  Effects  of  Financial  Globalisation”,  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics, Vol. 131, Issue 3.
For a review see Pavcnik, N. (2011), “Globalization and within-country income inequality”, in Bacchetta, M. and M.
Jansen 
(eds), Making  Globalization  Sustainable,  International  Labour  Organization  and  World  Trade
Organisation.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “Sustainable Globalisation: Lessons from Europe”, speech at the special public event
“25 Years after Maastricht: The Future of Money and Finance in Europe”, Maastricht, 16 February 2017.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
See, for example, Eurobarometer Spring 2017.
For a more extensive discussion of this point see Rodrik, D. (2017), “It’s Time to Think for Yourself on Free
Trade”, Foreign Policy, 27 January.
See, for example, the ongoing debate on the Posted Workers Directive.
European Commission (2016), “Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the
Council  –  Anti  Tax  Avoidance  Package:  Next  Steps  towards  delivering  effective  taxation  and  greater  tax
transparency in the EU”, Commission Staff Working Document, COM(2016) 23 final.
74% of EU citizens believe the EU should take more action in the field of fighting tax fraud. See Eurobarometer
Spring 2017.
See Wang, C., K. Caminada and K. Goudswaard (2014), “Income redistribution in 20 countries over time”,
International Journal of Social Welfare, Vol. 23, Issue 3.
See Draghi, M. (2017), “The interaction between monetary policy and financial stability in the euro area”, speech
at  the  First  Conference  on  Financial  Stability  organised  by  the  Banco  de  España  and  Centro  de  Estudios
Monetarios y Financieros, Madrid, 24 May.
IMF (2017), “Are Countries Losing Control of Domestic Financial Conditions?”, Global Financial Stability Report,
Chapter 3, April. 
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
