   Executive Management Department 
An  address  by  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Governor  of  the  South 
African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  launch  of  the  MPC  Schools 
Challenge, Pretoria 
21 July 2017 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen 
 Decisions whether to cut, increase, or keep interest rates unchanged are of enormous 
importance to the economy general, and they affect most people, either directly or 
indirectly. This often raises the question: how do central banks make these decisions, 
and specifically, what factors do they take into account in making these decisions.  
One of the channels that many central banks use to explain how they make these 
decisions and what factors they take into  account is  to run a  competition for high 
school  learners.  Typically,  these  competitions  involve  a  group  of  learners  forming 
themselves  into  a  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  making  a  case  either  to  cut, 
increase, or keep interest rates unchanged. 
The South African Reserve Bank began a pilot in 2012 in partnership with the Gauteng 
Department of Education to: 
  Offer learners the opportunity to enhance their understanding of monetary 
policy and how it relates to the economy as a whole; 
  Help learners understand better how the economy works; 
  Assist  learners  to  better  understand  how  the  SARB’s  Monetary  Policy 
Committee makes decisions; 
  Improve broad economic literacy in the country; 
  Create an opportunity for learners to put the classroom economic theory into 
practice and thereby enhancing their understanding of economics; 
  Stimulate interest among learners in a career as an economist; and  
  Raise  awareness  and  understanding  of  the  role  and  responsibilities  of  the 
SARB.    
 1 
  The MPC Schools Challenge has since been expanded to cover 7 provinces. We have 
also  since  partnered  with  the  Department  of  Basic  Education  and  the  provincial 
departments.  We  have  had  450  schools  participate  in  the  challenge  since  2012, 
involving 1 340 learners. By participation we mean schools whose team submitted an 
essay. 
A requirement of the programme is that participants take a combination of economics 
and mathematics subjects, excluding maths literacy. Certain schools therefore do not 
qualify as they do not provide this learning combination.  
Next year, the challenge will become national with the addition of KwaZulu-Natal and 
the Western Cape provinces. Hence, today’s launch of the MPC Schools Challenge. 
The way the competition works is that each school must constitute a team of four 
learners who model themselves on the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). The team 
presents its case to a panel of SA Reserve Bank economists. Representatives of the 
Department of Basic Education moderate the outcome. To ensure that all entrants 
have  access  to  the  same  basic  data,  the  SARB  provides  learners  with  relevant 
economic data. 
Accessing data is perhaps the easy part. The first hurdle is deciding how the outlook 
for  domestic  and  global  economy  impacts  on  future  inflation.  To  clear  this  hurdle 
requires the team to interpret current economic conditions and events, and to apply 
judgement about the likely future path of the economy. There are many factors that 
the team must consider, and they are often moving in different directions, making 
judgment on how they will affect future inflation that much more difficult. At the end 
of it all, committees rely on judgement in making the call whether to cut, increase, or 
keep interest rates unchanged.  
Monetary policy decisions in the SARB are made by the Monetary Policy Committee 
(MPC).  The  MPC  currently  comprises  six  members,  being  the  Governor,  the  three 
Deputy Governors, and two other senior officials of the SARB.  
Every decision of the MPC is an outcome of in-depth discussion and debate. Even a 
'no change' decision is a policy decision. I should also note that the monetary policy 
decision is not a one-off event; it is a continuous process which culminates in the MPC 
meeting where decisions are finally taken. We are constantly talking to each other, 
discussing what we see and how we interpret what we see.  
 2 
There is a sizeable literature on the relative efficiency of committee-based decision 
making. A committee tends to pool information and ideas from a group comprising 
different skills and views, and it also provides insurance against extreme preferences 
and outcomes.  
So,  there  is  an  additional  benefit  that  participation  in  the  MPC  Schools  Challenge 
potentially  offers  learners.  And  that  is  that  those  learners  get  an  opportunity  to 
develop  or  put  their  social  skills  into  practice.  By  social  skills  I  mean  the  ability  to 
interact with fellow human beings. Literature shows that the ability to interact with 
fellow workers, successfully working as a team remains among the most important 
skills  in  the  modern  economy.  This  is  because  technology  has  yet  to  successfully 
simulate human interaction. 
The ability to listen to the views of your colleagues, question or debate the issues they 
raise  and  attempt  to  persuade  them  otherwise  has  a  broad  societal  benefit,  way 
beyond application in policymaking. In that sense, the ability to engage with the ideas 
of fellow workers and collaborate with them will, for a long time to come, remain one 
of the prized skills by employers. 
The  MPC  Schools  Challenge  is  therefore  a  contribution  by  the  SA  Reserve  Bank 
towards improving the understanding by young South Africans of how the economy 
works,  why  high  inflation  is  bad  for  an  economy  and  how  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee makes decisions. 
Thank you 
   3 
