Øystein  Olsen:  Management  of  the  Government  Pension  Fund
Global
Introductory statement by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway),
before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of the Storting, Oslo, 2 May
2017.
 In  2016,  it  was  20  years  since  the  Ministry  of  Finance  made  the  first  capital  transfer  to  the
Government  Petroleum  Fund,  as  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  (GPFG)  was  aptly
named at the time. This transfer marked the start of a transformation of petroleum wealth in the
form of oil and gas in the ground into financial assets invested outside Norway.
Since the first capital transfer was made, the GPFG has grown considerably, to more than 2.5
times the size of GDP. The year 2016 also saw the first net withdrawal from the GPFG. Ahead,
the value of the GPFG will therefore, to a greater extent than previously, depend on the return on
the fund’s investments. The period of steady growth in the GPFG as a share of the economy is
now probably over.
The key variables determining the GPFG’s long-term performance have been specified by the
Ministry of Finance and approved by the Storting. For its part, Norges Bank has developed its
management  assignment  in  accordance  with  the  fund’s  growth  and  in  line  with  the  owner’s
mandate.  At  the  same  time,  Norges  Bank  has  focused  on  its  role  as  advisor  in  the  further
development  of  the  fund’s  investment  strategy.  In  2016,  the  Executive  Board’s  capacity  was
strengthened by the appointment of a second deputy governor and an increase in the number of
board members.
At the end of 2016, the cumulative value of transfers to the GPFG was approximately equal to the
cumulative return on the fund, reflecting the fund’s solid performance over time. Last year, the
return on the GPFG was 6.9 percent.  Over the period since inception, the return has averaged
5.7 percent. Adjusting for inflation and management costs, this gives an average real return of
3.8 percent. Developments in international financial markets and the growth outlook for the global
economy suggest that the expected real return ahead will be somewhat lower than has been the
case in recent years.
1
The GPFG closely tracks the benchmark index; it is invested across a broad range of countries
and  markets.  This  strategy  has  so  far  generated  a  solid  return  within  the  defined  risk  limits.
Restrictions imposed on the fund’s scope for investment, or instructions that disregard the trade-
off between return and risk, will limit the fund’s potential to achieve solid performance over time.
In the execution of our management assignment, it is important that Norges Bank’s role is that of
financial investor. It is crucial to the GPFG’s reputation in investee countries that the fund is not
perceived as a political instrument.
Norges Bank aims to be at the forefront of global efforts in the area of responsible investment.
Responsible investment is an integral part of the investment strategy and includes the exclusion
of companies on an ethical basis. In 2016, the Ministry of Finance, at the request of the Storting,
introduced two new criteria for ethics-based exclusions: a climate criterion and a coal criterion.
Norges Bank has conducted extensive research to collect data and perform analyses to identify
the  companies  that  fall  under  the  coal  criterion.  Based  on  the  results,  the  Executive  Board
decided to exclude 69 companies and place 13 companies under observation in 2016. On the
advice of the Council on Ethics, the Board also decided to exclude a further eight companies and
place one company under observation, while the exclusion of one company was revoked. The
exchange of information and division of responsibilities between Norges Bank and the Council on
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ethics functions smoothly.
At  the  end  of  2016,  Norges  Bank  submitted  a  recommendation  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  to
increase the share of equities in the GPFG. Historically, equities have generated a higher return
than bonds, but the return has also been more volatile. A lower return on bonds is the price we
pay  to  dampen  fluctuations  in  the  fund’s  value.  In  recent  years,  bonds  have  become  a  more
efficient, but also more costly, hedge against security market volatility. Both factors suggest that
the  bond  allocation  should  be  somewhat  lower.  In  addition,  Norway’s  petroleum  wealth  as  a
whole has become more diversified over the past ten years. The share of oil and gas resources
still  in  the  ground  has  decreased  considerably.  This  means  we  can  tolerate  slightly  higher
volatility in our financial wealth.
The  GPFG  is  managed  on  behalf  of  the  Norwegian  people.  Good  governance,  control  and
transparency with regard to the management of the fund are important democratic principles. A
broad  set  of  reports  on  the  GPFG’s  performance  and  operations  are  published  on  a  regular
basis.
Through  2016,  Norges  Bank  worked  on  preparing  its  strategy  for  2017–2019,  including  the
strategy for the management of the Government Pension Fund Global. The strategic plan builds
on the main elements of the plan for the previous period. We will continue to place emphasis on
our role as a long-term, professional owner with in-depth knowledge about the largest companies
and to actively contribute to the development of international standards and principles. As from
2017, the level and composition of the GPFG’s real estate investments will be decided by Norges
Bank’s Executive Board.
Norges  Bank  is  committed  to  performing  its  investment  management  assignment  in  a  cost-
efficient manner, taking advantage of the fund’s unique characteristics. The goal is to achieve the
highest possible return within the framework of the investment management mandate.
1
Return before management costs and measured in terms of the fund’s currency basket.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
