 The Bank of Korea 
  Opening Remarks at 
IARIW-BOK Special Conference 
  April 26, 2017 
Juyeol Lee 
Governor 
The Bank of Korea 
    Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen! 
   I am very delighted to welcome you all today to this conference, jointly 
hosted by the International Association for Research in Income and Wealth 
(IARIW) and the Bank of Korea. Let me begin by expressing my special thanks 
to our conference co-host, IARIW President Albert Braakmann; and to our two 
keynote  speakers,  François  Bourguignon,  Professor  at  the  Paris  School  of 
Economics, and Martine Durand, Director of the OECD Statistics Directorate. 
I  would  also  like  to  express  my sincere  appreciation  to  all  of  the  panelists, 
session  speakers,  chairs,  and  discussants  for  their  contributions  to  this 
conference.  
    The  IARIW  is  a  highly-esteemed  organization  which  has  been  at  the 
forefront of SNA-related research on income, wealth, productivity and well-
being.  And  the  Bank  of  Korea,  as  the  central  bank  and  national  accounts 
institution, currently releases five major national accounts statistics including 
GDP. I believe that today's conference will provide us with an opportunity to 
re-examine  national  accounts  statistics  from  the  perspective  of  well-being 
measurement  and  facilitate  exchanges among  researchers. Furthermore,  it 
will be a great help to improve Korean national accounts statistics. 
    - 1 - 
As  you  well  know,  GDP  is  the  primary  macroeconomic  indicator  of  a 
country. Throughout Korea's development, GDP has been used as one of the 
major indicators in setting economic policies and measuring the economy's 
performance.  And  GDP  is  expected  to  continue  playing  a  central  role  in 
explaining a country's macroeconomic conditions for a considerable period of 
time. 
 That being said, it has often been indicated that GDP has its limitations. 
There  are  criticisms  that  GDP  does  not  properly  reflect  new  economic 
activities such as the digital and sharing economies. And it is true that GDP 
does  not  fully  capture  degradation  of  the  environment,  the  distribution  of 
income and wealth, and changes in the quality of life.  
    Considering these points, we should make efforts to accurately measure 
material growth through GDP, and at the same time work to create a balance 
by  estimating  the  quality  of  life  measures  that  are  not  captured  by  GDP.  I 
would like to share some of my views on where we have to focus.  
    First  of  all,  GDP  needs  to  be  revised  to  faithfully  reflect  the  rapidly 
changing  economic  reality.  With  regard  to  the  advent  of  new  economic 
activities, including the digital economy and industries related with the Fourth 
Industrial  Revolution,  we  must  collect  the  relevant  base  data  and  further 
study estimation methodologies. In this regard, the Bank of Korea has been 
reviewing whether the current GDP fully measures the digital economy and is 
preparing a work plan for possible improvement. 
   - 2 - 
   Next,  we  need  to  expand  national  accounts  statistics  to  show  the 
distributions of people's living standards, in addition to their averages. The 
OECD  has  made  considerable  progress  in  its  research  on  distributional 
information  of  income  and  consumption  by  integrating  macroeconomic 
indicators from national accounts with microdata from household surveys. I 
hope that progress will continue to be made in this area and that the OECD 
will soon provide feasible international guidelines.  
    Lastly, as countries try to estimate well-being indicators in various ways, 
we have to continue the research on how to increase the relevance of these 
indicators  for  policy  makers.  Although  quality  of  life  measures  have  the 
advantage  of  showing  various  aspects  of  life,  they  have  a  number  of 
weaknesses  as  policy  tools.  For  example,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  the 
selection and weighting of relevant indicators can be subjective, and that the 
transmission  mechanism  between  policy  instruments  and  these  indicators 
has not been sufficiently clarified yet.  
   Ladies and gentlemen! 
 I  have  briefly  laid  out  my  views  on  the  tasks  of  improving  and 
supplementing  GDP  and  well-being  measures.  To  effectively  address  these 
challenges,  continuous  cooperation  among  academic  institutions  like  the 
IARIW, statistical agencies, and international organizations is essential. If this 
kind of multilateral cooperation can be achieved, I believe that the usefulness 
of GDP will be considerably increased and well-being could be measured in a 
more balanced way. 
   - 3 - 
I hope that this conference, through active and lively discussions, will 
lead  to  many  creative  and  practical 
ideas  on  enhancing  well-being 
measurement and the usefulness of GDP.  
 Thank you. 
  April 26, 2017 
Governor 
Juyeol Lee 
   - 4 - 
