Sharon Donnery: Financial markets and institutions - collaboration
and knowledge dissemination
Welcome  address  by  Ms  Sharon  Donnery,  Deputy  Governor  (Central  Banking)  of  the  Central
Bank of Ireland, at the Policy Research Meeting on Financial Markets and Institutions, Dublin, 15
June 2017.
 Good morning to you all and a very warm welcome to our new campus here at North Wall Quay
in Dublin. Our official opening took place in late April, with staff on the ground since January, so
you really have come here at a time of renewal and great excitement for us as an institution. I
hope that you enjoy your time here.
We are delighted to be welcoming such an eminent group of speakers to the Bank today. I would
particularly like to thank our colleagues from the Federal Reserve who first initiated this event,
which  has  been  running  since  2012  with  previous  workshops  having  taken  place  in  Turkey,
Luxembourg,  the  Netherlands,  Belgium,  Rome  and  Stockholm,  along  with  the  proceedings  in
Helsinki earlier this week. Special thanks also to Wayne Passmore and Scott Frame who have
provided  the  impetus,  helped  shape  the  program,  and  ensured  the  participation  of  such  a
distinguished group of speakers from across the Federal Reserve System.
Cross-institution collaboration and knowledge dissemination is of critical importance in central
banking. The coming together of people with a rigorous background in empirical research, yet
with such a keen focus on the ways in which research, data analytics, empirical evidence and
policy  decision  making  are  interwoven  is  fundamental  to  the  development  of  evidence  based
policymaking. This is entirely consistent with the type of working environment that we continually
strive to develop here at the Central Bank of Ireland. I hope that we will all leave here tomorrow
having learned a great deal.
I am impressed by the breadth of topics being discussed over the two days of this event. The
discussions about the implementation and effects of unconventional monetary policy are taking
place at a historic time for central banks. The differing paths faced by the United States and euro
area  economies  over  the  past  half-decade  mean  that  we  find  ourselves  at  an  extremely
interesting  juncture.  A  stock-take  of  the  effectiveness  of  unconventional  policy,  the  risks
associated with tapering and the differing experiences in the American and European systems is
highly  important  for  the  calibration  and  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  on  both  sides  of  the
Atlantic.
At  the  nexus  between  unconventional  monetary  easing  and  the  legacy  impairments  of  the
previous crisis lies the issue of bank profitability, which will be the subject of a session that I will
chair later this morning. Given my work on the issue of Non-Performing Loans across the euro
area, I take a great interest in this topic and look forward to hearing the thoughts of our Spanish
1
and Italian guests on the dynamics underlying bank profitability in their countries.
In the area of financial regulation, the changes experienced on both sides of the Atlantic since the
crisis  have  been  dramatic.  The  crisis  response  in  all  of  our  jurisdictions  has  involved  a  wide
range of regulatory interventions, from enhanced stress-testing capabilities and communication
strategies  to  the  development  of  the  macroprudential  toolkit.  The  speed  with  which  these
features have been conceived and implemented is of course to be applauded and many of the
people in this room have been important contributors to the rolling-out of this new central banking
architecture. However, such rapid and large-scale responses often leave us vulnerable to “blind
spots”, unintended consequences and implementation challenges. Discussions such as those
that will take place over the next two days are an important part of our attempt to fine-tune and
enhance our performance as macroprudential authorities and regulators.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
The importance of the housing market as a driver of the credit cycle as well as the status of
mortgages as the chief source of debt and financial vulnerability for most households has meant
that  in  Ireland  we  have  paid  a  particularly  strong  focus  on  macroprudential  measures.  In  this
context, we are delighted to have a number of focussed sessions on this topic. We underwent an
extensive  review  of  the  first  18  months’  experience  with  loan-to-value  and  loan-to-income
restrictions in November last year. We are committed to reviewing the measures using a wide
evidence base on an annual basis.   We hope to be able to both learn from you and inform you
as we share experiences tomorrow. Apart from our own experience here in Ireland, the focussed
sessions on housing finance and the interaction between government, lenders and the mortgage
borrowers in the United States promises to be particularly illuminating.
2
Despite the timing on a Friday, I encourage you all to stay until tomorrow afternoon to hear the
insights of our four guests from the United States on this topic.
1
2
www.centralbank.ie/news-media/press-releases/non-performing-loans-workout-in-the-euro-area-deputy-
 
governor-central-banking-sharon-donnery-at-bruegel 
See for example the Central Bank’s macroprudential mortgage measures
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
