Encik  Abdul  Rasheed  Ghaffour:  Optimal  balance  of  paper  and
digital, cash and cashless; and next page for physical currency
Welcoming address by Mr Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank
of Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Currency Conference 2017, Kuala Lumpur, 15 May
2017.
Mr Richard Haycock, Chairman, Currency Research,
 Fellow central bankers,
Distinguished participants.
A very good morning and a warm Selamat Datang to Malaysia.
Paper lives on
A lot has changed in the past 10 years. In May 2007, there was no such thing as a smartphone.
Tablets  did  not  exist,  and  the  human  race  had  not  discovered  the  fast-expanding  universe  of
mobile apps. Back then, we read the news by leafing through the pages of a large newspaper.
We listened to music with CDs, and bought or rented DVDs to watch movies. Today, most of
these are streamed through internet devices. When e-book sales increased by over 1,000% in
the two years leading up to 2010, many questioned the future of the printed book. The bankruptcy
of Borders in the United States the following year solidified these fears.
Similarly, there has been much hype about the end of cash. This has been sparked by the rising
use  of  e-payments  and  the  recent  proliferation  of  digital  currencies  in  an  increasingly  virtual
world. However, just as physical books continue to enjoy increasing sales, we have seen cash in
circulation rise in many countries, quicker than their GDP growth for some. The majority of global
consumer transactions still take place through cash. As previous Currency Conferences have
affirmed, we expect physical cash to remain necessary and relevant.
Digital media has significantly transformed the way we experience the world. However, it has not
brought us to the closing pages for physical media – including notes and coins. This may appear
strange, if one considers the fact that much of our communication, planning and transportation
revolve around the internet. As a recent McKinsey report puts it, mobile devices have become the
“digital container” of our daily lives. This marks a profound cultural shift. The smartphone is fast
becoming an extension of ourselves. Indeed, this digitalisation is altering the way payments are
being made. We are not only spending more time online, we are spending more money through
online  channels.  Our  familiarity  with  and  dependence  on  mobile  devices  is  unprecedented.  I
believe that this attachment has made us increasingly comfortable with digital payments. They
now appear more intuitive, more reliable and more convenient than ever before.
This  trend  is  evident  in  the  findings  of  a  recent  international  survey  by  ING.  Most  of  the
respondents are using less cash now compared to a year ago. A third of Europeans surveyed
were even willing to go completely cashless if it were possible. We have seen a similar shift here
in Malaysia. When internet banking was first introduced in Malaysia back in 2000, most people
were  sceptical  about  its  safety  and  reluctant  to  learn  how  to  use  it.  Today,  with  a  mobile
penetration  rate  of  145%,  internet  transactions  are  becoming  more  prevalent.  Last  year,
Malaysians spent 23% more on online shopping platforms compared to 2015. This is consistent
with what is happening around the globe. The number and value of non-cash transactions have
increased steadily in recent years.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Balance between paper and digital
However,  despite  these  observations,  central  banks  around  the  globe  expect  cash  to  stay
necessary and never go away. There are several reasons for this but ultimately they boil down to
having a good mix of both. Think about the printed book. There are some things that an e-book
simply  cannot  offer.  You  can’t  turn  down  a  corner,  leaf  through  the  pages,  or  crack  a  spine.
However conversely, reading off a tablet or Kindle saves you the hassle of lugging around heavy
books or lengthy academic articles – especially when you do not need to read them from cover
to cover.
As  a  policy  maker,  I  would  think  that  there  are  three  elements,  or  the  ‘3S’,  that  we  should
consider in determining an optimal balance of paper and digital, cash and cashless.
Security
The first consideration is security. Counterfeiting is as old as money itself. However, cash has
become  more  secure  in  recent  years.  In  Malaysia,  the  amount  of  counterfeits  discovered
reduced by 25% in the past year. The currency industry is continuing to make good progress in
enhancing security features. I am particularly pleased to note the recent efforts to make such
features intuitive – so that the man on the street is likely to notice when something is amiss
The  security  challenge  will  not  disappear  by  going  cashless.  The  latest  being  the  recent
Ransomware attack. Cyber risk remains a real threat that must be managed. Significant efforts
have  been  made  to  strengthen  resilience  against  cyberattacks.  The  banking  and  payments
systems  industry  has  made  this  a  key  priority  in  recent  years.  However,  cybersecurity  is
ultimately a shared responsibility between the provider and the consumer. Even the most robust
systems can be breached if consumers do not exercise adequate caution or are deceived by
fraudsters.  In  this  regard,  consumer  education  plays  an  important  role  in  keeping  cashless
payments secure.
In  addition,  cash  is  also  a  choice  payment  instrument  for  illicit  activities.  Unlike  digital
transactions which almost always leave a trail to the parties, payments in cash are anonymous.
In his recent book, The Curse of Cash, Kenneth Rogoff points out a very sobering reality – the
amount of US Dollars in circulation outside of banks suggests that each American should have
around USD4,200 in their wallet. This is not the case. According to him, most of this money is
used to hide transactions.
However,  this  alone  does  not  warrant  moving  away  from  cash  entirely.  Rogoff  himself
acknowledges this, and proposes the solution of eliminating large denomination notes – such as
the United States’ hundred dollar bill. The logic is simple. With the next largest bill being USD50,
such  a  move  would  immediately  make  it  twice  as  cumbersome  to  hoard  and  pass  around
suitcases of cash. This is in fact a policy call which Malaysia has made, when we phased out the
RM1000 and RM500 notes in 1999. At the same time, the case for removing large denominations
becomes weaker as each year goes by. This is because the effect of inflation plays a similar role
in making cash transactions more difficult for illegal activities.
Social cost
The second  element  for  consideration  is  the social  cost  imposed  by  the  form  of  currency
chosen.  On  the  surface,  cash  may  appear  to  be  costless.  Consumers  do  not  have  to  worry
about subscription fees and exorbitant interest rates lying in wait. Retailers are not required to
pay fees to accept cash, and so need not pass on any servicing charges to the consumer. There
is  no  need  for  banks  and  merchants  to  invest  in  and  maintain  sophisticated  software  and
hardware to support digital payments.
However,  cash  does  not  come  cheap.  Money  needs  to  be  printed  and  minted,  and  then
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
transported, counted and guarded – several times over. Each step here poses a significant cost
to various actors within the economy. Central banks have to deal with the rising cost of producing
secure  and  durable  money.  Storing  and  moving  money  around  under  tight  security  can  be
expensive for both commercial banks and retail businesses. This does not yet account for the
losses relating to under-reported taxes which is directly enabled by a cash economy – a cost
borne by society as a whole. A 2005 study estimated this figure to be USD100 billion annually in
the United States alone
The task of calculating the relative total cost of cash and cashless payments is a difficult one.
Apart  from  the  methodological  challenges,  the  findings  for  each  study  are  also  likely  to  differ
according  to  the  nuances  of  each  country.  Nonetheless  it  is  a  worthwhile  endeavour.  Policy
makers  around  the  world  have  made  positive  progress  in  this  area,  and  I  believe  we  will  see
more efforts on this front in the coming years.
This leads to another dimension of the social cost consideration, which is the impact on financial
inclusion.  Millions  of  people  live  in  rural  areas  globally,  with  little  or  no  access  to  the  modern
infrastructures  necessary  to  facilitate  cashless  solutions.  The  availability  of  cash  is  therefore
paramount in ensuring that they continue to be seamlessly included in the financial system. At
the  same  time,  the  success  of  mobile  payments  operator  M-Pesa  in  rural  Kenya  has
demonstrated that cashless alternatives can in fact be a means to promote financial inclusion for
the unbanked. Here in Malaysia, where mobile banking transactions have tripled in the past year,
there is potential to leverage the high mobile penetration rate to improve financial inclusion.
Stability
The third  element  is stability.  The  ability  to  make  retail  payments  reliable  is  crucial  for  the
effectiveness  of  the  financial  system.  As  discussed  earlier,  we  have  come  a  long  way  in
developing a reliable way of transacting electronically – through solutions such as credit cards,
mobile  transfers  and  prepaid  balances.  Central  banks  are  now  carefully  monitoring  newer
developments,  particularly  digital  currencies  based  on  the  use  of  a  distributed  ledger.  Digital
currencies  have  tended  to  be  volatile  and  subject  to  speculative  hoarding.  This  raises  the
potential for runs on the digital currency, triggered for instance by a loss of confidence in the
currency itself or a third party provider like an exchange. This risk is likely to be augmented where
the  digital  currency  is  not  backed  by  an  issuer,  and  where  there  is  no  lender  of  last  resort
function. If digital currencies are widely used, such a shock could have systemic repercussions.
At the same time, some of these concerns may be addressed if the digital currencies used are
issued by a central bank. Many policymakers are studying this option.
In  addition  to  facilitating  payments,  cash  has  been  a  powerful  instrument  for  central  banks  to
build trust and credibility with the public. The notes issued by central banks provide us with a
direct and tangible link to the people – making it a key branding tool. Trust and confidence in the
central bank are crucial for us to effectively deliver our mandate. This dynamic is augmented in
jurisdictions like Malaysia, where the central bank is responsible for promoting both monetary and
financial stability. If we were to go completely cashless, central banks might lose this traditional
means of maintaining a strong brand.
The policy calibration in Malaysia
At present, Malaysians still transact mostly via cash. While Malaysia endeavours to accelerate
the  migration  to  e-payments,  we  see  that  cash  is  necessary  and  will  always  be  in  demand.
Although  e-payments  per  capita  nearly  doubled  in  the  past  five  years,  the  ratio  of  cash  in
circulation to GDP rose by 17%. We are therefore committed to ongoing enhancements in the
way we manage cash and its circulation. To this end, we have invested in a new Automated
Cash Centre, which most of you will be visiting as part of this Conference. We are also in the
process of building a new modern Mint.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The next page for physical currency
As we consider the future of physical currency, it is crucial that we bear in mind the sensitivities
of  the  users  of  cash.  We  live  in  an  increasingly  aware  and  empowered  generation.  For  this
reason,  issues  of  environmental  footprint  cannot  be  an  afterthought.  Similarly,  banknote
production  must  carefully  consider  the  public  interest  and  legitimate  ethical  concerns  across
society – including special interest groups. In addition, the industry must be run with manifest
integrity. The Banknote Ethics Initiative is a welcome step forward in this regard. The industry will
also  benefit  from  continued  and  candid  engagement  with  central  banks,  who  understand  the
nuances of their respective populations.
We also cannot ignore the fact that the idea of a cashless utopia is becoming more popular. This
will  be  a  real  challenge  for  us  –  as  we  hope  to  see  physical  currency  remain  relevant.  The
sustainability and competitiveness of this industry depends on being able to deliver on the three
considerations I mentioned earlier – namely, ensuring that cash continues to be secure, socially
and 
the  promotion  of  monetary  and
financial stability.
economically cost-effective,  and  enabling 
for 
With that, I would like to wish all of you a productive conference as you discuss these important
issues in the coming days. Have a pleasant stay in Malaysia, enjoy yourselves, and please do not
hesitate to indulge in some shopping – we do accept cash!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
