Gent  Sejko:  Money  and  banking  in  Albania,  from  antiquity  to
modern times
Opening address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the First Conference of
the  Museum  of  the  Bank  of Albania  “Money  and  Banking  in Albania,  from Antiquity  to  Modern
Times”, Tirana, 14 June 2017.
 Dear Professor Picard,
Dear academics, professors and researchers,
Dear guests,
It is a special pleasure for me to welcome you to the First Conference of the Museum of the Bank
of Albania.
This is a special event, which brings together academics, researchers, and experts of central
bank and currency museums, to establish a new bridge of communication and cooperation that
will help us to take further our work at the Museum.
In  our  short  experience  in  museum  management,  we  have  learned  that  it  is  very  essential  to
cooperate with other institutions responsible for the administration of cultural heritage, as well as
with  scientists  and  experts  that  study  and  preserve  them,  and  tell  their  history. Also,  with  the
support from the Ministry of Culture, Centre for Albanian Studies and Institute of Archaeology, we
have today the Museum of the Bank of Albania, whose collection displays unique and impressive
items. The systematic work of our distinguished archaeologists and of the dedicated central bank
employees over the years has helped in materialising the efforts for presenting the history of the
Albanian  currency,  from  the  axes  of  the  Hoard  of  Torovica,  to  the  first  coins  struck  in
Dyrrhachium, to those in circulation throughout various historic periods, up to modern days.
Through  over  30  exhibits  and  5  educational  rooms  in  the  Museum,  we  show  interactively  the
ancient history of our currency. The permanent exhibition in the lower floor displays collections
from monetary systems that have existed in our territories over the past two thousand years.
They are part of the numismatic collection of the Bank of Albania and the Albanian Institute of
Archaeology. We have selected and studied them meticulously in a close and long process of
cooperation with archaeologists, numismatists, historians and ethnologists in Albania. I take this
opportunity to thank them for their valuable contribution.
Our Museum, however, is not just a money museum. It is also the museum of the central bank,
which considers financial education as an essential objective. The public needs to be informed in
order to be able to make judicious and sound financial decisions, which, in turn, contribute to
financial  stability.  That  is  why  we  have  dedicated  the  upper  floor  of  the  Museum  to  financial
information  and  education.  Through  a  number  of  activities,  educational  publications,  lectures,
films,  and  applications,  irrespective  of  their  age,  visitors  learn  about  financial  products  and
system. The history of money originates long ago and its developments are closely related to the
people that have produced it. Its role is not limited to the economic functions; it is also a historic
evidence  of  the  minting  or  issuing  country.  It  speaks  about  periods  of  economic  crisis  or
downturns, of peace and prosperity, of successes and injustices. In this context, we decided to
dedicate the First Conference of the Museum of the Bank of Albania to two main topics, which
we think are the gist of its exhibitions and educational activities.
1. Findings, researches and discussions in the area of monetary production and circulation, the
history  of  the  economy  and  banking  activity  in Albania  and Albanian  historic  territories,  which
contribute  to  accurate  interpretation  and  updating  of  information  transmitted  to  the  visitors
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
through Museum collections.
2. The educational role of central bank museums in getting to know the history of money, and
banking activities and enhancing financial literacy through exhibitions, education and innovation.
For this purpose, we aim, therefore, to bring together foreign central bank experts to share their
perspective on the management of central bank museums, collections and educational activities.
This conference certainly underlines the commitment of the Bank of Albania to earnestly engage
in both research and educational activities. We are very interested in enhancing cooperation with
researchers, academia, peer museums, and specialised institutions in economic, historic and
cultural heritage research.
Such  cooperation  is  an  excellent  opportunity  to  Bank  of Albania  employees,  who  may  benefit
from valuable skills and expertise for our Museum. It would also contribute to new networking and
collaboration in research activities.
In light of promoting and furthering cooperation, we are committed to turning our Conference of
the Museum of the Bank of Albania into an annual event. Also, in 2017, the Museum of the Bank
of Albania will organise a cycle of lectures dubbed as “Nights of the Museum”, which will address
a  variety  of  topics,  such  as  numismatics,  banking  history,  economic  and  financial  education,
philately, art and architecture. These projects aim at developing another aspect of our work at the
Museum, which would focus on social developments vis-a-vis museum objects.
Dear participants,
The first conference of the Museum of the Bank of Albania coincides with the 25th anniversary of
the establishment of the modern central bank of the Republic of Albania and a two-tier banking
system.
In  these  25  years,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  served  to  the  country’s  economic  and  financial
development,  supporting  successfully  the  development  of  an  efficient  and  stable  financial
system.
It  will  continue  to  remain  an  institution  with  ambitious  objectives  in  the  field  of  European
integration and approximation with the European Central Bank. Today, it is undertaking a new
challenge: opening to the public, not only to communicate clearly its primary objectives, but also
to  contribute  to  helping  the  public  learn  about  the  history  of  money,  art  and  tradition  that  it
represents.
We will work hard, so that all the interested persons, whether in Albania or abroad, will be able to
learn about the history of banking, money and people that have dedicated their life and work to it.
I  am  certain  that  very  soon  the  Museum  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  be  a  place  to  visit  the
exhibition, and exchange opinions and ideas about banking and money
Concluding, I would like to thank you for your participation and contribution to the conference and
wish success in these two days of the conference.
Thank You!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
