Guy Debelle: Launch of the FX Global Code
Opening remarks by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the
Launch of the FX Global Code, FX Code Press Conference, London, 25 May 2017.
 Today  marks  the  culmination  of  two  years’  effort  to  develop  the  FX  Global  Code  and  the
associated  adherence  mechanisms.  It  has  involved  considerable  input  from  many  foreign
exchange market participants, both public and private. Today I will reiterate the motivation for the
work,  highlight  the  main  features  of  the  Code  and  adherence,  summarise  how  we  have
developed the Code and outline the way forward.
Firstly, why is the work going on? The foreign exchange (FX) industry has been suffering from a
lack of trust. This lack of trust is evident both between participants in the market and, at least as
importantly,  between  the  public  and  the  market.  The  market  needs  to  move  toward  a  more
favourable and desirable location, and allow participants to have much greater confidence that
the market is functioning appropriately.
The Code sets out global principles of good practice in the FX market to provide a common set
of  guidance  to  the  market.  This  will  help  to  restore  confidence  and  promote  the  effective
functioning of the wholesale FX market.
A well-functioning FX market is very much in the interest of all market participants. This clearly
includes central banks, both in their own role as market participants but also as the exchange
rate is an important channel of monetary policy transmission. In a globalised world, the foreign
exchange market is one of the most vital parts of the financial plumbing.
One of the guiding principles underpinning our work is that the Code should promote a robust,
fair,  liquid,  open  and  transparent  market.  A  diverse  set  of  buyers  and  sellers,  supported  by
resilient infrastructure, should be able to confidently and effectively transact at competitive prices
that reflect available market information and in a manner that conforms to acceptable standards
of behaviour.
The  work  to  develop  the  Code  began  two  years  ago,  in  May  2015,  when  the  BIS  Governors
commissioned a working group of the Markets Committee of the BIS (which I chaired until early
January  this  year)  to  do  two  things:  first,  establish  a  single  global  code  of  conduct  for  the
wholesale FX market and second, to come up with mechanisms to promote greater adherence
1
to the Code.
This  work  is  very  much  a  public  sector–private  sector  partnership.  We  have  been  ably  and
vigorously  supported  by  a  group  of  market  participants,  chaired  by  David  Puth,  CEO  of  CLS.
David’s group contains people from all around the world on the buy side, including corporates
and  asset  managers,  and  the  sell  side,  along  with  trading  platforms,  ECNs  and  non-bank
participants, drawing from the various Foreign Exchange Committees (FXCs) and beyond. All
parts of the market have been involved in the drafting of the Code to make sure all perspectives
are heard and appropriately reflected.
There are two important points worth highlighting: first, it’s a single code for the whole industry
and second, it’s a global code.
On the first point, the Code is supplanting the existing codes that have been present in the FX
market. Importantly, the Code covers all of the wholesale FX industry. This is not a code for just
the sell side. It is there for the sell side, the buy side, non-bank participants and the platforms; it
reaches around the globe and across the whole industry. The way it is relevant will depend on
the nature of the engagement with the FX market. What this means in practice is that the steps
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
different market participants take to align their activities with the principles of the Code will differ,
reflecting the size, complexity, type and extent of their engagement with the FX market.
On  the  second  point,  our  group  contained  representatives  from  the  central  bank  and  private
sector from all the 16 largest FX centres, including both developed and emerging markets.
The  first  phase  of  the  Code  was  released  in  May  2016.  It  covered  areas  such  as  ethics,
information sharing, aspects of execution and confirmation and settlement. The second phase
covers further aspects of execution including e-trading and platforms, prime brokerage, as well
as governance, and risk management and compliance.
The complete Code comprises 55 principles spanning these issues. The principles are written in
plain language and should be easily read and understood by market participants. The principles
are supplemented by a suite of examples to illustrate their practical application.
Market participants have had a number of opportunities to comment on the Code, in addition to
the direct input of the Market Participants Group. Over the past six months, drafts of the full text
of the Code have been distributed to market participants for their review, principally through the
various  FXCs,  but  also  through  other  industry  associations  to  ensure  all  perspectives  are
appropriately reflected in the Code. Through this process, over 10,000 comments were received.
The Code reflects our collective judgement as to what constitutes good practice in the market,
taking account of the feedback received. I think it is a good outcome of the process that we were
able to distil the points of contention down to a small number of issues. Outside of these, the
feedback reflected a widely held consensus. Market participants have recognised the Code’s aim
of helping move the FX market to a better place.
One of our central aims in drafting the Code is for it to be principles-based rather than rules-
based. There are a number of reasons why this is so but, for me, an important reason is that the
more prescriptive the Code is, the easier it is to get around. Rules are easier to arbitrage than
principles. The more prescriptive and the more precise the code, the less people will think about
what  they  are  doing.  If  it’s  principles-based  and  less  prescriptive  then  market  participants  will
have to think about whether their actions are consistent with the principles of the Code.
But we have not written a procedures manual. Rather we have articulated principles that need to
be taken into account. Individual firms may then take these principles and reflect them in their
own  procedures  manuals.  Our  aim  in  setting  out  these  principles  is  to  provide  market
participants with the framework in which to think about how they, for example, handle stop-loss
orders. The emphasis here is very much on the word ‘think’. The Global Code will not provide the
answers to all your questions, but it should help you ask the right questions.
Adherence
Alongside drafting the Code, we have devoted considerable time and effort to thinking about how
to  ensure  widespread  adoption  of  the  Code  by  market  participants.  Clearly,  that  has  been  an
issue with the various existing codes that had been in place in a number of markets. It is evident
they were ignored on occasion in the past, wilfully or otherwise.
We  have  worked  with  the  industry  to  produce  a  principles-based  code  rather  than  a  set  of
prescriptive  regulatory  standards.  It  will  not  impose  legal  or  regulatory  obligations  on  market
participants, nor will it supplant existing regulatory standards or expectations.
We have developed a blueprint for adherence that has been published alongside the Code today
and sets out the key elements we think will be required for the Code to be successful – and the
steps that have been taken, and will be taken, to ensure this is the case.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
One  critical  dimension  is  market-based  adherence  mechanisms.  An  important  element  of
discipline should come from the market itself. The adherence to a voluntary code will only come
about if firms judge it to be in their interest and take the practical steps to ensure the Code is
embedded in their practices. Such practical steps would include training their staff and putting in
appropriate policies and procedures.
We  have  provided  a  draft  Statement  of  Commitment  for  firms  to  publicly  demonstrate  their
adherence to the Code. One reason for a public demonstration is that firms are more likely to
adhere to the Code if they believe that their peers are doing so too. That is, an important source
of pressure to adhere should come from other market participants. To provide visibility around
this,  there  are  a  number  of  market-based  initiatives  to  provide  public  registries  where  market
participants can demonstrate their use of the Statement of Commitment.
More  broadly,  market  participants  have  a  vital  interest,  and  a  role  to  play,  in  promoting  and
upholding good practices in the market as a whole. This can be partly achieved through leading
by example, but can also be supported by having similar expectations of counterparties and other
market participants and helping to raise awareness of the Code in their market interactions. In
that  regard,  we  have  reached  out  to  more  than  120  industry  associations  and  key  market
infrastructure providers globally.
Ultimately  the  success  of  the  Code  in  promoting  integrity  and  restoring  confidence  in  the
wholesale FX market lies in the hands of its participants.
Another aspect of market-based adherence comes through the FXCs.  FXCs have today issued
a  joint  statement  of  support  for  the  Code.  In  due  course,  adherence  to  the  Code  is  likely  to
become a requirement of FXC membership. That would ensure the Code is embedded at the
core of the FX market, given the extent of coverage of the FXCs. But it is also important that it
extends beyond that, and that there is, at the very least, an awareness of it across all market
participants.
2
A second dimension of adherence is that the BIS central banks have signalled their commitment
by  announcing  that  they  themselves  will  follow  the  Code,  and  that  they  expect  that  their
3
counterparties will do so too.
Given that we are only providing the full text of the Code to the market today, there will be a period
of time for market participants to adjust their practices where necessary to be in line with the
principles in the Code. I would not expect much time should be required to do this. This period of
time might potentially be as short as six months, but no more than twelve months for the vast
majority  of  market  participants.  How  much  effort  this  might  require  will  in  part  depend  on  the
nature and extent of engagement with the FX market. In drafting the Code, we have always kept
the principle of proportionality at front of mind.
Finally, it is vital that the Code remains up to date and evolves as the market evolves. The Code
will be collectively owned, maintained and updated by the Global Foreign Exchange Committee
(GFXC) Code, which met for the first time yesterday. This will continue the public sector – private
sector partnership which has supported the development of the Code.
The  GFXC  will  regularly  assess  whether  new  information  or  market  developments  warrant
updates or additions being made to the Code. As the first example of this, given diversity of views
on the use of last look in the market, the GFXC today is requesting feedback on trading in the last
look window. On a less frequent basis, the GFXC will oversee a more comprehensive review of
the Code.
Conclusion
This is the culmination of two years of work by a group of people from both the private and public
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
sectors. The work has reflected a very constructive and cooperative effort between the central
banks  and  market  participants.  We  have  all  undertaken  this  work  in  addition  to  our  regular
responsibilities, at all hours of the day and night. This contribution of time and effort reflects the
fact that all of us recognise the need to restore the public’s faith in the foreign exchange market.
We share the view that the Global Code plays an important role in assisting that process and
also in helping improve market functioning and confidence in the market.
I would very much like to thank the whole group for their work and commitment, but in particular:
David Puth for his tireless effort and support leading the Market Participants Group; Simon Potter
for leading the work on the writing of the Code with the enormous support of Jamie Pfeifer and
the team at the New York Fed; and Chris Salmon for leading the adherence work, supported by
Grigoria Christodoulou and the team at the Bank of England.
1
2
3
See www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm.
See afxc.rba.gov.au/news/afxc-26052016.html.
See <www.bis.org/press/p160526a.htm>.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
