RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
  ADDRESS BY 
GOVERNOR OF THE RESERVE BANK OF FIJI 
BARRY WHITESIDE 
AT THE LISTING OF FREE BIRD INSTITUTE LIMITED ON THE  
SOUTH PACIFIC STOCK EXCHANGE 
Venue: Intercontinental Hotel, Natadola, 2 February 2017 
  Mr Hiroshi Taniguchi, Chair and Chief Executive Officer of Free Bird Institute 
Limited 
The Board and Management Team of Free Bird Institute Limited 
Dr Nur Bano Ali, Chair of the Board of the South Pacific Stock Exchange  
Ms Latileta Qoro, Chief Executive Officer of the South Pacific Stock Exchange 
Members of the Capital Markets Industry 
Members of the Media 
Invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Introductory Comments 
 
Ni sa Bula Vinaka, “Konnichiwa” and a very good morning to you all! 
 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today  to  officiate  in  the  listing  of  Free  Bird  Institute 
Limited on the South Pacific Stock Exchange. 
 
I understand that it has been the founding shareholder, Mr Taniguchi’s dream to 
see his company listed on a Stock Exchange so I congratulate the Institute for its 
perseverance in meeting all the necessary requirements for listing. 
 Less  than  a  year  ago,  we  witnessed  the  listing  of  Vision  Investments  Limited 
(VIL)  and  I  noted  at  the  time  that  it  had  been  5  years  since  there  was  any 
previous activity on the Exchange.  It is certainly pleasing to now see a second 
listing in less than a year.  I feel this reflects the increasing acknowledgement of 
 1 
the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  participating  in  our  small  but  developing  stock 
market.  
 Background  
Ladies  and  Gentleman,  Free  Bird  Institute  Limited  is  a  company  with  its  own 
unique business intentions and a true visionary in Mr Taniguchi at the helm.  
 I  came  to  know  about  this  gentleman  several  years  ago  when  a  Reserve  Bank 
team comprising myself,  some Board members and our Economics team came 
out west on one of our “meet the industry” trips.  I was intrigued by the name of 
the institute and indicated to my team that we must make it a point to meet them. 
What did they do and where did the name “free bird” come from?  Clearly it had 
nothing  to  do  with  poultry  distribution  as  I  soon  found  out!!    Incidentally  that 
west  trip  did  include  a  visit  with  the  Rooster  Chicken  people  as  well!!  So  we 
obviously  had  a  comedian  amongst  our  Economics  team  who  made  all  the 
arrangements! 
 So, on that visit in 2013 I came to know that the Institute is an English language 
school  catering  to  non-English  speaking  foreigners,  who  travel  to  Fiji,  spend  a 
little time with us and learn the language.   
 I am told the average length of stay is  10 weeks, with the programmes varying 
from 2 to 50 weeks.  Many of these students will use their new skills acquired in 
Fiji  to  assist  them  in  achieving  their  education  and  employment  dreams  across 
the  globe.    The  Institute  was  established  with  the  approval  of  the  Ministry  of 
Education  in  Fiji  and  its,  mainly  local,  teaching  staff  are  licensed  by  the 
Ministry.   
 From the day the Institute first opened its doors in 2004 up to the end of  2015, 
more  than  15,000  students  from  29  different  countries  have  graduated  not  only 
2 
 with  their  newfound  English-speaking  prowess,  but  with  great  experiences  and 
memories of their time in Fiji.  The key student source market over the years has 
been Japan.  
 In  2016  the  total  enrollment  across  the  two  campuses  in  Namaka  and  Lautoka 
was a little under 1,500.  I understand there is also a smaller Ba Provincial Free 
Bird Institute.  
 Attracting young people from overseas to come to a strange land to study is not 
easy,  especially  when  they  do  not  speak  the  language!    It  can  also  be  an 
extremely  competitive  business.    However,  it  is  clear  that  Mr  Taniguchi  has 
found the secret recipe in his “total immersion” approach for students. 
 I have been reliably advised that the Institute has been active in marketing Fiji as 
one of the best places to learn.   I visited its website and was greeted by one of 
the  most  attractive  taglines  about  Fiji  which  says,  “Study  English  in  Islands 
Closest  to  Heaven”.    I  thank  the  Institute  for  helping  build  on  our  niche 
education-tourism  sector  and  supporting  our  most  important  foreign  exchange 
earning industry.  No doubt our Minister for Tourism will also be well pleased. 
 Listing of Free Bird Institute Limited 
With  10  years  of  experience  in  Fiji  now  under  its  collective  belt  and  an  ever-
growing  international  reputation  as  a  respected  English  language  educator,  the 
Institute has now set its intentions of extending the opportunity to local investors 
to be part of its plans and aspirations going forward.  Being the first company to 
be listed representing the education sector, today’s listing of  Free Bird Institute 
Limited’s shares is an achievement to be celebrated and supported. 
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  company  directors  had  initially  approached  the 
Reserve  Bank  and  the  South  Pacific  Stock  Exchange  back  in  2014  expressing 
3 
 their intention to get the company listed.  With some information gaps identified, 
the  company  took  it  upon  itself to  understand  the  requirements,  and implement 
necessary  changes  to  its  structure  and  plans,  to  ensure  that  it  was  ready  to  be 
listed, and that it would be able to continually meet listing requirements. 
 The  company  appointed  Kontiki  Capital  Limited  as  its  investment  advisor  to 
handle  its  listing  application  in  May  2016,  and  the  first  draft  Offer  Document 
was  submitted  for  our  assessment  in  October  2016.    Subsequent  to  numerous 
discussions  to  ensure  that  all  relevant  legislative  and  regulatory  requirements 
have  been  adequately  met,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  approval  was  granted  in 
December 2016. 
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  today’s  launch  highlights  an  important  factor  that  is 
crucial to the growth of our economy and continued confidence in  our financial 
system:  this  is  the  partnerships  between  foreign  and  local  investors.    The 
promotion of such collaboration is at the top of our list of national priorities as 
we seek to improve Fiji’s standing in the ease of doing business assessment, and 
attract new foreign investment into our country. 
 We  hope  that  today’s  launch  sends  a  favourable  message  to  potential  foreign 
owned  entities  wishing  to  consider  Fiji  as  an  investment  destination.    Industry 
stakeholders  and  relevant  regulatory  agencies  will  continue  to work  together  to 
develop  the  capital  markets  industry  in  Fiji  and  enable  it  to  reach  its  potential, 
with the private sector driving economic growth. 
 The Fijian Economy 
Before I conclude, allow me to share a few points on our economy. 
 
2016 for most of us will go down as the year of severe tropical cyclone Winston. 
But through all the pain, suffering and hardship, we also saw the resilience of our 
4 
 fellow  Fijians  to  turn  their  lives  around.    We  recognised  the  tremendous 
international, regional and domestic support and goodwill that was unparalleled 
in our lifetimes, and the efforts of Government, the public and private sectors, all 
with  the  one  goal  to  turn  the  economy  around.    And  then  of  course,  across  all 
that  destruction  and  sadness,  there  was  Rio,  and  the  absolute  joy  it  brought  us 
when our 7’s team won gold! 
 With all that happened last year, we still were able to post an estimated growth 
of 2 percent. That speaks volumes of our people. 
 For 2017 we are initially forecasting GDP growth at 3.6 percent.     
 The Fijian economy clearly remains on a recovery path as all the reconstruction 
work  continues.    Despite  the  setbacks  from  the  natural  disasters,  consumption 
and  investment  activity  have  remained  buoyant,  signaled  by  positive  trends  in 
various partial indicators.  Supportive fiscal measures, accommodative monetary 
policy  settings,  favourable  labour  market  conditions  and inflows  of  remittances 
and  tourist  earnings  continue  to  boost  consumer  spending  and  investor 
sentiments.   
 Inflationary  pressures  in  2016  came  largely  from  domestic  supply  side  factors 
following  the  natural  disasters.    Inflation  going  forward  in  the  near  term  is 
expected  to  continue  to  be  domestically  driven  with  any  major  downside  risks 
stemming  from  adverse  weather  conditions,  but  also  any  sharp  increases  in 
international  oil  and  food  prices.    For  now,  year-end  inflation  is  projected  at 
around 2.5 percent.  
 With  the  modest  performance  of  Fiji’s  external  sector,  foreign  reserves  levels 
remain  adequate,  currently  at  $1.9  billion,  which  is  sufficient  to  cover  5.1 
months of retained imports of goods and non-factor services.  
5 
  Our  financial  system  remains  stable  and  continues  to  support  the  economy 
during  this  time  of  recovery.    Bank  lending  has  been  reported  at  sustainable 
levels  after  a  period  of  aggressive  growth  in  the  last  5  years.    Non-performing 
loans  as  an  indicator  of  the  soundness  of  our  financial  system  have  been 
recorded at all-time lows.  The performance of the insurance industry continues 
to  be  assessed  as  satisfactory  even  though  the  2016  results  of  the  general 
insurance  sector  will  be  significantly  impacted  by  claims  arising  from  the  TC 
Winston insured losses. 
 Notwithstanding  the  current  stable  assessment  of  our  economy,  the  Reserve 
Bank  will  of  course  continue  to  closely  monitor  global  and  domestic 
developments  and  assess  likely  vulnerabilities  that  may  negatively  impact  our 
growth and the stability of our financial system. 
 Closing 
In  closing  Ladies  and  Gentlemen, I  take this opportunity  to again  acknowledge 
Free  Bird  Institute  Limited  for  its  strategic  vision  and  perseverance  towards 
achieving  its  listing  aspirations.    I  congratulate  Mr  Taniguchi,  the  Board  and 
staff  for  reaching this  milestone  in  the  company’s  journey  in Fiji and  wish  you 
well as a listed entity. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, I cannot leave you without making my  usual regulatory 
statement  to urge  all potential  investors to  take  the time  to  carefully  peruse the 
Offer Document that has been prepared for this listing.  Please ensure to conduct 
your  own  analysis  and  do  seek  professional  advice  from  licensed  investment 
advisers or stockbrokers on the suitability of investing in the stock market as per 
your objectives. 
  6 
With  that  said,  I  now  have  much  pleasure  in  officially  declaring  Free  Bird 
Institute Limited as listed on the South Pacific Stock Exchange. 
 Arigato gozaimasu!  Vinaka Vakalevu! 
 END. 
 7 
