Viral  V Acharya:  Some  ways  to  decisively  resolve  bank  stressed
assets
Speech  by  Dr  Viral  V Acharya,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Indian
Banks’ Association Banking Technology Conference, Mumbai, 21 February 2017.
 I am grateful to my colleagues and teams at the Reserve Bank of India for many stimulating
discussions and insights, to many banking sector stalwarts of today and the past, and to several
practitioners  and  policy-makers  in  sectors  and  institutions  related  to  the  resolution  of  bank
stressed assets. All errors remain my own.
Thank  you  to  organizers  of  Indian  Banks’ Association  for  inviting  me  today.  To  all  the Award
winners, congratulations on your stellar achievements and the innovative spirit you have shown
to  be  today’s  worthy  recipients.  Technology,  “Fin  Tech”  as  you  say,  is  taking  banking  and
intermediation into unchartered territories. I have yet to fathom the full import of these sweeping
changes.  In  the  meantime,  my  subject  matter  today  will  be  more  prosaic  and  somewhat
sobering.
I wish to speak today, with a certain sense of urgency, about the need and possible ways to
decisively resolve Indian banks’ stressed assets.
Since the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) initiated the Asset Quality Review of banks in the second
half of 2015, it appears that possibly up to a sixth of public sector banks’ gross advances are
stressed (non-performing, restructured or written-off), and a significant majority of these are in
fact non-performing assets (NPAs). For banks in the worst shape, the share of assets under
stress has approached or exceeded 20%. This estimate of stressed assets has doubled from
2013 in terms of what had been recognized by banks. The doubling of stressed assets is the
case also for private sector banks, but their ratio of stressed assets to gross advances is far
lower and their capitalization levels far greater. There have been several hints – in the declining
price-to-book ratios of bank equity, as I had observed in an oped piece for the Mint in September
2013, and in the incisive research reports of banking sector analysts – that many assets “parked”
by  banks  under  the  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  cell  were  severely  stressed.  These  assets
were deserving of advance capital provisioning against future recognition as NPAs.
The  Asset  Quality  Review  has  taken  a  massive  stride  forward  in  bringing  the  scale  of  this
problem out in the open and stirring a public debate about it. However, relatively little has been
achieved  in  resolving  the  underlying  assets  to  which  banks  had  lent.  Several  resolution
mechanisms and frameworks have been offered by the RBI to banks to get this going, but the
progress has been painfully slow. Most of the assets remain laden with such high levels of bank
debt that their interest coverage ratio is lower than one; they have little or no capacity to raise
funding for working capital and capital expenditures, or to attract private investors to turn them
around. Original promoters – who rarely put in any financing and primarily provide sweat equity –
have had somewhat of a field day, facing limited dilution, if any, of their initial stakes nor much of
a threat of being outright replaced.
There is a connection between these two outcomes – the lack of a comprehensive recognition of
stressed assets by banks and the absence of any resolution. Both stem from the structure of
incentives at our banks and the fact that stressed assets have been an outcome of excessive
bank lending, en masse, in a relatively short period from 2009 to 2012, and to a concentrated set
of large firms in a number of sectors such as infrastructure, power, telecom, metals (iron and
steel, in particular), engineering-procurement-construction (EPC), and textiles.
Let  me  first  discuss  the  bank  incentives.  Only  a  bank  that  fears  losing  its  deposit  base  or
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
incurring the wrath of its shareholders is likely to recognize losses in a timely manner. In many of
our banks, such market discipline is simply not present at the moment. In others, even if some
such discipline is at work, banker horizon is excessively short until end of the CEO’s term. Banks
lobby for regulatory forbearance; perhaps some loan prospects have turned sour due to bad luck,
but beyond a point, concessions in recognizing losses just ends up being a strategy of kicking
the can down the road and leaving them as legacy assets for the next management team to deal
with.
The  sectoral  concentration  of  losses  substantially  amplifies  this  problem.  Given  the  scale  of
assets  that  needs  restructuring,  it  is  natural  that  the  turnaround  capital  at  asset-restructuring
companies (ARCs) has been limited in comparison. Some capital is simply sitting on the fence
until serious asset restructuring picks up speed. In the meantime, any assets put up for sale can
raise financing only at steep discounts, implying significant haircuts for bank debt. The loss of
capital that would result on bank books and the fear of vigilance actions that such haircuts might
trigger have made it almost impossible to get banks to embrace restructuring.
Effectively, there is no right price at which the market for stressed assets clears if left alone to
private  forces.  Even  with  an  orderly  resolution  mechanism  such  as  the  Insolvency  and
Bankruptcy  Code  in  place,  why  would  banks  rush  to  file  cases?  In  the  unlikely  scenario  that
assets are in fact being sold by banks to investors at steep discounts, ARCs may just asset-strip
rather than do the economic turnaround. After all, these investors have waited far too long and
now wish to generate quick returns to meet the expectations of their own investors.
All this is playing out to near perfection in our setting. Its consequences are pernicious.
At one end, public sector banks are running balance-sheets that seem to be in a perennial need
of recapitalization from its principal owner, i.e., the government, and shying away from lending to
potentially  healthier  industrial  credits.  Bank  credit  growth  has  been  steadily  declining  at  the
stressed banks. Some private sector banks face such headwinds too.
At the other end, sectors with the most stressed assets have excess capacity relative to current
or near-term utilization and no sight of immediate pickup in economic prospects. Promoters have
continued to operate, staying afloat with rollovers from banks which only increase indebtedness,
partly disengaged, partly disgorging cash from the few assets that are running.
The end result has been a silent atrophy of the true potential of these assets.
This situation should be a cause for concern to all of us. It is reminiscent of weak banks and
stagnating  growth  witnessed  by  Japan  in  the  1990s,  with  repercussions  to  date,  and  by  Italy
since 2010. Japan has experienced, and Italy, is in my opinion experiencing, a lost decade.
I believe we are at crossroads and have an important choice to make.
We can choose status quo, but this would be insanity, “doing the same thing over and over again
and expecting different results,” as Albert Einstein put it. It would risk a Japanese or an Italian
style outcome.
Or we can choose to call a spade a spade as Scandinavia did to resolve its banking problems in
the early 90’s and the United States did from October 2008 to June 2009, even if only after letting
a significant bank fail. Ireland and Spain, where the recoveries since the global financial crisis
have not been as salubrious as in the United States, have nevertheless fared better than Italy;
they  too  first  adopted  measures  to  pretend  and  extend  troubled  bank  assets,  but  eventually
recognized the scale of the problem and dealt with them in a decisive manner.
With our healthy current level of growth and future potential, with our hard-fought macroeconomic
stability, with our youth climbing echelons of entrepreneurial success day after day, with our vast
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
expanses of rural India that need infrastructure and modernization, and with our levels of poverty
that have steadily declined but still need substantial reduction, we simply don’t as a society have
any excuse or moral liberty to let the banking sector wounds fester and result in amputation of
healthier parts of the economy.
How do we embark on a better path? I have been thinking hard of ways to swiftly resolve bank
stressed assets. I have tried to draw on the analysis and documentation of similar episodes in
economic  history  that  I  just  alluded  to,  which  in  some  cases  I  have  had  the  good  fortune  to
contribute to and learn from.
Let me mention the key principles to successful restructuring that I have managed to glean:
First, there has to be an incentive provided to banks to get on with it and restructure the stressed
assets at a price that clears the market for these assets. If they don’t do it in a timely manner,
then the alternative should be costlier in terms of the price they receive.
Second, the ultimate focus of restructuring and of assessment as to whether the restructuring
package being offered to the bank is at the “right” price must be the efficiency and viability of the
restructured asset. Generating the best price for the bank at all costs may only result in cosmetic
changes and risk serial non-performance of the assets.
Third,  not  all  of  the  resulting  bank  losses  should  simply  be  footed  by  the  government. As  a
majority shareholder of public sector banks, the government runs the risk of ending up paying for
it  all.  It  should  manage  the  process  at  the  outset  to  avoid  that  outcome.  Wherever  possible,
private  shareholders  of  banks  should  also  be  asked  to  chip  in.  Some  surgical  restructuring
should be undertaken to consolidate and strengthen bank balance-sheets so that private capital
will come in at better valuations. It might have to accept that it is best to let some banks shrink
over  time.  Divestments  should  also  be  on  the  table.  Historically,  significant  restructuring  of
stressed assets has almost always involved significant bank restructuring.
Let me now elaborate “a” plan that employs two different models for stressed assets resolution
and recognizes the concomitant need for bank resolution. I will provide the plan in detail to make
the point that it can be done. What I enunciate should be viewed as an attempt to address all
dimensions of the problem. Its individual parts are, however, not meant to be cherry-picked by or
for the constituency favored by it. That would not work well.
So here it is.
1. Model I: Private Asset Management Company (PAMC).  This  plan  would  be  suitable  for
sectors where the stress is such that assets are likely to have economic value in the short run,
with  moderate  levels  of  debt  forgiveness.  I  conjecture  based  on  anecdotal  observations  that
sectors such as Metals, EPC, Telecom, and Textiles, qualify for this.
1.  In terms of timeline, the banking sector will be asked to resolve and restructure, say its 50
largest stressed exposures in these sectors, by December 31, 2017. The rest can follow a
similar plan in six months thereafter.
2.  For each asset, turnaround specialists and private investors – other than affiliates of banks
exposed  to  the  asset  –  will  be  called  upon  to  propose  several  resolution  plans.  Each
resolution  plan  will  lay  out  sustainable  debt  and  debt-for-equity  conversions  for  banks  to
facilitate  the  issuance  of  new  equity  and  possibly  some  new  debt  to  fund  the  investment
needs. We may have to consider that the sustainable portion of bank debt does not have to
be greater than some minimum amount, so as to allow for a large haircut if necessary for
economic recovery of the asset. Each plan would lay out cash flow prospects, whether the
promoter stays or not, and if yes, with what stake.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
3.  Each resolution plan would then get vetted and rated by at least two credit rating agencies to
assess the financial health (interest coverage ratio, leverage, etc.), economic health (sector,
margins, etc.), and management quality (promoter or the new team). The rating would be for
the asset and not just for bank debt in case additional debt is issued under the plan.
4.  Feasible plans would be those that improve the rating of the asset (presently likely to be “C”
or “D”) such that minimum of the two credit ratings is at or above a threshold level, e.g., at
least just below the investment-grade level. The intention is that the asset should not have a
high  likelihood  of  ending  up  in  stress  soon  after  restructuring.  Therefore,  bank  debt
forgiveness may have to be high enough and its converted equity stake low enough so that
new investors can come in with a controlling stake and have incentives to turn the asset
around.
5.  Banks can then choose among the feasible plans. Coordination problems can be reduced
by  employing  RBI’s  Central  Repository  for  Information  on  Large  Credits  (CRLIC)  and
requiring  that  all  plans  with  2/3rd  approval  by  outstanding  bank  credit  can  proceed.  The
selected plan would simply be crammed down on any dissenting creditors.
6.  Haircuts taken by banks under a feasible plan would be required by government ruling as
being  acceptable  by  the  vigilance  authorities.  Sustainable  debt  would  be  upgraded  to
standard status for all involved banks. The promoters, however, would have NO choice as to
what restructuring plan is accepted, and may potentially get replaced and/or diluted, as per
the preference of and depending on the price at which the new managing investors come in.
7.  At expiration of the timeline, each exposure that is not resolved will be subject to a steep
sector-based  haircut  for  the  bank  consortium,  possibly  close  to  100%.  The  promoter  will
automatically  have  to  leave.  These  assets  would  be  put  into  our  new  Insolvency  and
Bankruptcy  Code  regime. Alternately,  they  could  be  put  up  for  sale  to ARCs  and  private
equity  investors  who  can  turn  around  the  assets,  levering  them  up  with  fresh  finance,  if
necessary. If designed right, only the worst assets should end up in this scenario. However,
the  possibility  of  ending  up  here  would  serve  as  a  credible  off-equilibrium  threat  so  that
banks, even the most exposed ones, cannot hold up the restructuring.
There are ways to arrange and concentrate the management of these assets into a single or few
private asset management companies (PAMCs), at the outset or right after restructuring plans
are approved. These companies would resemble a large private-equity fund run by a team of
professional asset managers. Besides bringing in their own capital, they could raise financing
from investors against equity stakes in individual assets or in the fund as a whole, i.e., in the
portfolio  of  assets.  The  portfolio  approach  might  help  investors  diversify  risks  on  individual
assets, improve valuations, and attract greater capital. Bank creditors can set up an oversight
committee to ensure cash flows are flowing in and out of the asset restructuring company as per
the security rights agreed in the restructuring plans.
Let  me  emphasize  that  under  this  model,  the  asset  management  company  would  be  entirely
private,  like  the  “Phoenix”  structure  set  up  in  Spain  after  2012  to  deal  with  bank  NPAs  in
Machinery, Steel and Winery.
Let me now turn to
2.  Model  II:  The  National  Asset  Management  Company  (NAMC).  This  plan  would  be
necessary for sectors where the problem is not just one of excess capacity but possibly also of
economically unviable assets in the short- to medium-term. Take, for example, the Power sector,
where  projects  have  been  created  to  deliver  aggregate  capacity  that  is  beyond  the  estimated
peak utilization anytime soon. Many of these are stalled as they have no fuel inputs and little or no
income realization due to lack of credible purchase agreements. Their scrap value is likely small
and the only efficient use is as an ongoing concern. If input and output requirements are sorted
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
out, and as power consumption needs rise, these projects could eventually provide value. For a
country with per-capita consumption of electricity that is only one-third of the world average, it is
reasonable to expect that a well-run power asset won’t end up being a white elephant.
Unlike the first model (PAMC) where asset recovery is likely to be relatively quick, these assets
may require a long time to start generating cash flows. In addition, the government should have
incentives  to  clear  approvals  and  purchase  agreements  to  make  them  viable.  For  both  these
reasons, such assets would be best quarantined into a national asset management company
(NAMC).  The  NAMC  would  perform  several  functions  to  get  the  ball  rolling:  raise  debt,  say
government-guaranteed  in  part,  for  its  financing  needs;  possibly  raise  some  more  to  pay  off
banks at a haircut, likely steep but softened by payment in the form of security receipts against
the  asset’s  cash  flows;  keep  a  minority  equity  stake  for  the  government;  and,  bring  in  asset
managers such as ARCs and private equity to manage and turn around the assets, individually
or  as  a  portfolio.  Infrastructure  assets  that  are  also  long-lived  and  create  externalities
(development  of  townships,  improvements  in  overall  productivity,  etc.)  could  be  resolved  in
similar way.
These two models of asset restructuring – one private and the other quasi-government – share
many  common  features  with  approaches  that  have  been  adopted  for  resolution  of  stressed
assets in history: Sweden (“Securum” and “Retriva”) in the early 1990’s; in the United States in
dealing with the Savings and Loans Crisis (“Resolution Trust Corporation”); in Japan (post-1998
via its Deposit Insurance Corporation); in Indonesia (“IBRA”), Malaysia (“Danaharta”) and South
Korea  (“KAMCO”)  to  deal  with  the  South  East  Asian  crisis;  and  more  recently,  in  Ireland
(“NAMA”), Spain (“Sareb”), and again the United States (“TARP” along with Fannie Mae, Freddie
Mac and Federal Housing Administration). In fact, the European Banking Authority has proposed
a similar structure to deal with the NPAs of European banks.
Before discussing what all this would imply for bank balance-sheets, let me pose and answer the
question: Are these supposed to be “bad banks”? The answer is NO. While I have previously
used the phrase “bad bank” for such ideas, over time I have come to dislike the title. A “bad bank”
conveys the impression that this entity is to operate as a bank but has bad assets to start with. In
fact, the idea is not to operate these entities as banks at all. Resolution agencies set up as banks
that originate or guarantee lending have ended up being future reckless lenders, notably in the
case  of  Germany  which  has  often  aggregated  stressed  assets  of  its  Landesbanken  into  bad
banks. I would argue this has also been the story of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac with respect to
housing booms and busts in the United States. It would be better to limit the objective of these
asset  management  companies  to  orderly  resolution  of  stressed  assets  with  graceful  exit
thereafter; in other words, no mission creep over time to do anything else such as raise deposits,
start a new lending portfolio, or help deliver social programs. It is essential to keep the business
model of these entities simple to make them attractive for private investors with expertise for the
main task on hand – asset restructuring.
A moment of reflection clarifies that under both models I proposed, bank balance-sheets would
be  freed  up  from  the  overhang  of  stressed  assets  and  allowed  to  focus  on  their  healthier
activities. The catch is that given the haircuts involved, there will be also be a need for decisive
3. Bank resolution. We keep hearing clarion calls for more and more government funding for
recapitalization of our public sector banks. Clearly, more recapitalization with government funds
is essential. But few have suggested that the government should adopt measures to economize
its total cost. It should ask in return from banks it recapitalizes significant corrective actions, and
wherever  possible,  injections  of  private  capital  for  loss-sharing  with  the  taxpayers.  The
expectation of government dole outs might have been set by the past practice of throwing more
money after the bad. Take for instance our bank recapitalization plan of 2008–09 after the global
financial crisis: banks that experienced the worst outcomes received the most capital in a relative
sense  to  get  back  to  the  regulatory  capital  norms.  We  must  not  allocate  capital  so  poorly,
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
recreate  “Heads  I  Win,  Tails  the  Taxpayer  Loses”  incentives,  and  sow  the  seeds  of  another
lending excess.
There are better ways to do it building upon some performance targets already set under the
ongoing recapitalization plan. Let me propose five options:
1.  Private capital raising: The healthier public sector banks could have raised private capital
by  issuing  deep  discount  rights  in  2013,  and  some  can  still  do  so  now.  They  must  be
required to do this to share the government’s burden of recapitalizing banks. It might be a
good way to restore some market discipline and get their shareholders to more seriously
care about bank board and management decisions.
2.  Asset sales: Some banks will have assets or loan portfolios that are in good enough shape
to  be  sold  in  the  market.  Assets  could  be  collected  across  banks  and  securitized  into
tranches  that  are  credit-rated,  potentially  creating  some  investor  demand  for  buying  it  at
different  levels  of  risk  profiles.  Such  asset  sales  can  generate  some  of  the  needed
recapitalization.
3.  Mergers: As many have pointed out, it is not clear we need so many public sector banks.
The system will be better off if they are consolidated into fewer but healthier banks. After all,
we  do  have  cooperative  banks  and  micro-finance  institutions  to  provide  community-level
banking. So some banks can be merged, as a quid pro quo for timely government capital
injection  into  the  combined  entity.  It  would  offer  the  opportunity  to  rejig  management
responsibility away from those who have under-performed or dragged their feet the most.
Synergies  in  lending  activity  and  branch  locations  could  be  identified  to  economize  on
intermediation costs, allowing sales of real estate where branches are redundant. Voluntary
retirement schemes (VRS) can be offered to manage headcount and usher in a younger,
digitally-savvy talent pool into these banks.
4.  Tough prompt corrective action:  Undercapitalized  banks  could  be  shown  some  tough
love and be subjected to corrective action. Such action should entail no further growth in
deposit base and lending. This will also restore some market discipline in deposit migration,
away from the weakest public sector banks that have price to book equity (P/B) ratios of
around 0.5 or lower, to healthier public sector banks (P/B ratios around 1) and private sector
banks (P/B ratios of 1.5 to 4.5). The market has given its verdict as to where the growth
potential in our banking sector lies and deposit growth should be allowed to reflect that.
5.  Divestments:  Undertaking  these  measures  would  improve  overall  banking  sector  health
and  market-to-book  valuations,  creating  an  opportune  time  for  the  government  to  divest
some of its ownership of the restructured banks. This would also reduce the overall amount
the government needs to inject.
There are many details to work out. But I hope this provides a start. It is going to require being
balanced and creative, holistic and uncompromising, in achieving the end goal. Piece by piece
approach with all discretion given to banks simply hasn’t worked. Time is of the essence if we
are to restore corporate investment and job creation.
Sustainable progress in an economy cannot occur when a set of players is allowed to hold up
the  efficient  allocation  of  capital.  Their  owning  a  smaller  share  of  assets  can  help  unlock
economic value; their hogging of these assets will only lead to further value-erosion.
I hope we can work together and collectively make the right choice.
Thank you for your kind attention.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
