Yves  Mersch:  Risk  management  in  times  of  non-conventional
monetary policy
Keynote speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank,  at  the  Joint  Bank  of  Portugal  and  European  Central  Bank  Conference  on  “Risk
Management for Central Banks”, Lisbon, 25 September 2017.
 Let me start by thanking you for coming to this joint ECB-Banco de Portugal conference, and the
Banco  de  Portugal  for  hosting  us  on  this  occasion.  I  am  delighted  to  see  central  bank  risk
managers, practitioners and academics here in Lisbon to exchange views on risk management
for  central  banks.  This  topic  has  gained  such  importance  in  recent  years  as  central  banks
across the globe, including the ECB, have sharply expanded their balance sheets, even though
the time for ever more of the same is behind us. Like the many great maritime expeditions that
started  out  from  this  country,  some  of  our  endeavours  in  recent  years  have  taken  us  into
uncharted territory. Now is a good time to take stock of what we have learnt and map out what
may come next.
Following stable principles in the Eurosystem’s risk management framework
1
The  Eurosystem  has  a  clearly  defined  objective,  enshrined  in  the  Treaty,  to  preserve  price
stability in the euro area.  The Treaty does not speak of eligible counterparties, collateral haircuts
or  issue  share  limits  for  bond  purchases.  However,  you  would  be  mistaken  in  assuming  that
managing  financial  risks  has  no  role  in  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  implementation  –
especially in the light of the significant balance sheet expansion over the past few years. On the
contrary, we have applied the guiding principles of our financial risk management framework in a
stable manner. We established these principles long before we embarked on non-conventional
policies, not least because we have a statutory obligation to lend only against adequate collateral.
We continue to apply them to standard as well as non-standard policy measures.
Broadly speaking, these principles are protection, consistency, simplicity and transparency. This
means that – if multiple monetary policy options exist to fulfil our mandate – we should select the
measures that minimise our own exposure to financial risks. This idea is sometimes referred to
as  risk  efficiency.  These  principles  also  imply  that  we  aim  to  avoid  undue  distortions  in  the
markets  in  which  we  operate.  We  trade  at  market  prices  and  we  adopt  a  risk-equivalent
approach in setting our risk control measures. In addition, the principles require risk management
to be an integral part of decision-making in the institution. So we are compelled to measure risk
in an objective and consistent way across different types of operation. Lastly, our frameworks
promote transparency and simplicity, and we champion adherence to these principles by being
rules-based ourselves and as predictable as possible in our operations.
We have come together here to discuss risk management for central banks and the lessons
from the crisis. But, in addition to looking back, I would like to take this opportunity to map out
some fundamental elements that should be part of the future risk management framework, once
we  have  returned  to  a  more  conventional  monetary  policy  environment.  Of  course,  these  are
largely  informed  by  some  of  the  actions  we  took  over  the  past  decade  and  founded  on  the
principles I have just described. So while we are clearly not in a position to move to this new
steady state in one go, its broad features can already be seen today.
Navigating through gusts, storms and crosswinds
Risk managers, including central bank risk managers, are generally prudent. Such prudence is
not only necessary to preserve market confidence in the central bank’s independence and ability
to comply with its mandate, it is also appropriate since we are entrusted with public money. In a
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
crisis, however, the central bank’s exposure to financial risks can – and may indeed have to –
increase, because it is still expected to fulfil its policy mandate. The non-conventional measures
that we implemented were necessary and proportionate to achieve our mandate; they have also
contributed to financial stability by reducing financial risks in the euro area. There are, of course,
limits  to  the  actions  of  central  banks,  as  monetary  policy  cannot  address  structural  or  fiscal
sources of financial distress, nor can it step in to rectify national deficiencies as our mandate
applies to the euro area as a whole. It is important for central banks to strike the right balance in
this regard, and for financial risks to be correctly measured, properly understood and sufficiently
contained.
Moreover, the European Court of Justice, in its judgment on outright monetary transactions, has
confirmed the need to provide sufficient risk management measures that are “likely to reduce the
risk of losses to which the ECB is exposed”.
Speaking  in  a  country  with  a  proud  history  of  maritime  exploration  let  me  recall  the  words  of
Seneca, the Younger:
When a man does not know what harbour he is making for, no wind is the right wind.
The  “harbour”  of  a  central  bank  is  its  mandate.  The  principles  it  seeks  to  adhere  to  are  the
“compass” that helps it fulfil this mandate. When a central bank is facing a crisis, it needs to
consider whether its monetary policy operations are still proportionate. This need stems from the
obligation under primary law (proportionality principle) to properly weigh up all the components of
a given measure against one another. The aim is to determine whether the expected benefits of
the measure outweigh its costs. As a general rule, a stable risk management approach and a
through-the-cycle  approach  are  advisable.  However,  extraordinary  circumstances  may  require
extensions of the framework, such as the acceptance of additional collateral. If this still proves
insufficient,  unprecedented  types  of  monetary  policy  measures  may  call  for  entirely  new
operations, accompanied by new risk management measures.
The evolution of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations in response to the crisis featured
all  these  activities.  Our  risk  management  framework  has  evolved  accordingly,  guided  by  our
stable principles.
First, the “gusty winds”: during the early stages of the financial crisis, we increased the amount
of  liquidity  we  provided  to  the  banking  system  without  tightening  the  risk  control  framework,
despite  the  onset  of  stress  in  the  system.  In  this  respect,  our  risk  management  framework
followed a through-the-cycle approach – thereby avoiding further distress to the banking system.
It also stood in stark contrast to the more pro-cyclical nature of the commercial banking sector’s
risk management approach – and was thus part of the central bank’s duty to lean against such
potentially self-reinforcing winds.
It  was  possible  to  avoid  tightening  the  framework  without  exposing  the  Eurosystem  to  undue
risks because the pre-crisis framework had been calibrated in a sufficiently prudent manner. In
fact, the framework proved to be robust enough to protect the Eurosystem from losses resulting
from counterparties defaulting, such as Lehman Brothers or the Icelandic banks – although the
complexity  of  the  collateral  in  some  of  these  cases  led  to  lengthy  liquidation  processes.  This
experience certainly merited a careful review of the collateral rules for complex securities and
financial  innovations.  More  broadly,  it  justified  taking  steps  towards  reducing  the  reliance  on
external credit ratings, in line with the G20 agenda.
Second, the “storm broke out”: after the default of Lehman Brothers, it became evident that such
standard  measures  were  no  longer  sufficient  to  achieve  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  We
therefore provided enhanced credit support and, later on, non-standard credit operations in the
light of the increased  liquidity  demands  from  the  banking  system.  To  avoid  potential  collateral
shortages  when  satisfying  this  increased  demand,  we  expanded  the  range  of  assets  against
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
which  banks  can  draw  liquidity  from  the  Eurosystem.  But  at  the  same  time,  we  followed  the
principle of risk equivalence with the assets accepted under the pre-crisis rules.
Let me give you a concrete example: since 2012, several national central banks of the euro area,
including the one hosting this conference, have accepted additional bank loans as collateral. To
ensure  risk  equivalence,  haircuts  on  these  assets  were  higher  than  those  used  in  regular
operations.
This brings me to the third phase of the crisis, the “crosswinds”: in recent years the continued
decline  in  inflation  rates  in  the  euro  area  called  for  additional  non-standard  measures  –  I  am
referring, of course, to the asset purchase programmes. This type of liquidity provision was a
novelty for the Eurosystem, although the instrument of outright purchases has been envisaged
as  one  of  the  legal  and  operational  tools  of  the  Eurosystem  since  its  inception. Accordingly,
additional risk control frameworks needed to be developed to keep the financial risks in check
given the significant rise in exposures.
Our Asset Purchase Program, especially the PSPP, its largest component, is a case in point:
the Eurosystem applies strict eligibility requirements. Purchases are subject to issuer and issue
limits. We closely monitor the risks of the programme in place and any possible deviations from
the benchmarks, e.g. in the CBPP3. Our due diligence can, under very strict conditions, lead to
purchases of covered bonds that credit rating agencies rate below our regular eligibility threshold.
On  the  other  hand,  our  due  diligence  can  also  lead  to  additional  risk  control  measures  for
particularly risky covered bonds.
Given that we have not suffered any impairment since we started the expanded asset purchase
programmes, I feel justified in saying that the financial risks have been successfully contained so
far.
Maintaining  the  risk  management  principles  while  returning  to  a  more  conventional
monetary policy
It is clear that, once we have seen a sufficiently sustained adjustment in the path of inflation, we
will continue to prudently adjust our tool-box of monetary policy instruments, as we have been
doing since December last year. This will also be the moment when we have to carefully review
how  our  operational  and  risk  management  framework  has  deviated  from  its  pre-crisis  state.
Where  necessary,  some  temporary  measures  will  be  rolled  back.  But  we  will  also  consider
whether  there  are  areas  where  we  have  taken  new  risks  onto  our  balance  sheet  –  and
consequently where certain elements should be kept.
The developments I have just described offer some insights into how the future steady state risk
management framework might look. At the moment, I see four key features:
First,  while  the  temporary  collateral  framework  has  successfully  eased  potential  collateral
shortages, it could be argued that it should not become part of the regular framework. As liquidity
demand declines, there will also be less need for an expanded set of eligible collateral. Whether
some temporary measures might be transformed into a state-contingent framework, ready to be
activated  again  in  the  future  if  circumstances  so  require,  is  an  open  question. As  experience
shows, each crisis needs a tailored response.
Second,  we  will  need  to  keep  the  flexibility  to  adjust  the  collateral  framework  to  financial
innovations,  especially  when  it  comes  to  complex  new  financial  products.  The  new  “simple,
transparent and standardised” securitisation regulation is a case in point. It will allow us to better
assess the collateral we accept. In a similar way, we will need to forcefully deal with new types of
securities, such as conditional pass-through covered bonds, whose risks may not yet have been
fully appreciated.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third,  we  will  have  to  retain  the  risk  control  frameworks  for  the  asset  purchase  programmes
beyond the horizon of our net asset purchases. As long as we keep outright portfolios on our
balance  sheet,  the  reasons  behind  the  risk  control  measures,  including  eligibility  criteria,
purchase limits, benchmarks ensuring diversification and the different risk-sharing agreements,
will continue to apply.
Fourth, the Governing Council will have to decide whether we ought to rely more on our own
judgement  about  the  quality  of  assets  and  counterparties  and  to  further  expand  Eurosystem-
internal credit assessment systems, steps which would require additional resources. It means
further enhancing the due diligence on external credit ratings, for which sufficient transparency
on  the  judgement  underlying  these  ratings  is  essential.  And  it  means  using  supervisory
information to ensure an efficient implementation of monetary policy operations – the introduction
of the European single supervisory mechanism has brought about fundamental improvements
here, as it allows for the sharing of relevant information within the legal limits of the separation
principle.
To  conclude,  I  believe  the  Eurosystem’s  risk  management  framework  has  successfully
weathered  the  financial  storms  of  the  past  few  years.  The  reason  is  that  we  followed  stable
principles  when  the  size  of  our  operations,  the  assets  accepted  as  collateral  or  the  types  of
operations  changed.  Looking  ahead,  we  can  already  start  thinking  about  a  financial  risk
management framework that will be appropriate for a central bank that has returned to a more
conventional environment for the conduct of monetary policy, while still following these principles.
I now look forward to the panel discussions, which will pick up on some of those issues in more
detail, and to hearing your views.
1
 Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
