Peter Praet: How does monetary policy secure price stability over
the medium term?
Intervention by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the 4th European Technical Consumer Goods Retail Summit, Berlin, 30 March 2017.
The origin of the global financial crisis
 In  2008  the  global  economy  faced  a  calamity  unparalleled  since  the  Second  World  War.  The
crisis  had  been  preceded  by  a  mood  of  over-optimism  in  several  advanced  economies.
Expectations about future income were at odds with slowing underlying growth, giving rise to an
“expectations  gap”.  In  the  euro  area,  expectations  were  reinforced  by  a  revived  sense  of
economic prosperity that was associated with the introduction of monetary union. Firms were
borrowing  against  their  future  income  expectations  in  some  countries;  households  and
governments  were  doing  likewise  in  other  countries. Also,  considerable  financial  liberalisation
and deregulation had taken place which made debt accumulation easier. In the euro area, this
was compounded by increased financial integration which led to a substantial rise in intra-euro
area cross-border flows. As banks acted as intermediaries in both debtor and creditor countries,
they too had become overexposed.
When  the  cycle  did  turn,  central  banks  were  confronted  with  a  multifaceted  and  pernicious
challenge. The “expectations gap” had left a number of economic agents overindebted and in
need of balance sheet repair. Overextended banks needed to deleverage. And with this, a so-
called balance sheet recession ensued.
Monetary policy responses to the crisis
The euro area crisis evolved in three main phases, each of which required a different monetary
policy response.
The first phase was an abrupt liquidity crisis triggered by the turning of the global financial cycle
and the subsequent collapse of Lehman Brothers. Banks suddenly became very uncertain about
the  underlying  health  of  other  banks  and  stopped  lending  to  each  other.  Consequently,  global
central banks stepped in with forceful and coordinated interventions to provide essential liquidity
to the banking sector. Without this response, the financial system would have collapsed and a far
deeper recession would have occurred.
This phase of the crisis had profound effects on the banking sector – effects which in the euro
area  were  not  addressed  as  swiftly  as  in  other  jurisdictions  due  to  the  incompleteness  of  its
institutional set-up. Sovereigns needed to support their national banking sectors even though they
lacked the fiscal capacity to do so, aggravating the link between banks and governments in the
euro area.
This  paved  the  way  for  the  second  phase  of  the  crisis:  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  its
amplification  through  the  “bank-sovereign”  nexus.  As  the  cost  of  borrowing  for  certain
governments increased, banks with exposures to this debt came under intense market pressure,
ultimately leading to entire national banking systems losing market access. This in turn resulted
in financial fragmentation and a serious disruption to the monetary transmission mechanism. In
other words, as the ECB lowered interest rates, these reductions were not being passed on to
firms and households to the same extent in every euro area country.
First,  to  ensure  banks  could  depend  on  longer-term  funding,  central  bank  liquidity  was  made
available  for  up  to  three  years  and  the  list  of  eligible  collateral  that  could  be  used  to  access
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
central bank money was expanded. This eased the pressure on banks to sell less liquid assets
at depressed prices to access obtain cash, a process which would have rapidly reduced the flow
of credit to the economy.
Second, the announcement of Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) in 2012 removed the euro
area break-up risk which was being priced into governments’ borrowing costs and the severe
economic dislocation that would have occurred. Second, the announcement of Outright Monetary
Transactions (OMT) in 2012 reduced the likelihood of a break-up of the euro area. This risk was
being  priced  into  governments’  borrowing  costs  and  would  have  resulted  in  severe  economic
dislocation.  Nonetheless,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  left  a  damaging  legacy  on  the  euro  area
economy and laid the groundwork for the third phase of the crisis.
In  the  subsequent  years,  as  the  euro  area  recovery  struggled  to  gain  traction,  banks  in  large
parts  of  the  euro  area  –  particularly  in  vulnerable  countries  –  were  engaged  in  a  drawn-out
process  of  deleveraging  their  balance  sheets  on  account  of  the  legacy  from  [impact  of]  the
second  phase  of  the  crisis.  In  early  2014  the  third  phase  of  the  crisis  started  and  by  that
summer, it was clear that additional monetary policy measures would be required. Inflation had
begun to drift downwards and there was a palpable risk of a self-sustained period of deflation.
As the main policy interest rate, the interest rate on the deposit facility, was already at zero, the
Governing  Council  needed  to  introduce  new  measures  to  provide  additional  stimulus  to  the
economy and steer inflation back to levels below, but close to 2%. To this end, the ECB sought
to affect the range of interest rates which are relevant for private sector financing conditions.
Starting in June 2014, the Governing Council introduced a negative deposit rate of –0.1%, and
reduced it by a further 10 basis points in September 2014. This marked the first round of cuts
into negative territory and was viewed as a way of providing additional stimulus to the economy
as it extended the scope of conventional monetary policy.
Over the same period, a credit easing package was announced which included targeted longer-
term refinancing operations (TLTROs I), a third covered bond purchases programme (CBPP3)
and  an  asset-backed  securities  purchase  programme  (ABSPP).   The  overarching  motivation
underpinning the design of this package was twofold. First, to improve the pass-through for each
euro of liquidity injected into the financial system to private sector borrowing costs and second, to
reinforce the accommodative monetary policy stance.
1
2
Credit  easing  measures  influence  the  economy  via  three  main  transmission  channels:  direct
pass-through, portfolio rebalancing and signalling.  The direct pass-through channel is the most
prominent  one.  It  directly  lowers  banks  borrowing  costs,  which  in  turn  lower  lending  rates  for
firms  and  households,  and  this  supports  consumption  and  investment.  In  the  case  of  the
TLTROs I, which were specifically aimed at encouraging bank lending to the private sector in an
environment of deleveraging, banks were able to borrow at a very favourable interest rate from
the Eurosystem. The cheaper funding costs were intended to increase competition in the market
for bank loans, which would consequently lower borrowing costs for firms and households. For
the CBPP3 and ABSPP, purchases increase the demand for these securities and as a result
lead  to  higher  prices  and  lower  yields. As  these  securities  are  backed  by  loans  to  firms  and
households, the price increase encourages banks to issue more loans so that they can be used
to issue more asset-backed securities and covered bonds. This increase in loan issuance also
fosters competition and lowers borrowing costs for firms and households.
At the beginning of 2015, the inflation outlook had deteriorated and there was an increasing risk of
a  too  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation.  As  a  result,  in  January  2015  the  Governing  Council
announced the expanded asset purchase programme (APP), which encompassed the CBPP3
and the ABSPP as well as the introduction of a public sector purchase programme (PSPP). The
monetary stimulus from the PSPP works through several transmission channels, but the most
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
powerful is via portfolio rebalancing. For example, this can mean that not only the asset prices
increase in market segments where direct purchases occur, but higher prices can also spill over
into  non-targeted  market  segments.  This  leads  to  a  decline  in  yields  and  lowers  the  cost  of
borrowing  on  capital  markets  for  firms. At  the  same  time,  the  general  compression  of  yields
across  all  asset  classes  incentivises  banks  to  rebalance  their  portfolios  towards  assets  with
higher risk-adjusted returns, such as loans to firms and households.
Not long after the APP became operational, the Governing Council introduced the second round
of  cuts  to  the  deposit  interest  rate.  This  decrease  into  more  negative  territory  meant  that  the
negative deposit rate was  now  viewed  as  an  instrument  to  empower  the  portfolio  rebalancing
channel of the APP, as it incentivised banks to invest the proceeds they received from selling
assets in higher yielding assets.
Overall,  these  measures  have  been  designed  to  complement  each  other  and  have  proved
adaptable and effective to the series of shocks which have buffeted the euro area economy since
their introduction. Indeed, the APP has been recalibrated three times since its introduction and in
March  2016  the  Governing  Council  announced  four  more  targeted  longer-term  refinancing
operations (TLTROs II) to further support credit availability to euro area firms and households.
The economic impact of monetary policy measures
Our measures are working their way through the financial system and have led to a major easing
of  financing  conditions  for  euro  area  firms  and  households,  benefited  credit  creation  and
contributed to a more robust and sustained economic recovery.
A  week  ago  we  conducted  the  fourth  and  last  operation  under  the  second  round  of  Targeted
Long-term Refinancing Operations (TLTROs), the so-called TLTRO-II, which we announced in
March 2016 as part of an effort to forestall the risks of renewed transmission impairments that
we saw early last year – in the wake of another episode of acute financial instability – and the
consequences that a break-down in bank transmission could have had for price stability in the
euro  area.  The  total  amount  borrowed  under  TLTRO-II,  EUR  740  billion,  has  surpassed  our
internal  expectations  by  far.  Together  with  its  predecessor,  TLTRO-I,  these  instruments  were
among the most effective components of the policy package which we have been enacting since
June 2014. The main channel through which they played through to the broad economy has been
the  interest  rate  channel.  When  the  facility  was  announced  in  June  2014  the  ECB  had  been
easing its monetary policy stance for almost three years. Yet, despite a reduction of the overnight
interest rate to levels close to zero, banks in a large fraction of the euro area economy had not
been  reducing  their  lending  rates  at  the  same  pace  and,  in  some  countries,  in  fact  they  had
tightened credit conditions dramatically. The stimulus was not moving downstream to reach the
real economy.
That trend was reversed almost instantly after the June 2014 announcement. Already over the
summer of 2014 – even before the first operation was allotted in September of that year – lending
rates plunged to levels unseen since 2010. Why did this happen? The new facility gave banks a
long-term source of funding at a very moderate cost on condition that they would lend the funds
on to the economy. This turned up the competitiveness temperature in the market for bank credit
which,  up  to  that  point  in  time,  had  become  polarised  between  banks  with  scarce  access  to
funding and limited capacity to create credit, on the one hand, and banks with normal access to
funding on the other. None of the two types of banks had a capacity or an incentive to provide
credit to the economy on affordable conditions. The new operation put all banks on the same
funding  footing  and  thus  created  the  conditions  for  the  banking  industry  as  a  whole  to  start
competing again for good credit.
As a result of TLTROs and, in due time, the other instruments that were added, bank lending
rates for both firms and households have dropped by more than 110 basis points since 2014 and
are now at historical lows. Encouragingly, the improvement in credit conditions is occurring both
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
within  and  across  euro  area  countries.  Borrowing  costs  in  vulnerable  countries  are  now
approaching levels observed in the less vulnerable countries. Euro area small and medium-sized
enterprises  (SMEs)  appear  to  have  particularly  benefited  from  the  increasing  pass-through  of
policy  rates.  Lending  rates  on  very  small  loans  (below  €250,000)  have  declined  by  177  basis
points, and bank lending rates on all non-financial corporation (NFC) loans have declined by 113
basis points.
This sharp decline in bank lending rates has also been accompanied by improvements in access
to  credit  for  firms  and  households.  Bank  lending  volumes  have  been  on  an  upward  trend.  In
January, lending to households recorded its fastest growth rate since May 2011, while corporate
lending, as in the  previous  month,  recorded  its  highest  reading  since  2009.  Since  September
2014, when the first TLTRO was conducted, bank loans to households have increased by 3.8%,
while bank loans to non-financial companies have increased by 3.1%.
As  overall  financing  conditions  have  eased  and  credit  growth  increased,  improvements  in  the
euro  area’s  economic  performance  have  followed.  Indeed,  the  current  recovery  is  showing
considerable  resilience,  which  to  a  large  extent  reflects  the  fact  that  domestic  demand  is  the
primary driver of growth. At the same time, there are encouraging signs that both global growth
prospects and world trade are strengthening and may well act as tailwinds to further support the
recovery.
Monetary  policy  is  playing  a  central  role  in  supporting  consumption:  lower  interest  rates  are
ensuring favourable borrowing conditions and encouraging households to bring forward durable
consumption  as  well  as  firms’  investment.  Consumption  of  durable  goods  has  rebounded  in
recent years, and especially in countries where credit was previously very tight. While investment
has  responded  more  slowly,  monetary  policy  is  helping  create  the  conditions  for  a  stronger
investment revival through its overall effect on the economy.
The euro area cyclical recovery is gaining momentum, broadening across sectors and countries.
While  the  economic  outlook  is  now  better  than  it  has  been  for  many  years,  downside  risks
remain, albeit less pronounced than they once were.
The  firming  of  the  recovery  has  not  yet  translated  into  a  durable  strengthening  of  inflation
dynamics. Headline inflation has increased, but for the most part this reflects rising energy and
food price inflation. Underlying inflation pressures continue to remain subdued. According to our
latest projections, inflation is expected to move towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the
forecast  horizon.  We  are  not  yet  sufficiently  confident  that  inflation  will  converge  to  levels
consistent with our aim in a durable manner. Inflation dynamics still remain reliant on the very
substantial degree of monetary accommodation which prevails.
Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  has  reaffirmed  its  monetary  policy  stance,
including its forward guidance, in order to secure a sustained convergence in inflation towards
our aim objective.
1
2
The first TLTROs took place in September 2014. In September 2014, the ECB announced the launch of the
CBPP3 and the ABSPP.
For more details see “The transmission of the ECB’s recent non-standard monetary policy measures” ECB
Economic Bulletin, Issue 7/2015.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
