SOUTHERN CONE AND ANDEAN OPPORTUNITIES CONFERENCE 
CHILE: THE VIEW FROM THE CENTRAL BANK 
  Mario Marcel1/ 
Governor, Central Bank of Chile 
April 2017 
 Current macroeconomic conditions and prospects in the monetary policy scenario 
 
1.  The last few months have brought mixed signals for the Chilean economy.  On the one 
hand, 2016 ended in a low tone, with a slowdown in activity and inflation. A series of one-
off events extended economic weakness into the first quarter of 2017, lowering forecasts for 
the year as a whole. On the other, the global outlook appears more favorable, both for the 
growth  of  trade  partners  and  terms  of  trade.  This  suggests  a  gradual  improvement  of 
economic  prospects  for  the  Chilean  economy  which  should  be  further  supported  by  an 
expansionary monetary policy as long as inflation remains below target. 
 
2.  Activity data and expectations in advanced economies have been more upbeat, marked by 
better than expected performance by the manufacturing sector and a broadening of the growth 
outlook across countries following years of stagnation. As a result, deflationary risks have 
dissipated, as inflation is expected to return to more normal levels. The Federal Reserve (Fed) 
has continued to normalize monetary policy and monetary authorities in Europe and Japan 
appear  to  have  set  aside  the  possibility  of  additional  stimulus  measures.  Markets  have 
incorporated these changes in their expectations avoiding any serious disruptions. Along with 
better signs in advanced economies, activity in China has remained relatively stable, which 
contrasts with what had been observed one year ago.  
 
3.  In this context, there has been an increase in the willingness to take on risk in financial 
markets, increasing stock market indices, reducing sovereign risk premiums and increasing 
capital flows to emerging markets. Commodity prices have also benefitted. Copper, our main 
export product, has been trading at prices near two year highs and prospects for the next few 
years have improved, which has had a material impact on the Chilean terms of trade. Thus, 
based  on  better  growth  prospects  for  our  trading  partners,  favorable  external  financial 
conditions  and  increased  terms  of  trade,  the  baseline  scenario  included  in  the    Monetary 
Policy Report published at the beginning of April, considered that, for the next two years, the 
Chilean economy will receive an external impulse higher than considered at the end of 2016 
(Figure 1).  
 
                                                 
1/ Keynote speech at the VI JP Morgan Southern Cone and Andean Opportunities Conference, April 25th, 2017. This speech 
is based upon that delivered at The Council of the Americas, April 20th, 2017.  
  
4.  On the domestic front, inflation has been consistent with what was expected in December. 
The annual variation of the CPI fell to 2.7% in March, a significant drop compared to the 
4.5% figure of a year ago. The behavior of the nominal exchange rate, which has appreciated 
relative  to  its  level  one  year  ago,  has  been  a  fundamental  driver  of  these  dynamics.  The 
appreciation has had a greater impact in the decline of the goods component of the CPIEFE 
index (our core inflation measure). In fact, the goods component of core inflation dropped 
from nearly 5% at the beginning of 2016 to 0.3% in March. The services component has been 
stickier, and has dropped from the same levels the first few month of last year to  3.3% in 
March. Approximately ¾ of the prices included in this component are managed or indexed 
prices, which enhances their inertia and, as such, makes them less sensitive to exchange rate 
fluctuations (Figure 2). 
 
   2 
5.  Although in the baseline scenario headline inflation is expected to continue declining in 
the coming months towards the lower bound of our tolerance range, it is foreseen to return 
to  3%  by  the  end  of  2017  and  fluctuate  close  to  target  towards  the  first  quarter  of  2019. 
Market expectations are very similar to our forecasts. Convergence of inflation rests on two 
main assumptions: first, that our RER will remain relatively stable  at its current levels --a 
level  we  believe  is  consistent  with  fundamentals--  and,  second,  that  the  output  gap  will 
gradually close by the end of this year (Figure 3). 
   6.  Activity has been somewhat weaker than expected. According to recent data the output 
gap is currently larger than we anticipated in December. GDP grew by 1.6% in 2016, in line 
with  what  was  anticipated.  However,  revised  national  account  data  suggests  the  economy 
was somewhat stronger towards the beginning of 2016 and weaker towards the end of the 
year, leaving a low starting point for 2017 and a higher base of comparison for the beginning 
of the year. The new data also point to weakness in investment-related areas and in sectors 
that tend to be more persistent, such as business services (Figure 4).  
 
  3 
 7.  On  the  expenditure  side,  domestic  demand—excluding  changes  in  inventories—also 
tended  to  decelerate  throughout  last  year.  Weakness  was  most  evident  in  investment  in 
construction and other works, which contracted by 4.9% in annual terms during the fourth 
quarter (average growth of 0.5% between the first and third quarters).  
 8.  Private consumption, in line with its behavior in previous years, provided support to the 
economy, growing by more than 2% annually throughout 2016, on the basis of wage growth 
and  a  low  unemployment.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  while  consumption  of  non-
durables and services has remained relatively stable, durable goods  have recovered, partly 
due to the appreciation of the peso during the last year and the necessary replenishment of 
inventories following several years of weak growth and even contraction. Something similar 
is observed with gross fixed capital formation in machinery and equipment. Excluding the 
purchase of non-regular transport machinery, this component of investment has improved in 
recent months. 
 
9.  In  our  baseline  scenario,  gross  fixed  capital  formation  should  experience  a  slightly 
positive  growth  in  2017,  after  three  consecutive  years  of  contraction.  A  key  factor  in  the 
negative figures of the last few  years is the ending of the mining investment cycle, which 
reached its peak in 2012. More recently the deterioration of housing construction has added, 
as the boom triggered by tax incentives finished and a modification of loan-to-value norms 
reduced home sales. Going forward, our forecasts rely on an increase in non-mining and non-
residential  investment  (mainly  machinery  and  equipment).  While  mining  investment  will 
eventually  return  to  positive  territory  during  2018,  the  gradual  adjustment  in  residential 
investment is expected to continue during the following quarters (Figure 5). 
    4 
10. The labor market continues to gradually adjust and runs the risk of becoming a drag on 
consumption.  Wage  employment  declined  by  2%  annually  in  the  moving  quarter  ending 
February, and annual wage growth moderated. In addition,  working hours declined due to 
demand  rather  than  supply  reasons.  Yet  this  has  not  translated  into  an  increase  in  open 
unemployment, due to flexibility in the Chilean labor market: the unemployment rate is still 
low from  an historic perspective.  In  fact,  despite being more precarious,  self-employment 
has acted as a significant buffer to the loss of dynamism in wage employment (Figure 6).  
 
  
11.  Domestic financial conditions remain favorable, particularly in terms of interest rates. 
Notwithstanding, credit volumes have decelerated with respect to previous years, as a result 
of overall subdued demand. Despite some increase in recent data, NPL ratios remain low, a 
clear  sign  that  slower  growth  has  not  affected  the  financial  health  of  companies  and 
households.  
 
12.  The evolution of the local stock market has caught some attention lately, since the IPSA 
has increased about 17% this year and more than 30% since December 2015. Although these 
numbers  might  ring  some  bells,  the  performance  of  the  Chilean  index  does  not  differ 
significantly from other regional stock markets and its recent behavior might just be a catch 
up from very low levels. Measured in real terms, its current value does not seem to be an 
outlier either (Figure 7).      
 
 5 
  
13.  The prolonged strike at La Escondida, the world´s largest open-pit copper mine, will 
have a very important effect on the first quarter GDP figures. It already did in the Imacec of 
February,  which  showed  a  yoy  contraction  of  1.3%,  with  a  fall  of  17.1%  of  its  mining 
component.  Since  the  strike  ended  in  late  March  and  resumption  of  production  is  not 
immediate, figures for that month will also be affected. Adding up the continued weakness 
in construction, the economy could experience an expansion close to 0% in the first quarter 
of  the  year.  However,  one  should  not  forget  that  the  strike  at  La  Escondida,  while  very 
relevant to explain the first quarter figure, is a one-off event that is not expected to generate 
significant spillovers on activity elsewhere in the economy, nor on inflation.    
 14.  On the basis of these data the Central Bank reduced its growth forecast for 2017 to 1-
2%, compared to 1.5-2.5% in December. At the same time, for 2018 we are expecting the 
economy to grow between 2.25 and 3.25% (Table 1), based on the fact that the economy does 
not  appear  to  have  any  relevant  imbalances,  the  mining-related  investment  adjustment  is 
expected to end, and a more favorable external outlook. Fiscal policy is assumed to follow 
the fiscal consolidation path announced by the Government.  
 
  6 
 
15.  Our base scenario assumes that monetary policy will remain accomodative throughout 
the policy horizon. Following the adoption of an expansionary bias in December, the policy 
rate has been cut 75bp, acting promptly upon the prospects of a softer economy. In the April 
monetary policy meeting, while adopting the last 25bp cut in this series, the Central Bank 
Board  signaled  that  it  could  consider  some  further  policy  easing  if  economic  prospects 
remained  subdued.  This  is  reflected  in  the  evolution  of  market  expectations  (Figure  8). 
Compared to a neutral real rate of 1%-1.5% Chile´s monetary policy continues to be one of 
the most expansionary among comparable economies. 
  
  16.  As usual with forecasts, this macroeconomic scenario is exposed to risks. External risks 
include  political  and  policy  risks,  especially  concentrated  on  fiscal  and  monetary  policy 
decisions  in  the  US.    China  remains  a  concern  although  its  authorities  appear  to  have 
successfully managed a  gradual  deceleration without a major disruption thus far.  External 
risks are particularly relevant for a small open economy like Chile´s. Upside risks essentially 
emerge from a more robust expansion of the world economy and additional improvement in 
terms of trade. 
 17. On the domestic front, several years of subdued growth may have caused some underlying 
erosion  that  could  compromise  the  economy’s  ability  to  grow  in  the  medium  term. 
Deterioration  of  the  labor  market  is  particularly  risky  because  it  could  weaken  household 
consumption, which, by growing 2%-2.5% annually over the last three years has provided 
support for domestic demand and, ultimately, inflation. On the other hand, private investment 
may recover faster if export demand and expectations improve faster than expected. 
 
 
Longer-term perspectives 
7 
  18.  In 2012-2013 the Chilean economy was exposed to a substantial external shock given by 
the end of the commodities super cycle. However, contrary to past episodes, the economy 
did not fall into a recession. In fact, despite a substantial slow down, the signs of an economic 
contraction are not visible. Salaried employment slowed down but no massive layoffs have 
taken  place.  Companies  saw  their  margins  compressed  by  rising  input  costs  and  weak 
demand, but bankruptcies have not picked up. The demand for loans has weakened, but NPLs 
have remained stable. 
 
19. The former is due to two major reasons. First, the macroeconomic policy framework has 
provided  countercyclical  support  while  allowing  relative  prices  to  adjust  to  the  new 
circumstances  via  the  exchange  rate.  Between  mid-2013  and  early  2016  the  Chilean  peso 
depreciated  some  55%,  putting  some  pressure  on  inflation,  but  the  Central  Bank  kept 
monetary policy on a steady course until inflation decelerated from nearly 5% to less than 
2% in less than a year. 
 20. The second reason is that domestic markets and economic agents have been able to adapt 
to changing circumstances. In the labor market there has been substantial mobility between 
sectors and from salaried to self-employment, while nominal wages and working hours have 
adjusted gradually. The corporate sector has cut on costs, improved operational efficiency 
and refinanced its debt. Financing conditions have remained historically favorable and banks 
have adjusted loan-loss provisions without rationing credit. 
 21. The above indicates not only that the Chilean economy has become more resilient than in 
the  past  but  also  that  it  is  well  prepared  to  resume  growth.  In  fact,  there  are  no  major 
macroeconomic  constraints  to  grow  beyond  the  current  rates.  On  the  one  hand,  financial 
conditions are highly favorable and corporations and financial institutions face no liquidity 
constraints.  On  the  other,  with  a  current  account  deficit  of  1.6%  of  GDP,  Chile  has  little 
pressure from external savings. Finally, public net debt is only slightly positive and there is 
very little risk of crowding out private investment. 
  8 
 22. This is one of the factors that explain the CB estimates of growth at 2.25%-3.25% in 2018. 
Other factors include improving external conditions, the expansionary monetary policy and 
the gradual disappearance of idiosyncratic factors that have dragged down economic activity 
in recent years. According to the CB growth should resume gradually from the second quarter 
of  2017  to  gain  speed  and  start  reducing  the  output  gap,  currently  at  1  ½  per  cent,  in  the 
second half of the year (Figure 10). 
 
   9 
 
23. The above compares to a potential growth between 2.5% and 3%, according to the latest 
Central Bank estimates. This is indeed significantly lower than trend growth rates close to 
5% in the mid-2000s. However, the same Central Bank analysis indicates that reallocating 
resources  beyond  the  shorter  term,  recovering  the  historical  investment/GDP  ratios  and 
resuming  the  increase  of  participation  rates  of  women  in  the  labor  force  could  allow  the 
country to attain trend growth of about 3.5% per year. This suggests that the Chilean economy 
still has considerably headroom to grow. 
 The challenges   
 
24.  Speeding up growth with price stability in Chile still faces some important challenges. 
First  and  foremost,  closing  the  current  output  gap  would  require  recovering  productive 
investment that has remained particularly weak over the last four years. Part of this is due to 
a substantial drop in investment in the mining sector, but gross capital formation in sectors 
other  than  mining  has  also  faltered.  While  recent  data  points  towards  an  increase  in 
machinery  imports,  a  more  substantial  change  would  require  an  improvement  in  business 
expectations that have remained in negative territory for some time. 
 
25.  The  possibility  of  raising  potential  growth  beyond  the  figures  quoted  above  relies 
mainly on: (1) increasing human capital accumulation through increased labor participation, 
raising working skills above the already projected levels or the migration of workers with the 
competences required by the Chilean system; and (2) making productivity improvements via 
enhancing  companies’  efficiency,  lowering  production  and  trading  costs,  and  changing 
output  composition  toward  more  competitive  and  productive  sectors,  while  advancing  in 
terms of innovation and technological development. 
 
26. As  Chile’s  concern  for  growth  has  intensified,  many  ideas  about  public  policies  have 
emerged that could help enhance productivity, with proposals coming from the government, 
private agents and the National Productivity Commission. In particular, policies have been 
developed that have permitted to diversify the energy matrix, increase supply reliability and 
reduce  costs.  There  have  been  other  factors,  however,  that  pose  a  risk  to  productivity, 
including  initiatives  that  may  overburden  corporate  costs,  generate  new  trading  costs  or 
reduce savings. Last, but not least, any discussion about productivity must necessarily cover 
technological  development  and  innovation,  which  in  Chile  is  limited  by  low  private  and 
public investment  in  R&D and by discontinuity in long-term policies  aiming at  economic 
diversification. 
 27. A third key challenge for the Chilean economy is to strengthen its institutions and making 
them more trustworthy. Even though Chile enjoys a substantial advantage in this respect over 
other emerging countries, trust in public and private institutions has suffered from a series of 
scandals  in  recent  times  and  rebuilding  such  trust  would  require  consistent  action  over  a 
number of years. Such effort, however, would be well justified since a low-trust economy is 
likely to suffer from high transaction costs, free-riding behavior and low policy effectiveness. 
 
 10 
28.  The former three elements—investor expectations, potential growth and institutional 
trust—are certainly not part of the conventional agenda of central banks. However, even a 
narrow focus on stable and low inflation requires monitoring the key developments affecting 
the future path  of the economy. While the Central  Bank can contribute indirectly to  these 
goals  by  reducing  economic  instability  and  uncertainty,  it  would  greatly  benefit  from  the 
additional flexibility, effectiveness and welfare that they would be able to build. 
 11 
