Jens  Weidmann:  Bundesbank  at  60  –  committed  to  a  stable
currency
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the reception marking 60 years of
the Bundesbank, Hamburg, 8 September 2017.
 1. Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen
May I begin by thanking you, Mr Scholz, for your speech and for your respectful remarks about
the  Bundesbank.  I  am  also  very  grateful  that  you  have  so  graciously  allowed  us  to  use
Hamburg’s delightful and prestigious Town Hall as a venue for looking back at 60 years of the
Bundesbank and sharing our thoughts on the challenges that lie ahead.
60 years of the Bundesbank – that means 60 years of dedication to a stable currency. Just like
its predecessor, the Bank deutscher Länder, the Bundesbank was committed to preserving the
stability of the Deutsche Mark. But more than that, the Deutsche Mark grew to become a key
currency in the international area and a symbol of Germany’s national identity as an economic
powerhouse.
The year 1999 saw Germany join European monetary union, and since then the Bundesbank has
been committed to a stable euro with equal vigour.
The Bundesbank first saw the light of the world on 4 July 1957, the day on which Germany’s
Bundestag adopted the Bundesbank Act – alongside the Antitrust Act. Writing at the time, the
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper remarked that this day had witnessed “the adoption of
two crucially important pieces of basic legislation for our entire economic system".
When the Bundesbank Act came into force on 1 August 1957, the Bank deutscher Länder, the
Land Central Banks and the Berlin Central Bank were merged to form a single institution, the
Deutsche Bundesbank.
This new institution took over the headquarters of the Bank deutscher Länder in Frankfurt am
Main. I wonder if you are aware that it almost ended up being based in Hamburg. Back then, the
British forces were pushing for the Bank deutscher Länder to make Hamburg its home. But as it
turned  out,  the Americans  got  their  way,  and  the  institution  was  established  in  their  preferred
location of Frankfurt, inside the US occupation zone.
That marked a major turning point for Frankfurt. The city evolved into Germany’s financial centre
and later also succeeded in attracting the European Central Bank. But I don’t think Hamburg lost
out in any way – Hamburg is an appealing, vibrant and economically successful location as it is.
One  thing  I  am  quite  certain  about  is  that  the  choice  of  location  did  not  influence  the
Bundesbank’s success, which I think can be put down to three key factors:
Its narrow mandate to preserve price stability,
Its independence, which allows it to pursue this objective even against political influence, if
need be, and
An appreciation of the need for stability throughout much of the German population, which
gave the Bundesbank the popular backing it needed to pursue its monetary policy objectives.
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ladies and gentlemen, the fundamental problem facing monetary policymakers is that they are
caught  in  a  conflict  of  objectives.  In  the  short  run,  staving  off  inflation  can  sap  economic
momentum  and  drag  on  employment.  On  the  other  hand,  the  central  bank  can  temporarily
dampen  unemployment  if  it  tolerates  a  higher  rate  of  inflation.  This  phenomenon  is  what
economists call the Phillips curve relationship. It is a concept which crops up in a famous remark
uttered by Helmut Schmidt in the early 1970s, when he once said that “I would rather have 5%
inflation than 5% unemployment".
An  inverse  relationship  exists  between  inflation  and  joblessness  because  an  unexpected
increase in inflation pushes down real wages, lowers the price of labour, and thus tends to lead
to a drop in unemployment.
But  that  only  happens  in  the  short  run.  Because  employees  will  push  for  the  higher  rate  of
inflation to be offset, thus moving real wages and unemployment back to where they were before.
There is a shift in the Phillips curve.
And if the unions, fearing a further increase in the rate of inflation, push through even higher wage
increases, unemployment will rise as a result.
Let  me  use  an  everyday  situation  to  shed  more  light  on  how  this  principle  works.  Imagine  a
person who is habitually late for work. Now, their partner might be able to outsmart them once by
moving the hands of the kitchen clock forward by five minutes. But in the long run, that person
will get used to the new time, so the clock will have to be put forward even more to prevent that
person from leaving the house late in future.
That’s  exactly  how  it  is  with  monetary  policy.  If  you  fire  up  the  printing  presses  to  fend  off
unemployment, you will end up mired in high inflation and high unemployment.
Events  in  the  1970s  provided  a  vivid  illustration  of  this  phenomenon.  That  was  a  time  when
central banks in a number of countries sought to cushion the negative repercussions of the two
oil price shocks for the labour market by pursuing an accommodative monetary policy.
But as we now know, that move did not pay off. These countries ended up stuck with stubbornly
higher  rates  of  inflation  but  without  the  flipside  of  lower  unemployment  than  in  countries  like
Germany and Switzerland, whose central banks had run a policy that was aligned more closely
with the goal of preserving price stability.
A central bank mandate geared to price stability helps to prevent the economy from slipping into
such  an  unfavourable  balance  of  high  inflation  and  high  unemployment. And  the  central  bank
should do all it can to stifle any doubts that it might not be operating safely within the confines of
its  mandate,  because  that  is  the  only  way  it  can  succeed  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations
among businesses and households on a permanent basis.
This is where the second condition I mentioned earlier on – independence – comes into play. A
central bank must at all times be in a position to pursue its price stability mandate, free from
political interference. After all, politicians can easily be tempted to favour the short-term gains of
higher  employment  over  the  long-term  costs  associated  with  a  persistently  higher  rate  of
inflation.
Bearing that in mind, it was undoubtedly crucial that the Bundesbank, just like its predecessor,
the Bank deutscher Länder, had independence from political control. Because German post-war
history also bears witness to a number of situations in which the Bank was forced to head off
political demands to loosen monetary policy.
One  such  situation  that  springs  to  mind  is  the  famous  “Gürzenich  speech”  which  Konrad
Adenauer  delivered  shortly  before  the  Bundesbank  was  established.  At  that  time,  the  Bank
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
deutscher Länder had switched to a tight monetary policy stance because there was a risk that
the  brisk  external  demand  might  cause  Germany’s  economy  to  overheat.  Konrad Adenauer,
speaking in 1956 at Cologne’s Gürzenich Hall, warned that the tight policy would be “disastrous
... for the man on the street". A year later, the SPIEGEL magazine looked back at these events
and wrote: “What is more, the credit constraints later turned out to be absolutely correct; they
came just in time to prevent the boom from morphing into an inflationary economic gallop."
Another situation I can think of occurred in the year 1979, when the government drummed up
sentiment  against  an  increase  in  the  discount  and  Lombard  rates.  Manfred  Lahnstein,  State
Secretary  in  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance,  presented  his  critique  before  the  Central  Bank
Council and then went public with his misgivings. He expressed concerns that the policy rate
hikes might endanger the economic upswing. As it turned out, the German economy expanded at
a real rate of 4½% in 1979, even though policy rates were increased. The Bundesbank, then, did
well to prevent the global inflationary tendencies from spilling over into Germany more strongly
than they did.
Because  the  Bundesbank  held  its  ground  in  both  these  cases  and  refused  to  be  knocked  off
course, the Die Welt newspaper once dubbed it in retrospect the “bulwark on the Main".
That was praise indeed for the Bundesbank, of course. For it had resisted the political pressure
not because it was indifferent to the macroeconomic prospects, but it firmly believed, even back
then,  that  monetary  stability  is  the  best  contribution  a  central  bank  can  make  in  the  long  run
towards high levels of employment and sustained economic growth.
It was Milton Friedman who once wrote that the best thing a central bank can do for the economy
is “prevent [...] itself from being a major source of economic disturbance". He continued: “Our
economic system will work best when producers and consumers, employers and employees,
can proceed with full confidence that the average level of prices [...] will be highly stable."
But I am convinced that the Bundesbank only prevailed in its skirmishes with politicians because
it could count on the general public’s appreciation of the merits of a stable currency. This brings
me to the third of the key factors in the Bank’s success which I mentioned earlier on. A policy
strictly geared to stability only stands a chance of success if the general public is sufficiently
aware  of  the  merits  of  stability.  That’s  because,  in  the  long  run,  it  is  not  right  for  democratic
states to have a monetary policy which runs counter to public opinion.
On this topic, Otmar Issing once said that each country gets the inflation it deserves.
Ladies and gentlemen
These  three  pillars  –  a  narrow  price  stability-driven  mandate,  independence,  and  a  stability-
conscious general public – helped the Bundesbank over the decades to keep the Deutsche Mark
exceptionally  stable.  Between  1956  and  1998  the  average  inflation  rate  in  Germany  was  the
lowest of all the G7 countries, without putting a strain on employment.
But truth be told, a central bank can only really be successful in achieving its mandate if it is
flanked  by  other  policy  areas.  So  there  are  still  more  factors  which  have  a  bearing  on  price
stability. The recent financial crisis, for instance, showed how difficult it can be for central banks
to preserve price stability when the financial system starts teetering.
And  another  factor  that  springs  to  mind  is  the  importance  of  fiscal  prudence:  only  if  there  is
sufficient fiscal leeway will the automatic stabilisers be able to function in difficult spells for the
economy, or the government might even respond to an economic slump by means of targeted
spending increases.
The  smaller  the  room  for  manoeuvre,  the  more  the  central  bank  will  come  under  political
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
pressure to stabilise economic activity in the short run – even if that does mean compromising
on price stability.
Sound  public  finances,  then,  act  to  shield  monetary  policy.  And  that  was  precisely  why  the
Stability and Growth Pact was adopted in Europe, and that is also precisely why the Bundesbank
repeatedly highlights why fiscal compliance is so important for making the euro a currency that
fulfils its promise of stability once and for all.
A clean dividing line between monetary and fiscal policy is important. The spell of hyperinflation in
Germany  in  the  1920s  showed  only  too  clearly  what  can  happen  when  a  central  bank  funds
surging government debt.
But  there  are  also  other  episodes  from  history  in  which  the  financing  of  fiscal  deficits  by  the
central bank went hand in hand with high rates of inflation. One dates back to the 1970s, when
the  Banca  d’Italia  was  forced  to  purchase  the  government  bonds  that  were  left  unsold  at
auctions. It doesn’t seem to be a mere coincidence that Italy’s inflation rate averaged more than
12%  during  that  decade.  That  would  appear  to  be  a  realistic  diagnosis,  given  that  the  Banca
d’Italia only managed to clamp down on inflation and stabilise the lira when it set itself free of
fiscal policy in the early 1980s.
In  Italy,  this  parting  of  the  ways  is  known  as  the  Banca  d’Italia’s  “divorce”  from  the  finance
ministry. Mario Draghi used a speech on the 30th anniversary to highlight this important event
and note that it was the Banca d’Italia’s regained autonomy which had enabled it to rein in price
pressures – and in a way which did not damage industry, as some sceptics had forewarned.
2. Bundesbank a model of success – and a template for the ECB
Ladies and gentlemen, I think we can take some pride in the way the Bundesbank’s success,
notably  in  the  1970s  and  1980s,  inspired  many  countries  to  also  make  their  central  banks
independent  and  give  them  a  clear  price  stability  mandate.  This  trend  culminated  in  the
establishment  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  whose  independence  and  clear  price  stability
mandate took after the Bundesbank.
That was undoubtedly a special tip of the hat to the Bundesbank and its work. However, given the
high esteem in which the Deutsche Mark was held and the central role which the Bundesbank
played in monetary policy matters in Europe with its credible stability orientation, it was clear that
the introduction of the euro was also a watershed for the German central bank.
Because  the  advent  of  Stage  Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  saw  decision-making
powers over monetary policy pass to the ECB’s Governing Council.
So where the Bank had once been solely responsible for the Deutsche Mark, it now had a shared
responsibility for the euro. The Bundesbank president, just like the governors of the other euro-
area central banks, has a seat and one vote in the Governing Council. And this co-responsibility
is no less important in a federal system which is constantly striving to gauge the right monetary
policy path.
Incidentally, co-responsibility for the euro also means putting monetary policy into practice. When
banks and savings banks in Germany need central bank money, they turn to the Bundesbank.
Because in the Eurosystem, it is the national central banks which are tasked with implementing
monetary policy operations.
Besides  operationalising  monetary  policy,  the  Bundesbank  also  performs  a  number  of  other
important tasks, like managing the cash supply. And 15 billion banknotes were handled by our
branch staff last year, checked for fitness and replaced, if necessary.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Cashless  payment  operations  are  another  one  of  our  key  tasks.  In  tandem  with  our  partner
central banks – Banca d’Italia, Banque de France and Banco de España – we are responsible for
the  backbone  of  European  payment  and  securities  settlement  operations:  TARGET2  and
TARGET2-Securities.  Day  in,  day  out,  we  process  payments  in  TARGET2  that  are  worth
something  like  1.7  trillion  euro.  And  together  with  BaFin,  the  Federal  Financial  Supervisory
Authority, we supervise around 1,800 German financial institutions and play a role in European
banking supervision under the aegis of the ECB.
More  tasks  have  been  added  to  our  agenda  since  the  financial  crisis.  One  is  the  statutory
mandate given to the Bank in 2013 to contribute to financial stability within Germany. In other
words, it is our job to identify risks to financial stability in Germany, issue warnings, and prepare
recommendations  for  the  German  Financial  Stability  Committee  on  how  such  risks  can  be
avoided. Because one of the main lessons we learned from the financial crisis was that it is not
enough to look only at microprudential stability – it was also important to monitor the functioning
and performance of the financial system as a whole at all times. Or, to use Janet Yellen’s words:
before the crisis, “we looked closely at the trees and not as intently as we should have at the
forest".
3. Creating stability
Ladies and gentlemen, though the playing field in which the Bundesbank operates has been in
constant flux, the main thrust of its monetary policy stance has remained steadfast: our sights
are – and always will be – set on stability. This shapes the views I express in the ECB Governing
Council, and it also shapes the views of my Bundesbank colleagues in the different Eurosystem
working groups.
It is simply the nature of things that debate in the Eurosystem’s committees can become heated
on occasion, particularly in times like these, which present us with monetary policy challenges.
But it is at precisely these times that I believe there should be intense debate about the right path
for  monetary  policy. And  I  am  also  certain  that  this  debate  is  enriched  by  the  many  different
perspectives and experiences the Eurosystem’s central banks bring to bear.
But of course, this doesn’t mean that every decision results in the outcome I would like. After all,
that’s not how a federal system works. I think Mr Scholz will back me up on this point.
Feeble inflationary pressure is currently posing a monetary policy challenge for the Governing
Council. Since 2013, inflation has been lower than the Governing Council’s medium-term inflation
rate  target  of  close  to,  but  below,  2%.  This  is  due  to  a  wide  variety  of  factors.  In  addition  to
plummeting oil prices, the economy was hit by the most severe recession in post-war history.
Weak economic activity in the euro area was compounded by the adjustment measures taken by
the crisis-stricken countries to regain competitiveness and reduce debt levels.
The ECB Governing Council found itself forced to continuously ease financing conditions until
central bank rates had fallen to zero – and even below. To be able to loosen financing conditions
further still, the ECB rolled out an extensive programme of both corporate and government bond
purchases.
I  have  always  been  sceptical  of  government  bond  purchases,  as  I  am  sure  you  are  aware.
Particularly  in  the  euro  area,  which  has  a  single  monetary  policy  but  where  economic  policy-
making is decentralised and in the hands of the 19 different member states, they threaten to blur
the lines between monetary and fiscal policy. Ensuring that these lines remain sufficiently clear
safeguards our independence, which, in a democratic system, can really only be justified by a
narrow interpretation of our mandate.
In any case, we have successfully argued that, under the current government bond purchase
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
programme,  the  Bundesbank  should  only  buy  German  bonds  and  not  those  of  euro-area
countries with poor credit ratings, as was the case between 2010 and 2012 under the Securities
Markets  Programme  (SMP).  So  unlike  then,  the  balance  sheets  of  Eurosystem  central  banks
are, for the most part, not being used to communitise solvency risk.
On the other hand, we cannot deny that the bond purchases over the last two and a half years
have  now  made  the  Eurosystem  the  governments’  biggest  creditors.  This  means  that
governments’  financing  conditions  hinge  much  more  directly  on  our  actions  than  in  times  of
normal monetary policy.
Meanwhile, practically all governments pay the same low interest rates on the share of their debt
held by the central bank. And you don’t need a crystal ball to see that in future, this will lead to
demands for the Governing Council to stand its ground and normalise monetary policy and raise
interest rates again.
For me, then, government bond purchases are nothing more than an emergency tool to be used
for  staving  off  a  dangerous  deflationary  downward  spiral  of  declining  prices  and  wages,  for
instance. However, I considered this risk to be low even at the beginning of the bond purchases,
and since then, it has all but disappeared.
Meanwhile, the upswing has actually gained momentum and breadth. Capacity utilisation in the
economy  is  increasing,  which  will  also  translate  into  increasing  price  pressures.  However,
yesterday’s projections show that inflation is set to climb at no more than a sluggish pace and
that the uncertainty surrounding the future path of inflation is fairly substantial. That is why the
ECB  Governing  Council  has  decided  to  wait  until  it  can  assess  the  monetary  policy  situation
calmly.
Ladies and gentlemen, Anthony Quinn supposedly once said that even when you’re 60 you can
still feel like you’re 40. Although only for half an hour a day.
Luckily,  that  doesn’t  apply  to  central  banks.  Not  least  because  60  isn’t  actually  that  old  for  a
central  bank.  After  all,  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  have  both  been  in
existence for over 300 years.
So we, too, can be just as committed to safeguarding the stability of our currency at 60 as we
were at 40.
Indeed, the euro-area crisis brought it home to all of us that the stability of the euro cannot be
taken for granted. And the same applies to the stability of the euro area, in fact. Unfortunately, this
vindicates the statement made by my predecessor Hans Tietmeyer 20 years ago: “The monetary
union will not experience only sunny days. There will be rain and storms, too".
The extensive crisis measures taken by European policymakers and the Eurosystem may have
prevented the crisis from escalating, but they have not made the monetary union permanently
stable. Above  all,  additional  elements  of  mutual  liability  have  been  introduced.  Economic  and
fiscal policy, on the other hand, remain primarily under the control of the member states. And as
we know, they set great store by their sovereignty.
This has knocked the relationship between actions and liability off balance. But I am convinced
that  responsible  decisions  can  only  be  made  if  decision-makers  are  also  held  liable  for  the
consequences of these decisions.  This  is  the  liability  principle  on  which  our  market  economy
system is based and which Walter Eucken held to be a constitutive principle of the social market
economy.
Consequently,  I  am  sceptical  of  reform  proposals  that  boil  down  to  extending  mutual  liability
without  transferring  the  corresponding  powers  to  intervene  to  the  European  level.  They  could
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
ultimately  turn  the  euro  area  into  a  transfer  union,  which  would  exacerbate  the  problems  in
Europe rather than solve them. Most importantly, a development like this would also undermine
the foundations of a stable currency.
Given the lack of willingness to cede extensive fiscal sovereignty rights to Brussels, or even to
venture  into  a  political  union,  the  only  remaining  option  is  the  one  anchored  in  the  Maastricht
Treaty – to reinforce the member states’ individual fiscal responsibility.
It is up to the member states to make far-reaching reforms that enable them to strengthen the
growth potential of their economies, open up job opportunities to more people and make public
finances sustainable over the long term. This is in their own interests, as well as the interests of
the euro area.
To reinforce the principle of national responsibility, the capital markets, too, would have to price in
the risk of government bonds more adequately. So far, investors have been able to rely on bail-
outs via rescue packages – and thus at the expense of European taxpayers – should a euro-area
government run into difficulties. Of course, this has weakened investors’ risk awareness. We are
therefore proposing that the maturity of bonds issued by a euro-area state should automatically
be extended for a certain period if that state applies for an ESM programme. This would keep the
original creditors on the hook and would require them to be involved in any debt restructuring
arrangements.
Aside from this, the crisis showed how troubled banks and ailing states can throw each other off
balance. That is why we need to sever the close economic ties between sovereigns and banks in
the euro area.
It  was  with  this  in  mind  that  we  successfully  advocated  for  the  banking  regulatory  bodies  to
consider at the international level how to eliminate the existing preferential regulatory treatment of
government bonds in banks’ balance sheets. In future, risk-appropriate levels of capital will need
to be held against government loans on banks’ balance sheets, just as they are for loans to any
private borrower.
Ladies and gentlemen, the founding fathers of monetary union recognised back in the day that
Europe should not rely solely on the capital markets to set sufficient incentives for sound public
finances. That is why they flanked the no-bailout principle with the budgetary rules belonging to
the Stability and Growth Pact.
But a glance at the government debt of the euro-area countries shows that the binding effect of
these budgetary rules was never terribly effective in the past. At least, that’s the impression you
get when you consider that some countries have now exceeded the budget deficit ceiling for the
ninth time in a row.
The Bundesbank has therefore spoken out in favour of simpler and more transparent rules, and
has  suggested  that  responsibility  for  monitoring  these  rules  is  transferred  from  the  European
Commission to an independent institution. The underlying problem is that the Commission plays
a dual role as a political authority and the guardian of the EU treaties. This causes a clash which,
in  the  past,  has  often  resulted  in  the  Commission  making  compromises  at  the  expense  of
budgetary discipline. It was for this reason that Wolfgang Schäuble, Germany’s Finance Minister,
also recently reiterated just how important it is for the European Commission to “strike the right
balance between its political function and its role as guardian of the treaties".
Realigning  action  and  liability  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  It  is  about  creating  the  right  incentives  to
encourage member states to do all they can to bring about sustainable growth and employment.
Ultimately, this also strengthens identification with the European project, as the German Council
of Economic Experts recently pointed out.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
4. Conclusion
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  important  to  “focus  all  efforts  on  preventing  inflation,”  as  Ludwig
Erhard wrote in his book “Wohlstand für alle” in 1957.
It is in line with this principle that the Bundesbank has done its utmost to ensure price stability
over  the  last  60  years.  If  necessary,  it  is  not  afraid  to  ruffle  a  few  feathers  if  it  sees  risks  to
stability.
This has not damaged our reputation among the general public, as proven not only by surveys,
but  also  by  the  widespread  support  for  us  on  occasions  such  as  our  recent  open  day  in
Frankfurt,  for  example.  On  our  anniversary,  Federal  President  Frank-Walter  Steinmeier,  too,
attested to the public’s deep-seated confidence in the Bundesbank – and not just in the area of
monetary policy, but in our other key tasks as well.
We will continue working to justify this confidence.
Of that you can be sure.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
