 M a y   2 ,   2 0 1 7 
Bank  of 
Japan 
Toward Inclusive Growth in Asia 
Keynote Speech at the Global Think Tank Summit 2017  
in Yokohama 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Introduction 
It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to make one of the keynote speeches here at the 
Global Think Tank Summit 2017 marking the 50th anniversary of the Asian Development 
Bank (ADB). Over the next couple of days, a number of key topics related to growth and 
sustainable development will be discussed. All the discussions today can be orientated more 
or less to the same goal: "inclusive growth." "Inclusive growth" has become a key objective 
for global policy makers including the G20. 
 "Inclusive growth" is typically defined as economic growth in which growth opportunities 
and benefits will be delivered to all people, regardless of their various socio-economic and 
gender attributes. Today, I would like to shed light upon an economic attribute; that is, income 
level. I do so because poverty remains in Asia, in spite of the remarkable growth in per capita 
GDP over the past 50 years. This fact points to the necessity for Asian economic growth to 
enhance its inclusiveness. Financial inclusion can contribute greatly in this regard. 
 I. Economic Growth and Inclusiveness in Asia 
During  the  50-year  history  of  the  ADB,  many  of  the  ADB's  Asian  member  countries 
transformed from low-income countries to middle-income countries. Indeed, a few member 
countries have succeeded in joining the category of high-income countries. 
 As the status of Asian countries has improved in terms of per capita GDP, the standing of 
Asia  in  the  global  economy  has  been  enhanced.  The  percentage  share  of  world  GDP 
accounted for by the ADB's Asian members, excluding Japan, Australia, and New Zealand, 
increased  from  8  percent  in  1966  to  25  percent  in  2015.1 Furthermore,  the  increase  in  per 
capita GDP in Asia has been accompanied by a 20-year extension of Asian people's life spans. 
Comparing 2014 with 1964, the average life span increased from 49 to 74 years in the East 
Asia and Pacific region, while in South Asia it increased from 45 to 68 years.2 
                                                         
1 See the first chapter of ADB (2016). ADB through the Decades: ADB's Fifth Decade (2007-2016). 
Mandaluyong City, Philippines: ADB. 
2 The source of data on life spans is the World Bank's World Development Indicators. High-income 
countries are excluded for the East Asia and Pacific region. 
 1 
In the past few decades, Asia's economic growth has accelerated. Asian economies appear to 
have benefitted from the strengths of globalization. Dating back 50 years, Asian developing 
countries' participation in world trade was quite modest. The mode of their trade participation 
was simple in many cases -- exporting primary products. In the following years, companies in 
advanced  countries  expanded  their  international  operations  and  some  of  them  grew  to 
become giant multinational companies. Since then, they have developed global value chains 
with a geographic focus upon the Asian region. This is one reason why per capita GDP grew 
at  a  faster  pace in  Asia than  in  other  developing  regions.  Comparing  2015  with  1996,  per 
capita GDP in developing countries increased by a factor of five in Asia, while this was two 
and three in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa, respectively.3 
 Economic  growth  in  Asia  has  been  accompanied  by  a  narrowing  income  gap  between 
developing countries in Asia and high-income countries around the world. Specifically, 50 
years ago, real GDP per capita was about 50 times larger in high-income countries than in 
developing  countries  in  the  East  Asia  and  Pacific  region.  It  was  about  45  times  larger  in 
high-income  countries  than  in  developing  countries  in  South  Asia.  Recently,  such  scaling 
factors have decreased to 7 times and 26 times respectively, in these two regions.4  
 There is no doubt that the ADB has made a significant contribution to economic growth and 
the extended life span in Asia. This contribution can be compared to the weaving of a cloth by 
the ADB. The warp is the financial capital that the ADB has provided for member countries 
to finance their development projects. The ADB's loans and grants have long continued to 
make  those  projects  successful,  even  in  the  face  of  wide-ranging  differences  in 
developmental needs and circumstances among the members. What has made this possible? 
 This  is  where  the  woof  becomes  important.  The  woof  is  the  ADB's  intellectual  capital, 
consisting  of  underlying  thought,  specific  knowledge,  and  creative  ideas.  The  ADB  has 
offered this type of capital to individual member countries so that their development projects 
                                                        
3 The  source  of  the  scaling  factors  is  the  first  chapter  of  ADB  (2016).  ADB  through  the  Decades: 
ADB's Fifth Decade (2007-2016). Mandaluyong City, Philippines: ADB. 
4 The  scaling  factors  in  this  paragraph  are  calculated  using  the  World  Bank's  World  Development 
Indicators. They compare 2015 with 1966. 
 2 
are  carefully  planned  and  well-managed.  An  indispensable  part  of  this  woof  has  been  the 
ADB Institute, co-host of this symposium. In addition, based on my experience at the ADB, 
this long-standing adaptive weaving has been made possible by the ADB's organizational and 
operational flexibility. 
 To continue with my analogy, the ADB will need to continue its work of weaving a cloth 
suitable and strong enough to wipe away the persistent problem of poverty. In contrast to the 
relative  economic  progress  made  in the  international  sphere,  domestic income  inequalities 
have  increased  in  some  Asian  countries.  Among  the  30  countries  with  comparable  Gini 
coefficients,  income  inequality  has  increased  in  recent  decades  in  twelve  countries, 
accounting for about 80 percent of their total population. In most of these countries, the top 
income  group  has  increased  its  income  share. 5 A  recent  survey  concludes  that  when  a 
deterioration  of  income  equality  occurs  by  benefiting  mainly  the  rich,  it  undermines  the 
poverty-reducing effects of economic growth.6 Unfortunately, poverty remains in Asia. 
 There are a variety of possible explanations as to why Asian people in the bottom income 
group continue to live in poverty in spite of strong macroeconomic growth. One explanation 
is  that  it  is  more  difficult  for  growth  opportunities  and  benefits  to  reach  people  whose 
residential  locations,  industries,  and  skills  have  not  been  incorporated  into  global  value 
chains.  It  will  be  essential  for  policy  makers  in  Asia  to  continue  to  introduce  domestic 
policies that can enhance the inclusiveness of their hard-earned economic growth. 
 II. Poverty in Asia 
Nonetheless, the history of the Asian economy shows quite clearly that economic growth is a 
key  driver  of  poverty  reduction.  In  the  past  50  years,  extreme  poverty  has  significantly 
decreased in Asia. Here, I refer to the World Bank's current definition of extreme poverty – 
living  on  less  than  1.9  U.S.  dollars  a  day.  Looking  at  selective  countries  with  comparable 
                                                        
5 See Zhuang, J., Kanbur, R., and Maligalig, D. (2014). "Asia's Income Inequalities: Recent Trends," 
in Kanbur, R., Rhee, C., Zhuang, J. (eds.), Inequality in Asia and the Pacific: Trends, Drivers, and 
Policy Implications, pp. 21-36. Oxon: ADB and Routledge.  
6 See  Škare,  M.,  and  Pržiklas  Družeta,  R.  (2016).  "Poverty  and  Economic  Growth:  A  Review," 
Technological and Economic Development of Economy, Vol. 22 (1), pp. 156-175. 
 3 
data, averaged headcount ratios for extreme poverty decreased from 68 percent in the 1980s 
to 8 percent in the five-year period of 2010-2014 in South East Asia and China.7 In South 
Asia, the extreme poverty ratios decreased from 50 percent to 19 percent.8 However, poverty 
continues to be a considerable burden in Asia. People falling into extreme poverty still exist. 
 Furthermore,  based  on  the  definition  of  "multidimensional  poor,"  which  takes  into 
consideration levels of education and health as well as living standards, the number of such 
poor people is globally 1.5 billion, and about 60 percent of them live in Asia.9 In South Asia, 
the number of the multidimensional poor is disproportionately large relative to its population. 
 Wide-ranging  measures  are  beneficial  for  poverty  alleviation.  For  example,  providing  the 
poor with education and employment opportunities has the potential to interrupt the vicious 
cycle of poverty. When poor parents cannot afford to provide their children with education, 
their children in turn grow up to be uneducated workers with the great risk of becoming poor 
parents  themselves.  Breaking  such  a  negative  cycle  enables  the  accumulation  of  human 
capital, thereby strengthening the potential for economic growth in the long run. 
 A precondition of breaking this cycle of poverty is to push poor parents to recognize that the 
future benefits of enabling their children to receive education are significant, and that they 
will far surpass any immediate profit from using their labor in housework and part-time jobs. 
 III. Contributions of Financial Inclusion 
Among  a  wide  range  of  poverty-reducing  polices,  I  would  like  today  to  focus  on  policies 
which promote financial inclusion. According to the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor 
housed at the World Bank, "financial inclusion means that households and businesses have 
access and can effectively use appropriate financial services. Such services must be provided 
responsibly  and  sustainably,  in  a  well  regulated  environment."  The  G20  has  been  keen  to 
                                                        
7 Data for South East Asia consist of those for Indonesia, the Philippines, and Thailand. 
8 The  headcount ratios in this paragraph are calculated using the World Bank's  Poverty and Equity 
Database.  
9 The source of the figures on multidimensional poor is the United Nations Development Programme's 
Human Development Report 2016: Human Development for Everyone. 
 4 
advance financial inclusion with the dual aims of benefiting the poor and activating smaller 
businesses.  
 Regarding financial inclusion for individuals, many poor people engage in financial activities 
in  their  daily  lives,  such  as  saving  and  borrowing  money,  but  they  tend  to  lack  access  to 
well-regulated and appropriate financial services.  
 Getting such access helps the poor escape from poverty through a number of channels. The 
first channel is reducing the cost of obtaining and managing funds by low income households. 
Borrowing loans from regular financial institutions enables the poor to avoid obtaining funds 
from informal moneylenders at very high costs. By using a safe savings account, they would 
not need to worry about protecting their physical cash. 
 The  second  channel  is  stabilizing  the  daily  lives  of  the  poor.  Deposits  and  loans  make  it 
possible for them to absorb negative financial shocks, including sickness and injury, as well 
as changes in the frequency and size of cash inflows. This shock-absorbing effect helps the 
poor smooth their consumption over time. 
 The last channel is exploiting growth opportunities. Absorbing negative financial shocks also 
helps poor parents allow their children to receive education rather than being incorporated 
into the labor force. In developing countries, some poor people are informal business owners. 
Access to financial services can enable them to invest in their own businesses.  
 However,  progress  in  financial  inclusion  for  individuals  appears  to  have  been  slow  in 
developing  Asia.  In  2014,  the  percentage  share  of  adults  with  savings  accounts  was  48 
percent in developing East Asia and Pacific, and 44 percent in South Asia. In high-income 
countries  around  the  world  the  figure  was  108  percent,  and  in  Latin  America  it  was  70 
percent.10 
                                                         
10 The source of the figures on account ownership is the World Bank's Global Findex. 
 5 
To  encourage  the  poor  to  open  savings  accounts  and  make  deposits,  it  is  necessary  to 
introduce hands-on policies that reflect the specific needs of individual countries. Economic 
factors are not the only reason why poor people often do not save money; there are also social 
constraints,  regulatory  barriers,  low  financial  literacy,  and  psychological  factors.  A  recent 
empirical finding shows that factors preventing poor people from opening savings accounts 
include high charges, distant bank outlets, weak legal rights, and political instability.11 
 Even  when  the  poor  do  open  accounts,  whether  or  not  they  actually  save  money  in  those 
accounts is a separate question. They need to have other incentives to do so. Such incentives 
may  vary  by  country.  For  example,  a  field  experiment  in  rural  Kenya  finds  that  effective 
incentives include earmarking the poor's deposits for emergency use, encouraging them to 
save  money  in  a  group  setting,  and  providing  them  with  credit  conditional  upon  saving 
money.12 
 Financial inclusion is important for small companies as well. In general, small companies are 
informationally opaque with regard to their business and financial conditions. Also, they are 
often short of collateral. Therefore, they are at a disadvantage when it comes to borrowing 
money. However, it is mainly small companies that create jobs for the poor. Their investments 
and innovations can support macroeconomic growth.  
 Also  in  the  context  of  small  businesses,  progress  in  financial  inclusion  has  been  slow  in 
developing  Asia. The  recent  percentage  share  of  small companies  that  borrow  from  banks 
was  15  percent  in  developing  Asia,  while  it  was  32  percent  in  non-Asian  developing 
regions.13 One statistical finding clearly shows the benefits of reducing this gap. That is, the 
level of bank credit relative to GDP can positively explain an income increase for the bottom 
                                                        
11 See Allen, F., Demirguc-Kunt, A., Klapper, L., and Martinez Peria, M. S. (2016). "The Foundations 
of Financial Inclusion: Understanding Ownership and Use of Formal Accounts," Journal of Financial 
Intermediation, Vol. 27 (1), pp. 1-30. 
12 See Dupas, P., and Robinson, J. (2013). "Why Don't the Poor Save More? Evidence from Health 
Savings Experiments," American Economic Review, Vol. 103 (4), pp. 1138-1171. 
13 See the first chapter of ADB (2013). ADB-OECD Study on Enhancing Financial Accessibility for 
SMEs: Lessons from Recent Crises. Mandaluyong City, Philippines: ADB.  
 6 
income group.14  
Efforts are on-going in developing Asia to enhance the accessibility of credit to small firms 
beyond their informational opaqueness. One approach is a centralized approach. An example 
is to establish a credit bureau for small companies. Such a bureau is an important financial 
infrastructure  and  is  managed  by  a  public  agency  in  eight  of  the  20  developing  Asian 
countries surveyed by the ADB.15 An additional example is to use a public credit guarantee 
scheme, which has been established in 16 of the 20 countries. These institutional supports 
have  the  potential  to  encourage  banks  to  provide  loans  for  small  businesses,  thereby 
promoting financial inclusion.  
 Another approach to deal with the informational opaqueness of small businesses is a more 
individual approach. A prominent example is microfinance. The ADB and other multilateral 
development  banks  have  supported  the  rapid  growth  of  microfinance  institutions  by 
providing  them  with  loans,  grants,  and  technical  assistance.  In  terms  of  the  number  of 
borrowers,  microfinance  is  more  active  in  developing  Asia  than  in  any  other  developing 
region. 16  Although  further  work  is  necessary,  studies  show  that  microfinance  provides 
expanded  access  to  credit  which  in  turn  increases  business  activity  of  microentreprenuers. 
Results also suggest that it provides people with more flexibility in choosing their occupation 
and affords them the possibility of being more self-reliant.17  
 Advances in information and communication technology, or ICT, have the potential to help 
financial inclusion continue to expand in developing Asia, in some cases beyond traditional 
banks. For example, crowd-funding schemes enable small businesses and poor individuals to 
                                                        
14 See  Beck,  T.,  Demirguc-Kunt,  A.,  and  Levine,  R.  (2007).  "Finance,  Inequality,  and  the  Poor," 
Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 12 (1), pp. 27-49. 
15 See ADB (2015).  "Regional SME  Finance Update," Asia SME Finance Monitor 2014, pp. 9-28. 
Mandaluyong City, Philippines: ADB. 
16 See Microcredit Summit Campaign (2015). The State of the Microcredit Campaign Report, 2015. 
17 See Banerjee, A., Karlan, D., and Zinman, J. (2015). "Six Randomized Evaluations of Microcredit: 
Introduction  and  Further  Steps,"  American  Economic  Journal:  Applied  Economics,  Vol.  7  (1),  pp. 
1-21. 
 7 
borrow money from the general public and even across borders.  
On  deposits  and  remittances,  mobile  phones  and  digital  money  enable  companies  and 
individuals at home and abroad to transfer funds, in some cases regardless of whether or not 
they have bank accounts. Financial inclusion in the digital economy has the great potential to 
help  users  enter  new  goods  markets  and  new  credit  markets.  I  look  forward  to  seeing  the 
positive impact of such digital financial inclusion on poverty reduction and economic growth 
in the near future.  
 Financial inclusion has implications for the institutional foundations of banking and finance. 
To introduce new financial services, or to permit new entities to provide traditional services, 
the relevant financial business laws would need to be updated appropriately. The emergence 
of new service providers, including ICT companies, may call for improvements in monitoring 
and regulations. At the same time, financial policy measures would need to strike the right 
balance  between  dealing  with  possible  issues  regarding  financial  stability  and  consumer 
protection, and facilitating the innovation of service-providers.  
 Concluding Remarks 
It  is  50  years  since  the  establishment  of  the  ADB.  In  spite  of  the  region's  remarkable 
economic  development,  poverty  does  remain  in  developing  Asia.  We  need  to  enhance  the 
inclusiveness of Asia's economic growth, and financial inclusion can play an important role 
in tackling the stubborn poverty problem. Policy makers need to find and eliminate obstacles 
to  such  inclusion  and  create  positive  incentives,  taking  into  consideration  each  country's 
specific circumstances. Enhancing financial literacy is also essential. 
 The ADB's revised "Strategy 2020" sets forth a vision of both poverty reduction and inclusive 
growth amongst its strategic priorities and financial inclusion  is a key area. I am confident 
that  the  ADB  will  continue  to  lead  work  in  this  area  by  providing  two  kinds  of  capital  -- 
financial and intellectual -- and through close collaboration with member countries. 
 Thank you. 
 8 
