Ravi Menon: Stepping up the Chongqing-Singapore connection
Keynote address by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at
the Singapore-China (Chongqing) Financial Conference, Singapore, 4 September 2017.
 Vice Mayor Liu Guiping, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
More than 2000 years ago, the Silk Road connected, by land and sea, the major economies of
the time, enriching the lives of many people along its routes. 
And now 2000 years later, Chongqing, one of China’s “super-cities”, is part of the effort to
revive this great heritage.
Chongqing is strategically placed.
It is a pivotal node on the One Belt, One Road, connecting the growing economies of South
and Southeast Asia with the rest of China
It is also an important city along the Yangtze River Economic Belt and a key player in the
overall development of the Western Region.
In short, Chongqing is a cornerstone of regional connectivity.
Singapore is proud to be a partner to Chongqing in this historic project, through the Chongqing
Connectivity Initiative, or CCI. 
And  so,  I  am  happy  today  to  welcome  you  to  the  second  Singapore-China  (Chongqing)
Financial Conference, to take stock of the progress we have made together and to set new
goals for the future.
China and Singapore – a vibrant economic relationship
The backdrop to CCI is, of course, the larger China-Singapore economic relationship – one of the
strongest in Asia.
China  is  Singapore’s  largest  trading  partner.  Singapore  is  China’s  fourth  largest  trading
partner in ASEAN.
Between 2000 and 2016, China-Singapore trade has increased seven times, to more
than USD 80 billion.
Singapore is the largest foreign direct investor in China.
Since 2010, Singapore’s direct investment into China has grown by an average 13.4%
each year.
Chinese financial institutions have significantly increased their presence in Singapore in recent
years.
Bank of China and ICBC have expanded considerably in Singapore over the past 4 years.
They have set up in Singapore their regional centres– for commodities, trade financing,
RMB trading, private banking, and debt capital markets.
Other Chinese banks have established in Singapore their first international operations.
Earlier  this  year,  the  Shanghai  Pudong  Development  Bank  opened  in  Singapore  its  first
overseas branch outside of China and Hong Kong.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
China Construction Bank opened its infrastructure services and private banking centres in
Singapore.
China Merchants Bank established in Singapore its only international private banking centre
outside of China and Hong Kong.
This vibrant economic connection between our two countries rests on the bedrock of a strong
bilateral relationship that has grown and matured over the years.
When President Xi Jinping and Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong met in Hamburg in July this
year  on  the  side  of  the  G20  meeting,  they  reaffirmed  our  close  ties  and  discussed  how
China and Singapore could strengthen cross-border collaboration.
In  the  past  few  months,  various  leaders  of  our  two  countries  have  met,  always  with  the
same purpose: to broaden relations, build connectivity, boost mutual prosperity.
Progress of the chongqing connectivity initiative
Against this strong economic relationship between our two countries, the Chongqing Connectivity
Initiative (CCI) has made remarkable progress.
Trade between Chongqing and Singapore has been growing at a healthy annual average of
5.2% in the last five years.
Annual direct investment between our two cities has more than doubled during this period,
from RMB 7.4 billion to RMB 22.2 billion (US$1.2 billion to US$3.2 billion).
The financial co-operation pillar of the CCI has helped Chongqing corporates to raise offshore
financing from Singapore’s financial centre.
As  of  end-2016,  39  cross-border  financing  deals  amounting  to  RMB  22  billion  have  been
completed.
The average financing cost for these deals in 2016 was about 4.86%, a good 70 basis points
lower than the average interest rate for one- to three-year RMB loans in Chongqing.
The savings in financing costs amounted to RMB 152 million.
Chongqing  companies  have  expanded  into  Asia,  with  the  support  of  Singapore  financial
institutions.
The China Chongqing International Economic and Technical Cooperation Group (CICET), is
the first Chongqing state-owned enterprise to set up in Singapore.
United Overseas Bank (China) supported this significant move.
Collaboration  through  the  CCI  is  starting  to  unlock  financing  channels  for  small  and  medium-
sized enterprises in Chongqing.
OCBC  Bank  Limited  and  Chongqing  Rural  Commercial  Bank  are  working  on  innovative
solutions  to  provide  cross-border  funding  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  in
Chongqing.
One of our panel sessions later will be discussing this topic in greater depth.
The CCI has become the major artery that connects Singapore to Chongqing financially.  But
more than that, it has the potential to help make Chongqing the beating heart of the Western
Region.
Let me suggest four areas of financial collaboration in the next phase of CCI.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
first, unlocking private sector financing for infrastructure projects;
second, expanding the role of capital markets in financing growth;
third, developing risk management solutions to support investment; and
fourth, strengthening financial capabilities and mutual learning.
Unlocking private sector financing for infrastructure projects
First, private sector financing for infrastructure projects, especially in the context of the Belt and
Road Initiative. The CCI can serve as a key priority demonstration project to operationalise the
Belt and Road Initiative.
The Belt and Road Initiative is breath-taking in its strategic vision.
At one level, it is about promoting economic growth in the countries of Asia through infrastructure
development.
The Asian Development Bank estimates that developing Asian countries will need to invest
US$1.7 trillion annually in infrastructure until 2030 to maintain their growth momentum.
But at a deeper level, the Belt and Road Initiative is about bringing together the countries of Asia
through greater connectivity – deeper links of transport and communications, stronger flows of
trade and investment, greater movement of people and ideas.
The  Belt  and  Road’s  potential  scope  for  connectivity  is  perhaps  unmatched  in  human
history.
As  an  international  financial  centre  in  the  heart  of Asia,  Singapore  can  play  a  useful  role  in
financing and advancing Belt and Road projects, particularly in Southeast Asia.
Chinese banks in Singapore have committed more than RMB 500 billion (USD 73.4 billion) in
financing Singaporean companies involved in Belt and Road projects, including the issuance
of project bonds.
China Construction Bank Singapore branch issued RMB 1 billion (USD 145 million) of Belt
and Road Initiative bonds in August last year.
And in May this year, Bank of China Singapore branch issued Belt and Road Initiative bonds
worth RMB 4 billion (USD 600 million).
Expanding the role of capital markets in financing growth
Second,  the  CCI  has  embarked  on  a  demonstrative  project  to  expand  the  role  of  our  capital
markets.
This complements the role of banks in financing growth and development. 
Specifically,  we  should  facilitate  the  participation  of  institutional  investors  in  development
projects.  Why? 
China  has  many  public-private  partnership  (PPP)  projects,  where  the  state  and  companies
involved own and operate infrastructure assets.
In Chongqing itself, RMB 800 billion worth of PPP projects are expected to be in the pipeline
between 2015 and 2020.
But infrastructure assets are illiquid by nature.  The capital invested is locked up and not available
for use in other development projects.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
If we can securitise these PPP assets, we can help free up capital and diversify funding
sources.
We can make these securitised assets available to long term investors such as insurance
companies and sovereign wealth funds, or even retail investors through a listing.
As  the  largest  hub  in Asia  ex-Japan  for  Real  Estate  Investment  Trusts  and  Business  Trusts,
Singapore  is  well-placed  to  partner  China  to  help  securitise  or  list  Chinese  assets  into  the
Singapore market.
Singapore investors are familiar with China’s industrial real estate assets.
Singapore’s  financial  institutions  also  have  a  long  history  of  experience  with  China-based
assets and infrastructure assets.
Nine  of  the  32  REITS  listed  on  the  Singapore  Exchange   invest  in  Mainland  China
properties.
1
There are several advantages a listing in Singapore can bring.
First, Singapore has a more diversified pool of investors compared to the local markets in
the Western Region.  This helps to ensure adequate liquidity for the securities.
Second, the REITs listed in Singapore tend to fetch higher yields than those listed in other
developed markets.
Third, the Singapore market has a reputation for high quality assets and strong governance. 
This will help raise the profile of REITs listed in Singapore.
I am pleased to note that currently, we have an ongoing demonstrative project where Shanghai
Pudong Development Bank is looking to securitise a portion of its client’s assets as a REIT in
Singapore. This innovation could inspire similar deals under the CCI.
Developing risk management solutions to support investment
Third, we can work together to develop risk management solutions to support CCI investments. 
Infrastructure projects are often exposed to large risks like natural catastrophes.
Just last year, Chongqing experienced disruptions due to floods and heavy rain.
More recently, in June 2017, Sichuan Province’s Mao County experienced a tragic landslide.
About 12% of the Western Region’s GDP in 2016 was contributed by agriculture, this is no
small number. When natural catastrophes occur, crops, homes and public infrastructure are
destroyed or damaged.
Financial markets can play an important role in mitigating such risks. 
An  innovative  example  of  this  is  an  orange  index  product  developed  by  the  Changshou
District Government here in Chongqing just four months ago.
This product compensates farmers if the price of the blood orange index is lower than the
price stated in the sales contract.
In  Singapore  too,  we  are  developing  mechanisms  to  assess,  manage,  and  transfer  disaster
risks.  Allow me to share one example which utilises state-of-the-art data aggregation. 
Asia Risk Transfer Solutions (ARTS), a Singapore start up, has developed a risk analytics
platform for pricing and managing index based insurance products.
ARTS’  crop  platform  in  India  has  reduced  the  time  taken  for  underwriters  to  calculate
agriculture insurance premiums, from days to a matter of hours.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ARTS is now exploring a similar pilot in China, working with local government and private
agencies, as well as local and international insurers.
Strengthening financial capabilities and mutual learning
Fourth, there is scope for Chongqing and Singapore to expand on financial training cooperation
and learn from one another through “people to people connectivity”.
Let me highlight two encouraging examples of ongoing training cooperation under the CCI.
The  China  Insurance  Regulatory  Commission  is  working  with  the  Singapore  College  of
Insurance to conduct training to about 300 management personnel of Chongqing insurers.
UOB  Singapore  will  be  conducting  training  for  financial  institutions  and  corporates  in
Chongqing on a variety of topics, including foreign exchange risk management.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
During these last two years, the CCI has been the springboard for many collaborations between
Chongqing and Singapore. But we are only at the beginning of our journey.
This  forum  is  a  good  platform  to  generate  ideas  for  Chinese  and  Singapore  companies  to
collaborate on, whether it is to meet the demands of funding, manage risks, or share expertise
and knowledge.
I wish you fruitful discussions. Thank you.
1
In  addition  to  these  32  REITs,  there  are  another  six  stapled  REIT-Business  Trust  securities  listed  on  the
Singapore Exchange.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
