Michael  Held:  Reforming  culture  and  conduct  in  the  financial
services industry - how can lawyers help?
Remarks  by  Mr  Michael  Held,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Legal  Group  of  the  Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  Yale  Law  Schoo's  Chirelstein  Colloquium,  New  Haven,
Connecticut, 8 March 2017.
 Thank you, Nancy, for your invitation and for organizing this discussion. It is an honor to join this
session of the Chirelstein Colloquium.
My  topic  today  is  culture  in  financial  services.  Reform  of  culture  has  been  a  priority  for  the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York for several years. Many of the observations I will share today
are  based  on  that  work.  But,  as  always,  what  I  have  to  say  reflects  my  own  views  and  not
1
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
My thesis is that lawyers should play important roles at financial firms as advisors not just on law
—what is legal or illegal—but also on culture. As I see it, culture is distinct from both public law
and private rules. That doesn’t mean that culture is completely independent of either. Indeed, a
group’s culture often informs and is informed by its rules. But culture is a powerful force in its
own right.
I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  a  lawyer  should  rush  headlong  into  areas  best  reserved  for
organizational psychologists. A lawyer’s advice on culture should always be grounded in law, and
lawyers should be cautious in venturing too far afield from their core expertise and fundamental
role as advisors on the law.
That  said,  an  in-house  lawyer  is  well-suited  to  assess  and  help  improve  an  organization’s
culture.  A  lawyer  can  supply  a  degree  of  both  independence  and  insight  that  is  required  to
understand  an  organization’s  culture  without  becoming  captive  to  that  culture.    Independence
comes, in part, from a lawyer’s training, independent code of ethics, and reporting responsibilities
that ultimately go up to the board of directors. Insight comes from building a trusted relationship
with a client over time.
A  lawyer’s  aim  should  be  what  Gillian  Tett  from  the Financial  Times  has  described  as  the
2
  Ben
viewpoint  of  the  “insider-outsider,”  someone  with  both  understanding  and  objectivity.
Heineman, a recent speaker at this Colloquium and a former general counsel of General Electric,
has  another  take  on  the  same  objective: A  lawyer  is  both  a  partner  and  a  guardian.  There  is
some  inherent  tension  between  an  insider’s  and  an  outsider’s  perspective,  between  being  a
partner and a guardian. But, as Heineman argues, “these potentially paradoxical ideas can co-
3
exist and, indeed, can be complementary."
Some might argue that this is an expansive view of a lawyer’s role. I believe it is the appropriate
view. A lawyer who is both a partner and a guardian—an insider and an outsider—can greatly
benefit a financial services firm. You might apply the same thinking to any number of contexts
4
and clients. But since my experience is largely with banks, I’ll stick with what I know.
Let me first explain what I mean by culture. I’ll then address the relationship between culture and
law, and how lawyers can contribute to a culture that respects law. Finally, I’ll propose an idea for
a new law to address a cultural problem, and ask for your input on how the idea might be refined.
I promised Nancy I would wrap up with plenty of time for questions.
For the purposes of our discussion today, I will use the word “culture” to mean the shared norms
within an organization that are evidenced through behavior. A strong culture is highly effective at
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
transmitting norms within a group and helping newcomers assimilate to those norms. We each
observe our environments. Often—sometimes too often—we conform our conduct to what we
see around us. As one of the New York Fed’s summer interns put it, “Culture is best understood
as something that makes people feel safe and confident in their inherited understanding of the
world."
This insight suggests why culture can sometimes cause trouble. An organization’s culture may
yield  too  high  a  degree  of  adherence—or  a  dangerous  lack  of  questioning.  Culture  can
sometimes  lead  to  a  conclusion  that  an  action  is  right  because  it  appears  to  be  accepted  or
ordinary. After all, if conduct is accepted, it must be safe and alright—right?
This assumption, and others like it, are frequently at the core of enforcement investigations by
the Federal Reserve. If you were to ask “Why do people commit financial crimes,” it might be
tempting  to  respond,  simply,  “They’re  greedy.”  Some  people  are  greedy. And  some  of  those
people commit financial crimes. In my opinion, however, the reasons why bankers break the law
are  varied  and  complex. And,  in  many  instances,  misconduct  is  related  to  an  organization’s
culture.
Let’s face it: In figuring out how to behave on an everyday basis, people may not always refer to
laws or rules or regulations or policies. They may not always consult their in-house counsel or
their compliance department. I know that probably sounds terrible for me to say, particularly as a
lawyer.  Make  no  mistake,  I  place  the  highest  value  on  our  laws  and  regulations.  When  I  first
joined the Fed, a colleague passed along a saying that he learned while in law school: Laws are
the wise restraints that keep us free. I firmly believe that. Looking at the role of culture is not the
same thing as excusing personal responsibility. There is no “culture excuse” when people break
the law. I want to be clear on this. Laws and regulations matter. As a supervisor, adherence to
laws and regulations is my top priority.
But I’m also a realist.
I think of a new, junior banker—fresh out of school, or otherwise new to an organization. In my
experience, junior bankers typically don’t consult “the law” for guidance on a day-to-day basis.
They take their cues from their peers and immediate supervisors. That’s how they discover what
is important—to gauge the difference between what is right and what is wrong, or between what
is  successful  and  unsuccessful. A  newly-minted  trader,  for  example,  may  not  realize  what’s
wrong  with  a  particular  activity,  especially  if  the  conduct  has  the  appearance  of  an  accepted,
ordinary, or highly rewarded industry practice. More often than not, it’s an organization’s culture—
the shared norms conveyed through conduct—that provides instruction.
Another  noteworthy  aspect  of  cultures  at  some  banks—again,  observed  in  hindsight  through
enforcement investigations—is that they do not tolerate failure. A banker with a track record of
success  (academically,  athletically,  or  professionally)  may 
to  misstate
performance indicators to preserve a self-image of success or to keep a job. The employment
structures within many a firm—for example, the tournament-style systems of job retention—may
contribute to this. In any year, a bank may part ways with anyone in the bottom ten or twenty
percent  of  a  peer  group,  based  on  financial  performance.  These  bankers  operate  in  an
environment that does not tolerate failure—even when failure is guaranteed by design for a large
percentage  of  the  workers.  That’s  dangerous  for  several  reasons:  It  can  encourage  cutting
5
corners. And it discourages escalation of problems.
feel  pressure 
In other cases, a misguided desire to help teammates may have contributed to misconduct. This
is also a feature of culture. Teamwork and employee loyalty are, no doubt, worthy principles. But
in  the  LIBOR  and  foreign  exchange  scandals,  for  example,  loyalty  to  friends  and  teammates
became a reason for manipulating market benchmarks. This behavior may indicate a culture in
which the company or a team is somehow viewed as above the law, or at least apart from it, as
long as you are a high performer. That’s a dangerous mindset for a bank, which exists in part to
 2 / 8
6
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
provide the intermediation activities on which other participants in the economy depend.
The rate-rigging scandals involving LIBOR and foreign exchange markets are further instructive
about  culture  in  two  respects. First, cultures may exist within an industry in ways that are not
firm-specific. In some instances, the allegiances of the traders involved in the LIBOR and FX
scandals ran toward one another, almost as a guild of traders, rather than to their employers or
customers.    Loyalty  to  the  guild  may  have  provided  a  sense  of  security  and  belonging.
 Second, any organization may have multiple cultures or subcultures. Indeed, most people who
worked at banks involved in benchmark manipulation did not participate in misconduct.
It can be tempting to define away problems like LIBOR and foreign exchange manipulation as
isolated to a “rogue unit.” Anytime someone uses the term “rogue,” as in “rogue trading unit” or
even “rogue trader,” the hairs on the back of my neck stand up. Yes, it is sometimes the case
that one or more people simply “go rogue.” But it may be more likely that a firm has a more
systemic problem on its hands. Branding a behavior as “rogue” does not explain why it occurred.
Even if the scope of misconduct appears limited to a few people, an underlying reason—such
misaligned incentives or loyalties—may apply more broadly within an organization, and may lead
to  problems  elsewhere.  Without  an  understanding  of  root  causes,  how  can  you  know  that  a
particular behavior is random, or that its breadth will remain limited? Or, to borrow a common
metaphor—and we lawyers love to use metaphors—how can you know that you are dealing with
a single bad apple or a bad barrel?
Let  me  make  one  final  observation  about  culture.  At  the  risk  of  stating  the  obvious,  every
organization  has  a  culture.  It  may  be  embraced  or  eschewed,  nurtured  or  ignored.  I  think  an
organization that ignores culture does so at its own peril. Or, more optimistically, culture can be a
powerful tool for achieving the firm’s goals.
What, then, does law have to do with culture? And what role can lawyers play?
As I mentioned, having a law on the books does not mean people will follow it. And being a lawyer
does not always mean clients will listen to you. Some believe the solution is more laws. (Only the
enlightened few argue for more lawyers.) But as New York Fed President Bill Dudley has argued,
rules are “necessary, but not sufficient."  It is impossible to create a rule for every situation. Gaps
in a regulatory regime are inevitable. Groups will develop shared norms for filling those gaps. So,
for that reason alone, we need to look to culture as well as laws for solutions.
7
In addition, the pace of rulemaking is not always commensurate with the pace of rule breaking.
Focusing exclusively on rulemaking creates a risk of fighting last year’s scandal.
What’s  more,  laws  are  good  at  setting  the  outer  limit  of  acceptable  behavior—what  is  clearly
prohibited. They are less frequently and less reliably used to define what is optimal or what is
good.
Finally, a regime dependent on bright-line rules may, strangely, entice people to walk right up to
the edge of a rule—or to find creative ways around the rules. A proliferation of technical rules
prompts us to ask what we can do, not what we should do.
In short, law can shape culture and conduct—but not always as intended. I worry that lawyers in
financial firms are too often asked by clients, in effect, “How close to the legal line can I get?” Or
maybe they’re instructed, “Just tell me if this is legal or illegal, not what I should do.” Worse, I
worry  that  lawyers,  intentionally  or  not,  enable  this  kind  of  thinking.  Lawyers  are  certainly  not
immune from cultural influences.
And  recall  my  observation  earlier  about  culture:  Repeated  behavior  becomes  a  shared  norm.
Preet Bharara, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, has a few views
about  this.  He  has  described  two  particularly  pernicious  forms  of  culture,  based  on  cases
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
handled  by  his  office:  the  culture  of minimalism  and  the  culture  of formalism.  In  a  minimalist
culture, an organization does the “least amount possible to be in some kind of compliance with
rules."   In  a  formalist  culture,  technical  requirements  take  precedence  over  principles.  Either
way,  it’s  only  a  matter  of  time  before  these  cultures  lead  people  to  cross  the  line.  When  this
happens,  CEOs  have  to  explain  themselves  to  people  like  Preet  Bharara—and,  if  you’re  a
banker, to me and my colleagues.
In my view, lawyers must push against minimalism and formalism. They must argue not just for
what  is  legal,  but  for  what  is  sound  and  right.  Lawyers  should  play  a  role  as  a  part  of  the
conscience of the organization.
Now,  this  is  not  a  new  concept.  I  certainly  didn’t  invent  it. And  you’ve  heard  recently  from  a
leading expert in the field—Ben Heineman. I state it here because it is so important to what we as
lawyers do.
Good  in-house  counsel  will  combine  traits  of  outsiders  and  insiders  that  can  produce  keen
insights  and  contribute  to  successful  results. As outsiders, lawyers are trained to spot issues
and,  in  the  common  law  tradition,  to  reason  by  analogy  and  common  sense.  We  also
learn some actual law—not necessarily a whole lot, but enough to be able to learn more as we
go.
I also think that lawyers are natural questioners—a self-selecting bunch. Questioners tend not to
be yes-men or yes-women, afraid of rocking the boat. One of my predecessors at New York Fed
put it this way, writing to the Legal Department in 1964: Lawyers should be “neither obstreperous
9
nor mousy."
We  also  enjoy  professional  standards  that  help  resolve  difficult  ethical  questions.  Indeed,  the
rules that govern our profession expressly permit advice on non-legal matters.
10
 
Lawyers  can  also,  and  should,  function  as  trusted insiders  and  advisors.  We’re  partners  in
addition to guardians. In-house counsel, in particular, are able to build longstanding relationships
with  their  clients.  We  get  to  know  their  businesses.  We  have  opportunities  to  build  trust  and
confidence, which can make us that much more effective and credible when we raise questions.
Retained by the organization, we are invited to take an enterprise-wide view, not a narrow view of
a particular business line.
 At large financial firms, lawyers advise most divisions, if not all of
them.  Lawyers  can  leverage  their  broad  insights  across  a  financial  services  firm.  They  can
discuss  among  themselves  how  the  conduct  they  observe  in  one  division  compares  with  the
conduct observed by colleagues in another division.
11
In this way, lawyers can identify and help combat troublesome silos of behavior—to help firm
management identify whether they have an issue in an isolated “rogue” unit, or a more systemic
problem. For a junior lawyer, this might mean escalating up when she spots issues. For a more
senior  lawyer,  this  might  mean  engaging  with  peers  in  management—including  the  chief  risk
officer or chief compliance officer—to help ensure that issues are identified and addressed.
All this is to say, lawyers should support their clients with a healthy skepticism. When a CEO
chuckles over the ethical lapses at another firm, assuming that such a thing could never happen
at her firm, that is precisely the moment to step in, and challenge, and ask how the CEO gains
this comfort. Are her assumptions are well-founded? Supervisors at the Federal Reserve call this
“effective  challenge."
  Lawyers  can  look  out  for  effective  challenge  at  all  levels  of  an
organization. They themselves should also be effective challengers.
12
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition to challenging a CEO’s schadenfreude when another firm experiences trouble, here
are some categories of questions that, while not strictly legal, a good lawyer should ask. Each of
these  categories  requires  both  the  understanding  of  an  insider  and  the  independence  of  an
outsider.
The  first  category  is structure. Does a particular way of organizing a business run the risk of
unacceptable  conflicts  of  interest?  Are  roles  within  a  group  clearly  defined?  Are  they  over-
defined, so that employees lose sight of the big picture? Are control functions participating in key
decisions? Are lawyers themselves siloed within separate business units? Are they consulted
early, or only at the last minute? To quote again from one of my predecessors at the New York
Fed: “Please let us get in on the take-off, if you expect us to be in on the crash landing."
13
The  second  category  is communication. Are  principles  and  tasks  made  clear? Are  problems
escalated early or belatedly? How is bad news relayed and received—both from employees to
managers, and vice versa? Note that, in both directions, communications pass through a middle
layer. So, you might also ask how intermediaries influence the content of communications.  In
addition, do control areas communicate and coordinate with each other? Do lawyers share with
each other and with other control areas such as compliance and risk officers about what they are
seeing?
The third category is leadership—in particular, what has been called “character at the top."
 Do
the messages from senior leaders match their actions? Do senior leaders set an example of
encouraging questions? Do they seek out feedback and input? Do senior leaders ask questions
themselves and demonstrate openness to alternative ideas? How do they handle the inevitable
mistakes that will occur in large organizations? Do they learn from them?
14
A  fourth  category,  which  I  think  is  particularly  important,  is  how  the  firm  treats  employees
who escalate issues. This is where I am focusing many of my efforts as general counsel at the
New  York  Fed.  For  an  institution  with  so  many  public  responsibilities—and,  indeed,  for  any
institution that wants to be effective over the long run—it is mission-critical that employees feel
comfortable escalating potential problems and challenging accepted points of view. Do we seek
out a diversity of viewpoints? If not, how do we know it the best idea wins? This is not always
easy or natural. I think human beings have a natural bias to seek out others who have similar
views to our own. But this only results in group-think. So, I encourage you to pay close attention
to how your organization encourages escalation and responds to dissenting or divergent views.
None of these questions are strictly, or even largely, legal. But, paying attention to these issues is
good  legal  risk  management—part  of  being  both  a  partner  and  a  guardian.  In  my  view,
organizations  with  good  structures,  communication,  and  leadership—and,  perhaps  above  all,
organizations that welcome divergent views and promote raising one’s hand—will, in my opinion,
have fewer legal problems."
Of course, lawyers have to be mindful of the possible consequences, however unintended, that
the partner/guardian or insider/outsider model may create. Lawyers may be perceived as giving
authoritative advice on issues for which they should be only one of many voices. While lawyers
may have a monopoly on rendering legal advice, they do not have a monopoly on advising as to
what is “right.” “We are not priests or rabbis."
 And as lawyers become more vocal on ethical
issues, there is a risk that tough ethical questions may be routinely outsourced to the lawyers. I
get nervous when I hear a client say, “I’m just doing this because the lawyers told me to.” This
would  be  the  opposite  of  the  result  that  I  would  like  to  see:  that  business  lines  feel  more
responsible and are held more accountable for their own ethics and conduct. Finally, the more
lawyers  engage  on  non-legal  questions, 
the  privileged  nature  of
communications with them becomes—and, an uncertain privilege, is not much of a privilege at
all.
the  more  doubtful 
15
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  believe  these  risks  are  manageable.  They  require  careful  attention,  but  not  anything
extraordinary. On the question of privilege, for example, client confidences should be protected
from  discovery  if  lawyers  ground  their  advice  in  legal  matters.  And,  by  the  way,  this  is  an
important  check  against  straying  too  far  from  our  expertise.  Our  advice  is  more  valuable  and
more credible when we speak from our training, knowledge, and experience.
Moreover, in my view, the benefits far outweigh any possible risks. Paying attention to structure,
communication,  leadership,  and  escalation  in  a  firm  provides  opportunities  to  spot  potential
misconduct early and intervene before problems grow even larger. Lawyers can also serve as
models in this regard, prompting non-lawyer colleagues to respond in kind. Remember, culture is
contagious.
Beyond spotting issues, lawyers must be proactive in solving problems, even ones that are of
their own making. I will give you an example that we are struggling with today. To extend the
metaphor I introduced earlier, we often call this the “rolling bad apple problem."
When an employee moves from one bank to another, it is standard practice for an employer to
provide  the  equivalent  of  name,  rank,  and  serial  number.  You  can  blame  lawyers  for  this.  I
mentioned earlier that lawyers are natural questioners. I think we’re also genetically averse to
risk.  Providing  information  about  employees  creates  a  risk.  For  example,  if  the  information
provided is incorrect, there is a risk of a lawsuit for defamation or tortious interference—to name
just two possible causes of action. And, regardless of the merit of a claim, it is very difficult to get
employment  cases  dismissed  at  the  pleadings  stage.  Most  suits  go  to  discovery,  which  is
expensive. So, lawyers advise clients that the best option is to say as little as possible.
Here’s the problem with that legal advice. It’s been observed since the financial crisis that some
of the persons most directly responsible for misconduct were not first-time offenders. They had
records  of  misconduct  at  previous  employers.  But  their  former  employers  did  not  share
information about misconduct with their prospective employers. Thus, a banker with a record of
misconduct  could  move  from  firm  to  firm,  spreading  bad  practices.  Remember  what  I  said
earlier: Culture is contagious. Bad behavior can travel with a banker across firms, but his official
record  does  not  travel  with  him.  What’s  legally  advisable  for  one  organization  results  in  a
collective action problem for all firms.
New  York  Fed  President  Bill  Dudley  spotted  this  problem  a  few  years  ago  and  proposed  a
database of banker misconduct to address the issue.
  In theory, a change in the law could
establish two duties for financial institutions: a duty to report misconduct and a duty to check the
database before an employee begins work.
16
The duty to report should arise when a covered employee leaves a firm in connection with some
misconduct,  defined  to  include  not  only  violations  of  law,  but  also  bank  policies  that  govern
behavior. Banks must explain the circumstances of misconduct in reasonable detail, such that a
prospective  employer  could  understand  what  happened.  Those  records  would  be  available  to
other financial institutions for some reasonable period of time—say, five years—and would then
expire.
The  duty  to  check  the  database  should  arise  after  a  conditional  offer  is  made,  but  before  the
individual begins work. An offer of employment would be contingent upon a database inquiry. The
prospective  employer  could  withdraw  its  offer  if  it  were  not  satisfied  with  what  it  sees  in  the
database.
To overcome the legal risk that inhibits disclosure, a federal statute could provide limited civil
immunity for reporting—a safe harbor. Banks would not face suits for money damages by former
employees. But their reports to the database would face judicial scrutiny. To guard against abuse
by  banks,  the  statute  should  entitle  employees  to  prompt  notice  and  two  options  to  pursue
redress  in  the  event  that  they  believe  a  report  about  them  is  false:  a  low-cost,  fast-track
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
ombudsman  hearing,  or  a  full  judicial  review  in  federal  court.  This  is  critical.  Remember  that
most people who work in financial services firms are not millionaires. The official sector would
also remain free to take action—criminal or civil—to combat abuse of the database and its safe
harbor.
There are costs and benefits to this idea—again, I’m only dealing with a hypothetical law, not any
statute on the books or pending before Congress. And the database idea is not a cure-all.  It will
not deter all bad conduct and will not, standing alone, restore the trustworthiness of banks. But,
on  balance,  I  think  a  database  will help  overcome  a  collective  action  problem  in  the  financial
services industry, which will benefit both banks and their customers.
The database idea would benefit from input by prosecutors and regulators, employment lawyers
for  plaintiffs  and  defendants,  in-house  counsel,  and  others  with  empirical  insight  on  human
behavior. It is, in short, a prime opportunity for collaboration and refinement through forums like
this one. I welcome your comments and questions.
One final note before I open the floor for questions. Some of you may be saying to yourselves,
“Well, that was a riveting and insightful speech. [You’re welcome.] But since I’m never going to
work in financial services, I don’t really need to worry about any of this stuff."
There is an ongoing debate as to whether there is something intrinsic and idiosyncratic about
financial services that creates especially egregious culture problems. I’ve tried to stay away from
that discussion today. Instead, I’ve tried to frame my remarks about culture in a way that can be
extended  beyond  financial  services  to  a  variety  of  industries—and,  dare  I  say  it,  even  to
academic  settings  or  public  sector  institutions  like  the  New  York  Fed.  I  would  respectfully
suggest, though, that you should be concerned with culture in financial services even if you’re
planning a career in a very different field. That’s because problems in financial services don’t
tend  to  stay  in  financial  services.  They  involve  clients  of  those  firms,  and  often  have
consequences for other sectors of the economy.
What’s  more,  cultural  problems  are  everywhere.  Think  of  the  problems  at  GM  with  its  faulty
ignition  keys,  or  problems  in  the  pharma  industry  with  inappropriate  sales  practices,  or  just
recently the headlines about a ride sharing company that allegedly used software to evade local
laws. In each of these instances, and in many others, I always wonder how the lawyers could let
this happen. I’m not the only one. “Where were the lawyers?” is a question often attributed to
Judge Stanley Sporkin following the collapse of Lincoln Savings and Loan.
 A decade later, the
post-mortem evaluation of Enron criticized lawyers who “saw their role in very narrow terms, as
18
an  implementer,  not  a  counselor." 
    And,  within  the  last  year,  Ben  Heineman  posed  the
19
question again regarding Wells Fargo.
17
Culture is an issue that you, as lawyers—both starting out in your careers and as you become
more seasoned—will need to work with, regardless of where you end up or who your client is.
Hopefully,  you  will  be  positioned  to  help  your  clients  think  about  these  issues  proactively  to
mitigate  risk ex  ante,  rather  than  just  reactively,  after  a  firm  experiences  significant,  even
existential, problems.
Thank you again, Nancy, for your kind invitation, and thanks to all of you for your kind attention.
1
2
3
4
5
 Celine Hwang and Thomas Noone assisted in preparing these remarks.  I am also grateful to Anne Thoma for
her contributions through the New York Fed’s summer intern program.
Gillian Tett, The Silo Effect 50 (2015).
Ben Heineman, The Inside Counsel Revolution 7 (2016).
I use the terms “banks” and “bankers” informally, to mean any supervised financial institution or its employees.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Cf. Wieke Scholten and Naomi Ellemers, “Bad apples or corrupting barrels?  Preventing traders’ misconduct,”
24 Journal of Financial Regulation and Compliance 366, 336–67 (2016) (describing the case of Kweku Adoboli,
who booked non-existent hedges to cover accumulated risk in his trading book).
See Dan Awrey, William Blair, and David Kershaw, “Between Law and Markets: Is There a Role for Culture and
Ethics in Financial Regulation?” 38 Del. J. Corp. L. 191, 217 (2013) (arguing for “a norm of ‘other regarding’
behavior within financial services firms, one which . . . attempts to induce firms to take into account the private
and social costs of their decisions”).
William C. Dudley, Remarks at the Culture Imperative: An Interbank Symposium (Jan. 11, 2017).
Preet  Bharara,  “Criminal Accountability  and  Culture,”  Remarks  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York’s
Conference: Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue (Oct.
20, 2016).
John Clarke, “The Role of the Legal Department,” 6 (June 10, 1964).  I am grateful to Ernie Patrikis, another of
my predecessors as General Counsel, for retaining and recirculating this memo.
See Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 94(3); Model Rules of Professional Conduct of the
American Bar Association § 2.1.
Cf. Association of the Bar of the City of New York, “Report of the Task Force on the Lawyer’s Role in Corporate
Governance”  3  (Nov.  2006)  (“Lawyers  are  often  in  a  position  to  influence  or  facilitate  the  conduct  of  their
corporate clients.”).
See, e.g., Supervision and Regulation Letter 15–18, “Federal Reserve Guidance on Supervisory Assessment of
Capital Planning and Positions for LISCC Firms and Large and Complex Firms,” 10 n.12 (Dec. 8, 2015) (“The
term ‘effective challenge’ means critical review by objective, informed parties who have the proper incentives,
competence, and influence to challenge the model and its results.”); Supervision and Regulation Letter 11–7,
“Supervisory  Guidance  on  Model  Risk  Management,”  4  (Apr.  4,  2011)  (“Effective  challenge  depends  on  a
combination of incentives, competence, and influence. . . . Such influence comes from a combination of explicit
authority, stature within the organization, and commitment and support from higher levels of management.”).
Clarke, supra n.9, at 23.
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr., “The Rewards of an Ethical Culture,” Remarks at the Bank of England, (Jan. 20, 2015).
Id.
William  C.  Dudley,  “Enhancing  Financial  Stability  by  Improving  Culture  in  the  Financial  Services  Industry,”
Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry (Oct. 20, 2014).
Lincoln Savings & Loan Ass’n v. Wall, 743 F. Supp. 901, 920 (D.D.C. 1990) (Sporkin, J.) (“Where were these
professionals, a number of whom are now asserting their rights under the Fifth Amendment, when these clearly
improper transactions were being consummated? . . . Where also were the outside accountants and attorneys
when these transactions were effectuated? . . . What is difficult to understand is that with all the professional
talent involved (both accounting and legal), why at least one professional would not have blown the whistle to
stop the overreaching that took place in this case.”)
Final Report of Neal Batson, In re Enron Corp., No. 01–16034 (S.D.N.Y. Bankr. Nov. 4, 2003), at 115.
Ben Heineman, “Heineman on Wells Fargo: Where Were the Lawyers?," Corporate Counsel (Oct. 12, 2016).
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
