Historical Archives of the European Union - European University Institute 
Travelling Exhibition on the Occasion of the 60th Anniversary of the Treaties of Rome 
‘EVER CLOSER UNION’ 
The Legacy of the Treaties of Rome for Today’s Europe  
Remarks by Fabio Panetta 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy  
   European Central Bank - Frankfurt, 21 March 2017 
I am delighted to speak at this commemoration of the 60th anniversary of the Treaties of Rome, 
which  established  the  European  Economic  Community  (EEC)  and  the  European  Atomic  Energy 
Community. 
Rome is not only the place where the European project came into being, but also the city that gave 
Europe its first ‘economic and monetary union’, more than 20 centuries ago. Indeed, if Emperor 
Augustus could be with us today, he would probably ask: ‘What have you guys been doing all this 
time? You are still at the point where we left you two thousand years ago!’  
But the Emperor would be wrong. The ‘monetary union’ of the ancient Romans emerged through 
war, conquest and prevarication; ours is based on peace, political consensus and shared welfare. 
In fact, we have progressed a lot from where the ancient Romans left us.  
The  EEC  Treaty  was  signed  on  March  25th,  1957,  in  the  Palazzo  dei  Conservatori.  It  was  an 
economic  compact  intended  to  transform  European  trade  and  manufacturing,  but  also  to 
contribute to the construction of a political Europe. In the preamble, the signatories of the Treaty 
declared that they were:  
   resolved to ensure the economic and social progress of their countries by common action to 
eliminate the barriers which divide Europe, […]   
anxious  to  strengthen  the  unity  of  their  economies  and  to  ensure  their  harmonious 
development by reducing the differences existing between the various regions, […]  
resolved by thus pooling their resources to preserve and strengthen peace and liberty. 
These  objectives  were  pursued  by  creating  a  common  market  and  a  customs  union  and  by 
developing common policies. The framers of the Treaty were fully aware of the difficulties that the 
path towards a united Europe would encounter. The presence of less developed regions, with low 
incomes and inadequate infrastructures, was definitely a cause of concern.  
For this reason the Rome Treaty foresaw the establishment of the European Social Fund and of the 
European Investment Bank, in order to provide financial support and reduce regional disparities.  
For many years, the development of the European project contributed to economic growth in the 
Member  States:  the  progressive  abolition  of  tariffs  favoured  specialization,  made  it  possible  to 
reap  the  benefits  of  scale  economies  and  stimulated  efficiency  and  competition,  with  positive 
effects on employment and welfare.  
 2 
The EEC subsequently evolved into the EU, becoming an area where Member States cooperate on 
a wide set of policies and citizens enjoy freedom and peace. In 1999 we introduced the euro, and 
even during the crisis we accomplished a lot in terms of deepening the Union.  
And  yet,  this  anniversary  takes  place  in  a  period  of  heightened  uncertainty.  The  anxieties 
generated by the crisis and geopolitical tensions – including the large migrant flows and civil war in 
nearby countries – have aroused uneasy sentiments among European citizens, thus giving further 
ammunition to anti-European movements, and narrowing the focus of the economic and political 
debate to mostly domestic and short-term issues.  
The divergent views of the Member States on fundamental issues – from migration to economic 
policy  –  weaken  the  EU  in  the  eyes  of  the  international  community  and  in  those  of  European 
citizens.  The  reaction  of  public  opinion  has  been  one  of  concern  and  rejection.  The  European 
project  is  sometimes  perceived  as  a  bureaucratic  superstructure  and  a  source  of  redundant 
regulations; it is seen more and more as part of the problem, less and less as the solution. Should 
this situation persist, the future of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), and even of the EU 
itself, cannot – and should not – be taken for granted.  
In my opinion, the necessary ingredients to strengthen the European project are precisely those 
that  inspired  the  choices  of  the  founding  fathers.  First,  an  unfailing  faith  in  the  importance  of 
European  integration.  As  Donald  Tusk,  President  of  the  European  Council,  has  asked  European 
leaders,  somewhat  rhetorically:  ‘If  we  do  not  believe  in  ourselves,  in  the  deeper  purpose  of 
integration, why should anyone else?’ 
Second,  it  must  be  clear  that,  as  President  Draghi  recently  affirmed,  for  the  EMU  to  be  viable 
‘Members have to be better off inside than they would be outside…If there are parts of the euro 
area that are worse off inside the Union, doubts may grow about whether they might ultimately 
have to leave’.  
Finally,  we  must  be  able  to  design  and  put  in  place  institutional  arrangements  and  policies  to 
address the pragmatic and pressing needs of all European citizens.  
With  these objectives  in  mind,  we  must  admit that  up  to now  we have  not been  able to  claim 
success.  True,  during  the  financial  crisis  European  institutions  and  Member  States  have 
demonstrated their willingness to invest in the European project. Measures have been taken to 
 3 
strengthen the EMU, such as the establishment of the ESM, the launch of the Banking Union, the 
introduction  of  new  budgetary  rules  and  the  extension  of  multilateral  supervision  to  macro 
imbalances.  
However,  what  we  have  done  so  far  is  not  enough.  Those  measures  were  often  enacted  in 
emergency  conditions,  and  risked  producing  overlaps,  redundancies  and  sometimes  genuine 
mistakes. In effect, the reaction to the crisis relied almost exclusively on monetary policy. The ECB 
acted  boldly  to  preserve  price  stability  and  to  support  the  real  economy.  In  the  absence  of  its 
monetary policy measures, economic conditions would have been much worse, possibly leading to 
a deflationary spiral.  
Going forward, it will be necessary to increase the incentives for reform and the coordination of 
economic and structural policies, and shift from an intergovernmental form of management based 
on the peer review of national policies to the formulation of genuinely common policies. The plan 
published by the European Commission in November 2012 and the report of the President of the 
European Council in June of the same year set the stage for a further strengthening of the EMU. 
The SSM has been a success story. It rapidly became operational in supervising the largest banks 
and,  in  the  euro  area,  it  has  contributed  to  stabilization,  which  is  a  prerequisite  for  economic 
growth. However, the Banking Union is still incomplete due to disagreement on the next steps to 
be taken. The Capital Markets Union is still embryonic, in spite of the fact that the free movement 
of capital is a long-standing objective of the European Union, dating back to the Treaty of Rome. 
Finally,  some  form  of  fiscal  capacity  at  the  euro-area  level  would  improve  the  management  of 
cyclical conditions in various economies and in the euro area overall. To be fully effective, it would 
require the introduction of common debt instruments. 
But, in order to move forward in the integration process we need, above all, to rebuild  mutual 
trust,  both  at  the  political  level  and  among  citizens.  The  first  step  must  be  to  tackle  the 
weaknesses  of  individual  countries,  but  such  an  effort  must  be  sustained  by  progress  in  the 
European construction.  
This is a demanding agenda, but as the late President of the Italian Republic, Ciampi, noted about 
thirty years ago ‘for the civilization to which we belong [European integration] is the only way to 
avoid losing the thread that was broken by two world wars and retied by those with the vision to 
 4 
imagine Europe as a community.’ Without an integrated Europe, we may not be able to influence 
global phenomena such as migration, terrorism, climate change or the vagaries of an increasingly 
interconnected economy.  
Returning to my starting point, in order to make our way forward we may need to look back at our 
history,  cherish  the  good  we  see  in  the  past  and  jettison  the  bad.  The  Roman  ‘economic  and 
monetary  union’  was  strong  because  it  was  backed  by  political  union,  and  we  should  strive  to 
achieve such a union – by peaceful means, of course; at the same time it was weak, because it was 
designed for the benefit of a few to the detriment of many, a mistake that we should certainly try 
to avoid today. 
 5 
