Abdul-Nashiru Issahaku: Effectively communicating economic and
financial developments in Ghana during 2016
Remarks by Dr Abdul-Nashiru Issahaku, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at a press soiree, held
at the Bank of Ghana to commemorate the end of the year, Accra, 28 December 2016.
Good afternoon.
 1. On behalf of the Board of Directors and Management, l would like to express our profound
gratitude to you members of the Press for the collaboration we have had during the year. As
effective  communication  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  monetary  policy  transmission  is  not
unduly impaired, we are very grateful for your support.
2.  As  you  are  aware,  the  inflation  targeting  framework  involves  expectation  management  to
ensure that inflation is anchored. Hence, the effectiveness of monetary policy has become more
and more dependent on steering expectations of future interest rate policy. And no other policy
tool plays this role better than effectively communicating the policy decision and the considerable
efforts made in arriving at that decision. It is for this reason that we try to be clear and open about
our actions and operations.
3.  On  the  policy  front,  our  efforts  at  sustaining  macroeconomic  stability  continue  to  yield
dividends.  Thanks  to  continued  fiscal  restraint  and  the  tight  monetary  policy  stance,  we  have
been largely able to anchor 2 inflation expectations while the economy is becoming more resilient
to external shocks.
4. As you are aware, the Ghana Cedi has remained broadly stable during the year and we are
optimistic  that  the  cumulative  depreciation  for  the  year  will  remain  in  the  single  digits.  This
stability in the Ghana Cedi has reduced the pass-through to domestic inflation, although inflation
is  still  above  target.  We  therefore  need  to  sustain  the  macroeconomic  stability  to  anchor
expectations  and  to  build  shock  absorbers  in  the  face  of  continued  volatility  in  the  global
economic and financial environments.
5.  Let  me  mention  the  establishment  of  our  new  Communications  Department,  which  has
assumed such a strategic role in our communication functions. As a department within the Bank,
the goal is to proactively support the mandate of the Bank in ensuring price stability and ultimately
contributing to economic growth. Therefore, the work of the department is to promote monetary
policy communication as well as economic development communication. I want to urge you to
continue to work with them in seeking feedbacks on the various aspects of our operations.  
6. In an effort to further promote effective public accountability, we have just introduced a 24-hour
Contact Centre. This offers the general public the opportunity to have complaints, questions and
requests  for  information  dealt  with  promptly.  We  have  the  technical  team  that  provides  the
backstopping function at all times. Over time, this platform would introduce an interactive voice
response system that would also have built-in financial education section for the public.
7. Also, as communication is as much about educating as it is about informing, in the coming
year,  there  would  be  a  step-up  in  financial  literacy  and  financial  education  programmes.  We
believe  that  the  Bank  has  a  significant  stake  in  financial  education  and  in  all  this  we  will  be
counting on your support. l am very confident that we will continue to work together as effectively
as we have done in the past.
8. Thank you for your support over the years and on behalf of the Board of Directors and the
entire Management of Bank of Ghana, l wish you a very happy and prosperous New Year.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
