Norman  T  L  Chan:  Strengthening  risk  management  of  banks  in
Hong Kong
Statement by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, to the
media, Hong Kong, 19 May 2017.
 In view of the increasing risk of overheating in the property market, I would like to announce that
the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) has decided to introduce three new counter-cyclical
prudential measures today to strengthen the risk management of banks. 
2.  The first measure requires those banks using Internal Ratings-Based Approach to
calculate  capital  charges  for  credit  risk  to  raise  the  risk  weight  floor  by  10
percentage  points  from  the  existing  level  of  15%  to  25%  for  new  residential
mortgage loans. 
3.  The  second  measure  requires  banks  to  lower  the  applicable  loan-to-value  ratio
(LTV) cap by 10 percentage points for mortgage loans extended to applicants with
one or more pre-existing mortgages. 
4.  The third measure requires banks to lower the applicable debt servicing ratio (DSR)
limits  by  10  percentage  points  for  mortgage  loans  extended  to  applicants  whose
income is mainly derived from outside of Hong Kong. 
5.  These  three  measures  take  immediate  effect.    However,  mortgage  applications  for
transactions with provisional sale and purchase agreements signed today or earlier will not
be affected.                  
6.  Finally, I would like to remind the public that, for most people, buying a property is not only
one  of  the  most  important  decisions  in  life,  it  is  also  a  financial  transaction  entailing
significant leverage through borrowing.    Prospective buyers must be mindful of their ability
to cope with the potential risk that may arise from possible changes in the property cycle as
well as mortgage interest rates. 
7.  The HKMA will continue to monitor the property market closely, and will introduce appropriate
counter-cyclical measures to safeguard the stability of the banking system.    
  1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
