  Public Finance Workshop on Fiscal-Structural Reforms 
Opening Remarks by Banco de Portugal Governor, Carlos da Silva Costa1 
Lisbon, 3 July 2017 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  open  this  workshop  on  ‘Fiscal-structural 
reforms: towards economic growth and the sustainability of public finances’. On behalf 
of Banco de Portugal and the organising team, a very warm welcome to you all!  
As you are aware, this workshop, hosted by Banco de Portugal, was organised in the 
context of the annual meeting away from Frankfurt of the Working Group on Public 
Finances of the European System of Central Banks. The workshop gathers here today an 
outstanding group of fiscal experts coming from central banks, fiscal councils, and other 
national and international institutions.  
Let me take this opportunity to reaffirm in particular the importance of fiscal councils 
and other independent fiscal watchdogs for the pursuit of sound public finances in our 
countries.  
Global economic activity is gradually recovering. However, structural challenges persist 
in many countries, including low productivity growth, high unemployment, insufficient 
levels of investment, high public and private indebtedness as well as weaknesses in the 
financial sector. 
How can structural reforms help? 
These  reforms  are  key  to  improving  long-term  economic  growth  prospects  and  to 
reducing our economies’ vulnerabilities to future adverse shocks. However, it should 
also be taken into consideration that they may be associated with some negative effects 
in the short and medium term, as reform implementation is not without economic and 
social costs. 
Structural  reforms  may  be  linked  to  fiscal  policies  through  various  channels.  This 
workshop will focus on a specific subset of structural reforms, namely fiscal-structural 
 1 Version prepared for presentation. 
    www.bportugal.pt  
  1   
 reforms.  Fiscal-structural  reforms  encompass  areas  like  taxation,  social  security  and 
pension systems, healthcare, education, justice, the institutional framework and public 
finance management, among others. They should be distinguished from the standard 
use of discretionary fiscal policy to fulfil short- to medium-term objectives.  
The  post-crisis  period  has  witnessed  a  reduction  in  fiscal  imbalances  in  Europe. 
However,  debt  ratios  remain  at  record  highs  and  risks  to the  sustainability  of public 
finances persist in several countries. Fiscal space for expansionary policies is limited and 
further consolidation is needed.  
Against this background, fiscal-structural reforms gain prominence as an approach to 
improve  the  efficiency  and  quality  of  public  finances.  Indeed,  if  well  designed  and 
implemented,  they  can  support  inclusive  economic  growth,  ensuring  their  long-run 
sustainability.  
Notwithstanding  their  potential  benefits,  the  implementation  of  effective  fiscal-
structural reforms faces several tough challenges. 
 First, they should preferably be part of a broad package of other necessary structural 
reforms. As such, the assessment of the potential impact on the economy is usually 
complex and requires a comprehensive approach. The technical expertise to make a 
correct assessment of the likely effects of reform is paramount for an efficient design. 
 Second, and closely related to the previous point, the planning of such reforms has to 
take into account the institutional and legal framework in each country. Indeed, the 
political decision-making process, the type of government, the existing domestic laws, 
in particular at constitutional level, and external rules like those included in the Stability 
and Growth Pact for European Union members, are important aspects to be taken into 
account. Sometimes, the improvement of this institutional and legal framework is in 
itself an important prerequisite for the feasibility and success of other reforms.  
 
Third, the technical expertise required for the planning of reforms should have a strong 
base in the country implementing them, along with ‘national champions’ supporting the 
reforms on their own merits. Domestic “ownership” is critical. Reforms should never be 
understood by society as an imposition from abroad, either from the IMF or from the 
European institutions.  
 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     2   
 Fourth,  careful  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  the  communication  strategy  and 
redistributive mitigation measures. Both are key to ensuring adequate support from the 
public and to containing populist appeals targeted at those parts of society that are 
potentially most adversely affected by the reforms. Indeed, some of these reforms may 
involve long implementation periods, with transitional arrangements, and often lead to 
changes in the distribution of income and wealth. This may create pockets of discontent 
in  spite  of  the  clear  overall  benefits  for  the  society.  Lack  of  understanding  of  these 
challenges by decision-makers may seriously jeopardise the expected outcomes. 
 
Last but not least, the length of the political cycle often proves insufficient to provide 
the  right  incentives  for  the  effective  implementation  of  fiscal-structural  reforms. 
Therefore, broader agreements across the political spectrum, if possible, significantly 
increase the likelihood of reform success. However, by their nature and especially in 
those countries most in need of them, such agreements have been quite hard to achieve 
lately. 
 
All in all, I am convinced that sustainable public finances and better long-run economic 
performance pose significant challenges that should be tackled without delay. The long-
term  benefits  of  structural  reforms  decided  today  will  far  outweigh  their  short-  and 
medium-term  costs,  in  particular  if  reforms  are  appropriately  designed  in  order  to 
mitigate the latter while not jeopardising the former.  
 
Today we have gathered here all the ingredients for a rich and fruitful debate on the 
topics I have touched upon.  
 
I  thank  you  all  for  your  participation  and  wish  you  a  very  pleasant  and  constructive 
workshop. 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     3   
