François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Presentation  of  the  2016  Annual
Report of the ACPR
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the
Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de resolution (ACPR), at the press conference, Paris, 29 May
2017.
 I am pleased to welcome you today for the presentation of the 7th activity report of the Autorité de
contrôle prudentiel et de résolution (ACPR), with Bernard Delas, Vice-President of the ACPR,
Rémi Bouchez, President of the Sanctions Committee, and Edouard Fernandez-Bollo, Secretary
General of the ACPR.
As you know, the ACPR and its 1,046 staff members have a broad field of action. The ACPR
guarantees the stability of our financial system, through the supervision of banks and insurance
companies, but it also guarantees the protection of French customers and savers. First of all, I
would like to mention our essential involvement both at the European and the international level. I
will  then  present  the  results  of  the  main  French  banking  and  insurance  groups,  before
addressing  four  major  challenges  that  strongly  shape  the ACPR’s  action:  low  interest  rates,
digital  finance,  customer  protection,  the  fight  against  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of
terrorism.
I. The ACPR’s action at the European and international level
 At the European level, the ACPR has taken an active part in furthering the deployment of the
Banking  Union.  The  ACPR  has  greatly  contributed  to  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  joint
supervisory teams, which supervise the major French banking groups, with 38 on-site missions.
Under the second pillar, the single resolution mechanism, which entered into force on 1 January
2016, the ACPR has actively prepared the preventive plans for the resolution of the four French
banking  groups  known  as  systemic  banks  and  the  transitional  resolution  plans  for  the  other
important groups.
Two and a half years of banking union, this is a significant step forward, but its construction is not
yet  completed:  we  have  to  complete  the  “resolution”  pillar,  with  finalised  and  simpler  rules
between MREL and TLAC, with a more efficient functioning between Frankfurt, Brussels and the
national authorities. The banking problems that remain in Italy, Portugal and even elsewhere can
be solved: but they must be dealt with quickly, and definitively. It is not normal to have localised
difficulties weigh to such an extent on the overall image of a European banking sector that is in
fact much stronger than before.
Today the question arises as to the architecture of European supervision and regulation.
Indeed, the Commission has opened the triennial review of the functioning of the three European
authorities,  in  charge  of  convergence  in  the  regulation  of  banks,  insurance  companies  and
markets respectively. In the short term, it is essential to relocate the European Banking Authority
to  take  account  of  Brexit.  The  powers  and  governance  of  the  three  authorities  could  also  be
adjusted to further improve their efficiency, but I do not think it would be useful in the short term to
radically change the existing architecture. Greater changes – which could also bring supervision
and resolution closer together – could be considered once Brexit has occurred and the Banking
Union and the Capital Markets Union are well established. With regard to Brexit, I would like to
reiterate a requirement which, in our view, is obvious: clearing operations in euro, for all those of
systemic  importance,  must  be  located  where  the  supervision  of  the  Eurosystem  can  be
exercised effectively. And after Brexit, we do not see how this could be in London.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
II. The 2016 results of the French banking and insurance sectors 
In 2016, in a context marked by the low level of interest rates, the major French banks showed
solid performances and compared favourably with their European counterparts. Their profitability
increased, with their net profit (group share) amounting to EUR 24.3 billion, up 3.1% over the
year. Moreover, the French banking system was able to strengthen its higher quality capital, while
maintaining the financing to the economy. The ratio of core capital now stands at 13.2% of risk-
weighted assets, up 60 bp from 2015; this represents a EUR 164 billion increase in capital since
2008 for the major banks, i.e. more than a two-fold increase: an increase of more than 120% in
less than 10 years. At the same time, with a 20% decrease in the cost of risk compared to 2015,
lending  to  the  economy  remained  buoyant:  +4.9%  in  outstanding  loans  to  non-financial
corporations and +4.5% to households. This growth, the strongest in Europe, accelerated further
at  the  end  of  March:  5.3%  for  non-financial  corporations,  5.6%  for  households.  While  the
management  of  these  risks  at  the  level  of  individual  institutions  does  not  give  any  cause  for
concern to the ACPR, this overall strong growth may call for special attention and a review by the
High Council for Financial Stability in which I participate.
For the insurance sector, Bernard Delas will give you more details, but I note the satisfactory
situation of the French insurance groups with a median solvency ratio of more than 200% at the
end of 2016.
Overall, I would like to point out that the French banking and insurance sector is sound, one of
the  soundest  in  Europe  and  the  G7.  The  quality  of  our  supervision  has  contributed  to  this
soundness, which is one of the assets of the French economy.
III. Four major challenges that shape the ACPR’s action 
The first challenge in our supervision of banks and insurance companies is the low interest
rate  environment.  These  low  rates  weigh  on  bank  margins,  mainly  on  their  retail  banking
business, although they are partly shielded by the high share of fees in their income. Since the
turning point last autumn, however, we are witnessing a very gradual rise in nominal long-term
interest rates and a “steepening” of the yield curve. This is a more favourable development for
bank profitability, which could turn into a weakness in the event of a sudden rise in rates: I do not
believe  this  hypothesis  is  the  most  likely.  But  the ACPR  remains  particularly  attentive  to  the
supervision of the interest rate risk management frameworks put in place by banks. The next
stress test exercise, currently underway, will look at different scenarios regarding interest rate
variations.
As regards the insurance sector, the moderation of the rates paid out on life insurance policies is
necessary to preserve their solvency. Luckily, we have observed such a trend in 2016 on euro-
denominated products, although the average return remains significant at 1.9%. The low interest
rate  environment  has  also  prompted  a  shift  in  savings  towards  unit-linked  products.  Here  the
ACPR is vigilant as to the commercial conditions of this development.
The second challenge is the rise of digital finance. Supporting new players is a priority for the
ACPR, which we have materialised by the creation of the Fintech Innovation unit and the Fintech
Forum with the AMF. Fintechs bring innovative solutions for customers, which are very welcome,
but they must also be attentive to data protection, cyber-security and compliance with anti-money
laundering measures. But the digital challenge is not limited to Fintechs. It can also be tomorrow
the major digital platforms – the GAFA – and today the transformation of banks and insurance
companies. They have committed themselves to it, much more actively in 2016; monitoring the
consequences for their business models is one of the priorities of European supervision in 2017.
New opportunities will also have to be seized: the possible exploitation of data, while protecting
customers and ensuring a real level playing field with the GAFA; or the development of cyber-
insurance.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The third challenge is the protection of the customers of banks and insurance companies,
which is of course one of our core tasks. The ACPR received more than 6,500 letters in 2016, an
increase of almost 20% in two years, and made more than 600 interventions among the bodies,
institutions  or  intermediaries  concerned.  The ACPR  has  also  continued  to  work  towards  the
dissemination of good practices, with five recommendations adopted or revised in 2016, notably
regarding the new practices related to social media or “complex products”. Finally, in its audits,
the ACPR  focused  on  providing  advice  on  health  insurance  contracts,  the  de-linking  of  home
loans  and  borrower  insurance,  and  on  compliance  with  obligations  related  to  unclaimed  life
insurance policies. On this subject of the “Eckert Act", the insurance companies monitored by
the ACPR paid out EUR 2 billion to the beneficiaries of unclaimed policies in 2015; banks, for
their  part,  transferred  5.5  million  inactive  bank  accounts  to  the  Caisse  des  dépôts  et
consignations  in  2016,  representing  a  total  amount  of  EUR  1.9  billion  to  be  claimed  by  the
account holders or their beneficiaries.
The fourth challenge is the fight against money laundering and the financing of terrorism,
which in 2016 was a higher priority for action. We carried out 30 missions among banks and
insurance  companies  on  this  subject  in  2016,  as  against  22  in  2015.  These  missions
complement the substantive action of the ongoing supervision, which resulted last year in close
to  700  follow-up  letters.  In  total,  we  initiated  and  published  six  disciplinary  sanctions  against
institutions. The year 2016 was therefore an active year in this field, raising to 22 the number of
sanctions taken since 2010 for noncompliance with the regulations.
 In conclusion, it is with pride that I look at what was achieved in 2016, but without any let-up or
complacency: many projects await us in 2017, both nationally and internationally. A strong ACPR
must  have  the  necessary  means  to  accomplish  its  missions:  I  would  like  to  emphasise  this
imperative.  I  will  now  give  the  floor  to  Bernard  Delas,  who  will  present  the  prudential
developments  in  the  insurance  sector.  Rémi  Bouchez  will  then  discuss  the  work  of  the
Sanctions Committee. Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
