REMARKS BY MR. JAVIER GUZMÁN CALAFELL, DEPUTY GOVERNOR AT THE 
BANCO  DE  MÉXICO,  ON  “EMERGING  MARKETS  IN  AN  ERA  OF  DOLLAR 
APPRECIATION  AND  VOLATILE  CAPITAL  FLOWS”,  AT  THE  STATE  STREET 
GLOBAL  ADVISORS  (SSGA) 
-  OFFICIAL  MONETARY  AND  FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS 
“POLICY  RUPTURE: 
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR PUBLIC INVESTORS”. London, April 
4, 2017. 1  
 
(OMFIF)  ROUNDTABLE 
FORUM 
I would like to start by thanking the organizers for the invitation to speak at 
this panel. 
 Several  years  after  the  outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  world 
economy continues to display a weak performance, despite the recovery that 
has  taken  place  since  then.  Following  the  rebound  observed  in  2010,  the 
growth rate of global GDP has been on a declining trend, averaging 3.5 percent 
annually during the period 2011-2016, a full percentage point below its pre-
crisis  trend.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  above  owes  to  a  large  extent  to 
developments in the advanced economies (AEs), whose sharp GDP contraction 
and slow recovery in the aftermath of the crisis limited the increase in real GDP 
from 2007 to 2016 to a mere 10 percent.  
 Even  though  cyclical  factors  explain  to  some  extent  the  aforementioned 
trends, the markedly low speed with which activity has recovered, as well as 
the  perceived  fragility  of  the  process,  point  in  the  direction  of  important 
structural  forces  at  play.  Indeed,  global  demand  for  both  capital  and 
                                                           
1 The opinions and views expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a 
whole. 
 1 
consumption goods  appears to remain subdued due  in part to  an excess of 
savings  over 
investment, 
further  compounded  by 
the 
long-lasting 
deterioration of balance sheets across sectors and economies as a result of the 
crisis.  On  the  supply  side,  factors  such  as  low  productivity  growth  and 
demographic  trends,  especially  in  the  AEs,  in  combination  with  so-called 
hysteresis  effects  from  the  crisis,  are  considered  to  be  exerting  downward 
pressure  on  growth.  All  in  all,  this  has  given  rise  to  concerns  about  the 
possibility of secular stagnation and therefore a much less dynamic outlook for 
the global economy.2 
 The  situation  is  further  clouded  by  parallel  and  reinforcing  trends  in 
international trade flows. Not only is  the  global trade volume  of goods and 
services  estimated  to  have  recorded  last  year  its  lowest  pace  of  expansion 
since the height of the crisis, but its average rate of growth has been cut by 
over one half between 2000-2007 and 2011-2016. Weakness in the pace of 
economic activity naturally accounts for a large share of the observed decline 
in the  growth rate of  international trade. However, global trade  flows  have 
also been undermined by a number of factors directly affecting them. Chief 
among these is the apparent loss of momentum in the pace of globalization 
and  the  trade  liberalization  process,  as  evidenced,  for  instance,  by  the 
lessened reduction of tariff and other regulatory barriers, the slowdown in the 
number and coverage of free trade agreements, and the uptick in protectionist 
measures. In addition, the patterns of production and trade may be changing, 
and a tendency to shorten global supply chains might also be playing a part in 
                                                           
2 See Teulings, C. and R. Baldwin (2014): “Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures”, a VoxEU.org eBook. 
 2 
the observed deceleration of the measured cross-border flows of goods and 
services.3 
 Not surprisingly, these developments and the hardship they have implied for 
wide  segments  of  society,  have  fostered  the  surge  of  a  strong  anti-
globalization sentiment, particularly in some of the main AEs.  
 In  this  context,  we  seem  to  be  entering  a  new  era,  where  the  problems 
resulting from the global financial crisis have not been fully dealt with, and new 
perils are emerging.  
 I am especially concerned about five sources of risk, in view of the challenges 
they present to the world economy.  
 First, the degree of uncertainty surrounding the outlook is significantly greater 
than what can be deemed normal. Although at the moment this is explained 
to a large extent by the lack of clarity and details about the future course of 
policies  in  a  number  of  areas  in  the  United  States,  this  comes  atop  doubts 
generated by exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union, as well as 
by  the  still-pending  electoral  processes  elsewhere  in  Europe,  all  within  the 
context of strengthening nationalist positions in many other countries. 
                                                            
3 See Hoekman, B. (2015): “The Global Trade Slowdown: A New Normal?”, a VoxEU.org eBook, June; and 
European Central Bank (2016): “Understanding the Weakness in Global Trade: What is the New 
Normal?”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 178, September.  
 3 
Second,  the  possibility  of  renewed  episodes  of  increased  volatility  in 
international  financial  markets  is  at  present  much  more  likely,  given  the 
combination  of  highly  integrated  international  financial  markets,  the  above 
described situation of uncertainty, the perspective of tighter global financial 
conditions derived mainly from the normalization of monetary policy in the 
United  States,  the  vulnerable  situation  of  several  major  advanced  and 
emerging market economies, and the potential for geopolitical problems in a 
number of regions of the world, among other factors. 
 Third, even though the US dollar has depreciated somewhat during the course 
of this year, a number of elements point towards a prolonged strengthening 
of this currency. One of the most important among them is the perspective of 
higher interest rates in the United States and the likely increasing divergence 
of monetary policy stances among the main advanced economies, a trend that 
may  be  accentuated  by  the  fiscal-monetary  policy  mix  anticipated  for  the 
United States in coming years. The implementation of corporate tax reform 
measures geared towards subsidizing exports and taxing imports, or a trade 
policy  aimed  at  increasing  import  tariffs  in  this  country,  should  they 
materialize, would also give a boost to the valuation of the dollar. 
 Fourth, the rise of nationalist sentiment across a broad range of economies 
could result in in an increase of protectionism worldwide, in a context in which 
new  trade  restrictions  returned  in  2016  to  the  trend  levels  observed  since 
20094 and a shift towards more opaque measures of protection is taking place. 
                                                           
4 World Trade Organization (2016): “Report on G20 Trade Measures”, 10 November. 
 4 
According to some recent studies, even an increase in tariffs by WTO members 
within  accepted  rules  would  have  a  significant  impact  on  world  trade  and 
welfare.5 Naturally, the consequences of an environment of retaliatory trade 
restrictions would be far more severe. 
 Lastly,  the  increasing  barriers  to  the  flow  of  labor  between  economies 
embodied  in  recent  anti-immigration  policy  proposals,  would  represent  a 
missed  opportunity  to  mitigate  some  of  the  challenges  faced  by  the  global 
economy. In particular, the aging and low growth of the labor force in some of 
the main economies would continue to be a major drag on both realized and 
potential global growth. Recent research by the IMF finds that a 1 percentage 
point increase of the migrant share in the adult population of AEs, can lead up 
to a 2 percent increase in the level of their GDP per capita in the long run.6 
 What are the policy options for EMEs under such a scenario?  
 Although specific circumstances will vary from one country to another, some 
principles of a general nature can be underscored. 
 A  first  one  is  to  fight  external  uncertainty  with  policies  aimed  at  enhancing 
domestic assurance. The priority here of course is to preserve macroeconomic 
and financial stability. Under a situation of volatile capital flows, this implies 
an  emphasis  on  prudence  and  preemptive  action  on  both  the  fiscal  and 
                                                           
5 See World Bank (2017): “Global Economic Prospects”, January; and Bouet, A., and D. Laborde (2010): 
“Assessing the Potential Cost of a Failed Doha Round”, World Trade Review Vol. 9 (02): 319-351. 
6 Jaumotte, F., K. Koloskova and S. Saxena (2016): “Impact of Migration on Income Levels in Advanced 
Economies”, International Monetary Fund Spillover Note No. 8, December. 
 5 
monetary  policy  sides.  Flexible  exchange  rates  can  provide  margins  of 
maneuver to cope with capital movements. However, exchange rate flexibility 
may  be  accompanied  by  costs,  and  therefore  intervention  in  the  foreign 
exchange  market  may  be  needed  to  gain  some  additional  space.  In  this 
process, the implementation of a balanced policy mix, which avoids excessive 
reliance  on  one  single  instrument,  is  of  the  essence.  Financial  stability  is  a 
complex  objective 
that  will 
frequently 
require 
the 
coordinated 
implementation  of  a  number  of 
tools, 
including 
fiscal,  monetary, 
microprudential and, in particular, macroprudential policies.  
 A second one is that in the face of a difficult external environment, reduced 
margins  to  implement  other  macroeconomic  policies  to  stimulate  domestic 
economic activity, and low productivity growth in a broad range of countries, 
efforts towards structural reform in EMEs take on particular relevance. As the 
empirical  evidence  demonstrates,  structural  reform  can  lead  to  improved 
productivity  performance  and  broad-based  macroeconomic  benefits.7  This 
strengthens the domestic sources of growth, thus making the economy less 
vulnerable  to  external  developments,  while  increasing  the  potential  to 
compete in international markets and the attractiveness of the economy to 
foreign investment flows. In addition, aggregate demand may be effectively 
stimulated by structural reform measures, not only directly, but also through, 
for  instance,  the  higher  efficiency  with  which  other  countercyclical  policy 
measures operate owing to reform-enhanced transmission mechanisms. 
                                                           
7 See Christiansen, L., M. Schindler and T. Tressel (2013): “Growth and Structural Reforms: A New 
Assessment”, Journal of International Economics 89(2): 347-356; and Prati, A., M. Onorato and C. 
Papageorgiou (2013): “Which Reforms Work and under What Institutional Environment? Evidence from a 
New Data Set on Structural Reforms”, The Review of Economics and Statistics 95(3): 946-968. 
 6 
 However, it is important to emphasize that the design and implementation of 
structural  reforms  face  a  number  of  challenges.  First,  as  the  international 
experience evidences, efforts in this direction are often undertaken within the 
context  of  episodes  of  severe  economic  distress,  with  the  risk  of  higher 
implementation costs, of a less carefully planned set of reform measures, and 
of  turning  what  should  be  regarded  as  a  strategic  action  into  a  desperate 
search for immediate relief. A second complication arises from the multiplicity 
of  idiosyncratic  factors  that  must  be  taken  into  account  to  maximize  the 
potential  of  reform  success  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  such  as  the  stage  of 
development  and  institutional  setup  of  the  subject  economy;  the  careful 
identification  of  a  sensible  order  of  priorities,  sequencing  and  intensity  of 
reforms; and the nonlinearities, interactions and complementarities that may 
exist among them. Third, the adequate implementation of structural reform 
faces  important  difficulties  of  its  own.  Among  these,  the  required  political 
support  may  prove  elusive  and  costly  to  achieve,  while  the  possibility  of 
implementation mistakes affecting the beneficial impact of the reform effort 
cannot be disregarded. Lastly, in addition to being feasible, structural reform 
must also be sustainable in the long-term, which in turn requires a strong and 
broad sense of ownership by the societies implementing them, aided too by a 
balanced mix of short- and long-term benefits. 
 Trade  policy  represents  another  key  component  of  the  policy  toolkit 
nowadays. In my opinion, a crucial issue here is to keep in mind that openness 
to  trade  flows  has  unquestionable  advantages.  In  addition  to  the  benefits 
 7 
arising  from  greater  competition  and  the  reallocation  of  resources  across 
sectors  on  efficiency,  technological  development  and  innovation,  the  wider 
variety and better quality of raw and intermediate inputs available to domestic 
producers at a lower cost also constitutes an important channel through which 
significant productivity and output gains can be obtained. Motivated by these 
and  other  beneficial  effects,  important  strides  towards  trade  liberalization 
have  been  made  at  a  global  scale.  However,  the  pace  of  progress  in  this 
direction  seems  to  have  declined,  and  there  remains  an  ample  margin  for 
further trade liberalization. According to recent estimations by the OECD,8 a 
broad-based  convergence  of  trade  policy  towards  a  stance  such  as  the  one 
currently observed in some of the most open economies would yield, over the 
long  term,  a  world  trade  intensity  (that  is,  the  sum  of  world  imports  and 
exports as share of GDP) about 22 percentage points higher than in a baseline 
scenario in which protectionism remains at present levels. 
 At the current juncture, nonetheless, the fact is that access to some markets, 
especially  in  the  AEs,  may  become  increasingly  more  difficult  to  obtain  and 
preserve. In such a context, EMEs will need to consider options to broaden the 
scope of trade and to deepen its reach. A first possible course of action in this 
direction is to look for a more extensive and ambitious network of free trade 
agreements (FTAs); experience shows that this has the potential to boost trade 
flows.9 Further to this, FTAs foster greater integration into global value chains 
                                                           
8 See Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2016): “Cardiac Arrest or Dizzy Spell: Why 
Is World Trade So Weak and What Can Policy Do About It?”, OECD Economic Policy Paper No. 18, 
September. 
9 According to recent estimates by the World Bank, preferential trade agreements accounted for nearly 14 
percent of world trade growth between 1995 and 2014, equivalent to a 0.6 percentage point increase in its 
 8 
(GVCs),  although  it  is  also  true  that  this  will  frequently  require  additional 
efforts towards the improvement of the economy’s infrastructure, particularly 
in transport and information and communication technology. Lastly, trade in 
services  appears  to  be  an  area  largely  unexploited,  given  its  relative 
underdevelopment  in  comparison  to  that  in  goods,  as  well  as  the  sector’s 
growing  importance.  In  more  general  terms,  and  as  noted  before,  it  is 
important to keep in mind the key role of structural reform in increasing the 
economy’s  competiveness  in  international  markets,  as  well  as  its  appeal  to 
foreign (particularly direct) investment flows. 
 To  conclude,  I  just  want  to  note  that  notwithstanding  its  beneficial  effects, 
globalization  is  accompanied  by  social  costs,  as  wages  and  employment  in 
those  sectors  more  exposed  to  competition  from  abroad  may  be  adversely 
affected. It has also been noted that globalization may give rise to an increase 
in  income  inequality,  although  the  evidence  here  is  not  fully  clear.10  In  any 
event,  as  the  recent  experience  demonstrates,  the  costs  resulting  from 
globalization,  either  real  or  merely  perceived,  can  be  significant  enough  to 
trigger a reaction that may stall, and even reverse, this process.  
 Indeed,  if  global  integration  is  to  continue,  it  is  essential  to  design  and 
implement policies geared towards the effective mitigation of the associated 
                                                           
annual growth rate. See Constantinescu, C., A. Mattoo, and M. Ruta (2017): “Trade Developments in 2016: 
Policy Uncertainty Weighs on World Trade”, World Bank Global Trade Watch, February. 
10 Recent empirical evidence shows that, while trade globalization appears to be associated with lower 
inequality, financial globalization does have an adverse effect on the distribution of income in both 
advanced and EMEs. However, this effect seems to be modest in comparison to those derived from other 
factors, such as skill-biased technological change and less regulated labor markets. For further details, see 
Dabla-Norris, E. et al. (2015): “Causes and Consequences of Income Inequality: A Global Perspective”, IMF 
Staff Discussion Note No. 15/13, June. 
 9 
costs. A first line of defense should aim at ensuring the availability of efficient 
and  well-targeted  social  safety  nets  that  limit  the  potential  damage  to  the 
most vulnerable, and that better equip them to face a far more competitive 
environment.  But  seen  from  a  broader  perspective,  there  is  a  need  for 
development  strategies  that  explicitly  foster  more  inclusive  and  sustainable 
growth  paths.  To  be  sure,  the  nature  of  the  challenges  involved  in  fighting 
poverty, lowering inequality, and providing adequate social protection under 
situations  of  stress,  implies  the  simultaneous  use  of  multiple  policy  levers, 
including  fiscal,  regulatory  and  structural  reform  measures,  among  others. 
Furthermore,  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  are  a  precondition  for 
these efforts to succeed. 
 10 
