Stephen  S  Poloz:  Canada  and  Mexico  -  common  issues  in
uncommon times
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the CanCham México and
Club de Industriales, Mexico City, Mexico, 4 May 2017.
 I  would  like  to  thank  Rose  Cunningham  and  Tatjana  Dahlhaus  for  their  help  in  preparing  this
speech.
Introduction
I am thankful for the opportunity to speak with you today, as it is a good time for our two countries
to  be  talking.  It  is  true  that  nobody  will  ever  confuse  Mazatlán  with  Manitoba,  particularly  in
February.  But  it  is  also  true  that  Canada  and  Mexico  have  more  in  common  than  is  usually
appreciated, especially on the economic front.
A  good  deal  of  our  commonality  stems  from  the  fact  that  we  are  both  relatively  small  open
economies that trade heavily with the economic powerhouse next door, the United States. But
we share much more than a common neighbour. Resources, particularly oil, are an important
part of both of our economies. The automotive industry plays a vital role in our manufacturing
sector, along with high-tech manufacturing such as communications and pharmaceuticals. And
while we may be at different stages of our economic history, we are following a similar trajectory.
In both countries, the service sector now makes up the majority of output—more than 60 per
cent  in  Mexico  and  70  per  cent  in  Canada—and  the  shares  are  rising.  Finally,  we  are  both
committed to rules-based free trade, and we both maintain a floating exchange rate within an
inflation-targeting framework for monetary policy.
Since we have so much in common, it is not surprising that shocks in the global economy have
hit us in similar ways. Now we are facing similar economic challenges. More important, we have
similar opportunities that we can capitalize on by using our strengths. So today, I want to discuss
recent developments in, and prospects for, the Canadian economy, in a way that will hopefully
resonate for the audience here in Mexico.   
Oil price shock
Let us start by looking back at the second half of 2014 and the collapse in oil prices. Various
benchmarks saw declines of more than 50 per cent. Given the importance of oil to both Canada
and Mexico, the shock represented a serious blow to our economies. It had a substantial impact
on the terms of trade—the ratio of the prices a country receives for its exports relative to the
prices it pays for its imports. Canada’s terms of trade fell by roughly 11 per cent from the middle
of 2014 though the first quarter of 2016. This meant a significant hit to our national income, about
$70  billion  in  that  period,  or  roughly  3.5  per  cent  of  Canada’s  annual  gross  domestic  product
(GDP). Meanwhile, Mexico’s national income declined by about 500 billion pesos, or about 2.5
per cent of annual GDP.
In response to the shock, our currencies depreciated—the peso dropped by 28 per cent against
the US dollar during the same period, while the Canadian dollar declined about 20 per cent. Of
course, some amount of depreciation was not surprising. It was a natural consequence of the
shock, and it helped economic adjustments happen by sending signals that prompted shifts in
investment and employment.
Although both currencies rebounded early in 2016, the peso then began to fall again, while the
Canadian  dollar  more  or  less  stabilized.  Global  capital  flows  were  likely  one  important  factor.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Historically,  flows  in  and  out  of  Mexican  capital  markets  have  been  closely  tied  to  investor
sentiment about emerging markets. Capital flows into Mexico fell sharply in 2015 and remained
low in 2016, as the US Federal Reserve prepared to raise interest rates and eventually began
tightening  monetary  policy.  This  put  additional  downward  pressure  on  the  peso,  on  top  of  the
pressure coming from lower oil prices that both Canada and Mexico faced.
In  terms  of  output,  though,  the  oil  price  shock  hit  Canada  harder  than  Mexico.  The  Canadian
economy contracted outright early in 2015, while growth in Mexico remained fairly stable. This
reflected, in part, the fact that Canada is a bigger oil producer than Mexico is—at the end of last
year, Canadian output was about twice as large as Mexico’s.
For Canada, the oil price shock meant a significant shifting of capital and workers out of the oil
and gas industry. It established a two-track economy: while the non-resource sector continued to
expand, it was not enough to offset the sharp decline in the resource sector. From the start of
2015, the negative impact of the resource track dominated.
While the adjustment process in Canada has been complex, and very difficult on a personal level
for many, we are seeing encouraging signs that the worst may be over. Activity and investment in
the  oil  and  gas  industry  have  stopped  declining  and  are  coming  back  to  a  level  that  is
commensurate  with  current  prices. And  because  that  large  negative  force  is  now  essentially
past, it is no longer masking the sources of strength in other sectors. There is still a way to go,
but  the  two  tracks  of  the  economy  are  gradually  converging  to  become  a  single  track  for
sustainable growth.
Policy responses
Now let me say a few words about monetary and other policies in the aftermath of the oil price
shock. Both the Bank of Canada and Banco de México dealt with the impact through our shared
framework—inflation targeting with a flexible exchange rate.
To set the scene, it is worth noting that Canada was a very early adopter of both aspects of the
framework. After  experimenting  with  a  floating  currency  in  the  1950s,  we  allowed  the  dollar’s
value to be set in financial markets as early as 1970, and we have not looked back. In contrast,
Mexico moved to a truly free-floating system only in 1994. In terms of targeting inflation, Canada
adopted the practice in 1991, 10 years before Mexico officially did. I mention this only because
the experience of central banks worldwide is that inflation targeting builds credibility and improves
an economy’s resilience to economic shocks. And the longer this policy framework is in place,
the greater this impact becomes.
There is no doubt that the predictability and certainty that come from inflation targeting helped
Canada’s  economy  respond  as  quickly  as  it  has  to  the  oil  price  shock.  The  response
demonstrated our economic resilience and flexibility, certainly when compared with shocks of
past decades. I do not mean to dismiss how difficult it has been for many individuals. But at the
aggregate  level,  the  economy  has  shown  its  ability  to  adapt  quickly.  Other  structural  factors,
such as Canada’s relatively flexible labour market, have also contributed.
Mexico’s inflation-targeting framework helped make its economy relatively resilient to the shock
as well. Indeed, it is worth noting that since Mexico adopted inflation targeting, the country has not
seen  the  type  of  domestic  financial  crisis  that  it  regularly  experienced  in  previous  decades.
Mexico’s tax collection has improved, and it has also made notable progress with other structural
reforms. While some of these have been politically difficult, such as the measures to open the oil
sector  to  private  and  foreign  participation,  they  have  been  important  for  increasing  Mexico’s
resilience and competitiveness.
In both countries, the inflation-targeting regime framed the monetary policy response. Recall that
the oil price shock led to a contraction in Canada’s economy, while in Mexico growth continued at
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
a  slower  pace.  The  drop  in  income  caused  by  the  shock  raised  the  clear  risk  that  Canadian
inflation would fall below the Bank of Canada’s target. So, we lowered our key policy interest rate
twice  in  2015  to  help  offset  the  fall  in  income  and  facilitate  the  adjustment  from  resource
industries to the non-resource sector.  
By the end of 2015, the US Federal Reserve began normalizing its monetary policy, and it has
raised its key policy rate three times amid strengthening US inflation and a labour market that is
near  full  employment.  But  in  Canada,  given  that  core  measures  of  inflation  have  drifted
downward in recent quarters and slack in the economy and labour market remains, we have kept
our  policy  interest  rate  unchanged.  Importantly,  longer-term  expectations  of  Canadian  inflation
have remained anchored at 2 per cent.
Mexico’s experience has been somewhat different. The oil price shock was less of a downside
threat to the inflation target. Indeed, the greater depreciation of the peso led to concerns about
upward inflationary pressure. So, the central bank has tightened policy, by a total of 350 basis
points, to counter inflationary pressures on consumer prices from the depreciation of the peso
and other factors, as well as to ensure the impact of the exchange rate did not de-anchor inflation
expectations.
Trade uncertainty
As I said earlier, the worst of the restructuring in Canada’s oil sector appears to be over. After the
shock  hit,  we  expected  a  natural  sequence  to  take  hold;  that  is,  stronger  global  demand—
particularly  from  the  United  States—would  lead  to  stronger  exports.  The  depreciation  in  our
currency would support gains in non-energy exports. All of this would spark increased business
confidence and investment, which would increase growth and ultimately help bring the economy
back to full output with inflation sustainably at target.
However,  this  sequence  has  yet  to  play  out  fully.  A  major  part  of  the  problem  has  been  a
continuing shortfall in Canadian exports relative to what one would expect historically. We have
looked at this closely and found both a permanent loss of export capacity that started more than
a decade ago and ongoing competitiveness challenges for some of our exporters. And now, we
have another challenge to deal with—uncertainty about the future of US trade policy.
Clearly, this uncertainty is a significant issue for both Canada and Mexico. Both of our countries’
trade is dominated by the United States. Last year, fully 75 per cent of Canada’s goods exports
went to the US market. For Mexico, the number was even higher, at 81 per cent. Similarly, the
biggest share of both of our imports comes from the United States. These numbers reflect the
traditionally open trading relationship among the three neighbours.  
This uncertainty has real consequences for companies. It increases the risks companies face,
which can raise their cost of capital and restrain investment. The Bank’s most recent survey of
Canadian companies showed that many see negative risks from potential US policies. These
risks  include  increased  protectionism,  reduced  competitiveness  of  Canadian  firms  if  US
corporate tax rates are lowered and possible delays in implementing pro-growth US policies.
To  be  clear,  the  outlook  for  investment  in  machinery  and  equipment  in  the  Bank’s  Business
Outlook Survey has continued to improve, and many companies are saying they are maintaining
or modestly increasing their level of investment. However, some are also saying this spending
will be limited to maintenance work, rather than the type of expansion that supports economic
growth. When you consider that the painful memories of the global financial crisis are still fresh, it
is  not  surprising  that  companies  would  continue  to  hesitate  to  expand  in  the  face  of  this
uncertainty.
The situation is similar in Mexico. Both producer confidence and investment intentions fell after
the US election, reaching their lowest levels since the global financial crisis. In concrete terms,
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
we  have  seen  several  announcements  by  companies  in  the  auto  industry  to  cancel  or  delay
plans for major investments in Mexico. The picture is certainly not uniformly poor, and we have
seen auto companies based outside the United States announce plans to invest in Mexico. Still,
the ongoing uncertainty represents a clear challenge for both of our countries.
Dealing with uncertainty
This naturally leads to the question of what can be done. Any economist will tell you that open
trade  supports  economic  growth  and  employment.  We  know  the  predictable  effects  of
protectionism.  We  have  seen  throughout  history  how  efforts  to  shield  industries  and  workers
from foreign competition have been counterproductive. Increases in tariffs lead to higher inflation
and a stronger real exchange rate, as well as potentially higher interest rates. Work done at the
Bank  of  Canada  shows  that  a  broad-based  increase  in  US  tariffs  would  ultimately  lead
to lower US output after about five or so years, whether or not other countries retaliate. Basic
economic theory also suggests that protectionism leads to slower productivity growth and slower
rates of innovation and technology adoption.
But  while  it  is  one  thing  to  make  theoretical  economic  arguments  about  the  benefits  of  open
trade, it can be more helpful to have concrete examples. Consider the auto industry. We can talk
about how it is responsible for 18 per cent of Canada’s goods exports and about 30 per cent of
Mexico’s. We can talk about how many times a single auto part might cross a national border
during the assembly process. And we can talk about the intricate supply chains that have been
developed over more than 50 years.
Or, we can show how building a single, integrated North American auto industry has led to jobs in
all three countries. The Automotive Parts Manufacturers’ Association has done a good job putting
the numbers together. In Canada, 81,000 people are employed in the automotive supply sector,
by both Canadian and foreign-owned firms. Those Canadian companies operate 150 plants in
the  United  States,  employing  almost  43,000  American  workers,  and  120  plants  in  Mexico,
providing jobs for roughly the same number of workers there. It is hard to imagine how interfering
with open trade or implementing other protectionist policies would benefit these people and their
families.
It would be helpful to hear many more examples from other industries. Policy-makers, business
leaders and labour leaders all have a role to play in showing how open trade has meant jobs for
workers across North America and around the world. Nobody can explain the importance of trade
to an employee better than their employer.
Regardless of what evolves, though, there is no shortage of potential sources of growth for both
of  our  economies.  The  first  order  of  business  should  be  to  keep  working  on  opening  trade
elsewhere in the world. In this respect, Canada has been playing catch-up to Mexico, which has
successfully negotiated access to many more markets than Canada.
The numbers tell a clear story. As of today, Canada has free trade agreements in force with 15
countries that represent about 22 per cent of global GDP. Mexico has agreements in force with
47 countries that represent 44 per cent of global GDP. But if you take the United States out of the
picture, Canada is left with free access to just 6 per cent of the world economy, compared with
28 per cent for Mexico.
The good news for Canada is that this gap will close significantly once the agreement between
Canada  and  the  European  Union  comes  into  effect.  It  is  unfortunate  that  the  Trans-Pacific
Partnership,  with  its  ground-breaking  coverage  of  intellectual  property  and  services,  has  been
shelved for now. Still, the work that was put into those areas could prove useful for both Canada
and Mexico in future trade agreements. The bottom line is there is still scope for both countries to
improve access to markets outside of North America.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Within  Canada,  we  had  the  positive  news  last  month  of  the  agreement  to  lower  barriers  to
interprovincial  trade.  Perhaps  the  most  encouraging  part  of  the  agreement  is  that  instead  of
listing the few areas that are subject to open trade, the provinces are now listing the areas that
are exempt. This makes open trade the default position, and it means the provinces will be under
continuous pressure to justify any exceptions.
Beyond  pushing  for  open  markets,  governments  can  pursue  structural  policies  that  allow  our
economies to be as flexible as possible. Canada is taking some welcome steps in this direction
—for  example,  by  investing  in  infrastructure  that  can  increase  our  economic  potential  and  by
helping workers develop new skills to take advantage of a changing labour market. I hope policy-
makers  at  all  levels  of  government  will  continue  to  focus  on  measures  to  improve  Canada’s
flexibility.
I have already spoken about the moves by the Mexican government over the past five years to
introduce some major structural reforms. Besides energy-market reforms, there has been good
progress in such areas as tax policy, competition policy and regulatory reform. These and other
measures are all investments in flexibility that will improve economic potential and give Mexico a
better  chance  to  succeed  and  grow  in  the  future,  no  matter  what  is  happening  in  the  global
economy.
In  terms  of  central  banking,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  been  working  on  the  implications  of
heightened uncertainty for the economy and the conduct of monetary policy. More fundamentally,
the Bank renewed its five-year inflation-targeting agreement with the Government last year. After
a thorough look at all the evidence, we concluded that setting interest rates to aim inflation at a
target of 2 per cent remains the best policy. Amid all the uncertainty, we can provide Canadian
businesses and consumers with certainty about the future value of their money.
Conclusion
Allow me to conclude. For both Canada and Mexico, the oil price shock represented a significant
economic setback. Sound economic policies in both countries are supporting a return to more
balanced growth. But now, again, we face a common challenge. Even though trade liberalization
and  increased  economic  integration  have  generated  prosperity  across  North America,  we  are
now faced with the threat of new protectionist policies from our largest trading partner. We know
that with protectionism, everybody loses eventually, including the country that puts the policies in
place. And the uncertainty around this threat of increased protectionism is holding back growth.
However, in these times it is important not to lose sight of the bigger picture. There is much that
Canada  and  Mexico  can  do  to  support  growth  and  employment  in  our  economies.  We  have
faced obstacles before, and have overcome them. Back in the 1860s, the United States pulled
out  of  a  free  trade  agreement  with  the  colonies  of  British  North  America.  This  provided  the
impetus for Canadian confederation 150 years ago, which turned out pretty well.
The antidote to uncertainty is certainty. The Bank of Canada will continue to provide certainty
around the future value of our money through our commitment to inflation targeting. This is the
best contribution we can make to Canada’s economic welfare. And more broadly, Canada and
Mexico’s shared commitment to open trade means both of our countries are well placed to thrive,
whatever the international environment.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
