Urjit  R  Patel:  Macro  and  micro  drivers  of  business  potential  of
IFSCs in India
Speech by Dr Urjit Urjit R Patel, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at Gandhinagar, Gujarat,
11 January 2017.
A. Introduction
 1. We are gathered here today to commemorate the establishment and success of GIFT, India’s
first International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) that brings together world class infrastructure,
connectivity, people and technology on a single platform for businesses across the world. An all-
inclusive and modern economic zone, it offers global firms competitive access to India’s large
and burgeoning demand for financial services.
2.  International  Financial  Centres  around  the  world  have  historically  emerged  out  of  the
confluence  of  economic  and  political  developments.  In  modern  times,  while  major  centres
adapted their financial institutions and instruments to intermediate international capital flows, they
also came to be seen as vehicles for economic growth and development of the host countries.
3.  To  achieve  their  objectives,  it  is  necessary  that  the  regulatory  frameworks  governing  IFSC
operations  are  well-thought  out,  guided  by  the  ease  of  doing  business  principle,  tempered  by
prudent risk management, and geared to deliver efficient financial services. The various areas of
attention  from  this  standpoint  include  registration  and  approval  process  for  new  entrants,
regulation, supervision and resolution of financial entities, and dispute settlement.
4.  IFSC  at  GIFT  City  is  probably  the  first  such  centre  to  be  launched  after  the  2008  global
financial crisis. In some ways, the light-touch regulatory philosophy epitomised by IFSCs came to
be questioned in the aftermath of the crisis. However, GIFT City has the advantage of drawing
the right lessons in this regard to avoid pitfalls.
5. The RBI has been working closely with all IFSC stakeholders on diverse subjects in recent
years to help GIFT develop.
6. Today we see intense competition among the major IFCSs trying to position themselves for
various business lines, and increase their business potential, which is the theme of this seminar.
In addition to the usual attributes there are two other dimensions, viz., the broader economic
environment in tandem with associated policies, and the micro ecosystem specific to the
IFSC sector.
B. Macro
7. As we celebrate GIFT today, it is important to recognise that its further growth will, inter alia, be
predicated on the environment of domestic macro stability that we have achieved along several
key areas over the last few years. We need to be ever vigilant to preserve and build upon what
we  have  attained.  Our  credibility  for  sound  macroeconomic  management  depends  on  it.  As
backdrop, there are two important transitions underway in the two largest economies. One is the
realignment  of  fiscal,  monetary  and  trade  policies  in  the  US,  which  has  already  imparted
considerable financial volatility in the global economy in the last two months. Even NAFTA is not
sacrosanct, US trade partners, especially emerging markets, stand forewarned. And all this is
even  before  the  new  US  administration  takes  office  later  this  month.  The  other  transition,  of
course, is the rebalancing of China’s growth drivers from investment and exports to domestic
consumption of goods & services. One of these transitions is welcome, the other not so.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
8. For us, in India, good policy housekeeping should be the cornerstone. It is easy and quick to
fritter away gains regarding macroeconomic stability. But hard and slow to regain them. What
have we learnt about the important policy attributes in this context?
9. Firstly, a monetary policy framework backed by legislation. The RBI now has a notified target
for inflation of 4 percent, which a six-member Monetary Policy Committee has been enjoined and
tasked to realise. We have to ensure that this objective is secured on a durable basis given the
progress already made. In addition to monetary policy, the gain on reducing inflation has been, in
no small part, due to supportive policies of the government, especially the proactive management
of the food economy since 2014.
10.  Low  and  stable  inflation  is  an  essential  prerequisite  for  having  a  meaningful  interest  rate
structure  or  regime  whereby  decisions  by  savers  and  investors  help  to  achieve  maximal
allocative  efficiency  in  an  economy  whose  investment  rate  has  to  increase  for  better  growth
outcomes.  Concomitantly,  we  have  to  continue  to  press  ahead  for  a  more  fluid,  smooth
transmission  of  monetary  policy,  as  also  enhance  the  formulaic  linkage  between  changes  in
policy rates and other rates, including administered ones. The perception is that some of these
adjustments are presently ad hoc. Automaticity will help to impart more predictability and possibly
make for better long-term decisions by economic agents.
11.  In  addition,  while  some  government  guarantees  and  limited  subventions  can  help,  steep
interest rate subventions and large credit guarantees also impede optimal allocation of financial
resources and increases moral hazard. The mandates for these have to be narrow, and thus
perforce  be  deployed  judiciously,  within  a  regulatory  framework,  which  RBI  has  suggested.
Guarantees  increase  government’s  contingent  liabilities,  and  add  to  risk  premia  for  its  own
borrowing. Guarantees per se at the end of the day have limited utility in solving important sector
issues. For example, for small scale enterprises, perhaps non-pecuniary and transaction costs
related to clearances, inspections and the taxation bureaucracy are more important.
12.  Second,  since  2013,  the  central  government  has  successfully  embarked  on  a  fiscal
consolidation path. Even then, our general government deficit (that is borrowing by the centre and
states combined) is, according to IMF data, amongst the highest in the group of G-20 countries.
In conjunction, the level of our general government debt as a ratio to GDP is cited by some as
coming in the way of a credit rating upgrade. We have to take cognisance of these comparisons
and facts as we go forward to make progress. Specifically, this will help us to better manage
risks for ourselves, and thereby mitigate financial volatility. In the context of an already adverse
external environment that I mentioned earlier, this assumes more importance.
13. Borrowing even more and pre-empting resources from future generations by governments
cannot be a short cut to long-lasting higher growth. Instead, structural reforms and reorienting
government  expenditure  towards  public  infrastructure  are  key  for  durable  gains  on  the  Indian
growth front. Investment in public transport, specifically railways and Urban MRTS can lead to
reduced costs and productivity gains as also help us to lower our oil import bill, and, as collateral
benefit, improve air quality in our cities.
14.  Third,  the  continuing  support  towards  recapitalisation  of  public  sector  banks.  A  well-
capitalised  domestic  banking  system  enhances  the  comfort  of  the  various  stakeholders  to
conduct  business  in  the  offshore  IFSC  as  well.  It  is  therefore  critical  that  efforts  towards
developing  an  attractive  offshore  financial  centre  should  also  include  measures  for  adequate
provision of capital to the domestic banking system. We have to ensure that our banks continue
to conform to international capital standards as a member of the G-20 and the BCBS. Let me
turn to IFSC-related sector issues.
C. Micro ecosystem
15. The other dimension that is critical to GIFT’s comparative competitiveness is, as I mentioned
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
earlier,  the  micro  ecosystem  within  the  IFSC.  Here,  there  is  the  need  for  a  modern
complementary legal infrastructure. We need to do a lot in this regard. We have to strengthen the
legal  framework  as  applicable  to  entities  operating  in  the  City  and  their  counterparties  in  the
domestic sector. It is possible that many business entities that can potentially relocate to GIFT
City are waiting for this framework to be put in place.
16. An IFSC should have a legal structure that is sufficiently supportive of the swift resolution of
conflicts and disputes arising from the settlement/enforcement of complex international financial
contracts. The contract should be of international standard and enforceable in the court of law
and preferably similar to ISDA documentation.
17.  The  existing  laws  governing  financial  contracts  in  India  should  be  reviewed  and  gaps
addressed. Based on the review, a world class legal framework for financial contracts in GIFT
could  be  enabled,  either  by  appropriately  amending  the  existing  laws  governing  financial
contracts or enacting a fresh law. Either way, this should be expedited, may be by constituting a
high level working group to address this gap in mission mode.
18. In addition, a unified financial regulatory framework providing for a single regulator for GIFT
City could contribute to better regulation and supervision of the financial entities in the City. While
individual regulators can supervise the entities initially when the size of the business is small, a
unified regulator would be necessary to pay undivided attention to the IFSC. Work on the design
of such a framework should begin soon so as to be able to implement this in time.
19. In conclusion, fiscal incentives and other leeway will take GIFT forward only so far, work in
areas that I have just suggested is essential for fully harnessing the IFSC’s business potential.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
