Yannis Stournaras: Recent economic and financial developments in
Greece
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 84th Annual Meeting of
Shareholders, Athens, 24 February 2017.
 THE GREEK ECONOMY COULD START GROWING AGAIN EURO AREA MEMBERSHIP
IS A PROTECTIVE SHIELD FOR GREECE
Remaining in the euro area is a vital condition for Greece
In a constantly changing globalised environment, the economic and monetary stability afforded by
euro  area  membership  provides  the  Greek  economy  with  a  protective  shield  against
unanticipated risks. The sequence of political and economic external shocks that emerged last
year demonstrated the resilience of the euro area and its capacity to prevent spillovers across
member countries’ economies. For Greece, active participation in the euro area is of the utmost
importance for economic, social as well as national reasons. It is a vital condition for surviving in
a turbulent European and international environment; it provides an anchor of economic, social
and political stability. And we must not overlook the fact that in the course of history no country
has  received  more  financial  assistance  than  Greece,  which  would  not  have  been  possible
outside the euro area.
The credible implementation of the current financial assistance programme, which is generously
financed by euro area member countries and contains actions that improve the competitiveness
and  creditworthiness  of  the  Greek  economy,  creates  the  necessary  conditions  for  Greece  to
return to positive growth, while participating on equal terms in the European crisis management
arrangements and in the processes to improve the euro area architecture.
The Bank of Greece is of the view that, if our partners, the institutions and the Greek government
all  show  flexibility  and  pragmatism,  substantial  progress  can  be  achieved  very  soon.  The
Eurogroup  decision  on  20  February  to  resume  negotiations  with  the  institutions  shows  the
willingness of the Greek government and our partners to continue the effort towards consensus-
building, overcoming existing differences. But if the negotiations drag on with no agreement in
sight,  then  Greece  will  enter  in  a  new  cycle  of  uncertainty,  deteriorating  relations  with  our
partners and creditors, and a backslide of the economy into stagnation. 
REINING-IN OF THE RECESSION IN 2016, GROWTH IN 2017
Over the past two years, the Greek economy has shown remarkable resilience:
In 2015, GDP contracted by just 0.2% despite the particularly adverse conditions prevailing
especially during the first half of the year, when uncertainty peaked about Greece’s euro area
membership,  but  also  during  the  second  half,  when  strict  –  at  least  in  their  first  phase  –
capital controls were imposed.
In the first half of 2016, the recession turned out milder than expected, and in the second half
the economy posted positive growth. For 2016 as a whole, GDP at constant 2010 prices
increased  by  0.3%,  deflationary  pressures  were  contained,  employment  picked  up  and
unemployment decreased, though still remaining very high.
These developments are a strong indication that the Greek economy has growth potential, which,
after remaining idle for so long, stands ready to be tapped into, as soon as the right conditions
are in place. Besides, despite the mistakes and the backsliding, despite the heavy economic and
social  costs  of  the  crisis,  the  economic  adjustment  programmes  implemented  over  the  past
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
years have succeeded in addressing chronic weaknesses and structural shortcomings of the
Greek  economy,  thereby  facilitating  the  improvement  in  the  medium-to-long  term  growth
potential. More specifically:
the  twin  deficits,  i.e.  the  primary  fiscal  deficit  and  the  current  account  deficit,  were
eliminated;
the substantial cumulative loss in labour cost competitiveness vis-à-vis our trading partners
has been fully recouped;
exports as a percentage of GDP have significantly increased (almost twofold);
recapitalisation and restructuring have taken place in the banking system; and
major structural reforms have been implemented in the labour and product markets.
The reforms implemented so far have contributed to an emerging restructuring of the economy
towards a new, extrovert growth model, based on tradables. 
Against this background, it is reasonable to anticipate positive growth of 2.5% in 2017, with the
economy poised to move on to a new and more virtuous growth trajectory. The driving factors
behind this outlook are: (a) an upward trend in private consumption; (b) a further strengthening of
business investment and a rise in foreign direct investment, in terms of capital inflows and of
reinvested profits by multinational firms; and (c) rising goods exports.
Fiscal policy
The year 2016 saw the enactment of a large number of fiscal measures, mainly related to tax
and social security reforms and the establishment of an automatic fiscal adjustment mechanism.
Progress  with  the  new  financial  assistance  programme  was  reflected  in  the  successful
completion of the first review, the disbursement of the second loan tranche, part of which was
injected into the real economy through the payment of government arrears, and the finalisation of
short-term debt relief measures. The new fiscal measures, together with the widespread use of
electronic  payments,  broadened  the  tax  base,  contributing  to  a  significant  increase  in  public
revenue.
Based on data currently available, the primary surplus in 2016 is expected to turn out at around
2% of GDP, while the target for a primary surplus of 1.75% of GDP in 2017 appears to be within
reach. Downside risks to this outlook are associated with uncertainties about: the carry-over of
the  strong  revenue  performance;  the  containment  of  non-productive  public  expenditures;  and,
most importantly, the immediate completion of the second review, given its catalytic effect on
macroeconomic developments. Further uncertainties relate to the Single Social Security Fund
(EFKA)  and  its  funding,  due  to  changes  in  the  calculation  method  for  the  social  security
contributions of the self-employed.
The banking system and private insurance companies 
The pressures on the banking system in 2015 eased in 2016, with a small net inflow of deposits
and redeposits of hoarded cash, a repatriation of funds and some decline in bank interest rates.
Capital adequacy ratios remained high, after the successful recapitalisation with the participation
mostly of private investors in late 2015, and banks maintained a very prudent provisioning policy.
Furthermore, based on data for the second and third quarters of 2016, banks returned, even if
only marginally, to pre-tax profitability. Meanwhile, the deleveraging of assets continues, mainly in
the  form  of  shedding  of  subsidiaries  as  part  of  restructuring  plans.  Importantly  however,  the
annual  growth  rate  of  credit  to  businesses  showed  signs  of  stabilising,  for  the  first  time  after
several years of decline.
The downward trend in non-performing exposures (NPEs) continued into the fourth quarter of
2016. At year-end, NPEs were €106.3 billion, down from €107.6 billion at end-September 2016.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
This implies that the banking system as a whole once again in the fourth quarter attained the
NPE  reduction  target  jointly  agreed  by  the  Bank  of  Greece  and  the  ECB.  This  reduction  was
achieved  mainly  through  the  implementation  of  more  effective  workout  solutions,  leading  to  a
higher cure rate, as well as through write-offs of non-recoverable loans. The accumulated stock
of NPEs, despite showing signs of stabilising and of even receding slightly, still remains the most
significant source of risk to the stability of the domestic financial system and (together with the
sharp contraction of the deposit base) an obstacle to the financing of the economy and to the
fulfilment of banks’ intermediation role.
A  welcome  development  is  that  several  steps  have  been  taken  in  the  area  of  legislation  and
regulation,  but  also  action  on  the  part  of  banks  to  address  the  problem.  The  most  recent
developments concern: the regulatory framework for the authorisation and supervision of credit
servicing and credit acquiring firms; the modernisation of bankruptcy law; the shift of banks to
long-term workout solutions and the requirement that banks meet specific operational targets in
terms of non-performing loan management. The target is for non-performing loans to be reduced
by nearly €40 billion by end-2019. Most of this reduction is expected to come from the corporate
loan portfolio. The achievement of the overall target will rely initially on long-term forbearance and
resolution and closure solutions, selective write-offs and collateral realisation, while loan sales
should  be  brought  into  play  mainly  from  2019  onward.  However,  reaching  this  target  will  also
require  that  several  legal  and  other  pending  issues  be  addressed  such  as:  (a)  out-of-court
settlement; (b) the legal protection of bank, public entity and special liquidations staff involved in
corporate debt restructuring processes; (c) the accounting/tax treatment of losses arising from
loan sales or write-offs; and (d) the establishment of an electronic auction system.
These  pending  matters,  coupled  with  the  uncertainty  associated  with  the  slow  progress  of
negotiations  with  the  institutions  on  the  completion  of  the  second  review,  pose  a  risk  to  the
attainment of the above target. Although the volume of non-performing loans declined in 2016,
January  2017  apparently  saw  a  pick-up  in  new  non-performing  exposures  and  a  drop  in
borrowers’  responsiveness  to  offered  workout  solutions.  Meanwhile,  the  situation  once  again
seems to be favourable to strategic defaulters, since deliberate default on loan obligations does
not incur the prescribed sanctions. Against this background, reducing non-performing loans is
imperative, all the more so given its multiplier effects both on banks and on the real economy:
banks  would  benefit  from  higher  asset  quality,  higher  liquidity,  lower  financial  risk  and  hence
lower  funding  costs;  this  would  translate  into  higher  loan  supply,  as  well  as  demand;  and
ultimately a restructuring of the economy’s production model through the freeing-up of resources
for financing productive investment.
Turning  to  the  private  insurance  sector,  the  main  developments  in  2016  concerned  the
transposition into Greek law of the Solvency II Directive and the conduct of an EU-wide stress
test.  The  adjustment  of  the  sector  to  the  new  framework  is  seen  as  overall  satisfactory  and,
despite  the  adverse  economic  environment  which  obviously  has  negatively  affected  premium
volumes, the insurance market is well-capitalised. However, there is no room for complacency,
given the serious challenges posed by macroeconomic developments, low interest rates and the
search  for  yields.  Consequently,  the  managements  of  private  insurance  companies  must
continue to improve their governance systems, personnel training, and transparency through the
solvency and financial condition reports they publish under the responsibility of their respective
boards of directors.
 
PRECONDITIONS FOR GROWTH 
(i) An immediate completion of the second review 
The Bank of Greece as well as international organisations forecast robust positive GDP growth
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
for 2017. However, the realisation of these positive forecasts hinges upon the timely and effective
implementation of the current financial assistance programme 2015–2018, which would signal a
return to normality. This is why, as already mentioned, the successful completion of the second
review is imperative. Among its numerous positive effects, it would:
secure the financing of government borrowing requirements and a smooth execution of the
2017 budget;
pave the way, together with the completion of the public debt sustainability analysis, for the
inclusion of Greek government bonds in the ECB’s quantitative easing programme;
bring  about,  in  turn,  a  decline  in  borrowing  costs  for  the  real  economy,  facilitating
restructuring in the private sector;
restore depositor confidence and allow a further easing or even full lifting of capital controls,
thereby providing a boost to the export sector of the economy;
improve the confidence of global markets and investors in the growth prospects of the Greek
economy and allow Greek firms to access international capital markets;
provide fresh impetus to the reform effort, geared to restructuring the economy towards a
new, extrovert growth model; and
reinforce political and economic stability.
(ii) Acceleration of reforms
As indicated by OECD and Bank of Greece estimates, the reforms can substantially increase
Greece’s  growth  potential. According  to  the  OECD,  the  reforms  implemented  in  Greece  from
2010 through 2016, together with those planned under the programme, can be expected, ceteris
paribus, to raise real output by about 13% over the next ten years.
This estimate by the OECD is corroborated by relevant Bank of Greece research, indicating that
structural reforms have positive effects, mainly in terms of total factor productivity growth.
For the positive effects to materialise in the economy, an essential condition is that the agreed
reforms are fully and consistently implemented without further delay. The cumulative gains from
implementing only two thirds of the reforms in the services and labour markets over a 5-year
horizon would fall short, during the first three years, by approximately 4% of GDP, compared to
full implementation over the same 5-year period.
(iii) Tackling the problem of non-performing loans (NPLs) 
The reforms are expected to further speed up the recovery and the restructuring of the economy.
At  the  same  time,  however,  the  financing  of  the  economy  must  be  improved.  This  hinges
crucially on the effective management of the high stock of non-performing loans (NPLs), which
would  impact  positively  on  economic  activity  and  productivity  through  two  channels:  by
increasing bank credit supply and by restructuring the production model. This is why the relevant
legislative framework must be complemented and completed as soon as possible.
Bank of Greece analysis indicates that a reduction in NPLs would help reduce the financial risk of
banks and their funding costs, while also boosting their capital adequacy ratios. This would result
in  higher  loan  supply  as  well  as  lower  bank  intermediation  margins  and  borrowing  costs  for
businesses  and  households.  At  the  same  time,  the  restructuring  of  overindebted  but  viable
businesses could serve as a vehicle for attracting investment capital, thereby further stimulating
investment demand. Finally, the resolution of NPLs will free up resources, which if redistributed
to the more productive businesses and sectors will lead to an increase in total productivity. 
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
RISKS TO THE RECOVERY OF THE ECONOMY 
In  2016  the  Greek  economy  found  itself  halfway  between  recession  and  growth.  In  2017  it  is
expected  to  recover,  although  this  outlook  remains  subject  to  risks. A  first  category  of  risks
relates to a volatile global environment.
Uncertainties  related  to  the  global  environment  in  which  the  Greek  economy  is  expected  to
operate are:
 (a)  a  series  of  crucial  elections  and  a  rise  in  euroscepticism  across  the  EU.  A  strengthening  of  anti-
European forces would influence the decisions of leaders of several EU countries, thereby threatening to
weaken EU institutions;
  (b)  uncertainties  associated  with  changes  in  US  foreign  and  economic  policies  under  the  new
administration, which generate ambiguity about the future global role of the US; 
  (c)  emerging  protectionist  trends,  accompanied  by  a  shortfall  of  private  productive  investment  and  a
decline in world trade;
  (d) possible adverse developments in the refugee-migrant crisis and a failure to properly address it could
heighten public concerns about security and migration and make societies less inclusive;
  (e)  a  deterioration  in  global  security  conditions,  with  significant  economic  losses  in  terms  of  trade,
transport and tourism;
  (f) geopolitical instability in the broader South-Eastern Mediterranean region; and
  (g)  the  new  European  economic  landscape  to  emerge  from  the  negotiations  between  the  EU  and  the
United Kingdom on their post-Brexit relationship.
On  the  domestic  front,  the  uncertainties  and  risks  are  mainly  associated  with  the  delays  in
implementing  the  programme,  as  reflected  by  the  difficulty  in  concluding  the  second  review.
Allowing these delays to drag on would severely impede the anticipated growth, with negative
repercussions on the overall climate and a new round of uncertainty regarding the completion of
the programme.
Uncertainty would be exacerbated if Greek government bonds were to remain excluded from the
ECB’s quantitative easing programme. All of the above would undermine confidence and serve
as a deterrent to foreign investment, which, as mentioned previously, is one of the fundamental
conditions for growth.
Risks also arise from delays and procrastination in implementing reforms already agreed on or
from distortions to competition that could hurt crucial sectors of the economy. A case in point is
the electricity market, where recently enacted legislation introduced distortions, causing major
problems even to companies that form the cornerstone of the electricity generation system. 
STRATEGY FOR SUSTAINABLE STRONG GROWTH 
The performance of 2016 suggests that the projected recovery in 2017 is feasible under the strict
condition that implementation of the programme will continue without delays.
However, for the economy to move from recovery to sustainable strong growth, active medium-
term policies are needed to eliminate the existing obstacles to growth, as well as to establish an
environment  of  stability  conducive  to  the  revitalisation  of  investor  interest.  These  obstacles
include:
the excessive tax burden on an overstressed tax base;
the volatile and unclear tax and overall legal regime of investor protection;
red tape and cumbersome administrative procedures, which delay progress with investment
projects already approved;
long delays in the delivery of justice;
banks’ low lending capacity and high lending rates;
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
capital controls; and
market distortions, notably in the electricity market, from ineffective regulatory interventions.
Lifting these obstacles should be a top priority of the growth strategy, which should focus on four
key  areas:  changing  the  fiscal  policy  mix;  encouraging  foreign  direct  investment;  fostering
innovation; and safeguarding social protection. 
(a) Changing the fiscal policy mix 
The most serious obstacle that needs to be gradually removed is the excessive tax burden on
businesses and households. The overachievement of the fiscal target for a primary surplus in
2016  was  predominantly  driven  by  an  overperformance  of  tax  revenue  and  to  a  much  lesser
extent by a containment of public spending. The increase in tax revenue is attributed to increases
in  direct  and  indirect  tax  rates,  but  also  to  a  broadening  of  the  tax  base  as  a  result  of  the
widespread use of electronic payments that reduced the scope for concealing income. However,
the current fiscal policy mix weighs heavily on economic growth, contributes to the increase in
private sector arrears to the government and encourages tax evasion and undeclared work.
Steering  the  economy  onto  a  growth  trajectory  calls  for  a  change  in  the  current  “tax-centred”
fiscal policy mix. Emphasis must be placed on: containing and systematically restructuring non-
productive expenditure; reducing the excessive burden of taxes and social security contributions
on the productive economy; and a more efficient use and management of state-owned property.
In other words, there is a need for a fiscal environment capable of supporting the growth effort.
This  fiscal  environment  would  additionally  benefit  from  the  implementation  of  short-term  debt
relief measures, the specification of medium-to-long-term ones and a possible quantification of
realistic fiscal targets for beyond 2018. More specifically, higher-than-targeted primary surpluses,
together with the implementation of the agreed reforms, could facilitate the progressive easing of
the  tax  burden  without  jeopardising  fiscal  sustainability.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  benefits  to
economic activity would be maximised if the fiscal space generated by the overperformance of
tax revenue or by the reforms is used towards reducing income tax rates. At the same time,
fiscal policy should support growth by ensuring a stable, internationally competitive and equitable
tax system.
(b) Encouraging foreign direct investment
Given, first, that private investment as a percentage of GDP currently falls far short of its pre-
crisis  level  (11%  against  24%  of  GDP)  and,  second,  that  chronically  low  domestic  saving  is
insufficient to finance the level of investment required for strong growth, there is an urgent need
to  attract  foreign  capital  for  joint  investments  with  domestic  firms.  Apart  from  tourism,  the
economy has a number of other sectors with noteworthy growth potential, export-orientation and
highly-qualified  human  capital. Attracting  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  will  require:  a  stable,
modern  and  favourable  tax  system;  reducing  businesses’  non-wage  costs;  encouraging
innovation and exports; and a predictable, business-friendly economic environment.
Attracting  and  maintaining  FDI  would  support  Greece’s  exit  from  the  crisis  and  sustainable
growth.  FDI  would  entail  significant  benefits  for  the  Greek  economy:  introduction  of  new
technologies and promotion of innovation; physical and human capital deepening; development of
new  higher-value  added  activities  and  products,  notably  in  the  tradables  sector;  higher
competition; and job creation.
More specifically, export-oriented FDI is an effective tool that can speed up the restructuring of
the  domestic  production  model.  The  integration  of  Greek  firms  into  global  supply  chains,  the
transfer  of  knowhow  and  foreign  market  expertise,  as  well  as  the  upgrading  of  production
processes  and  technology  content  to  catch  up  with  foreign  competitors  would  make  Greek
businesses more competitive and improve their export dynamism.
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Delays, procrastination and unwillingness to move forward with privatisations that have already
been approved and planned are serious disincentives to the attraction of productive investment. 
(c) Innovation and education
Fostering  research,  technology  diffusion  and  entrepreneurship  are  key  to  harnessing  human
capital towards creating added value by linking the currently sidelined public research system to
the productive economy, thereby contributing to Greece’s return to sustainable growth. Generally
speaking, public policy intervention can encourage technology transfer, i.e. the commercialisation
of  academic  and  scientific  research  (licensing  and  patents),  and  at  the  same  time  open  up
career opportunities for talented young graduates. To attain this dual objective, it is necessary:
first, to embed in society a culture of entrepreneurship and excellence and, second, to utilise the
resources  of  the  existing  guarantee  and  financing  funds.  The  use  of  the  finance  instruments
available  from  the  European  Investment  Fund  (EIF),  part  of  the  EIB  Group,  and  the  National
Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) 2014–2020 offers a solution to the funding problems of
innovative small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
(d) Reducing income inequality and tackling poverty
The relative at-risk-of-poverty rate based on 2014 income fell for the second year in a row, but
still  remains  the  seventh  highest  in  the  EU-28  and  significantly  above  the  EU-28  average. As
percentages of the total population, the number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion
edged down slightly, while the number of people suffering from material deprivation has risen.
The  fact  that  the  largest  increase  was  recorded  among  children  under  17  years  is  a  serious
cause  for  concern.  At  the  same  time,  the  income  inequality  indicators  for  Greece,  albeit
unchanged, are worse than the ΕU-28 averages. The targeted planning of social transfers has
proven to be effective in helping to reduce poverty. Actions taken in this direction include: (a) the
implementation  as  from  February  2017  nationwide  of  a  Social  Solidarity  Income  programme
(succeeding  the  minimum  guaranteed  income  scheme);  (b)  measures  to  protect  the
unemployed and tackle extreme poverty; and (c) an increase in the child support benefit.
Furthermore,  the  composition  of  unemployment  and  its  slow  decline,  coupled  with  the  high
percentage  of  young  people  “Not  in  Education,  Employment  or  Training”,  highlight  a  need  to
focus on life-long learning and a better matching of skills. The active employment policies and the
vocational training programmes of the Greek Manpower Employment Organisation (OAED) can
contribute in this direction, with appropriate planning and targeting and the optimal utilisation of
available, mostly EU, funds.
 In  an  uncertain  global  environment  marked  by  unpredictable  and  successive  episodes  of
turbulence,  euro  area  membership  today  provides  Greece  with  a  protective  shield  against
emerging risks. This is why Greece must consolidate its position as equal partner and be part of
the efforts to strengthen European cohesion.
But  for  this  to  happen,  Greece  must  return  to  normality,  by  successfully  completing  the
economic adjustment programme. Greece must take ownership of the reforms, which are for its
own  benefit,  and  take  immediate  action  to  modernise  and  commit  to  the  highest  European
standards of public administration, institutions and the rule of law, which no memorandum alone
can achieve.
Now  that  we  have  reached  the  final  stretch,  very  little  remains  to  be  done  compared  to  the
massive  changes  made  since  2010.  The  process  of  economic  adjustment  has  largely  been
completed, as suggested by the latest available economic data. With specific regard to fiscal
adjustment,  since  2010  about  90%  of  the  adjustment  required  by  2018  has  already  been
completed. The Greek economy has made a strenuous effort and has succeeded in eliminating
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
significant  structural  weaknesses  and  imbalances  that  had  accumulated  over  decades,
displaying  remarkable  resilience.  Its  growth  potential  and  high-quality  skills  pool,  so  far
unexploited, stand ready to be mobilised under the right conditions and to launch the economy
back onto a virtuous circle of growth. 
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
