Benoît  Cœuré:  The  transmission  of  the  ECB's  monetary  policy  in
standard and non-standard times
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the workshop "Monetary policy in non-standard times", Frankfurt am Main, 11 September 2017.
 Monetary  policy  has  had  a  powerful  impact  on  financial  markets  in  recent  years.   There  is
compelling international evidence that non-standard policy measures, such as asset purchases,
forward  guidance  and  negative  interest  rates,  have  been  successful  in  altering  relative  asset
prices  in  a  way  that  is  consistent  with  the  predictions  of  portfolio  rebalancing  theory  and  the
signalling channel of monetary policy.  Few therefore dispute that the first stage of transmission
of  non-standard  policy  measures  to  the  financing  conditions  of  the  private  sector  has  been
effective. Since the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates is expected to prevail more
often in the future, this is undoubtedly good news.
2
1
The  situation  is  less  clear,  however,  when  it  comes  to  the  second  and  third  stages  of
transmission – that is, from easier financial conditions to economic activity and from economic
activity  to  prices.  Many  central  bank  observers  point  to  continued  anaemic  growth  and  low
inflation  across  the  globe  and  conclude  that  unconventional  policy  measures  have  failed  to
stimulate the economy. If this were the case, it would place a question mark over the use of such
measures.
In my remarks this morning I would like to examine this claim more closely. In doing so, I will
focus on two prime channels underlying the second stage of transmission: the exchange rate
channel and the real interest rate channel. My remarks will therefore be neither exhaustive nor
complete, given that monetary policy can affect the economy through many other channels as
well, such as its impact on the valuation of equities and, hence, on firms’ cost of capital and
investment  decisions,  Tobin’s q  in  short.   Another  channel  of  relevance  is  the  bank  lending
channel as formalised by Bernanke and Gertler (1995).
3
But  by  focusing  on  the  exchange  rate  and  interest  rate  channels,  we  can  get  a  good
understanding of how effective recent policy measures have been. In particular, I will show that
monetary  policy-induced  exchange  rate  movements  may  have  considerable  impact  on
consumer prices, but that this relationship depends on the state of the economy and the shocks
driving  it,  much  in  line  with  the  recent  literature  in  this  field.  And  I  will  show  that  the  New
Keynesian  Investment  and  Savings  (IS)  curve  is  alive  and  well  in  the  euro  area  –  that  is,
aggregate demand responds to changes in real ex ante interest rates, and can also be shown to
have done so in recent times, provided it is measured properly.
A state-dependent exchange rate pass-through
Let me start with the exchange rate channel – a channel that has been heavily debated in recent
months  in  the  light  of  the  large  movements  that  we  have  observed  in  the  foreign  exchange
market.  For  example,  since  the  beginning  of April  the  euro  has  appreciated  by  around  13%
against the US dollar and 7% in nominal effective terms. Textbook economics would suggest that
such sizeable changes ought to lower the prices of imported goods and thereby put downward
pressure on producer and consumer prices.
  1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the left-hand side of slide 1 you can see that there is indeed a strong correlation between
annual changes in the euro’s nominal effective exchange rate and annual extra-euro area import
price inflation, here shown for consumer goods excluding food, beverages and tobacco. Simple
eyeballing would suggest a pass-through of around 40%, at least following depreciations, a point I
will  return  to  later.  On  the  right-hand  side  you  can  see  that  the  correlation  is  already  much
weaker in the case of the pass-through to producer and consumer prices. No discernible pattern
emerges over the past seven years or so.
Of course, the reduced responsiveness at higher stages of the pricing chain in part reflects the
fact  that  imports  only  account  for  a  fraction  of  both  producers’  overall  input  costs  and  final
consumption. But the seemingly stubborn resilience of consumer and producer price inflation to
the  sharp  depreciation  of  the  euro  in  2014,  and  the  subsequent  appreciation  in  2015,  is
nevertheless surprising. After all, based on prevailing estimates in the literature, the net effect of
these  two  opposing  exchange  rate  movements  could  have  lifted  HICP  excluding  energy  and
unprocessed  food  inflation  –  I  will  refer  to  this  as  core  inflation  from  now  on  –  by  up  to  0.5
percentage point over the course of last year.  In other words, such estimates suggest that euro
area core inflation in 2016 would have been less than half its actual level if it had not been for the
euro’s depreciation in the preceding years.
4
While  this  cannot  be  ruled  out  in  the  absence  of  a  reliable  counterfactual,  it  at  least  invites
suspicion,  not  least  as  producer  price  inflation  proved  equally  resilient  lately.  Recent  price
developments  therefore  raise  two  important  questions.  First,  has  the  exchange  rate  pass-
through declined over time and, if so, is it a temporary or a more permanent phenomenon. And,
second, if it has declined, is this related to the use of non-standard monetary policy measures?
My answer to the first question is that, yes, the pass-through is likely to have been lower in recent
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
years, mainly for two reasons.
The first, and more permanent, reason has to do with structural factors unrelated to monetary
policy. A large body of the literature illustrates that the exchange rate pass-through depends on
factors such as the monetary policy framework, import composition, trade integration, currency
invoicing and the rise of global value chains.  Broadly speaking, as globalisation has advanced
and inflation and inflation volatility have declined, these factors have contributed to progressively
reduce the exchange rate pass-through in most developed economies. For example, in the case
of  the  euro  area,  it  has  been  found  that  a  growing  share  of  local  currency  pricing  has
mechanically reduced the pass-through.  You can see this on slide 2 for the euro area. Today
the pass-through to final consumer price inflation may be less than a third of what it was at the
beginning of the century.
5
6
The  second  reason  is  more  cyclical  in  nature.  It  relates  to  the  state  of  the  economy  and  the
response  of  monetary  policy  to  it.  The  theory  is  that  exporters  will  not  set  their  prices  as  a
constant mark-up over costs, but will adjust them to expected changes in their future marginal
costs and demand prospects. The implication is that what ultimately matters for the exchange
rate pass-through is the type of shock that is hitting the economy. This notion goes back at least
to  Corsetti  and  Dedola  (2005)  but  has  received  more  prominence  lately  following  the  work  of
7
Kristin Forbes and co-authors (2015).
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the left-hand side of slide 3 you can see initial evidence to support this claim. ECB staff find
that less than half of the euro’s exchange rate variations vis-à-vis the US dollar over the past
almost 20 years was purely exogenous.  More often than not, exchange rates move in response
to changes in relative demand, supply or monetary policy. And each of these shocks might entail
a different response from domestic prices.
8
This you can see on the right-hand side. What this chart shows you is that there are occasions
when euro area core inflation rises, rather than falls, following an exchange rate appreciation –
which is entirely at odds with our traditional thinking on the pass-through. Perhaps unsurprisingly,
this  is  typically  the  case  when  the  exchange  rate  appreciates  in  response  to  a  favourable
demand shock. The logic is as follows: as the economy operates above capacity, inflationary
pressures  emerge  that  are  sufficient  to  fully  offset  the  disinflationary  effects  coming  from  the
exchange rate channel.
The chart also shows that changes in the relative monetary policy stance have, on average, the
expected impact on consumer prices: if euro area policy tightens, the exchange rate appreciates
and inflation falls. In other words, there is no empirical evidence that the exchange rate channel
of monetary policy is inactive.
But its strength will critically depend on the overall state of the economy, and not on the type of
policy measure, standard or non-standard. This is my answer to the second question and can
best be seen by looking at two concrete examples.
  4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The first one relates to the sharp depreciation of the euro in the run-up to the announcement of
the APP. As  you  can  see  on  slide  4,  a  simple  model-based  analysis  suggests  that  a  large
fraction of the decline in the euro’s external value reflected the worsening economic outlook, to
which we ultimately reacted. It is likely that exporters to the euro area, faced with falling euro area
demand, absorbed part of the exchange rate movement in their mark-ups to protect their market
shares, thereby mitigating the upward pressure on prices stemming from a weaker currency.
The second example relates to the current situation. Slide 4 shows that there are three forces, of
roughly  equal  strength,  that  help  to  explain  the  euro’s  marked  appreciation  in  recent  months:
improved euro area growth prospects, an exogenous component and a tightening in the relative
monetary policy stance vis-à-vis the United States.
 5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide  5  illustrates  the  implications  of  this  shock  decomposition  for  the  assessment  of  the
exchange  rate  pass-through.  The  black  line,  which  is  the  net  effect,  suggests  relatively  mild
downward pressure on core inflation, much below what the rule of thumb would tend to suggest,
despite the sizeable appreciation.
The reason is simple. The current solid economic expansion in the euro area allows firms that
export to the euro area to increase prices in their currency without losing market share, thereby
mitigating, once again, the pass-through. So, exporters to the euro area are now able to recoup
part of the margins they compressed during the downturn. The extent to which they are able to
do so also depends on the degree of competition, a point made by Rudi Dornbusch back in 1987.
The more concentrated market power is, and the less substitutable products are, the more likely
firms are to increase their margins following exchange rate appreciations. This also means that
9
the pass-through may well differ across industries.
These examples demonstrate that it is by and large the state of the economy that will determine
the  strength  of  the  pass-through.  Monetary  policy,  for  its  part,  is  likely  to  influence  the  pass-
through predominantly through its impact on the economy itself.
And at the moment this support from monetary policy may be even more powerful than in the
past. The reason is that, in the class of models used here, positive demand shocks are normally
identified  by  assuming  that  short-term  interest  rates  rise  in  response  to  higher  growth  and
inflation.
At the current juncture, however, the policy-relevant horizon – the “medium term” concept in our
monetary  policy  strategy  –  is  likely  to  be  longer  given  the  persistence  of  subdued  inflationary
pressures.  Our  forward  guidance  on  both  policy  rates  and  the  APP,  as  reiterated  by  the
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Governing  Council  last  Thursday,  reflects  this  assessment.  This  means  that,  compared  with
past demand shocks, policy will remain more accommodative for longer, thereby likely muting
further the pass-through of any growth-driven exchange rate appreciation. And with the current
recovery in the euro area being largely driven by domestic demand, euro strength may also have
less of an impact on growth than, for example, after the Great Financial Crisis.
All of this suggests, therefore, that monetary policy never acts in isolation on the exchange rate
and that, in periods of recovery, the positive confidence and stimulus effects of monetary policy
are likely to offset, at least in part, the disinflationary effects of a stronger currency coming from
expectations of tighter policy.
Of  course,  this  also  means  that  should  the  contributions  of  the  different  shocks  driving  the
exchange rate change over time, then also our assessment of the impact on inflation will have to
change – expansion or not. Exogenous shocks to the exchange rate, if persistent, can lead to an
unwarranted  tightening  of  financial  conditions  with  undesirable  consequences  for  the  inflation
outlook. As shown on slide 6, the emerging disconnect between the euro’s exchange rate vis-à-
vis the US dollar and the long term interest rate differential between the US and Germany may
suggest that we are entering such a situation. Against this background, the recent volatility in the
exchange rate represents a source of uncertainty which requires monitoring.
The New Keynesian IS curve in the euro area
This  brings  me  to  the  second  channel  I  would  like  to  discuss  this  morning:  the  effects  of
monetary policy on real economic activity.
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Much of our attention recently has been focused on the properties of the Phillips curve – that it
may be flatter, non-linear or mis-specified in terms of the relevant economic slack. By now, we
are fairly confident that non-linearities and broader labour market slack are likely to explain much
of the weakness in inflation as of late.
10
Some observers have interpreted the lack of stronger price pressures as a failure of monetary
policy  to  stimulate  the  economy.  They  argue  that  persistently  low  inflation  is  testimony  to  the
ineffectiveness  of  non-standard  policy  measures.  If  this  were  true,  then  also  the  reasoning
behind the shock-based exchange rate pass-through would in part be misguided.
I would argue, however, that such claims reflect a serious misunderstanding and simplification of
how monetary policy works. There are very few instances, such as through the exchange rate,
where  policy  can  directly  affect  prices.  In  most  cases  monetary  policy  transmits  to  prices
through  its  impact  on  the  intertemporal  allocation  of  consumption,  savings  and  investment.  If
prices are slow to adjust, a cut in the key policy rate lowers the real interest rate, which, in turn,
stimulates interest-sensitive spending. In other words, if we want to see if policy works or not, or
if the economy has become less sensitive to changes in interest rates, then we should examine
the slope of the IS curve, and not only of the Phillips curve.
11
Empirical  research  on  the  IS  curve  is  scarce,  however.  And  the  few  studies  available  are
generally  not  encouraging  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective.  They  typically  find  that  output
does not respond, in a statistically significant way, to the real interest rate.
 Often they even find
a  positive  relationship  between  real  interest  rates  and  output.  These  findings  are  at  best
disturbing given that much of mainstream monetary thinking is built on the idea that firms and
households take the level of the interest rate into account when making economic decisions.
12
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
To  illustrate  the  empirical  failure  of  the  IS  curve,  slide  7,  column  1,  shows  the  estimated
coefficients of a regression of the euro area output gap on its own lag and a measure of the real
“interest rate gap”, i.e. the difference between the real ex ante interest rate and the time-varying
natural rate. Except for the fact that output is not forward-looking – I will come to this in a minute
– this is a standard New Keynesian IS curve where the output gap is based on estimates by the
European Commission, the short-term interest rate is the three-month Euribor, expected inflation
is taken from the ECB’s Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and the natural rate is taken
from the euro area estimates by Holston, Laubach and Williams (2016).
Clearly, the real interest rate gap is not statistically significant at any reasonable confidence level.
This finding holds true if we use actual ex post inflation – specification 2 – instead of expected
inflation, or if we include the real interest rate per se, and not as a deviation from the natural rate,
as is sometimes suggested, as in specification 3.
The  financial  crisis  and  the  use  of  non-standard  policy  measures  do  not  seem  to  explain  the
puzzle either: the real interest rate remains insignificant if we restrict the sample to the period
before  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis,  specification  4,  or  if  we  take  the  euro  area  shadow  rate  as
estimated by Wu and Xia (2016) – specification 5 – a measure that attempts to mimic the joint
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
effects of unconventional policy measures at the zero-lower bound.
What I would argue, however, is that the short-term interest rate is not the appropriate measure
to use in an empirical IS curve. In a bank-based economy, such as the euro area, the short-term
interest rate may simply not be sufficient to characterise the monetary policy stance and, hence,
the  financial  conditions  ultimately  determining  the  decisions  by  households  and  firms.  The
imperfect  substitutability  between  market-based  financing  and  bank  loans  was  already
recognised by Modigliani (1963) and later refined by Bernanke and Blinder (1988).
Indeed, it is enough to recall the period after the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis, and the
associated financial fragmentation, to see that the interbank market rate is a biased measure of
the  financing  conditions  facing  the  private  sector.
  In  other  words,  unless  there  is  a  perfect
transmission  from  changes  in  short-term  rates  to  the  ultimately  relevant  borrowing  rates,
estimates using the former will yield inconclusive results.
13
This  conjecture  is  also  supported  by  the  data.  In  specification  6  we  replaced  the  short-term
interest  rate  with  a  measure  of  the  composite  bank-based  cost  of  borrowing  for  non-financial
firms.  If  we  use  this  measure  instead,  the  real  ex  ante  interest  gap  in  our  IS  curve  has  the
expected  sign  and  becomes  statistically  significant  at  the  10%  level:  a  1  percentage  point
reduction in the gap increases output by 0.13 percentage point.
The interest rate channel becomes even more powerful once we estimate a New Keynesian IS-
curve that is closer to first principles – that is, one that is also forward-looking in output, as in
specification 7. For this purpose, we add to the equation the expected real GDP growth rate six
quarters ahead, as collected by the ECB’s SPF.
As in previous findings in the literature, output appears to be strongly forward-looking. But the
thing to note is that the real interest rate gap is now significant at the 1% level, suggesting an
increase in output by 0.3 percentage point following a 1 percentage point drop in the real rate
gap. There is also no evidence that output might have become less sensitive to changes in real
bank lending rates with the advent of non-standard measures: although the sample is naturally
small, and estimates might therefore be biased, specification 8 illustrates that the coefficients
remain unchanged when we estimate the same forward-looking IS curve for a sample starting
with the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis in 2010.
In other words, these estimates would suggest that about a quarter of the reduction in the output
gap that we have observed since the introduction of our credit easing measures in June 2014
can  be  directly  explained  by  the  impact  of  our  measures  on  bank  lending  rates,  even  after
controlling for the indirect positive impact on expected inflation.
 These estimates are very close
to  other  internal  ECB  staff  estimates,  using  more  sophisticated  term  structure  and  general
equilibrium models, of the impact of our measures on economic growth.
14
15
So,  monetary  policy  is  far  from  being  ineffective  in  stimulating  aggregate  demand,  also  when
approaching  the  effective  lower  bound.  The  fact  that  inflation  remains  subdued  rather  reflects
constraints operating at the third stage of transmission – from activity to prices – that are often
outside the control of monetary policy.
Before I conclude I would like to illustrate one last point. Bank lending rates are without doubt a
key  variable  in  explaining  output  movements  in  the  euro  area.  The  evidence  I  provided  today
further  emphasises  this  point.  At  the  same  time,  the  financial  conditions  that  are  ultimately
relevant for firms and households may be broader than that. One of them – the exchange rate – I
discussed  in  more  detail  earlier  in  my  remarks.
  Other  factors  may  include  equity  prices  or
long-term interest rates that are often relevant for household mortgages.
16
17
One way to summarise these factors is to use financial conditions indexes (FCIs). My colleague
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Peter  Praet  gave  a  detailed  speech  on  such  indices  earlier  this  year,  which  I  strongly
recommend reading.
 Here I would like to focus on the relevance of these broad measures for
economic activity.
18
As you can see in column 9 of slide 7, FCIs are highly statistically significant when used in a New
Keynesian IS curve. This is unlikely to be a statistical artefact. It is rather further evidence that we
cannot reduce our analysis of the impact of monetary policy to a simple short-term rate as has
typically been done in the academic literature so far.
19
The question then is no longer which financial variable to use in estimations, but how to weigh
them  to  reflect  any  varying  impact  they  may  have  on  output  and,  ultimately,  inflation.  For
example, my last specification on slide 7 uses an FCI that attributes a much larger weight to the
exchange rate, in line with the rule of thumb I mentioned earlier, which suggested a strong pass-
through to inflation. Interestingly, this FCI fits the data less well, and is just about significant at the
10% level, which might support the view that the exchange rate pass-through could be lower than
what such a rule of thumb would suggest.
But as I explained earlier, even a lower weight on the exchange rate would likely not fully capture
the  relative  importance  of  the  various  financial  variables  at each  point  in  time.  That  is,  if  the
impact of changes in financial conditions on inflation depends on the state of the economy, then
ideally FCIs would be based on time-varying weights. This is food for thought for future research.
Conclusion
With this in mind, let me conclude.
The negative relationship between the real interest rate gap and economic activity as posited by
Wicksell back in 1898 is a mainstay of modern central banking. This relationship has not been
lost  with  the  advent  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures.  By  easing  market-based
financial  conditions,  and  by  putting  downward  pressure  on  the  real  interest  rate  that  banks
charge  to  borrowers,  central  banks  can  stimulate  aggregate  demand,  even  when  short-term
interest rates approach the effective lower bound.
The validity of this relationship is also crucial for assessing the price effects of monetary policy-
induced movements of the  exchange  rate.  With  policy  being  effective  in  boosting  growth,  any
disinflationary effect of a stronger currency arising from expectations of a tighter future monetary
policy stance might be mitigated, or offset, by the ensuing improvement in the economic outlook.
However,  exogenous  shocks  to  the  exchange  rate,  if  persistent,  can  lead  to  an  unwarranted
tightening of financial conditions with undesirable consequences for the inflation outlook.
Thank you.
References
Ahmed,  S.,  M. Appendino  and  M.  Ruta  (2015),  “Global  Value  Chains  and  the  Exchange  Rate
Elasticity of Exports”, IMF Working Paper WP/15/252.
Al-Eyd, A. and S. Pelin Berkmen (2013), “Fragmentation and Monetary Policy in the Euro Area”,
IMF Working Paper No 13/208.
Altavilla,  C.,  G.  Carboni  and  R.  Motto  (2015),  “Asset  purchase  programmes  and  financial
markets: lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No 1864.
Andrade, P., J. Breckenfelder, F. De Fiore, P. Karadi and O. Tristani (2016), “The ECB’s asset
purchase programme: an early assessment”, ECB Working Paper No 1956.
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ball, L., (1998), “Policy Rules for Open Economies”, NBER Working Paper No. 6760.
Bernanke,  B.  and  A.  S.  Blinder  (1988),  “Credit,  Money,  and  Aggregate  Demand”,  American
Economic Review, Vol. 78, No 2, Papers and Proceedings of the One-Hundredth Annual Meeting
of the American Economic Association, 435–439.
Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1995), “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy
Transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (Fall), 27–48.
Blattner, T.S. and M. Joyce (2016), “Net debt supply shocks in the euro area and the implications
for QE”, ECB Working Paper No 1957.
Blattner,  T.S.  and  J.  Swarbrick  (2017),  “Monetary  policy  and  cross-border  interbank  market
fragmentation: lessons from the crisis”, mimeo.
Campa,  J.M.  and  L.S  Goldberg  (2008),  “Pass-Through  of  Exchange  Rates  to  Consumption
Prices: What Has Changed and Why?”, in Ito, T. and Rose, A.K. (eds.), International Financial
Issues  in  the  Pacific  Rim:  Global  Imbalances,  Financial  Liberalization,  and  Exchange  Rate
Policy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2008, 139–176.
Cœuré, B. (2017), “Scars or scratches? Hysteresis in the euro area”, speech at the International
Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 19 May.
Comunale,  M.  and  D.  Kunovac  (2017),  “Exchange  rate  pass-through  in  the  euro  area”,  ECB
Working Paper No 2003.
Corsetti,  G.  and  L.  Dedola  (2005),  “A  macroeconomic  model  of 
discrimination”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 67, Issue 1, 129–155.
international  price
Di  Mauro,  F.,  R.  Rüffer,  and  I.  Bunda  (2008),  “The  changing  role  of  the  exchange  rate  in  a
globalised economy”, ECB Occasional Paper No 94.
Dornbusch, R. (1987), “Exchange Rates and Prices”, American Economic Review, Vol. 77, No
1, 93–106.
Draghi, M. (2015), “Global and domestic inflation”, speech at the Economic Club of New York, 4
December.
Draghi,  M.  (2017),  “Accompanying  the  economic  recovery”,  speech  at  the  ECB  Forum  on
Central Banking, Sintra, 27 June.
Engel, C. and K. West (2010), “Global Interest Rates, Currency Returns, and the Real Value of
the Dollar", American Economic Review, 100(2), 562–67.
European Central Bank (2016), “Exchange rate pass-through into euro area inflation”, Economic
Bulletin, July.
Forbes, K., I. Hjortsoe and T. Nenova (2015), “The shocks matter: improving our estimates of
exchange rate pass-through”, Bank of England Discussion Paper, No 43.
Fuhrer,  J.  and  G.  Moore  (1995),  “Monetary  Policy  Trade-Offs  and  the  Correlation  Between
Nominal Interest Rates and Real Output”, American Economic Review, 85, 219–239.
Fuhrer,  J.  and  G.  Rudebusch  (2004),  “Estimating  the  Euler  equation  for  Output”, Journal  of
Monetary Economics, 21, 1133–1153.
Georgiadis, G., J. Graeb and M. Khalil (2017), “Global Value Chain Participation and Exchange
Rate Pass-through”, mimeo.
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Goodhart, C. and B. Hofmann (2005), “The IS Curve and the Transmission of Monetary Policy: Is
there a Puzzle?”, Applied Economics, 37, 29–36.
Gopinath, G., O. Itskhoki and R. Rigobon (2010), “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-
Through”, American Economic Review, Vol. 100, No 1, 304–336.
Gust, C., S. Leduc and R. Vigfusson (2010), “Trade integration, competition, and the decline in
exchange-rate pass-through”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 57, Issue 3, 309–324.
Hahn, E. (2007), “The impact of exchange rate shocks on sectoral activity and prices in the euro
area”, ECB Working Paper No 796.
Holston,  K.,  T.  Laubach  and  J.  Williams  (2016),  “Measuring  the  Natural  Rate  of  Interest:
International Trends and Determinants”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper
No. 2016–11.
Joyce, M., D. Miles, A. Scott, and D. Vayanos (2012), “Quantitative Easing and Unconventional
Monetary Policy – an Introduction”, Economic Journal, 122(564), F271–82.
Landau, B. and F. Skudelny (2009), “Pass-through of external shocks along the pricing chain: A
panel estimation approach for the euro area”, ECB Working paper No 1104.
Meltzer, A.H. (1999), “The Transmission Process”, Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
Modigliani,  F. 
“The  Monetary  Mechanism  and 
Phenomena”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 45(1), 79–107.
(1963), 
Its 
Interaction  with  Real
Modigliani, F. (1971), “Monetary Policy and Consumption”, in Consumer Spending and Monetary
Policy: The Linkages. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 9-84.
Osbat, C. and M. Wagner (2006), “Sectoral exchange rate pass-through in the euro area”, ECB.
Praet,  P.  (2017),  “Calibrating  unconventional  monetary  policy”,  speech  at  The  ECB  and  Its
Watchers XVIII Conference, 6 April.
Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007), “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
DSGE Approach”, American Economic Review, Vol. 97, No 3, 586–606.
Stracca, L. (2017), “The Euler equation around the world”, The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics,
Vol. 17, Issue 2.
Svensson,  L.  (2000),  “Open-Economy  Inflation  Targeting”, Journal  of  International  Economics,
50, 155–183.
Taylor,  J.B.  (2000),  “Low  inflation,  pass-through,  and  the  pricing  power  of  firms”,  European
Economic Review, Vol. 44, Issue 7, 1389–1408.
Williams, J. C. (2014), “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice”,
Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings.
Wu, J. C. and F. Xia (2016), “Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at the
Zero Lower Bound", Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 48(2-3), 253–291.
1
2
I would like to thank Ine Van Robays for her contribution to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the
opinions contained herein.
For reviews see Joyce et al. (2012) and Williams (2014). For the euro area, see e.g. Altavilla et al. (2015),
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Andrade et al. (2016) and Blattner and Joyce (2016).
Rising stock prices might also trigger wealth effects on consumption (see e.g. Modigliani, 1971).
See, e.g., Landau and Skudelny (2009).
See e.g. Taylor (2000), Campa and Goldberg (2008), Gust et al. (2010), Gopinath et al. (2010), Ahmed et al.
(2015), Georgiadis et al. (2017) and di Mauro et al. (2008).
See ECB (2016).
For more recent work related to the euro area see Comunale and Kunovac (2017).
Exogenous shocks are often associated with changes in the risk premium (see e.g. Engel and West, 2010).
See e.g. Hahn (2007) and Osbat and Wagner (2006).
See e.g. Cœuré (2017) and Draghi (2017).
Phillips curve estimates are often partial equilibrium in nature, building on single equation specifications. Of
course, because output and pricing decisions are taken simultaneously, both the IS and the Phillips curve are
equally relevant and should therefore ideally be analysed in a general equilibrium model, such as in Smets and
Wouters (2007).
See e.g. Fuhrer and Rudebusch (2004), Stracca (2017) and references therein.
See also Al-Eyd and Pelin Berkmen (2013) and Blattner and Swarbrick (2017).
The real bank rate gap has fallen by around 1.6 percentage point since the second quarter of 2014. The output
gap has fallen by around 2.1 percentage point over the same period.
See, e.g., Draghi (2015).
In  empirical  open  economy  extensions  of  the  New  Keynesian  model,  the  exchange  rate  appears  as  an
additional variable in the IS curve (see e.g. Ball, 1998, and Svensson, 2000).
Fuhrer and Moore (1995) show that the correlation between short-term rates and output reflected the fact that the
statistical properties of the short rate were similar to that of the long rate, which should ultimately matter for
aggregate demand.
See Praet (2017).
This is similar in spirit to the findings of Meltzer (1999) and Goodhart and Hofmann (2005) that changes in the
real monetary base exert separate effects on aggregate demand and that the addition of other asset prices can
explain the real interest rate puzzle.
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
