Joachim  Wuermeling:  Securities 
management - current challenges
Keynote speech by Prof Joachim Wuermeling, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  26th Annual  Securities  Finance  and  Collateral  Management  Conference,
Berlin, 21 June 2017.
collateral
finance 
and 
1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
 Thank you very much for your kind invitation to give today’s keynote speech here at this high-level
conference. For me, the board member responsible for market operations at the Bundesbank,
this conference constitutes a great opportunity to exchange views on current challenges in the
fields of securities finance and collateral management.
“The convergence of liquidity” is a promising title. To be honest, though: At least with regard to
the  liquidity  the  Eurosystem  injects  into  the  markets,  there  are  –  unfortunately  –  no  signs  of
convergence  towards  a  certain  value  yet.  Most  of  you  will  be  well  aware  that  the  Governing
Council  of  the  ECB  decided  two  weeks  ago  to  leave  the Asset  Purchase  Programme  (APP)
unchanged for now. The Eurosystem will continue to buy securities through the APP to the tune
of EUR 60 billiona month at least until December 2017. Hence, mathematically speaking, linear
growth is the name of the game – at least for now. Excess liquidity, an essential indicator for
monetary policy implementation, currently stands at EUR 1,650 billion.
I would like to take this opportunity today to elaborate on three issues that are, at least to some
degree, interlinked with the Eurosystem’s activities in the markets. First, I would like to discuss
the remarkable upswing in asset prices after the financial crisis and drivers for this development.
Second,  I  would  like  to  briefly  discuss  the  shifts  in  financial  markets  with  respect  to  market
liquidity. I will argue that, whereas some of the factors affecting market liquidity are temporary,
others – such as the regulatory environment and innovations in trading – are here to stay. Finally I
will conclude by presenting my view on the outlook for monetary policy implementation.
 
2. Current drivers of financial markets
The financial crisis of 2008 and the subsequent European debt crisis dealt financial markets a
serious  blow.  Investors  had  to  reconsider  long-held  beliefs  that  were  accepted  as  truths:  that
large banks were immune to bankruptcy, and that sovereigns in the developed world would never
default  on  their  debt.  When  the  crisis  hit  and  the  unimaginable  happened,  prices  of  financial
assets, apart from a few viewed as safe havens, went into a tailspin.
This is history. Asset prices have rebounded remarkably. Stock markets in Europe as well as the
US have reached new historic heights. Corporate debt is in high demand, and risk premia have
shrunk  noticeably,  even  for  heavily  indebted  entities.  Prices  have  also  increased  for  more
tangible  assets  such  as  real  estate.  Naturally,  the  continued  rise  in  asset  prices  is  fuelling
speculation about potential bubbles. However, judging whether price developments constitute a
bubble or reflect fundamental and sustainable factors is not a simple task.
  1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
2.1 Recovery in asset prices and QE
There is little doubt that the extraordinary measures taken by central banks to shore up liquidity
have  played  a  significant  part  in  these  price  developments.  They  reassured  markets,  rebuilt
confidence and created an environment in which investors were once again willing to put money
into risky assets. It is important to remember that this was an intended effect. For the economy
to grow again, businesses and households need to have access to affordable capital. Investment
is the lifeblood of any recovery.
However, there is, of course, the concept of too much of a good thing. Unintended side effects of
quantitative easing are becoming more apparent the longer the programme runs and the less it is
needed to sustain the economic recovery. So far, the positive effects may well have outweighed
the negative implications, but this is bound to change at some point.
Quantitative  easing  is  designed  to  work  by  nudging  investors  away  from  safe  havens  and
towards  riskier  assets.  However,  one  has  to  realise  that  the  balance  to  be  struck  is  rather
delicate.  There  is  a  serious  risk  that  investors  will  start  to  underestimate  the  risks  of  their
investments, leading to price distortions and misallocation of capital. An abundance of liquidity
will not by itself make a risky investment less so. Market participants should think very carefully
about what will happen once the ample liquidity provision stops.
Additionally,  there  is  the  thorny  issue  of  whether  private  investors  are  being  crowded  out  of
certain  market  segments  by  central  banks  and  what  the  long-term  effects  are. Although  the
Eurosystem  puts  a  high  value  on  implementing  the  purchase  programme  in  a  market-neutral
way, it must be acknowledged that there are areas of concern.
Apart from concerns about private investors simply being crowded out for the time being and
associated questions about market functioning, there is also concern about which investors will
come back once the purchase programmes end. It is certainly not the Eurosystem’s intention to
harm capital markets: quite the contrary. Nevertheless, it needs to be recognised that investors
probably will most likely not flood in again immediately.
But as a wise person once said: it is very difficult to predict – especially the future. Instead of
looking into a crystal ball, I would like to discuss two further drivers that play a major role for
asset valuations.
 
2.2 The macroeconomic environment
The first one, the current macroeconomic environment, is convincing. While the recovery was
relatively  anaemic  for  a  long  time,  it  seems  to  have  gathered  pace  over  the  last  two  to  three
years. This is in part thanks to the unconventional measures taken by the Eurosystem.
Quarterly  growth  in  the  euro  area  has  improved  and  has  ranged  between  0.2  percent  and
0.8 percent for the last 16 quarters. The latest reading for April puts the unemployment rate at 9.3
percent.  That  is  still  too  high,  but  it  is  nevertheless  a  marked  improvement  on  its  peak  of
12.1 percent in mid-2013. And spirits are up: economic sentiment is close to a nearly 10-year
high.
Inflation, however, remains a sore point. Accelerating inflation from the beginning of the year has
come down once again. After hitting 2.0 percent in February, its highest reading since January
2013, inflation has retreated to 1.4 percent in May. The oil-price effect has subsided and once
again the onus is on economic growth to generate inflation. The Governing Council of the ECB
puts  a  strong  emphasis  on  underlying  inflation.  It  is  very  important  for  credibility  that  policy
decisions are taken on a strong footing. They cannot be beholden to monthly volatility in data
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
publications.
So overall, the macroeconomic backdrop does provide some justification for price developments
over the last few years. Asset prices should rise when growth prospects improve. Naturally, it
would be welcome to see asset price inflation translated into a reasonable level of consumer
price inflation as well.
 
2.3 Political uncertainty
While the macroeconomic backdrop is promising, there are still complications ahead. Politics,
another driver for asset prices I would like to briefly discuss, has created a lot of headlines over
the  last  year.  These  developments  have  not  substantially  affected  the  high  valuation  levels,
though.
The first major test came in the form of the Brexit referendum in June 2016. The decision by a
majority  of  UK  voters  to  leave  the  European  Union  came  as  quite  a  shock.  Markets  exhibited
substantial  volatility  in  response.  This  response  was  short-lived,  though,  and  markets  have
remained orderly throughout. Next up was the presidential election in the United States. Markets
adjusted even more quickly to the new circumstances. The constitutional referendum in Italy in
December 2016 was barely registered in markets.
However,  political  risks  remain  a  concern  for  markets.  The  run-up  to  the  French  presidential
election had investors worried, as evidenced by a widening spread between French and German
sovereign  bonds.  And  the  view  on  the  US  has  somewhat  turned  from  exuberance  to  wary
idealism as it has become clear that implementing all the stimulus measures promised by the
Trump Administration will not be a walk in the park after all.
Looking  forward,  questions  about  the  US  political  agenda  will  remain  relevant,  and  the  road
ahead  of  the  Brexit  negotiations  will  give  investors  much  to  interpret  and  think  about.  The
outcome  of  the  UK  elections  might  very  well  complicate  the  negotiations  with  the  rest  of  the
European Union further. In addition, election season in Europe is not quite over, with the German
general elections due in September.
The Brexit negotiations will not only be reflected in the prices on financial markets, but will also
have  a  lasting  effect  on  financial  market  locations  themselves.  Once  the  UK  has  left  the
European Union, European agencies currently based in the UK, like the EBA and EMA, will have
to be relocated into the EU-27. The future location of euro clearing operations is certainly another
crucial aspect: in my point of view, euro clearing is of key importance for Europe, and a mere
supervisory recognition of a UK central counterparty as “equivalent” is unlikely to be sufficient
post-Brexit.
Banks and the financial services industry will need to waste no time in planning ahead for the
future, since Brexit could involve a substantial loss of rights to conduct business in the European
Union and possibly necessitate the relocation of sensitive and important infrastructures. That is
why I expect a growing number of firms to transfer their operations from the UK to continental
Europe even before negotiations have been finalised. There will not only be just one city which
attracts these companies. Cities such as Paris, Dublin, Luxembourg and, of course, Frankfurt
will  complement  one  another  in  terms  of  the  value  they  add.  And,  in  my  personal  opinion,
Frankfurt has quite a few major selling points to offer.
Looking at current asset valuations, markets appear to be taking the political risks in stride. Going
forward, this behaviour might very well continue with markets only adjusting once it looks like
politics  will  impact  on  the  fundamental  outlook.  That  is  what  is  happening  right  now  with  the
market participants assessing the reform agenda in the US, and probably will happen when the
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Brexit  negotiations  are  underway.  If  some  tail  risk  scenario  were  to  materialise,  however,
markets might reassess valuations a lot more forcefully, and prices of risky assets might then
adjust accordingly.
 
3. Transitory and structural changes in market liquidity
Ladies and gentlemen
Distortions in asset prices are one concern when discussing financial markets. Other concerns
are related to changes in the market place. Today, we are facing a situation where central bank
liquidity is hitting all-time highs daily while, at the same time, market liquidity appears to be fickle
in  a  number  of  segments.  Reason  enough,  in  my  view,  to  shed  some  light  on  factors  that
influence market liquidity.
 
3.1 The APP and securities lending
As  already  mentioned,  the  purchase  programmes  seem  to  have  been  successful  in  lowering
fixed income yields and fighting potential deflation risks. Nevertheless, they have been criticised
strongly. Not only for inducing concerns in matters of supporting further government debt and
delaying structural reforms, but also because they are said to create market distortions.
Academic evidence on the effects of non-standard measures is helpful for determining the need
for  remedial  measures,  but  unfortunately  rather  rare.  The  Bundesbank  and  the  Bank  for
International Settlements have launched a joint project which analyses the impact of purchases
within the Public Sector Purchase Programme (PSPP) on prices and liquidity of Bunds in the
first 18 months of the programme. The researchers provide evidence for negative side effects
over the lifetime of the programme, eg decreasing Bund market liquidity. Based on data from the
Bund cash market, the authors not only show deteriorating liquidity conditions over the course of
the programme, but also find evidence that the purchases have a negative effect on transaction
costs and order book depth. These findings suggest that the scarcity effects of asset purchases
can impact adversely on market functioning.
Strains in market liquidity have also become visible in the repo market. Especially at quarter or
year  ends  we  have  seen  deeply  negative  repo  rates.  This  can  be  attributed  to  a  variety  of
reasons, but the large-scale purchases of the Eurosystem may have played a role.
In  order  to  curtail  tensions  in  repo  and  bond  market  liquidity,  Eurosystem  central  banks  have
made their holdings available for securities lending from the start of the PSPP. Let me go a little
deeper here, as securities lending is a key topic at this conference.
The lending was implemented in a decentralised manner in the Eurosystem. The Bundesbank
started by using the automated Clearstream lending facilities. In September 2016 we also began
to offer a bilateral repo facility.
Not all the features of the bilateral repo facility have been fully appreciated by market participants.
We have imposed relatively strict operational and risk management parameters. This concerns
specific  terms  such  as  a  maximum  maturity  of  seven  days  or  the  exclusion  of  automatic
rollovers as well as certain collateral requirements.
I would like to stress that the lending facilities for the asset purchase programmes are designed
as  backstop  facilities.  We  do  not  want  to  crowd  out  private  players;  we  are  just  offering
supplementary  facilities  to  the  repo  and  lending  markets. Against  this  background,  we  regard
somewhat stricter operational parameters as justified. Furthermore, as a central bank we have to
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
place particular emphasis on risk mitigation, and most of the lending parameters serve exactly
this purpose.
Despite the criticism put forward by some market participants, in the meantime our repo facility
appears to be being well received in the market. So, allow me to note that the conditions do not
appear to be overly harsh after all. The outstanding volume has been continuously growing and
most  of  our  active  trading  counterparties  are  also  using  the  repo  facility.  Especially  the
opportunity  to  submit  cash  collateral  for  PSPP  securities  lending,  which  was  implemented  in
December 2016, has enhanced the popularity of the bilateral facility. The APP securities lending
primarily  addresses  the  most  active  market  participants  in  the  respective  markets  or  primary
dealers. It is, however, open to other counterparties as well.
In 2017, volatility in the repo market for German government securities has been rather moderate
so far, even at the end of the first quarter. It seems that market participants have found a way to
cope with the challenging environment. The Eurosystem’s lending facilities may have contributed
to this development.
Another  area  in  which  various  commentators  and  academics  have  recently  criticised  the
Eurosystem is the collateral framework. The Eurosystem conducts repo operations to provide
temporary liquidity to the banking sector and takes financial assets as collateral in return. The
collateral framework defines the eligible financial assets, the related pricing methodology and the
respective risk-control measures.
Critics contend that the Eurosystem is accepting collateral of insufficient quality at excessively
lenient  terms.  This  –  so  they  argue  –  could  create  market  distortions  and  large  risks  for  the
Eurosystem’s balance sheet.
The  Eurosystem  is  taking  this  criticism  seriously.  However,  it  should  be  duly  noted  that,
throughout  the  difficult  times  of  the  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  broad  collateral
framework was regarded as a great institutional strength of Eurosystem’s monetary policy. While
the pledged collateral has successfully protected the Eurosystem from financial losses, at the
same  time  the  collateral  framework  has  been  flexible  enough  to  preserve  the  Eurosystem’s
ability to support market functioning and provide liquidity to the banking system in times of stress.
The Eurosystem thereby fulfilled one of the core functions of a central bank.
 
3.2 Regulation
As  is  apparent  from  the  agenda  of  this  conference,  regulatory  issues  have  become  a  crucial
factor  in  financial  markets,  cropping  up  in  almost  every  agenda  item.  In  the  aftermath  of  the
financial crisis, national and European regulatory initiatives alike have mushroomed.
In  a  nutshell,  the  regulations  involve  stricter  rules  for  capital,  stricter  provisions  for  risky
transactions, and higher administrative burdens. At the Bundesbank, we are fully aware of these
strains and the potential drawbacks of regulatory requirements. Liquidity in the bond and repo
markets has decreased, also – but not only – because of new regulations.
Moreover,  the  higher  required  capital  ratios  will  increase  banks’  cost  of  capital  while  banks’
earnings are currently compressed. This is making it difficult for banks to raise further capital,
which is why they may respond to regulatory requirements by deleveraging. This, in turn, may
well have negative effects on market liquidity.
At the same time, it is evident that well-designed regulatory measures will help make the financial
system  more  stable.  The  ultimate  aim  is  to  make  financial  markets  more  resilient  and  crisis-
proof in the future. Higher resilience will restore market and customer confidence in banks. This
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
is  intended  partly  make  up  for  the  higher  costs  of  capital  and  allow  banks  to  attract  more
customers and funds. In the long run, a stronger capital base can be expected to enhance banks’
loan  origination  capabilities.  These  are  thus  positive  effects  of  regulation  which  need  to  be
recognised.
I  am  convinced  that  we  need  effective  and  well-targeted  regulation.  This  also  means  that  we
need  to  closely  monitor  all  effects  –  intended  and  unintended  –  and  consider  making
adjustments, if necessary.
But even if targeted adjustments are made to the regulatory framework, I believe one thing can
be expected: while other factors currently weighing on market activity are eventually going to fade
out,  tighter  regulatory  requirements  will  definitely  stay,  and  this  is  the  “new  normal”  market
participants will have to adapt to.
 
3.3 High Frequency Trading
Let me now turn to another phenomenon whose role in market liquidity is, in my view, larger than
some  observers  think.  For  the  last  fifteen  years  the  investment  community  has  witnessed  a
transformation in the landscape of exchanges, brokers and investors from a trading process that
is based on human decision making into an automated electronic high-speed exchange. High
Frequency Trading (HFT) operates in a matter of microseconds.
The Bundesbank conducted a comprehensive empirical study on the significance of HFT in the
German capital market and analysed whether or not HFT has had a positive impact on market
liquidity.
The results show that HFT with its 40 percent share of trading volume in the DAX and BUND
future, does indeed play a very dominant role in market making and in the supply of liquidity in
these very important market segments. The observed characteristics of the market behaviour
paint a two-sided picture of HFTs’ impact in the markets:
In normal trading environments, the findings support the view that many HFTs act as a stable
source of liquidity that provides investors a steady opportunity to trade future contracts at very
good prices. Market response times to incoming fundamental news are in the millisecond range
and bid-ask spreads are for the most part at their minimum. 
During times of increased stress in the markets, such as during the anticipated announcement
of  important  macroeconomic  data,  the  empirical  findings  show  a  change  in  HFTs’  behaviour.
Market-making  activity  of  high-speed  algorithms  is  significantly  reduced,  sometimes  close  to
zero for short time periods, while at the same time more aggressive and liquidity-demanding HFT
trading strategies take over and start to dominate the trading field.
Hence,  the  ramifications  of  HFT  and  the  transformation  into  an  automated  trading  ecosystem
indeed change the liquidity conditions in the market. Drawing the right conclusions is not easy –
for market participants and regulators alike.
 
4. Outlook for monetary policy implementation
To  conclude,  there  are  a  number  of  factors  which  impact  financial  markets.  While  the
technological progress and the regulatory changes are here to stay, the Eurosystem’s extremely
accommodative monetary policy will come to an end at some point.
Discussions on normalisation took centre stage again last week, when the US Federal Reserve
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
System updated plans for its balance sheet runoff. The duration of the process has been defined
as “a few years”. The general approach will be to let the balance sheet runoff happen passively
“in the background,” as if markets were simply “watching paint dry.”
It is self-evident that the Eurosystem is hoping for a process which will be just as boring as the
Fed’s plan. But first, the necessary precondition has to be met:inflation has to sustainably adjust
back  towards  the  ECB  Governing  Council’s  target  for  price  stability  of  below  but  close  to  2
percent in the medium term. Additionally, we must bear in mind that – like in the US – the exit
process will take several years.
Which technical options does the Eurosystem have at its disposal once the Governing Council
determines that it is time to start the exit process?
From a technical point of view, neither an increase in the level of key interest rates nor an exit
from  individual  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  would  pose  particular  challenges.
However, since the start of the financial crisis the Eurosystem has gradually implemented a large
number  of  expansionary  measures  which  would  need  to  be  phased  out.  Once  the  Governing
Council  has  determined  the  appropriate  timing  and  has  adjusted  its  “Forward  Guidance”
accordingly,  the  sequencing  of  monetary  policy  normalisation  and  exit  from  non-standard
measures will follow a gradual and prudent approach. Even after non-standard measures have
been  discontinued,  a  considerable  amount  of  liquidity  will  stay  in  the  market  for  a  prolonged
period.
For the Bundesbank, the key step towards the normalisation of monetary policy would be the end
of  outright  purchases  of  government  bonds  under  the  Asset  Purchase  Programme,  as  this
programme  blurs  the  distinction  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  However,  from  an
operational or economic perspective there is no predetermined sequence for exiting from single
non-standard  measures.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  comprehensive  package  of  non-standard
measures is highly expansionary. Consequently, removing one measure would only remove its
particular  effects,  i.e.  the  monetary  policy  stance  would  not  become  restrictive,  only  less
expansionary.
Hence,  a  number  of  different  options  for  the  departure  from  expansionary  monetary  policy
measures are possible. An orderly exit which has been properly prepared both technically and
verbally will allow a smooth transition in the financial markets. Talking about communication – a
look at the introductory statement of the press conference after the last ECB Governing Council
meeting  reveals  a  few  interesting  details.  The  Governing  Council  considers  that  risks  to  the
growth  outlook  are  now  broadly  balanced.  It  also  removed  the  easing  bias  on  rates  for  now.
Some  observers  interpreted  this  statement  as  a  further  step  towards  monetary  policy
normalisation – and market participants should be prepared for these new challenges.
Thank you for your attention.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
