Andreas Dombret: Basel III - goal within sight
Opening  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the Bundesbank symposium on "Banking supervision in dialogue", Frankfurt am
Main, 15 March 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
I would like to warmly welcome you to this year’s Bundesbank symposium. I am delighted that
this year, too, so many of you have decided to join us at Kap Europa, where our event is once
again fully subscribed.
Precisely  one  week  ago  a  sensational  news  story  was  making  the  rounds.  No,  the  Basel
Committee  didn’t  complete  the  Basel  III  reform  package  just  in  time  for  our  symposium.  The
influence of this symposium doesn’t stretch quite that far, unfortunately ...
I am taking about the sensational discovery in Egypt, where archaeologists discovered a statue
of Ramses II weighing seven tonnes and towering nine metres high.
So why on earth am I telling you this? What does Ramses II have to do with Basel III? After all,
my speech is supposed to be about the Basel III reform. Allow me, if you will, to keep you in
suspense a little longer and reveal the answer to this question at the end of my speech. 
2. Are we there yet? The current status of negotiations
Ladies and gentlemen, we are very close to concluding the Basel reforms. And the closer we get
to the end, the more we turn our attention to what these reforms will mean. Many institutions are
worried, not least in Germany. What will the overall package look like in the end? Will the new
standards be too strict? And how can the new requirements be fulfilled?
These are all questions that are being asked, and rightly so. After all, banks and savings banks
have seen extensive reforms since the financial crisis, and they are afraid that the reforms will go
even further and might be too much for them to cope with. This is why the reform is also often
referred to as “Basel IV” ...
But how justified are these fears? This is what I want to talk about today. Let’s start off by looking
at the facts. What is the status of the negotiations and what can we expect?
First of all, let’s just remember that a large part of Basel III has already been fully agreed on and
implemented. That said, the final parts are still missing. This concerns, in particular, the new
rules on calculating risk-weighted assets, and this is what the ongoing negotiations are about.
The  Chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee,  Governor  Stefan  Ingves,  will  give  you  a  first-hand
account  of  this  following  my  speech  –  and  I  would  like  to  express  my  thanks  to  him  for  this
already.
We have made real progress in Basel since the end of last year. We have been able to reach a
consensus  in  nearly  all  of  the  open  points  while  also  taking  into  account  important  concerns
raised by Germany.
Take,  for  example,  real  estate  loans  –  an  important  business  area  for  banks,  not  only  in
Germany. Here, German negotiators were able to secure an agreement that regional differences
will be better taken into account. After all, while more lenient standards are used in most other
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries, the valuation of real estate collateral in Germany is particularly conservative. We were
always  of  the  view  that  these  different  methods  should  not  be  treated  equally  in  the  Basel
standards.  Anything  else  would  distort  global  competition  and  punish  those  institutions  that
assess the risks of real estate financing with particular care.
Another example are the internal models for estimating credit risk. The Bundesbank has always
objected to a too severe limitation of these models. This is because the use of models is always
more risk-sensitive than the standardised approach to calculating equity capital. Here, too, we
were able to drive a balanced compromise. The same applies to the measurement of operational
risk and the details regarding the upper borrowing limit.
When it comes to finalising Basel III, I feel it is particularly important that – for all the constraints
placed  on  internal  models  –  we  continue  to  keep  an  eye  on  risk  sensitivity.  Because  both
extremes – a risk-insensitive approach to capital backing on the one hand, and the unfettered
use of internal models to measure risk on the other – have undesirable side-effects.
Ladies and gentlemen, we have every right to be quite satisfied on the whole with the current
status  of  negotiations.  But  I  will  make  no  secret  of  the  fact  that  a  number  of  items  are  still
unresolved. One of these is the proposal to introduce a new output floor, as it is known, for risk-
weighted assets. This output floor would need to be applied by institutions which use internal
models – that is, mainly the large institutions.
I’m giving nothing away when I say that Germany’s supervisors have taken a critical view of this
proposal. This output floor is designed to help curb excessive variability in the calculation of risk-
weighted assets. But it needs to be calibrated carefully, because setting too high a hurdle quite
simply creates the wrong incentives. After all, there are good reasons why model calculations
are  designed  such  that  higher  risks  require  more  capital,  and  lower  risks  less.  If  this
straightforward principle were undermined by an excessively high output floor, it would be to the
detriment  of  risk  sensitivity.  This  would  give  institutions  less  of  an  incentive  to  run  their
businesses in a risk-oriented manner. Incidentally, fewer than 50 banks use internal models in
Germany – out of just under 1,900 institutions overall under our supervision. This means that the
number of institutions affected by an output floor is relatively small, particularly important though
those institutions undoubtedly are.
What is more, a robust line of defence is already in place today, in the shape of the leverage
ratio, which sets additional minimum capital requirements to prevent internal models from being
abused  by  those  looking  to  understate  the  capital  they  need  to  set  aside.  This  leverage  ratio
offers sound protection, and it improves on the current provisions under the European regulatory
regime.
We will therefore stick to our position in negotiations that any output floor should not be too high.
There is no need for that – and it would even be damaging. To put it in no uncertain terms: an
excessively high output floor is out of the question as long as we’re involved.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you can see, negotiations are on the right path, by and large. So what
happens next?
There is a general consensus on the Basel Committee that we shall continue to work towards
creating the clarity and certainty that market participants need to plan for the future. And do so as
quickly as we can. I do not intend to commit to a time schedule today, not least because the
United  States,  a  major  negotiating  partner,  is  recalibrating  its  position.  But  as  far  as  the
Bundesbank is concerned, we will stay at the negotiating table and are always ready to stake out
common ground. We naturally need to take into account the differences between the European
and  US  banking  systems  and  the  fact  that  the  new  rules  will  need  to  be  palatable  to  all  the
negotiating partners. These are, after all, global minimum standards we are talking about – no
more and no less.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The pace of negotiations isn’t decisive, either. It’s the outcome that counts. And I believe we will
have  achieved  a  good  outcome  if  it  reduces  excessive  variability  in  the  calculation  of  risk-
weighted assets without relinquishing the principle of risk sensitivity.
3. Don’t overstate the case: effects on German institutions are limited
But success is also about the ability of banks and savings banks to absorb the impact of the
reform  and  pass  into  a  new  world  of  regulation.  I’ve  now  reached  the  section  of  my  speech
where even the biggest regulatory gripers will probably prick up their ears ...
Our  internal  impact  studies  show  quite  clearly  that  the  future  requirements  from  Basel  are
manageable for German institutions as long as we conclude the reform in its intended shape.
Speaking  from  a  German  perspective,  I  consider  it  a  successful  outcome  that  a  set  of  rules
which  has  to  take  into  account  the  idiosyncrasies  of  28  countries  and  communities  achieves
such a high degree of regional balance.
What will the impact on German banks and savings banks look like, exactly? To provide a reliable
answer to that question we have taken the Basel Committee’s latest figures and added a number
of calculations of our own. Our scenarios thus reflect the current status of negotiations.
On balance, we do not see any material increase in risk-weighted assets, and thus in capital
requirements,  for  the  bulk  of  participating  institutions.  What  this  means  specifically  for  many
banks in Germany is minimal increases of less than 5% on average. We even find instances
where capital requirements decline. Fears of a strong upturn in capital requirements across the
entire German financial system are unfounded, in my eyes – quite the opposite, in fact. So the
sense of panic observed in some quarters is no longer warranted. Let’s not beat around the bush
here: it’s time critics came down from their barricades over Basel III and started to look ahead.
There is, however, one thing which I do not wish to play down: the need for action is, of course,
different  for  each  institution.  Certain  institutions  will  almost  certainly  be  affected  by  the  Basel
proposals. Those institutions affected the most could very well be confronted with higher capital
requirements,  in  a  few  exceptional  cases  by  more  than  20%.  Above  all,  this  is  due  to  the
proposed output floor. This output floor will be binding for the majority of the large German banks,
although to very differing extents. However, this also means that particularly the savings banks
and cooperative banks, which primarily use the standardised approach, will barely be affected
and will even benefit from Basel III to a certain extent.
For those institutions that are the most heavily affected, fulfilling the Basel III requirements will
undoubtedly present a challenge that should not be underestimated. Yet for them as well – and
let’s  remember  there  is  just  a  relatively  small  number  of  such  institutions  –  I  consider  the
consequences  of  the  reforms  to  be  acceptable.  Past  experience  teaches  us  that  preliminary
calculations tend to overestimate rather than underestimate the actual requirements. This is due,
among other things, to the fact that we look at bank balance sheets as at a specific reporting
date and do not take the banks’ reactions, such as restructuring operations on the asset side,
into account. However, this is where I do see considerable leeway for a number of institutions.
The equity ratio of German banks and savings banks has risen by more than half a percentage
point to currently 16.2% since September last year, which was due primarily to the reduction in
risk-weighted assets.
Furthermore, the new rules will not come into play overnight. It is planned that all institutions shall
be given longer implementation deadlines to give them enough preparation time for the transition.
This  will  extend  the  period  in  which  institutions  can,  for  example,  retain  profits  in  order  to
strengthen  their  capital  base.  It  may  also  make  it  easier  to  raise  fresh  capital  if  a  favourable
market environment can be expected. Not least, the transitional periods also provide institutions
with sufficient time to thoroughly check their business models. As the German representative in
the Basel Committee, I will do everything I can to ensure that the transitional arrangements are
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
adequate.
While  some  institutions  will  have  their  work  cut  out  for  them,  the  majority  of  German  credit
institutions will barely need to take any action. This applies, in particular, to small and medium-
sized institutions. As I mentioned earlier, some of you in this room can probably even expect to
see lower capital requirements in future. With a bit of luck, we will be able to create the first Basel
III fan base here tonight.
4. Don’t lose sight of the objective: Basel III in context
With this in mind, I would now like to steer your attention away from the immediate towards the
longer-term implications of the Basel III reforms. After all, this set of rules has the demanding
task of laying down global standards for the banking system – possibly for many years to come.
You will, of course, experience this first hand in a variety of different ways. Credit institutions will,
after all, either be subject to additional strain or may even see some relief. And that is not an
undesirable  side-effect  of  the  reform,  but  its  main  achievement.  The  idea  behind  the  Basel
reforms is ultimately to create incentives to encourage responsible bank governance. And the
best way to do this is by means of risk weighting. These incentives do, of course, work in both
directions: they make certain activities more expensive and make others more attractive. On the
whole, I am convinced that all banks will benefit in future from a fairer distribution of the capital
requirements within the banking sector. 
Furthermore, the successful implementation of the reform package can help to further calm the
markets. It will certainly pay off; last year we did, after all, see growing fears that European banks
were undercapitalised, which meant that their risk premiums continued to climb.
Ladies and gentlemen, Basel III is not designed to make life difficult for you and your institutions.
On the contrary: in the long term, I am convinced that that the entire banking sector will benefit
from better rules.
That  is  why  the  current  debate  about  deregulation  in  the  United  States  gives  me  cause  for
concern. If the Americans do not implement the Basel III framework, we Europeans will certainly
not introduce the new rules unilaterally – and the whole world will suffer the consequences. We
learned this lesson from Basel II. Of course, I understand that the many regulatory changes over
the  last  few  years  involve  a  great  deal  of  effort  and  that  smaller  institutions,  in  particular,  are
finding them cumbersome. And I am firmly convinced that the Basel III rules do not need to be
applied wholesale to small, regional banks.
That’s why I am pleased to see that the debate about greater proportionality in banking regulation
is  gaining  momentum  in  Europe.  We  should  therefore  take  an  unbiased  look  at  whether  the
Basel  III  framework  really  should  apply  in  full  to  all  banks  and  savings  banks  in  Germany,  or
whether a less strict approach, in the form of exemptions for smaller institutions, would make
sense. By this, I mainly mean exemptions relating to operational requirements. Exemptions from
capital and liquidity requirements, on the other hand, cannot and must not be made, in the future
as in the past. 
But that’s the subject of a different debate. And that debate must not be used as a pretext to do
away with Basel III. Because today’s financial system is not constrained by borders, we need
strict global regulatory and supervisory standards. They are crucial to ensuring global financial
stability. We should bear in mind the lessons we learned from the crisis in this regard.
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, in conclusion, allow me to revisit three points and draw a few parallels
with the story of our ancient Pharaoh.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
First – and this is perhaps the most important message of my speech today – if in the coming
days we can reach a compromise in Basel that sufficiently addresses Germany’s concerns, then
German institutions will be able to deal with the implications. I mentioned earlier that we do not
want  to  substantially  increase  capital  requirements  in  Germany.  On  average,  we  are  talking
about  small  increases  of  under  5%  in  Germany.  And  from  Germany’s  perspective,  we  are
advocating  for  things  to  stay  that  way.  For  the  small  number  of  banks  for  which  we  have
calculated  increases  of  more  than  20%,  in  some  cases,  the  transitional  arrangements  will
provide enough time to respond to the new requirements.
Second, the statue of Ramses is not only a work of art; it is also testament to the highest quality
of  craftsmanship,  which  is  one  major  reason  it  has  survived  for  three  thousand  years.
Figuratively speaking, this is how we, too, must approach the Basel reform package. It’s not just
about developing uniform, consistent rules – risk sensitivity is another of our guiding principles.
During the negotiations, we will therefore call for higher risk to go hand in hand with higher capital
requirements.
Third, like the unearthing of the Ramses statue, the completion of the Basel reform package will
take place in several stages. Some of these are very delicate and thus require a concerted effort
from all those involved. Acceptable compromises must be made on all sides. While the final part
of  the  Ramses  statue  is  being  carefully  excavated  with  a  crane  over  the  next  few  days,  we
should now focus all our efforts on bringing Basel III to a successful conclusion. Although we are
not under time pressure here, we are all aware of the importance of global standards and will
benefit  from  reaching  an  agreement.  Both  supervisors  and  institutions  need  clearly  defined
regulation. But it goes without saying that we cannot and will not come to an agreement at any
price – any compromise we make must be one we can live with.
I was – and still am – confident that we can reach a successful outcome in Basel and secure a
well-rounded  package  of  reforms  that  can  then  be  used  to  achieve  the  desired  effect  in  the
banking  sector.  Because  it  is  in  nobody’s  interest  for  archaeologists  to  be  unearthing  unused
parts of the Basel III framework three thousand years from now.
Thank you very much.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
