Guy Debelle: The Global FX Code of Conduct
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Thomson
Reuters Industry Event "Examining the FX Code of Conduct", Sydney, 15 June 2017.
 The FX Global Code of Conduct was launched just over two weeks ago in London. It is available
on the Global Foreign Exchange Committee’s website, www.globalfxc.org.  Today I will reiterate
the motivation for the work, highlight the main features of the Code and adherence, summarise
how we developed the Code and outline the way forward.
1
Firstly,  why  has  this  work  been  necessary?  The  foreign  exchange  (FX)  industry  has  been
suffering from a lack of trust. This lack of trust is evident both between participants in the market
and,  at  least  as  importantly,  between  the  public  and  the  market.  The  market  needs  to  move
toward a more favourable and desirable location, and allow participants to have much greater
confidence that the market is functioning appropriately.
The Code sets out global principles of good practice in the FX market to provide a common set
of  guidance  to  the  market.  This  will  help  to  restore  confidence  and  promote  the  effective
functioning of the wholesale FX market.
A well-functioning FX market is very much in the interest of all market participants. This clearly
includes central banks, both in their own role as market participants but also as the exchange
rate is an important channel of monetary policy transmission. In a globalised world, the foreign
exchange market is one of the most vital parts of the financial plumbing.
One of the guiding principles that has underpinned our work in developing the Code is that the
Code should promote a robust, fair, liquid, open and transparent market. A diverse set of buyers
and  sellers,  supported  by  resilient  infrastructure,  should  be  able  to  confidently  and  effectively
transact  at  competitive  prices  that  reflect  available  market  information  and  in  a  manner  that
conforms to acceptable standards of behaviour. Note that I am talking about all sections of the
FX market: buyers, sellers and infrastructure.
The  work  to  develop  the  Code  began  two  years  ago,  in  May  2015,  when  the  BIS  Governors
commissioned a working group of the Markets Committee of the BIS (which I chaired until early
January  this  year)  to  do  two  things:  first,  establish  a  single  global  code  of  conduct  for  the
wholesale FX market and second, to come up with mechanisms to promote greater adherence
2
to the Code.
This  work  was  very  much  a  public  sector–private  sector  partnership.  We  were  ably  and
vigorously  supported  by  a  group  of  market  participants,  chaired  by  David  Puth,  CEO  of  CLS.
David’s group contained people from all around the world on the buy side, including corporates
and  asset  managers,  and  the  sell  side,  along  with  trading  platforms,  ECNs  and  non-bank
participants, drawing from the various Foreign Exchange Committees (FXCs) and beyond. All
parts of the market were involved in the drafting of the Code to make sure all perspectives were
heard and appropriately reflected.
There are two important points worth highlighting: first, it’s a single code for the whole industry
and second, it’s a global code.
On  the  first  point,  the  Code  supplants  the  existing  codes  that  have  been  present  in  the  FX
market. So there is now one single code. Importantly, the Code covers all of the wholesale FX
industry. This is not a code for just the sell side. It is there for the sell side, the buy side, non-bank
participants and the platforms; it reaches around the globe and across the whole industry. The
way it is relevant will depend on the nature of the engagement with the FX market. What this
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
means in practice is that the steps different market participants take to align their activities with
the  principles  of  the  Code  will  differ,  reflecting  the  size,  complexity,  type  and  extent  of  their
engagement with the FX market.
On  the  second  point,  it’s  a  global  code:  our  group  contained  representatives  from  the  central
bank  and  private  sector  from  all  the  16  largest  FX  centres,  including  both  developed  and
emerging markets.
The  first  phase  of  the  Code  was  released  in  May  2016.  It  covered  areas  such  as  ethics,
information sharing, aspects of execution and confirmation and settlement. The second phase
covered further aspects of execution including e-trading and platforms, prime brokerage, as well
as governance, and risk management and compliance.
The complete Code comprises 55 principles spanning these issues. The principles are written in
plain language and should be easily read and understood by market participants. The principles
are supplemented by a suite of examples to illustrate their practical application.
Market participants had a number of opportunities to comment on the Code, in addition to the
direct input of the Market Participants Group. Before its release, drafts of the full text of the Code
were distributed to market participants for their review, principally through the various FXCs, but
also through other industry associations to ensure all perspectives were appropriately reflected in
the Code. Through this process, over 10,000 comments were received.
The Code reflects our collective judgement as to what constitutes good practice in the market,
taking account of the feedback received. I think it is a good outcome of the process that we were
able to distil the points of contention down to a small number of issues. Outside of these, the
feedback  reflected  a  widely  held  consensus  as  to  what  is  good  practice.  The  degree  of
consensus  and  the  willingness  to  contribute  to  the  process  reflect  the  fact  that  market
participants have recognised the Code’s aim of helping move the FX market to a better place.
One of our central aims in drafting the Code is for it to be principles-based rather than rules-
based. There are a number of reasons why this is so but, for me, an important reason is that the
more prescriptive the Code is, the easier it is to get around. Rules are easier to arbitrage than
principles. The more prescriptive and the more precise the code, the less people will think about
what  they  are  doing.  If  it’s  principles-based  and  less  prescriptive  then  market  participants  will
have to think about whether their actions are consistent with the principles of the Code.
But we have not written a procedures manual. Rather, we have articulated principles that need to
be taken into account. Individual firms may then take these principles and reflect them in their
own  procedures  manuals.  Our  aim  in  setting  out  these  principles  is  to  provide  market
participants with the framework in which to think about how they, for example, handle stop-loss
orders. The emphasis here is very much on the word ‘think’.
Adherence
Alongside drafting the Code, we devoted considerable time and effort to thinking about how to
ensure widespread adoption of the Code by market participants. Clearly, that was an issue with
the various existing codes that had been in place in a number of markets. It is evident they were
ignored on occasion in the past, wilfully or otherwise.
We  have  worked  with  the  industry  to  produce  a  principles-based  code  rather  than  a  set  of
prescriptive regulatory standards. The Code is not regulation. It will not impose legal or regulatory
obligations  on  market  participants,  nor  will  it  supplant  existing  regulatory  standards  or
expectations.
We have developed a blueprint for adherence that has been published alongside the Code and
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
sets out the key elements we think will be required for the Code to be successful – and the steps
3
that have been taken, and will be taken, to ensure this is the case.
One  critical  dimension  is  market-based  adherence  mechanisms.  An  important  element  of
discipline should come from the market itself. The adherence to a voluntary code will only come
about if firms judge it to be in their interest and take the practical steps to ensure the Code is
embedded in their practices. Such practical steps would include training their staff and putting in
appropriate policies and procedures.
4
We  have  provided  a  draft  Statement  of  Commitment  for  firms  to  publicly  demonstrate  their
adherence to the Code.  One reason for a public demonstration is that firms are more likely to
adhere to the Code if they believe that their peers are doing so too. That is, an important source
of pressure to adhere should come from other market participants. To provide visibility around
this,  there  are  a  number  of  market-based  initiatives  to  provide  public  registries  where  market
participants can demonstrate their use of the Statement of Commitment. These registries will be
in the public domain in the near future.
More  broadly,  market  participants  have  a  vital  interest,  and  a  role  to  play,  in  promoting  and
upholding good practices in the market as a whole.  This can be partly achieved through leading
by example, but can also be supported by having similar expectations of counterparties and other
market participants and helping to raise awareness of the Code in their market interactions. In
that  regard,  we  have  reached  out  to  more  than  120  industry  associations  and  key  market
infrastructure providers globally. In Australia, that includes AFMA and the Finance and Treasury
Association, as well as the NZFMA.
5
Ultimately  the  success  of  the  Code  in  promoting  integrity  and  restoring  confidence  in  the
wholesale FX market lies in the hands of its participants.
Another aspect of market-based adherence comes through the FXCs. In due course, adherence
to  the  Code  is  likely  to  become  a  requirement  of  FXC  membership.  In  Australia’s  case,
adherence to the Code will be a requirement of membership of the Australian foreign exchange
committee by the end of this year. That would ensure the Code is embedded at the core of the
FX  market,  given  the  extent  of  coverage  of  the  FXCs.  But  it  is  also  important  that  it  extends
beyond that, and that there is, at the very least, an awareness of it across all market participants.
A second dimension of adherence is that the BIS central banks have signalled their commitment
by  announcing  that  they  themselves  will  follow  the  Code,  and  that  they  expect  that  their
counterparties will do so too.  In the case of the RBA, we will require that our counterparties sign
the Statement of Commitment, just as we will ourselves.
6
Given that we provided the full text of the Code to the market only last month, there will be a
period of time for market participants to adjust their practices where necessary to be in line with
the  principles  in  the  Code.  I  would  not  expect  much  time  should  be  required  to  do  this.  This
period of time might potentially be as short as six months, but no more than twelve months for
the vast majority of market participants. How much effort this might require will in part depend on
the nature and extent of engagement with the FX market. In drafting the Code, we have always
kept the principle of proportionality at front of mind.
Finally, it is vital that the Code remains up to date and evolves as the market evolves. The Code
will be collectively owned, maintained and updated by the Global Foreign Exchange Committee
(GFXC),  which  met  for  the  first  time  in  London  in  May.  This  will  continue  the  public  sector  –
private sector partnership which has supported the development of the Code.
The  GFXC  will  regularly  assess  whether  new  information  or  market  developments  warrant
updates or additions being made to the Code. As the first example of this, given diversity of views
on the use of last look in the market, the GFXC is currently requesting feedback on trading in the
7
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
last  look  window.   On  a  less  frequent  basis,  the  GFXC  will  oversee  a  more  comprehensive
review of the Code.
Conclusion
The  Global  Code  is  the  culmination  of  two  years  of  work  by  a  group  of  people  from  both  the
private and public sectors. The work reflected a very constructive and cooperative effort between
the central banks and market participants. We all undertook this work in addition to our regular
responsibilities, at all hours of the day and night. This contribution of time and effort reflected the
fact that all of us recognise the need to restore the public’s faith in the foreign exchange market.
We share the view that the Global Code plays an important role in assisting that process and
also in helping improve market functioning and confidence in the market.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
An app version has also been made available by an external party: app.policystore.ch/C/FXCode/.
See <www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm>.
www.globalfxc.org/adopting_the_global_code.htm
The Statement of Commitment is in Annex 3 of the Code.
The Banking and Finance Oath has a very similar motivation www.thebfo.org/home.
See www.bis.org/press/p170525.htm.
See www.globalfxc.org/consultative_process.htm
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
