Yannis  Stournaras:  Reforming  and  rebalancing  the  economy  in
Greece
Introduction by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, to the presentation of the
European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development  (EBRD)  Transition  Report  2016-2017,
Athens, 25 January 2017.
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome Artur  Radziwill,  Director  for  Country  Economics  and
Policy of the EBRD, and his colleagues to the Bank of Greece.
As  you  are  aware,  the  Bank  of  Greece  has  on  several  occasions  provided  the  venue  for  the
presentation  of  the  Transition  Report  and  for  many  other  EBRD  initiatives.  It  this  vein,  we
endorse the activity and positive role of the EBRD in Greece, in particular during the last couple
of years following the establishment of its local office. Its commitment to the country sends a
strong signal to private sector investors that Greece is serious about reforming and rebalancing
its economy.
The 2016 Transition Report is of particular relevance to Greece, since it deals exclusively with
the important subject of inequality and economic inclusion. The Report focuses on a number of
key aspects of inclusive growth: the distribution of income; the impact that the transition process
has had on people’s well-being and happiness; equality of opportunity; and financial inclusion.
These aspects are topical for Greece. The economic adjustment programmes that have been
implemented since 2010 in Greece aimed at addressing the twin deficits (i.e. fiscal and current
account)  and  structural  weaknesses  from  which  the  economy  has  suffered  for  decades.  The
achievements so far have been remarkable:
Unprecedented  fiscal  consolidation.  Over  the  period  2013–16,  the  primary  deficit  was
eliminated and, for the first time since 2001, general government primary surpluses were
recorded.  Moreover,  the  improvement  in  the  “structural”  primary  budget  balance  by  more
than 17 percentage points of potential GDP between 2009 and 2016 means that, taking the
impact of the economic cycle into account, the fiscal adjustment in Greece was more than
double the one achieved in other Member States under similar programmes.
A  recouping  of  the  sizeable  cumulative  loss  in  labour  cost  competitiveness  vis-à-vis  our
trading partners between 2000 and 2009.
An elimination of the external deficit, which exceeded 15% of GDP in 2008.
An increase in the share of exports from 19% of GDP in 2009 to 32% today.
Structural reforms, notably in the labour market, but also in the product markets and in public
administration.
Recapitalisation and restructuring in the banking system, enabling it to withstand the crisis
and  the  flight  of  deposits,  and  ensuring  that  it  now  has  adequate  capital,  provisions  and
collateral,  i.e.  that  the  necessary  (though  not  sufficient)  conditions  are  in  place  for  the
banking system to address the major problem of non-performing loans.
A halting of the increase (and even a slight decrease) in the volume of non-performing loans
in the second and third quarters of 2016, for the first time since 2014.
A rebound of the economy in the second and third quarters of 2016, making it reasonable to
anticipate a positive growth rate for the year as a whole, for the first time since 2014.
These stabilisation policies in order to correct the unsustainable twin deficits inevitably came at
an  economic  and  social  cost:  even  more  recession,  job  and  income  losses.  But  as  argued
above, these sacrifices have not been wasted.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Greece is currently on the road to recovery. It is therefore more topical than ever that the reforms
that will be put forward in order to keep Greece on the track of a new, extrovert growth model will
also safeguard social cohesion. This is a prerequisite to ensure that reforms will be politically
sustainable, a key finding of this Report.
The  analysis  of  the  2016  Transition  Report  draws,  inter  alia,  on  the  third  round  of  the  Life  in
Transition Survey (LiTS III), a household survey conducted by the EBRD and the World Bank.
Crucially,  the  Life  in  Transition  Survey  also  covered  Greece,  to  which  a  whole  chapter  of  the
respective  Report  is  dedicated. According  to  the  Life  in  Transition  Survey,  the  impact  of  the
economic crisis on Greek households has been deep and widespread.
Lastly, the Bank of Greece has repeatedly underlined the importance of investment in the revival
of the economy. Therefore, tackling successfully the obstacles Greek firms are currently facing
in  the  business  environment,  according  to  the  key  findings  of  the  Business  Environment  and
Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS) for Greece, will induce investment, boosting in turn the
economic prospects of Greece.
I  am  looking  forward  to  today’s  presentations  and  I  am  confident  that  they  will  contain  many
useful insights for Greece that will contribute to the constructive discussions on the way forward. 
  2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
