Yves Mersch: Developing Europe's payment landscape
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Deutsche Bundesbank's payment and securities settlement symposium 2017, Frankfurt am
Main, 18 May 2017.
Introduction
 Fintech  has  created  the  potential  for  the  design  and  implementation  of  innovative  financial
services  that  can  better  serve  users’  needs  in  terms  of  speed  and  convenience.  Innovative
developments that lead to better services can support commerce, in particular e-commerce, as
well as productivity and income growth.
To  fulfil  its  mandate  under  the  Treaty,  the  Eurosystem  is  committed  to  keeping  step  with
innovation in financial services while, at the same time, safeguarding the safety and efficiency of
the financial market infrastructure. It is essential that we respond to the increased digitalisation of
our society, delivering innovative and efficient services to our economy, which has an impact on
the lives of all Europeans. In the context of these developments, there is a certain demand for
instant  payment  solutions  by  end  users. And  the  industry  has  to  deliver  solutions  to  support
innovation,  also  in  view  of  the  global  competition  in  this  respect.  Europe  has  the  capacity  to
innovate and deliver integrated solutions to all actors – individuals, industry, merchants – and we
should do our utmost not to fall behind the curve. Consequently, we must ensure that consumer
payments can be effected instantly but within a safe and sound market infrastructure unhindered
by borders in Europe, just as we do with euro banknotes. In this vein, the ECB will maintain a
choice for customers by facilitating the market infrastructure needed for the take-up of
instant  payments  across  Europe  –  in  a  fully  integrated  manner,  fostering  “domestic”
solutions  for  the  euro.  Customers  can  continue  to  select  the  payment  method  they
prefer. Instant payments are coming and will most likely be the preferred payment method for
the new generation.
However,  in  order  to  thrive,  innovative  financial  services  need  a  clear  legal  and  regulatory
framework.  The  revised  Payment  Services  Directive  (PSD2)  and  the  Regulatory  Technical
Standards  (RTS)  lay  the  groundwork  for  this.  It  is  of  critical  importance that  the  European
authorities pursue their efforts to complete the legal framework where needed, clarify a
number of aspects to ensure legal certainty and align the implementation of this legal
framework across Member States.
Finally, moving beyond the legal requirements, it is essential that market stakeholders reach a
consensus on the technical, operational and business requirements.
Today, I intend to cast more light on these issues by addressing two aspects that are required for
innovative financial services to come to fruition:
1.  the underlying market infrastructure for financial services; and
2.  the  founding  legal  frameworks  necessary  for  developments  to  flourish  in  the  payment
landscape.
My speech will focus on instant payments and payment initiation services.
Developing the Eurosystem’s market infrastructure
A sound and efficient market infrastructure is essential for the creation of an integrated financial
market  in  Europe.  The  Eurosystem  is  continuously  exploring  ways  to  develop  our  market
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
infrastructure so that it meets the needs and requirements of the market. In autumn 2016 we
announced the launch of an investigation into the future development of our market infrastructure.
The projects that are relevant in this context are:
1.  the TARGET instant payment settlement (TIPS) service; and
2.  the consolidation of TARGET2 and TARGET2-Securities (T2S).
Now, half a year later, I can say that good progress has been made.
TIPS and the consolidation of TARGET2 and T2S are closely linked. Under the assumption that
the  projects  will  get  the  go-ahead  in  the  weeks  ahead,  TARGET2,  T2S  and  TIPS  will  have  a
modular  structure  with  a  number  of  common  elements  and  centralised  liquidity  management.
The  centralised  liquidity  management  function  will  bundle  all  the  necessary  features  to  allow
participants  to  manage  their  liquidity  across  all  Eurosystem  services.  The  account  structure
envisaged  will  allow  participants  to  use  the  available  payment  capacity  whenever  one  of  the
connected services is open for business, without the need for harmonising the operating times of
the different services. A market consultation on the user requirements for these services was
launched in early May and we hope for wide market participation.
A market consultation on TIPS held earlier this year showed that there is significant interest in the
topic of instant payments in general, and in particular the service that TIPS can potentially offer.
Overall, feedback on the proposed TIPS service was very positive. One point on which we have
provided  further  clarification  concerns  the  broader  framework  of  how  TIPS  fits  into  the  future
European market infrastructure landscape, in particular as regards interaction with automated
clearing houses (ACHs).
The  TIPS  initiative  is  the  Eurosystem’s  response  to  the  increased  “speed”  which  we  are  all
experiencing in our daily lives. Europeans have a growing urge to make payments instantly, just
like they access music, news and traffic updates instantly. The TIPS initiative aims to create the
infrastructure  needed  for  the  settlement  of  instant  payments  across  Europe.  It  can  thus  help
achieve pan-European scale and prevent new fragmentation resulting from the development of
national solutions, which may not operate across borders, or only in a limited way.
TIPS is meant to complement the clearing services of ACHs. The two can complement each
other to achieve reachability across Europe. There are clear indications that ACHs alone cannot
achieve  that  scale  for  instant  payments  in  euro.  However,  with  TIPS, ACHs  can  extend  their
reachability  across  Europe  if  the  participants  in  the ACH  are  either  participants  or  reachable
parties in TIPS.
Last but not least, the feedback we received on expected volumes in the market consultation
was  very  encouraging.  The  volumes  initially  estimated  by  the  Eurosystem  were  substantially
exceeded  both  as  regards  total  market  volumes  and  the  volumes  that  market  participants
expected  to  process  in  TIPS.  For  TIPS  working  under  full  cost  recovery,  this  should  result  in
more attractive pricing.
Moving the payment landscape forward
For an integrated financial market to flourish, the legislators and the regulators must provide a
clear legal framework so that innovative payment services can be developed for the European
market as a whole. By defining the requirements to enable innovative players to easily enter the
market in a safe and efficient manner, we can promote competition and ensure that users benefit
from fintech innovation.
The revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2), which is to be transposed into national law by
January  2018,  aims  to  increase  pan-European  competition  and  participation  in  the  payments
industry, including by non-banks. At the same time, it is intended to provide a level playing field by
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
setting out the requirements for consumer protection and the rights and obligations of payment
providers and users.
The  last  few  years  have  seen  the  emergence  of  new  third-party  providers  (TPPs)  offering
payment initiation and/or account information services at the front end of the value chain. Level 2
measures on strong customer authentication and secure communication have been developed
by the European Banking Authority (EBA). These aim to provide the necessary safeguards for
ensuring the security of payment services. The review of the Regulatory Technical Standards
submitted by the EBA to the European Commission (EC) is currently under way. By the end of
this month, the EC will decide whether or not to accept them or request amendments before
submitting  the  revisions  to  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Council  for  adoption.  Following
adoption,  payment  service  providers  will  have  18  months  to  implement  the  standards. At  the
current juncture, a number of uncertainties remain for market players on the final shape of this
legal framework. I therefore welcome the efforts being made by the European authorities to settle
these  aspects  as  soon  as  possible  in  order  to  support  the  market  in  implementing  this  new
framework. I would in particular highlight three fields:
First, the legal framework as it currently stands is still incomplete. One important aspect in this
regard is the question of the interface to be used for TPPs to access account servicing payment
service providers (ASPSPs): will it be a so-called dedicated interface or will it be direct access?
In this regard, the EU regulator still needs to define whether there will be one interface or two and
in the latter case under which conditions each could be used.
Second,  further  legal  clarity  is  needed  from  the  regulator  on  a  number  of  legal  framework
aspects. One such aspect is passporting, i.e. the conditions under which a TPP licensed in one
country could provide services throughout the whole of the EU.
Finally, another aspect is the specific legal regime that is in force between the transposition of
PSD2  into  national  law  by  January  2018  and  the  applicability  of  RTS  in  2019.  The  authorities
should  follow  a  consistent  approach  and  not  exercise  unwarranted  discretion  in  the
implementation of the PSD2 requirements. This is needed to maintain the level playing field. It
applies particularly in the period between the transposition of the PSD2 into national law and the
coming  into  effect  of  RTS.  For  instance,  it  does  not  appear  conceivable  that  the  obligation  of
TPPs to identify themselves to the ASPSPs differs between Member States.
With  a  proper  regulatory  framework  and  an  integrated  market  infrastructure  in  place,  the
foundation  has  been  laid.  The  PSD2  cannot  however  settle  all  issues.  Within  the  Euro  Retail
Payments Board we have established a working group that will define the technical, operational
and business requirements for payment initiation services. The work is challenging, as there are
diverging views among stakeholders. It is essential that a harmonised approach and common
business  practices  are  defined  so  that  payment  service  providers  can  offer  services  in  an
integrated manner across Europe. In this vein, I hope for market collaboration that allows us to
reach a constructive solution which benefits the market and remains faithful to the spirit of the
legislation. Recent discussions suggest progress, and I hope that we can combine our energy
and find a compromise that will be a win-win for Europe.
Conclusion
To  conclude,  I  will  reiterate  that  fintech  has  unleashed  the  potential  for  innovative  financial
services that can bring benefits to individuals and businesses. The Eurosystem is committed to
keeping  pace  with  innovation  in  financial  services  while,  at  the  same  time,  safeguarding  the
safety and efficiency of our financial market infrastructure.
TIPS  has  the  potential  to  be  the  underlying  infrastructure  that  will  facilitate  instant  payments
across Europe. It will provide the basis for innovative payment services to flourish and, in tandem
with the services offered by ACHs, it can help foster pan-European reachability.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
For  PSD2  to  achieve  its  objective  regarding  access,  innovation  and  a  level  playing  field,  it  is
important  that  several  aspects  of  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  are  clarified  and
implemented in a consistent manner – in particular when PSD2 takes effect in January 2018 and
the respective RTS Iater in 2019. In this context, the authorities should consider how the new
directive  and  derived  regulatory  technical  standards  will  work  in  conjunction  with  instant
payments.
Moving  beyond  the  legal  requirements, I also encourage market stakeholders in the Euro
Retail  Payments  Board  to  agree  on  the  technical,  operational  and  business
requirements. The success of this endeavour can be achieved in a spirit of cooperation.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
