Yves  Mersch:  Ructions  in  the  repo  market  -  monetary  easing  or
regulatory squeezing?
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  GFF  (Deutsche  Börse  Group  Global  Funding  and  Financing)  summit,  Luxembourg,  26
January 2017.
Introduction
 There is no doubt that European repo markets today are operating in unprecedented territory. In
the past year we have faced the extraordinary situation of collateralised transactions taking place
well  below  the  ECB’s  deposit  rate,  and  not  just  for  the  highest-rated  issuers.  There  are
increasing signs that this is indicative of market stress.
Though market depth remains relatively stable and the bid offer spreads are not a major liquidity
restriction,  the  decreased  average  ticket  size  seems  reflective  of  collateral  scarcity  in  some
market segments.
If one looks at the distribution of trades taking place by rates towards the end of last year, while
German collateral usually traded at around –70 bps, it traded at –4.88% at year-end, reflecting
increased demand for “special” German bonds (while overall turnover declined about 50%). In a
“special” the repo contract specifies a particular bond to be exchanged for cash, rather than the
specification of a broad collateral class such as ‘German government bond’. As a result, specials
tend to trade at lower interest rates.
The volume of trades conducted at special rates also increased in other markets, pushing the
distribution  of  rates  lower. Average  French  collateral  rates  have  moved  from  –45  bps  before
summer 2016 to below –60 bps before Christmas. Spain is trading between –45 bps and –50
bps. Italy is now trading below –40 bps . And for Austria, Belgium and The Netherlands, rates
have been moving downwards as well.
1
One could say that whereas in the past the repo market was largely characterised by “collateral
chasing  cash”,  today  the  main  dynamic  in  some  markets  appears  to  be  “cash  chasing
collateral”. The evolution of repo rates for different collateral classes over reporting dates suggest
that  the  old  pattern  still  exists  in  parallel  with  the  new. As  I  will  argue  below,  this  observation
provides a key to understanding the roots of these developments.
New dynamics in the short term funding markets unsurprisingly lead to debate in the financial
industry. There are concerns about short-term borrowing costs swinging sharply at the end of
reporting periods, creating volatility and potentially spilling over into government bond markets –
an effect we have indeed seen for core general collateral (GC) collateral. And some observers
fear collateral scarcity might herald more general disruptions to the “plumbing” of the financial
system,  which  would  be  especially  problematic  given  ongoing  structural  changes  in  financial
intermediation. Activity  is  after  all  shifting  increasingly  from  banks  to  non-banks,  and  market-
based finance is, by and large, organised around collateralised lending.
Perhaps inevitably, some point the finger at monetary policy, and in particular at the side-effects
of  the  ECB’s  asset  purchase  programme.  The  substantial  creation  of  liquidity  by  the APP  is
argued to have pushed  unsecured  lending  rates  to  the  deposit  floor,  causing  secured  lending
rates to fall even lower. At the same time, the APP is said to have withdrawn increasing volumes
of  high-quality  liquid  collateral  from  the  market,  exacerbating  pricing  tensions,  especially  for
special bonds.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
While monetary policy may, in some circumstances, exacerbate repo market tensions, I believe
it to be far from the only factor at play today, or indeed the most important one. The situation in
the repo market today in fact reflects a confluence of longer-term trends that have affected both
the supply and demand for good collateral. I will review some of these trends in a moment.
Before doing so, I would like to recall an important point. Our mandate is clear: to deliver price
stability. This is our primary objective and the sole orientation for our policy. What we aim to do is
to act in a way that is necessary, proportionate and that limits side-effects. This is why we have
designed our programmes in such a way as to deliver our objective without creating excessive
distortions in market functioning and price discovery. And it is also why we have taken measures
to mitigate some effects of our measures on repo markets. These measure, too, are governed
by the principle that they must be necessary and proportionate, as well as not being in conflict
with our price stability mandate.
Contributing factors to the current situation in repo market
Let me now review some medium to long-term trends contributing to the current situation in the
repo market, affecting both the supply and demand of collateral.
It should first be noted that the repo market has seen a reduction in its role for funding, also due
to the excess liquidity injected and the securities absorption implied by APP.
On the supply side, the availability of high-quality collateral is inevitably pro-cyclical. From a pure
economic view point, the financial crisis, its length, rising debt levels and rating downgrades to
sovereigns  reduced  the  amount  of  available  assets  that  are  considered  ‘safe’,  particularly  for
non-banks (although regulators treat all sovereigns as risk-free). This is most easily visible in the
current clustering of GC collateral rates by country of issuer, which was largely absent prior to
the crisis.
On  the  demand  side,  the  evolution  of  prudential  regulation  has  affected  the  repo  market.  A
number of features, which have in principle been known since the reform of Basel III in 2010, are
still being phased in and directly affect banks’ participation in the repo markets, particularly the
liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR)  and  the  net  stable  funding  ratio  (NSFR). A  third  measure  –  the
leverage  ratio  –  is  now  subject  to  reporting  requirements,  but  there  is  not  as  yet  an  agreed
international regulatory standard.
The  LCR  requires  banks  to  hold  sufficient  high-quality  liquid  assets  (HQLA)  to  cover
projected net cash outflows. It started being phased in at the start of 2015 and reaches full
application  by  2018.  The  LCR  consequently  makes  short-term  funding  less  attractive  to
banks and holding HQLA more attractive. The requirement to meet this ratio is likely to be a
contributory factor in market volatility around reporting dates.
The NSFR is designed to reduce bank reliance on short-term wholesale funding relative to
more stable sources of funding. It penalises short-term funding, including repos of shorter
maturity  than  one  year,  particularly  those  under  six  months.  The  NSFR  also  penalises
matched book transactions, since  the  negative  impact  of  the  reverse  repo  leg  more  than
offsets the positive impact of the repo leg. Overall, the impact from the NSFR on short-term
repo is reckoned to be lower supply, reducing volumes and increasing the price.
The leverage ratio, which has been implemented in the United States for some time, is a
deliberately  simplified  way  to  assess  banks’  riskiness.  Traditional  bank  capital  ratios  are
calculated  as  capital  over  risk-weighted  assets.  The 
is  calculated
approximately as capital over total assets, with no attempt to employ risk weights.
leverage  ratio 
This  is  important  for  the  repo  market  because  sovereign  bonds  typically  attract  a  zero  risk
weight. As such, carrying out repo as a large volume, low margin activity is threatened by the
leverage  ratio. Although  the  exact  parameters  of  the  leverage  ratio  regulations  have  not  been
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
finalised, euro area banks are required to report leverage ratios. Given the higher relative penalty
given to holding sovereign bonds under the leverage ratio as opposed to the capital ratio, it is
expected to increase the cost of banks’ repo, and reduce incentives for money market arbitrage
2
and market making.
Reduced incentives for arbitrage and market making in turn affect market liquidity and can lead to
greater  periods  of  uncertainty.  Furthermore,  since  European  banks  are  required  to  report
average month-end positions, there are increasing signs of market stress at month-end dates.
The leverage ratio contains provisions for netting of offsetting cash positions when they are with
the  same  counterparty  and  settled  through  the  same  system.  This  has  resulted  in  a  much
greater use of central counterparties (CCPs). The use of CCPs has been strongly supported by
authorities and brings benefits in terms of smooth market functioning, as well as for individual
institutions.  Eurosystem  contacts  report  a  wide  difference  in  the  pricing  of  trades  cleared
bilaterally and those cleared through CCPs – sometimes in the tens of basis points.
CCPs,  however,  are  also  important  for  repo  markets  for  a  different  reason.  The  increased
volume of derivative trades centrally cleared at CCPs due to new regulations such as EMIR, as
well as sporadic bouts of volatility, means that those institutions tend to hold significant quantities
of cash. Placing that cash as unsecured deposits would represent wrong-way risk for CCPs as
the  collapse  of  a  significant  financial  institution  would  create  significant  market  volatility  at  the
same  time  as  potentially  the  loss  of  some  of  the  unsecured  deposits.  CCPs  are  therefore
increasingly large participants in the repo markets.
The  requirements  for  trades  to  be  centrally  cleared  are  still  being  introduced,  so  the  demand
from market infrastructure to exchange cash for collateral will rise.
The rise in importance of CCPs is indicative of the generally increasing role played by non-bank
financial institutions in recent years. Since these institutions do not hold accounts at the central
bank, they are unable to access the deposit facility. The demand from these non-banks to find a
secure  place  to  deposit  cash  is  a  contributory  factor  to  repo  rates  trading  below  the
Eurosystem’s Deposit Facility Rate (DFR).
Last  but  not  least,  changes  in  the  interbank  lending  market  have  led  to  increased  collateral
demand.  In  the  period  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  loan  losses  and  weak  profitability  have
constrained the availability of capital for banks. Unsurprisingly, there has been a marked trend in
interbank  markets  away  from  unsecured  towards  secured  lending  in  order  to  achieve  more
favourable risk weights for interbank lending.
I would also like to acknowledge at this point the role of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy in
shifting the balance of the repo market. Since the onset of the crisis, the ECB has undertaken a
number of necessary and proportionate measures to ensure the efficacy of monetary policy. The
first measure relevant here was introduced to repair the transmission mechanism, which had
become impaired and threatened the singleness of monetary policy within the euro area.
Prior  to  the  crisis,  internal  trade  imbalances  in  the  euro  area  had  been  primarily  financed  via
transactions between country banking sectors. Following the onset of the crisis, the interbank
market became fragmented, with a marked reduction in cross-border transactions. It became
increasingly clear to the ECB that this impairment in the interbank market interrupted the even
transmission of monetary policy across the euro area. The ECB responded by introducing full
allotment – we provided as much liquidity as the market required at our main refinancing rate. By
statute we only lend against good collateral and so more lending by us means more demand for
collateral.
The other important monetary policy measure with regards the functioning of the repo markets is
the asset purchase programme (APP), and in particular the public sector purchase programme
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
(PSPP). It is worth recognising firstly that although the APP has led to a shrinking pool of liquid
securities,  it  has  also  resulted  in  a  net  increase  in  liquid  assets  through  bank  reserves  in
exchange of inter alia non-HQLA marketable securities.
But the APP has clearly reduced the available pool of L1 securities for other investors. To the
extent that non-banks seek to maintain their holdings of government securities, this is likely to
cause additional pressure on the repo market.
These monetary policy measures carried out by the Eurosystem have been necessary to ensure
the continued orderly transmission of monetary policy throughout the euro area and to provide
sufficient  stimulus  to  bring  inflation  back  to  our  objective.  They  have  also  been  proportionate
solutions to the scale of the problems they seek to solve.
The  ECB  is  aware  of  –  and  closely  monitors  –  the  potential  impact  of  its  monetary  policy
measures on market functioning. Indeed, as I mentioned earlier, full allotment was put in place
precisely because the market wasn’t functioning. But in assessing the impact of its policies, the
ECB  must  have  first  regard  to  its  primary  objective  of  price  stability.  Under  our  mandate,
considerations of the robustness of the financial system and market functioning are only relevant
once we have fulfilled that primary objective.
Nonetheless, in designing the APP programme, the ECB has implemented a number of features
designed to minimise the impact on market functioning. The hard legal constraints on issue and
issuer  limits  reduce  the  influence  the APP  has  on  particular  bonds.  Our  recent  widening  of
eligible maturities and removal of the DFR floor permit purchases to be spread more widely and
reduce pressure on specials. We have also put in place a number of securities lending facilities.
Recent  moves  to  improve  these  facilities,  including  the  use  of  cash  collateral,  have  been
3
received positively by market participants.
Future direction for the repo market
Having described the longer-term trends driving current conditions in the repo market, I would like
to spend the rest of my speech today discussing prospects for the future.
I would argue that the supply of safe assets will increase again over time. As I mentioned earlier,
the volume of safe assets is pro-cyclical. The economic recovery underway in the euro area will
strengthen government finances. Furthermore, once inflation is sustainably back to our objective,
monetary policy will normalise, reducing any additional strain our unconventional measures may
be placing on repo markets today.
The  LCR  and  NSFR  are  relatively  new  as  regulations,  and  the  exact  future  form  of  leverage
ratios is still not finalised. European banks are currently somewhat less advanced than their US
counterparts in re-optimising their business models in the face of these regulations. Yet already
Eurosystem contacts tell us that repo desks are being reorganised and integrated more tightly
into banks’ overall decisions on balance sheet and liquidity usage. Certainly a range of potential
tools exist, from tri-party repo, to trade compression, intra-day margining and so forth.
Regulation may also encourage a greater use of unsecured lending. With a potentially binding
leverage ratio, banks may shift their balance sheets towards more risk-weighted assets, trading
off capital encumbrance against balance sheet encumbrance. Such a shift would reverse the
current  trend  towards  more  secured  lending  in  the  interbank  market.  Furthermore,  as  the
economic  recovery  continues,  bank  profitability  will  increase,  bolstering  equity.  With  less
constrained  equity,  conditions  will  become  more  favourable  for  a  return  to  more  unsecured
lending.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Banks and other market participants report a decrease in market making activities and collateral
scarcity  in  repo-markets.  The  perception  of  a  challenging  environment  can  therefore  not  be
denied.
Pro-cyclical  market  reactions  during  and  after  the  financial  crisis  and  –  related  –  changes  in
banking  regulation  clearly  had  an  impact  on  the  functioning  of  the  repo  markets.  But  with  the
continued economic recovery market stress should fade and conditions for unsecured lending
might re-gain some attractiveness. Likewise, market players will adjust their business models
over time amid a new regulatory environment.
Regarding the ECB’s asset purchase program, two important points have to be made:
1.  Although  the APP  might  have  some  negative  side  effects  on  the  functioning  of  the  repo
market  as  compared  to  the  pre-crisis  levels,  other  more  potent  factors  were  at  work.  To
reduce spill-over effects the ECB has also introduced several mitigation measures.
2.  Even more important: the ECB has one mandate, which is to ensure price stability. Elevated
risks to its goal have made unconventional measures necessary on an unpreceded scale
and on a temporary basis. And they prove successful. Although we try to minimise negative
side effects, any of these considerations are without prejudice to the obligation to honour our
mandate.
3. 
1
2
3
Rates based on RepoFunds Germany, France, Italy and Spain.
CGFS  (2015),  ‘Regulatory  change  and  monetary  policy’,  CGFS  Papers  No.  54,  Committee  on  the  Global
Financial System, Bank for International Settlements.
ICMA (2017), Regulatory Policy Newsletter, January.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
