Andreas  Dombret:  Failing  or  likely  to  fail?  Putting  the  European
banking union to the test
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Deutsche Bundesbank's University of Applied Sciences, Hachenburg, 21 August 2017.
 1. Introduction
Professor Keller
Professors
Students at the Bundesbank’s University of Applied Sciences here in Hachenburg
Ladies and gentlemen
I would like you to join me today as I take a look at the state of the European banking union. The
students among you can breathe a sigh of relief: I’m not here to discuss committee structures or
test your knowledge of EU institutions, and there will be no quiz after I’ve finished talking. The
question that I would like to explore is one that is of interest to us and the general public alike:
does the European banking union – that “big new thing” in the history of banking supervision –
actually work?
Truth be told, such a fundamental question shouldn’t really need any prompting. Nevertheless, I
will address the question by examining four recent examples of institutions running into difficulties
in the European banking sector – and, to my mind, what better place to illustrate such a topic
than at the Bundesbank’s University of Applied Sciences?
To start, which cases am I referring to? First, Banco Popular Español, which was wound up in
June 2017 under the new European resolution rules. Second, Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena.
It  received  EU  approval  for  precautionary  recapitalisation,  a  procedure  under  exceptional
circumstances in which an injection of state capital does not result in an institution being deemed
“failing or likely to fail” or in it bearing the repercussions of such an assessment. My third and
fourth  examples  are  very  recent  –  just  two  months  ago,  two  Venetian  banks  were  liquidated
under Italy’s national insolvency regime. So, within a short space of time, we have seen three
different approaches to dealing with struggling banks in the euro area.
In  exploring  these  cases  today,  I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  delve  deeper  into  the
functioning of the banking union and to draw a handful of initial conclusions. I want to focus on
three topics in this regard:
first, the work of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM);
second,  the  role  of  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  and  the  national  insolvency
regimes;
third,  the  current  state  of  affairs  in  the  European  banking  sector,  which  is  not  to  be
overlooked in the context of the banking union.
2. Crisis situations – uncharted territory for the SSM
It  isn’t  for  nothing  that  ailing  banks  attract  so  much  public  attention.  This  is  because,  by  their
nature,  a  great  deal  of  money  is  at  stake.  That’s  precisely  why  declaring  that  an  institution’s
failure is imminent or inevitable – known in technical terms as “failing or likely to fail” – is the most
powerful weapon in the banking supervisors’ arsenal. It equates to forcefully bringing an end to an
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
institution as we know it. The all but inescapable consequence is either resolution under the new
European resolution rules or insolvency proceedings under national law. In economic terms, the
decision draws a line – at least temporarily – under the institution’s accounts. Losses arising
from business activities now need to be realised. And the value of assets in a gone concern –
that is to say, an institution that needs to be wound up – is almost always lower than that of those
in a going concern. It’s not least for this reason that banking supervisors should not be overly
hasty in classifying an institution as “failing or likely to fail”.
But there’s also an old saying that applies here: it may be far better for all parties concerned to
make a painful break rather than prolong the agony. Needlessly perpetuating the situation could
very well push up costs and losses. What’s more, “gambling for resurrection” – by which I mean
focusing on a failing institution’s unlikely prospects of recovery, which could leave creditors and
taxpayers footing an enormous bill if things come to a head – is not a viable option. There is no
room  for  wishful  thinking  here  –  and  that  applies  to  both  financial  institutions  and  their
supervisors.
All in all, one thing is clear: when it comes to the timing of “failing or likely to fail” verdicts, banking
supervisors  cannot  simply  arrange  these  around  the  premier  league  schedule.  A  lack  of
confidence  and  liquidity  can  force  the  supervisors’  hand  at  extremely  short  notice.  In  each
individual case, every single detail needs to be scrutinised so that a well-thought-out decision can
be made. In this regard, cooperation within the SSM and with the SRM has worked well in the
cases I have mentioned.
The use of precautionary recapitalisation, which I touched upon at the start of my speech, also
marks  a  step  into  uncharted  territory  for  European  supervisors.  This  is  enshrined  in  the  new
European  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  as  an  exceptional  measure  that
enables an institution to receive an injection of public funds without - as is generally envisaged -
being deemed “failing or likely to fail”.
Precautionary  recapitalisation  is  only  approved  under  certain  conditions.  In  particular,  the
institution must be deemed solvent, and the public funds may not be used to offset existing or
anticipated losses. Supervisors need to carefully examine whether these requirements are met.
Additionally,  the  European  Commission  has  to  decide  whether  the  granting  of  public  funds  is
compatible with EU state aid rules.
It’s a particularly sensitive issue because one of the fundamental objectives of the new resolution
rules is to shield taxpayers: it should be a bank’s shareholders and creditors who are on the hook
for unsatisfactory bank management and any losses that arise as a result, not taxpayers. Then
again, European legislators have accepted a serious disturbance in the economy of a member
state and risks to financial stability as grounds for government intervention to prop up solvent
institutions.  The  stringent  criteria  outlined  in  the  legislation  do  actually  need  to  be  fulfilled,
however.
In other words, these conflicting aims make it clear that precautionary recapitalisation cannot be
a  blueprint  for  averting  bank  crises.  Consequently,  precautionary  recapitalisation  is  defined  in
the BRRD as a purely exceptional measure. This is also my clear understanding of the term.
What is also clear is that, in each and every instance, shareholders and subordinated creditors
need to be bailed in before the government coffers are opened. With regard to Italy’s Monte dei
Paschi di Siena, what this means in concrete terms is that the institution’s capital base was first
bolstered by €4.5 billion by converting subordinated debt instruments into equity, with the Italian
government  then  injecting  an  additional  €3.9  billion.  However,  the  government  will  offer
compensation  to  retail  investors,  thereby  increasing  its  stake  in  the  bank.  The  ownership
structure will change as a result of the aid provided: legacy shareholders will lose out as their
stakes are diluted. By contrast, the Italian government will own up to 70 % of the institution. To
sum up, the state is providing assistance to an ailing bank and, as an investor, will be exposed to
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
any potential future losses.
Looking beyond this particular case, one thing is clear: while the use of public funds will be made
more difficult under the new resolution rules and will only be permitted subject to compliance with
certain criteria, it has not been taken off the table completely. Yet the fact that government aid
was provided to as many as three of the first four banks to run into difficulties cannot be in the
interest  of  European  legislators.  Our  resolution  regime  should  be  measured  against  how
effectively it shields national taxpayers – and I firmly believe that this should also be the goal of
national insolvency law as well.
Before  I  go  on  to  talk  about  the  actual  resolution  cases  in  greater  depth,  let  me  take  this
opportunity  to  draw  three  conclusions  from  the  crises  as  viewed  from  a  banking  supervisor’s
perspective.
First, it will not be possible to draw up a straightforward supervisory blueprint for dealing with
future crises. As a general rule, every crisis tends to be different and there is no “one size fits all”
approach to resolving them. We observed this recently in Italy and Spain. The institutions there
differ in terms of the reasons why they ran into difficulties, their positions in the banking market
and their standing in their respective economies. However, we must nevertheless learn specific
lessons from each individual case.
Second,  as  this  issue  concerns  appropriate,  tailored  solutions  –  and  therefore  discretionary
scope as well – efficient decision-making processes are required. In this context, coordination
between all of the institutional stakeholders plays a very important role. As crisis situations will
always be unique, we need to ensure that all decision-making factors are incorporated sensibly
and objectively.
Third, we need to grasp that banking supervision certainly can, and must, deliver far more than
dealing with acute difficulties in the banking sector. As a general rule, it kicks in far earlier by
ensuring compliance with the rules, thereby tackling unwelcome developments in good time.
European supervisors have set new standards as far as the last point is concerned. Capital add-
ons, for instance, which are set following the annual supervisory review process, have become
far more important than they once were. And that is as it should be.
Having learned from the crisis years, banking supervisors have strengthened their early warning
systems  and  early  intervention  capabilities.  Supervisors  now  go  beyond  the  scope  of  an
institution’s solvency and liquidity – these days, they normally also examine business models and
governance, as unwelcome developments in these areas could have an impact on earnings and
resilience  in  the  medium  term.  One  SSM  project  I  could  mention  here  explores  the  structural
reasons for a disproportionately large risk appetite, which some institutions were shown to have
in  the  past.  This  certainly  does  not  mean  that  we  are  looking  to  intervene  in  an  institution’s
business activities; instead, it is our aim to identify at an early stage and mitigate to the greatest
extent possible any developments that could pose a serious threat to a bank’s livelihood.
Imbalances in the banking sector, then, are an important testing ground for European banking
supervisors – yet everyday supervisory measures are equally as important, even if their success
cannot always be put into numbers as easily.
You can see this, for example, in the case of home country bias, a phenomenon which occurs
when national supervisors unintentionally allow their national interests to influence their work. And
it  is  precisely  this  trend  that  the  SSM  is  designed  to  counter.  It  is  not  so  much  a  case  of
supervisors  breaking  the  rules,  but  more  a  question  of  how  they  interpret  them,  yet  it  is  not
always possible to identify a home country bias in each individual case. The new supervisory
architecture is designed to counter this home country bias trend that national supervisors exhibit.
Supervisory teams consisting of staff members from several different countries and, of course,
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  key  role  of  the  ECB  have  forged  a  more  neutral  approach  and  a  more  level  supervisory
playing field. I consider this a very welcome development.
Dear students, I hope that my remarks, which touched on only a small part of the work of banking
supervisors in the new European era, have also managed to drum up some interest in our field of
work.  The  tasks  of  national  and  European  banking  supervisors  not  only  entail  a  high  level  of
responsibility, but are also very varied and challenging. I do have my own particular reasons for
saying this, however, not least as it is the specialists from the individual member states who
keep  the  European  supervisory  mechanism  up  and  running.  Germany  and,  in  particular,
the Bundesbank  contribute  over  28  %  of  the  total  headcount  of  supervisors  in  the  SSM.  We
therefore rate well qualified young professionals like yourselves very highly.
3. Resolution – what we have learned so far
Let us now take a look at the topic of resolution in the narrower sense. We all have unpleasant
memories  of  institutions  which  unfortunately  only  appeared  to  obey  the  laws  of  a  market
economy  and  our  regulatory  framework  when  times  were  good.  The  new  European  Single
Resolution  Mechanism,  or  SRM,  which  consists  of  new  rules,  a  new  institution  and  a  new
resolution  fund,  was  therefore  established  in  2015.  How  well  is  it  functioning?  What  have  we
learned in the first few years?
There is one thing that I would like to stress from the outset which is all too easily forgotten when
assessing the recent crises: neither in the case of the Spanish bank nor the Italian banks have
we  seen  lasting  spillover  effects  or  negative  repercussions  in  the  markets.  Branches  opened
their doors again on the next working day following the resolution – admittedly under a new name
but otherwise it was business as usual. The fact that it all went largely unnoticed is the most
remarkable thing about it, and that should by no means be taken for granted.
I would like to look a little closer at the resolution of Banco Popular Español in particular, which
was  the  first  financial  institution  to  be  resolved  under  the  SRM.  This  was  a  concrete  case  in
which the SRM achieved what some experts had even considered unimaginable up until then:
that a decision could be reached within just a matter of hours on the fate of a multi-billion-euro
financial  institution  with  a  countless  number  of  branches  –  and  that  without  any  negative
repercussions for the European or the Spanish financial system. Given the rapid pace at which
the liquidity situation deteriorated, the institution even had to be resolved during the week between
two normal working days. In this specific case, the fact that a purchase offer had already been
made  meant  that  it  was  possible  to  find  a  solution  to  the  crisis  with  comparatively  little
intervention. The management board and supervisory board of Banco Popular also acted in a
responsible manner.
The  case  of  the  two  Venetian  banks  was  at  least  just  as  challenging.  I  am  pleased  that  the
market exit of these two banks ultimately turned out to be a success. The precarious banks that
were causing us concern in the past no longer exist in their previous form. Unlike in the case of
Banco  Popular,  these  banks  were  not  resolved  in  accordance  with  European  rules,  but  were
liquidated under Italy’s national insolvency regime.
Here,  it  was  possible  to  wind  up  the  institutions  using  government  funds  as  the  European
resolution rules apply only to banks that are classed as being systemically important. The switch
from a European regime in crisis cases to a national regulatory framework consequently created
a whole new ball game.
One  requirement,  nonetheless,  was  that  the  European  state  aid  rules  be  adhered  to.
Consequently, the banks’ owners and their subordinated creditors, too, had to be bailed in. The
fact  that  substantial  amounts  of  taxpayers’  money  were  drawn  on  at  the  same  time  was,  of
course,  justified  from  a  legal  perspective.  However,  the  declared  objective  of  the  European
resolution rules was to keep the taxpayers’ contribution in bankruptcy cases to a minimum. In
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
order  to  ensure  that  national  taxpayers  are  adequately  protected,  it  is  therefore  essential  that
national insolvency rules be aligned with the European resolution rules as a matter of urgency. 
4. The current banking union environment – the most important details 
Ladies and gentlemen, the cited examples show that many things are working well in the banking
union, but there is still a lot to be done. In particular, right-sizing the bail-in of investors and other
creditors  under  national  insolvency  proceedings  is  a  process  which  has  by  no  means  been
stretched to its limits. This, however, is important if banks are to live up to their claim of being
fully-fledged members of our market economy. What this also means is that losses should not
be socialised, but rather that investors and creditors should personally be held responsible for
the risks arising from their decisions. I am convinced that we must press ahead along the path
that we are now on.
A debate on the banking union needs to address many details. This also includes taking a look at
the bigger picture. If we are concerned with the resilience and credibility of the new regime as a
whole, we must always be aware that the banking union was designed for a banking system
scarred by the crisis. We committed the European banking sector to “self-healing” from the very
outset.  To  this  end,  the  balance  sheets  of  the  large  euro-area  institutions  were  thoroughly
examined  prior  to  the  launch  of  the  new  oversight  body.  I  recall  valuation  adjustments  of
€48 billion and mandatory capital increases totalling €25 billion in the period from November 2014
to June 2015.
However, we were, of course, unable to foresee new burdens resulting from factors such as
persistently weak economic activity and knock-on effects of the crisis further down the line. Non-
performing  loans  are  still  saddling  banks  in  a  number  of  member  states.  The  level  of  non-
performing loans for EU banks currently stands at around €900 billion. These burdens were a
notable feature of the four most recent crises. Ultimately, self-healing does not happen overnight,
but is often a long and arduous process.
This  is  also  true  of  the  resolvability  of  credit  institutions. Although  the  new  rules  were  quickly
reflected  in  price  effects  for  subordinated  bonds  following  their  entry  into  force  –  which  is  an
indication that they had the desired steering effect from the very outset –, the transition into the
new world is by no means completed. The Single Resolution Fund, for example, is still in the
development  phase.  And  Europe’s  credit  institutions  are  still  building  up  their  MREL
and  TLAC  holdings  –  in  other  words  capital  that  is  to  be  made  available  for  bail-ins.  The
corresponding MREL requirements are expected to be determined by the resolution authorities
by the end of this year.
5. Conclusion
Let me come back to my initial question: is the European banking union working?
The takeaway from the recent crises is ambivalent. For sure, we can breathe a sigh of relief that
we were able to overcome four bank failures without any far-reaching consequences and that
ailing banks exited the market successfully. At the same time, we have to draw conclusions from
the recent crises in order to further strengthen the banking union.
In my opinion, closing the gap between national insolvency rules and European resolution rules is
a major issue that should be addressed as a matter of urgency. As sensible as it may seem to
deal with crises differently depending on the specific circumstances, certain basic principles do
need to be adhered to in a consistent manner. These include, for example, bailing in investors
and creditors as envisaged in the European resolution framework.  
In the discussion about the functional viability of the banking union, I would, however, like to warn
against making overly one-sided and generalised judgments. We can only strengthen the large-
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
scale “banking union” project if we are willing to devote ourselves to the specific problems and
not  let  up  until  they  have  been  fixed  for  good.  This  means  taking  account  of  the  individual
circumstances  –  both  for  the  four  cases  discussed  earlier  and  the  over  3,000  other  credit
institutions in the euro area. It also means accepting that the banking union cannot pull simple
solutions  out  of  a  hat  when  the  going  gets  tough.  The  high  level  of  non-performing  loans  in
Europe bears witness to the major challenges that still need to be overcome.
Thank you for your attention. I now look forward to our discussion on this topic.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
