Yannis  Stournaras:  Climate  change  -  challenges,  risks  and
opportunities
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  23rd  Annual
Conference of the European Association of Environmental and Resource Economists (EAERE)
Dinner, Athens, 30 June 2017.
 It is a great pleasure for me to be with you today on this occasion and have the opportunity to
share my thoughts on the environmental challenges that the world is facing. These challenges
are now more important than ever before. In the World Economic Forum report  for 2017, three
out of the five top risks, in terms of impact, are environmental and all three  of  them  relate  to
2
climate change .
1
Climate change and global warming are associated with human activities and in particular the
use of fossil fuels and carbon dioxide emissions. The current and projected implications for the
society and for sustainable development are such that we cannot continue with the «business as
usual»  scenario  –  we  need  to  mitigate  and  drastically  reduce  emissions  by  adopting  energy
efficiency  practices,  financing  "green"  energy,  promoting  energy  saving  investments,  using
energy saving techniques, conducting energy management and finally by boosting low carbon
circle economy.    
Yet,  the  character  and  severity  of  the  impact  from  climate  extremes  depend  not  only  on  the
extremes themselves, but also on exposure and vulnerability . Therefore, apart from mitigating,
we also need to manage risks and adapt to the changing climate. 
3
Traditional  environmental  problems  have  been  dealt  with  only  locally .  In  the  case  of  climate
change,  the  “mother  of  all  externalities” ,  it  is  the  emissions  of  all  sources  in  all  nations  that
determine the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Therefore, the problem is a
public good one  and solutions need to be universal. This provides motivation for collective global
action,  yet,  as  no  independent  action  will  solve  the  issue,  this  situation  creates  free-riding
incentives and difficulties with the compliance to international climate agreements, as currently
demonstrated by the Trump administration.
5
6
4
As much of the impact of climate change fall on future generations, poverty, equity and justice
are key issues for international climate change policy. Ethical issues are also raised as to how to
allocate the remaining carbon budget , how “the polluter pays” principle is implemented, and how
to commit the current generation to sustain the environment for the future one. As my colleague,
the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mark  Carney  stated  in  his  2016  speech  on  the  climate
paradox “climate change is a tragedy of the horizon which imposes a cost on future generations
8
that the current one has no direct incentive to fix”  .
7
9
In 2015 in Paris, countries committed themselves to cutting down carbon emissions and limit the
rise  in  average  global  temperature .  The  Paris Agreement  that  came  into  force  in  November
2016  brings  nations  into  a  common  cause  to  undertake  ambitious  efforts  to  combat  climate
change and adapt to its effects, with enhanced support to developing countries. To date, 148
countries have ratified the agreement and although there are no legally binding targets, countries
have agreed on a monitoring and reporting process that is binding and a 5-year reassessment of
10
the collective progress .
Yet,  research  shows  that  more  effort  and  commitment  is  required .  There  is  a  significant
acceleration  of  climate  action,  however,  current  targets  may  not  be  enough  to  keep  the
temperature rise below the 2°C limit and the world needs timely revision of national contributions
11
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
within a global framework of deep decarbonisation of national energy systems.
There are definitely significant risks as well as opportunities along the way: Physical risks that
arise  from  climate  related  events,  and  transition  risks  that  arise  from  the  decarbonisation
process.  In  this  process,  companies  might  suffer  costs,  valuation  losses  and  serious
disruptions.  But  opportunities  might  also  arise,  related  to  the  creation  of  new  products  of
renewable energy and investment in energy saving and new infrastructure.
Hence,  in  the  transition  to  a  low  carbon  economy,  disclosure  and  transparency  are  very
important.  These  will  allow  markets  to  lead  the  transition ,  price  the  cost  of  doing  business,
price  the  risk  that  relates  with  climate  change,  as  well  as  assess  the  value  of  new  business
opportunities. 
12
Working  towards  a  solution  to  the  problem  of  climate  change,  the  work  of  environmental
economists is of utmost importance.
Environmental  economics  has  had  a  major  contribution  towards  understanding  contemporary
environmental  and  resource  problems.  Also,  both  theory  and  applied  tools  of  environmental
economics  have  been  directing  policies  and  informing  decision-makers  in  addressing
environmental challenges, such as the creation of markets for pollutants or the instruments for
the conservation of ecosystem services.
Yet, there is still a lot to be done and the work of environmental economists will provide valuable
guidance along the way.
It is this kind of guidance that we are also endorsing at the Bank of Greece, where we have set
up an interdisciplinary committee of scientists to help us assess the impact of climate change
and inform policy-makers.
Since  2009,  working  alongside  climatologists,  physicists,  biologists,  engineers  and  social
scientists, environmental and energy economists have assessed the impact of climate change
for  the  Greek  economy  and  studied  the  economic,  social  and  environmental  implications  of
climate change in Greece. This work highlighted the wealth of Greece’s natural resources but it
mainly  exhibited  the  risks  to  the  country’s  natural  and  human  environment,  as  the  impact  of
climate change on all sectors of the national economy was found to be adverse and, in certain
cases, extremely adverse.
In 2011, it was estimated that under a scenario of inaction regarding climate change, Greek GDP
would drop by an annual 2% by 2050 and even more by 2100, while the total cumulative cost for
the Greek economy over the period extending till 2100 would amount to €701 billion  
13 14
.
Successful international mitigation policy was estimated to reduce the cost of inaction by 40%,
while  adaptation  policy,  necessary  as  a  damage  control  measure,  would  total  €67  billion.
However, the adaptation measures do not fully eliminate, but merely contain the damage from
climate change. Thus, the cumulative cost for the Greek economy of the residual damage from
climate  change  was  estimated  at  €510  billion   and  as  a  result,  the  total  cost  for  the  Greek
economy  under  the Adaptation  Scenario  is  the  sum  of  the  cost  incurred  by  the  economy  on
account of the adaptation measures and the cost of the reduced damage from climate change;
16
this sum was estimated at €577 billion .
15
17
According to a vulnerability assessment
 which attempted to quantify and rank the anticipated
climate  risks  for  the  Greek  territory,  agriculture  is  the  sector  expected  to  be  most  severely
affected by climate change in Greece, while the impact on tourism and coastal systems will have
major  consequences  on  household  income  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Of  particular
significance  is  also  the  water  reserves  sector,  given  its  implications  for  agriculture  and  water
supply.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Our work to date has emphasized the need for a concrete adaptation policy that would cover all
sectors  and  implemented  in  a  timely  manner  so  as  to  mitigate  the  likely  adverse  effects  of
climate change. It is for this reason that under a Memorandum of Cooperation signed with the
Greek  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Energy  and  the Academy  of Athens,  we  have  worked  on
Greece’s  National  Climate  Change  Adaptation  Strategy  and  we  are  currently  developing  a
proposal  specifying  its  implementation.  This  Strategy  sets  out  the  general  objectives,  guiding
principles and implementation tools of an effective and growth-oriented adaptation strategy in line
with EU directives and international experience. Furthermore, it is the first step of a continuous
and  flexible  process  for  planning  and  implementing  the  necessary  adjustment  measures  at
national,  regional  and  local  levels  and  aspires  to  leverage  the  capabilities  of  Greece’s  public
authorities,  economy  and  society  at  large,  with  the  ambition  to  address  the  impact  of  climate
change in the coming years.
Research so far confirms that there needs to be a robust strategy and an action framework in
order to address current environmental challenges, climate change and sustainability as a whole.
I believe that the work you are presenting these days in Athens has already shed some new light
on these challenges and I would like to congratulate the European Association of Environmental
and Resource Economists and the organizers for a successful conference.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
reports.weforum.org/global-risks-2017/the-matrix-of-top-5-risks-from-2007-to-2017/
Ibid, the three risks are extreme weather events (1), major natural disasters (2) and failure of climate change
mitigation and adaptation (3)
IPCC, 2012: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A
Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
For example, the air pollution in a Chinese city had no direct impact on a European city.
Tol, R.S.J. (2009), The Economic Effects of Climate Change, in Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 23, No 2,
Spring 2009, pp. 29–51, www.ssc.wisc.edu/~walker/wp/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/Tol2009.pdf
IPCC 
Mitigation, www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/tar/wg3/index.php?idp=383
Assessment 
Report: 
(2001) 
Third 
Climate 
Change,  Working 
Group 
III:
IPCC (2007), Climate Change 2007: Working Group I: The Physical Science Basis, 7.3.2.2 Uptake of CO2 by
Natural  Reservoirs  and  Global  Carbon  Budget, www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/ch7s7-3-2-
2.html
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech923.pdf
The 
at unfccc.int/files/essential_background/convention/application/pdf/english_paris_agreement.pdf
Agreement 
Paris 
available
unfccc.int/paris_agreement/items/9485.php
Spencer, T., Pierfederici, R. (2015), Beyond the numbers: Understanding the transformation induced by INDCs,
Studies  N°05/2015,  Iddri  –  MILES  Project  Consortium,  available  at: www.iddri.org/Publications/Beyond-the-
numbers-Understanding-the-transformation-induced-by-INDCs
“…financial disclosure is essential to a market-based solution to climate change. A properly functioning market
will  price  in  the  risks  associated  with  climate  change  and  reward  firms  that  mitigate  them. As  its  impact
becomes more commonplace and public policy responses more active, climate change has become a material
risk that isn’t properly disclosed.” in Carney, M., Bloomberg, M., (2016), How to make a profit from defeating
climate 
available
a
t www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/bloomberg-carney-profit-from-climate-change-right-
information-investors-deliver-solutions
14/12/2016, 
Guardian, 
change, 
The 
expressed as GDP loss relative to base year GDP, at constant prices of 2008
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
14
15
16
17
CCISC (2011), The environmental, economic and social impacts of climate change in Greece, Bank of Greece,
p.454 available at www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/ClimateChange_FullReport_bm.pdf
at constant prices of 2008, over the period till 2100
total cumulative cost through 2100, at constant prices of 2008
the vulnerability assessment is presented on the CCISC (2015), National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
(NCCAS), 
available
at www.bankofgreece.gr/BogDocumentEn/National_Adaptation_Strategy_Excerpts.pdf 
Greece, 
Bank 
9-13 
pp. 
of 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
