Lawrence Schembri: Getting down to business - investment and the
economic outlook
Remarks by Mr Lawrence Schembri, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Greater
Vancouver Board of Trade, Vancouver, British Columbia, 21 March 2017.
I would like to thank Russell Barnett for his help in preparing this speech.
Introduction
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  here  today.  My  colleagues  and  I  routinely  consult  the
business community, and I welcome the opportunity to share our economic outlook with you and
listen to your views. This consultation process is an important ingredient in our policy making.
To  achieve  our  monetary  policy  goal  of  low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation  at  the  2  per  cent
target rate, our economy should operate at, or close to, its productive capacity. However, most
advanced economies, including ours, have been running well below full capacity since the Great
Recession of 2008–09 owing to a persistent deficiency in demand. 
After years of serial disappointment, recent data suggest that the recovery in the global economy
appears to be gaining traction. Notably, growth in the US economy is expected to remain solid,
supported by robust fundamentals, including a strong labour market with gradually rising wages.
For  the  Canadian  economy,  estimates  of  the  growth  of  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  from
Statistics  Canada  for  the  fourth  quarter  of  2016  came  in  somewhat  stronger  than  we  had
anticipated  in  our  January Monetary  Policy  Report (MPR).  While  the  headline  number  is
welcome  news,  a  more  detailed  analysis  suggests  continued  scope  for  caution.  Exports
continue to face ongoing competitiveness challenges. And despite recent gains in employment,
subdued growth in wages and hours worked continues to reflect persistent economic slack in
Canada, in contrast to the United States.
In  particular,  one  component  of  GDP  that  remains  concerning  is  business  investment.  While
investment in the energy sector now appears to be stabilizing after a painful adjustment to the
decline in oil and other commodity prices that began in 2014, overall business investment in the
economy  remains  weak.  Statistics  Canada  also  reported  that  non-residential  business
investment spending contracted by more than 15 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2016 and by
almost 8 per cent for the year as a whole.
The  current  elevated  level  of  geopolitical  uncertainty,  and  the  related  prevailing  uncertainties
around 
this  continued
underperformance in business investment. Therefore, it is still too early to assume that the worst
is behind us.
the  economic  outlook,  are 
likely  contributing 
importantly 
to 
So business investment is the topic I want to focus on today. It is, I am sure, top of mind for
many of you, given the strength of business activity here in British Columbia. It is also top of mind
for  the  Bank  of  Canada.  Obtaining  an  up-to-date  and  better  understanding  of  the  investment
intentions  of  the  business  community  is  critical  for  our  outlooks  for  economic  activity  and
inflation, which inform our monetary policy decisions.
Although business investment represents a relatively small share of GDP—about 12 per cent, on
average—it is a key economic indicator that we track closely for three main reasons. First, it
reflects  your  expectations  about  the  future.  Therefore,  it  is  an  economic  bellwether—you  will
invest  only  when  you  are  relatively  certain  that  the  demand  for  your  goods  and  services  will
remain  firm  or  increase.  Second,  fluctuations  in  business  investment  can  drive  the  business
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
cycle—roughly 50 per cent of the movements in quarterly GDP during the Great Recession and
its aftermath were due to shifts in business investment. And third, investment adds to our stock
of capital and increases the level of “potential output” or productive capacity—the level of output
our economy can produce sustainably without generating inflationary or disinflationary pressures.
My talk consists of three main sections. I’ll start with an overview of the cyclical and structural
forces affecting investment. Then I’ll review the impacts of these forces on investment in Canada
since the 2008–09 recession, especially the period since mid-2014. Finally, I’ll discuss our base-
case or most likely outlook for investment and the economy and our assessment of the risks to
inflation.
Investment: cyclical and structural forces
Cyclical forces
As I mentioned, business investment is a small and relatively volatile component of GDP, and
investment  across  business  sectors  tends  to  crest  and  trough  like  the  tides  in  response  to
shocks to demand. This ebb and flow reflects two related factors. First, investment projects are
often large, require irreversible sunk costs, and take time to build and operate. Undertaking them
depends on expectations of future demand. Second, the expectations of individual firms are often
influenced  by  the  behaviour  of  other  firms  and  perceptions  of  overall  business  confidence.
Consequently,  common  movements  in  expectations  can  become  self-fulfilling.  If  many  firms
invest  together,  they  will  collectively  boost  demand  for  their  products.  The  famous  British
economist  John  Maynard  Keynes  called  these  shared  psychological  forces  “animal  spirits,”
1
which he described as the “spontaneous urge to action rather than inaction.”
When these spirits are aroused and businesses start to see demand strengthening, economic
momentum  accelerates.   As  sales  improve  and  profits  rise,  businesses  become  more
confident. As  a  result,  they  invest  in  machinery,  equipment  and  buildings  to  expand  capacity.
Investment  expenditures  raise  employment,  household  income  and  spending,  which,  in  turn,
boost demand and further stimulate businesses to invest.
2
The other factor that promotes the cyclical flows in investment spending is depreciation. Over
time, capital assets depreciate or become obsolete and need to be replaced. During periods of
weak  or  uncertain  demand,  firms  typically  delay  their  reinvestment  decisions.   However,  they
can do so for only so long. Thus, when it appears that the economic tide is turning, firms will take
4
the opportunity to reinvest, and their collective actions will amplify the economic upswing.
3
In  practice,  these  psychological  and  economic  forces  often  work  in  tandem  and  are  self-
reinforcing.
Structural forces
For the structural forces, or long-term determinants of the demand for capital and investment, it
is useful to think about a typical firm’s production process. Firms combine labour, capital and
technology to produce goods and services. Therefore, demographic forces that affect the growth
of the labour force will also affect the demand for capital. For example, faster labour force growth
will encourage firms to invest not only to meet greater demand but also to equip these additional
workers with machines and other capital to raise  their  productivity.   The  rate  of  technological
progress  is  also  a  key  factor,  since  a  faster  pace  of  innovation  raises  the  return  on  each
additional  unit  of  capital,  stimulating  firms  to  invest  more.  Indeed,  fresh  investment  often
embodies new technology and serves to further increase productivity.
5
The composition of investment matters too. The nature of the production process determines the
amount and type of capital (and investment) required. Services, for example, generally require
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
less investment than oil sands or motor vehicle production. Thus, the ongoing expansion of the
service sector means we may see a shift from traditional forms of investment in structures, such
as factories and heavy machinery, toward investment in intellectual property, such as software
6
and research and development, as well as in human capital.
And  public  investment  can  complement  and  thereby  enhance  the  productivity  of  private
investment. High-quality infrastructure in the form of transportation systems, power-generation
facilities  and,  more  recently,  telecommunication  networks  (some  of  which  may  be  provided
privately) are essential to modern production processes, especially given the accelerating digital
7
transformation of the global economy.
Business investment since the great recession
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  business  investment  collapsed  during  the  Great  Recession,  and  its
much-weaker-than-expected recovery since, despite historically low financing rates, has been a
8
major source of disappointment in advanced economies.
The  challenge  for  policy-makers,  including  us  at  the  Bank,  is  to  assess  how  much  of  the
weakness in business investment reflects the dynamics of the business cycle and how much is
due  to  structural  forces.  This  distinction  is  important  for  our  projections  for  demand  and  for
potential output or supply, which are critical to our monetary policy decision.
Focusing  on  Canada,  let’s  consider  the  possible  impacts  of  cyclical  and  structural  forces  on
investment over this period.
Two  key  cyclical  factors  have  affected  business  investment  in  Canada  since  the  Great
Recession: sharp movements in commodity prices and the subdued pace of the US recovery.
Although  the  collapse  in  investment  was  as  acute  in  Canada  as  it  was  in  other  advanced
economies, Canadian business investment bounced back relatively quickly, as the oil and gas
sector benefited from a sizable rebound in commodity prices (Chart 1). Nowhere was this more
apparent than in investments in non-residential structures, which by the end of 2010 had already
surpassed their pre-crisis peak (Chart 2). Moreover, this had positive spillovers for investment in
industries with strong connections to the commodity sector, even though we were continuing to
see many firms in other industries closing their doors.
  3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
 By the middle of 2014, the level of Canadian investment had grown to 15 per cent above its pre-
crisis peak. Then the oil price shock hit. Prices plummeted from above US$100 a barrel in the
first half of 2014 to around US$35 a barrel by the end of 2015. This set off a complex set of
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
adjustments  to  the  Canadian  economy,  including  a  significant  depreciation  of  the  Canadian
9
dollar, that are still at play today.
The Bank estimates that over the past two years the level of investment in the oil and gas sector
alone has declined by almost 50 per cent (Chart 3). In turn, sectors linked to the oil and gas
industry curtailed their investment decisions. Consequently, investment in Canada has declined
by more than 20 per cent since the middle of 2014.
The second cyclical factor that has had a major impact on our exports and business investment
is the protracted recovery of the US economy—the slowest in the postwar period.
 When oil
and other commodity prices rose in the years before the 2014 oil price shock, so did our dollar,
making  our  non-commodity  exports  to  the  United  States  less  competitive  and  reinforcing  the
ongoing shift from manufacturing to services. As I mentioned earlier, this is likely reducing the
level of investment.  
10
Now, let’s look at the structural factors that affected business investment during this period. I’ll
focus on two: demographics and productivity growth.
Population aging under way across most advanced economies has led to a marked slowdown in
labour  force  growth,  and  this  has  been  a  strong  headwind  to  investment.  In  Canada  and  the
United States, for example, the annual growth rate of the labour force slowed from around 1 1/4
per cent in 2006 to less than 1/2 per cent in 2016.
 This decline has reduced potential output
growth and investment demand.
11
Low  productivity  growth  since  2007  has  also  been  a  headwind  on  business  investment.
However, while demographic shifts are fairly predictable, it is less clear how much of the decline
in productivity growth reflects a structural change and how much is a cyclical response to the
subdued recovery. For example, the loss of existing firms and the low creation rate of new firms
during and after the Great Recession have not only directly reduced investment but also impaired
12
the dynamism of the private sector, causing persistent, adverse effects on productivity growth.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
All  of  these  challenges  have  increased  uncertainty  about  the  strength  of  future  demand  and
weighed  on  business  confidence. As  a  result,  Canadian  firms  have  acted  cautiously  in  their
investment decisions, despite operating close to capacity in some industries. In some cases,
they have met any increases in demand by hiring more labour.
So that’s how we got to where we are. Let me now take you through our most recent economic
outlook for Canada.
The outlook for the economy and investment
Let  me  start  by  making  two  important  points  from  our  January Monetary  Policy  Report  and
March 1st policy rate announcement.
First, our outlook since mid-2016 for gradually increasing global growth is largely consistent with
what we have seen in the data.
Second, heightened concerns about prospective protectionist measures mean that we should
not  presume  that  the  economic  disappointments  we  have  experienced  since  the  Great
Recession are over. 
That  said,  the  adjustment  to  the  decline  in  commodity  prices  is  progressing,  and  activity  in
resource-related industries appears to have bottomed out.
Real GDP growth is expected to pick up from 1.4 per cent in 2016 to slightly above 2.0 per cent
in  2017  and  2018,  with  the  expansion  of  the  service  sector  underpinning  rising  employment,
household incomes and consumption.
The strengthening US and global economies and the federal fiscal stimulus in Canada are also
expected to support exports and domestic demand. Financial conditions remain accommodative
for investment, despite a modest increase in longer-term borrowing costs since October.
Against this backdrop, investment is expected to slowly strengthen. Recent data on oil rig activity
and the capital expenditure plans of oil and gas firms suggest that investment in the sector has
begun to increase this year. Meanwhile, the growth of the service sector and a modest expansion
in exports should continue to support moderate investment growth in other sectors in 2017 and
2018.  
Inflation is projected to be near 2 per cent through 2017 and 2018 as the temporary effects of
higher consumer energy prices and lower food prices dissipate and economic slack is absorbed.
Risks to inflation
The outlook for inflation is subject to a number of risks that the Bank identifies as important. Let’s
start with two risks that could raise inflationary pressures and that are particularly significant for
investment.
Stronger GDP growth in the United States
The ongoing US recovery, the new US administration’s decision to restart the approval process
for the Keystone XL pipeline and other energy projects, and further policy measures, including tax
reform,  deregulation  and  infrastructure  spending,  could  boost  both  demand  and  business
confidence, igniting animal spirits and leading to an acceleration in the rates of investment, firm
creation  and  innovation.  Stronger  US  household  spending  and  public  and  private  investment
would have positive spillovers for Canadian exports and investment.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Higher commodity prices
Recently the prices of non-energy commodities have drifted higher, rising by roughly 2.7 per cent
since we published our January Monetary Policy Report. If they were to continue to strengthen,
this  would  improve  Canada’s  terms  of  trade,  wealth,  and  hence  household  spending  and
business investment.
Now, let’s look at two risks that could exert downward pressure on inflation.
A shift toward protectionist trade policies
The  new  US  administration  and  some  political  leaders  in  other  jurisdictions  have  espoused
policies  that  are  inward  looking,  although  precise  measures  remain  to  be  determined.  Such
protectionist  policies  would  dampen  global  trade  and  economic  growth  and  either  directly  or
indirectly reduce Canadian exports and business investment. They could also restrain or reverse
the  ongoing  process  of  global  economic  integration,  most  notably  the  development  of  global
value chains, which has supported growth in recent decades.
Sluggish business investment in Canada
The  disappointing  performance  of  business  investment  to  date  could  reflect  more  sustained
structural factors, such as slowing labour force growth, low productivity growth and regulatory
obstacles.  Over  time,  weaker  investment  growth  would  reduce  capital  deepening  and  lower
poten​tial output growth.
Conclusion
Let me wrap up with three points.
First, the decline in oil and other commodity prices since mid-2014 has dramatically altered the
paths of business investment in Canada and the United States. The two countries are now at
different points in their respective business cycles (Chart 4 and Chart 5). Although the Canadian
economy  has  made  good  progress  adjusting  to  the  oil  price  shock,  material  slack  in  our
economy remains, in contrast to the US economy, which is approaching its productive capacity.
In  our  March  statement  we  indicated  that  our  current  monetary  policy  stance  remained
appropriate to achieve our 2 per cent inflation target on a sustainable basis by around the middle
of  2018,  whereas  US  authorities  have  now  begun  to  tighten.  Our  economic  projection  will  be
updated in the April Monetary Policy Report, and we will review the stance of monetary policy at
that time.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Second, recent economic data are largely consistent with our outlook of a gradual strengthening
in  global  economic  growth.  However,  uncertainty  remains  elevated  because  of  prospective
policies  that  put  at  risk  the  progress  made  in  recent  decades  to  liberalize  trade  and  foster
economic integration.
Canada, however, has resisted this protectionist tilt. We have just concluded a major free trade
agreement with the European Union and are working toward lowering barriers to internal trade.
We view these measures, as well as the recent changes to immigration policy,
  as  positive
steps that will increase growth over the medium-to-long term.
13
Third, and finally, I am sure many of you are considering whether this is the right time to invest
and  build  your  business.  Such  decisions  are  never  easy,  but  at  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we  are
committed  to  reducing  the  uncertainty  you  face  and  helping  you  make  the  best  possible
investment  decisions  by  achieving  our  monetary  policy  goal  of  low,  stable  and  predictable
inflation.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money (London: Macmillan, 1936).
American  economist  Paul  Samuelson  developed  the  multiplier-accelerator  effect  to  model  these  cyclical
movements.  See  P.  A.  Samuelson,  “Interactions  Between  the  Multiplier  Analysis  and  the  Principle  of
Acceleration,” Review of Economics and Statistics 21, no. 2 (1939):75–78.
Uncertainty increases the option value of waiting before incurring the sunk cost of investment projects. For
information, see A. K. Dixit and R. S. Pindyck, Investment Under Uncertainty (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1994).
Another factor that can amplify volatility in business investment over the cycle is the financial-accelerator effect.
The balance sheets of firms improve when they experience rising sales and profits, which in turn gives them
easier access to financing, and under better terms, thereby leading to more investment. See B. Bernanke, M.
Gertler and S. Gilchrist, “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in Handbook of
Macroeconomics, Volume 1, eds. John Taylor and Michael Woodford (Elsevier, 1999).
Faster labour force growth will also lower wages relative to the cost of capital, which will cause firms at the
margin to substitute labour for capital, partially offsetting the positive impact on investment demand from the
increase in the labour force.
See S. S. Poloz, “From Hewers of Wood to Hewers of Code: Canada’s Expanding Service Economy” (Speech to
the C.D. Howe Institute, Toronto, Ontario, 28 November 2016).
W. Dong, J. Fudurich and L. Suchanek, “The Digital Economy—Insight from a Special Survey with IT Service
Exporters,” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper No. 2016–21 (November 2016).
International  Monetary  Fund, World  Economic  Outlook:  Uneven  Growth—Short-  and  Long-Term
Factors (Washington, April 2015).
See L. Patterson, “Adjusting to the Fall in Commodity Prices: One Step at a Time” (Speech to the Edmonton
Chamber of Commerce, Edmonton, Alberta, 30 March 2016).
While Canadian exports have grown by about 4 per cent per year since the Great Recession of 2008–09, that
growth rate is well below the rate of recovery for exports in the wake of previous recessions. For example,
exports grew nearly 8 per cent per year over a similar length of time during the recoveries from the recessions of
1981–82 and 1990–91. See L. Schembri, “Wood, Wheat, Wheels and the Web: Historical Pivots and Future
Prospects for Canadian Exports” (Speech to the Atlantic Institute for Market Studies, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 8
November 2016).
For the purpose of this speech, I am defining “labour force” as the working-age population, those aged 15–64.
See R. A. Decker, J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin and J. Miranda, “Declining Business Dynamism: Implications for
Productivity?” Hutchins Center Working Paper No. 23 (September 2016).
The target for admission of immigrants has been increased from a range of 260,000 to 285,000 in 2015 to
300,000  for  2016  and  beyond.  In  addition,  an  Express  Entry  system  was  introduced  in  January  2015,  and
subsequently widened, to speed up the processing of applications for permanent residency through different
programs, such as the Federal Skilled Worker Program, Federal Skilled Trades Program and the Canadian
Experience Class. And on 9 March 2017, the federal government announced a new initiative to help high-growth
Canadian companies attract specialized global talent by providing more predictable, streamlined reviews and
approvals for work permits. These changes are expected to add to labour force growth.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
