    
 
Brexit and the pound 
 
Speech given by 
Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor Monetary Policy 
   Imperial College, London 
23 March 2017 
   
I’d like to thank Matt Corder, Chris Salmon, Michael Saunders, Greg Thwaites and Anthony Veal, 
along with other colleagues, for their helpful comments and assistance.  I reserve particular thanks for 
my Economic Advisor Alina Barnett. 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
    
 
Introduction and summary 
 The vote to leave the EU led to a big drop in sterling’s exchange rate. One consequence is a rise in import 
prices and a squeeze on households’ real income. We may already be seeing the impact of that squeeze on 
retail spending, which in real terms fell quite sharply around the turn of the year.  
 While it’s hit the income of households, however, the depreciation has come as a boon for many exporters. 
In sterling terms goods export prices rose 12% through the course of last year. This will significantly have 
boosted exporters’ profitability and with it the incentive to invest in extra capacity.      
 In general, it’s not really right – not enough at least – to think about the impact of a change in the exchange 
rate in isolation. Asset prices are volatile in the short run, sometimes inexplicably so. But over time they tend 
to move for a reason. They’re driven by deeper things that can have important effects of their own. To get the 
full picture you need to take both into account, not just the partial impact of a change in the exchange rate 
but those of its underlying drivers as well.  
 Take sterling’s fall in 2008 and 2009. One plausible explanation was that the financial sector is more 
important for the UK – notably its exports and the government’s tax receipts – than for other countries. So its 
economy and public finances were more vulnerable to the global financial crisis. The depreciation helped to 
cushion these effects but it wasn’t enough to outweigh them. The downturn was no less severe here than 
elsewhere, notwithstanding sterling’s fall.   
 Sterling’s more recent decline was clearly prompted by the referendum result. It also seems likely that the 
foreign exchange market has decided the consequences are negative. The most plausible explanation for 
the depreciation is that, in the eyes of the market, leaving the EU will make exporting harder and more costly. 
To help compensate the currency needs to be cheaper.  
 There are many important differences with 2008/09, of course. One is this: Brexit hasn’t happened yet. Back 
then sterling’s fall happened alongside its cause. On this occasion the depreciation reflects beliefs about a 
change in the UK’s future trading arrangements, but it’s acting on an economy where those arrangements 
are for the time being unchanged. The result – higher prices and profits but unchanged rules and costs – 
represents something of a sweet spot for exporters and businesses that compete with imports.   
 How they respond is one important determination of economic growth this year. Usually, one of the more 
positive aspects of an exchange-rate depreciation is that, by raising their profitability, it encourages the 
expansion of firms in the tradable sector. With the world economy in better health than for some time, there 
is certainty every incentive to do that today. On this occasion that response might be more muted than usual, 
however, because it’s not clear how long the sweet spot will last. If the currency market is right the UK’s 
future trading relationships will be less favourable; if it’s too pessimistic sterling is likely to rebound. Either 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
   
 
way, future returns in the tradable sector may not be as healthy as they are right now. This may act as 
something of a deterrent to longer-term, sunk-cost investments in that sector.       
 In what follows I’ll begin by looking at sterling and what economics has to say about its reaction to the 
referendum result. I’ll then say something about how depreciations work in small open economies, in 
particular their impact on profitability and investment in the tradable sector. There’s a short concluding 
section.  
 Sterling’s response to the EU referendum: some exchange-rate economics 
 So let’s begin with the depreciation and its proximate cause, the outcome of referendum. The link between 
the two was clear long before the vote itself. In the months leading up to June 23 there was a tight 
correlation between the value of the currency and the perceived likelihood of a “remain” vote (Chart 1).  
 That’s why the MPC, in conditioning its May 
2016 forecasts on that outcome, assumed a 
Chart 1: Sterling sensitive to expected result well 
before the referendum itself 
higher path for the exchange rate. It’s also why 
the Committee suggested there might be a 
“sharp correction” in sterling’s value in the event 
of a leave vote. And in the event that’s what we 
got. On June 23 and 24 sterling fell further 
against the dollar than over any two-day period 
since the devaluation of 1967.  
 You didn’t need any economics to make this 
prediction – the relationship in in Chart 1 was 
enough. But you probably do need some 
economics if you want to understand why the 
currency reacted this way. While we don’t know 
Source: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream, Betfair 
 precisely what’s in the collective mind of the  
foreign exchange market, in my view there are two broad possibilities: Brexit is expected either to weaken 
domestic demand or raise the cost of exporting.   
      
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
   
 
To understand these effects remember first what the real exchange rate is: the relative price of consumption 
here compared with that in our trading partners1. 
 Suppose you split consumption into stuff that can only be produced domestically (“non-tradables” like homes 
or haircuts) and things that can also be imported from abroad (“tradables” such as holidays and cars). This 
distinction is important because you’d expect prices of traded goods and services to move reasonably 
closely across countries (I’ll return to this point later). If so, it turns out you can re-express the real exchange 
rate in terms of another relative price, that of non-traded to traded output2: 
 𝜀 ≈
𝑝𝑁𝑇 𝑝𝑇
⁄  
        [1] 
So when things happen that push up this relative price, whether on the demand or the supply side of an 
economy, the real exchange rate will tend to move in the same direction.  
 Take domestic demand first. The material distinction between non-traded and tradable output is that, 
whereas the first can only be supplied domestically, the second is also produced elsewhere: its overall 
supply is more “elastic”. New houses can only be built by domestically located firms; cars are made 
everywhere.  
 So even a general increase in domestic demand will put relatively more pressure on the resources used to 
produce non-tradables as their global supply is more limited. As a result their relative price will tend to rise in 
domestically led expansions and to fall in contractions. This is illustrated in an extremely stylised way in 
Chart 2. You can think of the appreciation, in this case, as the economy’s way of tempering the effects on 
relative demand and, at the same time, encouraging resources to move where they’re needed. If domestic 
demand strengthens, the resulting rise in the exchange rate reduces returns in the tradable sector and raises 
them in the non-traded sector, drawing investment from the first to the second.3  
 This isn’t just theory. We know, for example, that fiscal expansions tend to be associated with an 
appreciating exchange rate4. More generally real exchange rates tend to be pro-cyclical. Chart 3 plots the 
relationship for the UK, with both lines – sterling’s real exchange rate and domestic demand growth – plotted 
                                                      
1 I’m interested here in the real forces driving the exchange rate. The nominal rate, e = εP*/P, where P* and P are price levels at home 
and abroad respectively, also depends on relative inflation rates. And in the shorter run, when those prices are sticky, monetary events 
can and do affect real exchange rates. But over time, the real exchange rate depends more on non-monetary things.  And in this 
particular instance, sterling’s fall had essentially nothing to do with differences in monetary policy (as measured, for instance, by shifts in 
relative short-term interest rates). Note too that, judging by the behaviour of forward inflation rates, financial markets too consider this to 
be a real phenomenon: five years ahead, the expected value of eP/P* is around 16% lower than it was at the start of 2016.  
2 This ratio then has to be divided by the same ratio in our trading partners.  Obviously for every domestic shock described here, the 
exchange rate is affected symmetrically, and in the opposite direction by the same phenomenon in the rest of the world. 
3 The ease with which this happens is what determines the slope of the supply curve in Charts 2 and 4. In the limit, if resources can 
move seamlessly and costlessly between sectors, the supply curve is flat. But this reallocation could take a long time. Empirically, over 
cyclical horizons, the correlation between exchange rates and demand disturbances is clear.   
4 Arguably, the recent appreciation of the US dollar owes something to the expectation that the incoming administration will loosen fiscal 
policy.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
   
 
as four-year moving averages. The graph also illustrates quite how weak the currency is at the moment (the 
green dot on the right-hand side) given the recent robustness of domestic demand growth (the blue dot).  
 Among other things this framework has important implications for the link between exchange rates and 
“imbalances”. The UK has periodically experienced episodes where the exchange rate is strong, the external 
balance deteriorates and, on the production side of the economy, the traded sector gets “crowded out”. One 
often hears that all this is the “consequence” of an “over-valued exchange rate”, as if that were some 
arbitrary, unexplainable thing.  
 Chart 2: Stronger domestic demand tends to 
push up the exchange rate 
Chart 3: UK data bear this out 
   Source: ONS and Thomson Reuters Datastream 
 But in these situations the exchange rate is more symptom than cause: the underlying driver is relatively 
strong growth in domestic demand5. And it’s this that jointly pushes up both the value of currency and the 
trade deficit6.  Indeed I think this helps explain to explain why sterling appreciated so strongly after 2012 (and 
until last year): relative to their respective incomes, domestic demand grew much more strongly in the UK 
than among its main trading partners in continental Europe.    
 There’s a limit to the duration of financial deficits, at an aggregate as well as an individual level. It was 
always unlikely that the UK could finance a 5%-of-GDP current account deficit indefinitely and the market 
would presumably have anticipated a closure at some point, partly via weaker growth of domestic demand. 
But one possibility, regarding sterling’s recent behaviour, is that the foreign exchange market believes that 
leaving the EU will hasten the correction of these imbalances. If, for as long as it lasts, financing the deficit 
                                                      
5 The word “relatively” is important here – what matters is the behaviour of domestic demand compared with that in other countries. If 
demand weakens in other countries the home country’s exchange rate will still appreciate even if nothing happens to domestic savings 
rates. [More here on global imbalances]  
6 For a thorough treatment of the relationship between imbalances and the exchange rate – and specifically the chain of causation 
running from the former to the latter – see Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2007). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
   
 
relies on “the kindness of strangers” (as the Governor once described it) perhaps the foreign exchange 
market thinks those strangers will be less generous to a UK outside the EU. International capital markets 
might require a higher premium for sterling finance. If so, this would slow the growth of domestic demand 
that much earlier, accelerate a rebalancing of the economy and depress the fair value of the exchange rate7.  
 While possible in principle, I’m not convinced this is the main explanation for sterling’s reaction to the 
referendum result. The currency has remained weak even in the face of robust consumption growth since 
that date. And if the foreign exchange market had anticipated a higher cost of finance for sterling borrowers 
after Brexit you’d probably have seen the same expectation in other financial markets – a steeper yield 
curve, perhaps, or higher premia in UK banks’ funding markets. That hasn’t really happened.  
 Chart 4: Weaker productivity in tradable 
sector depresses the exchange rate 
 
 
 
SNT /ST 
PNT /PT 
Chart 5: Supported by cross-country evidence 
DNT /DT 
YNT /YT 
Source: Penn World Table 
  A more likely channel, to my mind, involves expected supply. Go back to that relationship in [1] and imagine 
now that something happens to push up the cost of producing or selling tradable goods. Perhaps productivity 
in that sector grows less rapidly (relative to that in our trading partners)8. Or perhaps tariff and/or non-tariff 
barriers are imposed on international trade. Either way, if the relative cost of producing or selling tradable 
output goes up then so must its relative price (Chart 49). In effect, the currency falls to help absorb these 
costs. In doing so it spreads them throughout the economy: even those in the non-traded sector have to work 
longer to buy the same quantum of imports.  
                                                       
7 Sometimes this point is expressed in terms of the “sustainable” current account deficit but it amounts to the same thing.  
8 Cost is inversely related to productivity.  
9 Note that a contraction in tradable productivity, which is the denominator in the SNT/ST curve, shifts it to the right. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
   
 
There is ample empirical evidence of this channel in the data. Chart 5, for example, is a cross-country plot of 
relative price levels (the real exchange rate) against per-capita income. The latter is determined by  
whole-economy productivity. But much of the variation in aggregate productivity, across countries as well as 
over time, is in the tradable sector specifically. So the correlation is reasonably persuasive evidence of the 
link between tradables productivity and exchange rates10. And it’s quite possible that this is what lies behind 
sterling’s reaction to the referendum. Foreign exchange markets may believe that exiting the EU will in some 
way raise the cost of exporting – either directly, via the erection of barriers of one sort or another, or by 
depressing inward investment and productivity in the tradable sector (relative to that in other countries). 
 What does the weaker currency do in the meantime? Some more exchange-rate economics 
 I should emphasise at this point that what I’m musing about here are the implicit beliefs of the foreign 
exchange market. The specific question is why that market thinks the long-term consequences of leaving the 
EU warrant a lower sterling exchange rate. For its part the MPC has no particular expectation about the 
forthcoming negotiations. The currency market could turn out to have been too pessimistic.  
 Two things are clear, however. First, if the market has misjudged the risks – if the UK emerges from this as 
open an economy as it is today, or more so – one imagines the exchange rate will re-appreciate, all else 
equal. I’ll come back to the significance of this point later on.  
 Second, the weaker exchange rate is acting on an economy whose trading relationships are for the time 
being quite unchanged. As yet Brexit has done nothing directly to affect the UK’s openness because Brexit 
hasn’t happened.  
 The MPC is always keen to caution against treating a change in asset prices as some independent, 
“exogenous” event, without considering its underlying cause. This case is a bit special, however: in this 
instance the cause has yet to occur. We’ve had the reaction in asset prices well ahead of the event. In that 
sense it’s more independent than usual. 
 And what’s striking about this is that economists usually view independent depreciations in the exchange 
rate as expansionary rather than contractionary. Yes, they dent real household incomes and therefore 
consumer spending. But the usual view is that this negative effect is compensated, indeed outweighed, by 
positive effects on other areas of spending, net exports and investment.  With the additional tailwind of a 
strengthening world economy you might expect most forecasters to have predicted faster economic growth 
following sterling’s decline. Yet the opposite is true: after 2% through 2016 (in the year to Q4), the consensus 
forecast is that UK GDP growth will slow to 1.2% through this year.  
                                                       
10 In economics the impact on the exchange rate of variations in tradable versus non-tradable productivity is known as the  
“Balassa-Samuelson” effect (Samuelson (1964); for a survey of the evidence see Egert et al (2006)).   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
   
 
I want to ask why this is. Why do forecasters think the more negative effects of sterling’s fall will predominate 
– what impediment might there be to its more positive effects?  To do so it’s worth taking a closer look at how 
depreciations actually work.  
 The view one often hears is that they make UK output cheaper in foreign currency terms, encouraging extra 
demand from overseas. I’m not sure that’s quite right.   
 I said earlier that economists often make the approximation that prices of tradable goods and services are 
the same in all countries (measured in some common currency). This makes intuitive sense when you think 
of an area like commodities. For example, you would not expect sterling’s fall to reduce the dollar price of 
North Sea oil or the euro price of UK-produced wheat. Those are determined largely in global markets. What 
happens instead is that their prices go up in sterling terms. And if there is a response of net export volumes it 
comes about largely because the rise in prices directly boosts the profitability of UK-based production. 
Whether we’re talking about firms that export or those that compete with imports, it encourages such 
businesses to expand. In other words it’s a matter of supply not demand.  
 Chart 6 gives a stylised description. In a competitive market the demand curve facing an individual firm (and 
those in a relatively small country) is essentially flat. Domestic events don’t have much effect on the global 
price. When the currency falls, pushing up prices and profits of outward-facing firms, the response of export 
volumes depends on the slope of the supply curve: to what extent do firms in the tradable sector have the 
capacity to raise output and, where that is insufficient, the willingness to invest in more?     
 Chart 6: For a small open economy tradable 
demand is highly elastic 
Chart 7: Depreciations push up the sterling price of 
goods exports as well as those of imports 
 Source: ONS and Thomson Reuters Datastream.  
* excluding oil and erratics. 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  8 
 
8 
  
 
Now commodities may be an extreme case. They’re essentially homogenous – one country’s output is much 
like another’s. But even in non-commodity goods markets you find a similar pattern. The UK is relatively 
small, accounting for only 3% of international goods trade (even including oil). Many UK firms are to a 
significant extent “price takers” in international markets. And you can see from Chart 7 the close correlation 
between the sterling price of the UK’s (non-oil) goods exports and the exchange rate. The reaction is a bit 
less than one-for-one but in general no less marked than that of import prices. That’s true of the most recent 
period as well: prices of non-oil goods exports rose 12% through the course of last year, in line with those of 
imports.  
 Admittedly, the behaviour of the sterling price of services exports is rather different.  They’re more stable in 
the face of exchange-rate movements (Chart 8), implying that depreciations do indeed reduce them in 
foreign currency terms. I think this is understandable. Services are less homogenous than goods and there’s 
more room for non-price competition. The UK has a larger presence in this area, accounting for 7% of global 
services trade in total, 12% for business and financial services specifically. Those wholesale services are 
relatively specialised. 
 Chart 8: Sterling price of services exports more 
stable  
Equally, and for many of the same reasons, the 
evidence suggests that service export volumes are 
much less sensitive to any cross-country variations in 
prices than in goods markets. Indeed it’s only 
because of this relative insensitivity that such 
variations can persist for any length of time. 
 At any rate, my main point here is that the positive 
effects of a currency depreciation depend at least as 
much on the response of domestic firms as on that of 
foreign buyers. If firms in the tradable sector have 
plenty of spare capacity you’d expect net export 
volumes to rise significantly; once capacity 
constraints start to bind you’d expect greater 
Source: ONS and Thomson Reuters Datastream  
investment; in general, given that the degree of spare 
capacity is bound to vary across firms, you’d expect 
to see both.  
 I think this is what you have seen in the past – in both directions. The data are limited. Detailed sectoral 
numbers on profits and investment exist only from the early 1990s and until 2014. But that period does at 
least cover two significant moves in the currency, even before the financial crisis: the big drop when sterling 
fell out of the European Exchange Rate System (ERM) in 1992, after which the exchange rate remained 
relatively low for a few years; and the equally large re-appreciation in 1997 and 1998. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
9 
 
9 
   
 
As it happens, I think these swings can be traced back to the demand-side influences I discussed in the last 
section. Subdued domestic consumption, public as well as private, supressed the exchange rate in the years 
after sterling exited the ERM; much stronger growth, associated in part with the revival in the housing 
market, helped to push it back up later that decade (you can see these broad movements back in Chart 3).   
And if you define the “tradable” part of the economy as those sectors with above-average trade shares,  
“non-tradables” the rest, they behaved broadly as you might expect. Aggregate profits recovered strongly in 
the early 1990s, as they tend to in the early stage of economic recoveries. But, thanks to a jump in the 
sterling price of their output, the rise was most marked for firms exposed to international trade (Chart 9).  
 There was plenty of slack in the economy (Chart 10 uses the balances on capacity use from the BCC 
surveys). Within the tradable sector in particular this allowed for a marked rise in net export volumes. In the 
three years after ERM exit the UK’s trade balance improved by close to 2% of GDP. Furthermore, despite 
that spare capacity, business investment too began to accelerate – and again it was the tradable sector 
whose spending grew fastest (Chart 11).  
 Chart 9: Profits in tradable sector boosted by 
depreciation in early 90s, hit by later appreciation 
Chart 10: Unlike early 1990s, there is now 
limited spare capacity, including in tradable 
sector  
Source: ONS and Bank of England calculations 
Source: BCC and Bank of England calculations 
      
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
10 
 
10 
   
 
Chart 11: Investment in tradable sector also 
sensitive to exchange rate 
Chart 12: Business investment growth weak in 
2016 
Source: ONS and Bank of England calculations 
 Source: ONS, CBI, BCC and CIPS 
 These trends then went into reverse after sterling’s re-appreciation later than decade. If subdued domestic 
consumption had allowed the economy to “rebalance” through the 1992-97 period, the opposite occurred 
over the following few years. Stronger domestic demand growth “crowded out” the tradable sector by helping 
to push up sterling’s exchange rate. This led to falls in prices, profits and investment in the tradable sector.     
 What about today? Sadly we don’t have such detailed information on anything like a real-time basis. Indeed 
we have very little data of any kind, even at an aggregate level, to tell us how profits and investment have 
behaved since last summer. But here’s my take on what we do know:    
   First, it’s likely that profitability has improved significantly in the tradable sector of the economy. We 
know that non-financial corporate profits in aggregate rose 10% in the year to Q3. We know too that 
export prices rose strongly last year, much faster than those of domestic-facing firms11. At a rough 
guess, and relative to that in the non-traded sector, this will have pushed up the rate of return in the 
traded sector by 2-3 percentage points12.  
   Second – and this is in sharp contrast to the early 1990s – there is only limited spare capacity in the 
economy, including in its more tradable sectors (Chart 10 again). One would certainly expect net 
export volumes to improve this year. But one would also expect a greater share of the response to 
the depreciation, compared with the early 1990s, to come via stronger investment, less of it from 
                                                      
11 While export prices rose 12% in the year to 2016Q4, gross output prices across the economy as a whole, excluding the government 
sector, rose by around 4½% (by gross I mean including the cost of imports).  With exports worth around one quarter of gross output, this 
would imply output-price inflation in the rest of the economy of less than 2%.      
12 Higher prices boost profits, and disproportionately so, given the operational gearing. On the other hand exporting firms will also be 
paying more for their imports, on which they rely more than others. To work out the overall impact on profits you need to net out the 
extra cost of imports. We’ve done this by passing the rise in both export and import prices through the UK’s input:output tables and used 
the same definition of tradables and non-tradables as before.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
11 
 
11 
    higher output in the tradable sector. There is less room to raise output but more of an incentive to 
add to that capacity.   
   Third, and despite these incentives, growth of overall business investment in the UK was relatively 
weak last year. Early official estimates say it shrank slightly in the year to Q4, by around 1%. (This 
compares with positive growth of 2% or so in the Euro area.)  And although those estimates are 
particularly prone to revision, the various survey indicators also subsided in 2016 (Chart 12).  
This last point is the critical one. The world economy is looking better than it has done for some time. Against 
this backdrop, and given the existing capacity constraints, the fall in sterling provides a powerful incentive to 
invest in the UK’s tradable sector. All else equal, it would make sense for existing exporters to expand; for 
domestic-facing firms to think about entering new markets; and for multinationals to shift production to the 
UK.  
 Yet some caution would also be understandable. All else is not equal. While much is at stake, no-one can be 
sure about the eventual outcome of the Brexit negotiations. The evidence suggests that investment is less 
responsive to these commercial incentives the greater the degree of uncertainty about future returns 13. Nor is 
it just a matter of uncertainty: it’s unlikely that these propitious conditions will last forever. Either the currency 
market is right about the consequences of Brexit, in which case the UK’s trading relationships will become 
less favourable; or it’s wrong, in which case sterling is likely to recover. Yet even in normal times, currency 
moves generally have to endure for quite a while before multinationals decide to shift production from one 
location to another14.  
 So these are not straightforward decisions. Put simply, firms in the tradable sector, and those thinking of 
entering it, will be weighing the boost in the current rate of return against any additional risk premium they 
currently require of such investments. The question is whether the first is big enough to compensate for the 
second.    
 Summary and conclusion 
 The adjective “post-Brexit” is bandied around quite a bit these days. The term’s a bit previous. A better 
description of the UK’s current economic circumstances is “post-referendum” but “pre-Brexit”.  
 The result is something of a sweet spot for exporters. Sterling fell sharply after the referendum and, despite 
the strength of consumption since then, has remained close to record lows. The most likely explanation is 
that the foreign exchange market believes that, when it does actually occur, leaving the EU will raise costs in 
                                                      
13 Bloom et al (2007); for more on the impact of uncertainty on sunk-cost investment decisions see Dixit and Pindyck (1994); Handly 
and Limao (2013) consider the specific case of uncertainty about tariffs. 
14 For example Goldberg (2007).   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
12 
 
12 
   
 
the UK’s tradable sector. Whether this occurs through explicit tariffs, non-tariff barriers or lower productivity 
growth, the currency would need to be weaker in compensation.  
 But the UK’s trading rules are for the time being unchanged. The result is that the costs and ease of 
exporting are unchanged but the returns to it significantly higher. With the world economy looking better than 
for some time the circumstances for the tradable sector could hardly be more propitious. One would expect 
firms in the more open parts of the economy both to use up any spare capacity and, in the normal course of 
events, to invest significantly more in that capacity as well. Over the longer run, this reallocation of resources 
is what the positive impact of an exchange-rate depreciation relies upon.   
 It’s possible, of course, that Brexit won’t be as bad as the foreign exchange market appears to believe. If the 
government succeeds in negotiating a “new, comprehensive, bold and ambitious free trade agreement15” 
with the EU, and in opening up trade with non-European countries, the UK’s overall degree of openness may 
not worsen and it could improve. If so, and all else equal, the currency should in time rebound.  
 But this makes longer-term investment in the tradable sector a somewhat tricky decision. Either the currency 
market is too pessimistic, in which case sterling’s depreciation is likely to be reversed over time. Or it’s not, in 
which case the costs of exporting will eventually go up. Barring some other source of exchange rate 
weakness, such as a sharp rise in the household saving rate (which would have its own implications for the 
economy), the sweet spot is unlikely to last indefinitely. So while investments with shorter-term payoffs make 
commercial sense, especially for those already running up against capacity constraints, the uncertainties 
involved in longer-term decisions could temper the usually positive response of business spending to 
depreciations in the exchange rate. Indeed they’re probably already doing so somewhat.    
 In its latest forecasts the MPC expects this caution to persist. That’s why, in the central projection in the 
February Inflation Report, growth slows slightly this year, from 2.0% at the end of last year to 1.7% by 
2017Q4. Though there are plenty of other variables to consider, the negative effects of the depreciation on 
consumption (via import prices and household income) are expected marginally to outweigh its more positive 
effects on other parts of demand.   
 If only implicitly the consensus forecast seems to attach more weight to this Brexit-related caution. My guess 
is that financial markets do so as well. Despite higher profitability, business investment is projected to 
stagnate or fall this year even as it accelerates significantly further in other developed economies. The more 
negative effects on consumption clearly predominate and growth of aggregate demand is projected to slow 
reasonably sharply, to 1.2% by the end of this year.  
                                                       
15 This is the Prime Minister’s phrasing in her speech on 17 January. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 13 
 
13 
  
 
Yet there are clearly risks to both. If businesses share the view of financial markets, and in particular the 
foreign exchange market, the risks around EU exit could persuade them to cut investment further this year. If 
they side more with consumers – who, as we’ve noted before, appear to have taken such uncertainties very 
much in their stride – they will respond more to today’s favourable conditions than to any caution about the 
longer-term future and instead raise investment spending.    
      
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
14 
 
14 
   
 
References 
 Bloom N., Bond S. and J. Reenen, 2007, ‘Uncertainty and investment dynamics’ The Review of Economic 
Studies, 74 (2), pages 391-415 
Dixit A. and R. Pindyck, 1994, ‘Investment under Uncertainty’, Princeton University Press 
Egert B., Halpern L. and R MacDonald, 2006, ‘Equilibrium Exchange Rates in Transition Economies: 
Taking Stock of the Issues’, Journal of Economic Surveys 
Goldberg L., 2007, ‘Exchnage rates and Foreign Direct Investment’, Princeton Encyclopaedia of the World 
Economy, Princeton University Press   
Handly K. and N. Limao, 2013, ‘Policy uncertainty, trade and welfare: theory and evidence for China and 
the U.S.’, NBER working paper No. 19376 
Obstfeld M. and K. Rogoff, 2000, ‘Perspectives on OECD economic integration : implications for U.S. 
current account adjustment,’ Proceedings - Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City, pages 169-208 
Obstfeld M. and K. Rogoff, 2007, ‘The unsustainable US current account position revisited’, published in 
G7 Current Account Imbalances, National Bureau of Economic Research 
Samuelson Paul A., 1964, ‘Theoretical notes on trade problems’, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 
46, pp. 145-54. 
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
15 
 
15 
 