BANK OF UGANDA 
Remarks by 
Louis Kasekende (PhD.),  
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda 
Launch of the 10-Year Capital Markets Development 
Master Plan 
Kampala, Serena Hotel 
Thursday June 15, 2017 
The Chief Guest, H. E the President of the Republic of Uganda, 
The Hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 
Cabinet and State Ministers, Hon. Members of Parliament, 
The  Chairman,  CMA  Board,  Chairman,  the  Capital  Markets  Masterplan 
Steering Committee, Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  this  morning  to  participate  in  the  launch  of  the 
Capital Markets Development Master Plan. I am speaking on behalf of the 
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  Prof.  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile, 
who is unable to be here due to personal reasons. I would also like to point 
out  that  the  Governor  is  the  Chairman  of  the  Financial  Markets 
Development Committee  (FMDC). This  committee was set up to steer the 
development of the financial sector and to ensure that the sector maximizes 
its contribution to the economy. The FMDC coordinates reforms across the 
banking, capital markets, insurance and pensions sectors. 
The premise behind the creation of the FMDC in 2008 was the recognition 
of  the  vital  and  varied  roles  which  the  financial  system  must  perform  to 
support economic development. 
In  essence,  the  financial  system  must  mobilize  savings  from  households 
and  corporations,  and  allocate  those  savings  to  a  variety  of  economic 
agents  which  can  put  them  to  productive  use.  In  addition,  the  financial 
system  must  also  provide  other  financial  services  which  are  needed  in  a 
modern economy, such as payments and insurance services. 
 
Savings are a scarce resource in a developing economy like ours; hence it is 
essential  that  the  process  of allocating  these  savings  – sometimes  referred 
to as intermediation – is very efficient. As demands for investable funds far 
outstrip their supply, the task of the financial sector is to ensure that these 
scarce resources are allocated only to those firms and households which are 
best able to use them productively and, in doing so, to generate income for 
the savers who have provided the funds; for example in the form of interest 
or dividends.  
 
For practical reasons, a market based financial system, driven by the profit 
motive,  is  much  more  likely  to  generate  efficient  allocations  of  scarce 
financial resources than a system characterized by state controls, although 
that  does  not  obviate  the  need  for  appropriate  prudential  regulation,  by 
institutions such as the Bank of Uganda and the Capital Markets Authority, 
to safeguard the interests of savers and other users of the financial system. 
While  we  recognize  that  financial  markets  are  characterized  by  market 
failures,  it  is  often  very  difficult,  in  practice,  for  governments  to  correct 
these failures and efforts to do so are often counterproductive.      
 
An  important  component  of  the  financial  system  is  the  capital  market, 
which  entails  funds  being  mobilized  by  firms,  institutions  or  the 
government directly from savers through the issuance of equities or bonds. 
Although  market  based  financial  systems  are  sometimes  contrasted  with 
bank based systems, this is in some respects a false dichotomy. The capital 
market  is  not  a  substitute  for  the  banking  sector.  Instead  capital  markets 
and the banking sector are complements; each catering for different needs 
of the economy in terms of financial services.  
 
In  particular,  efficient  capital  markets  are  much  better  suited  than 
commercial banks to provide long term finance to the corporate and public 
sectors. The capital market is also better placed to accommodate the needs 
of  investors  –  both  institutional  and  personal  –  who  require  long  term 
assets and have a higher appetite for risk than is typical among depositors 
in commercial banks. As the business sector of our economy develops and 
as  a  larger  share  of  the  population  are  able  to  participate  in  institutional 
vehicles  for  savings,  such  as  pension  schemes,  the  demand  for  capital 
market instruments will grow.   
 
In this regard, I would like to note that one of the most important reforms 
for stimulating capital  market development in this country is  the genuine 
liberalization of the pensions sector, so that all pension providers licensed 
by  the  Uganda  Retirement  Benefit  Authority  can  compete  on  a  level 
playing  field  to  manage  both  mandatory  and  voluntary  pension 
contributions.  We  have  been  discussing  pension  reform  for  the  last  20 
years.  We  have  put  in  place  the  appropriate  regulatory  structure.  Now  is 
the time to liberalize the sector and open it up to competition. Monopoly is 
never conducive to the vibrant growth of a market.  
 
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  commend  the  Capital  Market  Authority  for 
their efforts to spearhead the preparation of the Master Plan for the capital 
market. The Bank of Uganda is proud to have contributed to these efforts 
and  we  will  continue  to  play  a  role  in  supporting  capital  markets 
development in our country.  
Thank you for listening. 
