Donald  Joshua  Jaganathan:  Enterprise  risk  management 
harnessing disruption
Opening remarks by Mr Donald Joshua Jaganathan, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Institute of Enterprise Risk Practitioners (IERP) Annual
Conference  2017  “Enterprise  Risk  Management  –  Harnessing  Disruption”,  Kuala  Lumpur,  23
May 2017
  It is my pleasure to have the honour of addressing you this morning. I would first like to take this
opportunity  to  congratulate  the  organisers  for  successfully  gathering  an  array  of  distinguished
speakers  to  share  their  broad-ranging  and  invaluable  experiences.  The  breadth  of  the
programme over the next few days reflects how vast the area of Enterprise Risk Management
(ERM)  has  evolved,  and  how  much  there  is  for  risk  managers  today  to  discover,  learn  and
master. In my speech this morning, please allow me to share my thoughts on risk management,
amid the so-called “age of disruption”.
Technology and risk management
Amongst all ‘disruptions’ witnessed thus far, perhaps none have been as forceful and impactful
as technological disruptions.  Take the smartphone, its use has permeated almost every aspect
of our daily lives and has become almost like another limb for some of us. I’m no longer woken
up by an alarm clock, nor do I read the papers on “paper” or take photos on a camera. In the
palm  of  my  hand  I  hold  a  music  player,  internet  browser,  GPS  navigator,  torchlight,  and
compass, even a wallet in more and more places. With a couple of taps I can hail a cab, and
monitor my home CCTV, or buy any number of goods from across the world, which might, in the
not too distant future, be delivered to my doorstep by a flying drone.
Given  how  extensively  technology  has  altered  our  world  today,  being  technology  savvy  has
become a crucial requirement for risk managers today. In what seems like a blink of an eye,
companies  like Uber,  Waze  and Airbnb  which  barely  existed  a  decade  ago  have  become
household  names.  Now  valued  in  the  billions,  they  are  a  source  of  income  for  thousands  of
people  across  the  globe,  and  are  shaping  our  modern  economy  in  a  myriad  of  ways.
Technological  savviness  is  crucial  for  two  reasons.  First,  technology  can  be  harnessed  to
improve business operations and enhance risk management.  Secondly, it allows us to quickly
identify and respond to new sources of risks emanating from technological developments.
The potential of technology in risk management is vast, not only for the automation of tasks, but
increasingly as a tool for making business decisions as well. The application of big data analytics
and artificial intelligence to assess and predict human behaviour, for instance, can provide great
value  to  businesses  in  terms  of  reducing  risks.    In  the  motor  insurance  sector  for  example,
General Motors Assurance in the US has been utilising mileage and driving behaviours captured
through  in-vehicle  telecommunication  devices. Telematics,as  this  approach  is  called,  enables
the  incorporation  of  personalised  information  distinct  to  the  policyholder  in  setting  insurance
premium prices and rewards those who continuously maintain good driving standards – a win-
win situation for both the insurers who mitigate their underwriting risk and consumers who benefit
from lower premiums.
Technology  has  also  advanced  to  a  level  where  machines’  capabilities  extend  beyond  simple
tasks, but also able to carry out complicated tasks by professionals more quickly and efficiently.
A bank in the US, for example, has created a machine-learning programme to sieve through and
review legal contracts in mere seconds, saving 360,000 of labour hours which are better spent
on more productive tasks. It is an ideal worker – having a low margin for error which minimises
the occurrence of costly mistakes, and better yet, never gets ill or asks for leave. Of course,
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
investments  in  technology  may  be  expensive  and  returns  may  not  be  immediate.  It  is,
nevertheless,  not  a  choice  and  it  is  crucial  to  start  early.  Not  innovating  along  with  the  latest
technology should not only be seen as lost opportunities, but also lead to risk of your business
being rendered obsolete.
Business  transactions  and  financial  services  are  becoming  more  digitised  and  reliant  on  the
internet. Alongside this, the extent of technology risks and the level of sophistication of cyber-
attacks are rapidly expanding. There is a need for risk managers to be quick in identifying and
responding  to  cyber  risks.  With  increasing  dependence  on  information  technology,  institutions
are faced with numerous threats such as distributed denial of service, malicious hacking and
virus  attacks  which  affect  vital  services  provided  to  customers.  Barely  a  week  ago,  the
vulnerability of major organisations to such attacks was laid bare when a massive “ransomware”
virus  hit  up  to  300,000  computers  across  150  countries  including  Malaysia.  Judging  from  its
name, the “WannaCry” virus clearly achieved its aim as users found themselves locked out from
their computers and their data held at ransom. A host of organisations were left reeling in the
wake  of  these  cyber  extortion  attacks,  including  the  Russian  interior  ministry,  delivery  and
shipping giant FedEx and the UK’s National Health Service where some hospitals were unable to
perform operations, putting patients’ lives at stake.
There  is  also  the  danger  of  phishing  and  stealing  of  confidential  customer  data  which  could
destroy the trust placed on your company. Yahoo!, one of the internet’s top sites with a billion
monthly  users,  suffered  a  massive  security  breach  in  2014  when  hackers  stole  the  personal
details of at least one billion user accounts. The implications are far-reaching as a stolen digital
identity makes us vulnerable to manipulation and undermines the safety of, not just ourselves,
but also the ones we love. Bank accounts, social media profiles and even medical information
can  be  abused  to  put  us  and  our  family  in  harm’s  way.  In  the  months  following  the  hacking
revelations, more than five billion dollars was wiped off Yahoo’s market capitalisation. This was
not an isolated incident and sadly, many more companies could fall victim to cyber-attacks. Last
month, a report by cyber security consultancy CGI Group and Oxford Economics estimated that
severe cyber-attacks have cost shareholders losses exceeding £42 billionsince 2013 as a result
of  falling  share  prices.  And  this  does  not  even  include  the  damage  from  lost  consumer
confidence which is not easily rebuilt.
These cases of cyber-attacks serve as a wake-up call to risk managers, as lagging behind in the
latest technology is no longer an option. Missing the boat can bring dire consequences, not only
tobusinesses but also to the overall safety and soundness of the socio-economic and financial
system.  Recognising  this,  technology  risk  has  been  one  of  the  top  priorities  of  Bank  Negara.
Allow me to share some of the Bank’s efforts thus far:
a.     In March this year, Bank Negara began testing current institutional capabilities in managing
cyber threats. Malaysian banks were required to participate in the National Cyber Drill exercise,
and  the  results  showed  that  the  millions  invested  on  modern  security  countermeasures  have
paid off, with our banks remaining resilient. Notwithstanding this however, the key message is
that we must be vigilant. We must be alert. We must be prepared.
b.     A key tool in identifying IT security vulnerabilities is the practice of penetration testing or
“pen-testing”, where a simulated attack is carried out on IT systems by “ethical hackers”. As part
of the efforts to improve the standard of pen-testing in Malaysia, Bank Negara Malaysia facilitated
the formation of a task force last October, to set up a Malaysia chapter of the UK-based Council
of Registered Ethical Security Testers  or CREST,  which  will  serve  as  a  certification  body  for
ethical hackers. We believe that this is a good platform to grow domestic talent in this area and
promote international best practices in penetration testing.
c.      The Bank has also launched the Operational Risk Integrated Online Network or commonly
known  in  the  industry  as  the ORION  system,  to  enhance  the  standard  of  operational  risk
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
management  in  the  financial  sector. ORION  is  a  risk  surveillance  system  that  consolidates
information on operational risk incidences, including cyber-attacks. The system will strengthen
the Bank’s ability to perform system-wide monitoring and early detection of developing trends in
cyber-attacks and frauds within the financial sector.
Moving forward, Bank Negara Malaysia is looking to address identified gaps in technology risk
management practices within the financial sector. As part of this effort, the Bank is in the midst of
conducting a comprehensive review of existing technology risk guidelines, including enhancing
the expectations for the board and senior management to play a more active role in managing
technology risk, and enhancing the resilience of IT infrastructures such as data centres.
In today’s world where there is increasing uncertainty of what the future may hold, it is no longer
possible  for  risk  managers  to  rely  solely  on  historical  trends.  The  2008  subprime  crisis  is  a
textbook example of how backward-looking data is not a good indicator for the future economic
environment. Hence, organisations need to be pragmatic and shift towards more forward-looking
and  proactive  risk  identification,  assessment  and  management.  In  a  recent  financial  industry
survey conducted by the Bank to gauge the top operational risks among financial institutions, it is
evident that most financial institutions are still focused only on “typical” risks such as card fraud
and operational errors, rather than proactively anticipating and preparing against emerging risks.
This has to change. In this regard, the Bank highly encourages pre-emptive and forward-looking
risk management practices such as scenario analysis to anticipate the potential impact of future
threats to an organisation and provide sufficient time for remedial actions to be taken.
Incorporating culture into risk management
Let me now move on to another element that a good risk manager cannot ignore, which is the
importance  of  incorporating  culture  into  enterprise  risk  management.  At  the  heart  of  every
corporate scandal is the failure of the people at different levels of the institution to uphold the
highest standards of ethical behaviour and integrity. This is the reason why organisations need to
do  more  than  just  comply  with  rules  and  regulations.    The  accounting  scandal  at  a  major
Japanese  conglomerate  recently,  illustrates  this  point.  The  company  was  once  seen  as
exemplary  in  corporate  governance.  Such  was  its  reputation  that  it  frequently  appeared  as  a
case study in books on governance. We now know that the truth was quite the opposite, with
findings that top executives were involved in accounting malpractices over the past seven years.
The reality was that while its governance structure looked good on paper, its execution had been
marred by its organisational culture. According to the investigation report, top management was
systematically involved in the inflation of numbers and drove the company into a place where
profits  were  paramount.  The  number  of  similar  cases  reported  in  the  media  highlights  how
detrimental poor internal culture can be for any organisation, not only in terms of financial losses
and the imposition of hefty regulatory fines, but also a potential permanent blow to the company’s
reputation.
Risk culture, in my view, is a key factor in determining the robustness and effectiveness of risk
management  in  an  institution.  At  Bank  Negara,  there  has  also  been  increasing  focus  on
preserving  the  integrity  and  trust  in  our  financial  sector.  Last  year,  the  Bank  published  the
enhanced Corporate  Governance  framework  for  financial  institutions  in  Malaysia.  The
enhancements relate to expectations for the board and senior management to set the right “tone
from the top” and play a more critical role in shaping the core values and culture of the institution.
This includes expanded requirements on compensation practices and disclosures to strengthen
market discipline, as well as putting in place a transparent whistleblowing policy that enables the
escalation of concerns without the risk of reprisal.
More  recently  in April,  the  Bank  published  the Code  of  Conduct  for  the  Malaysian  Wholesale
Financial  Markets  to  promote  high  standards  of  conduct  and  transparency  in  the  domestic
wholesale  financial  markets.  The  code  is  a  binding  obligation  and  it  sets  out  the  Bank’s
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
expectations for market participants to adhere to professional and ethical standards of conduct.
The Bank views this standard as critical and timely in light of the incidences of ringgit-rate fixing
misconduct and also involvement in the opaque NDF market.
Another  important  aspect  of  preserving  the  integrity  in  the  industry  is  by  maintaining  strict
membership requirements for all participants. As an industry riding on trust as the main vehicle
for business, the financial sector cannot afford to be tainted by the actions of a few bad apples.
Any unscrupulous behaviour exhibited by a player should not be tolerated and be weeded out
immediately  from  the  industry.  To  protect  the  financial  ecosystem,  each  organisation  has  the
responsibility to investigate any misconduct and record the outcomes to allow other institutions in
the market to make informed decisions on the ability of a person to serve with professionalism
and  integrity.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  is  currently  pursuing  an  initiative  that  will  mandate  the
sharing of employment references with future employers to mitigate the problem of ‘rolling bad
apples’ within the Malaysian financial industry.
Specific and rules-based regulations, while able to lead institutions in the right direction, do not
guarantee the internalisation of such values within bankers nor are they dynamic enough to catch
up with new ways of breaching ethics. Therefore, the Bank will also be expanding its supervisory
focus  on  financial  institutions  beyond  balance  sheet  ratios,  and  incorporating  organisational
culture in our radar such as tone from the top, echo from below, accountability, communication,
remuneration  and  performance  management.  This  is  a  challenging  but  necessary  task  that
requires creativity in exploring unconventional supervisory approaches including interviews and
questionnaires for employees of financial institutions among others..
Risk management as part of business strategy
Finally,  risk  managers  must  move  away  from  merely  compliance  and  loss  prevention.  Risk
managers  must  reposition  themselves  to  be  more  engaged  in  strategic  business  decisions
within  their  respective  organisations.  Chief  Risk  Officers  (CROs)  must  have  a  broad  and
independent  view  of  the  organisation,  with  an  ability  to  anticipate  potential  disruptions  and  to
influence decision-making. However, according to a global survey conducted by PwC last year,
only 1/3 of risk officers view themselves as part of the business. Especially now in the age of
disruption,  risk  managers  should  not  view  themselves  as  mere  compliance  officers  or  the
mundane department that says ‘no’ to exciting business opportunities. Instead, risk managers
need to also think in terms of finding the right risk-return trade-off. Risk management must go
beyond  the  prevention  of  losses  and  play  an  active  role  in  driving  business  sustainability  and
enhancing shareholder value.
technical  competency, 
Given  the  importance  of  enterprise  risk  management,  efforts  need  to  be  directed  to  give
prominence to this function. It is time for the stature of risk functions to be elevated. Professional
bodies  like  the  IERP  play  a  crucial  role  in  stewarding  this  transformation  by  equipping  risk
management experts and raising their credibility through branding and professional qualifications.
Events  like  this  conference  can  help  propel  the  risk  management  agenda  forward.  However,
beyond 
require  confidence  and
communication skills to be the resounding voice in promoting risk culture. Risk managers need
to have a seat at the executive table and play a role in shaping the risk profile and risk culture of
your  organisations. A  study  conducted  by Harvard Business School highlights how leadership
and  communication  by  risk  managers  can  influence  the  significance  of  their  role  within
organisations.  As  expected,  the  study  found  that  risk  managers  that  proactively  sought
opportunities to raise their visibility were able to assert risk management perspectives and were
better able to position themselves as critical voices within organisations.
Ladies and gentlemen
risk  managers 
increasingly 
The task of a risk manager in an organisation is like that of a ship navigator. As you work closely
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
with your captain to navigate your ship across unknown waters, your job is to ensure you get
your  ship  to  its  destination  in  one  piece.  You  never  know  what  hazards  may  lie  ahead  but
whether it be foul weather, rough seas or hostile forces, you stand ever ready to face them. The
things that set great risk managers apart, like great navigators, are their ability to work with their
captain and crew as a unit, their skills at employing the tools at their disposal to deal with risks at
hand, and their attention to their surroundings for signs of impending threats.
With that, I wish you all a smooth-sailing journey ahead and a productive and fruitful conference
over the next two days. Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
