Joachim  Wuermeling:  How  stable  is  Europe?  Taking  stock  of  the
latest developments in politics and the financial markets
Speech  by  Prof  Joachim  Wuermeling,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the American Council on Germany, New York City , 4 May 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Ten years ago, back in spring 2007, the US subprime bubble was bursting. In May 2007, there
were some early signs foretelling the escalation of the crisis in summer 2007.
Many  of  us  remember  August  2007,  when  interbank  interest  rates  skyrocketed  and  money
markets dried out. It was at this time that the crisis spilled over from the subprime mortgage
sector to the money markets, with the Lehman bankruptcy in September 2008 marking the start
of the banking crisis.
Back in those days, some in Europe tended to take the high ground. In 2007, ten years ago, the
situation in the European financial sector appeared to be generally stable. Many in Europe were
shaking their heads about the imprudence that had led to the emergence of the US subprime
bubble.
While  the  impact  of  the  US  financial  crisis  started  to  subside  from  2009  onwards,  this  was
precisely the point at which the euro crisis took hold. The belief that the crisis could be avoided in
Europe proved premature.
The negative economic impact of the euro crisis is certainly one of the key reasons why Europe
is facing serious headwinds to its most ambitious project: European integration. Populism has
reached  worrying  levels  and  is  accompanied  by  growing  scepticism  towards  many  forms  of
transnational  cooperation.  I  should  point  out,  by  the  way,  that  this  is  not  solely  a  European
phenomenon.
In my speech today, I would like to touch upon the economic outlook for Europe and what it may
imply for monetary policy. I’m also going to shed some light on recent political developments and
share my views on Brexit.
2. Economic outlook and monetary policy
The euro area is in fairly good economic shape. Last year, macroeconomic growth rates were
positive in all euro area countries except Greece. With a growth rate of 1.7%, GDP in the euro
area rose more quickly than production capacity last year; the output gap is gradually closing.
The  latest  growth  projections  for  the  coming  years  are  promising  as  well.  In  March,  the
Eurosystem slightly upgraded its expectations for economic recovery in the euro area: real GDP
is now expected to grow by 1.8% this year, 1.7% next year and 1.6% in 2019.
Unemployment has been falling in many euro area countries. In the euro area as a whole, the
unemployment rate is now less than 1 percentage point above its average in the pre-crisis years
after declining to 9.6% last year.
The economic upswing and improved employment data in the euro area are likely to drive up
price pressures gradually. Inflation rose more sharply at the start of the year than anticipated in
the December projection. In February, HICP hit a four-year high of 2.0%. However, this increase
was largely attributable to base effects and higher energy prices. On Friday, Eurostat published
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
its  most  recent  estimate:  the  inflation  rate  is  expected  to  hit  1.9%  in  April.  Meanwhile,  core
inflation is currently estimated at 1.2%. According to the March forecasts, it will slowly increase
as the euro area’s economic recovery continues. It is expected to reach 1.8% at the end of the
forecast horizon in 2019.
Considering  these  numbers,  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  remains  appropriate.  It  goes
without saying that opinions differ with respect to the right degree of monetary accommodation.
Of course, views also vary regarding the point in time at which the price outlook will have firmed
enough to justify a change in communication and, ultimately, in the monetary policy stance. Let
me share three thoughts on this issue.
First,  the  Bundesbank  has  always  been  critical  of  government  bond  purchases  by  the
Eurosystem  central  banks  as  they  lead  to  a  dangerous  commingling  of  monetary  and  fiscal
policy.
Second, as inflation has increased, the real interest rate has declined even further. The effects
are comparable to a central bank rate cut. Hence, monetary conditions in the euro area will be
looser even without any further central bank action.
Third,  the  risk  of  a  deflation  scenario  in  the  euro  area  is  extremely  low.  Financial  market
participants  seem  to  have  a  similar  take  on  it:  according  to  the  respondents  to  the  Survey  of
Professional Forecasters, the probability of the inflation rate turning negative in the next five years
is in the region of only 2%.
Against  the  backdrop  of  robust  growth  and  inflation  rates,  public  discussion  regarding  an  exit
from the ultra-loose monetary policy has already started. That said, as you might already expect,
I did not come to New York to comment on the timing of the exit. It’s up to the ECB Governing
Council to decide when and how such an exit will take place.
I do, however, want to shed some light on the issue of which operational options will be available
to the Eurosystem when the Governing Council decides that the time to exit has come. A key
factor in this context is the sequence of actions by which the normalisation of monetary policy will
be achieved – by first increasing the interest rate level or by scaling back non-standard monetary
policy operations. The latter would be reflected in the balance sheet more directly.
This issue might sound very familiar to you – the Federal Reserve System was confronted with a
similar issue a while ago. It stopped buying large quantities of assets in October 2014 and, since
then, it has kept the size of its balance sheet constant, buying just enough to replace maturing
securities. The Fed has stated that it will not begin shrinking the central bank’s balance sheet
until normalisation of the federal funds rate is well underway.
As for the Eurosystem, the ECB Governing Council is to decide upon the sequencing of such
measures. From an operational point of view, I believe that neither increasing our set of interest
rates  nor  abandoning  individual  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  presents  special
challenges.
We do have to consider, though, that the Eurosystem has introduced a considerable number of
non-standard  measures  since  2007  –  the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  is  the  most
recent and the largest measure so far. But other measures, such as the fixed rate full allotment
policy,  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  and  the  reduced  requirements  for  eligible
collateral – to name just a few – have played important roles as well.
The comprehensive package of non-standard measures has a highly expansionary impact when
viewed  as  a  whole.  Doing  away  with  any  one  single  measure  would  leave  the  impact  of  the
remaining measures unaffected; in other words, the monetary policy stance would not become
restrictive, simply less expansionary.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Please do not ask me when the time to normalise will come. As I have already mentioned, this
decision will be made by the Governing Council. However, in my view, it is important to signal the
financial  markets,  sooner  rather  than  later,  of  the  steps  that  are  likely  to  be  considered  in
connection with the asset purchase programme in 2018 – this goes beyond the calendar-based
forward guidance that has already been provided up to December 2017.
I believe that, when the time to exit arrives, there will be a gradual and prudent scaling-back of
non-standard monetary policy operations. It’s hard to imagine any other approach if we want to
avoid market tensions. But even if non-standard measures were to be brought to an end earlier
or at a quicker pace than expected, there would still be a considerable amount of excess liquidity
in the system for quite some time. This will hold, in particular, for as long as the targeted longer-
term  refinancing  operations  are  outstanding  (which  is  until  2021)  and  the  reinvestment  policy
adopted under the asset purchase programme is maintained.
Of course, the Eurosystem could decide at a certain point in time to absorb excess liquidity by
means  of  targeted  liquidity-absorbing  operations  –  if,  for  instance,  it  is  deemed  necessary  to
steer money market rates to values considerably above the ECB deposit rate. Let me make two
last comments.
First, I advise market participants in the euro area to be prepared for the considerations I just
discussed – both operationally and from a balance sheet perspective.
Second, I believe that, from an economic as well as from an operational point of view, there is no
predetermined  order  when  it  comes  to  scaling  back  non-standard  measures.  But,  as  I  have
mentioned before, the Bundesbank has always been rather critical of euro area government bond
purchases  as  they  blur  the  distinction  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  In  my  view,  the
intended effects of these purchases are diminishing over time due to the rise in the unwanted
side  effects  arising  as  a  result.  Thus,  ending  the  public  sector  purchase  programme  would
certainly be in our sights once the Governing Council decides that the time to exit has come.
3. 2017: an important election year
The markets are not only focussing on the monetary decisions to come. In 2017 and over the
course of 2016 as well, public attention has been shifting from one election to another throughout
the western world. In a way, this is a healthy development: markets had been moving politics
since 2008. It appears, however, that 2016 was the first year in which politics moved the markets
again.
Following the Brexit referendum, the US elections and the referendum in Italy in 2016, 2017 is
being, and will continue to be, shaped by elections in Europe. There will be elections in Norway
and  the  UK,  but  neither  is  key  to  the  cohesion  of  the  European  Union.  In  terms  of  Brexit,  it
currently seems that we no longer need to discuss if, but rather how, the UK will leave the Union.
Far  more  interesting  will  be  the  elections  in  those  countries  which,  for  many  observers,  are
regarded as core countries of European unification. We saw the outcomes of the elections in the
Netherlands  in  March.  We  are  currently  awaiting  the  second  round  of  the  French  presidential
election.  In  Germany,  two  important  state  elections  will  be  held  in  May  2017  and  the  federal
election in September 2017. At the moment, we can observe a swing in the voters’ mood. We
have  seen  a  rise  in  the  success  of  populism  in  recent  years,  culminating  in  the  astonishing
decisions of 2016 and their aftermath. But the popularity of political populism now appears to be
waning, and was not successful for example in case of the Netherlands.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4. Brexit: a chance to refocus on European strength
Given the UK government’s formal declaration to withdraw from the European Union, Brexit has
now entered a new and decisive phase. This applies, in particular, to the future role of the UK’s
financial sector as the financial hub of continental Europe.
At the current stage of negotiations, nobody knows what form any future interdependencies will
take. While the UK’s withdrawal from EU is highly regrettable, its exit could be associated with
the substantial loss of rights to conduct business in the European Union.
Most people agree that London’s major role as financial capital cannot be replaced within a short
timeframe. However, some argue that the uncertainty surrounding Brexit will lead to a substantial
shift of banking services out of London. This relocation of sensitive and important infrastructures
needs careful planning. Hence, market participants will most likely not postpone decisions until
the negotiations between the EU Commission and the UK have been finalised.
I do not expect that Brexit will have negative repercussions for the financial centres in continental
Europe. Given the economic weight of the world’s largest common market, home to 500 million
citizens, and the importance of banks for businesses in the euro area, there might even be a net
positive effect for the financial centres in the EU.
Incidentally, you may have noticed that a lively competition between financial capitals in the EU
has started. In the wake of Brexit, it is becoming ever-clearer that at least some business may
have to move to continental Europe. Some of you have already made, or are about to make,
decisions on where to relocate your business in the EU. I am convinced that, in the years to
come,  an  even  closer  network  of  European  capital  marketplaces  –  maybe  with  the  centre  of
gravity in Frankfurt – will provide added value to global financial markets. All capital marketplaces
together  linked  by  a  strong  single  currency,  a  balanced  European  legal  framework  and  a
profitable  and  resilient  financial  industry  in  a  capital  markets  union  will  be  of  increased  global
relevance.
Let me share another thought with you: the British referendum – and the refugee crisis – were a
wake-up call to work harder on convincing ideas for the future design of the European Union and
for  the  division  of  labour  between  the  European  Union  and  its  member  states.  Recent
developments have made it very clear to everyone that we need to put more effort into creating a
realistic vision for Europe that its citizens will support.
Discussions on the future set-up of intra-European relationships and the relationships with our
partners  abroad  have  been  gaining  momentum  recently.  This  debate  will  help  to  improve  the
architecture  of  Europe.  People  currently  appear  to  be  rediscovering  the  advantages  of  close
political ties and of an integrated economic area with a common currency. If the member states
work in concert, the European Union can act as a major economic player and will be in a better
position to influence further globalisation.
Today,  there  appears  to  be  no  majority  for  deeper  European  integration.  There  is  a  belief,
however,  that  we  should  consolidate  our  achievements  and  improve  the  finer  points.  It  is
necessary to reflect on how we benefit from Europe, the European Union and the euro.
For many EU citizens, the 60th anniversary of the European Union as a peace project was a
chance to express their support for a democratic European Union. For the first time in years, we
are  now  seeing  demonstrations  in  favour  of  the  European  Union  and  not  against  the
“bureaucracy  in  Brussels".  Frankfurt  marks  the  epicentre  of  a  movement  called  the  Pulse  of
Europe, as part of which citizens are gathering on a weekly basis and expressing their belief in
the fundamental idea of the European Union and its ability to be reformed. This movement is
intended as a countermovement to the negative and destructive voices that are often heard in
public. The Pulse of Europe has spread to other German and European cities.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
During  my  years  in  the  European  Parliament,  I  learned  that  Europe  has  never  been  an  easy
issue. Quite the contrary, it is a complicated and demanding project. But I am convinced that it is
a project worth fighting for. Thus, I believe the European declaration of Rome is right when it
says: “We have united for the better. Europe is our common future."
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
