Vítor  Constâncio:  Growth,  adjustment  and  resilience  in  the  euro
area
Remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Forum
Villa d'Este, Cernobbio, 1 September 2017.
 In my remarks today, I will reflect on the outlook for growth in the euro area taking distance from
monetary  policy  considerations  at  the  present  time  by  focusing  on  recent  economic
developments  and  their  structural  component.  I  will  then  elaborate  on  opportunities  and  risks
posed by broad structural developments across euro area countries.
In my intervention today, I want to convey five main messages:
First, the ongoing cyclical recovery in the euro area is now broader and more consolidated.
Second, this notwithstanding, the strong worldwide reflationary phase that seemed likely at the
beginning  of  the  year  has  not  materialised.  Therefore,  the  tasks  of  normalising  inflation  and
unemployment to acceptable levels continue to be difficult.
Third,  the  euro  area  peripheral  countries  have  completed  a  notable  adjustment  phase.
Consequently, the monetary union is now more resilient to shocks as a result of a reduction in
imbalances and stronger synchronisation of the economic cycle across countries. The euro area
is thus better prepared to resist financial market shocks.
Fourth, in this context, a correction in the worldwide risk premia, particularly in the bond market
seems now more absorbable. Financial conditions may nevertheless deteriorate suddenly, due
to  developments  in  the  US  or  emerging  economies’  or  to  geo-political  risks  that  can  trigger
spikes in a situation of prolonged low volatility.
Fifth, resuming real economic convergence among member countries is vital for the euro area.
This is the next fundamental challenge and it will require more structural and institutional reforms
both at national and European levels.
A broader and more consolidated recovery
The euro area has now been expanding for 17 consecutive quarters while business confidence
is at a decade high. Equally important, practically all countries are now taking part in the recovery
and  more  people  in  the  euro  area  are  employed  today  than  before  the  crisis.  These
developments would not have materialised without the ECB’s expansionary monetary policy after
the second recession in 2012–2013.
While  we  can  be  increasingly  confident  about  the  sustainability  of  the  recovery,  we  have  to
recognise that it has taken much longer for the euro area than for other advanced economies, to
emerge from the financial crisis which started in 2008.
The depth and length of the euro area crisis unveiled inter alia the incompleteness of the euro
area’s institutional design. However, on the positive side, it has also encouraged the euro area to
equip itself with new instruments to tackle these weaknesses.
Indeed, significant reforms have been adopted since 2010 to increase the resilience of the euro
area. At the European level, the revamp of the Stability and Growth Pact and the creation of the
European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  strengthened  the  fiscal  framework  and  the  crisis
management capacity with a permanent funding instrument. Moreover, the decision to establish
the Banking Union in 2012 has put in place the basis for a supranational supervision and crisis
 1 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
management. Also  at  country  level,  steps  were  taken  to  correct  macroeconomic  imbalances,
including through the implementation of structural reforms.
These  measures  have  put  the  euro  area  on  a  more  resilient  and  safer  footing  and  we  have
started to see the  pay-off:  countries  with  previously  large  current  account  deficits  now  record
surpluses,  competitiveness  has  improved  and  the  impact  of  reforms  on  growth  starts  to  be
visible  in  some  countries. At  the  same  time,  these  positive  developments  should  not  lead  to
complacency as crucial challenges remain in an environment of low trend growth and still high
debt levels in a number of euro area countries. To address these challenges we need to continue
to make progress at national and European levels. At the national level, the reform momentum
needs to be maintained while at the European level, further steps need to be taken to complete
the institutional architecture.
Let me start by reviewing a few facts on the euro area recovery and on the adjustment process
during the past years.
The euro area has been on a recovery path during the past four years (see slide 1, chart on the
left) with the recovery gaining momentum as of late. The euro area has finally reached a GDP
level above the 2007 level, recovering the output lost over the period 2008–2013. On the other
hand, stronger growth was coupled with increased convergence of growth rates in the euro area,
as shown by the development of the cross-country standard deviation of annual real GDP growth
over time (see slide 1, chart on the right).
Slide 1
Over recent quarters, the economic recovery has also become more broad-based across euro
area countries and the different sectors of the economy. All euro area countries are currently
recording positive real GDP growth in annual terms, for the first time since 2007 (see slide 2,
chart on the left). At the same time, growth rates have become less dispersed across countries
compared to the past, which also suggests increased business cycle synchronisation within the
euro area.
 2 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
The recovery is also broadening across sectors. The share of sectors with positive growth has
returned to its pre-crisis levels (see slide 2, chart on the right). At the same time, the dispersion
of growth rates across sectors is the lowest since the inception of the euro.
Taken together, the broadening of the recovery across countries and sectors suggests that it has
not only gained momentum but, importantly, the recovery has gained robustness.
Slide 2
A  more  robust  recovery  has  also  been  visible  in  the  labour  market  where  conditions  have
improved markedly (see slide 3, chart on the left). Employment has risen by almost 6 million
since 2013. This stands in contrast to the jobless recovery of 2010, which is another indication of
the turning tides in the euro area.
Furthermore, labour market recovery is stronger in countries where it was especially weak. Euro
area  unemployment  rate  has  receded,  despite  still  too  high  unemployment  rates  in  some
countries (see slide 3, chart on the right).
 3 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 3
Notwithstanding  these  improvements,  the  growing  uncertainty  surrounding  the  strength  of  the
world economic recovery, and of the US in particular, makes the normalisation of inflation and
unemployment levels in the euro area more difficult (see slide 4).
 4 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 4
Adjustment and resilience
The increased robustness of the euro area economy is also reflected in the gradual unwinding of
the macroeconomic imbalances accumulated before the crisis. In fact, countries that eventually
entered a programme had recorded large losses in price competitiveness in the run-up to the
crisis.  Since  the  crisis,  the  initial  dramatic  increases  in  the  real  exchange  rates  of  those
countries have largely been corrected (see slide 5) along with a marked improvement in price
competitiveness.  In  most  programme  countries  relative  unit  labour  costs  are  now  below  their
respective level in 1999.
 5 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 5
At the same time, the large current account deficits registered in several euro area countries
before  the  crisis  have  narrowed  significantly  or  even  turned  into  surpluses  (see  slide  6).
Importantly, the largest part of the current account adjustments is estimated to be non-cyclical
1
and therefore likely to be sustained as the recovery continues.
From this perspective, it is very relevant that (with the exception of Greece) the external account
improvements were also a consequence of dynamic export growth and not just resulting from
import compression due to the recessionary period.
 6 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 6
The  impressive  correction  of  current  account  deficits  in  some  euro  area  countries  has  been
mirrored in a significant adjustment of intra-euro area trade and current account imbalances (see
slide 7). As a result, some euro area countries with large external surpluses now record current
account surpluses mostly vis-à-vis countries outside the euro area.
 7 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 7
Fiscal  deficits  have  been  reduced.  Fiscal  effort,  measured  as  the  change  in  the  structural
primary  balance,  has  been  significant  in  many  countries  (see  slide  8,  chart  on  the  left). As  a
result, and also thanks to the reduction in interest payments, fiscal deficits are now in almost all
countries below 3% of GDP (see slide 8, chart on the right).
 8 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 8
Beyond  fiscal  deficits,  the  level  of  public  and  private  debt  has  also  posed  concerns  in  some
countries. In the run-up to the crisis, it was not so much public debt but rather the private sector
indebtedness that increased substantially (see slide 9). This should be underlined because, as
Jordà, Schularik and Taylor (2016) said: “…private credit booms, not public borrowing or the level
2
of public debt, tend to be the main precursors of financial instability in industrial countries.”
It was only after the crisis that public debt increased, on account of the necessary interventions.
More recently, both public and private sector debt levels stabilised, thanks to consolidation efforts
and private sector deleveraging, even if remaining rather diverse across countries.
Focusing  on  the  programme  and  post  programme  countries,  private  debt  levels  in  percent  of
GDP  are  currently  lower  than  10  years  ago  in  Spain,  Portugal  and  Greece,  but  still  higher  in
Cyprus and Ireland. Public debt however is higher than at the start of the crisis, across the euro
area. Increasing the growth potential of euro area economies would help to achieve a downward
shift in the debt-to-GDP ratios.
 9 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 9
Synchronisation of economic cycles and symmetric shocks
An important aspect stemming from the theory of optimal currency areas, relates to the risk of
asymmetric  shocks  to  countries  in  a  monetary  union,  placing  them  in  different  phases  of  the
economic cycle, which would make a single monetary policy inadequate for a smooth functioning
of the union. This concern was in everyone’s mind when the EMU was being conceived. In 1992,
Bayoumi  and  Eichengreen  published  a  well-known  paper,   using  data  from  1963  to  1988  to
calculate  the  correlation  of  demand  and  supply  shocks  of  each  potential  EMU  member  with
Germany, which represented the core of the union in terms of size and level of development. The
analysis clearly identified a core of countries well correlated with Germany and a periphery much
less correlated to the centre (see slide 10). They also showed that the difference between core
and periphery was bigger than the one among the Federal Reserve Regions in the US.
3
 10 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 10
This analysis raised concern of whether EMU could face the problem of asymmetric shocks thus
hampering  the  single  currency  performance.  Some  other  authors pointed  nevertheless  to  the
fact  that  synchronisation  could  be  endogenous  to  the  formation  of  the  monetary  union  itself,
meaning that the adjustment to the single monetary policy would lead member countries’ cycles
to become more aligned.
4
Interestingly,  this  is  precisely  what  Bayoumi  and  Eichengreen  found  out  when  conducting  the
same analysis in 2017, with data from 1990 to 2014. Remarkably, most of the countries (with the
exception  of  Greece)  that  were  previously  in  the  periphery  are  now  more  correlated  with
Germany  than  some  of  its  own  neighbours  (see  slide  11).  From  this  point  of  view
(synchronisation  of  cycles)  there  is  now  a  new  core  in  the  euro  area  to  which  most  of  the
geographically periphery now belongs.
 11 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 11
This is particularly important as a sign of robustness of the euro area, indicating that all countries
were able to restore competitiveness within the euro and return to growth thus ensuring a better
transmission of the single monetary policy. The euro area is now better prepared to withstand
financial market shocks.
Future risks and challenges
These signs of recovery and resilience should not lead to any complacency towards the future of
the euro area. Besides the tasks of normalising inflation and reducing unemployment to more
acceptable  levels  in  all  countries,  many  structural  and  institutional  reforms  are  needed  to
safeguard and improve the future functioning of the euro area. Both the Five Presidents Report
on “Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union” (2015) and the recent EU Commission
paper  on  the  “Deepening  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”  (2017),  provide  sufficient
guidance on the way to proceed. Next steps include: completing the Banking Union, creating a
Capital Markets Union, creating a Macroeconomic Stabilisation function at the euro area level,
possibly  with  a  European  Treasury  and  a  full  European  Monetary  Fund.  These  institutional
reforms  would  be  crucial  for  the  EMU  to  face  two  of  the  most  fundamental  objectives  to
consolidate  its  future:  increase  its  growth  potential  and  restore  a  path  of  real  economic
convergence among its member countries.
While  at  present  the  recovery  is  on  track,  looking  ahead  the  growth  potential  of  euro  area
economies needs to be strengthened. Further efforts thus need to be devoted to strengthening
productivity growth which requires an expansion of productive investments. Both the recovery of
productivity and that of business investments in the euro area has been lagging behind that of the
US (see slide 12).
 12 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 12
There  have  been  important  reform  efforts  in  the  euro  area  in  recent  years  supporting  the
recovery  of  potential  growth.  Since  2009  the  reform  responsiveness  in  the  euro  area  has
exceeded  the  OECD  average  (see  slide  13).  In  particular,  countries  which  had  financial
assistance  programmes 
their  resilience  and
competitiveness,  in  particular  through  reforms  in  product  market  regulation,  employment
protection and wage flexibility, and through revamping of active labour market programmes. Many
of these reforms are expected to support potential growth but they tend to exert their full impact
with a considerable lag.
took  a  number  of  reforms 
improve 
to 
At  the  same  time,  the  business  environment  in  some  of  the  euro  area  countries  is  still  well
behind that of countries near the frontier, and reform needs are significant.
 13 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 13
A  final  challenge  relates  to  convergence  of  income  levels  in  the  euro  area.  Gradual  but  real
economic convergence of income per capita across all countries is the ultimate condition for a
healthy and consolidated economic and monetary union prepared to resist the test of time.
Taking  a  long-term  perspective   –  from  1960  till  today  –  and  focusing  on  the  twelve  initial
members of the euro area, it is striking that the euro area crisis (2010–13) was the only period
when strong divergence materialised in the dispersion of GDP per capita levels.
5
However,  it  is  since  about  1993  –  well  before  the  adoption  of  the  euro  –  that  this  group  of
countries does not experience phases of marked income convergence, such as those recorded
in  the  periods  1960–1972  and  1986–1992.  The  same  applies  to  broader  groupings  of  mature
economies in the European Union, such as the Member States which had joined the EU by 1995
(see slide 14).
Focusing on the individual euro area countries with the greatest catching-up needs, while some
have  made  significant  progress,  others  have  stalled  or  even  reversed  their  process  of  real
convergence.  Such  countries  are  concentrated  in  the  South  of  Europe,  with  Greece  and  Italy
being the two most prominent examples.
 14 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slide 14
The re-establishment of a path towards real convergence in the euro area is, therefore, a vital
and difficult challenge. Some tentative signs of reversal of the divergence experienced during the
euro area crisis are visible since 2014. But more needs to be done, along the lines sketched in
the Five Presidents Report and the Commission paper already mentioned. Also crucial in this
regard will be the enhancement of countries’ economic structures through improved institutions
and governance.
Let me conclude. It is clear that the euro area recovery is becoming increasingly robust. The
upturn  is  not  only  strengthening  and  broadening,  but  is  also  starting  to  rest  on  more  solid
structural  foundations.  The  daunting  challenges  ahead  may  still  have  an  existential  nature  but
they can be overcome with time. However, the wise attitude now is not to predict the future but to
prepare it.
1
2
3
4
5
ECB staff estimate the cyclical and non-cyclical contributions to changes in the current account balance based
on an empirical model linking the current account balance to a broad set of cyclical, fundamental and policy
variables. A similar exercise, both in terms of methodology and main findings, is undertaken by the IMF in the
context of its External Balance Assessment: www.imf.org/external/np/res/eba/data.htm.
Jordà, O., Schularik , M. and Alan Taylor (2016) “Sovereigns versus banks: credit, crises and consequences” in
Journal of the European Economic Association, 14(1): 45–79.
Bayoumi, T. and B. Eichengreen (1992), “Shocking aspects of European monetary unification”, NBER Working
Paper No 3949.
See e.g. Frankel, J. A. and A. Rose (1998), “The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area Criteria”, Economic
Journal 108, pages 1009–1025.
 15 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
See Díaz del Hoyo, Dorrucci, Heinz and Muzikarova (2017), “Real convergence in the euro area: A long-term
perspective”, forthcoming in the ECB Occasional Papers series.
 16 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
