William C Dudley: Principles for financial regulatory reform
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Princeton Club of New York, New York City, 7 April 2017.
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today on the important topic of financial
regulatory reform.  As always, what I have to say reflects my views and not necessarily those of
1
the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.
A  robust  financial  system  is  central  to  our  economic  well-being.    The  financial  crisis  and  the
Great Recession wreaked havoc on millions of American households and businesses, and much
of this damage was due to a flawed regulatory framework.  In particular, many large banks and
securities  firms  had  inadequate  capital  and  liquidity  buffers,  and  the  financial  system  had  a
number  of  important  structural  weaknesses  that  made  it  vulnerable  to  stress.    In  response,
legislators  and  regulators  made  significant  changes  to  strengthen  our  regulatory  framework. 
Importantly,  as  we  consider  further  changes,  we  must  avoid  throwing  the  baby  out  with  the
bathwater. 
As I see it, an effective regulatory regime for the financial system must do three things: 
Ensure that all financial institutions that are systemically important have enough capital and
liquidity so that their risk of failure is very low, regardless of the economic environment.
Have an effective resolution regime that allows such firms to fail without threatening to take
down the rest of the nation’s financial system, and without requiring taxpayer support.
Preserve the important structural changes put in place since the financial crisis that make
the  financial  system  more  resilient  to  shocks.    These  include  the  centralized  clearing  of
over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, better supervision and oversight of key financial market
utilities,  and  the  reforms  of  the  money  market  mutual  fund  industry  and  the  tri-party
repurchase funding (“repo”) system. 
In  contemplating  changes  to  the  regulatory  regime,  the  good  news  is  that  the  U.S.  financial
system is much sounder today than it was on the eve of the financial crisis.  The quantity and
quality of capital and liquidity for U.S. banks have markedly improved, meaning that the banking
industry can support the economy even under considerably more adverse economic conditions. 
And, although returns on equity have dropped as balance sheet leverage has declined, banks
remain profitable enough to cover their cost of capital and continue to serve their household and
business customers.
Much  of  this  progress  is  due  to  regulatory  changes  enacted  since  the  crisis.    In  addition  to
buttressing  the  capital  and  liquidity  standards  for  major  banks,  the  regulatory  community  has
made  significant  strides  in  many  other  areas.    We  developed  a  resolution  framework  for
systemically important banks that better enables a failing bank to recapitalize with less risk to the
rest  of  the  financial  system,  and  in  a  way  that  should  not  require  taxpayer  assistance.    We
reformed key segments of the financial system such as the money market mutual fund industry. 
We  reduced  the  aggregate  risk  in  the  system  by  mandating  the  centralized  clearing  of  OTC
derivatives.    And,  we  strengthened  the  prudential  oversight  of  those  systemically  important
financial market utilities (FMUs) that clear such activity.  Collectively, these reforms make the
system  more  robust  and  resilient  to  the  failure  of  a  large,  systemically  important  institution. 
Thus,  we  have  made  considerable  progress  toward  ending  a  regime  in  which  some  financial
firms  were  “too  big  to  fail.”    We  want  to  avoid  the  unfortunate  situation  where  authorities  are
faced with a Hobson’s choice: save a failing firm to prevent it from taking down the entire financial
system, or allow the firm to fail but risk the collapse of the financial system.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Nearly  a  decade  ago,  we  suffered  the  worst  financial  and  economic  crisis  since  the  Great
Depression.  In fact, we were perilously close to experiencing another depression.  The harm the
crisis caused Americans can only be described as catastrophic.  From November 2008 to April
2009, the economy lost an average of 700,000 jobs per month.  Total employment in the United
States fell by nine million jobs, and the unemployment rate rose to more than 10 percent.  There
was also a broad-based decline in home prices—about 30 percent on average, nationally.  As a
result, nearly 8 million foreclosures occurred, and the homeownership rate declined to levels not
seen since the late 1980s. 
The  crisis  exposed  many  significant  structural  weaknesses  in  the  U.S.  and  global  financial
systems.  Among them:
Systemically  important  firms  were  allowed  to  operate  with  inadequate  amounts  of  capital
and  insufficient  liquidity  buffers,  and  were  overly  reliant  on  short-term  wholesale  funding. 
They were excessively complex and interconnected with each other and with the shadow
banking system. 
Large firms came up woefully short in monitoring, measuring and controlling the risks that
could—and did—materialize under stress.
Securitization markets suffered from a number of defects, including poor design for many
securitized  products  and  misaligned  incentives  in  the  credit  ratings  regime.    This  led  to
inflated credit ratings for many mortgage securitizations that subsequently performed poorly
as mortgage delinquencies increased.
There were significant problems in funding and derivative markets, including flaws in tri-party
repo, money market mutual funds that were vulnerable to runs, and massive and opaque
bilateral OTC derivative exposures. 
Finally, all of these problems were magnified by the lack of a good resolution process for
large, complex financial firms that got into trouble.  As a result, policymakers were forced to
develop ad hoc interventions to contain contagion and to prevent the collapse of the U.S.
financial system.
We should never forget how close we came to a full-blown depression, and we must resolve to
never allow a return to conditions like those that existed prior to the financial crisis.
That said, it is entirely appropriate to take a critical look at the changes that were made to the
regulatory regime.  While we do not yet have evidence of how these reforms will hold up during
the  next  economic  downturn,  many  have  been  in  place  long  enough  that  we  can  begin  to
evaluate their efficacy.
In such an evaluation, we should keep in mind the three goals I mentioned in my introduction. 
First,  we  must  ensure  that  the  probability  of  failure  for  a  systemically  important  firm  is
exceedingly low.  Such a failure can lead to contagion that can damage a broad set of financial
market participants, and impede the ability of the financial system to support the economy.  The
failure of a single systemically important firm—because of its size and interconnectedness—can
significantly weaken the entire financial system.  We saw this firsthand following the failure of
Lehman Brothers.
Second,  if  a  systemically  important  firm  does  fail,  we  must  have  mechanisms  in  place  to
minimize the damage to the rest of the financial system.  While we can make individual firms
stronger, more robust and less prone to failure, I expect that there will still inevitably be failures in
the future.  In principle, we could make individual institutions completely bulletproof in all possible
environments. However, this would require such high levels of capital and liquidity that it would
likely make them uncompetitive in their ability to provide financial services to their customers.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, we must keep in place the structural changes that have made the global financial system
less vulnerable to adverse shocks.
So, what does this imply when we consider revisions to the Dodd-Frank Act and other aspects of
reform? 
Capital and Liquidity Standards
It is important to maintain appropriate capital and liquidity standards for large, complex firms to
mitigate  external  shocks  and  the  risks  they  pose  to  the  economy.    In  particular,  we  need  to
maintain our focus on firms whose impairment would have significant negative consequences for
the  rest  of  the  financial  system.    Effective  capital  and  liquidity  standards  help  to  limit  these
adverse consequences.  At the same time, they work against conferring a competitive advantage
to large banks from a perception that they may be too big to fail.  Accordingly, large financial firms
have had to more than double their stock of high-quality capital since the crisis. 
Prior to the financial crisis, large financial firms were not required to hold sufficient high-quality
liquid  assets  to  protect  against  runs,  and,  as  a  result,  several  would  have  failed  if  not  for
extraordinary government intervention.  Today, the liquidity buffers for large financial firms have
dramatically improved in terms of both their size and quality.  This is due in part to investors’
demands, but also to the efforts by regulators and supervisors in the United States and abroad to
develop appropriate liquidity standards for large banking institutions. 
Some have argued that capital standards alone would be sufficient to mitigate the risks of failure. 
I am not convinced.  As I just noted, the crisis clearly demonstrated the added importance of
liquidity,  as  the  firms  that  failed  appeared  to  have  been  appropriately  capitalized  based  on
traditional regulatory metrics at the time.
Moreover, I strongly favor a system of capital and liquidity requirements that is harmonized on a
global basis.  Some believe that the United States should no longer participate in international
forums—such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision—that discuss and recommend
minimum capital and liquidity standards for global banking institutions.  The argument is made
that these international bodies are dictating to and constraining the choices of the United States. 
That is simply not the case.  The Basel standards and other international efforts actually benefit
the United States and its banks.  In the preponderance of cases, agreements struck in these
forums raise international standards closer to existing U.S. standards.  Establishing a more level
playing field enhances the competitiveness of internationally active U.S. firms.  It also makes the
global financial system safer by ensuring that foreign banks are subject to appropriate standards
that  cover  their  global  operations.    This  protects  the  U.S.  households  and  businesses  that
2
transact with these banks in the United States and abroad.  
Also, it is important to note that the recommendations of these international standard-setters are
not automatically legally binding in the United States.  They do not go into effect unless they are
adopted by a U.S. authority acting under U.S. laws following an administrative process. They are
also subject to a period of public notice and comment.  When appropriate, U.S. authorities have
adopted different standards than those proposed in international forums. 
Finally,  following  the  financial  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  developed  a  capital  stress  testing
supervisory  program—known  as  the  Comprehensive  Capital  Analysis  and  Review  (CCAR). 
CCAR  has  become  an  integral  part  of  ensuring  appropriate  capital  levels.    By  imposing  a
discipline of forward-looking capital assessment on our largest firms, CCAR helps protect the
safety and soundness of the largest financial institutions—and therefore the stability of the entire
financial system.
The CCAR process consists of two parts.  First, the quantitative assessment evaluates whether
a  firm  holds  a  sufficiently  large  capital  buffer  so  that  it  can  continue  to  be  a  viable  financial
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
intermediary  even  in  a  stressed  market  and  macroeconomic  environment.    Second,  the
qualitative  assessment  evaluates  whether  the  firm’s  risk  management  and  capital  planning
processes are well-developed and well-governed.  CCAR has helped to strengthen the capital
levels of the largest financial institutions, and has pushed these firms to steadily improve their
risk management and capital planning processes.
While appropriate capital and liquidity standards are necessary, they must be augmented by a
supervisory regime that can assure the quality of a firm’s governance, controls, risk culture and
compliance  with  applicable  laws  and  regulations.    As  we  saw  with  JPMorgan  Chase  in  the
“London Whale” episode and with Wells Fargo more recently, effective risk management and
governance is a necessary complement to having adequate capital and liquidity buffers.
Resolution
We  also  must  have  an  effective  resolution  mechanism  that  allows  a  firm  to  fail  without
threatening to bring down the entire financial system.  We are not quite there yet—given some of
the challenges in executing resolution on a cross-border basis—but we have made significant
progress.  In particular, I would point to two developments that are especially important.
The FDIC and the Federal Reserve have used the authority provided by Title I of the Dodd-Frank
Act to oversee the so-called “living will” process—the resolution planning that large financial firms
must do as a contingency for their potential failure.  Developing living wills necessitates that firms
and regulators consider, in advance, how bankruptcy can serve as the basis for resolution, and
take actions to address any obstacles to an orderly resolution under the bankruptcy code.  This
effort  has  helped  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  large  financial  firms  and  has  made  them  better
positioned to enter bankruptcy without imposing large costs on society.
In addition, the Federal Reserve recently finalized a rule that requires systemically important bank
holding companies to have minimum levels of total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC). Firms are
expected  to  meet  this  requirement  mainly  via  the  issuance  of  long-term  debt  by  the  holding
company parent. In bankruptcy, this debt could be used to recapitalize these firms and would be
available to absorb any additional losses. 
The Dodd-Frank Act also created a “last resort” option for the resolution of a large financial firm—
Title  II  Orderly  Liquidation  Authority.    This  authority  can  be  triggered  only  in  special
circumstances, and requires the action of a number of regulatory and fiscal authorities. 
There is an understandable reluctance for the government to be directly involved in resolving a
large firm.  It creates the perception that the largest firms get special advantages.  This is why
3
many would prefer to eliminate Title II and rely exclusively on a bankruptcy process.
But,  if  we  were  to  rely  on  ordinary  bankruptcy  rather  than  Title  II  for  the  resolution  of  a
systemically important financial firm, we would need to ensure that the bankruptcy regime would
work in a way that does not destabilize the financial system.  First, such a regime would need to
enable  a  systemically  important  firm  to  initiate  a  resolution  strategy  over  a  weekend  while
markets  are  closed  so  that  the  firm’s  subsidiaries  could  continue  to  operate.    Otherwise,  the
remaining franchise value of the troubled firm would quickly evaporate and we would experience
significant contagion across the financial system.  Second, there would need to be a credible
liquidity  backstop  for  the  restructured  firm  in  place  by  Sunday  evening  when  Asian  markets
open.  Many of the troubled firm’s counterparties would undoubtedly initially run because the cost
of  doing  so  would  be  very  small.    They  would  be  especially  likely  to  do  so  if  there  were  no
credible  liquidity  backstop.    Debtor-in-possession  financing  would  not  be  not  a  viable  option
because it simply would not likely be available in a timely manner and on the scale—potentially
hundreds of billions of dollars—needed to fill the hole created when counterparties run away from
a systemically important financial institution. 
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
There  is  also  another  difficulty.    In  the  event  of  a  financial  holding  company’s  bankruptcy
restructuring, there are limits on the Federal Reserve’s ability to lend to subsidiaries that continue
to operate.  The Federal Reserve has the legal authority to lend through the discount window
against a subsidiary bank’s high-quality collateral, with appropriate haircuts.  But, under existing
laws  and  regulations,  the  Federal  Reserve  cannot  lend  to  the  securities  affiliates.    Moreover,
Section  23A  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  restricts  the  commercial  bank  subsidiary  of  a
systemically important firm from on-lending the funds borrowed from the Fed to its broker-dealer
—even if the broker-dealer has good collateral to pledge against the loan. 
Put simply, in today’s legal and regulatory regime, there is a large potential liquidity gap.  There is
not a credible liquidity backstop for a broker-dealer in bankruptcy.  In contrast, Title II provides for
temporary funding through the Orderly Liquidation Fund, which can support the resolution of the
recapitalized entity, including the broker-dealer.  This means that if one were to eliminate Title II,
one  should  develop  an  alternative  means  to  provide  a  temporary,  comprehensive  liquidity
backstop to the restructured firm.
Reforms to Market Structure
We should also keep in place the key structural reforms of financial markets that are making the
financial system safer.  In my mind, the most important of these include money market mutual
fund  reform,  tri-party  repo  reform,  and  the  mandate  for  the  centralized  clearing  of  OTC
derivatives.    In  each  case,  the  post-crisis  structural  reforms  have  made  the  system  more
resilient to the potential insolvency of a major financial institution.  As a result, the level of stress
placed  upon  the  entire  financial  system  by  the  failure  of  a  single  firm  should  be  considerably
lessened.
As part of this, we must maintain the capability for robust oversight of key FMUs.  Centralized
clearing is a beneficial development for financial markets.  It reduces the amount of risk in the
system  by  facilitating  the  netting  of  exposures  to  the  central  clearing  party.    As  a  result,
centralized clearing makes the financial system more resilient and enables greater efficiency and
transparency for trading counterparties.  However, the trade-off for these benefits is that more
residual  risk  is  now  concentrated  in  the  FMUs.    Consequently,  it  is  important  to  retain  the
protections contained in the regulatory framework provided by Title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Act. 
We must ensure that FMUs are appropriately supervised and can withstand the failure of one or
two of their largest counterparties and continue to operate.
Worth Another Look
So, what hasn’t worked as well as we might have expected, or might be less crucial in light of the
principles that I discussed earlier? 
First,  I  would  start  with  regulations  for  small  and  medium-sized  banking  institutions.    As  I
discussed earlier, we must ensure that the firms whose failure could impose the greatest costs
on  ordinary  borrowers  and  savers  have  the  capital,  liquidity  and  risk  management  standards
appropriate to that risk.  But, the majority of banks in the United States do not come close to
falling into this category.  For smaller institutions, the regulatory and compliance burdens can be
considerably lighter because the failure of such a firm will not impose large costs or stress on
the broader financial system. 
Also, we must recognize that smaller firms have less ability to spread added compliance costs
across  their  business.    All  else  equal,  an  increase  in  compliance  burden  can  create  an
unintended competitive advantage for larger institutions.  We should also recognize the important
role that smaller banking institutions have in supporting local communities around the country. 
The ability to lend to local businesses often depends on close bank-customer relationships, and
on knowledge that is often difficult to develop when the home office is very distant.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
There  have  been  efforts  by  regulators  at  the  Federal  Reserve  and  elsewhere  to  reduce  the
regulatory requirements for such institutions, and that is something that we should continue to
work on.  Lawmakers could also evaluate statutory thresholds to see if they should be raised to
apply  to  fewer,  larger  institutions.    For  example,  the  Dodd-Frank Act  sets  a  higher  prudential
regime for those firms with $50 billion or more in assets.  I believe that this threshold could be
raised significantly without unduly increasing the risk to the broader financial system.
Second, policymakers might reexamine the implementation of the Volcker Rule to ensure that it
is efficiently achieving its policy objectives.  The fact is that most market-making activity has an
element of proprietary trading.  The market maker that bids successfully often does so based on
a  view  on  which  way  the  market  might  be  headed  in  the  near  term.    Thus,  the  line  between
market-making  and  proprietary  trading  is  not  always  clear-cut,  which  makes  regulation  in  this
space difficult. 
Some market participants have argued that the Volcker Rule has contributed to the decline in
market liquidity of corporate bonds.  Although I view the evidence on this point as inconclusive, it
may be worth considering giving greater discretion to trading desks that facilitate client business
to intervene when markets are illiquid and volatile.  Also, community banks are subject to the
Volcker Rule even though they typically do not engage in proprietary trading, or sponsor or retain
ownership  interests  in  hedge  funds  or  private  equity  funds.    This  seems  like  an  unnecessary
burden that drives up compliance costs without a significant corresponding public benefit, so we
also should exempt community banks from the Volcker Rule.
Third,  although  CCAR  is  a  vital  part  of  our  bank  regulatory  toolkit,  I  believe  that  we  should
consider  changes  that  might  lessen  the  burden  it  places  on  banks.    In  this  vein,  the  Federal
Reserve recently removed the CCAR qualitative assessment for large, non-complex firms.  This
is a good example of identifying regulatory burdens that are not worth the cost.  We are also
considering  the  implementation  of  a  stress  capital  buffer  that  would  better  align  the  dynamic
stress capital requirements of CCAR with our more static, point-in-time regulatory capital rules. 
Other  potential  adjustments  include  changes  to  the  assumptions  about  the  pace  of  a  firm’s
planned dividend and share repurchases, and how a firm in a stressed environment would likely
manage its balance sheet and business footprint.
The  financial  crisis  provided  a  vivid  reminder  that  a  well-functioning  financial  system  is  a
necessary condition for a vibrant economy.  The efficient intermediation of funding from savers to
borrowers supports economic activity and, over time, raises living standards.  This means that
we need a financial system that is robust and resilient to shocks.  Most of the changes that have
been implemented since the financial crisis have moved us in this direction, and it is important
that any new changes to laws and regulations be grounded in what we have learned.  Our central
purpose must be to ensure a safe and sound financial system that efficiently provides financing
to households and businesses through the ups and downs of the business cycle.
Thank you for your kind attention.  I would be happy to take a few questions.
1
2
3
James  Bergin,  Dianne  Dobbeck,  Jack  Gutt,  Kristin  Malcarney,  Kevin  Stiroh,  Joseph  Tracy  and  Emily  Yang
assisted in preparing these remarks.
In addition, a regime with common, harmonized standards helps to reduce compliance costs for U.S. firms that
operate internationally.
However, we should recognize that in the current setup large banks pay a price for being systemically important
in terms of higher capital requirements and the need to maintain a large cushion of TLAC. Combined with the
requirement  to  develop  living  wills  and  to  simplify  their  operating  models  and  their  business,  this  should
eliminate any competitive advantages associated with potential availability of Title II.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
