Mario Draghi: Accompanying the economic recovery
Introductory speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB
Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, 27 June 2017.
 For  many  years  after  the  financial  crisis,  economic  performance  was  lacklustre  across
advanced economies. Now, the global recovery is firming and broadening. A key issue facing
policymakers is ensuring that this nascent growth becomes sustainable.
Dynamic investment that drives stronger productivity growth is crucial for that – and in turn for
the eventual normalisation of monetary policy.
Investment and productivity growth together can unleash a virtuous circle, so that strong growth
becomes  durable  and  self-sustaining  and,  ultimately,  is  no  longer  dependent  on  a  sizeable
monetary policy stimulus.
The discussions we will have over the next two days – in particular understanding the puzzles of
slowing productivity growth and persistently low investment – are therefore highly relevant for the
path of the economy and of our monetary policy.
Yet as we anticipate the problems of tomorrow, we must also work on the issues of today. For
central banks, this means addressing an unusual situation. We see growth above trend and well
distributed  across  the  euro  area,  but  inflation  dynamics  remain  more  muted  than  one  would
expect on the basis of output gap estimates and historical patterns.
An accurate diagnosis of this apparent contradiction is crucial to delivering the appropriate policy
response.  And  the  diagnosis,  by  and  large,  is  this:  monetary  policy  is  working  to  build  up
reflationary  pressures,  but  this  process  is  being  slowed  by  a  combination  of  external  price
shocks, more slack in the labour market and a changing relationship between slack and inflation.
The past period of low inflation is also perpetuating these dynamics.
These effects, however, are on the whole temporary and should not cause inflation to deviate
from its trend over the medium term, so long as monetary policy continues to maintain the solid
anchoring of inflation expectations.
Hence we can be confident that our policy is working and its full effects on inflation will gradually
materialise. But for that, our policy needs to be persistent, and we need to be prudent in how we
adjust its parameters to improving economic conditions.
Monetary policy is effective in raising demand
Understanding inflation dynamics requires us to divide up the inflation process into two legs: the
effect of monetary policy on aggregate demand; and the effect of aggregate demand on inflation.
All the evidence suggests that the first leg is working well.
Though the euro area recovery started later than those in other advanced economies, we have
now enjoyed 16 straight quarters of growth, with the dispersion of GDP and employment growth
rates among countries falling to record low levels. If one looks at the percentage of all sectors in
all euro area countries that currently have positive growth, the figure stood at 84% in the first
quarter  of  2017,  well  above  its  historical  average  of  74%. Around  6.4  million  jobs  have  been
created in the euro area since the recovery began.
The role of monetary policy in this growth story is clear. Since mid-2014, our monetary policy
stance has been determined by the combination of three instruments: first, low policy interest
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
rates;  second,  asset  purchases  in  financial  markets  and  targeted  long-term  refinancing
operations for banks; reinforced by, third, forward guidance on both.
This has created strong downward pressure on financing costs, with rates falling steeply across
asset  classes,  maturities  and  countries,  as  well  as  across  different  categories  of  borrowers.
Converging financing conditions have in turn fed into rising domestic demand.
According  to  our  Bank  Lending  Survey,  our  latest  easing  phase  has  coincided  with  a  strong
rebound in demand for consumer credit to purchase durable goods, while demand for loans for
fixed investment has gradually firmed. At the same time, falling borrowing costs have reduced
interest payment burdens and facilitated deleveraging, which is one reason why, for virtually the
first time since 1999, spending has been rising while indebtedness has been falling. This is a
sign that the recovery may be becoming more sustainable.
Just to put our measures into context, since January 2015 – that is, following the announcement
of the expanded asset purchase programme (APP) – GDP has grown by 3.6% in the euro area.
That is a higher growth rate than in same period following QE1 or QE2 in the United States, and
a percentage point lower than the period after QE3. Employment in the euro area has also risen
by more than four million since we announced the expanded APP, comparable with both QE2
and QE3 in the US, and considerably higher than QE1.
For  the  monetary  transmission  process  to  work,  however,  stronger  growth  and  employment
ought to translate into higher capacity utilisation, scarcity in production factors and – in time –
upward pressure on wages and prices. And this is what we see.
The unemployment gap – the difference between actual unemployment and the non-accelerating
inflation  rate  of  unemployment  (NAIRU)  –  is  narrowing  and  is  forecast  by  the  Commission  to
close  within  the  next  two  years.  Surveys  of  business  capacity  utilisation  are  now  above  their
long-term average levels. And inflation is recovering. Between 2016 and 2019 we estimate that
our monetary policy will have lifted inflation by 1.7 percentage points, cumulatively.
Yet  the  second  leg  of  the  inflation  process  –  the  transmission  from  rising  demand  to  rising
inflation – has been more subdued than in the past. How can this be explained?
The  link  between  output  and  inflation  is  determined  by  three  main  factors:  external  shocks  to
prices;  the  size  of  the  output  gap  and  its  impact  on  inflation;  and  the  extent  to  which  current
inflation  feeds  into  price  and  wage  setting.  In  different  ways,  each  of  these  factors  has  been
relevant for the delayed reaction of inflation to the recovery.
Temporary external shocks
Starting with external factors, one explanation for the slow improvement in inflation dynamics is
that  we  are  still  suffering  the  after-effects  of  price  shocks  in  global  energy  and  commodity
markets, which have led output and inflation to move in different directions.
Inflation  has  indeed  been  subject  to  such  shocks  over  recent  years,  most  notably  the  oil  and
commodity price collapse in 2014-15. This not only depressed the cost of imported energy, but
also  lowered  global  producer  prices  more  generally.  ECB  analysis  suggests  that  the  global
component in the underperformance of euro area inflation in recent years was considerable. In
2015-16, around two thirds of the deviation of euro area headline inflation from a model-based
mean can be accounted for by global shocks linked to oil prices.
Even though the downward pressure on inflation from past oil price falls is now waning, oil and
commodity prices are still having a dragging effect – if only because they continue to lack a clear
upward  trend.  In  fact,  lower  oil  and  food  prices  than  those  assumed  in  the  March  2017
projections are an important factor behind the downward revision of our latest inflation forecasts.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Oil-related base effects are also the main driver of the considerable volatility in headline inflation
that we have seen, and will be seeing, in the euro area.
Falling  import  prices  partly  explain  the  subdued  performance  of  core  inflation,  too.  This  is
because imported consumer products account for around 15% of industrial goods in the euro
area. Likewise, changes in commodity prices feed through into some services items and into
industrial goods produced with high energy intensity. As a result, in the first quarter of 2017, oil-
sensitive items were still holding back core inflation. This illustrates that core inflation does not
always give us a clear reading of underlying inflation dynamics.
Global factors therefore do appear to be weighing on the path of inflation today. But our analysis
suggests that the drivers of low oil prices at present are mainly supply factors, which a central
bank can typically look through.  And even if supply factors affect the path of inflation for some
time, with inflation expectations secure, they should not ultimately affect the inflation trend.
1
 
Uncertainty over slack and its impact on inflation
A second explanation for the discrepancy between real developments and inflation is uncertainty
surrounding the size of the output gap and its impact on inflation. This might be happening for a
variety of reasons.
One  possible  reason  is  that  we  are  currently  experiencing  positive  supply  developments.  In
particular, we do observe that, as the recovery strengthens, the supply of labour is rising too.
Labour  force  participation  has  been  growing  consistently  over  the  last  few  years,  buoyed
especially by increases in participation rates of older workers. We also see some evidence that
labour  supply  has  become  more  elastic  due  to  immigration,  particularly  in  strongly  growing
economies such as Germany.  Since 2007, the euro area participation rate has risen by around
1.5  percentage  points,  whereas  in  the  United  States  it  has  fallen  by  more  than  3  percentage
3
points in the same period.
2
Structural reforms in labour markets have been a factor in this labour supply boost.
Similarly, past reforms in product markets may also have had a positive effect on the supply side
by reducing price mark-ups, increasing productivity and raising growth potential.
Another reason why there is some uncertainty over slack is the correct notion of unemployment
– that is, there may be residual slack in the labour market that is not being fully captured in the
headline unemployment measures. Unemployment in the euro area has risen during the crisis,
but so too has the number of workers who are underemployed (meaning that they would like to
work more hours) or who have temporary jobs and want permanent ones. This has implications
for inflation dynamics, since these people might prioritise more hours or job security over higher
wages in employment negotiations.
If one uses a broader measure of labour market slack including the unemployed, underemployed
and those marginally attached to the labour force – the so-called “U6” – that measure currently
covers  18%  of  the  euro  area  labour  force.   Phillips  curve  models  that  employ  this  measure
5
appear to be more successful in predicting inflation.
4
A third reason why slack might be larger is the effect of so-called “global slack”. This is the notion
that  globalisation  has  made  labour  supply  characteristics  more  uniform  across  the  globe  and
labour markets more contestable. Conditions in foreign labour markets could therefore have a
dampening effect on domestic inflation even as domestic slack is shrinking.
The  evidence,  however,  is  not  clear-cut.  For  example,  new  ECB  analysis  finds  only  limited
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
support for the thesis that global slack is weighing on euro area inflation today, over and above
6
the impact it has on global prices.
Alongside the question of the level of slack is the impact of slack on inflation. This is the well-
known debate on the slope of the Phillips curve. There are indeed reasons to believe that wage
and price setting behaviour in the euro area might have changed during the crisis in ways that
slow the responsiveness of inflation.
For example, structural reforms that have increased firm-level wage bargaining may have made
wages more flexible downwards but not necessarily upwards.
Likewise,  we  see  today  that  firms  are  absorbing  input  costs  through  lower  margins  due  to
uncertainty over future demand, which would also tend to temper price pressures. Indeed, ECB
estimates show that, if we take into account the unusually large and persistent shocks of the
past years, the Phillips curve for core inflation may well be somewhat flatter recently. However,
insofar  as  the  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve  depends  nonlinearly  on  the  cyclical  position,  it  may
steepen again when the economy reaches and surpasses full potential.
While these various reasons might delay the transmission of our monetary policy to prices, they
will  not  prevent  it. As  the  business  cycle  matures,  the  higher  demand  resulting  from  positive
supply developments will accelerate price pressures, while firms’ pricing power will increase and
the broader measures of slack will converge towards the headline measures.
As  shown  in  the  United  States,  the  gap  between  the  headline  unemployment  rate  and  those
broader  measures  typically  opens  in  recessions  and  shrinks  in  expansions.  Currently,  it  is
converging to the minimum levels recorded before the 2001 and 2007 recessions.
So just as for oil and commodity price shocks, we can be reasonably confident that the forces
we  see  weighing  on  inflation  are  temporary  –  so  long  as  they  do  not  feed  more  lastingly  into
inflation dynamics.
Low inflation feeding into price and wage setting
This brings us to the third possible explanation for why growth might be diverging from inflation:
the  hypothesis  that  a  persistent  period  of  low  inflation  is  in  fact  feeding  into  price  and  wage
setting in a more persistent way.
What  is  clear  is  that  our  monetary  policy  measures  have  been  successful  in  avoiding  a
deflationary spiral and securing the anchoring of inflation expectations. In the past, as interest
rates approached zero, some did question our ability to add sufficient accommodation to combat
a  prolonged  period  of  too-low  inflation.  We  answered  those  doubts  by  demonstrating  that  we
would take any measures necessary within our mandate to deliver our mandate, and that those
measures were effective in further easing financial conditions. Deflation risk premia, which had
been growing in 2014 and 2015, have now been more or less priced out of market-based inflation
expectations.
That  being  said,  a  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation  is  always  likely  to  be  exacerbated  by
backward-lookingness in wage and price formation that occurs due to institutional factors, such
as wage indexation.
This has plainly happened in the euro area. ECB analysis finds that, compared with long-term
averages, low past inflation dragged down wage growth by around 0.25 percentage points each
year between 2014 and 2016.
The evidence as to whether backward-lookingness has increased recently is mixed. There were
signs  that  indexation  had  fallen  in  the  early  part  of  the  crisis,  and  ECB  empirical  estimates
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
suggest  that  the  weight  of  past  inflation  in  current  inflation  has  decreased.  Yet  there  is  also
evidence that indexation has returned in some large euro area countries. In Italy, for example,
backward-looking  indexation  of  wages  now  covers  around  one-third  of  private  sector
7
employees.
Still, even if indexation rose, it would only create inertia in price formation: it would not obstruct
the  transmission  process.  As  economic  slack  shrinks,  upward  pressure  on  prices  will
materialise and gradually enter the indexation ratchet.
So  once  again  we  see  temporary  forces  at  work  that  should  not  affect  medium-term  price
stability. And  this  assessment  is  broadly  what  we  see  in  market-based  inflation  expectations
today. Interpreting with some caution, they are now consistent with the picture that our policy is
effective, but that its full effects will take time to materialise.
Accompanying the recovery
So what do these various explanations imply for our monetary policy stance?
The  first  point  to  make  is  that  we  face  a  very  different  situation  today  from  the  one  we
encountered three years ago. Then, we also faced global shocks and significant labour market
slack. But the recovery was still in its infancy. Global growth was slowing, depressing both import
prices and net exports. Fiscal policy was less supportive than it is now. And headline inflation
was much lower than today and inflation expectations more fragile, creating a higher risk of low
inflation becoming entrenched.
In this context we faced another risk, too: of permanent damage to the economy through so-
called “hysteresis effects”. Given the large degree of slack at the time, the risk was that if output
remained  below  potential  for  too  long,  we  would  see  a  permanent  destruction  of  productive
capacity. The output gap would close the “wrong way” making the losses permanent.
When we said we wanted our policy to have effects without undue delay, we meant we wanted
the output gap to close “upwards” – and before such hysteresis effects could develop. This is
8
why we had to act forcefully.
Now, we can be confident that our policy is working and that those risks have abated. The threat
of deflation is gone and reflationary forces are at play. And since one of the drivers of inflation
today is positive supply developments, this should feed back positively into potential output rather
than  produce  hysteresis.  In  these  conditions,  we  can  be  more  assured  about  the  return  of
inflation to our objective than we were a few years ago.
This more favourable balance of risks has been already reflected in our monetary policy stance,
via the adjustments we have made to our forward guidance.
Another considerable change from three years ago is the clarification of the political outlook in the
euro  area.  For  years,  the  euro  area  has  lived  under  a  cloud  of  uncertainty  about  whether  the
necessary reforms would be implemented at both the domestic and Union levels. This acted as
a brake on confidence and investment, which is tantamount to an implicit tightening of economic
conditions.  Today,  things  have  changed.  Political  winds  are  becoming  tailwinds.  There  is
newfound  confidence  in  the  reform  process,  and  newfound  support  for  European  cohesion,
which could help unleash pent-up demand and investment.
Nevertheless, we are still in a situation of continuing slack, and where a long period of subpar
inflation translates into a slower return of inflation to our objective. Inflation dynamics are not yet
durable and self-sustaining. So our monetary policy needs to be persistent.
This is why the Governing Council has repeatedly emphasised that a very substantial degree of
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary  accommodation  is  still  needed  for  underlying  inflation  pressures  to  build  up,  and  to
support headline inflation in the medium term. This is reflected in our forward guidance on net
asset purchases and interest rates, as well as our decision to reinvest the principal payments
received under the APP for as long as necessary.
With  reflationary  dynamics  slowly  taking  hold,  we  now  need  to  ensure  that  overall  financing
conditions  continue  to  support  that  reflationary  process,  until  they  are  more  durable  and  self-
sustaining.
As  the  economy  continues  to  recover,  a  constant  policy  stance  will  become  more
accommodative, and the central bank can accompany the recovery by adjusting the parameters
of  its  policy  instruments  –  not  in  order  to  tighten  the  policy  stance,  but  to  keep  it  broadly
unchanged.
But  there  is  an  important  caveat  that  we  need  to  consider.  Financing  conditions  are  not  only
determined by the calibration of central bank instruments, but also by other market prices, some
of which are significantly affected by global developments.
In the past, especially in times of global uncertainty, volatility in financial market prices has at
times  caused  an  unwarranted  tightening  of  financial  conditions,  which  has  necessitated  a
monetary policy response.
So in the current context where global uncertainties remain elevated, there are strong grounds
for prudence  in  the  adjustment  of  monetary  policy  parameters,  even  when  accompanying  the
recovery.  Any  adjustments  to  our  stance  have  to  be  made  gradually,  and  only  when  the
improving dynamics that justify them appear sufficiently secure.
Conclusion
Let me conclude. Our assessment of the outlook for inflation and for monetary policy can be
summed up in three messages.
The first is confidence that monetary policy is effective and the transmission process will work.
All the signs now point to a strengthening and broadening recovery in the euro area. Deflationary
forces have been replaced by reflationary ones.
While there are still factors that are weighing on the path of inflation, at present they are mainly
temporary  factors  that  typically  the  central  bank  can  look  through.  However,  a  considerable
degree of monetary accommodation is still needed for inflation dynamics to become durable and
self-sustaining. So for us to be assured about the return of inflation to our objective, we need
persistence in our monetary policy.
And,  finally,  we  need prudence. As  the  economy  picks  up  we  will  need  to  be  gradual  when
adjusting our policy parameters, so as to ensure that our stimulus accompanies the recovery
amid the lingering uncertainties.
1
2
3
4
5
For a fuller account of the response of monetary policy to demand and supply shocks in the oil market see
Draghi M. (2015), “Global and Domestic Inflation”, speech at Economic Club of New York, 4 December.
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2016),  “The  Phillips  curve  as  an  instrument  for  analysing  prices  and  forecasting
inflation in Germany”, Monthly Report, April.
Source: AMECO database (workers aged 15–74 for the euro area and 16–74 for the US).
ECB (2017), “Assessing labour market slack”, Box 3, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “Scars or scratches? Hysteresis in the euro area”, speech at the International Center for
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 19 May.
6
7
8
ECB (2017), “Domestic and global drivers of inflation in the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4.
Banca d’Italia (2017), box on “Private sector contract renewals in 2016”, Economic Bulletin, No. 1, January.
For a fuller explanation of this point see Draghi, M. (2016), “On the importance of policy alignment to fulfil our
economic potential”, 5th Annual Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa Lecture at the Brussels Economic Forum 2016,
Brussels, 9 June.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
