Benoît  Cœuré:  Central  bank  communication  in  a  low  interest  rate
environment
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
an event organised by Bruegel, Brussels, 31 March 2017.
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  at  Bruegel,  a  think  tank  that  has  always  been  at  the
forefront of the policy debate in Europe, and I am grateful for the opportunity to contribute to the
1
discussion in this forum.
Today, I would like to share with you a few thoughts on central bank communication in a low
interest  rate  environment.  In  particular,  I  will  discuss,  drawing  on  the  ECB’s  experience,  the
communication  challenges  central  banks  face  when  rates  are  negative  and  when  there  is
uncertainty on the reaction function of policymakers. I will conclude with some remarks on the
current policy debate.
Let me start on a more general note, however.
The  relationship  of  central  banks  with  the  outside  world  has  evolved  over  the  years.  From  a
starting  point  of  near-complete  secrecy,  central  banks  have  come  all  the  way  to  using
communication explicitly as a tool of monetary policy.  Especially during the financial crisis, the
communication efforts of central banks around the world expanded.
2
There  are  good  reasons  for  this.  To  fulfil  their  mandates,  central  banks  have  injected  large
amounts of monetary stimulus, while also making use of novel instruments. The monetary policy
response  has  been  unprecedented  in  both  scale  and  scope.  This  has  certainly  added  further
impetus to central banks’ drive for accountability and transparency – something that we at the
ECB have always taken very seriously. Earlier this week, at an event organised by Transparency
International, also here in Brussels, I explained in more detail how the ECB goes about fulfilling its
3
accountability and transparency duties.
these  institutional 
I  will  not  discuss 
Today, 
focus  on
the functional dimension behind the increased importance of communication for central banks.
This  functional  dimension  derives  from  the  relationship  between  the  monetary  authority  and
financial markets.
Central bank communication as a tool for monetary policy
factors.  Rather, 
I  will 
In  today’s  economy,  the  transmission  of  monetary  impulses  starts  with  asset  prices.  A
transparent  policy  framework  greatly  enhances  our  ability  to  steer  financial  conditions  and,
hence, ultimately ensures the effective transmission of monetary policy in the pursuit of our price
stability objective.
The relationship between central banks’ policy communication and financial market conditions
received  even  greater  attention  when  central  banks  were  approaching  interest  rate  levels  that
were generally judged to offer limited or no further room for manoeuvre.
I will argue that in the vicinity of the effective lower bound for policy interest rates, communication
becomes even more important, and while there are similarities to communication further away
from the lower bound, there are also peculiar challenges.
I  said  before  that  monetary  policy  is  transmitted  mainly  through  asset  prices.  Since  financial
markets  exist  to  price  future  cash  flows,  they  are  inherently  forward-looking.  This  means
monetary policy works largely by affecting expectations of future policy interest rates – this is true
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
both at, and away from, the effective lower bound.
Away from the lower bound, monetary policy steers such expectations mainly by sending signals
through  the  current  level  of  central  bank  interest  rates  and  by  communicating  on  the  central
4
bank’s assessment of the macroeconomic outlook.
At the lower bound, the ability of central banks to ease the stance of monetary policy in this way
is constrained. Instead, central banks must increasingly rely on influencing expectations directly.
This  they  can  do  by  communicating  about  the  likely  path  of  future  policy  rates  –  by  providing
forward guidance.
In other words, the lower bound puts a premium on clear communication not only because it
represents unusual circumstances that require the central bank to explain itself carefully, but also
because it elevates the importance of communication in the monetary policy toolbox.
Indeed, with frictionless capital markets, at the effective lower bound forward guidance would be
the only way to ease the monetary policy stance.  In this setup, central bank asset purchases
would be ineffective: whether assets are held on the balance sheet of the public or private sector
would not affect term premia and, hence, long-term interest rates.
5
Of course we know that capital markets are not frictionless. This opens up an important role for
central  banks  to  intervene  in  asset  markets  via  outright  purchases  and  to  act  on  the  term
premium. So, forward guidance is one tool, but not the only one, central banks can resort to in
conditions where the space for changes in policy-makers’ traditional instrument – the short-term
policy rate – is constrained.
The ECB’s forward guidance
But let me focus on the workings of forward guidance by looking at the case of the ECB. I will
6
start with some general remarks before explaining our current forward guidance framework.
For  forward  guidance  to  be  credible,  it  ultimately  has  to  be  anchored  in  the  central  bank’s
mandate.  Any  pronouncement  we  make  about  the  likely  path  of  our  policy  instruments  is
inevitably based on current information and conveys our assessment of where the economy is
most likely headed over the policy-relevant horizon. This type of forward guidance is sometimes
termed “Delphic”  , because, like the Oracle of Delphi, it basically consists of a forecast, in this
case a forecast by the central bank of how the economy will likely evolve.
7
But our forward guidance is also intended to clarify our reaction function. The reaction function
maps  the  economic  environment  into  our  instrument  space.  To  put  it  simply,  it  relates  what
w e think  will  happen  to  what  we  will do  if  it  happens.  To  continue  with  the  Greek  mythology
theme,  this  means  there  is  also  an  “Odyssean”  element  to  forward  guidance:  like  Odysseus
tying  himself  to  his  ship’s  mast  in  order  to  resist  the  songs  of  the  Sirens,  it  conveys
a commitment to react in specific ways to the contingencies that might arise.
An extreme form of Odyssean forward guidance, which I will not discuss today because I believe
that it is not consistent with our mandate, would consist in committing to an unconditional interest
path, irrespective of contingencies.
This is how far theory goes.
In  practice,  and  applying  the  distinction  between  Delphic  and  Odyssean  guidance  to  the
ECB’s rate forward guidance, when we say that we “expect interest rates to remain at present or
lower levels for an extended period of time …”, we convey both our assessment of how we see
inflation  most  likely  evolving  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon  and  how  we  intend  to  map  this
outlook into the level of our key policy rates.
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
You  can  now  easily  see  that  our  rate  forward  guidance  entails  two  key  components:
a structural component that corresponds to our reaction function – our monetary policy strategy
– which is firmly anchored in our primary mandate. In today’s world, where central banks make
use  of  different  instruments,  our  reaction  function  also  includes  the  mapping  of  any  desired
monetary policy stance into instruments, such as policy rates and asset purchases. Think of it,
ideally, as a finely tuned machine that we constantly feed with our assessment of the likely future
path of inflation, which itself is the variable component, for it evolves as a result of the incoming
data stream.
The  same  two  components  –  a  structural  and  a  variable  one  –  also  apply  to  our  forward
guidance on the asset purchase programme (APP), which contains three main elements:
First,  clear  Delphic  communication  on  expected  volumes  and  the  purchase  horizon,
currently “until December 2017 …”.
Second, an Odyssean element of state contingency that clarifies the Governing Council’s
reaction function should it not see “a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent
with its inflation aim.”
And  third,  since  last  December  an  additional  Odyssean  clarification  that  expresses  our
preparedness to increase the size and/or duration of the APP under certain conditions, i.e. “if
the  outlook  becomes  less  favourable,  or  if  financial  conditions  become  inconsistent  with
further progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation …”.
Taken together, the ECB’s current forward guidance encompasses a carefully expounded series
of expectations involving both key policy rates and asset purchases.
Indeed,  guidance  on  policy  rates  is  linked  to  the APP  timeline,  with  the  Governing  Council’s
expectation being that they will remain at present or lower levels “well past the horizon of our net
asset  purchases.”  The  logic  behind  this  guidance,  in  very  simple  terms,  is  that  it  may  be
beneficial  to  retain  full  control  over  the  expected  path  of  future  short-term  policy  rates,  while
allowing  a  gradual  decompression  of  the  term  premium  if  and  when  we  see  solid  progress
towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.
At any rate, for our forward guidance, both on rates and the APP, to be credible, we need to keep
our policy expectations well aligned with our evolving assessment of the balance of risks and the
outlook for inflation – this is the Delphic part of our forward guidance. We would pay a high price
in terms of our credibility if we failed to adapt our forward guidance once we had changed our
views on the outlook.
I will come back to this point later but let me note, for now, that a too gradual adjustment of our
guidance could ultimately be quite costly. Indeed, central banks and markets may have moved
8
towards what Jeremy Stein and co-author have called a “gradualist” equilibrium.
This  is  a  situation  in  which  central  banks  make  gradual  changes  to  policy  tools  and
communication  in  order  not  to  upset  the  market.  In  such  an  environment,  any  change  to  the
central  bank’s  policy  inclination  will  have  a  major  effect  on  asset  prices.  The  reason  is  that
markets have come to expect the initial central bank move – no matter how incremental – to be
followed by many similar moves in the same direction.
This effect is likely to be greater in conditions where there is an exceptionally large amount of
monetary stimulus in place. It makes the expectations of an announcement of a change in the
monetary policy stance much more important for markets.
The ECB’s experience with forward guidance: successes and challenges
With this in mind, what has been our experience with forward guidance?
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is too early to draw definitive conclusions – after all, we are still in a lower bound environment.
But we do have some evidence that our forward guidance has been successful – in the following
respects.
First, it has had a stabilising influence on certain market prices that reflect expectations of our
policy instruments and are important in the chain of transmission. We have evidence that the
sensitivity  of  forward  rates  to  macroeconomic  news  declined  at  the  time  of  our  (very  first)
forward  guidance  announcement  in  July  2013,  and  that  sensitivity  has  remained  lower  than
historical regularities ever since. In other words, markets trust our assessment of the economy
and the implied path of policy rates.
Second,  by  stating  that  domestic  policies  are  likely  to  differ  from  those  elsewhere,  forward
guidance  has  insulated  euro  area  financial  conditions  from  external  shocks  that  would  have
resulted  in  an  unwarranted  tightening   and  facilitated  nominal  exchange  rate  adjustments
consistent with different monetary conditions, which themselves reflect different circumstances.
9
Third,  it  has  been  a  source  of  additional  monetary  policy  accommodation  at  a  time  when  the
room for cuts in key policy rates has been very limited.
Let me explain this last point in more detail, referring back to our forward guidance on the APP.
The  impact  of  asset  purchases  on  market  prices  is  likely  to  depend  critically  on  how  these
purchases are communicated to the market. The fact that we chose to communicate, as part of
our forward guidance, and from the very beginning, an expectation of the intended horizon of APP
purchases  is  likely  to  have  been  a  key  determinant  of  the  success  of  the  programme.  The
reason  is  that  providing  guidance  on  the  horizon  helps  markets  to  form  more  accurate
expectations about the likely amount of purchases – conditional on the price stability outlook –
thereby reducing uncertainty and hence term/risk premia.
This has been confirmed by recent research: when flanked by communication on the likely size,
announcements of purchase programmes have been found to lead to a much greater decline in
stock market uncertainty compared with announcements that omit a size indication.
10
This  first  element  of  our  APP  guidance  was  reinforced  by  the  second  element  –  the  state-
contingent  leg  of  our  forward  guidance.  By  establishing  an  intimate  link  to  our  price  stability
objective, we made clear that the expected volume could well be larger should it take longer for
inflation to converge back to levels closer to 2%.
In practice, this means that by clarifying our reaction function in this way, markets were able to
better  anticipate  our  actions,  thereby  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  policy  by  frontloading  the
required accommodation. This has not always been a gentle ride as I will explain in a minute but I
think it is fair to say that the state-contingent leg of APP forward guidance has supported and
continues to support the important price discovery function of markets.
Overall,  therefore,  the  combination  of  time  and  state-contingent  forward  guidance  has  been
highly  instrumental  in  supporting  powerful  portfolio  rebalancing  effects  and  a  compression  of
term premia, and in turn has led to a broad-based easing of financial conditions.
I think the evidence speaks for itself.
Euro  area  bank  lending  rates  to  firms  have  fallen  by  some  80  basis  points  since  we  started
purchasing covered bonds in October 2014, a step which was succeeded shortly afterwards by
purchases of asset-backed securities (ABS) and government securities. ECB analysis attributes
a significant portion of this fall to the workings of our asset purchase programme.
11
And  effective  forward  guidance  on  and  implementation  of  the APP  may  have  also  helped  to
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
reinforce forward guidance on rates – a channel famously labelled the “signalling” channel. The
argument goes that large-scale bond purchases would be perceived by markets as preventing
policy-makers from raising rates quickly, as this would cause losses on central banks’ balance
sheet. In other words, central banks purchasing assets “put their money where their mouth is”.
At the same time, I will not deny that communication on policy intentions has been, and remains,
challenging and that we cannot always be sure how our forward guidance works.
Much of the challenge arises of course from the fact that communication is not a one-way street
as I alluded to before. There is an interaction between central bank communication and financial
markets which creates a well-known risk that financial conditions would become de-anchored.
Paul Samuelson famously compared the central banker who reads too much from movements
in the bond markets to a monkey who “discovers his reflection in the mirror and thinks that by
looking  at  the  reactions  of  that  monkey  –  including  its  surprises  –  he  is  getting  new
information”.
12
Let me explain by giving you two concrete examples.
The  first  one  refers  to  our  decision  of  December  2015,  when  we  announced  a  substantial
package of policy measures, including a six-month extension of the APP, a 10 basis point cut in
the deposit facility rate (DFR) and the reinvestment of the principal payments on the maturing
bonds.  To  give  you  an  idea  of  the  size,  the  additional  purchases  alone,  including  the
reinvestment,  amounted  to  almost  €700  billion  of  bonds  that  we  expected  to  extract  from  the
market – an appreciable amount of stimulus.
Yet, the market paid little heed and bond yields tightened measurably on the day. We observed a
hawkish  revision  of  expectations  about  the  trajectory  of  ECB  policy  rates  and  increased
uncertainty about our reaction function. Market intelligence following the decision suggested that
the absence of clearer forward guidance on the possibility of further cuts in the DFR led to a
sharp repricing in the EONIA forward market.
This suggests two things: first, the introduction of negative rates, while having a powerful easing
effect on the monetary policy stance, has created uncertainty about how low we are prepared to
go with our key interest rates.
Second,  any  perceived  communication  on  the  lower  bound  is  a  strong  signal.  Recall  that
markets on that day undertook a repricing, although the Governing Council, in each and every
Introductory Statement, has kept an implicit reference to its initial rate forward guidance of July
2013, namely that it expects rates to remain at present or lower levels.
13
Incidentally,  this  experience  squares  with  recent  findings  in  the  literature.  Researchers  at  the
ECB have shown that if central bank communication leads to different interpretations by market
participants – in this case about the willingness to cut the DFR further and the likely lower bound
– they tend to look to financial market prices to find out about how their peers have interpreted the
same statement.
 This makes it more likely that they react to exogenous disturbances, which in
turn increases uncertainty.
14
At  face  value,  this  would  call  for  self-standing  forward  guidance  on  the  lower  bound.  But  as  I
explained in my remarks in Yale last year, there is great uncertainty about the estimates of the
so-called “economic” lower bound, the level at which further reductions in rates would be more
likely to lead to a tightening rather than an easing of the stance.
15
Would it be credible for central banks to provide guidance on such sketchy, and probably time-
varying,  estimates?  My  answer  would  be  no,  at  least  not  until  we  can  say  with  much  more
confidence where the lower bound might be.
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
But in respect of what we do know, communication should be as clear as possible, in particular
when uncertainty about non-standard measures is considerable.
This brings me to my next observation: the market’s reception of our decision last December to
extend the intended horizon of APP purchases to December 2017, but to reduce the monthly
purchases from €80 billion to €60 billion.
It was feared that a reduction in the pace of purchases – despite the longer purchase horizon –
could cause instabilities in financial markets, similar to those during the so-called “taper tantrum”
episode in the US in 2013.
These  risks  were  ingrained  in  market  surveys  which  suggested  that  the  market  was  almost
unanimous in believing that the ECB would continue purchases at €80 billion per month, also
beyond March 2017.
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  these  fears  proved  unfounded.  The  December  2016  policy
announcement was met with broad approval by market participants, thereby safeguarding the
continued  support  for  the  recovery  in  the  euro  area  through  very  accommodative  financing
conditions.
I  see  two  potential  trains  of  thought  that  could  square  the  benign  market  response  with  the
signals from surveys and the Fed’s experience: the success of the December 2016 decision in
preserving  the  favourable  market  conditions  could  be  attributed  to  the  additional  “easing  bias”
attached to the APP that I mentioned earlier; the other line of thinking would be that the available
market surveys painted a biased and misleading picture of true investor expectations.
Which line of thinking is likely to be closer to reality?
In  my  view,  both  are  equally  relevant.  The  decision  to  communicate  that  we  stand  ready  to
increase the size and/or duration of the programme under certain conditions assured investors
that there was no change in our reaction function. Rather, the reduction in the pace of purchases
was a mere reflection of the diminished deflationary tail risks – a Delphic signal embedded in
clearer Odyssean forward guidance, if you wish.
But the additional easing bias, however important it may be, is unlikely to explain the whole story.
One reason is that some market participants voice concerns about our ability to increase the
monthly  pace  of  purchases  given  the  scarcity  of  bonds  available  in  the  market  and  the
constraints  on  our  purchase  programme.  Others  doubt  our willingness  to  step  up  purchases
once more.
Both  concerns  seem  to  cast  doubt  on  the  credibility  of  this  part  of  our  forward  guidance  –
wrongly, in my view, considering our proven track record of decisive action in the face of adverse
shocks that threaten to jeopardise the achievement of our price stability objective.
But  if  we  take  these  doubts  seriously,  it  means  that  markets  might  have  discounted  more
strongly the possibility of a more abrupt end to the APP post-March 2017 than what available
surveys might have suggested – a view that would seem to corroborate, at least at face value,
the argument put forward by Hyun Shin.
16
He argues that we should not think of the market as a homogenous entity with its own coherent
set of beliefs and expectations. Rather, the marketplace is diverse, and prices at any given point
in time aggregate many different – indeed opposing – opinions. Investors with the most strident
views – that is, with the highest degree of conviction – may have the largest influence on pricing
in  the  short  term.  It  is  because  these  market  participants  are  willing  to  make  the  strongest
commitment, both in terms of the size of the positions they take, and in terms of leverage.
17
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
You can see what I’m getting at. Perhaps the overall benign market response to our December
2016  announcement  may  have  frustrated  those  who  expected  an  outright  tapering  decision,
perhaps because they doubted our willingness or ability to continue purchasing.
This suggests that expectations gleaned from market surveys may be imperfect reflections of
“true” market expectations. Of course, it may also be that we have not been clear enough in our
communication – that investors misunderstood our forward guidance or our reaction function,
which is different from doubts about our willingness to act. To some extent, when there are too
many disparate voices, such  risks  of  miscommunication  –  the  danger  of  cacophony,  as Alan
Blinder
  once  put  it  –  can  be  mitigated  by  putting  discipline  on  communication  by  monetary
policy  committees  –  the  Governing  Council  in  the  case  of  the  ECB.  In  fact,  the  case  for
disciplined communication is even stronger at the lower bound.
18
All this is not to say that we should ignore what investors think and expect. Market intelligence is
an important input into the analysis of financial market developments. It rather means that the
successful  sequence  of  policymaking  –  in  particular  in  the  presence  of  unconventional  policy
measures – is (i) to be clear about our reaction function, including how the expected monetary
policy stance would be mapped into different policy instruments, (ii) to disclose frequently our
assessment of the state of the economy and its likely evolution, and (iii) to act accordingly.
In doing so, central banks can lead the markets and minimise the risk of being led by them. And
by fostering the markets’ understanding of our reaction function, we reduce market volatility and
support both the effectiveness and predictability of monetary policy actions.
Conclusions and outlook
19
With these experiences and challenges in mind, allow me a few thoughts on the current state of
our forward guidance – and with this I will conclude.
As  you  know,  earlier  this  month  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  leave  its  forward  guidance
unchanged. Thus, we have maintained both “easing biases” – the one on purchases and the one
on key interest rates, i.e. meaning that rates could go lower.
The euro area economy has undoubtedly made a great deal of progress. The recovery has been
steadily  broadening,  firming,  and  may  even  have  gained  some  further  momentum  since  the
beginning of this year. In fact, we may now see the full potential of our policy measures unfolding.
That of course raises the question as to whether the time has come to communicate a change in
our policy expectations.
As I said earlier, our forward guidance framework consists of two key components: a structural
and a variable one. Changing the structural part is not an option as it would leave markets in a
state  of  uncertainty,  with  risks  of  excess  volatility  and  even  of  a  de-stabilisation  of  financial
conditions.
But  the  variable  component  of  our  guidance  demands  that  we:  (i)  regularly  re-assess  the
medium-term price stability outlook, (ii) run this assessment through our reaction function, and
(iii) decide whether or not our policy expectations on the horizon and pace of our asset purchase
programmes,  on  the  level  of  our  policy  rates  (“present  or  lower”)  and  on  their  expected
endurance (“well past …”) need adjustment.
Should  we  conclude  that  an  adjustment  is  needed,  we  should  not  hesitate  to  adapt  our
communication. After all, abandoning the intimate link between our policy expectations and our
assessment of the progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation would risk
creating  the  false  impression  that  we  had  changed  our  reaction  function  –  a  dangerous  path
towards time-inconsistency.
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Of  course,  should  we  decide  to  change  our  policy  expectations  on  the  back  of  an  improving
economic landscape, this does not mean that we would not lower interest rates or increase the
pace of purchases in any state of the world. It just means that – given the current outlook – it
seems increasingly less likely that we will have to do so.
In a similar way, any decision to change our policy expectations does not prejudice further policy
steps. There are no automatic implications for our policy tools. It is natural that a potential change
in expectations first has to withstand the test of time.
Ultimately, also the choice of sequencing of policy instruments will be the outcome of our regular
assessment of the medium-term price stability outlook, reflecting the state-dependent nature of
our expectations of the horizon over which our policy instruments are likely to be maintained.
And here, let me be clear.
The latest incoming data have shifted the balance of risks for growth towards neutral territory in
my view. But at the same time, measures of underlying inflation in the euro area remain subdued
and our projected path of inflation still remains highly conditional on our policy stance. In line with
our forward guidance on the APP, this clearly suggests that current expectations on the intended
horizon of our purchases, as encapsulated in our Introductory Statement, and on the sequencing
of policy instruments, remain valid today.
Thank you for your attention.
References
Altavilla,  C.,  G.  Carboni  and  R.  Motto  (2015),  “Asset  purchase  programmes  and  financial
markets: lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper Series No 1864.
Blattner, T. and M. Joyce (2016), “Net debt supply shocks in the euro area and the implications
for QE”, ECB Working Paper No 1957.
Blattner,  T.,  M.  Catenaro,  M.  Ehrmann,  R.  Strauch  and  J.  Turunen,  “The  predictability  of
monetary policy”, Occasional Paper Series No 83, ECB, March 2008.
Blinder, A. S. (2004), “The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern”, New Haven, CN:
Yale University Press.
Blinder,  A.,  Ehrmann,  M.,  Fratzscher,  M.,  De  Haan,  J.,  Jansen,  D.-J.  (2008),  “Central  bank
communication  and  monetary  policy:  a  survey  of  theory  and  evidence”,  Journal  of  Economic
Literature 46, pages 910–945.
Brand C., D. Buncic and J. Turunen (2010), “The impact of ECB monetary policy decisions and
communication on the yield curve”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 8 (6),
pages 1266–1298.
Campbell, J., Evans, C., Fisher, J. and A. Justiniano (2012), “Macroeconomic Effects of Federal
Reserve  Forward  Guidance”,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic Activity,  Spring  2012,  Issue  1,
pages 1-80.
Cœuré, B. (2013), “The usefulness of forward guidance”, Speech before the Money Marketeers
Club of New York, New York, 26 September 2013.
Cœuré, B. (2016), “Assessing the implications of negative interest rates”, Speech at the Yale
Financial Crisis Forum, Yale School of Management, New Haven, 28 July 2016.
Cœuré, B. (2017), “Independence and accountability in a changing world”, Introductory remarks
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
at the Transparency International EU Event, “Two sides of the same coin? Independence and
accountability of the European Central Bank”, Brussels, 28 March 2017.
ECB (2017), “Impact of the ECB’s non-standard measures on financing conditions: taking stock
of recent evidence”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2/2017.
Eggertsson,  G.  and  M.  Woodford  (2003),  “The  zero  bound  on  interest  rates  and  optimal
monetary policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2003, Issue 1, pages 139 235.
Filardo, A. and B. Hofmann (2014), “Forward guidance at the zero lower bound”, BIS Quarterly
Review, March 2014.
Fuhrer,  J.  (1994),  “Goals,  Guidelines,  and  Constraints  Facing  Monetary  Policymakers”,
Proceedings of a conference held in June 1994, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference
Series, No. 38, p.14.
Gaballo,  G.  (2016),  “Rational  inattention  to  news:  the  perils  of  forward  guidance”,  American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (1), 42–97.
Gürkaynak, R.S., Sack, B. and E. Swanson (2005), “Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words? The
Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements”, International Journal of
Central Banking, vol. 1(1).
Praet,  P.  (2013),  “Forward  Guidance  and  the  ECB”,  column  by  Peter  Praet,  Member  of  the
Executive Board of the ECB, published on VoxEU.org on 6 August 2013.
Shin, H. (2013), “Commentary on Robert E. Hall, “The Routes into and out of the Zero Lower
Bound”,  speech  delivered  at  “Global  Dimensions  of  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy”,  a
symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.’
Stein, J. (2014), “Challenges for monetary policy communication”, remarks by Jeremy C. Stein to
the Money Marketeers of New York University, May 6, 2014.
Stein,  J.  and  Sunderam, A.  (2016),  “The  Fed,  the  bond  market,  and  gradualism  in  monetary
policy”, manuscript, Harvard University.
Woodford, M. (2012), “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-rate Lower Bound”, The
Changing Policy Landscape, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pages 185–288.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
I would like to thank S. Andreopoulos for his contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the
opinions contained herein.
See Blinder et al. (2008).
See Cœuré (2017).
See Gürkaynak et al. (2005) and, for the ECB, Brand et al. (2010).
See Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Woodford (2012) in particular.
For earlier contributions, see Coeuré (2013) and Praet (2013).
See Campbell et al. (2012).
See Stein (2014) and Stein and Sunderam (2016).
See, e.g., Filardo and Hofmann (2014), p. 45.
See Coenen et al. (2017).
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
See, e.g., Altavilla et al. (2015), Blattner and Joyce (2016) and ECB (2017).
See Fuhrer (1994).
Specifically,  on  occasions  of  no  change,  the  Introductory  Statement  said  that  “[…]  in  line  with  our  forward
guidance, we decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged.”
Gaballo (2016).
See Cœuré (2016). The speech concluded that the current level of the DFR is “still far away from the physical
lower bound”, triggering cash substitution, and safely above the economic lower bound.
See Shin (2013).
See also Stein (2014).
Blinder (2004).
See e.g. Blattner et al. (2008) and Blinder et al. (2008).
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
