Carl-Ludwig  Thiele:  Industry  Dialogue  on  "Distributed  ledger
technology - potential benefits and risks"
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Carl-Ludwig  Thiele,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the G20 conference &quot;Digitising finance, financial inclusion and
financial literacy&quot;, Wiesbaden, 26 January 2017.
 Mr von Weizsäcker,
Ladies and gentlemen
Whenever a technical topic attracts as much media attention as blockchain technology has, it
must mean it’s something special, especially considering the topic itself is not an easy one.
It’s safe to say that there is much anticipation surrounding distributed ledger technology – some
feelings  of  hope,  some  of  fear. And  the  influence  this  technology  is  likely  to  have  extends  far
beyond the financial sector.
The Deutsche Bundesbank  operates  large  financial  market  infrastructures  and  also  develops
these further in line with technological advances. For this reason, we need to be aware of the
potential benefits and risks of this technology early on.
Together with Deutsche Börse, we have developed a preliminary prototype for blockchain-based
settlement.
This prototype has the following capabilities:
Settling payments based on blockchain technology,
Transferring securities,
Processing  basic  delivery-versus-payment  transactions,  where  securities  purchases  are
settled and paid for simultaneously, and
Processing basic corporate actions, such as coupon payments on bonds and redemptions
of maturing securities.
The aim of the project is to learn, step by step:
How blockchain technology works,
How secure and reliable blockchain-based transactions are,
Which factors affect the costs of blockchain-based transactions,
How efficient and effective blockchain-based processes are, and
How existing processes may be improved using blockchain technology.
One of the key points here is increasing process efficiency. By using a shared data pool across
all  entities  concerned,  it  should  be  possible  to  standardise  and  simplify  some  of  the  overly
complicated transaction monitoring processes we have today. In addition, a shared data pool in
combination  with  a  flexible  access  rights  concept  would,  for  example,  also  establish  the
conditions in which the relevant regulatory reporting and internal audit requirements could be met
with reduced effort and designed more securely.
We opted for a concept based on a Hyperledger blockchain. The most important considerations
for us when designing the Hyperledger-based prototype were:
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Having a closed – or “permissioned blockchain” – network, where only authorised users can
transact on our blockchain network.
Confidentiality and responsibility – we believe that even in the future, financial transactions
will continue to be governed by today’s standards as far as confidentiality and acceptance of
responsibility  for  effected  transactions  go.  That’s  why  each  individual  transaction  is
encrypted, along with the identities of the transacting parties.
Our  conceptual  study  shows  that  blockchain  technology  can  be  adapted  to  meet  the  current
needs  and  requirements  of  the  financial  system.  The  prototype  works.  Having  said  that,  its
further development for mass use is still presenting many challenges.
The conceptual study is far from being market-ready. We are currently only at the preliminary
stage with a test application, with which we are able to simulate large-volume delivery-versus-
payment securities transactions.
At  this  point,  we  are  unable  to  say  whether  this  application  can  be  adapted  for  mass  use  or
whether this is even a viable option in terms of costs.
So, to summarise: our joint project has seen the development of an elementary, but functional,
blockchain-based application, which caters to the basic requirements of the financial sector.
With  this  as  our  starting  point,  we  aim  to  develop  a  technically  more  sophisticated  prototype,
capable of providing information on technical performance and thus allowing comparison with our
present settlement infrastructure.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
