Peter Praet: Interview in Der Spiegel
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
Der Spiegel, conducted by Mr Stefan Kaiser on 19 June 2017 and published on 22 June 2017.
 Mr Praet, you are a Belgian who was born in Germany and who spent the first years of
your childhood here. Can you understand why so many people here regard the European
Central Bank (ECB) as the greatest threat to their personal wealth?
I  think  the  German  public  is  much  more  impartial  on  that  point.  Most  people  understand  the
position we are in: we have to define the right monetary policy for a monetary union with very
different countries. The press often criticises us for this, but the personal discussions I have here
are  much  more  courteous  and  relaxed.  Even  the  discussions  within  the  ECB’s  Governing
Council are very good, even when there are critical voices.
But it’s the Germans who complain most about the ECB, isn’t it?
Of course, criticism in Germany is somewhat more vocal than in other countries. That also has
to  do  with  Germany’s  role  in  the  financial  and  euro  crisis.  Because,  on  the  one  hand,  it  had
already undertaken important reforms and was in a stronger position. And because, on the other
hand, the people of Germany are by tradition not so highly indebted. That’s a cultural thing – and I
very much share it. But it’s also a factor that played a role in the origin of the crisis.
How?
It concerns the creditor-debtor relationship: before the crisis, Germany was a significant lender to
other countries. German savers invested, mainly via their banks, a lot of money abroad – in those
countries where households and companies had bigger debts, for example Spain. And the crisis
came and the money flowed back – €400 billion came back from Spain alone and a large part of
that originated in German savings. The ECB made liquidity available to banks in exchange for
collateral. That prevented a meltdown of the financial system, which otherwise would have led to
strongly deflationary pressure across the euro area.
So Germany was also saved by the ECB?
In Germany, one might say that it’s obvious that debtors have to pay back what they owe. But the
lenders  also  bear  a  responsibility.  They  too  should  be  careful.  The  Germans  are  complaining
about the interest rates being so low. We understand that. But they also have to bear in mind that
lenders  were  very  well  protected  in  and  after  the  crisis  –  and  that  none  of  Germany’s  large
neighbours  slipped  into  a  depression.  That  too  would  have  had  a  serious  impact  on  the
economy, not least in Germany.
What do you say to those people who put money to one side month by month in order to
be able to afford a little something when they get older – but whose plans won’t work out
now because of the zero interest rates?
We  have  studied  how  the  low  interest  rates  affect  the  disposable  income  of  households,
including in Germany. People not only earn interest on their savings, but they also borrow money
–  for  example,  if  they  buy  a  house.  And  the  results  show  that  the  advantages  offset  the
disadvantages.
So there’s no reason to complain?
Yes  there  is,  because  of  course  not  everyone  benefits.  All  monetary  policy  decisions  have
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
undesirable  distributional  effects  as  well.  Consider,  for  example,  the  equity  markets,  where
prices have risen dramatically. In Germany, those suffering most from the low interest rates are
middle-aged people who own a small fortune and have invested it largely in savings accounts
and in interest-bearing securities – i.e. it’s not very diversified.
Are you telling Germans that their money would be better invested in shares?
Of  course  I’m  not  giving  investment  tips;  I’m  a  central  banker. And  to  be  honest,  I  invest  my
money in a similar way to most Germans.
In Germany, some economists are already warning about the economy overheating – and
in many other countries in the euro area, the recovery is now evident. Isn’t it the right
time to exit from the policy of extremely cheap money?
As a central bank, we conduct monetary policy for the whole of the euro area – and this policy
has  been  working.  There  is  a  broad-based  recovery  happening  and  it  will  probably  continue.
Germany has made a bit more progress than others in that respect. The output gap is closing, in
other words, Germany’s economy is exploiting its potential virtually to the full. Surprisingly, prices
are still rising slowly. But this will change over the short or long term. And it will help to trigger a
change in monetary policy. So there is light at the end of the tunnel.
Before  you  raise  the  key  interest  rates,  you  intend  to  wind  down  government  bond
purchases from the current €60 billion per month to zero. But can it be done so easily?
The bond spreads for countries such as Italy might once again shoot upwards, as during
the euro crisis.
If  the  spreads  for  a  particular  country  rise,  that’s  not  a  monetary  policy  problem.  We  are  not
singling out particular countries and neither are we there to ensure governments have favourable
financing  conditions.  When  the  day  comes,  we  will  look  at  inflation  and  act  accordingly,
regardless of whether governments complain. We forewarned them and they clearly understood
that. I have just read a commentary by the Italian Minister of Economy and Finance, Pier Carlo
Padoan. “When the bond purchases come to an end, we are on our own”, he writes. And he’s
right.
Italy is currently in any case the euro area’s problem child. Nowhere else is the economy
growing so slowly; nowhere else are the banks sitting on so many non-performing loans.
How serious is the situation?
Indeed, the Italian economy hasn’t grown for 20 years. Real GDP per capita – taking inflation into
account  –  has  stagnated  over  that  period.  Italy  therefore  has  a  deep-seated  problem.  The
government is addressing that, but it also has to convince people to support the reforms. In fact,
the economy has great potential, with very many creative enterprises.
Until now, Greece was always the euro area’s shakiest prospect. But the country has just
agreed on new loans and further debt relief with its international creditors. Observers
are  now  expecting  the  ECB  to  also  accept  Greek  government  bonds  in  its  purchase
programme.  They  have  been  excluded  until  now  because  of  doubts  about  the
sustainability of the country’s debt.
Before we change any aspects of the asset purchase programme, we need to conduct our own
analysis  of  Greece’s  debt  sustainability.  We  will  not  rely  on  others  for  that.  Whether  it’s  the
European  Stability  Mechanism  or  the  European  Commission,  everyone  has  their  own
perspective. But when it comes to buying bonds, we have to take a look for ourselves.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
That means the answer is “no”?
That means we have to take a look for ourselves.
The  Brexit  negotiations  started  this  week.  From  an  economist’s  perspective,  how
important is it that the EU and the United Kingdom reach an agreement?
Extremely important. When we say that the economic outlook for the euro area is good and that
risks are broadly balanced, that doesn’t mean that there are no risks. There is currently a lot of
uncertainty about the direction of the United States’ economic policy in the coming months. We
now have a good sense of how things will develop in China, but not in the United States. And it’s
a  fairly  similar  story  with  the  United  Kingdom.  It  shows  how  a  country  can  create  severe
difficulties  for  itself.  Europe  offers  a  robust  institutional  framework,  including  for  trade.  The
internal  market  works  and  is  very  important.  And  now  the  United  Kingdom  is  leaving  it  and
heading for great uncertainty.
What can the negotiations achieve?
In my opinion, the British have made a huge mistake. Populist forces have stirred up people’s
fears and fear is not a good counsellor. The damage is done, the British economy is already
slowing  down.  Now  it  is  just  about  minimising  the  negative  impact.  I  hope  there  will  still  be  a
reasonably sensible solution.
Does US policy also concern you a lot?
Not many major decisions have been made there yet, unlike in the United Kingdom. And I hope
that, in the end, reason will prevail. In general we should not get mixed up in power politics where
everyone only seeks their own advantage. Ultimately, the danger is that large countries dictate
deals to the others. That would be catastrophic. We need strong international institutions. And we
again need a unified Europe. Because the weaker Europe is, the more dangerous it will be for us.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
