Peter Praet: Interview in VDI Nachrichten
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
VDI Nachrichten, conducted by Ms Sabine Seeger and published on 24 March 2017.
 Mr Praet, the European Union is celebrating its 60th anniversary on 25 March in Rome.
After a brilliant start and major achievements, the Community is now in a crisis. Can it be
overcome, do you think?
The people of the European Union (EU) have got so used to the benefits of open borders and the
Single Market that they can no longer imagine what it was like before or what it would be like
without it. They live in a stable world and are not always aware that it’s a great asset, and one
that needs to be preserved.
What has to be done now?
We have to re-convince people that the EU market, with more than 500 million people, forms the
basis for our prosperity. When we laid the foundation for it in 1992 with the Maastricht Treaty, the
EU was a grouping of relatively homogeneous states. However, as a result of the enlargement,
countries were integrated [into the EU] which had much lower income levels or much weaker
social safety nets. This has led to distortions which we have to address.
Some examples?
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  trade  and  a  larger  market  foster  prosperity.  But  we  should  not
overlook the fact that this progress does not benefit everyone to the same extent. This may lead
to  resentment.  Such  feelings  cannot  simply  be  brushed  aside;  people’s  concerns  have  to  be
taken  seriously.  Moreover,  the  enlargement  was  linked  to  the  expectation  that  the  Community
would continue to come together and that people’s circumstances would steadily improve. This
has happened for many, but not for all. Also, the financial crisis which occurred at the start of the
recession in 2009 has led to a crisis of credibility. So there are reasons for many people to feel
discontent. On the other hand, the EU is willingly used as a scapegoat. Some find this a cheap
way to distract from national problems, such as undesirable developments on the labour market,
in social security systems or in debilitating bureaucracies.
The  world  is  less  safe  because  of  politicians  such  as  Trump,  Putin  and  Erdogan.
Shouldn’t this make people think again?
We  have  been  able  to  progress  peacefully  for  a  long  time  under  the  protection  of  the  United
States.  We  have  set  ourselves  up  in  a  multilateral  world.  But  the  old  world  order  is  being
challenged. In the worst-case scenario, there is a risk that power and size will matter above all. In
such  a  system  the  great  powers,  the  US,  Russia  and  China,  would  dominate.  The  voices  of
smaller countries would lose their relevance if they act in isolation. And let’s face it, even the
biggest European countries fall into this category if left to their own devices. If we want to protect
our interests and our conception of how we want to live together, then we have to stand together.
And that’s only possible through the EU.
One of the biggest challenges is populism, which takes aim at the EU in many ways. How
can we convince people that populism will lead to our undoing?
We  are  seeing  mistrust  in  and  scepticism  about  the  elites.  All  too  often,  problems  and
grievances,  which  of  course  exist  in  our  societies,  are  no  longer  being  addressed  in  order  to
seek  the  right  solutions,  but  are  becoming  the  expression  of  a  general  rejection.  Populists
promise  supposedly  simple  solutions  which  are,  at  the  same  time,  specious  and  ultimately
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
harmful. How can you take a stand against them? First of all, you should listen and take people’s
concerns  seriously,  because  it’s  essential  to  consider  carefully  the  real  and  supposed
grievances and, if possible, resolve them. Lastly, it’s necessary to explain the consequences of
political action: if people vote for populists who idealise the nation state and make its sovereignty
absolute,  then  those  voters  have  to  know  that,  although  they  would  live  in  smaller,  easier-to-
control markets, it would also mean much higher prices for consumers and reduced prosperity.
Basically, as I see it, people vote for populists in order to protest, but not to reject the EU as
such.
Given  the  current  mood,  do  you  still  see  any  opportunities  for  further  steps  towards
integration?
Yes, we are working on a deepening of the Single Market to facilitate free trade. For example, if
the  EU  harmonises  the  performance  of  vacuum  cleaners,  then  they  can  be  marketed  right
across  Europe,  in  addition  to  being  a  factor  in  energy  efficiency.  But  people  see  this  as
“Brussels” wanting to impose a diktat, as almost some kind of “harassment”. Harmonisation cuts
the cost of our products, which would otherwise have to be adjusted separately for each national
market.  So  when  the  talk  is  about  a  deeper  EU,  greater  harmonisation  and  fewer  barriers  to
trade,  then  inevitably  that  is  at  the  expense  of  the  Member  States’  freedom  to  decide.  But  in
areas where national or even regional institutions are better suited to establish the right rules,
then the principle of subsidiarity should be applied to a greater extent. It’s not about integration as
a  value per  se,  but  about  integration  that’s  appropriate  and  necessary.  I  think  there  is  the
necessary consensus on this point.
Now  that  the  euro  area  has  wriggled  its  way  out  of  the  crisis,  things  are  improving
economically.
Things  are  getting  better  but  the  economic  situation  still  varies  a  lot.  Germany,  which  has
weathered the crisis well because of the low level of government debt and household debt, is in a
very good position. But other countries were severely hit and still have some serious challenges.
The  good  news  is  that  the  recovery  is  firming  up  in  all  the  countries  of  the  euro  area  and
expanding into more and more sectors. Consumer and business confidence is rising, despite all
the political uncertainties. That’s encouraging. After all the years of crisis progress is being made
and people have trust in it.
Is the upturn a result of the ECB’s low interest rate policy?
In  2009  we  had  the  biggest  recession  in  the  post-war  era,  with  a  sharp  increase  in
unemployment. Since that low more than four million new jobs have been created in the euro
area. Our monetary policy has supported the recovery as it has made financing conditions for
banks  and  thus  also  for  households  and  businesses  easier.  But  let  us  take  a  step  back  and
consider  the  economic  slump.  The  sovereign  debt  crisis  resulted  from  it  and  caused  the
countries to fall into a recession again in 2011 and 2012. The ECB’s monetary policy and its
intervention played a decisive stabilising role. It averted a depression.
If there had been no intervention, what would have happened?
To give an example: if the ECB had not given the Spanish banks liquidity assistance in 2012,
when  a  lot  of  money  was  withdrawn,  capital  controls  would  have  resulted  and  creditors  from
other euro area countries would have found it difficult to gain access to their assets. People have
forgotten just how dangerous the situation was at that time. Many are unaware that the ECB and
governments  too  acted  in  a  carefully  considered,  reasonable  way  and  prevented  a  worse
outcome.  The  European  institutions  were  not  at  all  prepared  for  such  a  crisis,  which  is  why
decisions were also quite chaotic at the outset. But in the end, also thanks to the creation of the
European Stability Mechanism (ESM), a collapse of the Single Market was prevented.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
And  yet,  the  ECB’s  role  remains  controversial  and  its  expansionary  monetary  policy
heavily criticised.
The ECB has played a leading role, not least because of the fact that it was capable of acting at
any time during the crisis. The decisions were never simple and there was much discussion
about the right course to follow. But at the ECB we were always aware of our responsibility and
managed to craft a monetary policy supported by all members of the Governing Council. This
paid off during the crisis. But this success has been double-edged: the ECB has not only had to
repeatedly take on new tasks, such as banking supervision. But also it is being held responsible
for problems the more it is seen as an especially influential European institution that can take
action. This is the case even if in reality it is not responsible.
But you are now facing the challenge of finding a way out of the expansionary monetary
policy. This includes an increase in interest rates, as has just happened in the US. Is the
Fed’s step a signal for the ECB?
We have a clear mandate and it relates to the euro area. And we have to watch developments
closely before we take action. So far, we can only say that the economic situation is improving.
That gives us confidence, but the upward trend and hence the normalisation of inflation are still
very dependent on monetary policy stimulus. While inflation is temporarily close to the desired
target, it is based to a large extent on short-term fluctuations in energy prices. The underlying
inflation trend is still noticeably weak, and we have to monitor it in order to fulfil our mandate in a
sustainable way.
Inflation in Germany is over 2%. Shouldn’t that be taken into account and the low interest
rate policy, which has a serious cost for German savers, be brought to an end?
We are indeed very aware of the criticism – and by the way it exists in other countries – and we
take it seriously. Of course, interest rates could be higher for Germany’s economy and in some
other  countries  as  well,  if  they  were  alone.  But  they  aren’t  –  we  have  a  single  currency.
Therefore, the ECB is committed to conducting a monetary policy for the euro area as a whole,
and  sometimes  that  requires  everyone  to  be  patient.  As  always,  there  are  some  for  whom
monetary policy is too loose, while others would specifically like to see more support. But let’s
not  forget  the  times  before  monetary  union,  when  we  had  fluctuating  exchange  rates,  which
brought a lot of instability. That was very costly for economies such as Germany’s. Today, by
way  of  our  monetary  policy,  we  are  contributing  to  the  continued  existence,  stability  and
functioning  of  the  Single  Market.  That’s  really  important  for  Member  States  that  are  major
exporters. And that’s even more relevant in times when free trade is being called into question
internationally.
But the low interest rate policy is creating market distortions, as we see in Germany’s
housing market. Aren’t there dangers looming?
The price increases should be seen in context. They were preceded by an unusually long period
of  stagnating  house  prices  in  Germany.  This  has  changed  in  the  last  seven  years. And  the
question now arises as to whether there is some overheating. That may be the case in the most
popular cities, but overall there are no clear signs of that. A dangerously speculative, destabilising
overheating  would,  moreover,  only  occur  if  the  price  rises  were  being  increasingly  and
excessively financed by credit. One would see that from strongly growing home loans, but which
is  not  the  case. And  if  it  got  to  that  point,  then  it  would  not  in  the  first  place  be  the  task  of
monetary  policy  to  react,  as  its  primary  commitment  is  to  price  stability.  But  there  are  other
means available to national governments and supervisory authorities to curb overheating, should
a worst-case scenario arise. For instance, by tightening the rules on lending or via fiscal policy.
The UK’s exit from the EU now lies ahead. Could Brexit endanger the financial stability of
the euro area?
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
No, I don’t think that Brexit poses a risk to financial stability. First, it will be a thoroughly controlled
exit and, second, we have learnt from the crisis how to handle dangerous situations. One must
always  be  concerned  about  stability  should  there  be  abrupt  events  which  have  an  immediate
impact.  But  with  the  UK’s  expected  exit  this  is  precisely  not  the  case.  We  will  have  time  to
organise the break and the related adjustment. And from a purely organisational perspective the
adjustment brings for the regulators such as the supervisory authorities an enormous amount of
work. What concerns me are the massive costs that the withdrawal will cause for the EU27 and,
above all, for the UK.
But  there  could  also  be  winners.  Frankfurt  could  become  the  EU’s  largest  financial
centre. Do you agree?
Frankfurt is a friendly place, multinational, well-organised and convenient. The city offers a good
working environment. I value that, as do some private sector bankers. But no doubt you could
say  that  about  Madrid,  Dublin,  Paris  or  other  European  cities.  In  my  view,  what  matters  is
something different: if the financial centres of the euro area hope to play a more prominent role,
then they will have the best chance of doing so only in the context of a fully fledged European
banking union. And there’s no point in hoping for that in some distant future. We need a strong
and complete banking union within the next four to five years.
What’s needed to complete it?
We need a clear road map, showing where we want to be in four or five years’ time. Brexit is
regrettable and harmful, but it is also an opportunity for the banking union. Having a strong and
reliable regulatory framework and a single supervisory body that is both strict and fair are big
competitive advantages in the banking sector – for that creates trust of a sustainable kind, the
bankers’ most important “currency”.
How optimistic are you then that the banking union can be completed before the next
financial crisis?
Banks  are  now  much  better  capitalised  than  before  the  crisis.  Furthermore,  the  supervisory
authorities  have  also  learnt  to  respond  quickly  to  avert  risks  to  financial  market  stability.  A
bankruptcy like that of Lehman Brothers in 2008 is much less likely nowadays. The banks protect
themselves as well by making better provisions.
What  does  it  mean  that  some  banks  are  withdrawing  from  the  European  market  and
focusing on their domestic market? That there’s no European banking system after all?
I am also concerned about that, because we in the monetary union need cross-border banks
which are subject to common supervisory and resolution rules. When there is common banking
supervision, you also need burden-sharing in case something goes wrong. We don’t have that at
the  moment.  We  indeed  have  common  supervision,  but  if  something  starts  keeling  over,  the
individual states still have to step in. We won’t have a banking union with real risk sharing until we
have a common backstop, i.e. a credit line from the European Stability Mechanism, for instance.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
