Yves  Mersch:  Loan-level  data  transparency  -  achievements  and
future prospects
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the 5th Anniversary European Data Warehouse, Frankfurt, 4 July 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It  is  a  good  time  to  reminisce  on  the  importance  of  the ABS  loan-level  data  initiative  and  the
achievements over these five years. I will also take the occasion to talk about the challenges and
opportunities that lie ahead of us.
Achievements to date with loan-level data
Transparency  requirements  for ABS  products  are  especially  important  most  notably  because
ABS  can  have  more  complex  risk  characteristics  than  other  assets.  For  example,  a  more
diverse  set  of  underlying  assets  can  be  included  in  the  collateral  pool  compared  with  other
instruments.  The  recent  financial  crises  clearly  illustrated  the  complexity  and  the  lack  of
transparency  of  some ABS.  By  promoting  the  loan-level  data  initiative,  the  ECB  has  made  a
significant  effort  to  ensure  a  high  degree  of  transparency  in  European  ABS.  Indeed,  there
were three reasons why the ECB saw and still sees ABS transparency as a field deserving
specific attention.
First,  the  financial  crisis  and  its  ramifications  threatened  the  provision  of  funds  to  the  real
economy. Hence, ABS helped as a tool to spread risk across different financial actors and to
avoid a major liquidity disruption for Euro area banks during the years following the crisis. Simple
and  transparent  ABS  can  have  a  more  decisive  role  to  help  banks  to  fulfil  their  purpose  in
providing necessary funding to the real economy. Transparency is key for a better functioning
securitisation market in the EU.
Second,  the  Eurosystem  itself  had  and  still  has  a  large  exposure  to  ABS.  ABS  are  key
components  of  the  collateral  framework  of  the  Eurosystem  and  the  Eurosystem  purchased
significant amount of ABS in the ABSPP. The peak was reached in 2010 with EUR 500 billion of
ABS  pledged  as  collateral,  amounting  to  25%  of  the  total  pledged  collateral  for  Eurosystem
operations at that time. ABS still form close to 20% of the total pledged collateral for Eurosystem
operations nowadays and in addition 24 bn EUR were purchased by the Eurosystem outright as
part of the Extended Asset Purchase Programme. If a counterparty who had pledged ABS as
collateral were to default on its obligations, the Eurosystem would gain ownership of the ABS
collateral and would then seek to liquidate it in secondary markets without incurring a loss. It is
therefore pivotal that ABS remain a safe and transparent asset class traded in well-functioning,
liquid markets. Prior to the loan-level initiative, however, there was insufficient transparency in
order to assess the risk profile of the ABS.
Third,  there  was  a  coordination  problem  among  ABS  market  participants  in  2012.  Although
many  acknowledged  the  need  for  enhanced  transparency  in  the  ABS  market,  there  was  no
market infrastructure that could have been supplied by individual actors. A bundling of efforts was
needed and a catalyst role of the ECB was called for in an exceptional situation where market
participants  did  not  provide  the  market  infrastructure.  Such  a  situation  is  exceptional,  but  not
unprecedented, as we see if for example in the field of benchmarks or market agreements.
So these are the three main reasons why the ECB prioritised ABS transparency. Let me add,
however, that the ECB does not believe that ABS should warrant special treatment where it is not
justified from a theoretical, empirical and practical perspective. The ECB is interested in ABS
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
insofar as they can help us achieve our policy objectives in compliance with our legal obligations,
while ensuring risk equivalence in our collateral framework.
Having said that, the ECB will also – in the not too distant future – have to review the specific role
of ABS in the context of the broader issue of QE beyond 2017.
As  regards  its  achievements,  the  loan-level  initiative  set  an  example  of  swift  and  convincing
action to show that European ABS were, broadly-speaking, less risky than feared. And this was
done in spite of the many technical difficulties of establishing common templates covering EUR 1
trillion of assets from many different jurisdictions and asset classes. A set of common templates
were  established  which  are  easily  accessible  to  market  participants.  Today  loan  level  data  is
widely  used  by  market  participants  and  we  can  be  confident  that  the  initiative  improved  the
transparency on ABS.
Yet, it is no secret that the revival of the European ABS market is, broadly speaking, still anaemic
at the moment. Market-placed issuance is at historic lows. The investor base has not recovered.
The EU ABS markets are impacted by bank deleveraging, unfavourable regulatory treatment and
relative costs of funding of alternative instruments. Admittedly, the sizeable Eurosystem covered
bond purchase programme and long term loan operations have also represented viable funding
alternatives for banks.
Thus,  the  extended  timeframe  in  creating  legal  certainty  through  forthcoming  regulation  on
securitisation, the “STS Regulation” has been regrettable. The ECB expressed early support for
the concept of simple, transparent and standardised securitisations. Happily, the compromise
text  was  just  published  last  week  following  the  trialogue  procedure  between  the  European
Commission, Council and Parliament. However, the regulation will probably come into force only
in  2019  while  various  important  technical  standards  still  need  to  be  prepared  in  the  months
before that deadline.
The  loan-level  data  initiative  had  an  important  contribution  in  the  discussion  on  simple,
transparent and standardised, or ‘STS’ securitisations. It provides high quality information which
allows  for  informed  credit  risk  assessments  of  ABS,  either  on  the  basis  of  the  individual
underlying loans, or on the basis of the aggregated summary information. The platform enabled
financial actors as well as policymakers to better assess and understand the embedded risks in
securitised portfolios.
The final compromise version of the STS Regulation published last week is significant in many
ways. In particular, it creates for the first time a system of registration and supervision for ABS
data repositories established in  the  EU.  ‘Securitisation  repositories’  as  they  are  called,  will  be
subject  to  the  same  ongoing  governance,  technical  and  operational  requirements  as  trade
repositories under the EMIR framework. They will be expected to store not just loan-level data,
but also all other documentation which the Regulation requires originators, sponsors and issuers
to disclose under its transparency rules..
The repositories will be registered, authorised and supervised by ESMA, which will also have the
same range of supervisory tools and sanctioning powers as it already exercising in relation to
trade repositories under the EMIR framework. ESMA will be tasked with developing Regulatory
Technical  Standards  on  the  requirements  for  securitisation  depositories  in  the  coming  18
months.  It  will  be  of  particular  importance  for  ESMA  to  avoid  creating  different  reporting
standards. It is positive that the compromise text already acknowledges existing standards and
that they should ‘reflect as closely as possible existing templates for disclosures’. The valuable
and pioneering experience gained in the European DataWarehouse is a natural starting point for
ESMA in this regard.
Finally,  the  compromise  text  includes  a  requirement  for  securitisation  repositories  to  provide
direct  and  immediate  access  free  of  charge  to  a  long  list  of  entities,  including  ESMA  and
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
members of the European System of Central Banks, including the SSM as well as all current and
potential  investors  in  ABSs  reported  to  the  repository.  These  changes  will  create  a  new
landscape,  from  a  regulatory,  commercial  and  competitive  perspective,  for  securitisation
repositories in years to come.
While  the  ECB  welcomes  the  finalisation  of  the  trilogue,  there  are  some  aspects  of  the  STS
Regulation for which the ECB has concerns. For example, providing a role in the legislation for
third parties in the STS certification process introduces moral hazard for investors as investor
would  have  fewer  incentives  to  undertake  independent  due  diligence.  Additionally,  it  would
increase complexity and burden public resources, given the need to supervise such third parties
separately.  In  addition,  the  compromise  text  no  longer  requires  originators  and  sponsors  to
disclose  the  actual  transaction  contracts.  Instead  this  transparency  enhancement  has  been
weakened so a summary of the relevant documentation will also be accepted. This is a weaker
requirement than the current provisions of Article 8b of the Credit Rating Agencies Regulation.
These  and  other  aspects  will  need  to  continue  to  be  assessed  as  the  Regulatory  Technical
Standards become available in the coming months.
A new frontier for EU-wide transparency: NPL register
Looking ahead, a new frontier for having more transparency in the form of loan-level data could
emerge. As mentioned by market participants and policy makers, one of the key challenges for
the non-performing loans (NPLs) market is the lack of standardised access to high quality data
on NPLs. They pointed out that one possibility to address the large stock of non-performing loans
(NPLs) could be to create an EU wide template and reporting system for such loans, alongside
minimum standards for transparency.
Currently, there is no functioning NPL market. Although there are many banks in the EU who
would  like  to  sell  these  assets,  the  investor  base  is  only  developing,  while  there  are  certainly
buyers who would be interested to acquire these assets, at the right price.
Efforts to enhance the transparency and standardisation of NPLs could foster the creation of a
NPL  market.  But  we  have  to  be  mindful  not  to  stigmatize  lenders  unduly  and  respect
confidentiality appropriately.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The Eurosystem ABS loan-level Initiative has made an important contribution in ensuring a high
degree of transparency to enable investors to assess the embedded risks of securitisations. At
the same time, a number of barriers are yet to overcome to foster the revitalisation of European
ABS  markets.  Much  work  is  already  on-going  on  this  topic,  but  many  important  technical
standards  still  need  to  be  finalised.  Loan-level  data  had  an  important  contribution  in  the
discussions on simple, transparent and standardised securitisations. The STS Regulation, could
make an important contribution.
Moreover, there is potential for developing common loan-level templates for NPLs, which will then
also help another corner of EU financial markets.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
