Sabine  Lautenschläger:  The  European  banking  sector  –  growing
together and growing apart
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism,at the LSE
German Symposium, London, 2 March 2017.
 Two major events provide the frame for my speech today. Both of them took place in June – one
in  2012,  the  other  in  2016.  One  of  them  took  place  in  Brussels,  the  other  here  in  the  United
Kingdom. One of them made Europe grow together; the other made Europe grow apart.
On 28 June 2012 in Brussels, the leaders of the EU decided to take banking supervision to the
European level and explore the idea of a fully fledged banking union. They took a decisive step
towards a more united Europe. On 23 June 2016, the people of this country voted to leave the
European Union. They took a decisive step away from a united Europe.
Both  events  –  while  very  different  in  nature  –  will  fundamentally  change  Europe.  From  the
perspective of banks and their supervisors, both events have had and will have a huge impact.
Let us take a closer look.
Growing together – European banking supervision
In June 2012, the euro area was a bad place to be – if you were an investor, a bank or a country
that had lost the trust of the markets.
On 1 June that year, the Financial Times wrote “Spain suffers €100 billion exodus”. In the days
thereafter, its front-page stories focused on ailing Portuguese and Spanish banks. In mid-June,
its headline was “Fears rise over EU handling of debt crisis”.
By then the markets had driven the bond yields of some euro area countries to new heights. In
other words, if the governments of those countries wanted to sell bonds to finance their debt they
would have to pay much more. The media started speculating about a break-up of the euro area,
as did some politicians.
Two  weeks  later  though,  something  had  obviously  changed.  On  the  last  day  of  June,  the
Financial Times, on its front page, said “Markets rebound following EU deal”.
What had happened?
What had happened was that an EU summit had taken place in Brussels. There, the leaders of
the EU agreed on a package of measures to stabilise the euro area. They decided on a €120
billion  pact  for  growth;  they  decided  that  the  rescue  funds,  the  European  Financial  Stability
Facility  and  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  could  directly  recapitalise  banks  under  certain
conditions; and they pledged to use the instruments of the rescue funds flexibly and efficiently.
Another important element of the package was to create a “Single Supervisory Mechanism”, as it
was called. Banking supervision was to be taken from the national to the European level.
Just two years later, European banking supervision became reality. In November 2014, the ECB
began to supervise banks in the euro area. But how does the new European system work? And
why is it better than the old national ones?
Some people think that the ECB has become the sole supervisor of all banks in the euro area.
Well, it is true that European banking supervision has put an end to the patchwork of national
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
supervision. But in essence, it is a common European undertaking.
In the euro area, we divide banks into two groups: large ones and small ones. And it is the 126
largest banking groups which are directly supervised by the ECB – they are called “significant
institutions”  and  account  for  82%  of  the  euro  area’s  banking  assets.  For  each  of  these  large
banks, we have set up a “Joint Supervisory Team”, or JST. These JSTs are headed by ECB staff
and comprise supervisors from both the national authorities and the ECB. It is these teams that
actually supervise the banks. They are at the heart of European banking supervision.
Alongside  the  126  largest  banking  groups,  there  are  around  3,300  smaller  ones,  the  “less
significant”  institutions.  These  banks  are  still  directly  supervised  by  the  national  authorities.
Nevertheless, the ECB plays a role, too. Together with the national authorities, it develops and
implements supervisory standards for the smaller banks, and it ensures that supervisors apply
these standards across the euro area.
And  not  only  is  the  day-to-day  supervision  of  banks  a  joint  task.  Decisions  are  also  jointly
prepared  and  adopted.  The  main  bodies  in  this  regard  are  the  Supervisory  Board  and  the
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  The  Supervisory  Board  is  chaired  by  the  ECB  and  includes
representatives from all the national supervisory authorities. The Governing Council of the ECB in
turn  comprises  the  governors  of  all  the  euro  area  central  banks  and  the  Executive  Board
members of the ECB.
It is true to say that national authorities are no longer responsible for supervising their largest
banks. But they share their knowledge and experience with the ECB, which directly supervises
the largest banks and oversees the entire system of European banking supervision. We have
joined forces to make the banking sector safe and sound.
In my view, this was the right thing to do. Over the past decades, the financial system has turned
into a global village. As a result, a crisis, say, affecting a single bank can quickly spread around
the entire globe – as happened in 2008. This is particularly true for monetary unions such as the
euro area. Here, problems can spread even faster and may threaten the financial stability of the
entire union.
Therefore, European banking supervision brings real benefits. It allows us to look beyond national
borders and national interests. When we supervise banks and take decisions, we take a truly
European view.
At the same time, we can compare banks across the euro area and gain many more insights
than national supervisors could. We can draw on a huge pool of expertise as our analyses are
based on the knowledge and experience not only from the ECB but from across Europe and
beyond. All in all, the ECB itself brings together staff from 28 different countries. So not only do
we have lots of data and information but we also have the resources to analyse it. All this helps to
spot potential problems early on and thoroughly assess their impact.
We can combine the best approaches to banking supervision from 19 different countries. We
can  ensure  that  high  standards  are  uniformly  applied  in  the  entire  euro  area.  This  creates  a
stable and predictable business environment for banks that operate across borders. Wherever
they go in the euro area, they are supervised to the same standards and methods.
The  idea  of  harmonisation  goes  beyond  supervision;  it  is  the  theme  of  the  entire  European
banking union. In January 2016, a European resolution mechanism for banks was introduced. It
ensures  that  banks  across  the  euro  area  can  be  resolved  according  to  the  same  rules.  A
European  deposit  guarantee  has  not  yet  been  agreed  upon  –  but  even  without  one  we  have
made good progress. Altogether, the banking union helps to create a level playing field for banks.
This is the ground on which a truly European banking sector can emerge. And contrary to what
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
some  people  say,  a  large  common  market  is  better  than  isolated  national  ones. A  common
market  creates  more  jobs,  more  income  and  more  wealth.  On  that  note,  let  us  move  to  the
second part of my speech.
Growing apart – Brexit and the banks
It seems that by now we have got used to political events that defy all expectations. Last June,
however, it was still a new thing. So when a majority of the people of the UK voted to leave the
EU, it sent a shockwave not only through Europe, but around the world.
Indeed, on 23 June 2016, the future changed – or to quote Yogi Berra: “The future ain’t what it
used to be”. But what exactly the future will be is still unclear. Official negotiations on Brexit have
not even started, and they will take years to conclude.
Meanwhile, a cloud of uncertainty is now hanging over everyone, including the banks. Despite
this uncertainty, the banks need to act now to be well prepared for any outcome. But what does
Brexit mean for the banks? Well, let us for a moment assume that there will be a ‘hard Brexit’ in
the sense that the UK would turn into a third country from the perspective of the EU. As a result,
the UK and its banks would lose their access to the single EU market. Why is that?
Currently there are around 40 banking groups in the UK that operate in the EU market. Some of
them are British, of course; others are global investment banks, for instance, from the US. And
there are some smaller groups with roots in Asia and the Middle East.
How do these banks currently access the EU market? Many of them use the EU passport, which
was introduced in 1993. The passport was actually one of the first major steps towards a truly
European  banking  market.  When  a  bank  is  licensed  in  one  Member  State  of  the  EU,  it  can
conduct business in any other Member State – no additional licensing is required.
In the event of a hard Brexit, these banks would lose the passport. Those banks that fully rely on
it would have to seek another point of entry. Most obviously, they would have to obtain a licence in
an EU country.
And  this  is  where  European  banking  supervision  comes  in:  it  is  the  ECB  that  grants  banking
licences throughout the euro area – for large and small banks alike. Moreover, we have no stake
in whether UK banks set up shop in Paris, Dublin, Frankfurt or any other euro area city. We are
neutral.
However, there is one issue on which I have strong views.
Our objective is to make the banking system safe and sound. I therefore expect banks which are
seeking a licence in the euro area to meet our standards. There will be no race to the bottom in
banking supervision.
In particular, I do not see the ECB issuing banking licences to empty shell companies. Banks
which plan to permanently book all exposures back-to-back with another entity in London might
be in for a disappointment. This is not about a full ban of back-to-back booking. We rather aim at
ensuring both an adequate local management of all material risks and the resolvability of the euro
area entity.
Needless to say that I would certainly not accept banks’ booking all exposures with the euro area
entity while having their risk management and internal control systems outside the euro area.
As we expect many banks to apply, I urge them to make up their minds and contact us early on.
We will then decide on an appropriate path for them to meet our expectations. But one thing has
to  be  clear:  eventually,  all  banks  will  have  to  fulfil  the  high  standards  of  European  banking
supervision.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
We are talking to the banks, of course. And what we hear is that some of them are thinking about
taking other paths into the EU market. They are considering complementing or even replacing
licensed  subsidiaries  with  other  entities  –  investment  firms  or  branches,  for  instance.  Such
entities, however, would not come within the scope of European banking supervision. They would
continue to be supervised at the national level.
Still, investment firms can be quite large and might conduct bank-like business. In countries such
as the UK or the US, the largest investment firms are supervised by banking supervisors. To
achieve greater consistency, regulation in the EU might be adapted – the intermediate holding
company  might  be  a  part  of  a  potential  solution.  The  current  review  of  the  European  banking
rules might provide an opportunity to do so. For those banks we directly supervise we will in any
case keep a close eye on the risks that result from different group structures and from relations
between different entities of the same group.
Securing continuous market access will be the most pressing issue for UK banks – there’s no
doubt about that. We know that some of them have already started to address this issue. And
yes, time is of the essence.
Market  access  is  just  the  first  step.  Related  to  it  are  hundreds  of  other  even  more  technical
questions. How to treat financial and risk relations between existing and new entities in the euro
area and related UK entities? How to deal with the internal models that UK banks might want to
use in their newly established EU entities? How best to continue the fruitful cooperation with our
colleagues from the Prudential Regulation Authority? After all, our banking systems will remain
closely connected.
Brexit might cut through a sector that is deeply connected. Keeping the sector together will be a
complex task – legally, operationally, organisationally. From whichever angle you look at it, it will
be difficult. I have only scratched the surface here, but that much should have become clear.
Still, I can assure you that we are prepared for any scenario. Whatever the UK and the remaining
27 EU members agree upon, European banking supervision stands ready to contribute to a safe
and sound banking sector.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have talked a lot about UK-based banks that operate in the EU. What
about banks on the Continent that operate in the UK? Well, they face the same uncertainty and
the same challenges. I therefore urge these banks as well to prepare for the new future.
Brexit will shake up the banking sector; there’s no doubt about that. But how will it affect London
as a financial centre?
Just two Tube stations away from here is Mansion House. It was there, on 10 November 1986,
that  the  then  Prime  Minister,  Margaret  Thatcher,  was  invited  to  speak  at  the  Lord  Mayor’s
banquet.  In  her  speech,  she  said  that  “the  City  serves  not  only  the  City,  but  the  nation  as  a
whole”. This was two weeks after the government had established a new legal framework which
deregulated the stock exchange. The “Big Bang”, as it was called, attracted banks from around
the world and turned London into a global financial centre.
It became a magnet for banks. And the resulting scale effects have made it even more attractive.
Today, it offers liquid markets, specialist services, solid market infrastructures and a huge pool of
talent. More than a million people work in the financial sector and another million work in related
services. Altogether, the sector generates about 11% of Britain’s GDP.
And there’s no doubt either that the Single Market increased London’s appeal. Because of EU
passporting, banks enjoy unlimited access to the European market, as I said just now. And they
make  the  most  of  that  opportunity.  Their  business  in  the  other  27  EU  countries  accounts  for
about one-quarter of revenues of the UK’s financial services.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Take, as an example, the clearing of derivatives that are denominated in euro. A large number of
these deals take place in London – more than 75% in some asset classes. The ECB is involved
in the oversight of UK central counterparties through supervisory colleges and a Memorandum of
Understanding with the UK authorities. This framework enables us to monitor risks to the euro –
also  due  to  good  cooperation  with  our  British  colleagues  and  legal  certainty  afforded  by  the
European Court of Justice.
In view of Brexit, some might now ask whether it would make sense in the future for the majority
of euro clearing to take place outside the EU. Well, that depends on whether the new framework
will offer us the same level of involvement as we have today. And it depends on whether the new
framework will be strong enough to ensure financial stability in the euro area.
To sum up: access to the European market is important for the financial sector. And the financial
sector is important for the British economy. Losing that access would therefore have an impact –
not only on the banking sector itself but also on the UK’s economy. We are talking about jobs,
income and prosperity.
The question therefore is: will London remain a global financial centre? Yes, it will. But at the
same time, it might lose part of the business, while Europe might attract some of it. The race is
on, and many cities are competing for the banks – either to keep them, in the case of London, or
to attract them, in the case of other cities in Europe. In the end, there probably won’t be a winner-
takes-it-all  scenario.  Some  banks  might  go  to  Dublin,  some  to  Paris,  others  to  Frankfurt  or
elsewhere in Europe.
As I said, the ECB is neutral. Still, the competition must not result in a race to the bottom with
regard to regulation, supervision or taxation – neither in the UK nor in the rest of Europe. Such a
lowering of standards might work in the short term, but in the long term it would do more harm
than good. That is why European banking supervision will not change its policies in the wake of
Brexit.
In fact, strong rules and strong supervision should attract banks – they boost the reputation of
banks, increase people’s trust, and that’s good for business. And above all, strong rules serve a
purpose: they help to prevent future crises – not only at a national but also at a global level. And
financial crises can be very costly.
The financial sector will always test the boundaries of regulation; it will always look for the best
deal  –  globally.  We  therefore  need  global  rules  to  make  the  financial  sector  a  safe  place.
Countries which believe that they can secure national financial stability without global rules may
actually endanger the financial sector – everywhere.
So  Sam  Woods,  head  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority,  was  quite  right  to  say  in  his
Mansion  House  speech  last  year:  “The  UK  financial  system  must  be  robustly  regulated  and
supervised whatever the outcome of the government’s negotiations with the European Union”.
The same is true for the European banks, of course. This approach makes for a safe and sound
banking sector and should not change.
Conclusion
The euro area has grown closer together. The single currency has been complemented by a
single banking supervisor and a single resolution authority. This was a major step towards safe
and sound banks as well as towards a stronger economy. To be sure, the euro area faces some
serious challenges, but I am convinced that they are better tackled jointly rather than individually.
Still, the UK is charting a course away from the shores of Europe and into a vast and empty
ocean. That makes me think of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, who said: “If you want to build a ship,
don’t drum up people to collect wood and don’t assign them tasks and work, but rather teach
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
them to long for the endless immensity of the sea”. It seems that many people in the UK indeed
long for the endless immensity of the sea. To them it stands for independence from the EU and
for freedom.
However, building a ship and sailing the seven seas still requires collecting wood and assigning
tasks and work. These may seem to be small details, but in the real world, the devil is in the
detail. Today I have touched on some of the details that will affect the banks – and these are very
intricate and difficult to handle. Now just imagine that there are many other sectors where Brexit
will trigger equally complex issues.
The goal should be to find a workable solution that is in the interests of both the British people
and  the  people  of  the  EU.  We  all  have  an  interest  in  strong  banking  supervision  and  mutual
cooperation. And that is a strong foundation.
Thank you for your attention.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
