Mario Draghi: IMFC statement
Statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the thirty-fifth meeting
of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington DC, 21 April 2017.
 Growth in the euro area economy, supported by the ECB’s monetary policy measures, is firming
and  broadening,  compared  with  the  situation  at  the  time  of  our  last  meeting  six  months  ago.
Risks to the growth outlook have somewhat diminished, but remain tilted to the downside and
relate predominantly to global factors. While euro area headline inflation has increased markedly
over  the  past  year,  underlying  inflation  is  expected  to  continue  to  remain  subdued.  A  very
substantial degree of monetary accommodation is still needed to secure a sustained return of
inflation rates towards levels below, but close to, 2% – in line with the ECB’s mandate. In order to
reap the full benefits of our monetary policy measures, actions in other economic policy areas
are necessary to strengthen long-term growth and resilience in the euro area.
The euro area’s ongoing economic expansion is being largely driven by domestic demand, with
both  private  consumption  and  investment  contributing  to  growth.  Real  GDP  rose  by  1.7%  in
2016. There are signs that the recovery is broadening across countries and sectors. The pass-
through  of  our  monetary  policy  measures  is  supporting  domestic  demand.  The  recovery  in
investment continues to be promoted by very favourable financing conditions and improvements
in corporate profitability. Private consumption should be further aided by continued employment
gains. There are also signs of a somewhat brighter global recovery and increasing global trade.
The latest ECB staff projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.8% in 2017, 1.7% in
2018 and 1.6% in 2019.
Headline inflation in the euro area has increased over the past year, largely reflecting noticeably
higher energy and food inflation. The risks of deflation, defined as generalised price declines that
trigger a negative spiral of self-fulfilling expectations, have largely disappeared. At the same time,
underlying inflation has not shown a convincing upward trend – domestic cost pressures remain
subdued and recent increases in global price pressures have yet to filter through. In the coming
months, headline inflation is likely to fluctuate around current levels, mainly reflecting movements
in the annual rate of change of energy prices. Underlying inflation, however, is expected to rise
only gradually over the medium term, supported by our monetary policy measures, the expected
continuing  economic  recovery  and  the  corresponding  gradual  absorption  of  slack.  The  latest
ECB staff projections for the euro area point to annual headline inflation of 1.7% in 2017, 1.6% in
2018 and 1.7% in 2019.
The  comprehensive  monetary  policy  measures  taken  by  the  ECB  since  June  2014  have
materially  contributed  to  the  economic  upturn.  Financing  conditions  and  credit  demand  have
improved. Lending volumes continue to rise, bank lending rates for households and companies
have  fallen  to  historically  low  levels;  and  there  has  been  a  decrease  in  their  cross-country
heterogeneity.  Also,  compared  to  six  months  ago,  market-based  inflation  expectations  have
noticeably strengthened. At the same time, as underlying inflation remains subdued and the path
of inflation crucially dependent on the prevailing very favourable financing conditions, we cannot
yet have sufficient confidence that a sustained adjustment in inflation will materialise in a durable
manner.  Thus,  a  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  is  still  needed  for
underlying inflation pressures to build up and to support headline inflation in the medium term.
As the Governing Council affirmed at its last monetary policy meeting on 9 March, we continue to
expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of
time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  the  net  asset  purchases.  Until  the  end  of  last  month  our
monthly purchases of public and private sector securities under the asset purchase programme
(APP) amounted to €80 billion on average. They are now intended to continue at a monthly pace
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
of €60 billion until the end of December 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the
ECB’s Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its
inflation aim. The net purchases will be made alongside reinvestments of the principal payments
from maturing securities purchased under the APP. If the outlook becomes less favourable, or if
financial conditions become inconsistent with further progress towards a sustained adjustment in
the path of inflation, we stand ready to increase our asset purchase programme in terms of size
and/or duration.
Market sentiment towards the euro area banking sector has improved. The recent strengthening
of the recovery is supporting banks’ profitability and helping to reduce the stock of non-performing
loans (NPLs). Euro area banks have improved their capital positions since the crisis and are now
well capitalised at an aggregate level. Nevertheless, profitability remains weak in parts of the euro
area  banking  sector  and  important  vulnerabilities  and  structural  challenges  remain.  These
challenges  include  incomplete  adjustment  of  bank  business  models,  cost  inefficiencies,
overcapacity and still-large stocks of NPLs for parts of the euro area banking sector. First and
foremost, it is up to the banks themselves to undertake the needed adjustment. But an effective
reduction  of  NPLs  will  require  action  from  all  stakeholders,  and  will  need  to  include  legal  and
institutional reforms. In particular, active policies are needed to improve the efficiency of judicial
systems, increase access to collateral, introduce swift out-of-court procedures and create liquid
markets for distressed debt. Last month the ECB published its final guidance to banks on NPLs.
Furthermore, it is crucial to complete the global regulatory reform agenda as soon as possible in
order  to  significantly  strengthen  the  regulatory  framework  for  banks  and  ensure  a  period  of
regulatory stability and certainty for market participants.
While  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  firming,  the  reform  process  needs  to  be
reinvigorated to transform the cyclical pick-up into stronger and persistent long-term growth. To
that end, structural reforms have to be implemented much more decisively, including reforms
addressing key institutional weaknesses and improving private debt workout mechanisms which
are necessary to improve the investment environment. In many cases, these reforms entail fairly
low  short-term  economic  cost.  Given  that  national  reform  efforts  remain  limited  in  euro  area
countries, it is also important to foster the use of existing tools, most notably a full and consistent
application  of  the  EU’s  macroeconomic  imbalance  procedure.  Likewise,  full  and  consistent
implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact remains crucial to ensure confidence in the EU’s
fiscal  framework  and  to  safeguard  public  debt  sustainability.  In  the  current  environment  of  a
firming  economic  recovery,  a  broadly  neutral  euro  area  fiscal  stance  strikes  an  appropriate
balance between aggregate stabilisation and sustainability needs. However, the contribution of
individual Member States to the area-wide stance is sub-optimal. Some Member States need to
take additional measures to ensure compliance with the fiscal rules while others have scope to
use  available  fiscal  space.  All  euro  area  countries  should  strive  for  a  more  growth-friendly
composition of fiscal policies.
More broadly, a stronger and more complete Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is essential
to ensuring the future resilience of the euro area economy. The European Commission started a
general reflection on the future of the EU by publishing a white paper last month, which will be
followed by a paper on EMU in May 2017. We need to make progress on completing the banking
union by moving forwards in parallel on risk sharing and risk reduction, and we look forward to an
ambitious mid-term review process of the capital markets union agenda. A more complete EMU
is the foundation for a stable, flourishing and resilient euro area economy that will be the best
contribution to global economic growth and financial stability. The ECB will continue to do its part
by delivering on its mandate.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
