Claudia  Buch:  How  can  we  protect  economies  from  financial
crises?
Statement  by  Prof  Claudia  Buch,  Deputy  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  for  a  panel
debate  at  the  Rencontres  Economiques  d'Aix-en-Provence  "In  search  of  new  forms  of
prosperity", Aix-en-Provence, 8 July 2017.
 These remarks have been prepared for a panel debate at the Rencontres Economiques d’Aix-
en-Provence, July 7-9, 2017, Session 19. I would like to thank Steffen Günther, Marcus John,
Katharina Knoll, Sophia List, Frieder Mokinski, Jens Reich, Marc Rennert, Christoph Weißermel,
and Melanie Wulff for their most helpful contributions to an earlier draft. Any errors are my own.
 Financial crises are costly – output and financial wealth are lost, unemployment increases, and
social  gaps  widen.  The  costs  may  be  prolonged,  and  they  may  become  chronic.  The  global
financial crisis that began ten years ago with the liquidity squeeze on global financial markets in
August 2007 is still casting long shadows.
Global debt levels remain elevated. Debt levels of the non-financial sector relative to GDP stood
at 220% by the end of 2016 compared with 179% a decade earlier (BIS 2017).  In the aftermath
of the financial crisis, risks were shifted from the private to the public sector (Figure 1). In the
euro area, government debt due to the support for financial institutions went up by €488 billion, or
4.5% of GDP, between 2007 and 2016 (Eurostat2017a). Today, in the euro area, government
debt  relative  to  GDPis  about  24  percentage  points  higher  than  it  was  prior  to  the  crisis
(Eurostat 2017b).
1
The global financial crisis has had a significant impact on economic growth and unemployment.
The estimated median loss varies between 4% and 9 % (Ball 2014, Mourougane 2017, Ollivaud
and Turner 2014). Such output losses have also had social consequences. In the euro area, the
unemployment rate went up from 9.2% in 2005 to 11.2% in 2015 (Eurostat 2017c).
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Answering the question of how economies can be protected from financial crisis is thus a key
challenge for policymakers. Complete “protection” against fluctuations on financial markets is not
possible and would impair critical functions of markets in terms of the allocation of resources.
But reducing excessive risk-taking, making crises less likely and reducing their costs should be
the  ambition  of  policymakers.  In  this  note,  I  want  to  highlight  three  elements  of  a  strategy  for
making future progress.
First, agreed financial sector reforms need to be implemented. Enhancing the resilience of the
financial system and improving buffers against unexpected shocks has been a key goal of post-
crisis  financial  sector  reforms.  High  levels  of  debt  can  increase  the  fragility  of  finance,  make
financial crisis more likely, and be an impediment to growth. In response to the global financial
crisis,  governments  have  thus  set  out  to  tackle  the  underlying  causes  of  the  kind  of  financial
distress  that  can  seriously  harm  the  economy.  Regulations  have  been  amended  in  order  to
strengthen the financial system’s capacity to buffer shocks and to promote strong, sustainable,
balanced, and inclusive growth.
Second,  complementary  reforms  can  make  the  reform  agenda  fully  effective.  In  Europe,  the
Capital Markets Union is such a complementary project. Implementing the Capital Markets Union
can  represent  a  major  step  forward  towards  achieving  a  more  resilient  financial  system  and
putting in place improved mechanisms of cross-border risk sharing in Europe.
Third,  effects  of  post-crisis  reforms  need  to  be  evaluated.  Full  implementation  of  post-crisis
financial sector reforms should be followed by a structured evaluation of the effects of reforms. A
structured  evaluation  is  needed  in  order  to  assess  the  impact  and  the  effectiveness  of  the
reforms implemented and to study potential unintended consequences.
1. What are the drivers and costs of financial crises?
Financial crises have been a recurrent theme in economic history. Reinhart and Rogoff (2008b)
have put together a large historical database covering eight centuries and 66 countries in Africa,
Asia, Europe, Latin America, North America, and Oceania. These countries represent about 90%
of world GDP. The database comprises information on a large set of economic indicators as well
as  indicators  of  crisis  episodes  (0/1  indicators),  including  external  and  domestic  defaults,
banking  crises,  currency  crashes,  and  inflation  outbursts.  Analysing  these  data,  the  authors
conclude:
"Capital flow/default cycles have been around since at least 1800 – if not before. Technology has
changed,  the  height  of  humans  has  changed,  and  fashions  have  changed.  Yet  the  ability  of
governments and investors to delude themselves, giving rise to periodic bouts of euphoria that
usually end in tears, seems to have remained a constant" (Reinhardt and Rogoff 2008b, p. 53).
While fluctuations on financial markets are part of regular market processes, making crises less
likely and less costly should be a key goal of economic policy. After the crisis, macroprudential
policy has thus become established as a new policy area. A stable financial system fulfils its
core macroeconomic functions smoothly and at all times. These functions include the efficient
allocation of financial resources, the provision of risk-sharing mechanisms, and the provision of
an efficient and secure financial infrastructure, including the payments system.
Yet, financial stability can be threatened if the distress of one institution or a group of financial
institutions can “infect” the entire system. Channels of infection can be direct contagion through
financial linkages or indirect contagion through asymmetries of information, panics, or fire sales.
Through such channels, decisions by individual market participants can have external effects on
the functioning of the financial system. Such “externalities” are all the greater, depending on how
pronounced the risk-taking incentives are, how high the leverage of individual market participants
is, how large the  institutions are (“too big to fail”), how connected they are (“too connected to
fail”), and how high common exposures to similar risks are (“too many to fail”). The real economy
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
can be affected through a credit crunch when banks are forced to reduce their lending activities
in response to the crisis (Brunnermeier 2009, Brunnermeier and Oehmke 2013).
One  key  factor  that  affects  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  is  the  structure  of  finance
(Bernanke, Gertler andGilchrist 1996; Gambacorta, Yang, and Tsatsaronis 2014). The larger the
share of debt finance is, the larger the “financial accelerator” effects can be – seemingly small
shocks  can  then  have  large  and  systemic  implications.  Economic  fluctuations  may  become
magnified and threaten the stability of the entire financial system. The channel of transmission
between  debt  and  output  fluctuations  can  run  through  consumption  or  investment  (Cecchetti,
Mohanty, and Zampolli 2011, Sutherland and Hoeller 2012):
High  levels  of  household  debt  can  affect  the  stability  of  the  real  economy  through  the
adjustment  of  consumption.  Evidence  for  the  United  States  shows  that,  during  the  crisis,
households with high levels of real estate debt cut down consumption in response to shocks
to asset prices, thus amplifying the cycle (King 1994; Mian and Sufi 2014, Jordà, Schularick
and Taylor 2015; Mian, Sufi and Verner forthcoming). Similar effects have been documented
for  other  countries:  The  loss  in  consumption  during  the  financial  crisis  was  particularly
severe in economies that experienced a large run-up of household debt prior to the crisis.
And  these  same  countries  experienced  the  fastest  increases  in  house  prices  in  the  pre-
crisis period (Glick and Lansing 2010, Leigh et al. 2012).
High  levels  of  debt  may  also  impair  the  ability  of  firms  to  smooth  employment  and
investment  when  an  adverse  shock  hits.  High  leverage  has,  for  example,  been  shown  to
have negative effects on the performance of firms as a consequence of industry downturns
(González 2013).
High levels of public sector debt can be destabilising. Strained government finances may, for
example,  weaken  the  ability  to  ensure  financial  stability  (Das  et  al.  2010,  Davies  and  Ng
2011). Furthermore, high levels of public sector debt may amplify under some conditions the
effects of cyclical shocks due to raising sovereign risk (Corsetti et al. 2013).
Given the importance of the banking sector for the allocation of resources across all sectors
of the economy, excessive leverage in the financial sector can be particularly harmful for the
real economy. An insufficiently capitalised financial sector or banking system is thus a threat
to  financial  stability. Adverse  shocks  can  then  set  in  motion  a  downward  spiral  of  asset
valuations and prices that ultimately threatens the solvency of financial institutions.
The destabilising effects of debt arise from its contractual features. Standard debt contracts are
insensitive  to  the  borrower’s  situation. An  adjustment  to  idiosyncratic  shocks  can  occur  only
through  new  lending  or  through  haircuts  on  existing  loans  after  risks  have  materialised.  In
contrast,  the  value  of  equity  adjusts  if  the  borrower’s  situation  changes.  In  this  sense,  equity
provides an ex ante risk-sharing mechanism. In other words, equity as a claim on real assets
has stabilising features compared with debt as a claim on nominal assets.
Empirical studies do indeed show that excessive private (and public) sector indebtedness, asset
price misalignments, international linkages of banks, and high external imbalances are drivers of
financial  crisis  (Borio  and  Drehmann  2009).  Furthermore,  banking  crises  have  often  been
preceded by real estate price booms (Reinhart and Rogoff 2008a, 2008b). This was the case in
the 2008 global financial crisis, but it is also true of earlier crises in the 1970s to 1990s in, for
example, Spain, Sweden, Norway, and Finland. Asset price booms are particularly harmful if they
are debt-financed (Jordà, Schularick and Taylor 2015). Consequently, measures of private sector
indebtedness,  such  as  credit  relative  to  GDP,  have  been  identified  as  predictors  of  banking
crises (Detken et al. 2014, Drehmann and Juselius 2014, Laeven and Valencia 2012). Moreover,
asset price booms may be fuelled by increasing capital inflows from abroad with the potential for
severe negative consequences when these capital flows stop (Kaminsky and Reinhart 1999).
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
2. Financial sector reforms – where do we stand?
In  response  to  the  crisis,  the  G20  countries  have  agreed  on  a  large  set  of  financial  sector
reforms with four core areas:
building resilient financial institutions
ending too-big-to-fail
making derivatives markets safer, and
transforming shadow banking into resilient market-based finance.
Progress in the implementation of reforms has been steady but uneven across the core areas of
reforms. Several reforms of the Basel III package still need to be fully implemented, more work is
required  to  improve  the  framework  for  the  resolution  of  global  systemically  important  banks,
implementation  of  over-the-counter  derivative  reforms  has  progressed  relatively  far,  and  the
implementation  of  reforms  in  the  regulation  and  oversight  of  shadow  banks  is  still  at  an  early
stage (Financial Stability Board 2016).
2.1 From implementation to evaluation
Many  of  the  reforms  have  ventured  into  uncharted  territory. Assessing  the  effects  of  financial
sector  reforms  in  a  structured  way  is  thus  crucial.  Evaluation  of  reforms  needs  to  take  into
account how the macroeconomic environment has changed, what the short- and the long-term
effects of reforms are, and how reform effects differ across countries.
One key challenge for evaluation is that many of the costs of financial reforms borne by financial
participants  –  such  as  enhanced  reporting  costs  –  tend  to  be  felt  immediately  and  are  often
observable. The benefits to broader society, in contrast, can be reaped only over the longer term
and are difficult to quantify: What is the probability that financial crises will occur in the future?
And  how  devastating  would  their  effects  be? Addressing  such  questions,  let  alone  providing
quantitative answers to them, poses a number of challenges. Also, resources that are needed for
policy  evaluation.  Evaluations  require  good  data  and  the  labour  input  of  skilled  individuals  to
perform them.
Facing up to such challenges is unavoidable if the effects of reforms are to be understood. A
structured  evaluation  process  is  critical  to  managing  them.  Policy  evaluation  means  being
transparent about what policy was intended to do in the first place and what it has achieved.
Policy  evaluations  follow  procedures  that  have  many  similarities  with  drug  tests  in  medical
science.  "What  are  the  effects  of  regulations  on  the  stability  of  the  financial  system?"  is  like
asking  "How  does  this  drug  affect  the  patient’s  health?"  In  either  case,  the  purpose  of  the
question  is  to  find  out  whether  the  treatment  cures  the  disease  –  or  merely  alleviates  the
symptoms.  Besides  this,  potential  side  effects  can  be  revealed.  A  structured  evaluation
framework allows disentangling the many different factors that may have affected the “patient".
Good evaluations provide answers to three questions:
Did  the  reform  “cause”  an  outcome?  Much  has  changed  since  the  crisis:  the  competitive
environment in which banks find themselves has changed, economic recovery has been slow,
and other policies areas such as monetary policy have responded as well. Thus, even in the
absence of regulatory reforms, banks would be in a different situation now than before the crisis.
Have the reforms had similar effects across markets or jurisdictions? Lessons learned from one
market or country may not apply to another. In some countries, (non-financial) firms finance the
bulk of their investments through capital and debt markets, in others, they rely more heavily on
bank credit. Legal and institutional settings differ across countries. Such differences need to be
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
taken into account.
Have the reforms achieved their overall objectives? Ultimately, one needs to look at the benefits
of reforms to society as a whole. Disentangling the costs and benefits of regulation is the crucial
point  of  any  evaluation.  Financial  reforms  generate  direct  compliance  costs  for  market
participants, such as the costs of reporting requirements, and these costs tend to be recognised
immediately. The benefits of a more stable and resilient financial system, by contrast, can be
reaped only over the longer term and are more difficult to quantify.
Direct costs of compliance need to be distinguished from the costs of crises that are borne by
market participants. The bailout of banks during the crisis shifted private costs to taxpayers and
raised levels of public debt worldwide. Reforms thus seek to realign incentives by withdrawing
implicit public guarantees. As a result, risk taking on the part of banks may decline, allocation of
credit may change, and costs of debt may increase, because creditors cannot rely on bailouts
and  thus  demand  higher  risk  premia.  Profits  in  the  financial  sector  may  decline  as  a
consequence of reforms.
Taken  together,  costs  are  shifted  from  the  public  sector  to  the  (private)  financial  sector.  One
example from environmental policy may serve to illustrate the point. A Pigovian tax on chemical
producers that pollute a river internalises the externalities of polluting the river by aligning private
and social costs, thereby realigning the incentives to pollute. The direct result of this policy is
lower production of chemicals, as pollution of the river is now part of the private sector’s costs,
and lower sectoral profits. However, these are not the costs of the reform, but rather the intended
consequence.
Fortunately, a robust, evidence-based policy evaluation process does not have to be designed
from scratch. Many jurisdictions already have explicit frameworks for the evaluation of financial
sector  policies  (Financial  Stability  Board  2017,  Annex  A).  In  many  policy  areas,  structured
evaluations are routinely applied. Labour market reforms are being evaluated in many countries,
educational  programmes  are  often  implemented  only  following  a  testing  phase,  and  policy
evaluations  are  commonly  applied  in  the  area  of  development  policies.  There  has  been  a
profound improvement in economic analysis, and this forms part of the infrastructure needed to
perform  evaluations.  Policy  evaluation  can  thus  rely  on  a  rich  infrastructure  of  data,
methodologies, and – not least – skilled personnel.
Because  regulatory  reforms  have  a  global  dimension,  it  is  important  to  speak  a  common
language when looking at the effects of reforms. Setting standards, learning from good practices,
and  international  coordination  are  thus  vitally  important.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  has
developed a framework for the post-implementation evaluation of the effects of the Group of 20
(G20) financial regulatory reforms (Financial Stability Board 2017).
2.2 The role of the Capital Markets Union
Complementary reforms can further strengthen the international reform agenda. The European
Capital  Markets  Union  provides  an  opportunity  to  deepen  financial  market  integration  and  to
enhance  the  resilience  of  the  European  financial  system  (European  Commission  2015,  2017;
Deutsche Bundesbank 2015a). Cross-border debt flows tend to be more stable than equity flows
and in particular foreign direct investment. Well developed and integrated capital markets can
thus  facilitate  risk  sharing  among  investors,  with  the  accompanying  potential  for  generating
welfare gains. In integrated markets, local risks can be shared among investors from different
regions. Similarly, individual investors can protect themselves against local income shocks by
diversifying  their  investments  across  borders.  Increased  reliance  on  equity  finance  would  be
particularly beneficial in the European Monetary Union, where exchange rates cannot adjust to
cope  with  regional  macroeconomic  shocks  and  where  cross-border  fiscal  risk-sharing
mechanisms are limited.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Cross-border risk sharing, however, is constrained if the integration of capital markets is tilted
towards debt finance. In fact, private sector mechanisms for cross-border risk-sharing remain
underdeveloped in Europe (European Central Bank 2017). The development and integration of
European equity markets can thus play a vital role in strengthening cross-border risk sharing in
Europe and should remain a goal of the Capital Markets Union. Despite the freedom of mobility of
cross-border  capital  flows  in  Europe,  many  implicit  barriers  to  the  cross-border  movement  of
equity  capital  and  the  development  of  equity  markets  remain  in  place.  Examples  include  the
development  and  integration  of  European  venture  capital  markets  and  the  removal  of  tax
incentives  that  favour  debt  over  equity  financing  (Deutsche  Bundesbank  2015b).  One  major
achievement of the Capital Markets Union could thus be the removal of impediments to efficient,
non-distorted cross-border capital flows.
3. References
all 
(core 
debt), 
sector 
(2011): 
reporting 
accessed 
economies", 
“The  Real  Effects  of
Ball,  L.  (2014):  “Long-term  damage  from  the  Great  Recession  in  OECD  countries",
European Journal of Economics and Economic Policies, 11 (2), pp. 149–160.
Bank for International Settlements – Statistics (2017): “Time series for total credit to the non-
financial 
on
03.07.2017, stats.bis.org/statx/srs/table/f1.1. Basel.
Bernanke, B., Gertler, M., Gilchrist, S. (1996): “The Financial Accelerator and the Flight to
Quality", Review of Economics and Statistics, 78 (1), pp. 1-15.
Borio,  C.  E.  V.,  Drehmann,  M.  (2009):  “Assessing  the  Risk  of  Banking  Crises  –
Revisited", BIS Quarterly Review, March, pp.29–46. Basel.
Brunnermeier,  M.  K.  (2009):  “Deciphering  the  Liquidity  and  Credit  Crunch  2007–2008",
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23 (1), pp. 77–100.
Brunnermeier,  M.  K.  and  Oehmke,  M.  (2013):  “Bubbles,  Financial  Crises,  and  Systemic
Risk", Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Chapter 18, pp. 1221–1288.
Cecchetti,  S.  G.,  Mohanty,  M.  S.,  Zampolli,  F. 
Debt", BIS Working Paper, No. 352. Basel.
Corsetti, G., Kuester, K., Meier, A., Muller, G. J. (2013): “Sovereign Risk, Fiscal Policy, and
Macroeconomic Stability", Economic Journal, 123 (566), pp. 99–132.
Das, U. S., Papapioannou, M., Pedras, G., Ahmed, F., and Surti, J. (2010): “Managing Public
Debt and Its Financial Stability Implications", IMF Working Paper, WP/10/280. Washington
DC.
Davies,  M.  and  Ng,  T.  (2011):  “The  rise  of  sovereign  credit  risk:  implications  for  financial
stability", BIS Quarterly Review, September, pp. 59–70. Basel.
Detken, C., Weeken, O., Alessi, L., Bonfim, D., Boucinha, M. M., Frontczak, S., Giordana,
G., Giese, J., Jahn, N., Kakes, J., Klaus, B., Lang, J. H., Puzanova, N., and Welz, P. (2014):
“Operationalising 
threshold
identification and calibration options", ESRBOccasional Paper, 5. Frankfurt a.M.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015a): “Capital markets union – financial stability and risk sharing",
Financial Stability Review 2015, pp. 85–94.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015b): “Deutsche Bundesbank’s reply to the European Commis-
sion’s Green Paper ‘Building a Capital Markets Union’". Frankfurt a.M.
Drehmann,  M.,  and  Juselius,  M.  (2014):  “Evaluating  Early  Warning  Indicators  of  Banking
Crises:  Satisfying  Policy  Requirements", 
International  Journal  of  Forecasting,  30
(3), pp.759–780.
European Central Bank (2016): “Report on financial structures", October. Frankfurt a.M.
European Central Bank (2017): “Financial integration in Europe". Frankfurt a.M.
European Commission (2015): “Action plan on building a capital markets union", accessed
the  countercyclical  capital  buffer: 
indicator  selection, 
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
of 
(19 
area 
Financial 
accessed 
assessed 
Reforms", 
Regulatory 
countries)", 
the  G20 
Institutions  –  Background  note 
on 04.07.2017, ec.europa.eu/info/publications/action-plan-building-capital-markets-union_en.
Brussels.
European Commission (2017): “Mid-term review of the capital markets union action plan",
assessed  on  04.07.2017, ec.europa.eu/info/publications/mid-term-review-capital-markets-
union-action-plan_en. Brussels.
Eurostat (2017a): “Eurostat Supplementary Table for Reporting Government Interventions to
Support  Financial 
(April  2017)",  accessed  on
27.06.2017, ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/1015035/2022710/Background-note-on-gov-
interventions-APR-2017-final.pdf. Luxembourg.
Eurostat (2017b): “Time series for general government gross debt (annual data)", accessed
on 
27.06.2017, appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=teina225&lang=en.
Luxembourg.
Eurostat (2017c): “Unemployment by sex (total) and age (total) – monthly average, EA19 –
Euro 
on
04.07.2017, appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/submitViewTableAction.do. Luxembourg.
Financial  Stability  Board  (2016):  “Implementation  and  Effects  of  the  G20  Financial
Regulatory  Reforms  31  August  2016  2nd  Annual  Report",  accessed  on
0 4 . 0 7 . 2 0 1 7 , www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/Report-on-implementation-and-effects-of-
reforms.pdf. Basel.
Financial  Stability  Board  (2017):  “Framework  for  Post-Implementation  Evaluation  of  the
Effects 
on
03.07.2017, www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P030717–4.pdf. Basel.
Gambacorta,  L.,  Yang,  J.,  Tsatsaronis,  K. 
Growth", BIS Quarterly Review, March, pp. 21–35. Basel.
Glick,  R.,  Lansing,  K.J.  (2010):  “Global  Household  Leverage,  House  Prices,  and
Consumption", FRBSF Economic Letter, January. San Francisco CA.
González,  V.  M.  (2013):  “Leverage  and  corporate  performance:  International  evidence",
International Review of Economics & Finance, 25, pp. 169–184.
Group  of  20  (2017):  “Communiqué  of  the  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank
Governors  Meeting  in  Baden-Baden,  Germany,  17–18  March  2017",  accessed  on
04.07.2017, www.bundesfinanzministerium.de/Content/EN/Standardartikel/Topics/Featured/G20/g20-
communique.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=3.
International Monetary Fund (2016): “Debt: Use it Wisely", Fiscal Monitor – World Economic
and Financial Surveys, October. Washington DC
Jordà,  O.,  Schularick,  M.,  Taylor,  A.  (2015):  “Leveraged  Bubbles",  Journal  of  Monetary
Economics, 76, pp. 1-20.
Kaminsky, G. L., and Reinhart, C. M. (1999): “The Twin Crises: the Causes of Banking and
Balance-of-Payments Problems", American Economic Review, 89 (3), pp. 473–500.
King,  M.  (1994):  “Debt  Deflation:  Theory  and  Evidence",  European  Economic  Review,
38, pp. 419–445.
Laeven,  L.,  and  F.  Valencia,  F.  (2012):  “Systemic  Banking  Crises  Database:  An
Update", IMF Working Paper, No. 12/163. Washington DC.
Leigh, D., Ignaz, D., Simon, J., Topalova, P. (2012): “Dealing with Household Debt", World
Economic  Outlook:  Growth  Resuming,  Dangers  Remain,  Washington  DC:  International
Monetary Fund, pp. 89–124.
Mian, A., Sufi, A. (2014): House of Debt, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Mian,  A.,  Sufi,  A.,  Verner,  E.  (forthcoming):  “Household  Debt  and  Business  Cycles
Worldwide", Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Mourougane, A.  (2017):  “Crisis,  potential  output  and  hysteresis",  International  Economics,
“Financial  Structure  and
(2014): 
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
149, pp. 1-14.
Ollivaud, P., Turner, D. (2014): “The Effect of the Global Financial Crisis on OECD Potential
Output", OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1166, Paris.
Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoff, K. S. (2008a): “Is the 2007 USSub-Prime Financial Crisis
so  Different?  An  International  Historical  Comparison",  American  Economic  Review,  98
(2), pp.339–344.
Reinhart, C. M., Rogoff, K. S. (2008b): “This Time is Different: A Panoramic View of Eight
Centuries of Financial Crises", NBERWorking Paper, No. 13882. Cambridge MA.
Sutherland, D., Hoeller, P. (2012): “Debt and Macroeconomic Stability: An Overview of the
Literature and Some Empirics", OECD Economics Department Working Paper, No. 1006.
Paris.
 1
Aggregates cover G20 and other major economies and are based on a conversion to US dollars at purchasing
power exchange rates.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
