  24.05.2017 
 Welcome address 
I Conference on Financial Stability/Banco de España-CEMFI 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Good morning ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  first  Conference  on  Financial  Stability,  jointly 
organised by the Banco de España and the Centro de Estudios Monetarios y Financieros 
(CEMFI). Thank you very much for your interest in and attendance at the Conference. 
We have a very interesting agenda for today and tomorrow, structured around six sessions 
and  a  panel  discussion  covering  a  wide  range of  topics  related  to  the  theory  and  policy 
practice of financial stability.  
This event is bringing together distinguished speakers and discussants from central banks, 
international financial institutions and academia - a combination which will offer a diversity 
of perspectives and also ensure a lively and, for sure, interesting debate over the next two 
days.  
This conference has been possible thanks to the joint effort of Banco de España and CEMFI. 
I am very grateful to the organisers, in particular to Rafael Repullo, Director of CEMFI, as 
well as to all the members of the scientific committee responsible for promoting this meeting 
and  selecting  the  papers  to  be  presented  in  the  programme.  This  event  has  aroused 
particular interest among researchers, with -I am told- nearly one hundred papers having 
been submitted for just twelve slots. With this auspicious start, I trust this conference may 
become a regular forum of dialogue between researchers and policy-makers: central banks 
and financial supervisory authorities have many things to learn from the research carried out 
in academia, away from the frequent policy-making urgencies that drive the daily workload 
in our institutions.  
 Financial stability and macroprudential policy  
The last crisis generated a good deal of issues to be dealt with by authorities with a role in 
financial stability. The experience gained over recent years has shown the importance of 
safeguarding the stability of the financial system as a whole. We now understand that this 
ambitious task requires the use of sophisticated analytical tools to identify vulnerabilities at 
an  early  stage  and  anticipate  how  potential  shocks  can  propagate  across  the  financial 
system. To this end, both micro and macroeconomic methodologies can offer valid insights, 
and this is why the conference programme intends to offer a mix of both approaches. 
One of the most relevant and obvious legacies from the crisis is the introduction of a fully-
fledged macroprudential policy framework.  
As  we  all know,  macroprudential  policy  has,  essentially,  a  twofold  objective.  On  the one 
hand, it seeks to prevent or mitigate the emergence of systemic risks over the expansionary 
phase  of  the  credit  cycle,  as  well  as  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  financial  institutions 
against these risks. This is typically carried out through countercyclical instruments, such 
as capital buffers, which should be accumulated over expansionary periods and, eventually, 
be released in downward phases in order to smooth total credit over the cycle.  
Second,  macroprudential  policy  is  concerned  with  the  structural  features of  the  financial 
system. This is a notion that has to do with the impact on systemic risk arising from the size, 
 3/5 
 complexity and interconnections of certain financial institutions. It is essential that financial 
institutions  duly  internalise  the  impact  of  their  decisions  on  the  whole  system,  which  is 
generally  greater  for  larger,  more  complex,  more  interconnected  and  less  substitutable 
financial institutions. Capital buffers specifically tailored to the most systemic banks have 
been introduced in recent years in many countries, within the framework of the G20, the 
Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  initiatives, 
precisely to address this issue.  
Another interesting tool for financial stability, of potential macroprudential use, are the stress 
test exercises. Notwithstanding their current limitations, stress tests represent a major effort 
by  supervisory  authorities  to  assess  the  impact  of  different  adverse  scenarios  on  the 
financial system, to convey its state of resilience to the public and to inform the necessary 
follow-up actions. 
Summing up, the macroprudential policy toolkit has significantly expanded in recent years. 
This is a change in the right direction because, beyond conferring new powers to central 
banks and supervisory authorities, it requires the adoption of a system-wide perspective in 
policy-making.  
This new set of powers has been introduced rather quickly –over a few short years – and 
this leaves us with a number of questions still awaiting answers.  
We need to better understand the effectiveness of the new instruments in improving the 
resilience of the financial system, in reducing systemic risks, and the trade-offs between 
different  policy  options.  We  also  need  to  understand  how  macroprudential  policies  can 
affect risk-taking attitudes by different agents and to what extent the provision of credit to 
the real economy may be affected, especially during difficult periods.  
After a thorough analysis, it might be the case that the current macroprudential toolkit is still 
insufficient  or  incomplete.  The  European Union’s macroprudential  framework  is  currently 
under review and different possibilities are being contemplated to fine-tune the applicable 
legislation and to introduce additional instruments.  
Over  the  last  decade  we  have  observed  that  bank-like  activities  are  increasingly  being 
undertaken by non-banks, in particular the so-called shadow banks. There is a debate about 
expanding  the  scope  of  the  macroprudential  instruments  beyond  the  banking  system. 
Another area of discussion is whether it will be necessary to introduce borrower-oriented 
instruments in order to address in a more effective way misalignments in real estate markets. 
For all these issues, your analyses and new insights are, indeed, important. 
So, we have ahead of us a large amount of work and avenues for research. As regards the 
Conference  programme,  some  of  the  topics  I  referred  to  will  be  discussed  today  and 
tomorrow, as well as the interaction with other policies. Needless to say, macroprudential 
policy  cannot  be  fully  understood  without  assessing  how  monetary,  microprudential  and 
even fiscal policies may affect financial stability. 
  4/5 
  Experience at the Banco de España with dynamic provisions 
Let me finish by briefly referring to our own experience in dealing with financial stability.  
Spain was among the European countries building up very pronounced imbalances over the 
opening years of this century and, then, going through a very severe crisis. The Banco de 
España was, I believe I may venture to say, a pioneer in developing macroprudential tools, 
by introducing countercyclical provisions as early as the year 2000, a short time after the 
launching of the European Monetary Union. Research carried out at the Banco de España 
shows that these provisions, although not able to counter the strong credit growth in the 
boom years, proved effective in smoothing the credit contraction during the early years of 
the recession.  
In addition, “dynamic” or “statistical” provisions –the names more frequently used in Banco 
de España papers when those provisions were first implemented– were, I think, a kind of 
inspiration for the countercyclical capital buffer, an instrument developed and agreed by the 
Basel  Committee  in  2010,  and  now  widely  implemented  around  the  world.  Dynamic 
provisions  can  also  be  considered,  with  some  nuances  along  the  way,  the  precursor  of 
expected-loss provisions. The recent introduction of expected-loss provisions has entailed 
a change of the accounting paradigm, which, so we think at the Banco de España, was long 
overdue from a banking supervisory perspective.  
Overall, given the acceptance of countercyclical approaches to macroprudential policy, I 
am  sure  that  the  panel  discussion  tomorrow  on  the  Spanish  countercyclical  provisions 
experience will offer not just an interesting study in history, but also some lessons for the 
future. 
Without further ado, I am pleased to open this first Conference on Financial Stability giving 
the floor now to Rafael Repullo, director of CEMFI, who will chair the first session. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 5/5 
