Andreas  Dombret:  Results  of 
the 
conducted by the Bundesbank and BaFin
Opening statement by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  press  conference  presenting  the  results  of  the  low-interest-rate  survey
conducted by the Bundesbank and BaFin, Frankfurt am Main, 30 August 2017.
low-interest-rate  survey
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Are you familiar with the German smartphone app “App zum Arzt”? It advises the user on which
medical check-ups they should have. I can only recommend it to everyone, given that prevention
is clearly the best cure. Despite all the fintech mania, however, we banking supervisors have not
yet morphed into app developers – though for us, too, prevention is a high priority. And it was
precautionary motives that led us to once again conduct the low-interest-rate survey.
In  this  third  instance,  after  our  surveys  in  2013  and  2015,  we  want  to  establish  exactly  how
healthy the German banks and savings banks are at this moment in time, and how susceptible
they are to future ailments.
That is why we gave the small and medium-sized credit institutions overseen by the Bundesbank
and  BaFin  a  comprehensive  check-up;  the  large  institutions  that  are  directly  overseen  by
the ECB are excluded from this survey.
Over the past few months, we asked 1,555 institutions about their profitability and resilience – in
numerical terms, that’s 88%  of  all  German  institutions.  With  aggregate  total  assets  of  around
€3,000 billion, they represent roughly 41% of the entire German banking sector.
Thanks  to  the  results  of  the  survey,  we  can  provide  an  exclusive  insight  into  the  current  and
future risk situation facing German banks and savings banks. The survey was based both on
assumptions made by the institutions and on stress scenarios defined by the supervisors.
Before Mr Röseler and I present the results, let me begin by saying one thing. Without a doubt,
the low-interest-rate survey consumed a great deal of time and money. I would therefore like to
take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  participating  banks  and  savings  banks  as  well  as  their
associations and IT service providers. You all deserve a huge thank you, because without your
cooperation,  a  survey  like  this  would  not  be  possible.  But  I  am  certain  that  the  insights  to  be
gained from this check-up justify the effort – after all, it is unquestionably in all our interests to
make a sound diagnosis of the health of our banking system.
Now let’s take a closer look at the survey. The check-up covers three areas. First, it analyses
profitability on the basis of business figures – here, we look not only at the institutions’ planning
and  forecasts  up  until  2021,  but  also  at  how  the  annual  results  would  change  under  the
assumption  of  different  interest  rate  levels  in  the  future.  We  supplemented  these  quantitative
analyses  with  qualitative  questions,  whereby  the  banks  and  savings  banks  gave  a  uniform
assessment of the future of their institution and the banking sector.
The second area is stress testing. In this context, we analysed what would happen to the capital
base of the institutions if they had to cope with particular external stress events. For the first time,
in addition to the classic stress factors of interest rate, market and credit risk, we also stress
tested residential real estate.
Residential real estate also formed part of the third area of analysis, in which we examined other
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
key risks. Besides risks in the residential real estate sector, we performed a detailed analysis of
lending standards and the position of building and loan associations.
Our examination centres on the question of how the low-interest-rate environment is affecting the
resilience of banks and savings banks. In order to grasp the effects of possible future interest
rate  levels  on  credit  institutions,  we  calculated  how  the  profitability  of  the  institutions  would
change  if  the  interest  rate  level  were  to  move  in  one  direction  or  the  other.  What  were  the
underlying scenarios we used?
For the first area, the analysis of profitability, we first asked the institutions to provide their three-
years plans using a uniform template and requested forecasts for a further two years. In addition
to  this,  we  examined  supervisory  interest  rate  scenarios:  a  sustained  low-interest-rate
environment, a positive interest rate shock of 200 basis points, a negative interest rate shock of
100 basis points, and a turn in the yield curve of +200 basis points at the short end and –60 basis
points at the long end, each at the beginning of this year. The institutions’ balance sheets could
be altered for some scenarios, and not for others.
For  the  stress  test,  the  impact  of  a  positive  interest  rate  shock  of  200  basis  points  was
compared with that of a continued low-interest-rate environment. The scenario also assumes a
200 basis point increase in the probability of default and a 20% increase in the loss given default.
Moreover, for interest-bearing securities, risk premiums were assumed to rise by between 30
and 1,500 basis points, depending on credit quality. A 20% loss in value was assumed for other
securities, such as equities.
Ladies and gentlemen, when doctors start explaining all their findings down to the very last detail,
some patients might think, “Don’t beat around the bush, just tell me what I have”. So here are the
key diagnoses, to start with.
Small and medium-sized German credit institutions expect their profits to continue shrinking
between 2016 and 2021, according to their planning. In concrete terms, they expect their
pre-tax profit to dwindle by 9% and their total return on capital to fall by 16%.
In the same period, the aggregate common equity tier 1 (CET1) ratio is expected to rise from
15.9% to 16.5%.
Further cuts in interest rates would reduce overall pre-tax profitability by up to 60%. All told,
however, these effects are less drastic than in the 2015 survey.
Under the conditions prevailing in our stress test, around 4.5% of the institutions would fail to
meet the prudential requirements set out in pillars I and II plus the capital conservation buffer,
taking into account hidden reserves.
One  thing  that  increases  in  the  low-interest-rate  environment  is  competition:  over  70%  of
institutions  expect  competition  from  other  banks  and  savings  banks  to  pick  up  –  and  as
many as 85% see fintechs as a source of mounting rivalry.
On this score, nearly every second institution can see a prospect of mergers and takeovers
in the medium term.
One set of findings I am sure you will all be interested in is from the residential real estate
market. This much I can tell you already: we are seeing the unsecured portion of housing
loans increasing at one in three institutions, but there is no sign of a worrying easing of credit
standards.
And the good news is that a simulated extreme drop in housing prices in Germany would
shave just one percentage point, or thereabouts, off institutions’ CET1 ratio.
2.  Ongoing decline in profitability forcing banks to fight back
Let us now take a closer look at the details, starting with earnings. In this part of the survey, we
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
asked credit institutions for their budgeted figures for the period until 2021. You can see straight
away that the trend does not look good. Smaller and medium-sized German credit institutions
are expecting results – measured in terms of their pre-tax total return on capital – to shrink by an
average of 16% by 2021. The 2015 survey had even projected a decline by one-fourth.
What is behind this drop in profitability? This chart shows the aggregate decline in results over
the 2016–21 period, broken down by type of result. The heaviest losses are projected to come
from the 0.27% pre-tax drop in net interest income, corresponding to a contraction of more than
3 billion euro in absolute terms, and from the increase in loss provisions – the latter including
positions such as expected credit losses. Here, the decline in annual earnings to the tune of 0.43
percentage  points  is  equivalent  to  future  loss  provisions  amounting  to  more  than  €5  billion  in
absolute terms.
The overall decline, however, will first be offset by an improvement in net commission income in
the amount of 0.24 percentage points, corresponding to a figure of almost €3 billion in absolute
terms.  The  second  dampening  factor  at  play  here  is  the  reduction  by  0.5  percentage  points
(equivalent  to  more  than  6  billion  euro)  in  additional  reserves   –  these  factors  will  keep  the
decline in profitability in check at a negative 1 billion euro.
1
On aggregate, then, the banking sector is expecting to see a steady decline in profitability in the
years ahead – however, there are growing signs that institutions are beginning to fight back. But
these steps still don’t go far enough – further, more decisive action will be needed to turn things
around.
Let’s  now  move  on  and  look  at  what  happens  when  interest  rates  change.  To  illuminate  this
point, we specified a number of uniform interest rate scenarios and asked banks and savings
banks to calculate how their business figures until 2021 would change if interest rates remained
static, increased or declined. The blue bar highlights the 16% decline in total return on capital I
have just described.
If the interest rate level stayed low or even shrank further, their results would slump, as you can
see from the dark blue line (-41%) and especially the solid red line (-60%). Assuming a dynamic
balance sheet, portfolio adjustments can cushion this impact accordingly, as the red dashed red
line (again –41%) illustrates. A rise in interest rates would be a different story. To begin with, the
short-term burden of interest rate risk would materialise, hitting bank profitability. But on a more
cheery note, over the medium to long term, results would even move back above the current
2
figure from 2016 (+7%).
But banks and savings banks are not projecting such an upbeat scenario as this interest rate
scenario is not regarded as being likely to happen.
Institutions’ earnings, then, are under pressure. This might lead them to take on greater risks,
which are normally rewarded by higher returns. If that does not work out, institutions will end up
taking excessive risk on board. For this reason, supervisors need to focus on the resilience of
the institutions.
And as you can see from the chart, one in three institutions are expecting their CET1 ratio to
contract.  The  left-hand  side  of  the  black  bar  shows  institutions  whose  ratios  are  declining.
Another thing the survey responses tell us is that as many as two out of three institutions are
projecting a drop in their total capital ratio. However, that’s not a point we should overdramatise
because the average outcome across all institutions is that while the total capital ratio looks set
3
to shrink from 18.3% to 17.8%, the CET1 ratio is projected to climb from 15.9% to 16.5%.
The main question, though, is what the one in three institutions which are expecting the CET1
ratio to drop are planning to do. The institutions in this group, which account for a handsome 32%
of participants, are planning to increase their total assets and exposures, but not to step up their
 3 / 6
4
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
equity capital to the same extent – on aggregate, this will slightly reduce the capital ratio.
These are all early warning signals of a heightened propensity among credit institutions to take
risks, and we are monitoring developments very closely indeed.
3. Continued intense competition a catalyst for merger plans
But why are institutions taking on greater risks? One likely reason is that there aren’t any superior
straightforward  alternatives.  Efficiency  gains  can  only  be  achieved  through  costly  optimisation
measures. And low-risk investments are hotly contested in Germany’s banking sector, plus their
returns have been depressed by the low-interest-rate environment.
In  this  setting,  speculation  has  long  been  rife  over  further  consolidation,  and  not  just  in  the
German  banking  sector.  Our  survey  now  delivers  clear  indications  not  only  that  competition
remains as fierce as ever, but also that institutions are even expecting it to intensify – and not
only because of fintechs, but also due to other credit institutions, especially regional ones.
It is hardly surprising that consolidation continues to make headway under these conditions. But
what  we  did  not  expect  were  the  figures  on  future  mergers: Around  every  tenth  institution  is
already in the process of implementing a merger or has specific merger plans. What’s more,
almost  half  of  all  banks  can  envisage  a  merger  in  the  next  five  years.  However,  considerably
more  banks  see  themselves  as  the  acquiring  institution  rather  than  as  the  institution  to  be
acquired.  That’s  another  reason  why  I  expect  we  will  ultimately  see  fewer  mergers  than  the
responses might initially suggest.
The number of German institutions is likely to continue falling in the years ahead, too. In our role
as bank supervisors, we only want to warn banks that not all mergers are sustainable. In this
respect, too, banks would do well to carry out a comprehensive check-up to identify avoidable
problems in good time.
4. Elevated risks through housing loans
And now we come to a new element of our check-up: the housing market. Fear of a housing
market  bubble  and  rising  real  estate  risks  in  banks’  balance  sheets  has  been  the  subject  of
heated  debate  for  some  months  now,  not  least  because  of  constantly  rising  property  prices.
Bundesbank calculations show that we are experiencing price hikes in major towns and cities of
15% to 30% above the level that is justified by the fundamentals.  Credit growth in Germany has
likewise gathered momentum of late, notably at the smaller institutions. But this needs to be put
into perspective: growth is still comparatively moderate compared with the euro area in the early
2000s.
5
And  our  survey  currently  sounds  something  of  an  “all-clear”  for  Germany.  We  see  no  far-
reaching  loosening  of  credit  standards  or  conditions.  If  these  were  significantly  softened,  this
would point to the emergence of a housing bubble capable of threatening financial stability. But
we have found no sign of that.
What  we  certainly  do  see,  though,  is  a  growing  tendency  among  institutions  to  incur  greater
risks. These movements have been minor so far – but we need to be especially alert to them.
What exactly do we see? First, in the current low-interest-rate environment, there is an increase
in mortgage loans in banks’ balance sheets – both the overall volume and the average loan size
have risen distinctly. Customers seem to be taking advantage of the low interest rates to offset
part  of  the  price  increases  –  and  because  rates  are  so  low,  they  can  also  finance  their
purchases without any additional costs. Moreover, the rate fixation period is simultaneously being
extended.   On  top  of  that,  institutions  also  seem  to  be  willing  to  grant  loans  against  less
collateral. The sum result of these factors is increased risk-taking on the part of banks.
6
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Parallel to this, the interest rate margins, that is the interest they demand minus their funding
costs, have contracted significantly over the last two years. One reason for this appears to be
the  fierce  competition  for  mortgage  business,  which  remains  a  safe  and  therefore  attractive
business segment for banks.
Let us move on now to the housing stress test. How well would banks and savings banks cope
with a bust in the housing sector? To put it in no uncertain terms: we do not see any real estate
bubble that should give us cause for concern. Nevertheless, we do need to be on our guard. That
is why we took the precaution of performing the housing stress test. To this end, we simulated a
decline  in  housing  prices  and  examined  how  such  an  occurrence  would  impact  on  banks  in
terms of losses and their capital ratio.
Therefore, we first needed to simulate a macroeconomic setting appropriate for the hypothetical
house price developments, using a suitable model. This then enabled us to determine both the
impact on default probabilities and on loss ratios for housing loans. Based on the changes in
these parameters, we were able to derive the hypothetical increase in impairment charges as
well as the losses in interest income, both of which diminish the capital base. Furthermore, using
the standard approach, the banks’ risk-weighted assets expand on account of the reduction in
the value of eligible collateral. These partial effects cause the CET1 of the banks in question to
shrink.       
From the upper chart you can see that we simulated very pronounced price corrections which,
however,  experience  in  other  countries  has  shown  to  be  plausible  in  a  crisis  situation.  The
dashed lines show the development of housing market crises in other countries. The dark blue
line  represents  our  extreme  scenario,  which  simulates  how  a  drop  in  prices  similar  to  that
experienced  during  the  Spanish  housing  crisis  from  2011  onwards  would  have  affected  the
banks in our survey. In this simulation, prices plunge by 30%. The light blue line represents the
less extreme, yet still severe, scenario – which we call “adverse”. In this case, prices fall by 20%,
which is not exactly a small margin either.
The credit institutions would sustain heavy losses under the extreme scenario: the result would
be a drop in their CET1 ratio of 0.9 percentage points. In this case, the small and medium-sized
German banks and savings banks would have to raise additional capital of around €12 billion in
order  to  lift  their  CET1  ratio  back  to  its  original  level.  And  even  under  the  somewhat  less
dramatic, adverse scenario, the CET1 ratio would still fall by 0.5 percentage points. Here, capital
7
would have to be topped up to the tune of €5.6 billion.
So you see, the risks stemming from the residential mortgage market are relevant for banks.
What is more, taking contagion into account would intensify the impact considerably. We see
signs  of  growing  competition  to  secure  mortgage  loan  business  in  the  low-interest  rate
environment. Nevertheless, the stress test shows that banks need to look closely at how well
they would be able to cope with the associated risks in the event of a crisis.
The message to banks and savings banks, then, is that they ought to make provisions if they
want to stay healthy in the long term – that is and remains, without a doubt, the best medicine.
1
2
While institutions are continuing to make allowances for risk by stocking up the fund for general banking risks
(pursuant to section 340g of the German Commercial Code), they are planning to set aside roughly 6.1 billion
euro less altogether between 2017 and 2021.
The individual scenarios are as follows. The blue bar shows the banks’ own P&L projections. The dark blue line
continues the current interest rate level. It is based on a constant yield curve and the balance sheet as at 31
December 2016. The green line depicts the positive interest rate shock scenario, in which the assumption of an
unchanged balance sheet is retained. However, it is assumed that interest rates rise by 200 basis points
across  all  maturities  –  in  other  words,  there  is  a  parallel  upward  shift  in  the  yield  curve.  The  red  lines,
meanwhile,  show  the  negative  interest  rate  shock  scenario  in  which  rates  drop  by  100  basis  points  and
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
4
5
6
7
institutions are allowed (solid line) and not allowed (dotted line) to respond by adjusting their balance sheets.
The CET1 ratio is defined as the ratio of CET1 capital to risk-weighted assets.
Developments in the total capital ratio point in much the same direction: this ratio will decline overall from 18.3%
to 17.8%; two out of three survey participants are expecting it to shrink.
See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, February 2017, p 53.
Loans with a rate fixation period of more than 10 years rose from 10% of new loans in 2014 to 20% in 2016.
These  scenarios  represent  isolated  shocks  which  test  for  the  impact  of  falling  prices  and  the  resulting
macroeconomic developments on the banks’ residential property portfolios.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
