  24.02.2017 
 The Mediterranean economies in a changing world. Lessons learned in 
economic and financial instability: what scenarios can we envisage? 
IEMED Conference/Barcelona 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Good  morning  ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  for  me  a  great  pleasure  to  make  the  opening 
remarks in this conference organised by IEMED, to discuss economic and financial matters 
in  the  Mediterranean  region.  The  two  previous  conferences  took  place  in  Barcelona,  in 
October 2014, and in Rabat, in November 2015, and were very successful as, I am sure, it 
will the case again this time.  
The  idea  behind  these  conferences  is  to  provide  a  forum  in  which  different  parties  from 
Mediterranean  countries  interested  in  exchanging  ideas  on  monetary,  economic  and 
financial matters in the region --central banks, public officials, representatives of the private 
sector and international organisations- can do so in a friendly and forthcoming environment. 
I think the diversity of participants, with presence of some central banks, is one of the clues 
for the success and the continuity of this initiative.  
For the “Introductory session” we are joined by leading representatives of three multilateral 
organisations with an important involvement in the region. The Union for the Mediterranean 
gathers together the countries at both shores of this sea; it is always of the highest interest 
to listen to his Secretary General, Mr. Fathallahh SijiImassi. The European Investment Bank 
has made in recent years a huge effort to increase its activities, financing and support in the 
South and East Mediterranean countries; we have today the presence of its Vice President, 
Mr. Román Escolano. Finally, the OECD, one of the leading institutions in economic analysis 
and  policy  advice,  represented  by  former  Portuguese  Minister  of  Finance,  Mr.  Alvaro 
Pereira. 
With their presence the session devoted to the discussion of “the role of central banks at 
present and of monetary and exchange rates policies in Mediterranean countries” promises 
to  be  of  a  great  interest.  In  2015,  in  Rabat,  we  had  the  opportunity  to  benefit  from  the 
support and hospitality of Bank Al-Maghrib, and this year we are again privileged by the 
presence of Governor Al-Jouahri. It is also a great honour to have here today the Governor 
of the central bank of Malta, my colleague at ECB Governing Council, Mr Mario Vella, and 
the former Governor from the central bank of Tunisia, Mr. Mustapha Kamel Nabli. 
The following sessions of the Conference deal with two topics of fundamental importance 
for the region: the need of structural reforms to enhance the business climate and improve 
productivity  and  the  most  adequate  fiscal  policy  to  be  adopted  in  the  present  context. 
Finally, the economic scenarios that the region can be confronted to within the next few 
years, will be analysed in the last session. 
The title of the Conference is “Lessons learned in economic and financial instability”. Indeed, 
over the last decade the world, and the Mediterranean region, have been confronted with a 
very important and serious unexpected political, economic and financial events. After the 
Financial Crisis exploded in 2008 a profound feeling of vulnerability and lack of confidence 
spread globally, not the less in Europe, shaken also by a sovereign debt crisis. In the South 
and East Mediterranean countries instability in the last few years has had mainly a political 
origin  but  its  effects  in  terms  of  economic  uncertainty  and  increased  fragility  have  been 
huge. 
This challenging environment has led to a rethinking of the way we design and implement 
economic policies, be it in the monetary, financial or fiscal fronts, and also to a renewed 
emphasis  on  enhancing  the  stability  and  the  resilience  of  the  economies,  as  well  as  on 
reducing their vulnerabilities. Stability and certainty are probably the main attributes with 
 3/4 
 which  economic  policy  can  contribute  to  economic  prosperity.  But  I  am  sure  that  the 
participants in the different sessions of the Conference will elaborate more on this topic on 
lessons learned and will enlighten us with their ideas on the economic policies needed to 
attain a better economic future in our Region.   
Ladies and gentlemen, I leave the floor to the Executive President of IEMED, Mr. Senén 
Florensa, congratulating him for the organisation of this event and of course thanking you 
all for your presence here today. 
 4/4 
 