  25.04.2017 
 Testimony of the Governor of the Banco de España before the Spanish 
Parliamentary Budget Committee in relation to the draft State Budget for 
2017 
 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  appear  before  this  Committee  at  the  start  of  the  discussion  and  approval  of  the  State 
Budget for 2017, the draft legislation for which, was approved by the Government on 31 
March.  
Let  me  begin  by  referring  to  the  international  setting  and  the  outlook  for  the  Spanish 
economy, after which I will move on to the core aspects of the draft Budget and conclude 
with some reflections on the relationship between fiscal policy and our economic recovery.  
The external setting of the Spanish economy 
In recent quarters, the international economic setting has been marked by a high level of 
uncertainty, both in the United States, where there are doubts about the timing and scope 
of the new Administration's measures, and in Europe, as a result of Brexit and the elections 
scheduled for this year. 
For  the  moment,  this  uncertainty  has  hardly  been  reflected  in  financial  indicators.  The 
markets have continued to perform favourably and longer-term interest rates, which rose in 
late  2016,  have  stabilised  at  still  moderate  levels.  Oil  prices  remained  stable  in  the  early 
months of the year, after the rise observed in the wake of the agreements  reached by oil 
producing  countries  at  the  end  of  November  2016,  although  recent  data  show  a  higher 
degree of volatility. 
As for global economic activity, the figures for the last quarter of 2016 show higher-than-
expected GDP growth in advanced economies, except in the United States; in emerging 
economies  there  were  clear  differences  with  robust  growth  in  Asia,  that  prompted  a 
moderate  rise  in  international  trade,  and  a  further  slowdown  in  Latin  America.  Similarly, 
indicators  published  in  the  first  quarter  have  been  somewhat  more  favourable  than 
expected. 
In the euro area, despite the presence of the above-mentioned factors of uncertainty, the 
most recent economic developments show a firming of the recovery, although its strength 
across countries is uneven. The ECB's most recent projections in March indicate that the 
current phase of recovery will persist and that GDP growth in the euro area will continue to 
be underpinned essentially by domestic demand, with forecast growth rates of 1.8% and 
1.7% for 2017 and 2018, respectively, similar to that observed in 2016. 
Euro area inflation climbed to 2% in February, mainly reflecting temporary factors linked in 
particular to energy prices, which will unwind over the year. In fact, headline inflation in the 
euro area slowed to 1.5% in March and core inflation (excluding energy and unprocessed 
food) stood at 0.7%. From a medium-term perspective, the ECB projection exercise points 
to inflation moving on a very gradual upward path, with the result that, towards the end of 
2019, it would still stand below 2%. 
Against  this  background,  in  March  the  ECB  Governing  Council  decided  not  to  change 
benchmark interest rates and repeated its commitment to continue net asset purchases at 
a monthly pace of €60 billion until the end of December 2017 or beyond, if necessary, and, 
 3/9 
 in any case, until a sustained adjustment is seen in the path of inflation consistent with its 
medium-term objective of a rate of close to but below 2%. 
The monetary policy measures of recent years have resulted in a significant improvement in 
financing conditions, which has been particularly visible in the case of the Spanish economy, 
both  as  regards  the  low  cost  of  new  funds  and  the  gradual  normalisation  of  lending 
conditions. This reduction has been particularly significant in terms of the cost of financing 
public debt. 
Performance of and outlook for the Spanish economy 
The Spanish economy grew 0.7% in the last quarter of 2016 and the latest indicators show 
that the growth rate in the opening months of 2017 could have been slightly higher. 
According to the Banco de España's projections published at the beginning of April, GDP 
growth is estimated to be 2.8% in 2017 as a whole, which is somewhat lower than in 2016, 
but continues to be significantly higher than the euro area average. 
Turning to its composition, domestic demand remains the main engine of economic growth. 
Household consumption remains robust, underpinned by the improvement in the outlook 
for  employment,  and  favourable  developments  in  household  disposable  income  and  in 
lending standards. Real estate market indicators show an ongoing recovery in the sector 
which,  albeit  uneven  in  terms  of  market  segments  and  geographical  areas,  is  also 
contributing to the buoyancy of household spending and employment. Although investment 
has decelerated in recent quarters, it remains firm given the favourable situation of financial 
conditions and final demand. 
The Banco de España's projections anticipate that the current growth phase of the Spanish 
economy, dating back to the second half of 2013, will persist over the next few years and 
that it will continue to be supported by gains in competitiveness, the ongoing favourable 
financial conditions, and the expected positive performance of international markets. The 
foundations of the recovery in the Spanish economy are, in fact, the correction of certain 
macroeconomic and financial imbalances, which had built up previously, most notably the 
improvement in international competitiveness, the progress made in the financial position 
of  households,  firms  and  financial  institutions,  without  forgetting  the  improvement  in 
employment,  with  a  significant  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  in  the  last  four  years, 
although it still remains at very high levels.  
However, it should be noted that GDP growth in recent years has also received a significant 
boost from factors of a more temporary nature such as lower oil prices, the fiscal impulse 
which  gave  rise  to  an  expansionary  budgetary  policy  stance  in  2015  and  2016,  and  the 
ECB's expansionary monetary policy. Lower growth of activity can be expected as the effect 
of some of these factors fades. 
As in the euro area as a whole, inflation rose notably at the beginning of the year to levels 
of 3% in January and February, according to the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, 
and  declined  to  rates  of  close  to  2%  in  March.  Its  quickening  in  January  and  February 
responded, in particular, to the strong increase in electricity prices and the base effects of 
oil prices. Consequently, this increase is expected to be temporary and will begin to fade as 
the impact of the acceleration of the energy component dissipates. Thus, after an average 
4/9 
 increase of 2.2% in 2017,  the CPI will  foreseeably  slow  to  1.4%  and  1.6%,  in 2018  and 
2019, respectively.  
 The risks 
The scenario which I have just outlined is not without both external and internal risks.  
Noteworthy  on  the  external  front  is  the  higher  degree  of  uncertainty  concerning  global 
economic  policies  and  their  possible  impact  on  world  trade  and  the  capital  markets.  In 
particular, the current buoyancy on financial markets reflects, at least partly, the expectation 
that the new US Administration will apply economic policies favouring higher growth and 
inflation in the short term – such as a possible fiscal expansion – perhaps underestimating 
the effect of such policies on the pace of the monetary normalisation in the United States, 
as well as other less favourable aspects, such as the shift towards the lower international 
mobility of goods and people.  
A  trend  towards  consideration  of  the  introduction  of  protectionist  barriers  in  certain 
developed  economies  has  been  observed  recently.  Should  such  barriers  actually  be 
introduced, there would be a negative impact on world trade that could affect an economy, 
like Spain's, whose recovery has been largely export-led.  
In the same vein, uncertainty about the implications of the United Kingdom leaving the EU 
remains high, in a setting in which the Spanish economy has significant exposure to this 
country in terms of services exports and financial ties. This uncertainty is also affected by 
the  context  of  low  returns  in  Europe's  financial  system  and  of  the  fragility  of  certain 
institutions. 
On the domestic front, several factors of vulnerability persist. One of them arises from the 
level of public indebtedness (which I will refer to later) and that of certain segments of the 
household  and  corporate  sectors,  which  entails  high  reliance  on  foreign  saving  and 
represents a source of weakness in the face of possible increases in the cost of borrowing.  
Also, despite efficiency improvements, our economy remains highly sensitive to potential 
increases in commodities prices, particularly, oil prices. From a medium-term perspective, 
the  high  structural  component  of  the  unemployment  rate,  an  ageing  population  and  low 
productivity are the main factors limiting the sustained growth of our economy.  
I shall now review the main features of the budget. 
Budgetary policy in 2017 
The macroeconomic forecasts accompanying the draft State and Social Security Budgets 
for  2017  involve  the  prolongation  of  the  current  expansionary  phase.  Specifically,  they 
estimate real GDP growth of 2.5%, accompanied by a recovery in prices, so that nominal 
GDP growth is slightly above 4%. 
The  macroeconomic  projections  used  in  the  preparation  of  the  draft  budget  are  broadly 
compatible with the scenario that I have just referred to, which forms the backdrop to the 
latest forecasts of the Banco de España, and also with the consensus scenario of private 
analysts.  Real  growth  in  2017  under  the  consensus  scenario  is  somewhat  lower  than 
 5/9 
 projected by the Banco de España (2.5% as against 2.8%), but the nominal GDP growth 
forecasts are in line with each other.  
The  deficit  target  for  general  government  as  a  whole is  3.1% of  GDP  for  2017,  which  is 
compatible with the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact and involves a projected 
reduction of 1.4 pp of GDP. Achievement of this target is essential for Spain to resolve its 
situation of “excessive deficit” (more than 3% of GDP) in 2018. 
Public debt, according to the draft budget, will be 98.8% of GDP in 2017, down 0.6 pp of 
GDP from 2016. The slight downward trend of recent years, from the peak of 100.4% in 
2014, is therefore extended. 
In this macroeconomic context, it should come as no surprise that the improvement in the 
deficit  in  2017  stems  mainly  from  the  favourable  cyclical  situation  and  the  reduction  in 
interest rates on public debt. In this respect, the budgetary adjustment required to make 
further  progress  with  fiscal  consolidation,  as  measured  by  the  change  in  the  primary 
structural balance, is very small. This is in line with the latest Updated Budgetary Plan for 
2017, which anticipates a slightly contractionary fiscal policy stance for the current year, in 
contrast to the expansionary stance of the last two years. Naturally, any downward deviation 
in growth or inflation, or any increase in financing costs, would make fiscal consolidation 
more demanding. 
With  regard  to  subsectors,  the  draft  budget  includes  the  stability  targets  approved  by 
Parliament in December 2016.  
The budget deficits projected for central government and the Social Security system are 
1.1%  and  1.4%  of  GDP,  respectively,  as  against  the  actual  deficits  of  2.7%  and  1.6%, 
respectively,  recorded  in  2016.  The  deficit  targets  for  regional  and  local  government  are 
0.6% in the case of regional government (0.8% in 2016) and a balanced budget in that of 
local  government  (as  against  the  surplus of  0.6%  recorded  in  2016).  According  to  these 
plans, central government agencies will account for most of the improvement in the total 
deficit in 2017. 
Achievement  of  the  budget  deficit  target  is  a  result,  first  of  the  State  spending  ceiling, 
approved  in  December,  which  excludes  spending  under  the  financing  arrangements  for 
local and regional government; and second, of the growth in public revenue. 
The most important measure on the expenditure side, in relation to personnel costs, is the 
increase of 1% in the compensation of public sector employees, in line with that approved 
last  year.  With  regard  to  public  sector  employment,  it  is  proposed  that  temporary 
employment be reduced to 8%, over the next three years, from its current level of 23%. 
According to the draft budget, this would involve converting 250,000 temporary employees 
into permanent employees within this period. Also, there will be an increase in the number 
of sectors allowed to increase their replacement rate to 100%. For general government as 
a whole, this measure will mean, according to the budget, that there will be 67,000 public 
sector vacancies in 2017.  
Overall, these measures would result in growth of 1% in the wage bill in the State budget, 
as compared with the decline of 1.2% in 2016. At the same time, the restriction is maintained 
on current spending on goods and services, which declines by 14%.  
6/9 
  As regards public investment, real investment is projected to increase by 23%, with respect 
to the initial budget for 2016. However when the effect of certain defence-related payments 
outstanding from other years is taken into account, State investment is budgeted to fall by 
almost 20%, which is accompanied by a significant reduction in business investment in the 
public sector. 
Turning  to  the  Social  Security  system,  the  increase  of  0.25%  in  pensions,  arising  from 
application  of  the  indexation  formula  in  force  following  the  2013  reform,  is  notable.  The 
projected growth in expenditure on contributory pensions in 2017 is rather higher (3.1%), as 
a  result  of  the  projected  increase  in  the  number  of  pensions  and  the  substitution  effect 
arising from the new pensions that replace those that are terminated, so that the weight of 
expenditure  on  pensions  in  total  consolidated  State  and  Social  Security  expenditure 
increases  to  40.7%  (as  against  38.5%  in  2016).  Also,  the  reduction  in  expenditure  on 
unemployment  benefits,  of  7%,  should  be  noted.  This  is  explained  by  the  fall  in 
unemployment and in the coverage rate of contributory benefits. 
On the revenue side, the main measures included in the draft budget are those that were 
approved on 2 December 2016 in Royal Decree-Law 3/2016. Notable among them is the 
amendment to corporate income tax in order to widen the tax base. As regards VAT, limits 
are placed on the conditions for granting deferrals, and a new system is set up for immediate 
supply  of  information.  As  for  excise  duties,  the  rates  on  alcoholic  drinks  and  tobacco 
products  are  raised.  In  the  case  of  Social  Security  system  revenues,  an  increase  in  the 
maximum contribution base of 3% was approved in the above-mentioned Royal Decree-
Law. 
Overall, tax revenues, before the transfer to local and regional government, are projected to 
increase  by  7.8%  in  2017,  while  social  contributions  are  projected  to  increase  by  6.3%, 
which, given the macroeconomic forecasts and the impact of the tax reforms mentioned 
above, would entail a greater response by revenues to growth in activity than in the past, 
especially in the case of social contributions, which are projected to grow by more than their 
bases (employment and wages), even taking into account the effect on revenues of the legal 
changes mentioned above. If the uncertainties surrounding the estimates of the impact of 
the  legislative  changes  on  taxation  are  also  taken  into  account,  it  is  clear  that  revenue 
growth  needs  to  be  monitored  constantly  over  the  course  of  the  year,  so  that  a  timely 
adjustment can be made to spending or revenue in the event that the risks to the deficit 
target materialise. 
Moreover,  in  such  a  decentralised  country  as  Spain,  where  more  than  40%  of  public 
spending is made at the local and regional level, the State and Social Security budgets give 
merely a partial view of the budgetary policy of the public sector as a whole for next year.  
From this perspective, the Updated Stability Programme to be published in the next few 
days  is  particularly  important,  since  it  consolidates  the  budgets  of  central  government 
agencies with those of regional government and local government. This document should 
enable a complete analysis of budgetary projections to be performed and is, in fact, that 
used by the European Commission as a basis for its assessment of Spanish fiscal policy. 
   7/9 
 The importance of budgetary consolidation 
Before concluding my address, I should like to offer some reflections on the importance of 
completing the budgetary consolidation process.  
Spain’s  public  debt-to-GDP  ratio  remains  very  high.  Despite  its  recent  stabilisation,  it  is 
close to 100% and more than 60 percentage points above its pre-crisis level. Moreover, the 
budget deficit (both the total deficit and the structural deficit) is also very high and exceeds 
that of most of our European partners. The outstanding adjustment is still significant, despite 
the  current  context  of  a  high  pace  of  growth  and  low  interest  rates,  that  is  relatively 
conducive to reducing the structural budget deficit and the public debt-to-GDP ratio.  
Reducing  fiscal  imbalances  is  important  in  order  to  moderate  the  future  financial  costs 
associated  with  public  debt,  and  also  to  reduce  the  vulnerability  of  the  economy  to  a 
possible tightening of financial conditions, without forgetting the need to restore scope for 
a fiscal policy response in the event of possible adverse growth scenarios. 
For all these reasons, it is crucial to adopt a time perspective that goes beyond the annual 
budgetary  exercise,  with  a  detailed  and  credible  deficit  correction  plan  geared  towards 
gradually  reducing  public  debt.  The  Updated  Stability  Programme,  which  I  have  already 
mentioned, provides an opportunity to define such a plan, incorporating the budget plans 
of  all  tiers  of  government  within  the  framework  of  medium-term  public  finance 
developments. 
Moreover, I should also point out that budgetary consolidation is fundamental for achieving 
the aim of placing our public finances in a better position from which to face the challenges 
of an ageing population. Demographic developments are currently (and in future will be even 
more so) a fundamental determinant of the growth in certain public spending items, such as 
health, care for the elderly and, in particular, pensions. They must be taken into account in 
the short, medium and long-term consolidation strategy. 
Finally, we should not forget that, apart from the pace of reduction of the budget deficit, the 
intensity and duration of the public sector deleveraging will also hinge on macroeconomic 
factors and, in particular, on the economy’s growth potential.  
Indeed, the problems of sustainability of public finances may be relieved if employment and 
productivity behave favourably. The improvement in the outlook for economic growth and 
employment in the Spanish economy still requires pressing ahead with various structural 
reforms.  Delaying  the  implementation  of  such  reforms,  or  the  reversal  of  any  of  those 
introduced since the start of the crisis, would undoubtedly damage the growth outlook. 
Conclusions 
I will now conclude.  
The Spanish economy continues to record high rates of GDP and employment growth and 
is  showing  notable  resilience  in  the  face  of  gradual  disappearance  of  the  so-called 
“tailwinds”.  These  positive  developments  are  occurring  against  a  background  in  which, 
moreover, competitiveness gains are being sustained, our exports continue to gain market 
share  and  the  substantial  external  surplus  persists.  That  said,  this  favourable  situation 
8/9 
  should not be understood as meaning that Spain has managed to completely overcome the 
imbalances built up during the previous expansion and during the crisis that began in 2007, 
as demonstrated by the figures for unemployment, public debt and external net borrowing, 
among others.  
Persevering  with  reforms  to  increase  the  economy’s  growth  potential,  maintaining 
competitiveness gains  and  fiscal  consolidation  policies  are  a  prerequisite  for  progress  in 
making  the  reductions  required  in  the  budget  deficit  and  public  debt,  controlling  the 
economy’s  financing  costs,  improving  the  balance  of  payments  and,  last  but  not  least, 
increasing the Spanish economy’s capacity to generate employment.  
Thank you for your attention.  
  9/9 
