Cleviston  Haynes:  In  search  of  practical  solutions  to  strengthen
economic growth
Opening remarks by Mr Cleviston Haynes, Acting Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at
the 37th Annual Review Seminar, Bridgetown, 26 July 2017.
 Let  me  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  this  37th Annual  Review  Seminar  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Barbados.  I  wish  especially  to  welcome  those  who  have  joined  us  from  overseas  on  this
occasion. To all participants, presenters, discussants and support staff, I wish on behalf of the
Bank to convey our appreciation for your ongoing show of support for our conference over the
years and we want to say a big thank you to you for your effort and participation again in 2017. 
The Annual Review Seminar was conceptualised in the early 1980s to provide an outlet for the
young economists in the Bank’s Research department to share their work in progress with their
peers  in  and  outside  of  the  Bank.  For  those  of  us  there  in  the  early  years,  it  represented  an
opportunity for us to have our papers discussed by more experienced economists, including our
former  professors  such  as  Sir  Frank  Alleyne  and  Professors  Andrew  Downes  and  Michael
Howard.  Over time, some of the research presented at these sessions was eventually published
in the Bank’s Economic Review or in well-respected academic journals.
Tough but fair criticism of my own research efforts at various Annual Review Seminars has been
instrumental in my own development, and has enhanced my ability to systematically examine
issues,  assisted  by  a  range  of  formal  tools  even  while  acknowledging  limitations  on  existing
range of information. This is perhaps an aspect of the profession that remains underdeveloped in
my view, because as Sir Courtney Blackman has rightly noted, the profession is centred on its
ability  to  persuade,  and  policies  can  only  be  effected  if  the  economists  possess  the  ability  to
persuade policy makers of the merits of their particular argument.
As the seminar grew, we have been able to attract to Barbados, a steady stream of experienced
scholarly  economic  researchers  over  the  years,  from  Trinidad,  Guyana,  the  OECS,  Jamaica,
Guadeloupe, Martinique, the International Monetary Fund and other financial institutions.
The Annual  Review  Seminar  has  become,  therefore,  an  important  part  of  the  Bank’s  ongoing
training  regimen  designed  to  familiarise  economists  with  best  practice  relating  to  statistical
analysis,  economic  policy  formulation,  report  writing,  the  design  of  an  economic  research
project, and the application of econometric theory. 
And so this seminar has played an invaluable role in the nurturing of the Bank’s economists, as
well  as  laying  the  foundation  for  the  Bank’s  well-earned  reputation  for  its  research  among
regional central banks. Without doubt it has contributed to the development of our economists,
facilitating the transition from the study of economics to the practice of research economics in
the real world. 
For more experienced economists, the ARS has and continues to provide  an opportunity to stay
at the cutting edge through on-going discussion and collaboration with their peers in academia,
the public sector, and private business, in Barbados, the region and beyond.
Our  theme  this  year, Practical  Solutions  to  Strengthen  Economic  Growth, is  indeed
timely.   As I noted in a recent presentation, rates of economic growth in the CARICOM region
declined significantly from 6% in the 1960s to less than 1% in recent years. Indeed, a recent IDB
study  points  out  that  that  Caribbean  economies  have  grown  by  1.7%  over  the  past  25  years
compared to 3.7% for the world and 4.6% for emerging markets.
Size,  or  lack  thereof,  and  openness  have  made  the  region  especially  vulnerable  to  the  many
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
exogenous shocks, including the several natural disasters that have impacted the region during
this period. While the region as a whole is experiencing low growth, differences in endowments
are  impacting  overall  growth  performance  in  individual  economies.  For  example,  last  year,
regional  output  declined  largely  because  of  falling  output  in  the  commodity  based  economies
which  have  been  adversely  impacted  by  declines  in  commodity  prices.  On  the  other  hand
services based economies are registering modest growth.
As policy makers, we face the challenge of creating conditions that will contribute to improved
standards of living over time. We all recognise that our policy framework must be credible and
sustainable. In Barbados we face current policy challenges to which some of the research at this
seminar can help to provide explanations as to how policy actions can be designed to favourably
impact economic activity.
Indeed, a cursory view of the agenda for this week reveals topics of current interest, including de-
risking, financial stability, the optimal size of government, macro-fiscal linkages of green energy
and trade in cultural industries. I do hope that you will find the seminar this year to be interesting,
stimulating  and  rewarding  as  you  seek  to  share  insights  and  practical  solutions  that  might
stimulate an acceleration of growth across the region.
To set us on the path of exploration, I have the distinct pleasure to introduce our Keynote speaker
this  morning, Dr Justin Ram,  Director  of  Economics  at  the  Caribbean  Development  Bank. Dr.
Ram is a specialist in energy and development economics and possesses a PhD in economics
from the London School of Economics. In addition, Dr. Ram has a wide range of experience as a
lecturer in economics, as a policy maker, and has acted as a consultant for the World Bank,
United Nations and International Labour Organisation. In his address, he asks us to imagine an
end to slow economic growth. It is therefore highly appropriate that he opens the batting at a
conference such as this, designed to address the vexing problem of slow growth and economic
instability in the small open economies of the Caribbean.
Ladies and gentlemen, please give a warm welcome to Dr. Ram.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
