Monetary Policy Challenges During the Great Transition:  
Perspectives from an Emerging Market Central Bank  
Dr. Veerathai Santiprabhob, Governor of the Bank of Thailand 
Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum, London 
January 10, 2017 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in London and to have a chance to contribute to the City Lecture 
series.  Firstly,  I  hope  it  is  not  too  late  to  wish  you  all  a  happy  and  prosperous  new  year.  Secondly,  I 
would like to thank OMFIF for the invitation and also express my appreciation of the work that OMFIF 
has done in providing a vibrant and informative platform for policymakers to exchange their views on 
issues relevant to the future of the international monetary  and financial system. Given the economic 
and political challenges that we face today, I feel that the need and importance of such platforms for 
open dialogue is as important as ever. For it is only through constructive dialogue that the diversity of 
perspectives inherent in modern society can be harnessed to drive meaningful progress.  
In  that  spirit,  I  would  like  today  to  reflect  on  the  prevailing  monetary  policy  paradigms  that  have 
guided central bank actions over the recent past and highlight some of the tensions and limits of such 
framework.  In  policy,  we  are  often  preoccupied  with  the  technical  and  tactical  management  of  our 
instruments. Most of our energy is devoted to analyzing latest economic developments and deciding on 
the size and timing of our actions. Yet over time, if one gets the paradigm right but the details wrong, 
the damage will be largely limited. Moving the policy instruments slightly too much or too little or a 
few months too soon or too late won’t matter very much in the long term. But if we get the paradigm 
wrong, the resulting harm will be severe because we will make the same mistakes over and over again. 
Questioning prevailing paradigms now and then is therefore healthy.   
Nine  years  on  from  the  global  financial  crisis,  it  is  remarkable  that  policy  interest  rates  in  major 
advanced economies are essentially at zero or negative and central banks continue to seek innovative 
ways to further stimulate the economy. Economic developments are still cast in terms of “the recovery” 
and the crisis mentality has yet to fully abate. With growth repeatedly disappointing on the down side 
and inflation stuck below targets, a sense of déjà vu permeates policy discussions. On this long journey 
towards  normalization,  the  destination  never  seems  to  arrive.  And  during  this  period,  which  could 
aptly be called the Great Transition, we have seen some remarkable things.  
If someone had asked you back in 2007 what you would expect to see if the major central banks in the 
world  cut  policy  rates  to  zero  and  held  it  there  for  almost  a  decade,  triple  the  size  of  their  balance 
sheets, and bought up roughly a third of all outstanding government bonds in their jurisdiction,  very 
few of us would have thought that subdued price pressure and tepid growth would be the outcome. Yet 
that is what we have seen. Across the major advanced economies and some emerging market ones, 
inflation has been persistently below targets  and growth weak for many  years. What does this say 
about the influence of monetary policy over cyclical variations in the economy?  
The prevailing view is that inflation is low and recovery weak because the zero lower bound prevents 
central  banks  from  lowering  real  interest  rates  enough  to  re-equilibrate  the  economy.  That  is,  the 
 1 
actual  real  interest  rate  is  too  high  relative  to  the  equilibrium  or  natural  real  interest  rate.  This  view 
rests  on  two  key  propositions.  First,  the  problem  besetting  economies  is  one  of  aggregate  demand 
deficiency. Second, low interest rates can offset this by encouraging people to bring future expenditure 
and  investment  forward.  This  logic  underpins  the  unprecedented  monetary  accommodation  that  we 
have witnessed. But this prism, based on prevailing macro models, for viewing recent developments is 
rather narrow.  
Consider  the  broader  context  where  structural  forces  are  at  play.  At  the  global  level,  changes  in  the 
structure of world trade, rising competitive pressures, and common forces such as falling oil prices have 
for  a  long  time  increased  the  influence  of  external  factors  on  inflation.  In  individual  jurisdictions, 
changes in labor market fundamentals mirroring changing demographics and reduced wage bargaining 
power have exerted a powerful downward force on price dynamics. Meanwhile, the digital revolution 
has driven the prices of  many  modern  services,  such as telephone  calls, news, and  entertainment  to 
essentially zero.  These forces have contributed to a weakening, and in some cases the disappearance 
altogether, of the link between inflation and measures of economic slack, as traditionally captured in 
the Phillips curve. Low inflation cannot be attributed primarily to insufficient aggregate demand.  
Some  of  these  same  structural  forces  also  account  for  weaker  growth. For highly  open economies, 
slowing  world  trade  has  undermined  export  as  a  growth  engine.  At  the  same  time,  the  transition  to 
services has also contributed to growth headwinds given that modern services is less labor and capital 
intensive than manufacturing. Think of Facebook’s 15,000 workforce compared to Coca-Cola’s 150,000 
despite the former having twice the market valuation of the latter. Or how the Ubers and AirBNBs of 
the world can generate immense value added without hardly any capital outlays. Given that investment 
is relatively interest sensitive, to the extent that the transition to services has dampened investment, it 
may have also made the economy less responsive to monetary policy. Rising income inequality, insofar 
as  it  translates  into  more  purchasing  power  being  in  the  hands  of  those  less  likely  to  spend  at  the 
margin, also acts as an additional drag on growth. Finally, the legacy of debt overhang and an impaired 
banking system has both weighed on growth and hampered the transmission of monetary policy.  
The  upshot  is  that  much  of  the  forces  driving  inflation  and  output  are  structural  and  not  easily 
amenable  to  monetary  policy.  The  returns  to  monetary  ease  may  be  limited  and  most  likely 
diminishing  in  the  face  of  these  headwinds.  That  would  not  be  so  much  of  a  problem  if  extended 
monetary  accommodation  entailed  no  costs.  But  there  are  side-effects  and  they  are  pervasive. 
Persistent ultra-low interest rates and the increased presence of central banks in markets raise concerns 
that they are distorting market prices away from fundamental values. Very low interest rates has driven 
a search for yield that has boosted asset prices globally, compressed risk premiums, and supported high 
leverage. It is striking that global leverage, at 225 percent of world GDP in terms of gross debt of the 
nonfinancial  sector,  is  presently  higher  than  it  was  before  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  For 
institutions that have committed liabilities, such as insurance companies and pension funds, sustained 
low rates threaten their long-run viability and compels them to take more risk.  
International  spillovers  have  also  been  prominent.  In  today’s  hyper-connected  global  economy,  a 
problem  anywhere  can  quickly  become  a  problem  everywhere.  The  exchange  rate  has  been  an 
important conduit in this respect, especially for emerging market countries. Through successive rounds 
of  easing,  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies  increasingly  came  through 
currency movements. Resistance to unwelcome currency appreciation then spreads exceptionally easy 
monetary conditions to the rest of the world. Easing begets easing. Hence the frequent references to 
“currency  wars”  and  “competitive  depreciations”.  For  international  currencies  such  as  the  US  dollar, 
 2 
very low interest rates directly boosted credit expansion elsewhere. From 2009 to the end of 2015, US 
dollar-denominated  credit  to  non-banks  outside  the  United  States  increased  by  more  than  50%,  to 
about $9.8 trillion; and to nonbanks in EMEs, it doubled to some $3.3 trillion.  
Overall,  we  have  a  dichotomy  between  diminished  monetary  influence  on  inflation  and  output  on 
the one hand, and hyper-sensitivity of financial markets and asset prices to monetary policy actions 
and  communication  on  the  other.  This  raises  a  dilemma.  Against  the  tide  of  structural  headwinds, 
inflation and output fail to respond to monetary ease, and the temptation is to do more and more. In 
the  meantime,  financial  markets  respond  vigorously  to  low  interest  rates  and  the  search  for  yield 
accumulates in the form of greater financial fragility over time. This has important long-run implications 
that current frameworks neglect.  
The prevailing paradigm views monetary policy as a stabilization tool for managing cyclical movements 
in  the  economy  with  no  impact  on  the  trend.  Money  is  neutral  in  the  long-run.  But  it  is  becoming 
increasingly  recognized  that  there  is  a  direct  link  between  the  financial  cycle  and  long-run  output 
trajectories. A large body of evidence indicates that financial crises often result in very large economic 
contractions followed by a long period in which output is depressed substantially, with no rebound on 
average  to  the  pre-crisis  trend  over  the  medium  term.  Output  losses  in  many  cases  are  permanent. 
Given that financial instability can have long run impact on the economy, then if monetary policy plays a 
role  in  influencing  the  likelihood  of  a  crisis  occurring  or  the  magnitude  of  its  impact  once  one  does 
occur, it follows that monetary policy has long-run implications.  
This perspective calls for a reassessment of prevailing macroeconomic models that focus on flows and 
shocks but neglect stocks and states. The financial cycle acts as the thread that binds the challenges 
and constraints of today to the actions and decisions taken in the distant past. This path-dependency 
sharpens  the  trade-off  between  short-term  inflation  and  output  stabilization  on  the  one  hand,  and 
financial fragility and their impact on longer term economic trajectories on the other.  
From  this  alternative  paradigm,  the  calculus  is  tilted  against  unrelenting  monetary  stimulus.  It  calls, 
instead,  for  a  monetary  policy  framework  that  systematically  reacts  to  the  financial  cycle,  both  in 
good times as well as in bad. This differs from an approach in which policy leans against the wind only 
when financial stability risks become evident. Given the long and drawn-out nature of financial cycles, 
such an approach would inevitably lead to doing too little too late, as the cumulative impact of policy 
over the whole financial cycle is ignored.  
The alternative framework entails more flexibility with respect to the delivery of inflation targets and 
longer  horizons  over  which  the  effects  of  policy  are  judged.  Such  a  framework  could  be  usefully 
complimented by the application of macro-prudential tools. Here I stress the word “compliment”. Much 
of the discussion on macroprudential policy these days view them as a useful way to help offset some of 
the  excesses  that  result  from  low  interest  rates.  But  macroprudential  measures  were  originally 
envisaged  as  compliments  to  monetary  policy  rather  than  as  instruments  to  substitute  or  offset  the 
effects of monetary or other government policies.  
It is easy to be lulled into a sense of blissful separation whereby safeguarding financial stability is left to 
macroprudential tools while monetary policy focuses on inflation and output goals. But this would be 
like driving a car with one foot on the accelerator trying to reach the destination as soon as possible, 
and the other foot on the brake making sure that we don’t crash. An even more precarious task if each 
foot  belongs  to  different  drivers.  There  are  limits  to  what  macroprudential  can  achieve,  both 
 3 
economically and politically. Just as monetary policy has been over-burdened, macroprudential tools 
too risk becoming overburdened.  
In  Asia,  central  banks  have  generally  become  more  mindful  of  financial  stability  concerns  in  the 
aftermath of the 1997 crisis. The Thai experience is illustrative. Having lowered our policy rate to 1.5 
percent in the second quarter of 2015, we have kept rates unchanged since then even though headline 
inflation  was  below  our  target  range  and  growth  relatively  soft.  This  reflects  the  recognition  of  the 
wider context and set of factors which act to mute the monetary transmission mechanism that I have 
alluded to earlier. Structurally, we share many of the fundamental forces holding inflation and growth 
down in advanced economies. This includes an aging population, high income inequality, and a rising 
share of services. The decision to keep rates on hold also reflects ongoing financial stability concerns 
given  high  household  debt  levels  and  evidence  of  search  for  yield  behavior  leading  to  risky  shadow 
banking  activities.  The  preservation  of  room  for  manoeuvre  reflects  a  policy  framework  that 
embodies the longer horizon perspective and recognition of the limits of monetary policy that I have 
discussed.  
In  terms  of  the  outlook  going  forward,  we  forecast  continued  economic  growth  this  year  at  broadly 
similar pace to 2016 while inflation should pickup as the base effect from lower oil prices dissipate. With 
available fiscal headroom, government spending, particularly on infrastructure investment, will provide 
significant  impetus  to  the  growth  momentum.  On  the  external  front,  if  the  scale  and  breadth  of 
surprises that transpired last year in the global political and economic landscape is any guide, we will be 
in for a rough ride. Here, Thailand’s high level of foreign exchange reserves, which amounts to some 
3.2  times  of  outstanding  short-term  foreign  debt,  as  well  as  strong  current  account  position  should 
provide  adequate  buffers  for  new  surprises.  The  high  levels  of  capitalization  of  our  banking  system 
moreover, with average capital to risk-assets ratios of over 18 percent, provides a solid foundation for 
financial stability and alleviates concerns from the recent pickup in non-performing loans.  
Thailand’s  main challenges are micro, not  macro, in nature. A key growth engine over past decades 
has  been  the  productivity  gains  from  structural  transformation,  whereby  labor  moves  from  low 
productivity  agriculture  to  high  productivity  manufacturing  and  services.  This  has  stalled,  and  even 
reversed, of late. To reinvigorate growth, we need to upgrade education and skills of our labor force, 
streamline  rules  and  regulation  that  shackle  business  productivity,  catalyze  public  and  private 
investment  in  key  infrastructures,  and  establish  platforms  that  spur  innovation.  At  the  same  time, 
there is great potential for Thailand to leverage on our unique geographical advantage of being in the 
midst of the Greater Mekong Subregion that includes the rapidly developing economies of Cambodia, 
Laos, Myanmar, and Vietnam.   
The good news is that the government fully recognizes these priorities and is currently embarking on a 
multi-pronged  approach  to  move  forward  rapidly.  The  reform  agenda  encompasses  wide-ranging 
initiatives to improve efficiency as well as propel growth. Prioritizing on the most binding constraints, a 
number of legal and governance reforms have already been implemented. These include streamlining 
of the process involved in obtaining business licenses and the strengthening of laws governing business 
collateral that expands the range of security interests that can be. Small-medium enterprises stand to 
benefit most from these, both in terms of lower operating costs and greater financial access.  
Under  consideration  is  also  a  comprehensive  reform  of  the  governance  of  state-owned  enterprises. 
Given their very large size and their critical role as provider of basic infrastructure such as electricity, 
telecommunications,  and  transportation,  state-owned  enterprises  exert  a  significant  influence  on 
overall  economic  efficiency.  The  existing  regulatory  framework,  however,  is  complicated  with  large 
 4 
overlaps and a lack of overriding authority. The proposed establishment of the National State-owned 
Enterprise  Corporation  with  a  clear  separation  among  the  relevant  government  agencies  in  terms  of 
responsibilities  as  policymaker,  regulator,  and  owner,  therefore  holds  promise  of  bringing  about 
tremendous improvements in resource allocation within the economy. 
In terms of invigorating  growth, a  key strategy being pursued is to  shore up economies at the grass-
roots level through various interventions, including fiscal injections, at the local government level. At a 
more national level, efforts are underway to shift industrial structure towards certain high value added 
industries.  
For the Bank of Thailand’s part, the overriding focus is on strengthening the capacity of our financial 
system  to  serve  the  economy  by  leveraging  on  fundamental  technological  improvements.  As  the 
backbone  of  all  economic  activities,  the  payment  system  and  infrastructure  is  critical  to  economic 
efficiency and stability. Among others, we will be rolling out a new Faster payment platform early this 
year that will encourage greater digital payments as well as lower transaction costs. We will enhance 
financial  connectivity  with  neighboring  countries  through  various  means,  including  the  promotion  of 
local currency usage for regional trade. Moreover, in recognition of the potential for innovative financial 
platforms  to  increase  efficiency  and  expand  inclusion,  we  recently  launched  a  “regulatory  sandbox” 
approach to facilitate FinTech. 
So the policy strategy is clear: leverage on our strong macroeconomic fundamentals to push through 
critical microeconomic and structural reforms that unleash productivity improvements. The challenge 
is one of execution. In all this, monetary policy plays a secondary supporting role.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Marshall Goldsmith in his popular executive coaching book, “What Got You Here Won’t Get You There”, 
highlighted  the  unwillingness  to  change  modes  of  thought  and  behaviors  as  a  critical  obstacle 
preventing executives from becoming successful leaders. So too in monetary policy I believe that the 
frameworks, paradigms, and norms that have gotten us to where we are need to be openly reassessed. 
We have arrived at this juncture partly as a result of a financial cycle that was unanchored. We need 
to seriously rethink the framework that allowed this to take place. What got you here won’t get you 
there. More of the same will not do.   
On a monetary road less traveled, it is important to make sure that our intellectual compass points to 
the  right  general  direction.  Through  the  years,  monetary  policy  has  shifted  through  successive 
frameworks.  From  the  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates  under  Bretton  Woods,  to  monetary  targeting 
during the Great Inflation in the 1970s, to inflation targeting in the context of the Great Moderation, 
and finally to an assortment of unconventional monetary policies in the wake of the Great Recession. 
Today,  as  we  navigate  our  way  through  the  Great  Transition,  the  search  for  a  new  framework  is 
ongoing.  
In  so  doing,  the  limits  of  monetary  policy  as  well  as  its  unintended  consequences,  especially  on 
financial  fragility,  needs  to  be  better  recognized.  We  would  do  well  to  revisit  our  monetary 
architecture, both domestically and globally, our optimal policy mix, and structural constraints to ensure 
that the transition leads us to a more stable, prosperous, and sustainable economic outcome.  
Thank you very much.  
 5 
