South African Reserve Bank 
 Keynote address by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the Strate GIBS FinTech Innovation Conference 2017 
Gordon Institute of Business Science, Johannesburg 
  22 August 2017 
 Regulatory responses to FinTech developments 
  Introduction 
 Programme Director, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
 I would like to start by thanking the organisers for the invitation to address you at 
this year’s Strate GIBS FinTech Innovation Conference.  The  conference is  timely 
as  we  potentially  face  one  of  the  most  severe  innovation-  and  technology-driven 
disruptions to products and services, particularly in the financial sector space. 
 Arvind Sankaran, an advisor on FinTech, argues: “We are witnessing the creative 
destruction  of  financial  services,  rearranging  itself  around  the  consumer.  Who 
does  this  in  the  most  relevant,  exciting  way,  using  data  and  digital,  wins!”  To 
paraphrase  the  famous  Austrian-born  economist  Joseph Schumpter:  it  is  the 
process  of  industrial  mutation  that  revolutionises  the  economic  structure  within, 
incessantly  destroying  the  old  one,  incessantly  creating  a  new  one,  a  prominent 
feature of capitalism – which he further describes as the ‘perennial gale of creative 
destruction’. 
 My address today will focus on regulatory responses to FinTech developments. 
  Page 1 of 11 
FinTech developments viewed from a regulatory perspective 
 Over  the  last  decade  or  so,  FinTech  has  attracted  attention  from  many  quarters; 
publicity around FinTech developments continues to increase. 
 Interestingly, some parties suggest that FinTech may offer revolutionary changes, 
such  as  completely  new  ways  of  banking  where  peer-to-peer 
lending 
arrangements,  for  example,  may  displace  more  traditional  intermediaries.  By 
contrast,  others  suggest  that  this  type  of  innovation  is  not  different  to  that 
experienced in the past. Moreover, like the Internet, these innovations are likely to 
integrate existing value chains and business processes that will give expression to 
a symbiosis between new FinTech firms and incumbents. Along these lines, others 
still  argue  that  developments  in  the  FinTech  space  are  merely  part  of  an 
evolutionary process driven by innovation – that this is therefore nothing new and 
that regulatory regimes are adequate to deal with these developments. 
 Given these varying perspectives, regulators continue to reflect on how to respond 
to developments in the FinTech space. I believe that the following three proposals 
could serve to strengthen regulatory approaches to FinTech developments. These 
are: 
 i. 
focusing analysis on activities involving financial services rather than on firms 
or technologies; 
ii. 
continuing collaboration between local and global regulatory authorities; and 
iii. 
investigating  and  deciding  on  the  most  appropriate  structures,  such  as 
sandboxes,  to  keep  abreast  of  FinTech  developments  and  to  allow  for 
demonstration of the technology and experimentation with user cases. 
 These  three  approaches  are  not  mutually  exclusive  and  are  of  importance  in 
developing sound policy stances for FinTech. I will address each of these in turn. 
    Page 2 of 11 
Focusing analysis on financial services activities 
 FinTech  is  developing  rapidly.  It  has  a  vast  scope  that  touches,  among  other 
things, on chatbots, artificial intelligence, block chains, cloud computing, and smart 
contracts. Given the pace of change, regulators, like most mortals, may find it hard 
to  remain  up  to  date  with  these  developments;  we  are  faced  with  the  daunting 
prospect  of  having  to  reflect  on  the  most  appropriate  regulatory  responses  to 
technologies that we may not fully comprehend yet. 
 In  this  regard,  I  favour  a  ‘back  to  basics’  approach.  Regulators  should  focus  on 
regulatory  principles 
that  are 
risk-based 
rather 
than  creating  excessive 
rules-based  regulations  aimed  at  these  technologies  or  products.  For  example, 
financial  regulators  do  not  regulate  the  Internet,  biometric  technology,  or  mobile 
devices.  Regulatory  intervention  should  be  appropriate  and  applied  to  the 
underlying  economic  function.  In  the  case  of  most  central  banks,  the  regulated 
activities  should  fall  within  the  ambit  of  their  regulatory  mandate  and  would 
typically include deposit taking, payments, lending, insurance, and investments. 
 The Financial Stability Board describes FinTech as ‘technology-enabled innovation 
in  financial  services  that  could  result  in  new  business  models,  applications, 
processes  or  products  with  an  associated  material  effect  on  the  provision  of 
financial services’1 by focusing on the identified activities. In this regard, the focus 
centres on business process innovations and de-emphasises both the entities and 
the emerging technologies. 
 Through this lens, we identify four areas of economic activities and potential areas 
of financial services provision. 
 New forms of money or value storage 
 The  concept  of  virtual  currencies  is  increasingly  recognised.  As  people  become 
more  familiar  with  the  concept,  it  has  the  potential  to  become  more  widely 
adopted. The ‘traditional’ currency issued by the central bank, also known as ‘fiat 
                                                           
1   Financial stability implications from FinTech supervisory and regulatory issues that merit authorities’ attention, 
2016, Financial Stability Board 
 Page 3 of 11 
money’,  has  the  advantage  that  its  issuer  is  a  trusted  third  party.  However,  it  is 
conceivable that other trusted third parties may emerge issuing virtual currency in 
the future. 
 Virtual currencies that utilise advanced cryptography have enabled the issuance of 
private  crypto-currency. 
In  particular,  Bitcoin  and 
its  underlying  enabling 
technology, the blockchain protocol, has created the capability to exchange value 
on a peer-to-peer basis. 
 In  the  words  of  Thomas Carper,  a  US Senator,  ‘virtual  currencies,  perhaps  most 
notably Bitcoin, have captured the imagination of some, struck fear among others, 
and confused the heck out of the rest of us’. 
 
According  to  the  website  coinmarketcap.com2,  the  total  market  capitalisation  of 
more than 800 different virtual currencies is about US$146 billion, of which Bitcoin 
makes up approximately 47%, followed by Etherium, Ripple, and Litecoin3. This is 
still  significantly  lower  than  the  current  value  of  all  money  (approximately 
US$84 trillion) or physical money (approximately US$31 trillion). 
 Although  much  lower  in  value,  virtual  currencies  are  emerging  as  a  new  form  of 
money  and/or  a  new  ‘store  of  value’  that  is  ‘held’  within  a  network  of  computers. 
The  underlying  technology,  such  as  the  distributed  ledger  technology  (DLT), 
although immature and still needing to be fully proven, could serve as a means to 
possibly  reshaping  financial  services.  Potential  applications  include  general 
banking activities, trade finance, insurance, and payments. 
 However, virtual currency is not without controversy. According to a paper issued 
by the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) in 20144, one of 
the  challenges  facing  regulators,  the  private  sector,  government  as  well  as  law 
enforcement agencies is the lack of a common understanding of virtual currencies, 
including how virtual currencies operate,  the potential risks associated with them, 
and the vocabulary used to talk about them. 
                                                           
2   https://coinmarketcap.com/charts/  
3   www.coinbase.com  
4  http://www.fatf-gafi.org/media/fatf/documents/reports/Virtual-currency-key-definitions-and-potential-aml-cft-
risks.pdf  
 Page 4 of 11 
 Payments 
 The second set of innovations that affects financial services is the transfer of value 
undertaken  through  the  effecting  of  payments.  Due  to  its  nature,  the  payment 
environment  lends  itself  to  being  a  ‘natural  testing  environment’  to  allow  for 
developmental  innovations  such  as  FinTech.  Attention  has  been  drawn  to 
innovations  such as  SamsungPay  or  ApplePay,  which  have  created  the  ability  of 
paying with your mobile device, using your smartphone as a point-of-sale device5. 
A  preliminary  analysis  conducted  by  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB) 
reveals  that  these  innovations  leverage  existing  payments  infrastructure  and  that 
these  new  firms  integrate  themselves  into  existing  value  chains.  Whether  these 
innovations  will  fundamentally  reshape  or  disintermediate  existing  business 
models remains an open question. 
 In  addition,  new  payment  business  models  are  emerging  where  current  DLT 
solutions are applied to extended value chains. An example includes cross-border 
remittances  where  FinTech  firms  use  DLT  solutions  to  streamline  the  remittance 
value  chain.  The  new  business  processes  remove  intermediaries,  thus  lowering 
costs  and  reducing  the  time  taken  to  effect  these  payments  and  remittances. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  SARB  continues  to  monitor  payment  use  cases 
involving  DLT  closely.  Other  activities  include  the  use  of  social  media  and  other 
emerging platforms such as WeChat and AliPay. Innovations that  remove friction 
in the system, but also reduce transaction costs and information asymmetries are 
encouraging but, as regulators, we should be mindful of the risks and social costs. 
 
A FATF report6 highlights some of the risks when virtual currency is exchanged for 
real currency. These include money-laundering and terrorism financing. As virtual 
currencies  permit anonymity,  they  are  ideally  placed  to  be  traded  on  the  Internet 
(which then becomes the ‘darknet’) and allow for anonymous funding activity. The 
traditional  ‘know  your  customer’  philosophy  and  the  tracing  of  funds  become 
                                                           
5   Examples include Square and Zettle. 
6  http://www.fatf-gafi.org/media/fatf/documents/reports/Virtual-currency-key-definitions-and-potential-aml-cft-
risks.pdf  
 Page 5 of 11 
nearly  impossible.  An  unintended  consequence  of  these  developments  may  be 
increased regulatory costs. 
 Lending 
 The  third  major  domain  of  financial  services  that  may  potentially  be  impacted  by 
FinTech  developments  is  the  provision  of  credit.  Online  peer-to-peer  and  equity 
crowd-based  funding  platforms  have  provided  alternative  financial  services 
options.  These  platforms  connect  investors  to  borrowers  and  disintermediate  the 
traditional lending by banks and other service providers. Some of these platforms 
have grown rapidly, providing consumers and small businesses with opportunities 
to  access  credit.  Regulatory  authorities,  however,  have  to  balance  this  with 
concerns  regarding  issues  such  as  the  protection  of  consumers,  investors  and 
lenders  alike,  liquidity,  procyclicality,  general  business  risk7  as  well  as  the 
unintended  consequences  that  these  activities  may  potentially  have  for  the 
traditional banking models. 
 Investments 
 The  so-called  ‘robo-advice’  and  high-frequency  trading  (HFT)  are  FinTech 
innovations  in  the  investment  domain.  ‘Robo-advisors’  are  a  class  of  financial 
advisors that provides financial advice and portfolio management services online, 
with  minimal  human  intervention.  The  software  that  is  used  for  these  services 
utilises  its  algorithms  to  automatically  allocate,  manage,  and  optimise  clients’ 
assets. 
 Similarly  to  ‘robo-advisors’,  HFT  firms  have  established  themselves  as  notable 
participants  in  the  financial  markets.  The  Financial  Stability  Review  published  by 
the Banque de France in 20168 highlights that HFT firms have two characteristics 
which enable them to carry out very large numbers of small trades with short-term 
investment horizons (often intraday), namely:  
                                                            
7   This would include, as an example, the structure of the platforms’ balance sheet. 
8   Banque de France, ‘Constructing the possible trinity of innovation, stability and regulation for digital finance’, 
Financial Stability Review, April 2016 
 Page 6 of 11 
i. 
ultra-fast access – just a few milliseconds – to trading platforms and market 
information; and 
ii. 
trading  algorithms  that  operate  autonomously  without  human  involvement 
when markets are open. 
 The rapid development of HFT firms takes advantage of low entry barriers. These 
financial  services  providers  tend  to  be  non-banks  with  small  or  even  negligible 
amounts  of  capital  compared  with  the  traditional  market  makers,  i.e.  the  banks, 
whose regulatory capital requirements for trading books have increased. 
 The rapid growth of these activities has attracted the attention of regulators due to 
the  impact  and  potential  systemic  risks  that  HFT  companies  may  unleash  on 
financial markets and market stability. An example of this is short-lived but severe 
market crashes, such as the ‘Flash Crash’ in the US markets in May 20109.  
 In  summary,  FinTech  innovation  can  be  observed  across  multiple  financial 
services,  including  deposit  taking,  payments,  lending,  and  investments.  An 
in-depth  analysis  of  the  activities  rather  than  of  the  technologies  and/or  firms 
providing  these  services  helps  one  to  understand  these  developments.  New 
technologies will continue to  present opportunities to  reshape financial services. I 
would  like  to  suggest  that  policymakers  should  focus  unrelentingly  on  financial 
services  and 
their  underlying  activities,  as  opposed 
to 
the  ever-evolving 
technologies  per  se.  Such  a  focus  will  most  likely  ensure  appropriate  regulatory 
treatment  of  similar  activities,  irrespective  of  the  entity  providing  such  activities, 
and will thus aim to better achieve level playing fields. 
 Continuing collaboration between local and global authorities 
 I would now like to turn to the importance of continued collaboration by regulatory 
authorities.  Given  the  fast  pace  of  change  and  the  global  nature  of  these 
innovations, collaboration between regulators is important. 
                                                           
9   On 6 May 2010, a ‘Flash Crash’ occurred in the US markets. HFT allows firms to submit orders and execute 
trades  (using  algorithms)  and  to  interact  with  markets  in  unpredictable  ways,  causing  price  pressure  and 
dislocation of financial markets (albeit momentarily). 
 Page 7 of 11 
At  the  domestic  level,  the  SARB’s  involvement  in  monitoring  FinTech  innovation 
started in 2013 when it joined an informal intergovernmental working group (IWG) 
in  our  jurisdiction.  This  work  group  was  established  to  better  understand  virtual 
currencies such as Bitcoin and their regulatory implications. The IWG consisted of 
National  Treasury,  the  Financial  Intelligence  Centre,  the  South  African  Revenue 
Services, and the SARB. In 2014, the working group issued a user alert on virtual 
currencies  through  National  Treasury.  The  SARB  in  turn,  through  its  National 
Payment  System  Department,  furthermore  issued  a  position  paper  on  virtual 
currencies later that same year. 
 In  2016,  the  SARB  established  an  internal  Virtual  Currencies  and  DLT  Working 
Group. In recognising the growing evolution of cryptocurrencies, the SARB tasked 
this cross-disciplinary working group to research and analyse the evolution of user 
cases  of  emerging  technologies,  including  blockchain  and  DLT.  The  main 
objective  was  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  underlying  DLT  and  smart 
contracts that leverage these emerging technologies. 
 Further,  by  focusing  on  financial  services  activities,  the  SARB  has  accepted  that 
FinTech  extends  beyond  virtual  currencies  and  DLT.  For  this  reason,  the  SARB 
has  recently  decided  to  establish  a  broader  FinTech  programme,  with  three 
dedicated  full-time  staff  members  that  report  directly  to  me.  Although  it  is  at  an 
early stage, this programme will be required to strategically review the emergence 
of  FinTech  and  assess  the  related  user  cases.  The  primary  responsibilities  are 
expected to include the facilitation of the development of refreshed policy stances 
for the SARB across the FinTech domain. This will be done by robustly analysing 
both  the  pros  and  the  cons  of  emerging  FinTech  innovations  as  well  as  the 
appropriate regulatory responses to these developments. 
 A  critical  success  factor  of  the  programme  will  be  the  ongoing  collaboration  with 
our fellow regulators. We thus continue to work closely with National Treasury, the 
Financial  Services  Board,  and 
the  Financial 
Intelligence  Centre 
in  an 
intergovernmental  FinTech  working  group.  We  will  collectively  determine  the 
appropriateness  of  applicable  regulatory  frameworks  and  further  review  how  our 
 Page 8 of 11 
frameworks  can  strengthen  policy  goals  such  as  financial  inclusion  and  the 
deepening of competition. 
 Besides  collaborating  locally,  the  SARB  actively  participates  in  international 
regulatory  and  standard-setting  bodies.  Work  undertaken  by  the  various  working 
groups at the Financial Stability Board and the Bank for International Settlements 
has been proactive in trying to understand the FinTech phenomenon and robustly 
explore  its  benefits,  risks  and  appropriate  regulatory  frameworks.  The  SARB  has 
contributed  a  paper  recently  published  on  assessing  DLT  and  its  impact  on 
payments and securities markets. Additional work has also been published on the 
impact  of  FinTech  on  financial  stability.  In  addition,  work  continues  on  matters 
such  as  machine  learning,  artificial  intelligence,  and  digital  currencies  issued  by 
central banks. The ongoing global collaboration is vital in order to keep pace with 
these  developments.  The  SARB  is  committed  to  staying  abreast  of  and 
contributing to global thought leadership on FinTech.  
 Deciding on the appropriateness of structures, such as innovation hubs and 
sandboxes to keep abreast of FinTech developments 
 Lastly, I would like to turn to innovation hubs and sandboxes. The SARB has been 
following  the  approaches,  adopted  by  other  jurisdictions,  to  assist  policymakers 
and  regulators  in  staying  abreast  of  FinTech  developments  given  how  some 
lending  and  payment  platforms  have  grown  to  become  systemically  important 
systems within a short space of time. 
 For  this  reason,  jurisdictions  such  as  Australia,  Hong  Kong,  Singapore  and  the 
United  Kingdom  have  implemented  innovation  hubs  and  regulatory  sandboxes. 
Innovation  hubs  provide  support,  advice  and  guidance  to  firms  in  navigating  the 
regulatory  framework  and/or  identifying  supervisory,  policy  or  legal  issues  and 
concerns.  Regulatory  sandboxes  provide  the  platform  for  live  or  virtual  testing  of 
new  products  or  services,  in  a  controlled  environment,  with  or  without  any 
‘regulatory relief’. With added attention to FinTech, through the newly established 
FinTech  programme  within  the  SARB,  we  will  urgently  review  the  need  for  and 
 Page 9 of 11 
appropriateness of innovation hubs and regulatory sandboxes and how to be in a 
potion to take a firm decision within the coming year in this regard. 
 Conclusion 
 In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  note  that  we  live  in  an  era  of  ongoing  and  rapid 
change  which  may  hold  significant  implications  for  the  regulation  of  financial 
services in response to these changes. 
 I  have  suggested  approaches  that  could  aid  the  development  of  new  regulatory 
frameworks in response to FinTech developments. The first fundamental principle 
is  to  focus  sharply  on  regulating  financial  services  provision  or  related  activities. 
Regulation must, however, be appropriate, purposeful and smart – and it must aim 
to  ensure  a  level  playing  field.  Regulations  should  not  be  an  impediment  to 
progress, competition, or efficiency. 
 The  second  fundamental  principle  that  needs  to  be  adopted  relates  to  continued 
collaborating at both local and international levels. In the current age of universal 
provision  of  financial  services,  ensuring  harmonised  frameworks  that  limit 
regulatory arbitrage is crucial. 
 Lastly, structures such as innovation hubs  and sandboxes need to be considered 
carefully.  The  success  of  these  structures  is  dependent  on  a  clear  regulatory 
purpose,  open  and  transparent  participation  criteria,  and  measurable  success 
criteria. 
 Charles Darwin  famously  said: “It is not the strongest of the species that survive, 
nor  the  most  intelligent,  but  the  ones  most  responsive  to  change.”  Significant 
incumbent financial sector firms and other service providers would need to learn to 
appreciate  that  the  biggest  threat  to  the  sustainability  of  their  business  is  not 
necessarily  their  traditional  competitors.  It  may  very  well  be  firms  still  to  be 
established,  that  utilise  technology  still  to  be  developed,  and  that  leverage 
innovations still to be incubated. 
  Page 10 of 11 
I  wish  you  well  in  your  deliberations  and  hope  that  these  thoughts  have  created 
insights  on  how  we  as  regulators  may  respond  to  developments  in  the  FinTech 
space. 
 Thank you. 
 Page 11 of 11 
